The Exact Lawgiver; Faithfully Communicating To the skillful The firm Basis
and Axioms of their Profession. To the ignorant Their Ancient and undoubted
Birthrights and Inheritances.
Being as a Light unto all the Professors of the Law, as well Counselors as
Atturneys, Clerks, Soliciters, Scriveners, etc. OR A MANV-DVCTIO, Or a Leading,
as it were, by the hand, all such, both of the Gentry or Laity (as desire to be
Instructed how to gain or preserve their Estates from the hands of their cruel
Adversaries) to the Perfect Knowledge of the Common and Statute Law of this
Nation.

Cicero lib. 1. de Leg. Ratio cum est in mente hominis confirmata and conferta
lex est, and lex est radius divini luminis.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bassett in St Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street.
1658.

To the READER.
THis Book being an Ancient Manuscript coming to my hands, which through my own
small skill in the Law, perceiving it to be an Ingenious thing, yet desiring to
bring it to the Test, I do assure you the grave Judgment of such as were
profound in the Knowledge of the Law, with me not only approved of it, but
highly Commended it, for an Ellaborate and Learned Treatise, adjudging it a
thing worthy to be Published for the good of the whole Nation. These lively
Characters of the goodness of the Book, agreeing with, and as wonderfully
relishing with my Genious, being very ambitious to do something that might
manifest to my self the filial love I bear unto my Country, I resolved to
publish it, (but incognito) esteeming him the Charitablest man that dispenceth
his Larges freely, but privately.

Another Reason that I do not attest it with my Name, is; because I am no ways
greedy of the worlds applaus, adjuding it as little worth. And if it be
objected why I do not set my Friends Name to it, whose Script it was, I make
this my Answer and Apology, That I am not of their minds, who to get themselves
or their Friends a great applaus with the common people, matter not what wiles
or crafts they use, so that they can any wise bring their device about.

But of the contrary Opinion am I, detesting such absurdities, who as I must
say the truth, do acknowledge that I am not thoroughly convinced in my mind, that
my Friend, in whose Library I found this (Script) did make or Compose it, and
therefore I would not presume to affix his Name to any thing that should not be
absolutely his; and the smallness of the thing besides would have raised a
Quaere, fi I should have had such a thought.

Howbeit, being carried with a great desire of hearing Commendations of the
thing, and thereby to be greatly delighted; imagining the Praises of it to be
the just Deserts of my worthy Friend and supposed Author, I was necessitated,
as it were, what by my own desire to do my Country good, and what by the great
Commendations several Eminent Practisers of our Law gave of it, to cause it to
be put in print, which being done, I represent it to the open View of all men,
wishing them Heartily to peruse it, not doubting but they will find it answer
their desires, to their great Use and Benefit. But knowing on the other side,
that many will be apt to spurn, if they find the least (Iota) wanting, I wish
them to remember Nemo nascitur sine crimine; I crave the favorable
Construction of all ingenious Persons, and for the (Malevilous) and
Caterpillars of our Age, which will not be content with any thing, I leave as I
find. Vale.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the Antiquity, Excellency, and Perfection of the Common Laws of
England. page 1. CHAP. II. Of the Professors of the Law. p. 9. CHAP. III. The
Definition of Law. p. 12. CHAP. IV. A Division of Estates. p. 14. CHAP. V.
Tenant for Term of Years. p. 15. CHAP. VI. Tenant at Will. p. 17. CHAP. VII.
Tenant by Copy of Court-Roll. ibid. CHAP. VIII. Of Freeholds. p. 24. CHAP. IX.
Tenant for Term of Life. p. 26. CHAP. X. Tenant by the Courtesy. p. 28. CHAP.
XI. Of Tenant in Dower. p. 31. CHAP. XII. A Division of Inheritance. p. 38.
CHAP. XIII. Of Fee-simple. p. 39. CHAP. XIV. Of Fee-tayle. p. 47. CHAP. XV.
Tenant after possibility of Issue Extinct. p. 52. CHAP. XVI. Of Perceners or
other Coheirs. p. 54. CHAP. XVII. Of Joyn-tenants. p. 60. CHAP. XVIII. Tenants
in Common. p. 70. CHAP. XIX. Of Chattels. p. 84. CHAP. XX. Of Partition, to be
made by Joyntenants and Tenants in Common. p. 87. CHAP. XXI. Of Conditions. p.
89. CHAP. XXII. How strangers shall take advantage of Conditions. p. 96. CHAP.
XXIII. Livery of Seisin and Atturnment. p. 98. CHAP. XXIV. Of Service. p. 104.
CHAP. XXV. Knight Service. p. 105. CHAP. XXVI. Of Ward, Marriage and Relief. p.
111. CHAP. XXVII. Service of Castle-Guard. p. 117. CHAP. XXVIII. Of Grand
Sergeanty. p. 118. CHAP. XXIX. Petty-Sergeanty. p. 121. CHAP. XXX. Homage
Ancestrell. p. 122. CHAP. XXXI. Of Liveries. p. 125. CHAP. XXXII. How Heirs
ought to sue their Livery. p. 126. CHAP. XXXIII. Soccage. p. 134. CHAP. XXXIV.
Frank Almoign. p. 136. CHAP. XXXV. Of Burgage. p. 140. CHAP. XXXVI. Of
Villenage or Bond-Service. p. 142. CHAP. XXXVII. Of Antiet Demesne. p. 148.
CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Rents. p. 151. CHAP. XXXIX. What remedy a man has to recover
his Rent when it is behind. p. 160. CHAP. XL. How Avowries ought to be made of
Rents and Services. p. 165. CHAP. XLI. For the assurance of Farmers. p. 166.
CHAP. XLII. Of fulfilling of Recoveries by Farmers. p. 169. CHAP. XLIII. Of
Tithes, and how they shall be recovered. p. 171. CHAP. XLIV. Of Mortuaries. p.
173. CHAP. XLV. Of discontinuance. 175. CHAP. XLVI. How Recoveries by collusion
against Tenants for terne of life is no discontinuance. p. 179. CHAP. XLVII.
How wrongful diseisin is no descent in the Law. p. 181. CHAP. XLVIII. Of
limitation of prescription. p. 182. CHAP. XLIX. Of Fines. p. 184. CHAP. L. Of
Testaments or Last-Wills. p. 187. CHAP. LI. The difference between Executors
and Administrators. p. 189. CHAP. LII. For probate of Testaments. p. 203. CHAP.
LIII. How Lands and Tenements may be by Testament (or otherwise) disposed of:
Enacted An. 32. H. 8. p.206. CHAP. LIVE. Matrimony and Marriage. p. 212. CHAP.
LV. Of Voucher. p. 213. CHAP. LVI. Voucher and Counter-Plea of Voucher. p. 214.
CHAP. LVII. Of Warranty. p. 220.
The Exact Lawgiver.
CHAP. I. Of the Antiquity, Excellency and Perfection of the Common-Laws of
England.
THere is no Jewel in the world comparable to Learning; The Excellency of the
Common Law of England.
no Learning so excellent both for Prince and Subject, as the knowledge of
Laws; and no knowledge of any humane Laws so necessary, as of those under which
we are subject; And if we respect the goodness of Law in general, we shall find
none so necessary for all Estates, and for all Cases, concerning Goods, Lands
or Life, as the Common Laws of England: And such is the judgment of the
Honorable the Lord Coke, and other famous Sages of our Law, the very echo of
whose words are of sufficient power to engraff (an honorable respect thereof)
in the mind of any ingenious person.

And that the conceited Novelists and malevilous spirits of these our times
(who spurn at any thing of Antiquity) may be infatuated in their opinions, and
withdrawn from their rash and overmalepert censure of our Common Law, let them
consider the Reasons which induced those Worthies to their high estimation and
value of our Common Laws of England.

For (say they) if the ancient Laws of this noble Island (viz.) England, had
not excelled all others, it could not be but some of the several Conquerours
and Governors thereof (that is to say) the Romans, Saxons, Danes, or Normans,
but especially the Romans, (who as they justly may) do boast of their Civil
Laws, would, as every of them might, have altered or changed the same: And this
also is the opinion of the Honorable Sir John Fortescue, the Lord Coke, and
many more.

Yet notwithstanding these Honorable Vouchers of the Excellency of our Common
Law, one Zoilus or other never leaves carping at it, though thereby they do but
display their own ignorance and folly, even as the Fly which never leaves
spurning at the Candle till it burns its own wings.

And of such kind are those first of all, who exclaim against the Law, because
writ in an unknown tongue (when as their object shows a worthiness in it) For
as all humane things are excellent by their order, so the Common Law of England
has some luster by its proper and peculiar language, yea and is transcendent
in its order, to all humane Sciences in the world: When we consider that the
true genuine sense, and fullfraught phrase of our Common Laws of England cannot
be so well expressed, nor any Case in Law so succinctly sensible, and withal so
fully reported and demonstrated, as in that speech our Ancestors first taught
it to speak, viz. that trinal composition and connexture of three Languages,
viz. English, Latin and French.

Which reason surely (says a Reverend Judge) has not been well understood by
those, who object it as a fault to the professors of the Law, who say, They
write the Books of Law in a strange Language, which none can understand but
themselves, that thereby the people might be kept in ignorance, and they the
more admired and esteemed: And (says Cicero in his first Book de Oratore) were
held of the first Professors of the Romans Civil Law, Quia veteres illi qui
huic scientiae praefuerunt, obstinendae atque augendae potentiae suae causa per
vulgari artem suam noluerunt.

But the weakness of this Objection does manifestly appear, in that there is
such a facility in the reading and understanding of the Law French; For none
can deny but that it may be learnt in a week or fortnights time without a
teacher: So that it may boldly be said in honor of the Common Laws of England,
That there is no rational Science in the world, having so many words and terms
of Art, whose Cases, Arguments and Judgments are expressed and delivered in a
form of speech, so plain, so significant, and a tongue so soon learned as our
Common Laws of England.

The alteration of which has brought in innumerable Petifoggers and Splitters
of Causes, (as they may well be called,) who by the reading of two or three
Law Books in English, dare take the presumption to infatuate and delude
ignorant people, under the notion of being cunning in carrying on of business
(which if they be) it is merely in the nature of the horsleech, to suck them
dry that employ them; and besides through their ignorance of the true sense of
the Law, they undo many a Cause, which good Council might have saved.

Secondly, Our Laws are villified with the aspersion of uncertainty and
unnecessary delays in its proceedings, when we all know, That the Law is but a
Rule of Reason, and humane Reason being pliable every way, not only the
knowledge of our Law, but all other rational Sciences in the whole world which
are subject to argument and discourse, must needs be subject to uncertainty and
error: Yet if we will take the honorable the Lord Coke's Testimony, there is
no Art or Science which depends upon discourse of reason, so little subject
to diverse Interpretations as our Common Law of England; and this he spoke by
his own experience, as in the Epistle to the second part of his Reports he tells
us, That in all his time there was not moved in the Courts of Justice in
England two Questions touching the Right of Descents or Escheats, or the like
fundamental points of the Common Law; So certain, sure, and without questions
are the principles and grounds thereof. And furthermore it will be a
confirmation of its certainty and sure principles, even to admiration, when we
consider with what wonderful Judgment the grounds of our Laws were laid,
which in so many hundred years after their establishing, do still meet with,
and provide for almost all the Cases that can happen in a Commonwealth. And
herein also does appear profound wisdom and simplicity in their establishing,
in that the grounds hereof are so clear and plain, that whereas the Civil Law,
which is so highly esteemed is fain to have gloss upon gloss, even to a great
number; for the true understanding of the Text of their Law, when the Text of
the Common Laws of England, which has continued so many hundred years, has
had but one Commentary upon its Text, viz. the Lord Coke's Commentary on
Littleton, which contains the principal grounds of our Common Laws. So that it
plainly appears, That the Judgment and Reason of the Common Law of England is
more certain then any humane Laws in the world besides. And for Delays, though
the Law and Lawyer chiefly be blamed, yet the main cause of Delays arise from
the stomackfulness and perverseness of Clyents, who are of that contentious
disposition, that they will spend all that ever they are worth, so they may
have their wills, and through their own refractoriness and perverse humors will
reverse Judgment after Judgment, and Decree after Decree, standing by their
good wills to nothing which the Law awards; And indeed there be too many of
these melevolous spirits, who cannot be content to undo themselves, but will
strive also to ruin others, and not only so, but will strive also to ruin
others, and not only so, but strive to defame the learned and honest Council,
because the Cause went against them, when as it is the uprightness of the Law,
which distinguishes right from wrong.

And furthermore our legal proceedings are so contrary to the common conceived
opinion that almost any cause in the Common Law being orderly pursued may come
to a period in a year, whereas in France (as Bedin testifies) the like will
scarcely be in thirty years. And lastly, for the malediction of all frivilous
Objections, and in honor of our Nation: There is no Nation in the world (says
a learned Judge) that has a course of Justice so speedy, and withal so
commodious and easy for the Subject, as our Trials of Assize, and nisi prius
are; for Justice the Lady and Queen of all moral virtues, makes her progress
twice in a year throughout every Country in the Land, so that the Fountains of
Justice are conveyed even home (as it were) to our very doors.

And now having showed you the Antiquity, Eminency, and Perfection of the
Common Laws of England, I shall in the next place say something of the learned
Professors thereof.

CHAP. II. Of the Professors of the Law.
AS I have demonstrated unto you by infallible Reasons and sufficient Witnesses
the worthiness of our common Law, Of the Professors of the Law.
dispersed the grand Objections which have risen against it, so shall I in this
place strive to vindicate the learned Professors thereof from the unjust
calumnies aspersed against them. And

First of all, It is objected against them, as it was against the Law it self,
that they are the cause of long and tedious Suites in that they wittingly and
willingly take upon them bad Causes, knowing them to be unjust when they are
first consulted with and retained; And that a bad Cause never wants a
Councellor to defend it, and such like. To which I answer, that the learned
Professor may be able to give judgment upon most Causes at their first
commencement, and may know right from wrong, this I say they may do, and yet
not wittingly maintain a bad Cause: for it is to be considered, that the
Counselor hears but one man's Cause only; and to be sure the Clyent will make
his own Cause good: How then should the learned Counselor be able to
distinguish right from wrong, until it be known what can be alleged and
proved by either party: how then can it be said that the Council maintains an
unjust Cause, when he knows not how the Case will be, till he had made his
utmost defense? Secondly, This Objection will be invalid, if we consider how
tender our Judges are of the reputation of the profession of the Law, by
branding (as it were) with infamy all such as give sinister Council, or too
boldly defend a bad Cause, so that seldom or never are such permitted to rise
to any higher degree in the Law; and this is the testimony of one of our famous
Judges: and for the Attorneys or practisers, they are commonly cast over the
Bar, and detained from practice upon their default; such great care is taken
to suppress dishonesty amongst the professors of so Honorable a Science. So
now seeing that there is no just Cause of such aspersions, which I hope few can
deny; yet if they do, I am sure they must allow, That all men, at all times,
and in all places, do stand in need of justice, which is the Law, for Law is
but the rule of justice, and without her support the Noble man cannot maintain
his Honor, nor the subject his liberty; nay, without her no man living, either
virtuous or vicious, can enjoy his life or any thing that makes his life
delightful: If the Law then merits so much of all mankind in general, (for
that it is the fountain of all our benefits;) what do the professors of this
Law then deserve, which draw these benefits out of this fountain, and convey
the same to every one of us: for the Law being only a rule to measure the
actions of men, the rule cannot measure unless applied by the hand of the
Architect: and Cicero defining the Law says; It is mutus Magistratus, even
dumb and speaks not but by the tongue of a learned and eloquent Lawyer; deaf
and hears no complaints but by the ear of a grave and potent Judge; blind and
sees not, but by the eye of a watchful and diligent Officer: so that without
these Interpreters of the Law, viz. the learned Professors thereof, there can
be no use or application of the Law, and consequently the Law and Justice it
self cannot consist without them.

Thus have I briefly treated of the Law and Lawyers, answering to all the
Objections that might be brought against the one or the other. In the next
place I will lay before you the definition of the Law, that from thence we may
proceed to the structure it self.

CHAP. III. The Definition of LAW.
LAw is defined by our Ancestors and others, What Law is.
to be that which commands those things which are to be done, and forbids their
contraries.

2. To be the rule of all moral Acts, obliging to what is right, and is the
conservation of Justice, which is a constant and perpetual will to give every
one his own.

3. The precepts of Law are, as Bracton says, to live honestly, wrong no man,
give every man his own, and the like.

4. The Law is the direction and administration of Justice and Injustice, is
(as the Emperor Justinian says) a constant and permanent will to render every
person his right; and duty.

5. Demosthenes the renowned Orator, defines it to be the gift of God as well
as the Decrees of Learned men; and so likewise Chrysippus an excellent
Philosopher begins his book of Laws; The Law, says he, is King of all as well
divine as humane Offices, the President and Councellor of all things, honest or
dishonest; Captain and Ruler of the just and unjust; and is of several
natures, as well the commander of what they ought to do, as the forbidder of
what they ought not to do; it is that only which distinguishes right from
wrong; for (ubi Lex non distinguit nec nos distinguere debemus.) Thus you see
how jointly and severally our most famous Ancestors have defined Law
unanimously agreeing; That it is a fortress for the weak to retire unto; a
sanctuary for the oppressed to fly unto; restraining the boldness of the
insolent; tying (as it were with manacles) the hands of the potent, and like
Orpheus Harp, charming the fierceness of the Lion or Tiger, so as the poor Lamb
may lie in safety by them.

And now having thus moderately discoursed of the Law, and the Professors
thereof, I shall henceforward speak of several fundamental parts both of the
Common and Statute Law of this Nation.

CHAP. IV. A Division of Estates.
YOu shall therefore understand, that whosoever has any Estate in Lands or
Tenements, either he has in the same only a Chattell, or a Free hold, or an
Inheritance; Chattell.
if he has an Estate but for term of certain years, or at his Landlords will,
then it is called a Chattell; if for term of his life, or for any other man's
life, it is called a Freehold; Freehold.
and if he has to him and to his heirs in fee-simple or in tail, Inheritance.
then he has an Estate of Inheritance.

CHAP. V. Tenant for term of Years.
TEnant for term of years, is he to whom Lands or Tenements be let for term
of certain years, as is agreed between the Landlord and the Tenant, and when
the person to whom such Lease is made, does enter by force of the said Lease,
and is in possession of the same, then he is called a Tenant for term of
years. And here ye shall note, that if the Lessour that made the Lease, Rent
reserved.
has reserved unto him a yearly Rent upon the said Lease, as it is
accustomably used to be done; if the Rent be behind and unpaid, it shall be in
his lection either to enter and distrain for the Rent, Action of Debt.
or to bring an Action of Debt against the Tenant for the arrerages of the
same: A good Plea.
But in this case it is requisite that the Lessour were seized of the Lands or
Tenements at the time of the making of the Lease, for otherwise it shall be a
good Plea in the Action of Debt, for the Tenant to say, the Lessour had nothing
in the Lands and Tenements at the time of the Lease made, except the Lease were
made by Deed indented, for then the Plea shall not be in the Tenants mouth to
plead.

And it is to be known, Livery of Seisin needs not in a Lease for term of
years.
that in a Lease for term of years, whether it be by Deed or without Deed,
there need no livery of seasin to be made to the Lessee, but he may enter when
he will by virtue of his Lease, without any further ceremony of the Law.

And if a man leaseth Lands for term of years, though the Lessour chances to
die before the Lessee does enter, yet he may enter well enough, otherwise it is
where livery of seisin is to be made as in Free-holds and inheritances.

Also if the Tenant for years does waste, Waste.
the Landlord may bring an Action of Waste against him, and shall recover the
place wasted, and his treble damages.

Also if a Lease for years be made of two several things, and after the one is
recovered, the Lessee shall hold the other, and the rent or farm shall be
apportioned, M. 12. H 8.

Also if the Tenant for years grants a greater estate in the Land then he
has himself, whereby he conveyeth the fee-simple to himself, Forfeiture
he shall forfeit his Lease or term.

CHAP. VI. Tenant at Will.
TEnant at will, is he to whom Lands or Tenements be leased, to have and to
hold the same at the will of the Lessour, and in this case the Lessour may put
out his Tenant at what time he lists; but yet nevertheless if the Tenant have
sowed the grounds with Corn, in this case if the Lessour will enter and put out
his Tenant before harvest, the Law will give him free coming and going to reap
and carry his Corn away, without any punishment or damages to be sustained for
his so doing, because he knew not at what time the Lessour would enter: but
otherwise it is of Tenant for certain term of years; for if he sows the
ground, and his term of his Lease be come out, and expire before the Corn be
ripe, in this case the Lessour, or he in the reversion, may enter and take the
Corn, because it was the folly of the Tenant to sow the ground, knowing the
end of his term.

So likewise Tenant at will shall have free coming and going after the time of
the Lessours entry, to carry away his household stuff and goods, for a
reasonable space.

Ye shall also understand, that he that makes a Lease at will, may reserve an
annual or yearly rent; Distress or action of Debt.
in which case if the rent be behind, he may enter very well, and distrain the
Goods and Chattels of the Tenant, or at his election he may bring an Action of
Debt against him.

Also it is to be known, that a Tenant at will of a House or Tenement, is not
bound by the order of the Law, to sustain and repair the Houses that be decayed
and ruinous, as is the Tenant for years, and therefore no Action of Waste lies
against him: Waste.
yet if he will do wilful waste, as if he plucketh down the Houses, or cutteth
down the Trees, it has been thought by the Sages of the Law, that the Lessour
may bring an Action of Trespass against him, and shall recover his losses
thereby sustained.

And if such a Tenant die, and his Heir enter, in that case the Lessour may
have an Action of Trespass against the Heir for his entry. Trespass.


CHAP. VII. Tenant by Copy or Court-Roll.
THere is another kind of Tenant at Will which is called Tenant by Copy of the
Court Rolls, and this is when a man is seized of a Manor, within which it
has been used time out of mind, that the Tenants within the bounds and
precinct of the said Manor, have holden Lands and Tenements to them and to
their Heirs in fee-simple, see-taile or for term of life, at the will of the
Lord, according to the custom of the Manor, and such a Tenant cannot alien or
sell his Land by his Deed; for if he do, the Land or Tenement that is so
alienated and sold, is forfeit into the Lords hands: but if he will alien his
Copyhold-Land to another, he must according to the custom, come into the Lords
Court, Surrender.
and there surrender it into the Lords hands, to the behoof and use of him that
shall have the Estate; the form of which Surrender is commonly used to be thus:

Ad hanc curiam venit A. de B. and sursum redidit in eadem curia unum
mesvagium, The form of a Surrender.
etc. in manus Domini ad usum C. de D. and heredum suorum vel heredum de
corpore, etc. Et super hoc venit praedictus C. de D. and eripiet de Domino in
eadem curia mesvagium praedictum habendum and tenendum sibi, etc. ad voluntatem
Domini secundum consuetudinem Manerij faciend inde redditus servitia and
consuetudines inde juris debita and censuetas, etc. and dat Domino pro fine,
etc. and fecit Domino fidelitatem.

These, as I said, be called Tenants by Copy of Court Roll, because they have
none other Evidence to show concerning their Lands, save only the Copies of the
Rolls of their Lords Court.

Neither can these Tenants sue or be sued for such Lands, but in the Kings
Court by Writ or otherwise; but if they will in any wise implead or sue others
for such Copy Lands, they must do it by way of plaint in the Lords Court after
this form:

A. de D. queritur versus C. de D. de placito terrae, The form of the Plaint.
videlicet de uno mesvagio 46 acris terrae, 4 acris prati, etc. cum
pertinentiis and facit protestationem sequi quaerelam istam in natura brevis
Domini Regis assisae mortis antecessoris ad communem Legem pol' etc. Plegij de
prosequendo F.O. etc.

Now although some such Tenants have an Inheritance according to the custom of
that Manor, yet in very deed they are but Tenants at the will of the Lord: for
(as some men think) if the Lord will expel them and put them forth, they have
no remedy at all but to sue unto their Lord by way of Petition, desiring him to
be a good and gracious Lord unto them: for if they might have any remedy by the
Law, then should they not be called (say they) Tenants at the will of the Lord
after the custom of the Manor: but other men of no less Learning and
prudence, have been of contrary judgment, as Lord Brian Chief Justice in the
time of King Edward the fourth, whose opinion was always, that if such a
Tenant by the custom (paying his Services) be ejected and put forth by his
Lord without cause reasonable, Action of Trespass.
he may very well bring and maintain an Action of Trespass against his Lord at
the Common Law, as appears Termino Hillarij An. 21. E. 4. Also Lord Danby
Chief Justice likewise was of the same judgment, as appears Termino Mich. An.
7. E. 4. where he says, That the Tenant by the custom is as well Inheritable
to have his Land after the custom, as is he that has a freehold at the
Common Law: but the determination of this question I remit to my great Masters,
which can lose the knots and ambiguities of the Law, forasmuch as yet still of
this matter, Causidici certant and adhuc sub judice lis est.

Also ye shall understand, that the usage of some Manor is, when the Tenant
will surrender his Land to the use of another, that he shall take a Wand or a
Rod in his hand, and deliver it to the Steward of the Court, and the Steward
shall deliver the same Wand in name of Seisin, to him that shall take the Land,
and such a Tenant is called Tenant by the Verge. Diverse other customs there be
of surrendering of Copyhold Lands, which here for tediousness I will omit: And
forasmuch as Tenants by custom of the Manor have by the course of the Common
Law no freehold; therefore they be called Tenants of base Tenure. Base Tenure.


Also if such a Tenant lets to farm his Copyhold Land, for longer time then
a twelve month and a day without the Lords license, it is a forfeiture of his
Land to his Lord.

And know ye, that if this Tenant fell any Timber that grows upon the Land,
but only for the reparation of the same, this is Wast and a forfeiture of his
Copyhold.

Hitherto have I treated of the first member of our division, that is, to wit
of Chattels; for (as I said) all Leases for term of years and at will, be
accounted in the Law but as Chattels, and be comprised under that name, save
that these be called Chattels reals, whereas Kine, Oxen, Chattell real and
personal.
Horses, Money, Plate, Corn and such like, be called Chattels personals: Now we
will proceed to the explanation of the second member, that is to say of
Freeholds.

CHAP. VIII. Of Freeholds.
FReeholds or Frank-tenements a man may have in sundry wise; for either he is
seized for term of his own life, or for term of another man's life; if he be
seized for term of his own life, either he has gotten such estate by way of
Purchase, or else the Law has entitled him thereunto: I call it by purchase,
whether he comes unto it by his own bargaining and procurement, or by the gift
of his friend: and I call it by the operation of intituling of the Law, when a
man marries a woman that is an inheritrix, and has issue by her, Tenure by
the Courtesy.
and she dies, now shall he have the Lands during his life by course of the
Law, and shall be called Tenant by the courtesy of England.

Likewise if a man be seized in fee-simple or fee-taile of Lands, and takes a
wife and he dies, the Law gives unto the wise the third part of her husbands
Lands for term of life, Tenant in Dower.
and she shall be called Tenant in Dower.

CHAP. IX. Tenant for term of Life.
TEnant for term of Life, is he that holds Lands or Tenements for term of
his own life, or for term of another life; howbeit the most frequent and
common manner of speaking is, to call him that has an estate for term of his
own life Tenant for life, and him that has an estate for term of another
life, Tenant for term, dauter vie, that is to say, Tenant for term of
another life.

Ye shall note, that like as he that makes the Lease is called the Lessour,
and he to whom the Lease is made is called the Lessee; so he that makes the
Feoffment is called the Feoffer, and he to whom the Feoffment is made the
Feoffee.

Also if the Tenant for term of life, or Tenant for term of another man's life
do waste, Waste.
the Lessour, or he in the reversion shall maintain very well an Action of
Waste against him, and shall by the same recover trebble damages.

Finally, Ye shall understand, that by an Act of Parliament made in the 27.
year of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the eight, it is enacted, That no
Freehold nor estate of Inheritance shall pass nor take effect, by reason of any
bargain and sale, except the same be made by writing indented, sealed and
enrolled in one of the Kings Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or else within
the County where the Land does lie, before the Custos Rotulorum, and two
Justices of Peace and the Clerk of the Peace of the same County, or two of them
at least, of which the said Clerk shall be one, and that such enrolment be made
within six months after the date of such writing: and for the enrolment of
every such writing, where the Land comprised therein is not above the yearly
value of Forty shillings, they shall take two shillings, that is Twelve pence
to the Justices, and Twelve pence to the Clerk; and if the Land be above the
yearly value of Forty shillings, then they shall take Five shillings, that is,
Two shillings and six pence to the Justices, and Two shillings and six pence to
the Clerk which shall enroll and ingross sufficiently in parchment such Deed
and writing; and at every years end he shall deliver the same to the Custos
Rotulorum of the same County, to remain in his custody among other Records of
the same County, so that the parties resorting thither may see them: provided
that this extend not to any Tenements or Hereditaments lying within any City or
Town Corporate, wherein the Majors Records or other Officers have authority, or
have lawfully used to enroll any Evidences or writings within their Precinct.

CHAP. X. Tenant by the Courtesy.
TEnant by the Courtesy of England, is he that has married a Wife inherited;
and has had issue by her and she is dead, in this case the Law of England
permits and suffers the husband of such a wife, to receive and keep still
all his wives Land that she had either in fee-simple or fee-taile so long as he
lives, and this is by the courtesy and urbanity of England, for this thing is
used in none other Country nor Region. But in this it is required, that the
Child be vital, that is to say, be born and brought forth into this world
alive; and therefore the common saying is and has been, that unless the Child
be heard cry, the Father shall not be Tenant by the courtesy, for the only
proof and argument of life in an Infant born, is the vagite and crying. Ye
shall furthermore understand, that unless the husband be in actual and real
possession of his wives Lands, and seized of them in her right, he shall not be
Tenant by the courtesy after her death: And therefore if Lands descend to a
man's Wife, so that she is Tenant in the Law, and to every man's Actions, yet if
the Husband have not made an actual entry during coverture and matrimony
between them, he shall not be Tenant by the courtesy, for it shall be reputed
and judged his folly and negligence, that he would not enter in her life time.

Otherwise it is of Advowsons, Rents, Commons, and such other things which
forthwith when they descend, be in man or in a woman, without any entry or
further ceremony in Law.

Note, That if a Tenant by the courtesy of England, will suffer or make any
waste in the Lands or Tenements that he so holds, he is punishable therefore
by Action of Waste brought by him in the reversion.

Also it is to be known, That of things that be in suspense, a man shall not be
Tenant by the courtesy; and therefore if a man be Tenant in fee-simple of
certain Land, and does intermarry with a woman that is the Seignioress or Lady
of the same, and has issue by her, and she dies, yet shall he not be Tenant
by the courtesy of the Lordship or Seigniory, because himself is Tenant of the
Land, and therefore the Lordship is suspended for the time, for a man cannot be
both Lord and Tenant of one thing; but if he had not been Tenant of Land, he
should have had the Lordship after the death of his wife by the courtesy of
England very well.

Also note, That of a right only a man shall not be Tenant by the courtesy; as
if a woman sole, seized in fee of Lands or Tenements be disseized, and after
take a husband and they have issue, and she die before any reentrie be made,
the husband shall not be Tenant by the courtesy.

Note further, That of a reversion a man shall not be Tenant by the courtesy;
as if a woman sole seized of Land in fee, make a Lease to S. for term of life,
after takes a husband and they have issue and she die, living the Lessee for
term of life, the husband shall not be Tenant by the courtesy.

CHAP. XI. Of Tenant in Dower.
TEnant in Dower, is she that has been married to a husband that was (during
the matrimony between them) seized of Lands or Tenements in fee-simple or
fee-taile, which is now dead, and she seized of the third part of her husbands
said Lands for term of her life, for by the Common Law of the Land, Dower at
the Common Law.
if the husband be at any time during the coverture seized lawfully, whether it
be by purchase or by descent, either in fee or in fee-taile, and die, his wife
shall be endowed by the course of the Common Law, of the third foot; Dower by
custom.
and in some places (by an ancient custom) she shall be endowed of the Moitie;
yea and though the husband were never seized actually during the coverture, yet
if the Lands be cast upon him by the Law, so that the Law calls him Tenant to
every man's Action, it suffices the woman to demand her dower, for it were
unreasonable that the negligence and slackness of entering of the husband should
hurt the wives Title.

Otherwise it is as it is said before of Tenant by the courtesy; Tenant by the
Courtesy.
for if Lands descend to a woman covert, and the husband for slothfullness or
negligence does not enter in his wives life, he shall not be Tenant by the
courtesy, for by all Laws the wife owes obedience and subjection to her
husband, and therefore she cannot compel him to enter: but when Lands descend
to the wife, the husband only has power to enter at his pleasure.

And ye shall understand, that unless the wife be above the age of Nine years
at the time of her husbands death, she shall not be endowed by the Common Law.

But it is to be known, A Woman shall have no Dower.
that a woman may by diverse ways estoppe and prejudice her self of her dower;
as if she commit any crime for which she is attainted of Treason, Murder or
felony, she shall have in this case no dower, notwithstanding she has obtained
her pardon,

Allo if after the death of her husband she takes a Lease for term of life of
the same Lands whereof she is indowable, she loses her dower of the same.
Moreover if she depart from her husband, and lies in adultery with another
man, and is not reconciled again to her husband, without cohersion of the
Ecclesiastical power, she loses her dower after her husbands death; she shall
be also barred of her dower, if she will withhold from the heir, the Charters
and Evidence concerning that Land whereof she asks dower: but none other save
the Heir can withhold dower for this cause. No Dower.


It ought not to be unknown also, of what things she may demand dower, and of
what things not; of Lands, Messuages, Advowsons, Rentcharge, Rent-services, or
Seigniories in gross; or otherwise of Villains, of Commons certain, of Estovers
certain, of Milles and Offices, or of the profit of them she is dowable; but of
Commons and Estovers saus number also of Annuities, of Homages of things of
Pleasure, as of Service, of payment of Roses and semblable, she shall not be
endowed. Note.


There be yet two other kinds of Dower, Dowment ex assensu Patris.
the one is called Dowment ex assensu patris, that is to say, by the assent of
the father; and the other is called Dowment de la plus beale part, that is to
say of the fairest part: Dowment ex assensu patris, is when the Father is
seized of Lands in fee simple, and his Son which is Heir apparent, indoweth
his Wife at the Church door when he is espoused, of parcel of his Fathers
Lands, with the assent of his Father in writing, testifying the same assent; if
in this case her Husband die, she may forthwith enter into the Land so assigned
unto her, without further procurement of process of Law, although the Father of
her said Husband be yet alive, and in actual possession of the Land; but if
she thus do, and take her to this endowment at the Church door, she cannot have
her Dower also by the Common Law of the third part of her Husbands Lands, or
any part or parcel of them: Howbeit if she will refuse this Assignment made
unto her at the Church door, and demand Dower at the Common Law, she may so do
v ry well. A man may also endow his Wife at the time of the Espousals, of his
own Lands, the which he has by his own possession, and that Dower is called
Dower ad estium Ecclesiae, that is to say, at the Church door. Dowment ad
ostium Ecclesiae.


Dowment de la plus beale part, Dowment de la plus beale part.
that is to say, dowment of the fairest part, shall be in this case, when a man
is seized of Lands which he holds of another man by Knights-service, and of
other Lands which be of Socage tenure, and has Issue which is within the age
of fourteen years and die, and the Lord of whom the Land is holden by
Knight Service, enters in the Land holden of him, and the mother of the Child
enters into Socage tenure as Guardian in Socage; if in this case the woman
will bring a Writ of Dower against the Lord which is Guardian in Chivalry, he
may plead the special Matter, and show how she is Guardian in Socage, and has
so much Land, and thereupon pay the Court, that she may be suffered to endow
her self of so much Land being in her own custody, as amounts to the third
part of the whole Lands.

And then the judgment shall be, That the Guardian in Chivalry shall retain the
Land holden of him, quit from (...) woman during the nonage of the Ward; after
which Judgment and Sentence given, she may go, and in the presence of her
neighbors endow her self of the best part of that which is in her custody,
amounting to the third part of the whole; and then is she called Tenant in
Dower de la plus beale.

Finally ye shall understand, An. 27. H. 8.
That by a Statute made in the 27. year of our most dread Sovereign Lord King
Henry the Eight, it is enacted, That where diverse Persons have Estates made to
them and to their Wives, and to the Heirs of the Husband, or to the Husband and
Wife, and the Heirs of their two bodies begotten, or the Heirs of one of their
bodies, or for term of both or one of their lives, or any other Persons and
their Heirs, to the use of the Husbrnd and Wife, or to the Wife alone for her
Jointure, in every such case the Woman shall not be suffered to demand any
Dowry of the residue of her Husbands Lands of whom she has Jointure against
any Tenant of the Land; but in case she has no such Jointure, then may she
demand her ^^wrie, after the course of the Common Law: Provided nevertheless,
that if such Women be lawfully expulsed from their Jointure, or any part
thereof, without fraud or covin, then shall they be endowed of the residue of
their Husbands Lands, for as much as the Lands shall amount unto, out of which
they were so expulsed and put forth.

Provided also, That if Lands or Tenements be assured to any Woman after
marriage, for term of life, or likewise in Jointure (except it be by Act of
Parliament) and the Wife over-live her her Husband in whose time the Jointure
was made, in this case the Wife may refuse the Lands so appointed unto her in
Jointure, and have her Dower at the Common Law, of such Lands as her Husband
was seized of at any time during the coverture.

Also if the Husband commits Treason, Murder or Felony, for which he is
attainted, the Wife shall not have her Dower.

And note, That if the Husband enter into Religion and is professed, the Heir
shall enter into the Land, but the Wife gets no Dower till the Husband
dies. M. 32. E. 2.

And likewise if a man seized of Land, takes a Wife that is an Alien born and
dies, she shall not be endowed, except she be made Denizon by Act of
Parliament, T. 3. H. 6. And note, That where the Wife brings a Writ of Dower
and recovereth her right, she shall recover no damages, but where her husband
died seized of the Lands recovered.

CHAP. XII. A division of Inheritance.
HItherto have I spoken of Free-holds, Damages.
now it remains to treat of Inheritances; not the Inheritances that be no
Free-holds, for they be Free-holds also; but the other Estates of which I have
hitherto treated, be only Free-holds and of no higher nature; whereas an Estate
of Inheritance, although it be a Free hold indeed, yet it is not to be called
by name, since it is after more excellent and greater Estate: but ye shall
understand, that of Inheritances some be of more amplitude and excellent then
other some be, as that Inheritance which is pure simple and without limitation
of what Heirs, which kind of Inheritance is called fee-simple: but when I make
a limitation of what Heirs, then it is called fee-tayle; and of which also be
two sorts, as hereafter more at large shall be declared: now therefore the
nature of fee-simple is set forth with our accustomed compendiousness.

CHAP. XIII. Of Fee-simple.
FEe-simple is (as I said) the most ample and large Inheritance that can be in
this Realm devised or invented: Fee-simple.
it is that which a man has to him and his Heirs, simple without any further
limitation: for whether they be of his own body begotten or not, so that they
be the next of his kin and within the degrees it suffices.

So then, Tenant in fee-simple is he that has Lands or Tenements, whether it
be by purchase, or by descent to him and to his Heirs and Assigns for ever: for
if a man will purchase Lands in fee-simple, he must needs have these words his
Heirs in his purchase, for these be the only words that make the Estate of
Inheritance. Therefore if Lands be given to a man for ever, and no mention be
made of his Heirs, he has an Estate but for term of his life, because these
words his Heirs do lack.

Yet nevertheless if a man by his Testament does devise Lands to another, in
such place or case where the custom or Law will serve so to do, although he
make no mention of Heirs, but says, that he bequeaths to such a person such
Lands, to have and to hold to him and to his Assigns for evermore, here an
Estate of Inheritance does pass; for in Testaments the will and intent of the
Testator is to be pondered, and not the formal and prescript words of the Law.

Also these terms in the Law, frank-marriage, and frank almoigne, that is to
say, free marriage and free alms, do include in the words of Inheritance.

And therefore if I give Lands to a man with my Daughter in frank marriage,
without further addition or mention of Heirs, this is an estate of Inheritance,
as shall be declared hereafter more plenteously. So likewise it is of Lands
given to an House Ecclesiastical in pure and frank alms. Moreover if Land be
given to a man and to his blood, or unto him and to his seed, he has in both
cases an estate of Inheritance; for in the last he has a fee-tayl, and in the
other a fee-simple; for these words seed and blood, and such like, do imply
words of Inheritance.

Also if Lands be given to a man, and and to his Heirs males or females, he
has by this gift a fee-simple, because it is not expressed of what body the
Issue shall come.

But now it is to be seen, The half-blood.
who be said to be a man's Heirs in the Law: ye shall therefore know, that my
Brother or Sister by the half-blood, that is to wit by the Fathers side and not
by the Mothers, or contrariwise by the Mothers side and not by the Fathers,
shall never be mine Heir, A Bastard shall be no Heir.
nor none that come of them: neither my bastard can be mine Heir, nor mine own
natural Father nor Mother, nor Grandfather nor Grandmother, can be mine Heir;
for it is a principle and ground of the Law, A ground of the Law.
That Inheritance may lineally descend, but ascend it cannot; and therefore if
I have Lands in fee-simple, and die without Issue of my blood, my Father cannot
be my Heir, but my Fathers Brother or Sister shall; and then if my Uncle or
Aunt die seized without Issue, my Father shall have the Lands as Heir to mine
Uncle and not as Heir to me, for that cannot be; but it may go from me to my
Uncle or Aunt well enough, for that is not called a lineall ascension, but a
collateral descent.

Also ye shall understand, Lineall and Collateral descent.
That a lineall descent is, when the descent is conveyed in the same line of
the whole blood, as Grandfather, Father and Son, and so down; and collateral
descent is of another branch from above of the whole blood, as the Grandfathers
Brother, or Fathers Brother, and so descending.

And ye shall also note, That by the Common Law of this Realm, the eldest Son
shall have the whole Inheritance, and after him (if he have no Issue) the
second Son, and so forth: and if I have no Sons but Daughters, then shall
all the Daughters together inherit, which be called Coparteners. Copartners.
But if I have no Issue at all, neither Sons nor Daughters, then shall my
eldest Brother in heritage succeed me: but if I have no Brother, then my
Sisters, if I have any; if not, my Uncle by my Fathers side, if the Lands be of
mine own purchasing, or if they descended unto me from my Father: and to be
short, if there be none in life of my Fathers side, the purchased Land shall go
to my Mothers side: and if there can be found no Heir neither by my Fathers
side nor yet by my Mothers, then shall it Escheat, Escheat.
as they call it, to the Lord of whom it was holden; for every Land must needs
be holden of some Lord, as shall be hereafter showed. But if Lands descend unto
me by my Mothers side, then if I fail of Issue, the Lands shall descend only to
my Heirs of my Mothers side, and never to mine Heirs of my Fathers side: as on
the contrary side, if I have Lands or any Tenements by descent from my Father
or his blood, they shall never descend to my Heirs by my Mothers side.

And thus you see a great difference in this behalf, Diversity.
between purchased Land, and Lands which descend from an Ancestour.

If there be three Sons, and the middle Son purchase Lands, and die without
Issue, the eldest shall have the Lands and not the youngest.

And it is a principle in our Law, A ground of the Law.
That none can be mine Heir of Lands that I hold in the Fee-simple, unless he
be mine Heir by the whole blood, that is to say both by Father and Mother; for
if a man have Issue two or three Sons by sundry Wives, and the eldest
purchases Lands in fee and dies without Issue, his half brethren (I mean
these that be not his Brethren both by the Fathers side and Mothers side, shall
not have his Land, but it shall go to his Uncle: Likewise if a man has by his
first Wife a Son and a Daughter, and by his second Wife another Son, and
the Son by the first Wife purchases Lands in fee-simple, and dies without
Issue, the Sister-germaine, that is to say, both by the Fathers side and
Mothers, shall have the Lands by descent, as Heir to her Brother, and not the
younger Brother, for as much as the younger Brother cannot in this case be Heir
of his elder Brother, because he is no Brother-germane unto him: Otherwise it
is of Lands or other hereditaments entailed, as shall be hereafter specified.

Also if a man be seized of Lands in fee-simple, and has Issue a Son and a
Daughter by one Wife, and after the death of his first Wife a Son by another
Wife, and dies, and the eldest Son enters into the Lands, and after he
dies without lawful Issue of his body, the Daughter shall have the Lands, and
not the youngest Son, and yet the youngest Son is Heir to his Father, but
he is not so unto his Brother. But in this case if the eldest Son has not
entered after the death of his Father, but had died before any entry made by
him, then shall not the Sister-germaine enter, but the younger Brother is Heir
to his Father, because the eldest Brother was never in actual possession,
which is requisite to the person that claims to be Heir collaterally.

But to the lineall Heirs it suffices that the Ancestour should have been Heir
if he had lived; I mean as thus: a man seized of Lands, and has Issue a Son
and a Daughter by one Wife, and afterward a Son by another, he dies, and
after his death the eldest Son enters not but dies without Issue, before he
can make actual entry, here in this case his Sister shall not have the Lands
as Heir to her Brother, because her Brother was not in actual possession, but
the younger Brother shall have them as Heir to his Father: yet if the eldest
Son in that case had left behind him Issue of his body, whether it had been
Son or Daughter, this Issue, notwithstanding that the Father of the Issue was
never possessed, either actually or in the Law, shall have the Lands, and shall
convey his descent from his Father; the cause hereof is this, that the Son or
Daughter is lineall Heir, whereas the Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt, etc. be
Heirs collateral, and so ye shall observe a diversity. Diversity.


I call an actual possession when a man enters indeed into Lands which be to
him descended, but a possession in Law is called, when Lands be descended to a
person, and he has not yet really and actually entered into them; for
notwithstanding that he is not in actual possession, yet he is possessed in
the Law, that is to say, Haereditae quid sit.
in the eye and consideration of the Law, he is deemed to be possessed, for as
much as he is Tenant for every man's Action that will sue for the said Lands, or
else assuredly there should ensue an intolerable inconvenience, as we shall
more copiously open in another place. Ye shall furthermore understand, that
this word Inheritance is not only to be accommodate and applied to that which
comes by descent or succession from a man's ancestors or predecessors, but also
to every purchase in fee-simple or fee-tayle.

And note, That a man can have no larger or greater estate then fee-simple.

CHAP. XIV. Of Fee-Tayle.
YE shall understand, that before a certain Statute called the Statute of West.
second, West. 2. Chap. 1.
there was no estate tail, but all was fee-simple, either purely that is to
say without condition, or at the least way conditionally, Division.
as appears by the presence of the said Estatute, but now sithence the
promulgation of the Estatute, diverse forms of Estates Tail have risen.

Fee-tayle is, when it is prescribed and limited in the gift, what sort of
Heirs and by whom engendered shall inherit.

As for example, I give Lands to a man and to his Heirs, and go no further,
this is a fee-simple; but if I make a limitation, and add of his body
begotten, now it is a fee-tayle, that is to say, a fee or Inheritance limited,
prescribed, determinate or assigned.

So that if I give Lands to a man and to his Heirs, he has fee-simple, but if
I give Lands to him, and to his Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, he has
but a fee-tayle, forasmuch as I appoint, limit, prescribe and express, what
Heirs they shall be, and for lack of such Heirs, the gift shall be expired and
worn out, and the Land shall be reverted again to the giver or his Heirs.

But ye must observe and Note, That there be two kinds of fee-tayle, there is a
general tail and there is a special tail.

Fee-taile general is, where Lands be given to a man and to his Heirs of his
body begotten, without any mentioning and expressing by what woman they are
begotten.

And therefore if a man be Tenant in the general tail of Lands, General
tail.
and takes a wife and has Issue by her and she dies, and afterward he
takes another wife, of whom he has also other Issue by her, either of these
Issues is inheritable to this Land entayled. But if I express in the gift, by
what woman the Heirs shall be procreated and ingendered, then it is an
especial tail: as for example, to make the thing plain; Especial tail.
If Lands be given to a man, and to his Heirs of his body lawfully begotten by
Margaret his wife, this is an especial tail, for the Issue of him begotten by
another woman shall never inherit by force and virtue of the tail: Likewise it
is if Lands be given to a woman, and to the Heirs of her body lawfully begotten
(and show not by what man) this is a general tail; but if I go forward and
say by such a man her husband, then it is an especial tail.

Also if I give Lands to a man and to his wife, and to the Heirs of their two
bodies lawfully begotten, this is an especial tail as well in the husband as
in the wife.

Semblable it is if a man gives Lands to another man with his Daughter or
Kinswoman in frank marriage, Frank-marriage.
this word (frank marriage) implies an estate tail special, and in this case
as well the man as the woman has an an estate in the special tail.

But if I give Lands to a man and to such a woman, and to his Heirs that he
has begot of her, here the woman has an estate but for term of her life, and
the Husband an estate in the especial tail; and likewise it is in the woman's
behalf, as if I give Land to a man and to his wife, and to her Heirs of her
body by her said Husband engendered, he has an estate but for term of life,
and she an estate in the special tail; but in both cases, if I had said to
the Heirs, and not to his or her Heirs, then should either of them have had an
estate in the special tail, because this word Heirs, is as well referred to
the one as to the other.

Ye shall also understand, That if Lands be given to a man, Descent by Heir
males.
and to the Heirs males of his body, this is an estate tail, and in this case
the Heir female shall never inherit.

Also if a man has Issue and dies, and Lands be given to him and to his Heirs
of his body begotten, this is a good estate tail, although the father were
dead at the time of the gift. Finally it is to be noted, that of Lands which a
man has in fee-simple, the possession of the Brother shall cause the
Sister-germaine, that is to say, the Sister both by Fathers side and Mothers to
inherit; and in this case the Brother by the half-blood shall not inherit, as
heretofore was said, but of Lands which be entailed: Otherwise it is therefore
if a man be seized of Lands in the general tail, and has issue by his first
wife a Son and a Daughter, and also a Son afterward by another wife and
dies, and the eldest Son enters into the Lands and after dies, the
Sister-germaine to the eldest Son shall not have the Land, but the younger
Brother of the half-blood, because whosoever shall inherit Land or any other
hereditaments in tail, must claim them as next and immediate Heir, not to him
that dies last seized of the Lands, but to him to whom the Lands were first
given unto, whom in the case before remembered, is the Son and Heir, and not
the Daughter.

Thus ye shall mark a great diversity between the form of succession in the
Lands of fee-simple, Diversity.
and the form in fee-tayle.

CHAP. XV. Tenant after possibility of Issue extinct.
WHen Lands, Tenements or other Hereditaments be given to a man and to his
wife, and to the Heirs of their two bodies lawfully begotten, if in this case
either of them chance to die before they have Issue between them, Dispunishable
of waste.
he or she that overliveth is still Tenant in tail, but without possibility of
any Issue that can be Heir to these Lands or hereditaments thus entayled, and
for this cause he or she thus overliving, is called Tenant in Tail after
possibility of Issue extinct, for in such a Tenant is all possibility of Issue
that may be inheritable to these Lands by force of the gift in tail utterly
extinct or quenched, and by his or her death, the estate tail shall expire,
cease and be abolished for ever, and shall revert and turn again to the giver
or donor from whence it came.

Yet forasmuch as the Tenant after possibility of Issue had once an Inheritance
in him, he shall not be punished by an Action of Waste, though he make never so
much waste in the Lands and Tenements, whereas yet in effect he is but a Tenant
for term of life. But if this Tenant does alien in fee such Lands, he in the
reversion may enter for the forfeiture.

And this for Estates at this present time shall suffice: Forfeiture.
but to the intent that ye may the more easily comprehend all the members of
the division of Possessions and Estates, which men have in Lands, Tenements and
other Hereditaments, it shall not be evil done, to set forth as it were in a
Table before your eyes the division thereof, which is this:

A Figure of the Division of Possessions.
Possession de Frank-tenement, Selon comonley Estate Dinheritance, Fee simple,
Fee-tayl general, special.

Frank-tenement. Apres possibility dissue extinct, Courtesy Dangl' Dower,
Term de vie, Term daut vie.

Selon custom, que poet este divide en mesme le manner come franktenement al
common ley.
Chattell, Real Term daus, Guard de terre, Tener a volunt.
Personal Biens movables.



CHAP. XVI. Of Parceners or other Coheirs.
HItherunto I have made a compendious and short declaration of Estates of all
sorts: but where I said that among Sisters there is no prerogative or
pre-eminence concerning the inheriting of their Ancestors Lands, but that they
shall be all together inheritours, and make as it were but one Heir; it is
expedient to make a further declaration and process in this behalf, and to show
how and in what manner this partition shall be made.

But ye shall understand, Division of Parceners at the Common Law and Parceners
by Custom.
That there be besides Parceners at the Common Law which be only Sisters, also
Parceners by Custom which is amongst Brothers, contrary to the course of the
Common Law, and this custom is in some places of Rent, and in other places
where Lands and Tenements, be of the tenure of Gavelkind.

Ye shall therefore kow, That when a man is seized of Land in fee-simple or fee
tail, and has no issue but Daughters, and die, and the Daughters do enter
into the Lands thus descended unto them, now they be called Parceners or
Coheirs, Writ de partione facienda.
and by a Writ called de partitione facienda, brought by one of them against
the others, they shall be constrained by the Law to suffer an equal partition
to be made of the Lands between them.

Now partition may be made in sundry ways; one way is, when they themselves do
make partition between them of the whole heritage, and do agree unto the same,
and do enter every one into her part so allotted unto her.

Another way is, Partition in diverse manners.
when by all their agreements and consent, one common friend does make the
partition, in which case the eldest Sister shall have the first election, and
after her the second Sister and so forth; but if they agree that the eldest
Sister shall make the partition, and she makes it, then the eldest shall not
choose first, but shall suffer all her Sisters to choose before her, as it is
thought.

There is also another form of partition, which is, equally to divide the Lands
into so many parts as there are Coheirs or Parceners, and to write every part
so divided in a several scroule of paper, and so put the said scroules in a
bonet, or to enclose them severally in balls of wax, and then the eldest Sister
to choose which ball she will, or to put her hand into the bonet and take a
scroule, and to hold her to her chance and allotment, and so consequently
every Sister after other.

And ye shall note, Nota.
That Partition by agreement may as well be made by nude and bare words without
writing as by writing.

And if any of the Parceners will not suffer any partition to be made, then may
the other that would have partition, A writ de partritone facienda.
purchase a Writ called De partitione facienda, against them that refuse
partition, to compel the same to suffer partition to be made accordingly, and
then by the judgment of the Court, the Sheriff by the serement and Oath of
twelve men shall make partition between them, and shall assign to each Sister
her portion as he shall think good, without giving any election of choice to
the eldest.

And if two Manors or Meases happen to descend to two Sisters, and the Manors
be not of equal value, then may she to whom the less Manor or Mease is
allotted, have assigned unto her a Rent proportionably out of the other Manor;
for the which Rent, she and her Heirs may distrain of common right, though they
have no writing thereof.

Finally ye shall understand, Distress of Common Right.
That if a man be seized of Lands in fee-simple, and has Issue two Daughters,
and gives with one of his Daughters to another man that shall marry her, the
third or fourth part of his Land in frank-marriage, and dies; if in this case
the Daughter that is in this wise bestowed and advanced, will have her portion
of her fathers heritage, she must put her Land given unto her in frank-marriage
in hochpot new again, Hochpot.
I mean she must be contented to suffer her said Lands to be commixed and
mingled with the other Lands of which her Father died seized in fee-simple, so
that an equal division may be made of the whole, or or else she shall have no
part of those Lands of which her Father died seized; but if her Father had made
unto her a common gift in tail or feofment in fee, she should not need to put
her Lands in hochpot, but may very well keep and retain them still, and also
have as good part of the rest of the Lands of which her Father died seized, as
her other sister or Sisters have, Frank-marriage.
for a gift in frank-marriage is accounted the most free and most liberal gift
that can be, and that gift which the Law judges to be only for the advancement
and bestowing of the Daughter; whereas feofments in fee-simple, and also common
gifts in tail, be accustomarily for other causes, and for the advantage rather
of the giver or feoffer then of the taker.

And if Parceners make partition of Lands being within age, that partition is
void.

And if Parceners in fee-simple make partition, and the part of the one is
better then the other, being of full age of 21. years, then the partition is
good and cannot be defeated; but if it be of Lands in fee-tayle, the one part
being better then the other, that partition may be defeated by their Heirs.

CHAP. XVII. Of Joyntenants.
HItherunto briefly have we spoken of Coheirs, called Parceners of the the
Common Law, which as is heretofore declared, do come to Lands and other
hereditaments jointly by the course, operation and act of the Law. Now shall we
speak somewhat of them that either jointly or severally come to Lands,
Tenements or other Hereditaments, by their own purchase, act, procurement and
working; and of these they that come to them by joint title way or color, be
called joyntenants, but they that come by several titles, ways or colors, to
Lands or Tenements, be named Tenants in common.

So then if a man being seized of Lands or Tenements, Tenants in common.
or other Hereditaments, shall thereof enfeoff two, three, four or more, to
have and to hold to them in fee-simple, fee-tayle, or for term of their lives,
or for term of another life, these persons so enfeoffed and seized, be called
Joyntenants also; also if two or more do expel and disseize another man of any
Lands or Tenements, to their own behoof and use, these disseizors and wrong
doers, are now become Joyntenants, because by their own act they come jointly
to this Land; but if they do disseize another man to the use only of one of
them, in this case they be not Joyntenants, but he to whose use the disseizin
is made, is Tenant alone of the same, and the others have nothing in the
tenancy, but be called aydours or coadjutors to the disseizin.

And ye shall understand, Disseisin. Survivour takes place.
That a Disseizin is properly where a man enters into any Lands or Tenements
there where his entry is not lawful, and puts out him which has the
freehold of the same.

And ye shall further know, That the nature of Joyntenancy is, that he which
surviveth and overliveth the other, shall have to himself alone the whole and
entire tenancie, according to that estate which he should have had if the
jointure had been continued: as for example, three Joyntenants be of Lands in
fee-simple, and the one half has Issue and die, in this case the two which do
overlive their fellow, shall have the whole Lands between them, and the Issue
of him that is departed gets nothing; and if the second Joyntenant has
Issue also and die, the third which has overlived them both, shall now have
and enjoy the whole to him and to his Heirs for evermore.

But otherwise it is of Coheirs, Diversity.
which in our Law are called Parceners; for if there be three such Coheirs and
Parceners, and before any partition made, the one have Issue a Son or a
Daughter and dies, her portion shall descend and fall to his child, and shall
not run amongst the other joynt-heirs or Coparceners; howbeit if such
Parcener or Coheir had died without Issue, then should his portion have
descended to his Coheirs; but how? not by force of surviver or overliving,
which in Latin is ealled jus acrescendi, but by very descent; for where any of
the Coheirs die without Issue, who can be Heir to him or her so dying, but the
other Coheirs to him or her so dying, or the rest of the Coheirs if there be
many?

And like as this right of survivor or overliving holds place amongst
Joyntenants of Lands and Tenements, so in like manner it holds place amongst
them which have joint estate or possession with others, of Chattels whether
they be real or personal; as (for example) if a Lease of Lands or Tenements
be made to many for term of certain years, the overliver or overlivers shall
have the whole during the term by force of the same Lease; Joyntenants of
real and personal goods.
so of Chattels personal; if an Horse, Ox, grain or other such personal
Chattell be given to many, he which overliveth shall have the same alone; in
semblable wise it is of Debts and duties; for if an Obligation be made to many
for one debt, and of some other Covenants and Contracts the Law is likewise so.

Also some Joyntenants may be which may have joint estate and be Joyntenants
for term of their lives, Joyntenants of several Inheritances.
and yet have several Inheritances; as where Lands be given to two men, and to
the Heirs of their two bodies engendered, in this case these two persons have
joint estate for term of their two lives, and yet they have several
Inheritance; for if the one have Issue and die, the other that surviveth shall
have all by force of the survivour for term of his life, and if he that
surviveth has also Issue and die, then the Issue of the one shall have the
half of the Lands, and the Issue of the other shall have the other half, and
they shall hold the Land between them in common, and shall not be Joyntenants
but Tenants in common; Tenants in common.
and the cause and reason why such Donees in such cases have a joint estate for
term of their lives is, for that at the beginning the Lands were given to them
two; which words without more saying, make a joint estate to them for term of
their lives; for if a man will let Land to another by Deed or without Deed, not
making mention what estate he has, and of this makes livery of seisin, in
this case the Lessee shall have an estate for term of his life; and if he have
no livery of seisin, he is Tenant at will, and so forasmuch as the Lands were
given unto them, they have a joint estate for term of their lives; but the
cause why they have several Inheritance is this, for that they cannot by
possibility have an Heir between them engendered as a man and a woman may have;
wherefore the Law will that their estate and their Inheritance shall be such,
as reason will after the form and effect of the words of the gift, and that is
to the Heirs that the one engendered of his body by and of his Wives, and to the
Heirs that the other engenders of his body by any of his Wives; so it behooves
by necessity of reason, that they have several Inheritances; and in such case,
if the Issue of one of them after the death of them both does die, so that he
has no Issue alive of his body engendered, then the Donor which gave the Land,
or his Heirs may enter in the half as in his reversion, though the other has
Issue alive; and the cause is, that forasmuch as the Inheritances be several,
therefore the reversion in the Law is severed, and the survivour of the Issue
of the other shall hold no place to have the whole; and as it is said of Males
in the same manner, it is where Lands, be given to two Females, and to the
Heirs of their two bodies begotten.

Also if Lands be given to two, Survivor holds no place.
and to the Heirs of one of them; this is a good contenancy, and the one has a
freehold, and the other has a fee-simple, and if he which has fee-simple die,
he that has the freehold shall have the whole by the Survivor for term of his
life.

And if these two Joyntenants, join in a gift in the tail to a stranger,
reserving a Rent to him that has an estate but for his life; this reservation
is void to make a Tenure: likewise it is where Tenements be given to two, and
the Heirs of the body of one of them engendered, the one has a freehold, and
the other fee-tayle.

Note, Rentcharge granted by a joyntenant.
If two Joyntenants be seized of an estate of fee-simple, and the one grants
a Rentcharge by his deed to another, out of that which to him belongs, in
this case during the life of the graunter, the Rentcharge is good and
effectual; but after his decease, the Rentcharge is void, as to charge the
Lands, for he that has the Land by the Survivour, shall hold all the Land
discharged; the cause is, for that he that surveieth claims to have the Land
by the Surviour and not by descent of his fellow, Diversity.
but otherwise it is of Parcener or Coheirs, for if there be two Parceners in
fee-simple, and before any partition be made, the one charge that that to him
belongs by his deed of a Rentcharge and dies without Issue, here that which
to him belongs descends to the other Parcener; and in this case the other
Parcener shall hold the Land charged, because he comes to the half by descent
as heir. Also if there be two Joyntenants in fee-simple within one Borough,
where the Lands and Tenements within the same Borough be devisable by
Testament, If the one of the said Joyntenants devise that which to him
belongs by Testament and die, Divise by Testament.
this devise and legation is void And the cause is, for that no devise may take
effect till after the death of the Testator which bequeathed and devised the
same, and by his death all the Land incontinent comes by the Law to his fellow
that Surviveth by the Survivor, which neither claims nor has any thing in
the Land by the devise, but in his own right by the Survivor after the course
of the Law, and for this cause such a devise is void.

But otherwise it is of Parceners, A ground of the Law.
seized of Tenements devisable in such case of devise for the cause above
remembered; and it is commonly said that every Joyntenant is seized of the Land
that he holds jointly, per my et per tont; that is, throughout, and by all,
and this is as much to say, that he is seized by every parcel, and by all,
which saying is true, for in every parcel and part, and throughout all the
Lands and Tenements, he is jointly seized with his fellow, and therefore if the
one Joyntenant make a Feofment to his companion that is void, because he can
make no Livery of seizin to him. Diversity.
Also if two joyntenants be seized of certain Lands in fee-simple, and the one
lets that that to him belongs to a stranger for the term of Forty years,
and dies within the term, in this case, after his death the Lessee may enter
and ocupy the half to him letten, during the said Term, though the Lessee never
had possession of it in the life of the Lessour by force of the Lease,
Diversity between a grant of a Rent and Lease.
and the difference between the case of the grant of a Rentcharge and this
case is this, that in the grant of Rentcharge by a joyntenant, the Lands or
Tenements abide always as they were before, without that that any has right to
have parcel of the Tenements but themselves, and the Tenements abide in such
pity as they were before the Charge; but where a Lease is made by a Joyntenant
to another for term of years incontinent by force of the Lease, the Lessee has
right in the same Land; that is to say, of all that that to his Lessour
belongs by force of the same Lease during his term, and if the Lessor in this
case die, the other joyntenant shall have the Rent or Term during the said
Term, because the reversion is come to him by Survivor. Finally, if a joint
estate be made of Land to the Husband and Wife, and to the third person in this
case, the Husband and the Wife have not in the Law in their right but the half,
and the third person shall have as much as the Husband, and the Wife have, that
is to say, the other half; and the cause is, for that the Husband and Wife be
but as one person in the eye of the Law, and it is here in like case, as if an
estate be made to two joynt-Tenants, where the one has by force of the
Jointure, the one half, and the other the other half: in semblable wise, it is
where an estate is made to the Husband and Wife, and to other two men, in this
case the Husband and the Wife have not but the third part, and the other two
men the other two parts.

Also if two or three together disseiseth another of Lands and Tenements to
their own uses, then such disseisors be called Joyntenants.

More shall be said of this matter, touching Joyntenants in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XVIII. Tenants in Common.
TEnants is Common, (as I said before) be they that have Lands or Tenements in
fee-simple, fee-tayle, or for term of life, which have such Lands and Tenements
by several Titles, and not by one joint Title, and none of them knows that
which is several to him, and in this case they ought by the Law, before
partition made between them, to occupy such Lands and Tenements in common and
undevided, and to take the profits in Common; and because they come to such
Lands and Tenements by several Titles, and not by one self joint Title, and
their ocupation and possession in the same is among them in Common, they be
called Tenants in Common, or Tenants pro indiviso; as for example, If a man
Enfeoff two Joyntenants in fee-simple, and the one of them alieneth that that
to him belongs to another in fee, now the other Joyntenant and he to whom the
Alienation was made, be Tenants in Common, for that they be seized of such
Tenements by several Titles, for the one comes to the one half by the
Feoffment of the Joyntenant, and the other has the other half, by force of the
first Feoffment made to him, and to his first fellow, and so they be in by
several Titles, and by several Feofments.

And it is to wit, Diffinition of fee only.
that when it is said in any Book that a man is seized in fee, without more
saying or addition, it shall be understood fee-simple, for it shall not be
understood by such a word in fee, that a man is seized in fee-tayle, except
there be put in it such addition in tail.

Also if three joyntenants be, Joyntenants.
and the one of them alieneth that which unto him belongs to another in fee,
in this case the alience is Tenant in Common, with the other two Joyntenants.
But yet the other two Joyntenants be seized of the two parts Jointly, and of
these two parts the Survivor between them holds place.

Also if there be two Joyntenants in fee, and the one gives that that unto him
belongs to another in the tail, the Donee and the other Joyntenant be
Tenants in Common, but if the Lands be given to two men, and to the Heirs of
their two bodies engendered, the Donees have a joint estate for term of their
lives, and if each of them have Issue and dye, their Issues shall hold in
Common.

Also if Lands be given to two men, to have and to hold the one half to the one
and to his Heirs, and the other half to the other and to his Heirs they be
Tenants in Common.

Also if a man seized of certain Lands, enfeoffeth another in the half of the
same Land, without any speech of assignement or limitation of the same, half in
severalty at the time of the Feofment, then the Feoffee and the Feoffour shall
hold their parts of the Land in Common.

And as it is of Tenants in Common, of Lands or Tenements in fee-simple,
fee-tayle; even so it is of Tenant for term of life. Therefore if two
joyntenants be in fee, Joyntenants.
and the one lets to a man that that unto him belongs, for term of life,
and the other Joyntenant lets that which to him belongs to another for
term of life also; these two Lessees be Tenants in common for term of their
lives. Also if a man let Lands to two men for term of life, and he to whom the
one grants all his estate to another, then that other Tenant for term of
life, and he to whom the grant is made, shall be Tenants in common during the
time that both the Lessees be alive.

Note, If there be two Joyntenants in fee, and that one lets that that unto
him belongs to another for term of life, the Tenant for term of life,
during his life, and the other Tenant that did not let be Tenants in common.
And upon this Case a Question may arise, as thus; Let the Case be that the
Lessour has Issue and dies, living the other Joyntenant his fellow, and
living the Tenant for term of life, the Question is, Question.
Whether the Reversion of the half that the Lessour has shall descend to the
Issue of the Lessour, or whether the other Joyntenant shall have it by the
survivour or no? And some have said that the other Joyntenant shall have the
Reversion by the survivour, forasmuch as when the Joyntenants were jointly
seized in fee-simple, though one of them made an estate of that that unto him
belongs for term of life, and though he has severed the frank-tenement of
that that to him belongs by the Lease, yet he has not severed the
fee-simple. But the fee-simple abides to them jointly as it was before, and so
it seems unto them that the other Joyntenant which surviveth, shall have the
Reversion by the survivour: But other have thought the contrary, and this is
their reason; when one of the Joyntenants lets that which unto him belongs
to another for term of life, by such Lease the Franktenement is severed from
the Jointure, so that the reversion that is dependant upon the same
Frank-tenement is severed from the Jointure: furthermore if the Lessour had
reserved to him a yearly Rent upon the Lease, the Lessour only should have the
Rent, which is a proof that the reversion is only in him, and that the other
has nothing therein.

Also if the Tenant for life were impleaded and make default after default,
Recie.
the Lessour shall be only hereupon received to defend his right, and not his
fellow; which proves the reversion of the half to be only in the Lessour; and
so consequently if the Lessour die, living the Lessee for term of life, the
reversion shall descend to the Heirs of the Lessour, and shall not come to the
other Joyntenant by the survivour after these men's opinions, yet it is
doubtful. But in this case, Quere.
if the Joyntenant that has the franktenement have Issue and die, living the
Lessour and the Lessee, then it seems that the Issue shall have the half in
his demesne as of fee by descent, forasmuch as the franktenement may not by
nature of the Jointure be annexed to a reversion; and it is certain, that he
that made the Lease, was seized of the half in his demesne as of fee, and that
none shall have any Jointure in his franktenement, so that this shall descend
to his Issue.

If three Joyntenants be, and the one releaseth by his Deed to one of his
fellows, all the right he has in the Land, Release.
then has he to whom the Release is made the third part of the Lands by force
of the Release, and he and his fellow shall hold the other two parts jointly;
and as to the third part that he has by force of the Release, he holds it
with himself and his fellow in common.

And it is to wit that sometime a Deed of Release shall take effect to put the
estate of him that made the Release in him to whom the Release is made, as in
the case aforesaid.

Also if a joint estate be made to the Husband and Wife, and to a third person,
and the third person releaseth his right that he has to the Husband, then has
the Husband the half which the third person had, and the Wife of this has
nothing: semblably if the third person had released to the Wife, not naming the
Husband in the Release, then should the Wife have the half that the third
person had, and the Husband nothing of this but in the right of his Wife,
because such Release shall enure to put the estate in him to whom it was made,
of all that that belongs to him that made the Release. Again, In some case a
Release shall enure and serve to put all the right that a man has that made
that Release in him to whom it is made: As a man being seized of certain Lands,
is disseized by two disseizors, if the person disseized by his Deed release all
his right to one of the disseizors, then he to whom the Release is made, shall
have and hold all to him alone, and put out his fellow out of the occupation of
it. And the cause is, Disseisors.
for that the two disseizors were seized by wrong by them done against the Law,
and when one of them gets the Release of him that has right to enter, this
right rests in him to whom the Release is made, and in such plite, as if he
that had the right had entered and enfeoffed him of the same; and the cause is,
for that he that before had an estate by wrong, has now by the Release a
rightful estate.

And in some case a Release shall enure and take effect by way of
extinguishment, Release by way of extinguishment.
and such a Release shall help the Joyntenant to whom the Release was not made,
as well to him to whom it is made, as if a man be disseized, and the disseisour
makes a feoffment to two men in fee, if the person disseized release to one of
the feoffees in fee by his Deed, then such Release shall inure to both the
feoffees, because the feoffees have their estate by the Law, that is to say by
the feoffment, and not by wrong done to any other.

And in like manner if the disseizour make a Lease to a man for term of life,
A Release shall inure to him in the remainder.
the remainder over to another in fee, if the disseises will release to the
Tenant for term of life, all his right, this Release serves as well to him in
the remainder, as the Tenant for term of life: And the cause is, for that the
Tenant for term of life, comes to his estate by the course of the Law, and
for this cause the Lease shall inure and take effect by way of extinguishment
of the right of him that has released; and by this Release the Tenant for
term of life has no greater estate then he had before the Release made unto
him.

And yet the right of him that released is all utterly extinct and gone,
wherefore for as much as such a Release cannot enlarge the estate of the Tenant
for term of life, it is reason that it shall serve him in the remainder.

Also if there be two Parceners, and the one alieneth his part to another, the
other Parcener and the alience be Tenants in Common.

Furthermore, Tenants in Common, by Title of prescription.
Tenants in Common may be by Title of Prescription, if that one and his
Ancestors, or they whose estate he has in the half have holden in Common, the
same half with the other Tenant that has the other half, and with his
Ancestors or them whose estate he has, as undenied time out of mind, and ye
shall mark, that in some case Tenants in Common ought to have of their
possession, several actions and in some case they shall join in one action,
Actions several.
for if there be two Tenants in Common and they be disseised, they ought to
have against the Disseisor two Assizes and not one Assize, for every one of
them ought to have an Assize of his half, Assize.
because they were seized by several Titles, but otherwise it is of
Joyntenants, for if there be twenty Joyntenants and they be disseised they
shall have in all their names but one Assize, Assize.
because they have but one Joynt-Title.

Also if there be three Joyntenants of whom the one Releaseth to one of his
fellows all the right he has, and afterward the other two be disseised of the
whole, in this case, they shall have in both their names one of the two parts:
And as to the third part, he to whom the Release was made, ought to have hereof
an Assize in his own name, because as to the third part he is Tenant in Common.

Also as to sue Actions that touch the Realty, Diversity.
there is a Diversity between Parceners that are in by diverse discents and
Tenants in Common. For if a man seized of certain Lands in fee has Issue two
Daughters and die, and they enter into the Lands as Coheirs, and each of them
have Issue a Son and die without partition made between them, so that the one
half discendeth to the Son of the one Parcener, and the other half to the Son
of the other, and they Enter and Occupy in Common and be disseised in this
case, they shall have in their two names one Assize and not two Assizes, and
yet the cause is, though they come in by diverse Discents yet they be Coheirs
and Parceners. Also if two Tenants in Common of certain Lands in fee, give the
same to another man in the tail or let it to another for term of life, yielding
an annunity or certain Rent, or a pound of Pepper, or an Hawk, or an Horse, and
they be seized of these services, and afterward all the Rent is behind, and
they Distrain for it, and the Tenant makes Rescous in this case, Rescous.
as to the Rent and the pound of Pepper, they shall have two Assizes, and as to
the Hawk and the Horse but one Assize, and the cause why they have two Assizes,
as to the Rent and pound of Pepper is, for that they were Tenants in Common by
several Titles, and when they made a gift in the tail for Lease of term of
life, saving and reserving to them the Reversion, and yielding to them certain
Rent; This Reservation is incident to their Reversion, and because their
Reversion is in Common and by several Titles, even as their possession was
before the Rent, and other things which may be severed, and which were to them
reserved upon the gift or upon the Lease which be incident by the Law to the
Reversion. Plaint in Assize.
Therefore such things so severed be of the nature of the Reversion, wherefore
it behooves that the Rent and the pound of Pepper which may be severed to be
then in Common by several Titles, and of this they shall have two Assizes, and
every of them in his Assize shall make his Plaint of the half of the Rent, and
of the half of the pound of Pepper, but of the Hawk and the Horse which cannot
be severed, they shall have but one Assize, for it were an absurdity and thing
inconvenient to make a plaint in Assize, of the half of an Hawk, or of the half
of an Horse: In like manner it is of the other Rents and services that Tenants
in Common have in ground, by diverse Titles.

And ye shall understand, Personal Action.
that concerning Actions personalls, Tenants in Common ought to have them
Jointly in all their names: that is to say, Of trespass, or of offenses that
touch their Tenements in Common; as of breaking of their Houses, breaking of
their Closes, and Pastures, wasting and defouling of their Grass, cutting of
their Weeds, and of Fishing in their Ponds, and such other, they shall recover
jointly damages, because the action is in the personalty and not in the realty.
Damages.


Also if Tenants in Common make a Lease of their Tenements to another, for term
of years, Tenants in Common shall have one Action of Debt.
yiedling unto them yearly a certain Rent, if the Rent be behind, they shall
have one action of debt against the Lessee, and not diverse actions, because the
action is in the Personalty, but in an Avowry, for the said Rent they ought to
be severed, because it is in the realty, as be the Assizes.

CHAP. XIX. Of Chattells.
IT is to be known, that as there be Tenants in Common of Lands or Tenements,
so there be Tenants in Common of possessions, and property of Chattells as well
Real as Personal: Of Real, as if a Lease be made of certain Lands to two Men
for term of Twenty years, and when they be thereof Possessed, the one grants
that that unto him belongs during the term to another, he to whom the grant
is made, and the other shall hold and Occupy in Common.

Also if two Joyntenants have the Ward of the Body, Joyntenants of a Wa d.
and of the Lands of an Heir within age, and the one of them grants to
another that that unto him belongth of the same Ward, then he to whom the grant
is made, and the other that grants not shall have and hold it in Common.

Of Chattels Personalls: as if two have a joint estate, either by gift or by
buying of an Horse or of an Ox or such like, and the one of them grants that
that to him belongs; here shall the grantee and he that grants not, have
and possess such Chattels personal in common: And in such case where diverse
persons have Chattels reals or personals in common and by diverse Titles, if one
of them die, the other that surviveth shall not have his fellows part by the
survivour, but the Executors of him that dies shall hold and occupy it with
him that surviveth, in like form as their Testator did or ought in his life,
forasmuch as their rights and Titles were several, also in the Case aforesaid,
if two have an estate in common for term of years, and the one does occupy all
and put the other out of his possession and occupation, then shall he that is
put out, have against the other a Writ de Ejectione firmae for the half: A Writ
de ejectione firmae.
in semblable manner, where two hold the Ward of Lands or Tenements during the
nonage of a Child, if one shall put out the other of his possession, he that
is out shall have a Writ Ejectione custodiae, De ejectione custodiae.
of the half, because these things be Chattells Realls, and may be opportionted
and severed, but no Action of Trespass lies for one against the other (as for
example, quare olausum fregit and herbam suam conculcavit and consumpsit, nor
such like Actions,) forasmuch as each of them may enter and occupy in common:
but if two be possessed of Chattels personal in common, by diverse Titles, as
of an Horse, an Ox or a Cow, if the one take it all to himself out of the
possession of the other, the other has none other remedy but to take it again
from him that has done him the wrong, when he may see his time.

In like manner of Chattels realls which may not be severed, as in the case
aforesaid, where two be possessors of the wardship of the body of a Child
within age, if one of them shall take the Child out of the possession of the
other, the other has no remedy by any Action at the Law, but to take the
Child out of the others possession when he sees his time.

Finally ye shall understand, Form of Pleading.
That when a man in pleading and declaring his Cause, will show a Deed of
Feoffment made unto him, or a gift in fee-tayle, or a Lease for term of life,
of any Lands or Tenements, he shall use his terms in this wise and say; By
force of such Feoffment, Gift or Lease he was seized, etc.

But where a man will declare or plead a Lease or Grant made unto him of a
Chattell real or personal, then he shall say, By force of which he was
possessed.

CHAP. XX. Of partition to be made by Joyntenants and Tenants in Common,
enacted by two Statutes made, the one in An. 31. H. 8. and the other in 32. H.
ALl Joyntenants and Tenants in Common of any estate of Inheritance, in their
own rights or in the right of their Wives, of any Lands or Hereditaments within
this Realm of England, Wales, or the Marches of the same, shall and may be
compelled to make partition between them of the same which they so hold as
Joyntenants or Tenants in common, by a Writ de partitione facienda, Writ de
partitione facienda.
to be devised in the Chancery, in like manner as Coparceners are compelled to
do, and the same Writ to be pursued at the Common Law. Aid prayed.
And after such partition made, every of the said Joyntenants and Tenants in
common, shall and may have aid of the other or of their Heirs, to the intent
to dereigne the warranty paramount, and to recover for the rate as is used
between Coparceners after partition made by the order of the Common Law.

Item, In the thirty second year of King Henry the eight, Chap. 32. it is
further enacted, That all Joyntenants and Tenants in common, which hold jointly
or in common for term of life, year or years, or Joyntenants or Tenants in
common, where one or some of them have an estate for term of life or years,
with other that have an estate of Inheritance or freehold in any Lands or
other Hereditaments, shall be compellable by Writ of Partition to be pursued
out of the Chancery upon their Cases, to make severance and partition of all
such Lands and Hereditaments as they hold jointly or in common, for term of
life or lives, year or years, or where one or some of them hold jointly or in
common for term of life or years, with other that have an estate of
Inheritance of freehold; Provided that no such partition nor severance be
hurtful to any person, other then such as be parties unto the said partition,
their Executors or Assigns.

CHAP. XXI. Of Conditions.
FOrasmuch as every Estate is either pure or conditional, it were not amiss to
make some declaration of the nature and efficacy of Conditions.

Wherefore ye shall understand, that of Conditions some be actual conditions,
and be called express Conditions or Conditions indeed, and other some be
Conditions in Law; which be called in Latin Conditiones tacitae sive
Conditiones implicitae, because they be secretly implied by the Law and not
expressed.

Conditions indeed be such as be knit and annexed by express words to the
Feoffment, Division.
Lease or Grant, either in writing or without; as for example, if I infeoff a
man of certain Lands, reserving to me and to my Heirs so much Rent yearly, to
be paid at such a Feast, and for default of payment, that it shall be lawful
for me to reenter, this is a feoffment upon condition of payment: And here the
reenter of the feoffor for the not payment of the Rent shall dissolve and
utterly defeat the feoffment; Semblamble it is of Gifts in tail, Leases, etc.
but if the Condition be, that for default of payment of the Rent, it shall be
lawful for the feoffor to enter again into the Lands, and to hold them till he
be contented and satisfied of the Rent; this Condition not performed, does not
dissolve nor undo the feoffment, but only gives to the Feoffor an authority
to retain the Lands (as it were by way of Distress) till he has levied the
arrerages of Rent. Distress.


And ye shall well mark and observe, That Conditions be sometime made to be
performed on the Feoffees behalf, and sometime on the Feoffors behalf: on the
feoffees behalf, as when I infeoff you of Lands or Tenements, upon Condition
that you shall do such an act, as to pay unto me or mine Heirs such an annual
Rent on the feoffors behalf; as when I make a feoffment unto you, upon
Condition that if I pay or cause to be paid unto you before such a day such a
sum of money, then it shall be lawful for me to enter again and retain my
Lands in my former estate; Tenants in Mortgage.
in this case he that is the feoffee is called Tenant in Mortgage, which is as
much to say as dead-gage; and it seems that the cause why it is so called is,
forasmuch as it is doubtful whether the feoffor will pay at the day limited
and prescribed, such a sum of money for the redemption of his Lands or not,
for if he do not, his Title or interest in the Lands thus gaged and
oppignorate, is utterly extinct and gone without all hope of renewing.

Ye shall also note, That if the mortgager dies before the day of payment, his
Heir may redeem the Land very well, even as well as his Ancestour that
mortgaged the Land might have done, although there be no mention made of Heirs
in the writing.

Also if when the money is lawfully by the mortgager or his Heir tendered and
proffered, and the Lessour refuses to receive the same, the feoffour or his
Heir may enter, and then has the feoffee no remedy for his money at the Common
Law.

Ye shall understand also, that some conditions be utterly void in the Law, and
of none efficacy, Conditions void.
virtue or strength: As if a feoffment be made of Lands in fee-simple, upon
condition that the feoffee shall not alien or put away the same to none other;
this condition I say is void, because the feoffee is restrained of his whole
power that the Law gives in such case unto him, and with power and liberty is
manner included in every feoffment: yet I may abridg him of part of his power,
as to condition with him, that he shall not alien the Lands to such a person or
such; but of Gifts in Tail otherwise it is, for if I give Lands to a man, and
to the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, Gift in Tail upon Condition.
upon condition that he nor his Heirs shall alien the Lands to none other
person, this Condition is good and effectual in the Law; and if he or his
Heirs, contrary to the Condition, do alien them, then the giver or his Heirs,
may very well enter and retain the Lands for ever, because this Condition shall
stand with the forenamed Statute of Westminster the second, which prohibiteth
such alienations to be made.

Hitherunto have I spoken of Conditions in Deed; now will I show what be
Conditions in Law that be annexed to any Estates.

Know ye therefore, Estates upon conditions in Law.
that if the Office of a Parker, Steward, Constable, Bedle, or Baliff, or such
like Office be granted to a man for term of his life, though there be no
condition at all mentioned in the grant; yet the Law speaks of a condition in
this case, which is, that if the party to whom such Office is given shall not
execute all points appertaining unto his Office, accordingly by himself or his
Lawful Deputy, it shall be Lawful for the grantor to Enter, and discharge him
of his Office, and this condition is called a condition in Law.

There be also three other manner of Estates upon Condition, that is to say,
Conditions against the Law, Conditions Depugnant, and Conditions Impossible.
First, Estates upon Conditions against the Law, be as if a man make a
Feoffment, gift, grant or Lease upon Condition, that if the Feoffors, Donours,
Grantours, or Lessours kill J. S. which is not the Kings enemy, or burn his
house, that then it shall be Lawful to the Feoffors, Donours, etc. To reenter
this Condition is void, and the Estate good.

And like Law is, Conditions against the Land;
if such Conditions be to be performed of the part of the Feoffee, Grantee, etc.

But if it be that a Lease for term of years be made of Land, upon Condition,
that if the Lessees kill J. S. that then he shall have fee simple, although
that he in his case perform the Condition, his Estate is nothing thereby
enlarged, because the Condition is against the Law.

And ye shall understand, that where an Obligation is Indorsed, with a
Condition which is against the Law, both the Obligation, Conditions Repugnant.
and also the Condition, be clearly void in the Law.

Estates upon Conditions Repugnant, be as if a Feoffment or a gift in tail be
made, upon Condition, that the Feoffee or Donee shall take no profit, or shall
do no wast, and such other like, such Conditions be void, and the State good
and effectual in the Law notwithstanding.

Also if a Lease be made for term of life, upon Condition, that he shall not
do Fealty, that is as a void Condition.

Likewise it is, if a man that has nothing in the Manor of Sale, grants a
Rentcharge, going out of the same, upon Condition, that the person shall not
be charged, this grant is good, and the Condition is void.

Estates upon Conditions impossible, be as if a Feoffment be made upon
Condition, that if the Feoffee goes not through the Sea on foot to Calice in
one day, Conditions Imposble.
then it shall be Lawful to the Feoffor to re-enter, this is a frustrate and
void Condition, and yet the estate is good.

Like Law is of a Lease made for term of years, etc. or an Obligation with a
Condition impossible, ut supra, the Obligation or Lease is good, and the
Condition void to all purposses.

CHAP. XXII. An Act how strangers shall take advantage of Conditions made An.
32. H. 8.
IT is enacted, that as well persons which have or shall have any gift or grant
of the King, by his Letters, Patents of any Lands, Personages, Titles or other
Hereditaments, or any reversion of the same, which did belong to any Monastry
or other Ecclesiastical House disolved, or otherwise come into the Kings hands
since the fourth day of February, in the twenty eight Year of our Sovereign
Lord King Henry the Eight, or which at any time heretofore did belong to any
other Person, and after come into the Kings hands; as also all other Persons
being Graunters or Assigns to the King, or to any other Person, their Heirs,
Executors, Successors and Assigns, shall have like advantage against the
Farmours, and their Executor, Administrators, and Assigns, by Entry for
Non-Payment of the Rent, or for doing wast or other forfeiture, and also shall
have the same advantage by Action only, of not performing of other Conditions,
Covenants, or Agreements, contained in the Indentures of their Leases or
Grants, against the said Farmours, and Grantees, their Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, as the said Lessors or Granters themselves might
have had at any time; and again Mutually, and on the other side the said
Farmours and Grantees for term of years, life or lives, their Executors,
Administratours, and Assigns shall have like advantage against them, for any
Condition, Covenant, and Agreement, contained in the said Indenture, as they
might have had against their said Lessors, and Granters, their Heirs,
Successors, all benefits and advantage of recoveries in value, by reason of any
warranty of deed, or in Law, by voucher or otherwise only except.

Provided, that this Act shall not extend to charge any Person for Breach of
any Covenant or Condition comprised in any such writing, but for such as shall
be broken and not performed, after the first day of September, in the 32. Year
of this King, and not before.

CHAP. XXIII. Livery of Seisin and Atturnement.
IN all Feoffments gifts in tail, Leases, for term of another life, of Lands,
or Tenements, there can be no Alteration, Transmutation of Possession, by the
Ancient Laws of this Realm, unless there be a certain Ceremony Adhibited and
Solemnized in the presence and sight of neighbors or others, which Ceremony is
called Livery of Seisin.

And ye shall understand, The manner Livery of Seisin.
that this Ceremony of Livery of Seisin is done, when the Feoffour, Donour,
Lessour, or other Deputy come with the Neighbors Solemnly to the Lands or
Tenements, and they put the Feoffe, Donee, or Lessee in possession of the said
Lands or Tenements, by delivering to him a Clod of Earth, or the ring of the
Door, or some other thing in the name of Seisin, and for this self cause, this
Ceremony of Law is called Livery of Seisin, that is to say, a Tradition or
giving of Seisin.

But this Ceremony is not required in Leases for term of years, Diversity
between Possession and Seisin.
or in Leases at will: For as much as the Lessour in such Lease remains still
seized, and the Lessee only has possession without any Livery of Seisin, and
therefore the terms of the Law be that such a man is possessed, whereas in
Feoffments, gifts in tail, and Leases for life he is called seized.

Wherefore if a Feoffment or Lease for life be made of Lands or Tenements, and
before that the Livery of a Seisin be made, the Feoffour dies, the Heir of the
Feoffour shall have Lands, Per summum jus, that is to say, by the Rigor of the
Law; Notwithstanding that the Feoffee have paid to the Feoffour the price of
the Land, and although the Feoffee be in possession, but otherwise it is of a
Lease for term of Years.

A like Ceremony is used, Atturnment.
when Rentcharge, Rent-service, Rent in gross, a Villain in gross, common in
gross, common for Beasts, certain Estovers, and such other things as pass by
way of grant be granted, for it is no full and perfect grant till it be
consignat and sealed as it were with the Ceremony of Atturnment; this
Atturnment is nothing else, but when the Tenant of Land of which a Rent granted
is granted, or out of which a Rent is granted, does make some evident
signification and token, that he accepts the person to whom the grant is
made, to be in the same respect unto him that the granter was: as for an
example, if the Tenant of the Land after he have heard of the grant, comes to
the grantee, that is to wit, to the person to whom the grant was made, and say
in this wise, or in like effect;

I agree unto the Grant made unto you by such a man; How attu nment shall be
made.
or I am well apaid and contented of the Grant that such a man has made unto
you: but the most usual frequent form of Atturnment, is to say; Sr I atturn
unto you by force of the said Grant; or I become your Tenant; or to deliver
unto the grantee a Penny or a Halfpeny by way of atturnement.

If a man makes first one grant to one person, and after another to another
person, that grant shall stand to which the Tenant will atturn, although it be
to the later grant.

And ye shall note, That if a man be seized of a Manor, which is parcel in
demean and parcel in service, and does alien the same Manor to another,
unless the Tenant of the Manor do atturn the Service shall not pass, only
Tenants at will excepted, for it needs not to cause them to atturn.

Note furthermore, Diversity.
there is a great difference between giving a Penny in name of Seisin, and
giving by way of Atturnement; for when it is given by the Tenant to the Grantee
in the name of Seisin, it does not only imply an Atturnment, Assize.
but also it gives him such a seizin, that if the Rent afterward were behind
and not paid, he may now upon the seisin of the Penny, after a lawful distress
taken, and after Rescous made, Writ of Rescous.
bring an Assize of Novel Disseizin; whereas if it were given only by way of
Atturnement, he could not bring the Assize, but his Writ of Rescous only if
Rescous were made.

Also ye shall understand, That where Lands be deviseable by Testament by the
custom of any ancient Borough or City, if the reversion of any Lands be by
Testament bequeathed to a man in fee, and the Testator (which we call the
devisor) dies, the devisee (that is to wit he to whom the devise was made)
has forthwith the reversion in him without further ceremony of Atturnement:
Atturnment.
likewise it is if a man by testament does bequeath a Rentcharge that he is
seized of, or of a Rent-service there needs none atturnement at all.

If two Joyntenants of Land and the Lord grants the services to another, if
one of the Joyntenants atturneth it is enough.

Finally, If a Lease be made for term of life, the remainder to another in
tail; the remainder over to the right Heir of the Tenant for term of life in
this case, if the Tenant for term of life will grant his remainder in fee to
another by his deed, this remainder passes forthwith without any atturnement;
For if any Atturnement were requisite, it should be made of the Tenant for
term of life, Not Requisite.
which in this case is the granter himself. And in vain it is that the granter
should be enforced to atturn, since an atturnment is adhibited and had to none
other purpose, then to have the consent and agreement of the particular Tenant,
to the intent that it may appear that he has notice and knowledge of this
grantee; but here where the particular Tenant himself is the granter, an
atturnement were superfluous and more then needed.

Note furthermore, That where there is Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant leaseth
his Tenements to a woman for life, the remainder over in fee, the woman takes
a Husband, and after the Lord grants the services, etc. to the Husband, in
this case during the coverture, the services be put in suspense; Suspense.
but if the Wife die leaving the Husband, the Husband and his Heirs shall have
the Rent of them in the remainder, etc. And in this case there needs no
atturnement by word, because the Husband that ought to atturn accepts the
Grant of the Services, the which acceptance is an atturnement in the Law.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Service.
HItherunto have I briefly touched and overrun the sundry kinds and forms of
Estates: Now forasmuch as there is no Tenure but has unto it some service knit
and annexed, it were very necessary to declare how many kinds of Services there
be, and what Service is due to every Tenure; for the knowledge hereof ye shall
understand, that the principal and most common kind of service that the Tenant
owes to his Lord, is called Knights-service.

CHAP. XXV. Knights-service.
KNights-service includes Homage, Fealty, and for the most part Escuage, and
whosoever holds his Lands by Knights-service, is bound by the Laws of this
Realm, to do unto his Lord homage and fealty, and to pay for the most part
Escuage, when it shall be assessed by authority of Parliament, as hereafter
more plainly shall be declared.

Homage is the most humble and reverent service that a man of free estate and
condition can do, for when the Tenant shall do homage to his Lord, the Lord
shall sit, Homage.
and the Tenant then shall kneel down before him upon both knees, holding his
hands between his Lords hands, and say in this wise; I become your man from
this day forward, of life and of member and of earthly Honor, How the Tenant
shall do Homage.
and to you shall be faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear for the
Lands that I claim to hold of you, saving the faith that I bear unto our
sovereign Lord the King. And then the Lord so sitting shall kiss him: But if an
Ecclesiastical person, which by his order and profession has addicted himself
to the service of God in especial, What a religious Person say when she does
Homage.
and do homage to his Lord, he shall say; I do to you homage, and shall be to
you faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear for the Tenements that I
hold of you, saving the faith which I owe unto our sovereign Lord the King.

Also when a woman not married does homage to her Lord, What a woman shall say.
she shall not say, I become your woman; for it is not convenient that a woman
should be the woman of any other then of her Husband that she shall marry, but
shall say even as the Ecclesiastical person says; I do unto you homage, etc.
And if perchance a man holds sundry Lands and Tenements of sundry Lords, and
every of them by Knights-service, then in the end of his Homage making he shall
say; Saving the faith that I owe to our sovereign Lord the King, and to mine
other Lords. And none is bound to do homage to the Lord, unless it be such
Tenant as has in the Tenancy an estate of fee-simple or fee-tayle, either in
his own right, or in the right of another, for if a woman have Lands or
Tenements in fee-simple or fee-tayle, What Tenant shall do Homage.
which she holds of her Lord by Knights service, and takes an Husband and
has Issue, in this case the Husband in the life of his Wife shall do homage,
because he has Title to have the Lands by the Courtesy of England if he
overliveth her, and also he holds them now in his Wives right; yet before
Issue had between them; the Homage shall be made in both their Names; but if
the woman dies before any homage made in her life, and the Husband keeps
still the Lands, as Tenant, by the Courtesy, now he shall not do homage to his
Lord, because he has now an estate but for term of life.

Fealty is as much to say as Fidelity, Fealty.
or faithfulness, in doing whereof the Tenants shall hold his hand upon a Book,
and say thus; How a Tenant shall do Fealty.
Hear you this my Lord, I to you shall be faithful and true, and faith to you
shall bear for the Lands and Tenements which I claim to hold of you, and duly
shall do to you the Customs and Services which I owe to do to you at the
terms assigned, as, Me help God; and then he shall kiss the Book, but he shall
not kneel as he that does homage, nor do such humble or reverent service as is
before declared in Homage.

And ye shall observe that Homage cannot be done but to the Lord himself;
Diversity between Homage and Fealty.
whereas the Steward of the Lords Court, or the Bailiff may take Fealty for the
Lord.

Also, Tenant for term of life, shall do Fealty, but Homage (as I said) he
cannot do.

Now as concerning Escuage, that is to say, The service of the Shield. Ye shall
understand, that he that holds his Lands by Escuage, when the King makes a
voyage Royal into Scotland, for the subduing of the Scots, is bound to be with
the Kings Majesty, by the space of twenty days, well and conveniently arrayed
and appointed for the War: And he that holds his Land but by the Moity of
the Fee of Knights service, is bound by the force of his Tenure, to be with the
King by space of twenty days; and so proportionably according to the rate and
quantity of his Tenure.

But now to our institute and purpose after this Voyage Royal into Scotland, in
which the King goes in Person, and after his return into England again, a
Parliament is wont to be summoned, in which shall be prescribed and assessed
what every Person that held his Land by Homage, and went not with the King,
neither by himself nor by his Deputy, shall pay to his Lord in satisfaction of
his not serving; and according to the taxation hereof, every Tenant shall pay
to his immediate Lord, whether it be to the King, or other, after the rate and
portion of his Tenure: If he holds by an whole Fee, he shall pay the whole
Escuage; if by a Moity, the half; if by a fourth part of a Fee, the fourth
part, etc. And this Money thus assessed, is called Scutage, or Escuage; for
which the Lord to whom it is due, may very well for the nonpayment thereof
distrein: But here is to be noted, that some Tenants by Custom, used time out
of mind, Distress of Escuage.
are bound to pay but the Moity, or the third part of that which shall be
assessed and limited by Act of Parliament.

Yea, Escuage Certain.
and the Custom is in some place, that to what sum of Money soever Escuage is
assessed, the Tenants shall pay never but such a certain sum of Money; and
this kind of Escuage is called Escuage certain, that is to say, Where Escuage
is assessed by the Parliament to a more or less sum, the Tenant to pay to the
Lord five Shillings, and no more, nor no less, etc. Such a Tenure is called
Socage Tenure, and not Knights Service, whereas the other is called Escuage
uncertain.

Finally, Escuage Uncertain.
ye shall understand that Escuage uncertain, is always adjudged to be Knights
Service, and draws unto it Ward, Marriage, and Relief; but Escuage certain,
is not Knights Service, but is of the Tenure of Sucage; as shall be hereafter
more amply showed.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Ward, Marriage, and Relief.
EVery Knights-Service draws unto it Ward, Marriage, and Relief; wherefore
it is now right expedient somewhat to entreat of them.

Ye shall therefore be admonished, Ward.
that when the Tenant which holds his Lands by Knights-service dies, his
Heir male, being at that time within the age of twenty one years, the Lord
shall have the Ward; that is to say, the custody or keeping of the Lands so
holden of him, to his own use and profit, till the Heir comes to the full age
of twenty one years; For the Law here presumes, that till he comes to his
age, he is not able to do such Service as is of his Tenure required.

Furthermore, Marriage.
if such Heirs be unmarried at the time of the death of the Tenant, then the
Lord shall have also the Ward, and the bestowing of the Marriage of him.

But if a Tenant by Knights-service dies, The full age of a woman.
his Heir Female, being of the age of thirteen years or above, then the Lord
shall have the Ward, neither of the Land, nor yet of the Body of such an Heir;
and the reason hereof is, because a woman of that age, may have a Husband able
to do Knights-service; that is to say, To wait upon the Kings Majesty's Person,
when he goes into Scotland with his Army Royal.

But if such an Heir Female be within age of fourteen years, and not married at
the time of the death of her Ancester, then the Lord shall have the Wards of
the Land holden of him, till such Heir Female comes to the age of sixteen
years, by force of an Act of Parliament, in the Statute of Westminster. 1 Cap.
12.

Note that there is a great diversity in the Law between the ages of Females,
Diversity of age.
and of Males; for the Female has these many ages appointed by the Law: Age of
a woman.
First, At seven years of age the Lord her Father may distrein his Tenants for
aid to marry her. Secondly, At nine years of age she is dowable. Thirdly, At
twelve years she is able to assent to Matrimony. Fourthly, At fourteen years
she is able to have her Land, and shall be out of Ward, if she be of this age
at the death of her Ancester. Fifthly, At sixteen years she shall be out of
Ward, though at the death of her Ancester she was within the age of fourteen
years. Sixthly, At twenty one years she is able to make alienations of her
Lands or Tenements; whereas the man has but two ages, the one at fourteen
years to have his Lands holden in Socage, The age of a man.
and to assent to Matrimony, the other at twenty one to make Alienations.

Ye shall understand, that by the Statute of Merton. 6 Chap. it is enacted,
That if in case the Lord do marry their Ward to villains or others (whereby is
disparagement) if such Heirs so married be within the age of fourteen years, or
such age that the said Ward cannot consent to the marriage; then if the
friends of this Heir complain, and feel themselves grieved with this unmeet
marriage, the next of kin to the Heir unto whom the Heritage cannot descend,
may enter into the Lands, and put out the Lord which is Guardian in Chivalry:
And if the next Kins-man will not thus do, another Kins man of the Infant may
do it; and shall take the Issues and Profits to the behoof and use of the Heir,
and yield account thereof unto him, Account given.
when he comes to his full age.

And there be diverse other disparagements which be not expressed in the said
Statute; Diverse Disparagements.
as, if the Heir (being within age of consent, and in Ward) be married to a
decreped Person or Creeple, as to one that has but one foot, or one hand, or
that is a deformed creature, or having any horrible disease, or continual
infirmity. All these and such like be disparagements.

But here also ye shall understand, that it shall be said no disparagement,
unless the Heir be so married when he is within age of discretion, that is to
say, within the age of fourteen years: For if he be of that age, or above, and
assenteth to such marriage, it is no disparagement, neither shall the Lord for
such marriage loose his Ward, because it shall be reputed and assigned to the
folly of the Heir, being of age, of discretion, to consent to such marriage.

Now if the Lord, then being a Guardian, after to the Heir, being his Ward, a
convenient marriage without disparagement, and the Heir refuses it, Value of
Marriage.
as he may at his choice and election very well do; then the Lord shall have
the value of the marriage of such an Heir when he comes to his full age: But
yet if he marry himself, being so in Ward against the will of his Gardein, then
he shall pay the double value, Double value of Marriage.
by force of the said Statute of Merton, before remembered.

And ye shall Note, that if Lands holden by Knights-service, One shall not be
Ward, living his Father.
descend to an Infant or Child within age, from his Mother, or from any of his
Ancesters; his Father being yet alive, in this case the Lord shall not have the
marriage of his Heir; for during the life of his Father, the Son shall be
Ward to no man.

Finally, it is to be known, that he which is Guardian in Chivalry in right, may
before he has seized the Ward, grant the same either by Deed or without Deed
to another man; and then he to whom such a grant is made, is called Gardein in
Fait.

Now as touching Relief, ye shall know; that if a man holds his Land by
Knights-service, and dies, his Heir being of full age (the full age of the
Male is twenty one years, of the Female fourteen) then the Lord of whom the
Land his holden, shall have of the Heir Relief.

Note ye, that all Earls, Barons, or other the Kings Tenants (holding of him in
chief by Knights-service) which die, their Heir being of full age at the time
of their deaths, that is to say, twenty one years of age, they ought to pay the
old Relief for their Inheritance; that is, the Heir or Heirs of an Earl, for an
whole Earldome 100l; the Heir or Heirs of a Baron, for an whole Barony an 100
Marks; the Heir or Heirs of a Knight One 100 Shillings, and he that has less,
shall give less according to the old Custom of Fees. Like Law is observed of
all others that hold of any other Lords: immediately, Vt supra.

Also a man may hold Lands of a Lord by two Knights Fees, and then the Heir
being of full age at the death of his Ancester, shall pay to his Lord for
Relief ten Pounds.

CHAP. XXVII. Service of Castle-Guard.
YE shall understand, that a man may hold by Knights-service, and yet not hold
by Escuage, nor shall pay any Escuage; for he may hold by Castle-Guard, that is
to say, by service to keep a Tower of his Lords Castle, or some other place,
upon a reasonable warning, when his Lord hears that enemies will come, or be
already come into England.

This service is also Knights-service, Ground in the Law.
and draws to it Ward, Marriage, and Relief; as in all Cases the common
Knights-service does.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Grand-Serjeanty.
THere is also another kind of Knights-service, which is called
Grand-Serjeanty; that is, where a man holds his Lands or Tenements of the
King by such service as he owes in proper person to do, as to bear the Banner
of our Sovereign Lord the King, or his Spear, or to conduct his Host, or to be
his Marshall, or to be the lower Carver, or Butler at the Feast of the
Coronation, or to be one of the Chamberlains of the receipt of his Exchequer,
or to do like service to the King in proper person: Such manner of service (I
say) is called Grand-Serjeanty, that is to say, A great or high Service. And
the cause why it is so called, is, because it is the most honorable and most
worthy Service that is: The most high Service.
For he that holds by Escuage, is not appointed by his Tenure to do any other
more special Service, then another is bound that holds by Escuage; but he
that holds by Grand-Serjeanty, is bound to do some special service to the
King.

Also if he that holds of the King by Grand-Serjeanty dies, Relief of the
Tenant by Grand-Serjeanty.
his Heir being of full age, then the Heir shall pay to the King for Relief,
not only a 100s, as he that holds by Escuage shall do, but moreover the clear
yearly value of these Lands and Tenements, which he so holds of the King by
Grand-Serjeanty. Tenure by Cornage.


Furthermore, ye shall observe, that in the Marches of Scotland, some men hold
of the King by Cornage, that is to say, blowing of a Horn; to the intent, to
warn the men of the Country, when they hear that the Scots or other their
Enemies be coming, or be already entered into England; which service is also a
kind of Grand-serjeanty. Grand-Serjeanty therefore is as much to say in Latin,
as Magnum-servitium; Definition of Serjeanty.
that is to say, A great or high Service: Like a Petty-Serjeanty, is called
Parvum servitium; that is to say, A little or small service.

But to revert again to the matter: Ye shall Note, that if any Tenant holds
of any other Lord then of the King by such service of Cornage, then it is no
Grand-Serjeanty; but yet nevertheless, it is Knights service, and draws to it
Ward, Marriage, and Relief: For this is a Rule infallible, That none can hold
by Grand-Serjeanty, but of the Kings Majesty only. Rule in the Law.


Finally, Ye shall understand, that all they which hold of the King by this
Service, called Grand-Serjeanty, do hold of the King by Knights-service; and by
virtue of his Tenure, the King shall have of them Ward, Marriage, and Relief;
but Escuage, yet he shall not have of them, unless they hold by Escuage of him
by express special words.

CHAP. XXIX. Petty-Serjeanty.
TEnant by Petty-Serjeanty, is he that holds his Land immediately of our
Sovereign Lord the King, by this manner of service, to pay to the King yearly,
either a Bow, a Spear, a Dagger, a pair of Gauntlets, a pair of Spurs of
Gold, a Shaft, or such other small things appertaining to the War: And this
service is in effect but Socage, because that such a Tenant is not bound by his
Tenure to go, nor do any thing in his own proper person, touching the War,
but only to render and pay yearly certain things to the King, as a man ought to
pay a Rent. Wherefore this Service of Petty-Serjeanty, is no Knights-service;
but yet ye shall note, That a man cannot hold neither by Petty-Serjeanty,
neither by Grand-Serjeanty, but of the King only.

CHAP. XXX. Homage Ancestrell.
TEnant by Homage Ancestrell, is he which holds his Land of his Lord by
Homage, and both he and his Ancesters, whose Heir he is, have holden the same
Land of the said Lord, and of his Ancesters, time out of mind, by Homage; and
have done unto them Homage: And this is called Homage Ancestrell, by reason of
the long continuance which has been by title of prescription, Warranty because
of Homage Ancestrel.
as well concerning the Tenancy in the blood of the Tenant, as concerning the
Lordship in the Lord. And this service of Homage Ancestrell draws unto it
Warranty (that is to say) if the Lord, which is now in life, has once received
the Homage of his Tenant, he ought to warrant the same Tenant, what time soever
he shall be impleaded or sued for such Lands so holden of him by Homage
Ancestrell.

Moreover such service of Homage ancestrell draws unto it acquitall, that is
to say, the Lord ought to acquit the Tenant against other Lords that can demand
any manner of Service of the Tenancie.

Wherefore if in this case the Tenant which holds by Homage ancestrell, be
impleaded of his Lands, and voucheth or calls his Lord to Warrantie, who
comes in by Process and demands of the Tenant, what he has to bind him to
the Warrantie, and the Tenant shows, how he and his ancestors whose Heir he
is, have holden his Lands of him and of his ancestors time out of mind; surely
the Lord if he cannot deny this, and if he has received the Homage of such a
Tenant, is bound by the Law to warrant him his Land; so that if the Tenant lose
his Lands in default of the Lord thus vouched, that is to say, called to
warrantie, he shall recover against him as much in value of these Lands and
Tenements which the Lord had at the time of calling to warranty, or at any time
after: but if the Lord never received the Homage of his Tenant, then he may
very well when he is thus vouched, disclaim in the Lordship or Seignory, and so
put out the Tenant of his warranty: Wherefore ye shall note, that in every case
where the Lord disclaimeth in his Seigniory in Court of Record, his Seigniory
or Lordship is extinct, and the Tenant shall hold from henceforth of the next
Lord to him that thus disclaimeth.

Thus ye perceive that Homage ancestrell is a long continuance, as well in the
blood of the Tenant in respect of his Tenancy, as in the blood of the Lord in
respect of his Seigniory; wherefore if the Tenant does once alien his Lands to
another, although he purchase the same again, yet he shall not hold any longer
by Homage ancestrell, because of his discontinuance, but shall hold now by the
vulgar and accustomed Homage.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Liveries.
WHen one dies which held of the King by Knights-service in Capite, that is to
say, in chief; Tenant in chief of the King.
his Heirs being within age, the King (as before is declared) shall have the
wardship and custody as well of the Lands as of the body, that is to wit, the
marriage if he be unmarried; but if the Heir be of full age at the time of the
death of such ancestor, yet shall the King by his Prerogative royal, have
primer Seisin of all the Lands, Tenements, Primer seisin.
and other Hereditaments whereof such his Tenant was seized in his demean as
of see: Intruder upon the Kings possession.
And if such an Heir will enter into his Lands when he comes to his full age,
before he sue his Livery and receive Seizin by the King, no Freehold shall
accrue nor grow unto him, but he shall be deemed an intruder into the Kings
possession; yea and if he die so seized in the mean time, his Wife shall have
no Dowry of such Lands; wherefore it behooves in any wise, that such Heir as
well male as female, coming to full age before he or she enter into their Land
to sue Livery, the manner and form whereof, according to the Act of Parliament
lately promulgated and set forth, I intend briefly to recite.

CHAP. XXXII. How Heirs ought to sue their Liveries, enacted 33 H. 6. Cap. 21.
NO Person or Persons having Lands or Tenements, about the yearly value of five
Pound, Writ Diem clausit extremum.
shall have any Livery before Inquisition or Office found before the Eschetor
or other Commissioner, by virtue of the Kings Writ of Diem clausit extremum, or
Commission directed out of the Chancery or other Courts; having authority to
make such a Writ or Commission, which shall not pass out of the same, but by
Warrant or Bill assigned and subscribed by the Master of Wards or Liveries, the
Surveyor, Attorney, and recoverer of the said Court; or three, two, or one of
them to be directed and delivered to the Chancellor of England, or to any other
Chancellor or Officer, having power to awarde such Writs; and for the writing
and sealing of the same, shall be paid of the accustomed Fees. But if the Land
exceed not the said yearly value of five Pounds, then they shall pay for the
Seals of every such Writ or mission eight Pence, and for the Comwriting six
Pence; and not above.

And the Inquisitions and Offices hereupon found, shall be returned by the said
Escheters or Commissioners into the same Court from whence the Writ or
Commission was awarded; which done, the Clerks of the Petty-bogg shall receive
the same Offices, and and make a Transcript thereof to the Master of the Wards
and Liveries. And then the said Master, and the Surveyor, Attorney, and
general Receiver; or three of them, whereof the Master or Surveyor to be one,
shall Covenant and Indent with such Persons for their Livery of the Castles,
Mannours, Lordships, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, comprised or not
comprised in such Offices; and shall make and set a rate and price of the same,
and appoint the days of payment thereof by Obligation, to be taken for the
same to the King.

And every Bill for any special or general Livery, assigned by the hands of
the said Master, Surveyor, Attorney, Receiver, or three of them, whereof the
Master or Surveyor to be one, shall be Warrant sufficient to the Lord
Chancellor or other Officer, having power to pass Liveries under any of the
Kings Seals accordingly: In which case, the Clerks of the Petty-bogge, or other
Clerks by whom the Liveries be written, shall receive as well for themselves as
for other, such Fees as has been accustomed.

Item, General Livery.
Every person may sue at his pleasure a general Livery, for any Mannours,
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Remainders, or other Hereditaments;
whereof the clearly yearly value shall not exceed twenty Pounds, provided that
an Office be thereof found, and a Warrant first obtained of the said Master and
others; as is aforesaid.

And where such general Livery is sued, if the Lands exceed the yearly value
of five Pounds, they shall pay for the Seal twenty Shillings four Pence; and
all other Fees accustomed, as afterward shall be declared. But if they exceed
not the yearly value of five pound, they shall pay but these Fees following;
that is to say, for the Seal of the Livery twelve Pence to the Clerks of the
Petty-bogge, for the writing and the inrolling twenty Pence, for the respect of
the Homage in the Hanapar eight Pence, to the Lord great Chamberlain twenty
Pence, to the Master of the Rolls, twenty Pence, and the Clerk of the
Liveries, for the Warrant and Inrolling of the Livery twenty Pence.

Item, Respect of Homage.
No person or persons shall pay in the Exchequer, or any other Rents for the
respect of Homage; for any Lands or Hereditaments, not exceeding the yearly
value of five Pound above eight Pence, and for the entering thereof, and
Warrant of Attorney above four Pence.

And the value of such Lands and He-Hereditaments, not exceeding the yearly
value of twenty Pound, shall be taken as it is limited in the Offices founden
thereof, except by the examinations and Certificate of the said Master,
Surveyor, Attorney, and Receiver, or three of them: It shall otherwise appear
and be declared in any of the Kings Courts.

Also, no Eschetor shall sit only by virtue of his Office, for the inquiry of
the Tenure, Title, or value of any Lands, or other Hereditaments holden of the
King, being of the yearly value of five Pounds, Pains of forfeit.
or above, without the Kings Writ to him directed upon pain to forfeit five
Pound for every time, he shall so do; neither shall he take for the finding of
any Office of Lands, Fees of Office.
not exceeding the yearly value of five Pound, above fifteen Shillings: That is
to say, six Shillings eight Pence for his own Fee, and three Shillings four
Pence for the writing of the Office, and for the Charges of the Jury three
Shillings, and for the Officers that shall receive the Offices in any Court of
Record two Shillings; upon pain, that the Eschetor doing otherwise, shall for
every time forfeit five Pound. And upon like pain, the Officers of every Court
of Record, where such Inquisitions shall be returned, being offered unto them
within one Month, next after the finding thereof, shall receive them the one
Moity of all, with forfeitures to the King, and the other to the Party that
will sue for the same, etc.

And they which hereafter shall be in case to sue Livery, whose Lands and
Tenements exceed not the yearly value of five Pound, may lawfully sue forth
that general Livery, by Warrant from the said Courts, as is aforesaid; although
none other Inquisition be thereof had, nor certified, paying nevertheless the
Fees above remembered.

Finally, Every person shall sue forth his Patent for his Livery, within three
Months next after the assignment of his Bill, or else his Bill assigned to be
void and of none effect.

Hereafter ensues the Fees Accustomed of the General Liveries.
FIrst to the Clerks of the Petty bog, for the respect of Homage and Fealty;
the writing and inrolling fourteen Shillings two Pence, to the Lord great
Chamberlain forty Shillings, to the Master of the Rolls three Pound, to the
Clerks of the Liveries for writing of the Indentures and Obligations twenty
Shillings, besides Council.

The Fees of the special Livery, accustomed to be paid by these following: That
is to say, for the signet three Pound ten Shillings, for the Privy Seal thirty
Shillings, for the great Seal forty four Shillings eight Pence, to the Clerks
of the Petty-boggs forty Shillings, to the Master of the Liveries Clerks
forty Shillings, for inrollment of the knowledge of the Indenture twelve
Shillings, to the Lord great Chamberlain of England forty Shillings, for the
Writ of the Allowance for the same Livery ten Shillings six Pence.

And note ye, that sometime in special Cases the Fees be more, and sometime
less, as the case and matter does require.

Hitherto have we briefly touched all kinds of Knights-Service, and things
incident to the same: Now will we with like briefness, declare the other kind
of Services, which commonly be comprised under the general Name of Socage: For
all Lands or Tenements, either they be holden by Knights-Service, or else by
Socage Tenure, or at least by the Nature of Socage Tenure; which in effect is
all one.

Wherefore, first we shall define what Socage is in the proper signification;
which done, we shall peruse the other kinds of Services, which be of the nature
of Socage Tenure.

CHAP. XXXIII. Socage.
SOcage is properly where the Tenant is bound to come with his Yoke; that is,
What Socage Tenure is.
with his Plow, to Ear, and Sow a parcel of the demean Lands of his Lord:
which service in ancient time was very common, but now by the mutual consent
(both of the Lord and the Tenant) it is converted for the most part into a
yearly Rent, howbeit the name of Socage abides still. Wherefore now, all that
is not Knights-service, is called by the Name of Socage, so that if a man
holds by Fealty only, or by Fealty and Homage; For all manner of service it
is but Socage Tenure: For Homage alone, makes not Knights-service, as I have
said heretofore: He holds in effect but by Socage. Guardian in Socage.


Now where a man holds his Lands by Socage and dies, his Heir being within
the age of fourteen years, the Lord shall not have the Ward, but the next of
kin to the Heir, to whom the Heritage cannot descend, shall have the Title
and Wardship, as well of the Land as of the Heir, till the Heir come to the age
of fourteen years: And such tutor or Guardian, is called Guardian in Socage, and
shall render accounts to the Heir, of the Issues and Profits that he has
received of the Lands, during such time; deducting his reasonable Costs and
Expenses: So that he shall not have the Wardship to his own use and profit, as
the Lord which is Guardian in Chivalry has.

And in case the Guardian in Socage dies before he has made his account, the
Heir is without remedy, because no Writ of account lies against the Executors,
but for the King only.

Finally, Ye shall understand, that when a Tenant in Socage dies, Rent.
the Lord of whom the Land is held shall have Relief; That is to say, Distress.
the value of the Rent that is yearly due unto him of the Tenancy, beside the
yearly Rent. So that in effect (after the death of his Tenant) he shall have of
the Heir two Rents, save that for the Relief he may distrein forthwith; but for
the accustomed Rent, he cannot distrein till the usual day of payment become.

CHAP. XXXIV. Frank-Almoign.
TEnant in Frank-Almoign, that is to say, The first foundation of Frank
almoigne.
in free Alms, is where a Bishop, Deane, or any Ecclesiastical Person holds
of his Lord in pure and perpetual Alms: And such Tenure began first in old
times after this manner. When a man was seized in atient times of certain Lands
or Tenements in his demesne, as of Fee, and of the same Tenements enfeoffed, an
Abbot and his Covent, or a Pryer and his Covent, or any other Person
Ecclesiastical; as a Deane of a College, Master of an Hospital, and such
like; to have and to hold the same Lands, to them and to their Successors for
ever, in pure and perpetual Alms, or in Frank-almes in these two cases, the
Tenements should be holden in Frank-almoigne.

By force of which Tenure, they that hold in Frank-almoigne after this sort, be
bound of right before God, to make Orisons and Prayer, and to do other Divine
Services for the Souls of their Granters and Feoffors, and for the Souls of
their Heirs which be dead; Tenant in Frank-almoigne shall do Fealty.
and for the prosperous Estate of them and their Heirs whilst they be alive;
and because of right, they be bound to this Divine service, they be discharged
by the Law to do any other Profane or Corporal Service, as Fealty, or such
like.

But nevertheless such as hold their Tenements in Frank-almoigne, do omit and
leave undone these Divine services whereunto they be bound before God; the Lord
cannot distrain them, nor yet compel them by any other means, by the course of
the Common Law; but the only remedy is, to complain of them to their ordinary,
who of right ought to compel such Ecclesiastical persons to do the Divine
service due as before said.

But here ye shall note, Tenant by Divine Service.
That if a Parson of a Church, or any other Ecclesiastical Person, did before
the Statutes of dissolution of Abbeys, Monastries, etc. hold of the Lord by
certain Divine Service to be done, as to sing Mass every Friday, or placebo and
dirige, or to find a Priests to sing Mass, or to distribute in Alms 100. pence
to a hundred men at such a day; Distress for Divine Service.
in all these cases if such Divine service be undone, the Lord may very well
Distrain, because the service is here put in certain.

Now as I said before, that if in old time a man did Enfeoffe such
Ecclesiastiall Person, after such sort he should hold his Lands in
Frank-almoigne, but at this day it is otherwise, for by reason of the Estatute
called, Quia emptores terrarum Westmin. 3. Cap. 1. No man can Alien nor grant
Lands or Tenements in Fee-simple to hold of himself: So that now if a man being
seized of Lands in Fee-simple, grants the same by License to an
Ecclesiastical Person in Frank-almoigne; These words Frank-almoigne be void,
and the Ecclesiastical Person shall hold them immediately of the Lord of the
Feoffer, by the same services that the Feoffer held; so that no man can hold in
Frank-almoigne, but by force of a grant made before the said Statute, only the
Kings Majesty excepted, for he is out of the compass of the Statute.

Finally ye shall note, That whereas a man shall hold in Frank-almoigne, his
Lord is bound by the Law to acquit him of all manner of service that any other
Lord can have or demand out of the said Lands, so that if he does not acquit
him but suffer him to be distrained, then he shall have against his Lord a
certain Writ called a Writ of Mesne, Writ of Mesne.
and shall recover against him his damages and costs of his Suit.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Burgage.
A Tenure in Burgage is where an ancient Borough is of which the King his Lord
and they which have Tenements within the same Borough, Socage Tenure.
held the same of the King, paying a certain Yearly Rent, which Tenure in
effect is but Socage Tenure, likewise it is, whereas any other Lord Spiritual
or Temporal, is Lord of such borough.

Here ye shall note, Custom.
that for the most part such ancient Boroughs and Towns, have diverse Customs
and Usages which other Towns have not, for some Boroughs have a Custom, that
the youngest Son shall Inherit before the Eldest, which custom is commonly
called Borough English. Dower by Custom.


Also in some Borough by the Custom, the Woman shall have for her Dowry, all
the Lands and Tenements whereof her Husband was seized at any time, during the
Matrimony and Coverture.

Moreover, Devise by Custom of Borough.
in some Boroughs a man may bequeath or devise his Lands or Tenements by
Testament, at the time of his death, and by force of such devise or Legacy, he
to whom the bepuest is made, after the death of the Testator, which made such
Testament, may by force of this Ancient Custom, enter into the Land, so to him
bequeathed or devised, without any Livery of Seisin to him made, or further
Ceremony of Law.

Howbeit, how and in what manner a man may at this day devise his Lands by his
last will and Testament, by force of a certain new Statute, it shall be
hereafter declared. Diverse other Customs in England there be, contrary to the
course of the Common Law, which if they be any thing probable and may stand,
with reason are good and effectual; notwithstanding, they be against the
Common Law.

And note, That no Custom is allowable but such Custom as has been used by
Title of prescription, or time out of mind.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Villinage or bond Service.
A Tenant in Villinage, is properly when a Villain, that is to say, a bondsman
holds of his Lord whose Bondsman he is, certain Lands or Tenements according
to the Custom of the Manor, or otherwise at the will of his Lord, and to do
his Lord Villane service, as for to bear and carry the dung of his Lords out of
the City, or out of his Lords Manor, and to lay it upon the Demean Lands of
the Lord, or to do such like Service, and Villainies Service: Howbeit, Freemen
in some places hold their Tenements and Lands of their Lords by Custom, by
such sort of Service, and their Tenure is called Tenure in Villinage, and yet
they themselves be no Villains, nor of servile condition, but Freemen for the
Land holden in Villinage, makes not the Tenant a Villain; but contrariwise, a
Villain may make Free Land to be Villains Land unto his Lord; as if a
Villain purchases Land in Fee-simple, or Fee-tayl, the Lord of the Villain
may enter into the Land, so purchased by his Bondmen, and put him and his Heirs
out for ever; and this done, the Lord if he will, may Lease the same Land to
his Villain, to hold of him in Villenage.

And here ye shall understand, That Servitude or Villenage is the ordinance,
not of the Law of nature, but of that Law which is called jus gentium, by which
a man is made subject contrary to nature unto another man's Dominion, for he
that is a Villain or Bondsman, either he is so by Title of prescription, that
is to say, he and his Ancestors have been Villains time out of mind, or else he
is a Villain by his own confession in some Court of record; so that all
Villains either they be born Villains or else they be made so, they be born
Villains when their Father being a Bondsman himself begets them in Lawful
Wedlock, either of a Free Woman, or of a Bond Woman, for so that the Father be
Bond, the Issues of him Lawfully begotten, must needs be Bond by the Laws of
England, having no regard to the Condition of the Mother, whereas in the Civil
Laws of the Romans it is clean contrary, for there Pars sequitur ventrem, that
is to say, the Servitude or Bondage of the Mother makes the child Bond, and
not the Bondage of the Father. Bastard.
Howbeit, the Bastard Son of a Bond man shall not be Bond, and the reason is,
because a Bastard is nullius filius in the Law, that is to say, no man's son.

They be made Bondmen or Villains two ways, either by their own proper act,
as when a Free Person, being of full age will come into a Court of Record, and
there confesses himself Bond to another man.

Or else by the Laws of Arms, called jus gentium, as when a man is taken
prisoner in wars, and is compelled to serve and become the Thrall and Bond man
of him that took him, the Law calls such a Person a Villain, that is to say,
a slave and Thrall.

And ye shall note, Definition of Villains.
That Villains be properly called in Latin Servi, because that when they be
taken in war, the Captains be wont not to kill them, but to sell them, and so
to save their lives: So that they be called Servi a servendo, that is to say,
of serving: They be called Mancipia a manu capiendo, because they be taken by
hand and power of their enemies.

Now as I said by the Law of Nature, we are all born free; but after that, by
the Law of of Gentility, servitude or bodage did press and invade the world,
then ensued the bene-of Manumission: Manumission is Quasi de manu emissio, that
is to say, Manumission.
a giving out of the hand or power: For so long as a man is in bondage and
servitude, he is subject to the hand and power of another, and when he is
Manumissed, he is made free and delivered from the said power. So that a
Manumission is (to say) a Writing, testifying that the Lord has infranchised
his Villain, and all his offspring and Sequel.

Also if the Lord makes to his bondsman an Obligation of a certain sum of
money, What acts makes Manumission in Law.
or grants to him by his Deed an Annuity, or yearly Pension; or leaseth to
him by Deed Lands or Tenements for term of years, any of these acts do employ
an Enfranchisement.

Likewise, if the Lord makes a Feoffment to his Villain, and makes unto him
Livery of seisin, this also is an Enfranchisement, and secret Manumission.
Briefly to speak, wheresoever the Lord compels his Villain, by the course of
the Law, Causes of Infranchisem.
to do that thing that he might otherwise enforce him to do or to suffer,
without the authority and compulsion of the Law, he does by implication
Enfranchise his Villain; as if the Lord will bring against his Villain an
action of debt, an action of account, of Covenant, or of trespass: These and
such like be in the eye of the Law Enfranchisments and Manumissions, because
that the Lord in all these cases, may have the effect and purpose of his suit;
that is to say, the Goods, Chattels, and correction of his bondsman, without the
compulsion of that Law, even by his own proper power and authority which he
has upon his Villain: But if the Lord does sue his Villain by an appea of
Felony, the Villain being lawfully indicted of the same before, this is no
tacit Manumission or Enfranchisement; For the Lord, though he have power to
beat his Villain, and to spoil him of his goods, yet he cannot by the Law of
this Realm put him to death.

Ye shall also understand, that if a man's bondsman purchase Lands, or acquit,
and get unto him any other thing, the Lord may forthwith enter and seize the
same into his own hands. Wherefore if the Lord will bring against his Villain a
Praecipe quod reddat, by which he demands against his Villain any Lands or
Tenements; this implies an Enfranchisement, for as much as he binds himself
to the Prescript and Authority of the Law, whereas he might use his own
Authority by entering and seizing the said Lands.

Finally, Ye shall mark that some Villains be called Villains in gross, and
other some be called Villains regardant. In gross, be they of which the Lord is
severally seized, and not by reason of any Lordship or Manor; but they be
called regardant, which do belong to a Manor of which the Lord is seized: And
the said Villains have been regardant, that is to say, exspectant and
attendant time out of mind to the Lord of the said Manor, in doing unto him
such services as to a Villain appertains.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of ancient Demesne.
THere is also a certain kind of Tenure, which is called ancient Demesne; and
these Tenants which hold by their service be Fee-holders, and by Charter, and
not by Copy or Court-Roll, or by the Verge, after the Custom of the Manor, at
the will of the Lord: And these Tenants be such as hold of those Mannours which
were S. Edwards the King, or which were in the hands of King William the
Conqueror; and these Mannours be called the ancient Demesnes of the King, or
the ancient Demesnes of the Crown of England. And to such Tenants which hold of
such Mannours, be many and diverse Liberties given and granted by the Law; as,
to be quit of tole and passage, and such like Impositions which be demanded of
men for their Goods and Chattels, sold or bought in Faires and Markets; by
them also, to be quit and free of Tax and Tollage, granted by Parliament;
except that the Kings Majesty do Tax ancient Demesne (as to him only
appertains) when he thinks good, for great and urgent Considerations.
Tenants also of ancient Demesne, ought to be quit of payments to the Expenses
and Charges of the Knights which came to the Parliament. Also they ought not to
be impannelled, nor put in Juries and Enquests in the County, out of their
Mannours or Seigniory of ancient Demesne for the Lands which they hold of such
Manor, unless they have other Lands at the Common Law, for which they ought
to be charged. And if such Tenants, or any of them; which hold of the Manor
of ancient Demesne bedistreined, to do unto their Lord other Services or
Customs then they or their Ancesters have used to do, Writ of Monstraverunt.
then may they sue a certain Writ, called a Monstraverunt, directed to the
Lord, commanding him that he distrein them not for to do other service or
Customs then they have been accustomed to do.

And for further knowledge hereof, you shall understand, that in the Exchequer
there is a Book called Doomsday; which Book was made in the time of the said
S. Edward, and all the Lands that were in the Seisin, and in the hands of the
said S. Edward, at the time of the making of the said Book by ancient Demean.

But the Lands which then were in other men's hands, Frank-fee.
though they be written in the said Book, be frank Fee and no ancient Demesne.

Finally, It is to be noted, that Tenants of ancient Demesne shall not be
impleaded for their said Lands out of the Manor whereof they so hold, and if
they be, Abatement. of Writ.
they may show the matter and abate the Writ; But if they once Answer to the
Writ and Judgment given, then the Lands have lost the nature and benefit of
ancient Demesne, and are become frank Fee, that is to say, Pleadable at the
Common Law for evermore. And thus have we spoken of the Diversity of Tenures.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Rents.
FOr as much as upon every Tenure there is commonly reserved one Rent or other;
therefore I think it good somewhat to treat of Rents, but ye must understand,
that there be sundry sorts of Rents: There is one kind of Rent which is called
Rent-service; Division of Rent-service.
another which is called Charge; and the third which is named in French Rent-
Secke, that is to say in Latin, Redditus siccus, a dry Rent. Now Rent-service
is so called, because it is knit to the Tenure, and is (as it were) a service
whereby a man holds his Lands or Tenements; or at the least way, when the
Rents be unseverably coupled and knit with the service: As for an example,
where the Tenant holds his Land of the King, or of any other Lord by Fealty,
and by certain Rent, or by any other sorts of services, and by certain Rent;
this Rent is called Rent-service. Distress of common right.
And here ye shall note, That if this Rent-service be at any time when it ought
to be paid, behind and unpaid, the Lord of whom the Land or Tenement is so
holden, whether it be in fee-simple, fee-tayl, for term of life, for years, or
at will, may of common right enter and distrein for the Rent, though there be
no mention at all, nor cause of distress put in the Deed or Lease. I said
before, that the Nature of this Rent-service is to be coupled and knit to the
Tenure; For where no Tenure is, there can be no Rent-service. And therefore if
at this day I be seized of Lands of Fee-simple, and make a Deed of Feoffment of
the same to another in Fee-simple, reserving by the same Deed a Rent; this can
be called no Rent-service, because there can be now no Tenure between the
Feoffer and the Feoffee; otherwise it is of Feoffments in Fee simple made
before the Statute of Westminster the third, Cap. 1. called Quiae emptores
terrarum: For before the making of that Statute, if a man had made a Feoffment
in Fee-simple; reserving to him a certain Rent, yet though it had been without
Deed, here had been begun and Created a new Tenure between the Feoffor and the
Feoffee, and the Feoffee should have holden of the Feoffor, who by virtue of
the same might of Common right have distrained for such Rent; but at this day
by force of the said Act, there can be no such holding or Tenure Created or
begun, and consequently no Rent-Service can be at this day reserved, upon any
gift in Fee-simple, except it be in the Kings case, who being chief Lord of
all, ever might and may give Lands to be holden of him: thus ye see, that at
this day no Subject can reserve any Rent Service unto him, unless the reversion
of the Lands or Tenements that he shall grant be still in him, as where he
grants them in Fee-tayle, or makes but a Lease for term of life or for
certain years, or else at Will.

For in all these cases the reversion of the Fee-simple remains still in him,
and therefore if there be any Rent reserved, it is to be called a Rent-Service,
and is of Common right distrainable, though there be no Clause of distress in
the Deeed of Feoffment or Lease.

But here ye will ask me when in the case before remembered, a man at this day
gives clean away the Land or Tenement from himself in fee-simple, so that
there is no manner of Reversion of the same remaining in him at all, and yet
nevertheless reserveth unto him by his deed, a certain Rent, what manner of
Rent shall this be called, I answer, if there be in the Deed indented any
clause of distress; Charge.
that is, that if the Rent be behind unpaid, it shall be Lawful for the
Feoffour to enter and to distrain, it is called a Rentcharge, for as much as
the Land is charged therewith, but how? of Common Right? no, but only by virtue
and force of the wriing, but on the other side, if there be no such Clause of
distress put in the Indenture, then the Rent so reserved shall be called a Rent
secke.

Likewise if a man that is seized of certain Land will grant, either by
Indenture, or by Deed-poll, that is to say, single, and not indented, a Yearly
Rent out of the same Lands to another, whether it be in the Fee-simple,
Fee-tayle, for term of Life, for Years, or at Will, with Clause of distress,
then this Rent is called a Rentcharge, and he to whom such Rent is granted,
may for default of Payment thereof enter and distraine.

But contrary, if the grant be made without any such Clause of distress, it is
called a Rent-seck, that is to say, a dry Rent, because he cannot come to it
in Case it be deemed by way of distress; Insomuch, that if he were never seized
of it, he is by Course of the Common Law without remedy, otherwise it is of a
Rent Charge, for here he to whom the grant is made, when the Rent is behind,
may choose whether he will sue a Writ of. Annuity against the granter, or
distrain for the Rent behind, and retain the distress, till the time he be paid
accordingly, but he cannot have both remedies together, but must take him to
the one, for if he once recover by a Writ of Annuity, Annuity.
then is the Land discharged, and if he Sue not his Writ of Annuity, but
distraine for the Arrerages, and the Tenant Sueth a Replevin, whereupon the
other anoweth the taking of the distress in Court of Record, then is the Land
charged, and the Person of the Granter dischared of the Action of Annuity.
Estopple.


Ye shall understand, That if a man will that another shall have a Rentcharge,
coming out of his Land, and yet will not that his Person shall be by any means
charged by Writ of Annuity, he may then have such Clause in the end of his
deed, Proviso.
Proviso quod praeseus Scriptum, nec quicquam in eo contentum, ullo pacto se
extendat ad onerandum Personam meam, per breve seu Actionem de Annuitate, sed
tantum modo valeat ad onerandum Terras, Fundas, and Tenementa mea, de annuo
redditu Praedicto. If this or such like Clause be added, then the Land is
charged, and the Person of the Granter is discharged.

Also if a man will make a Deed of Grant in this wise, that if John at Style be
not Yearly paid at the Feast of Christmas, for term of his life Twenty
Shillings Sterling; that then it shall be Lawful for the said John at Style,
to distrain for it in the manner of Dale, this is a good Rent charge, because
the manor is Charged with the Rent, by way of distress, and yet nevertheless,
in this Case the Person of him that made such Deed is discharged of any Action
of Annuity: For as much as he granted not by his Deed any Annuity to the said
John at Style, but only granted that he might distrain for such Yearly Rent.

Furthermore ye shall note, That if a man has a Rentcharge to him, and to his
Heirs, coming out of certain Lands, and does Purchase any parcel of these
Lands to him, and to his Heirs, in this Case the whole Rentcharge is quenched
and gone, and the Annuity also, Extinguishment.
the Cause is this, that a Rentcharge cannot be in such Case apportioned.
Otherwise it is of a Rent-Service, as for example; If one which has a
Rent-Service of 20d by Year, does Purchase parcel of the Land, out of which
this Yarely Rent of 20d is coming, this shall not extinguish or drown the whole
Rent, but for the parcel only. For Rent Service in such case may very well be
apportioned, and rated according to the value of the Land. Yet there be some
sort of Rents-Services, Rent service cannot be apportioned.
which in no wise can be apportioned. As where a Tenant holds his Land of his
Lord, by the service, to render to his Lord Yearly at such a Feast, a Horse
lading of Gold, a red Rose, a Gilliver, or such like; If in this case the Lord
does Purchase parcel of the Land thus of him holden, this Service is gone,
because such Service cannot be Severed and apportioned. Also Escuage is a
Service that may be very well apportioned according to the difference and rate
of the Land.

But where any Land is holden by Homage and Fealty, if the Lord purchase
parcel of the Land, yet he shall have his Homage and Fealty still of his
Tenant.

Ye shall mark also, That if a man makes a Lease of Land to another for term
of life, reserving to him certain Rent, if in this case he grants that Rent
to John at Style, saving to himself the Reversion of the said Land; this Rent
is but Rent Seck, because John at Style that has the Rent, has nothing in
Reversion of the Land.

But if he grants the Reversion of the Land to John at Noke, for term of
life, and the Tenant Atturneth accordingly, then has John at Noke the Rent, as
Rent Service, because he has the Reversion for term of his life.

Likewise it is, If a man gives Lands or Tenements in tail, Rent is incident
to a reversion.
Reserving to him, and to his Heirs certain Rent, or makes a Lease of the Land
for term of life, Reserving certain Rent, if he grants the Reversion to
another, and the Tenant Atturneth accordingly the whole Rent and Service shall
pass by this word Reversion, because the Rent and Service in such case be
Incident to the Reversion, and do pass by the grant of the Reversion. But if he
had Granted the Rent only, it had been Rent Seck.

CHAP. XXXIX. What remedy a man has to recover his Rent when it is behind.
I Showed you before, that for a Rent-service if it be behind you may distrain
in the ground, even of Common right, though there be no such Clause of distress
mentioned in the Deed of Feoffment, Grant or Lease.

Also for a Rentcharge ye may distrain or bring your Writ of Annuity at your
choice, and election as before is declared. But of a Rent Seck, if you were
never seized of it, nor of any Parcel thereof, ye be without remedy by course
of the Common Law, for ye cannot distrain for it, nor yet bring your Writ of
Annuity, but if you were once seized of it, or of Parcel thereof, and it is
eft-soones behind, then your remedy shall be this, ye must go either by your
self or by your Deputy, to the Land or Tenement out of which the Rent is
coming, Disseisin of Rent Seck.
and there demand the Arrerages of the Rent, which if the Tenant denies to
pay, this denial is desesin of the Rent. Also if the Tenant be not then ready
to pay it, this countervaileth a denial, which is a disesin.

Moreover, if neither the Tenant, nor no other man be remaining upon the ground
to pay the Rent, when ye demand they Arrerages, this also is a denial in the
Law, Assize.
and is in very deed a diseisin. And for these diseisins you may have an Assize
of Novel diseisin against the Tenant, and shall recover seisin of the Rent, and
the Arrerages, and your Damages and Costs of your Writ, and of your Plea. And
if after such Recovery and Execution had, In Rediseisin double damages.
the Rent be again at another time denied you, then you may have a Writ of
Rediseisin, and shall recover your double Damages.

It shall therefore be wisdom for a man, Therecauses of disseisin of Rent
service.
when a Rent is granted by any person unto him, to take of the Tenant of the
Land, a Penny or half Penny, in name of seisin of the Rent; and then if at the
next day of payment the Rent be denied him, he may have an Assize of Novel
diseisin; And ye shall note, That there be three Causes of diseisin of
Rent-service, that is to wit, Rescous, Replevin, and Enclosure: Rescous is,
when the Lord upon Land holden of him distraineth for his Rent behind, and the
distress be rescued from him, or if the Lord comes upon the Land to distrein,
and the Tenant or any other man for him will not suffer him, that is called
Rescous.

Replevin is when the Lord has distrained, Replevin.
and Replevin is made of the distress by Writ, or by Plaint.

Enclosure is where Lands or Tenements be so enclosed, Enclosure.
that the Lord cannot come within the Lands or Tenements for to distrain. And
the chief case why such things so made be diseisin to the Lord, is forasmuch as
the Lord is by this way disturbed of the mean and remedy, whereby he ought to
come and have his Rent, that is to wit, by distress.

And there be four Causes of diseisin of Rentcharge, Four Causes of Diseisin
of Rent-charged.
that is to wit, Recous, Rplevin, Enclosure, and Denier. For Denier or denial,
is as well a diseisin of a Rentcharge, as it is of a Rent-secke. Finally, You
shall understand, that there be two cases of deseisin of Rent-secke, that is,
denial and Enclosure.

And it seems that there is yet another cause of diseisin of all the three
Rents aforesaid, that is to wit, And two of Rent-secke.
this when the Lord comes to the Land holden of him, or when he that has a
Rentcharge, or a Rent-secke, comes to the Land to distrain for the Rent
behind, or to demand the Rent, and the Tenant hearing this encountreth him, and
forestalleth him the way, with force and Arms, and menaceth him in such sort,
as he dare not come to the ground for to distrain for his Rent behind, for fear
of death or mutilation of his members: This is a Diseisin because the party is
disturbed of his mean and lawful remedy, whereby he ought to come to his Rent.

Finally, Ye shall observe and mark, That by an Act of Parliament made in the
22th year of our Sovereign Lord King Henry 8, it is lawful for the Executors
and Administrators of Tenants in Fee-simple, Tenants in Fee-tayl, Tenants for
term of life, of Rent-services, Rent-charges, Rent- Seckes, and of Fee-farmes,
for Arrereages of such Rents as were due to the Testators in their lives;
either to distrein for the same, or at their Election to bring an Action of
debt, except in such Lordships in Wales, Distress or Action of Debt.
or in the Marches thereof; whereas the Tenants have useed time out of mind, to
pay unto every Lord, at his first entry into the Lordship, any sum of Money,
for the redemption of all manner of Outcries and Penalties incurred at any time
before their Lords entry.

Also by force of the said Act, the Husband which was seized in the right of
his Wife, may after the death of his Wife, either distrein or bring an Action
of Debt, for the Arrerages of such Rents as were due and unpaid in her life.

Likewise it is of him that has a Rent for the term of another man's life, if
he for term of whose life he has the Rent, dies, yet by virtue of the said
Act, he or his Executors and Administrators, may either distrein, or bring an
Action of Debt for the Arrerages due before the death of him, for term of whose
he had the Rent.

CHAP. XL. How Recoveries ought to be made of Rents and Services.
UPon a Replevin sued, an Avowry may be made by the Lord, or Conusance, and
Justification by his Bailiff or Servant, upon the Land holden of the said Lord,
without naming any person certain to be Tenant thereof: The like Law is also
upon every Writ sued of second deliverance.

In any Replegiare or second deliverance for Rents, Customs, Services, or
damage Feasant, if the Avowry, Conusance, or Justification be found for the
Defendant, or the Plaintiff be nonsuit, or otherwise barred, the Defendant
shall recover such Damages and Costs, as the Plaintiff should have had, if he
had recorded.

Both Parties shall in such Writs have like pleas, aid, prayers, and Joynder in
age, as at the Common Law, notwithstanding this Act, Pleas in Avoury.
Pleas of Disclaymer only excepted. 2 H. 8.19.

CHAP. XLI. For the Assurance of Farmers made.
ALl Leases hereafter, to be made of any Lands, or other Hereditamens by
writing indented, under Seal for term of years, or for term of life by any
persons, being of the age of twenty one years; having any estate of
Inheritance, either in Fee-simple, or in Fee-tayl, in their own right, or in
the right of their Charges, or Wives, or jointly with their Wives, shall be
good and effectual against the Lessors; their Wives, Heirs, and Successors,
according to the estate comprised in such Indenture of Lease. Surrender of the
old Lease.


This Statue shall not extend to any Lease to be made of Lands in the hands of
any Farmer, by force of any old Lease, unless such old Leases expired within a
year after the making of the new; nor to any Grant to be made of any Reversions
of Mannours, Lands, etc. nor to any Leases of such Mannours, Lands, etc. which
have not been let to Farm, or occupied by Farmers twenty years before such
Lease made; nor to any Lease to be made without impeachment of wast; nor to any
Lease to be made for above twenty one years, or three lives from the day of the
making thereof; and that upon every such Lease, there be reserved so much
yearly Rent, as has been usually paid for the Lands so let within twenty
years next before such Lease made, and the Reversioners of the Mannours, Lands,
etc. so let (after the death of such Lessor or his Heirs) may have such remedy
against such Lessee, his Executors, Assigns, as such Lessor might have had
against such Lessee.

Provided that all Leases made by the Husband of Mannours, Lands, The Wife
shall be party to the Lease.
etc. (being the Inheritance of the Wife) shall be made by Indenture in the
name of the Husband and Wife, and she to seal to the same, and the Rent shall
be reserved to the Husband and Wife, and the Heirs of the Wife: And here the
Husband shall not alien or discharge the Rent, or any part thereof longer then
during the Coverture, unless it be by fine levied by Husband and Wife.

Provided furthermore, that this Act extend not to give liberty to take more
Farms or Leases, then might have been taken before this Act ( Vide Stat. 25.
H. 8.13. Sheep.) nor to any Parson or Vicar to make any Lease, otherwise then
they might have done before.

It is furthermore enacted, What grant by a Corporation is good.
that the Grant, Lease or gift, or Election, of the Governor or Ruler of any
Hospital, College, Deanery, or other corporation, with the assent of the more
part of such of the same as have voice thereunto shall be good and effectual,
any Rule or Statute made by any Founder to the contrary notwithstanding. 32 H.
8.

CHAP. XLII. Of falsifying of recoveries by Farmers, 21. H. 15.
A Termer for years may falsify a feigned recovery had against them in the
reversion, and shall retain and enjoy his Term against the recoverer, his Heirs
and Assigns according to his Lease.

Also the recoverer shall have like remedy against the termer, Avowry or Action
of Debt.
his Executors or Assigns by Avowry, or Action of debt for Rents and Services
reserved upon such Lease, and due after such recovery, and also like Action for
wast done after such recovery, as the Lessor might have had if such recovery
had never been.

No Statute of the staple, Statute Merchant, or execution by Elegit, shall be
avoided by such feigned recovery, but such Tenants shall also have such remedy
to falsify such recoveries as is here provided for the Lessee for years.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Tithes, and how they shall be recovered, 33. H. 8.7.
ALl Persons shall duly set forth and pay all Tithes and offerings, according
to the custom of the places where they grow due.

If Tithes or offerings be not so set out and paid the party grieved may
convent him, that so detain them, before the Ecclesiastical Judge, who has
power to hear and determine the matter in question Ordinarily or Summarily,
according to the Ecclesiastical Laws, and to give sentence thereupon
accordingly.

Here if any of the parties appeal, the Judge upon such appeal shall adjudge
to the other party reasonable cases, and compel the Appealant to satisfy them
by process and censures Ecclesiastical taking surety of the other party, to
whom the costs shall be adjudged to restore the costs, in case the principal
case pass against him.

If any Person after such sentence given refuse to pay Tithes or Sums of
Money so adjudged, then two just of P. (1. Qu.) shall upon Certificate thereof
from the Judge, commit the Party so refusing the next Goal, there to remain,
till he have found Sureties to be bound by Recognisance, or otherwise (before
the same Judge) to the King to perform the said Sentence.

Howbeit, none shall be thereby compelled to pay Tithes for Lands, or other
Hereditaments, which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm are discharged, and
not chargeable with the payment of Tithes, neither shall it extend to the City
of London or the Suburbs thereof.

In all cases, where any Person, who has any Estate of Inheritance, Freehold,
Term, right or interest in any Parsonage, Vicarage, or other Ecclesiastical
profit, which now be, or hereafter shall be made Temporal, and admitted to be,
and abide in Temporal hand, and to lay uses by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, shall happen to be hereafter outed, or otherwise wronged from or
concerning the same, he or she shall have remedy for the same (in the Kings
Temporal Courts, or other Temporal Courts) as the case shall require, by
Writs of precipe quod reddat, Assize of novell disseisin, Mordancester, quod ei
defoveat, Writs of Dower and other Original Writs, as the case shall require;
in like manner as for Lands, Tenements, and other Hereditaments in such manner
to be demanded.

Also Writs of Covenant, and other Writs for Fines to be Levied, and all other
assurances to be had and made of Parsonages, Vicarages, and other profits
called Spiritual, shall be devised and granted in Chancery, as has been used
for Fines and Assurances of other Land: Likewise all Judgments given, and
Fines Levied, for, and of such Parsonages, etc. shall be of like effect as
judgments given and Fines levied of other Lands. 32. H. 8.

CHAP. XLIII. Of Mortuaries, 21. H. 8.6.
NO Spiritual Person, his Bayliffe, or Lessee, shall take or demand more for a
Mortuary, then as is hereafter expressed, nor shall convent any Person before
any Ecclesiastical Judge for the recovery of more for the same, then as is
hereafter declared, in pain to forfeit so much as he takes or demands more, and
likewise 40s. to the party grieved, to be recovered by Action of Debt, wherein
no essence, etc. shall be allowed.

None shall take or demand for a Mortuary any thing at all, where (by the
Custom) they have not been usually paid, nor upon the death of a Woman covert,
a Child, a Person not keeping house, a Wayfaring man, one not residing in the
place where he happens to dye, nor where the goods of the dead Person (Debts
deducted) amount not to the value of 10. Marks; nor above the Sum of 3s. 4d.
when they exceed not 30lb. nor above 6s. 8d. when they exceed 30lb. but not
40lb. nor above 10s. when they amount to 40lb. or above. And if the Person dye
in a place where he or she dwells not, their Mortuary shall be paid in the
place where they had their most abode.

This Act shall not abridge Spiritual Persons to receive Legacies bequeathed
to them, or to the Kings Altar.

No Mortuaries shall be paid in Wales, Callais, or Barwick, or in any of their
Marches, save only in Wales, and the Marches thereof, where they have been
accustomed to be paid, and such as are there paid shall be regulated according
to the order prescribed by this Act.

The BP of Bangor, Landaff: S. David's and S. Assaph, and the Arch Deacon of
Chester, shall take Mortuaries of the Priests within their Jurisdiction, as
has been accustomed notwithstanding his Act.

Less Mortuaris already settled by custom shall not be increased, and there
also persons exempted by this Act, shall not hereafter be chargeable.

CHAP. XLV. Of Discontinuance.
IT is called a Discontinuance by the Laws of England, whereby he has the
possession of Lands or Tenements, for the time present, and yet not having the
Fee-simple in himself, nor in his own right only, makes an Alienation of the
same to another, by reason whereof, he that should have them after him, and
which then has right unto them, cannot enter, but is driven to his remedy by
way of Action, in such wise, that the said Lands be not utterly shifted, etc.
gone from such Person or Persons as have right unto them, but be all only
discontinued for a time, till the Person which after the death of such
discontinuer has right unto them, do continue and bring them home again, not
by entry, but by suit and way of action. As for example, a Tenant in tail of
certain Lands, does Enfeoff another in the same, in Fee-simple, or Fee-tayle,
and has Issue, and dies, his Issue cannot enter into the Lands though he has
Title, and right unto them, Formedon in the descender.
but is but to his Action, which is called a Formedon in the descender. And if
such Tenant in tail which makes such a Feoffment, has no Issue at time of
his death, it is yet nevertheless a discontinuance to him, which is either in
the reversion or in the remainder, so that neither the one nor the other can
enter, Formedon in the reverter or remainder.
but be driven to their Action, he in the reversion of his Formedon in the
reverter, and he in the remainder to his Formedon in the remainder.

In like manner if a Bishop does alien Lands, Enter sine assensue Capitali.
which be parcel of his Bishopric and dies, this is a discontinuance of his
Successor; Forasmuch as he cannot enter, but is driven to his Writ of enter
sine assensu Capitali.

Semblable, if a Deane be sold seized of Lands, in the right of his Deanery, and
makes such an Alienation, this is a discontinuance to his Successor. Also the
Master of an Hospital alieneth any Lands of his Hospital, that is a
discontinuance, and his Successor cannot enter, but is put to his Writ, Igressu
sine assensu confratrum and sororum.
De ingressu sine ascensu confratrum and sororum.

But if a Parson or a Vicar of a Church will alien any of his glebe-Lands to
another in Fee-simple, or Fee-tayl, and dies, or resigneth his Benefice, this
is no discontinuance to his Successor, but he may very well. enter,
notwithstanding such Alienation made by his Predecessor. And the highest Writ
that a Parson can have, if his Predecessor have aliened his Glebe-Land, or lost
it by default, or Reddition, is a Juris utrum. Reddition, that, is voluntarily
yielding.
And furthermore note, That no Tenant of the Land, can by his or their Act,
discontinue the right of him in the Reversion, unless it be by Feoffment, with
Livery and Seisin, or else by a Release with Warranty.

And note, That such things as pass by way of Grant by Deed, without Livery and
Seisin, cannnot be discontinued, as an Advowson, Common, or a Villain in Gross,
Reversion, Rentcharge, Common for Beasts certain, and such other like.

And ye shall understand, That in 32 H. 8. it was enacted that no fine,
Feoffment, or other Act, to be made or suffered by the Husband only, of any
Lands or Tenements being the Inheritance or the Freehold of his Wife, during
the Coverture between them, should be any discontinuance thereof, or be
prejudicial, or hurtful to the said Wife, or to her Heirs, or to such as
should have right, title, or interest to the same by the death of such Wife,
but that the same Wife and her Heirs, and such other to whom such right should
appertain, after her decease may then lawfully enter in all such Lands and
Tenements, according to their rights and titles therein.

CHAP. LXVI. How Recoveries by Collusion against Tenants for term of life, is
no Discontinuance. An. 32. H. 8.
WHere diverse Persons seized of Lands and Hereditaments, as Tenants by the
Courtesy of England, or otherwise, only for term of life or lives, have
heretofore suffered other persons by agreement or covine between them had, to
recover the same against them in the Kings Court, by reason whereof they to
whom the reversion or remainder thereof have belonged, have after the deaths of
such Tenants been driven to their Actions, for the recontinuance and obtaining
the said Lands and Tenements so recovered, and sometimes have been clearly
disherited of the same: It is enacted that all such Recoveries hereafter to be
had by agreement of the Party, or by covine, or against any such particular
Tenant of Lands or Hereditaments, whereof he is or hereafter shall be seized as
Tenant by the Courtesy of England, Tenant in tail after possibility of issue
extinct or otherwise for term of life, shall from henceforth as against such
persons to whom the reversion or remainder shall then appertain, and against
their Heirs and Successors be clearly void. Provided that this Act extend not
to any person that shall by good title recover any Hereditaments without fraud
or covine, against any such particular Tenant by reason of any former right or
title, nor to avoid any recovery to be had against any such particular Tenant,
by the assent and agreement of those in the reversion or remainder, so that
such assent and agreement to appear of record in the Kings Court.

CHAP. XLVII. How wrongful Diseisin is no descent in the Law, Enact. Anno 32.
H. 8.
WHere diverse persons have by strength and without title, entered into Lands
and Tenements, and wrongfully diseised and dispossessed the rightful owners
and possessors thereof, and so being seized by diseisin have died seized
thereof, by reason of which dying seized, the Parties that were so diseized and
dispossessed, or such other persons as before such descent might have lawfully
entered into the said Lands and Tenements, be thereby clearly excluded of their
entry into the Land, and put to their Action for their remedy and recovery
thereof; It is enacted, that the dying seized hereafter, of any such diseisour,
having no right or title therein, shall not be deemed any such descent in the
Law, as to take away the entry of such persons, or the Heirs, which at the time
of the same descent had good title of entry into the same. Except that such
diseisor had the peaceable possession of his Lands or Tenements, whereof he
shall so die seized, by the space of five years next after the diseisin by him
committed without entry; or continual claim, by such as have lawful title
thereunto.

CHAP. LXVIII. The Limitation of Prescription Enacted. Anno 32. H. 82.
SEisin in a Writ of Right shall be within sixty years before the test of the
same Writ. Limitation of years.


In a Mordancester, Cosenage, Ayel, Writ of Entry Sur diseisin, Limitation of
50 years.
or any other possessory Action, upon the possession of his Ancester or
Predecessor, it shall be within 50 years before the test of the Original of
any such Writ.

In a Writ upon the Parties own seisin or possession, Limitation of 30 years.
it shall be within 30 years before the test of the original of the same Writ.

In an Avowry or Cognizance for rent, suit, or services, of the seisin of his
Ancester, Predecessor or his his own, or of any other, whose estate he pretends
to have, it shall be within 40 years before the making such Avowry or
Cognizance. Avowry.


Formedons in reverter or remainder, and scire facias, upon fines shall be sued
within 50 years after the title or cause of Action accrued; and not after.

The Party Demandant, Plaintiff, or Avowant, (that upon traverse or deiner by
the other Party) cannot prove actual possession or seisin, within the times
above limited shall be for ever after barred in all such Writs, Actions, Bar.
Avowries, Cognizance, Prescription, etc.

Provided that in any of the said Actions, Attaint upon false Verdict.
Avowries, Prescriptions, etc. the party grieved may have an Attaint upon a
false Verdict given.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Fines.
FInes have their Names, because they make a final end and determination of
all suits, strifes, and debates between men. For the due levying whereof, it
was enacted in the fourth year of King Henry the seventh, That every Fine after
the engrossing, shall be proclaimed in the Court the same Term, and the three
next, four several days in every Term, and in the mean time all Pleas shall
cease.

The Proclamation being so made, they shall conclude all Persons both Princes
and strangers, except women, covert persons under age, in prison, out of the
Realm, or of none sane memory, being not Parties to the Fine.

The right and interest that any person or persons (other then Parties) has or
have at the time of the Fine engrossed, is saved, so that they or their Heirs
pursue such the r right or interest by Action or Lawful entry, within five
years after the Proclamations so made; so also is the right and interest saved,
which accrues after the engrossing of the Fine, so that the parties having the
same, pursue within five years after it so accrues, and in this case the Action
may be brought against the pernor of the profits.

If at the time of the Fine engrossed, or of such accruer, as aforesaid, the
persons be covert (and no parties to the Fine) under age, in prison, out of the
Realm, or of none sane memory, they or their Heirs, have time to pursue their
Actions within five years after such imperfection removed.

The exception that none of the parties, nor any to their use, had any thing in
the Lands, at the time of the Fine levied, is saved to all persons, except
parties and Princes.

Fines at the Common Law have the same force that they had before the making of
this Act; and a Fine may be levied this way, or at the Common Law, at the
pleasure of the parties.


Furthermore in 32. Year of (...) for the avoiding of certain doubts and
ambiguities, it was enacted that all Fines levied of any person or persons of
full age of Lands intailed before the same Fine to themselves, or to any of
their Ancestors in possession, reversion, remainder, or use, shall immediately
after the Fine ingressed, and Proclamations made, be a sufficient bar against
them and their Heirs, claiming only by such En-tayle, and against all others
claiming only to their use, or to the use of any Heir of their bodies.

Howbeit this Act shall not bar the interest of any persons accrued by reason
of any Fine levied by a Woman, after her Husbands death, contrary to the
Statute of V. H. 7.20.

A Fine levied by him who is restrained by any express Act of Parliament so to
do, shall be void, notwithstanding this Act.

This Act shall not extend to any Fine heretofore levied, of Lands now in suit,
or heretofore Lawfully recovered in any court by Judgment or otherwise: Nor to
any Fine of Lands entayled by the Kings Letters Patent, or any Act of
Parliament the reversion thereof at the time of such fine levied being in the
King.

CHAP. L. Of Testaments or last Wills.
TEstamentum in Latin is as much to say as mentis Testatio, Division.
that is a Declaration or witnessing of a man's mind. And there be two sorts of
Testaments. The other is called Testamentum Scriptum, Written Testament.
that is a written Testament or last Will by writing, and the other is called
Testamentum Nuncupaticum, The Testament. Nuncupative
a Testament Nuncupative, which is when a man does express by Mouth his last
Will and Testament without writing, by calling before him certain of his
Neighbors, in whose presence he does signify by words of his last mind and
Will. And this for the most part men use to do, when for fear of suddenness of
death, they dare not abide the writing of their Will. And this Will (unless it
be in certain cases) is as strong and as sure, as is a Testament or last Will
put in writing, and Sealed with the Seal of the Testator.

Also though a Testament by writing be not Sealed with the Seal of the
Testator, yet is the Testament good and effectual in the Law.

And ye shall also mark, That where a man makes once his Testament and Will,
and afterward makes another Will by words, if his last Will be proved before
the Ordinary, and by him put in writing and in sealed with his Seal, such last
Will shall avoid the first Will, unless it be in special cases. And so always
the latter Will and Testament shall avoid the former.

Finally by an Act made the 21. Year of H. 8. it was ordained, that part of the
Executors which take upon them the charge of a Will, may sell any Land devised
by the Testator to be sold; albeit the other part which refuse will not join
with them.

CHAP. LI. The difference between Executors and Administrators.
EXecutor is when a man makes his Testament and last Will, and therein names
the person which shall execute his Testament, then he that is so named is his
Executor, and such an Executor shall have an Action against every Debtor of his
Testator, Assets in the hands of the Executors.
and if his Executors have Assets, that is to say, sufficient in their hands,
then shall every one to whom the Testator was in Debt, have Action against the
Executor, if he have an Obligation or specialty to show. But in every Cause
where the Testator might wage his Law, there no Action lies against the
Executor.

Administrator is he to whom the Ordinary commiteth, the Administration and
bestowing the goods of a dead man, for default of an Executor. And Actions
shall lie against him, or for him as for an Executor, and he shall be charged
to the value of the goods of the dead, and not further, if it be not by his
false Plea, or for that he has wasted the goods of the dead. But if the
Administrators dye, his Executors be not Administrators, Executors of his own
wrong.
but it behooves the ordinary to commit a new Administration. Howbeit if a
stranger, (I mean him that is neither Executor named in the Testament, and last
Will nor yet Administrator appointed by the ordinary) will take the goods of
the dead and Administrator of his own head and mind, without Lawful authority,
this person shall be charged and sued as an Executor, and not as an
Administrator in an Action which is brought against him by any Creditor. But if
the ordinary make a Letter de colligendum bona defuncti, he that has such a
Letter is not Administrator, but the Action lies in this case against the
ordinary, as well as if he took the goods by his own hand, or by the hand of
any other his Servant, by any other Commandment.

CHAP. LII. An Act of the probate of Testaments made Anno Dom. 21. H. 8.5.
NOthing shall be given for the Probate of a Will or Commision of
Administration when the goods of the dead exceed not 5lb. save only 6d. to the
Register. Nevertheless the Judge shall not refuse to prove such a Testament
being exhibited to him in writing, with Wax ready to be Sealed and proved
Communi forma, but shall dispatch the party without delay.

For the Probate of a Will, and all other things concerning the same when the
goods of the dead exceed 5lb. but not 40lb. the Judges Fee is 2s. 6d. and the
Registers 12d. and when they exceed 40. the Judges Fee is 2s. 6d. as before,
and the Registers as much, or the Register may refuse the 2s. 6d. and take a
penny for every ten lines of the Will, each line being conceived to contain ten
Inches in length, and for these Fees they shall dispatch the party without
frustratory delay.

Where there is no Will, or the Executors refuse it, Administration ought to be
committed to the Intestates Widow, if he left any, or to the Widow and the next
of the Kindred; or in case he left no Widow; to one or more of the Kindred; or
in case they look not after it, to any Creditor or Creditors that desire it; or
(in case they also neglect it) to any other person or persons, at the
descretion of the Ordinary, who is enjoined to take Security of such
Administrators for the due Administration of the Intestates goods.

Nothing shall be given for Letters of Administration, when the Intestates
goods exceed not 5lb. and when they exceed 5lb. but not 40lb. the Officers Fees
are only 2s. 6d.

The Executors or Administrators (calling to them two or more Creditors, or so
many of the next of the Kin, or (in their default) two or more neighbors or
friends of the dead) shall in their presence, cause a true Inventory to be made
of the goods, and shall deliver the same in upon Oath, unto the Ordinary
indented, whereof one part shall remain with the Ordinary, and the other with
the Executors and Administratours.

The Judge or Ordinary shall not refuse to receive an Inventory indented,
Inventory of goods.
so tendered unto him in Court, together with his oath to verify the same.

Lands devised to be sold shall not be accounted any of the Testators goods.

The Fee for the Copy either of the Will or Inventory, is the same with that
above allowed for registring the Will, or else the Register may take a Penny
for every ten lines of the length, as aforesaid.

The Officer that takes more then his due Fee, shall forfeit that excess to
the Party grieved, and besides 10lb to be divided betwixt the King and the same
party grieved.

This Act shall not alter the Customs, where less money has been for probate
of Testaments.

The Ordinary may convent Executors to prove the Testators Will, and to bring
in the Inventory as before, notwithstanding this Act.

CHAP. LIII. How Lands and Tenements may be by Testament (or otherwise disposed
of) Enacted. Anno 32. H. 8.
EVery person having Mannours, Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, holden in
Soccage, or of the nature of Soccage Tenure, and not having any such Mannours,
Lands, etc. holden of the King by Knights-service Soccage, or of the nature of
Tenure in chief, Soccage Tenure in chief, nor of any other person by
Knights-service, shall have power to give, dispose, will, and devise, as well
by his last Will and Testament in writing, or otherwise by any Act executed in
his life; all such Mannours, Lands, etc. at his pleasure. Every person having
Mannours, Lands, etc. holden of the King in Soccage, or of the nature of
Soccage in chief; and having any other Mannours, Lands, etc. holden of any
other person in Soccage, or of the nature of Soccage; and not having any
Mannours, Lands, etc. holden of the King, or any other by Knights-service,
shall have power to give, will, dispose, and devise, as well by his last Will
and Testament in writing, as otherwise by any Act executed in his life; all
such Mannours, Lands, etc. or any of them at his pleasure.

Howbeit, all such Primer Seisins, Reliefs, Fines for Alienations, and all
other rights and duties for Tenures in Soccage, or in the nature of Soccage in
chief, as have been heretofore used, are saved to the King and the said
Mannours, Lands, etc. are to be taken, had and sued out of the Kings hands, by
the person or persons to whom they shall be so disposed, willed, or devised, in
like manner as has been used by any Heir or Heirs, before the making of this
Statute.

Every person having Mannours, Lands, etc. of Estate in Inheritance, holden of
the King in chief by Knights-service, or of the nature of Knights-service in
chief, has power by his last Will in writing, or by any other Act executed in
his life, to give, dispose, will, or assign two parts thereof in three parts to
be divided, or else so much thereof as shall amount to the yearly value of two
parts thereof in three parts to be divided, in certainty and by special
divisions, that it may be known in severalty, for the advancement of his Wife,
preferment of his Children, and payment of his debts, or otherwise at his
pleasure.

Here also the custody, Wardship, and Primer Seisin, or any of them, as the
case shall require, of as much of such Mannours, Lands, etc. as shall amount to
the clear yearly value of the third part thereof: as also all fines for
Alienations, upon such alteration of the Freehold or Inheritance, are saved to
the King.

Every person having Mannours, Lands, etc. of Estate of Inheritance, holden of
the King in chief by Knight Service, and having other Mannours, Lands, etc.
holden of the King, or any other by Knight Service, or otherwise, has power to
give, dispose, or will, or assign by Will in writing, or otherwise by Act
executed in his life, two parts thereof in three parts to be divided, or so
much thereof as shall amount to the yearly value of two parts thereof, to be
severed as aforesaid, for the advancement of his Wife, preferment of his
Children, and payment of his Debts, or otherwise at his pleasure.

Here likewise the Custody, Wardship, Primer Seisin, and Fines for Alienation
are saved to the King, as before.

Every person having Mannours, Lands, etc. of estate of Inheritance, holden of
any other Lord by Knight Service, and other Lands in Socage, or of the nature
of Socage, may give, dispose, assure by will, or otherwise, by Act executed in
his life, two parts of the Knight Service Land, or so much thereof, as shall
amount to the yearly value of two parts, as aforesaid; and also all the Socage
Land at his pleasure; saving to such Lord (for his Custody and Wardship) so
much of the Knight Service Land, as shall amount to the yearlyly value of the
third part thereof.

Every person having Mannours, Lands, etc. holden of the King by
Knight Service, and not in chief; or any Mannours, Lands, etc. holden of the
King by Knight Service, and not in chief, and other Mannours, Lands, etc.
holden of any other person by Knight Service, and also other Mannours, Lands,
etc. holden of any other person in Soccage, or in the nature of Soccage, may
give, dispose, will, devise, and assure by his last Will, or otherwise by Act
executed in his life, two parts of the said Knight Service Land, or so much
thereof, as shall amount to two parts of the yearly value thereof, as
aforesaid, all the Soccage Land at his will and pleasure: Howbeit, here also
the Custody and Wardship, of so much of the said Knight Service, Mannours,
Lands, etc. as shall amount to the yearly value of the third part thereof, are
saved to the King, and other Lords respectively; and if the King, or other
Lord, have not (in this case) a full third part set out for them, they may
(respectively) take into their possession so much of the other two parts, as
will make it a full third part.

Provided that all persons shall sue Liverie for Possessions, Reversions, or
Remainders, and pay Reliefs and Heriots, as they did before the making of this
Act.

Fines for Alienations shall be paid in Chancery upon Writs of Entry in the
Post for common Recoveries, suffered of any Mannours, Lands, etc. holden of the
King in chief, in like manner, as upon Alienations of such Mannours, Lands,
etc. by Fine or Feoffment: Howbeit, no other Fine shall be paid there for any
such Writs, but only such Fines for Alienations.

Where two or more hold any Mannours, Lands, etc. of the King by
Knight Service, jointly to them and their Heirs of one of them, and he that
has the Inheritance dies, his Heir being within age, the King shall have the
Ward and Marriage of such Heir, the life of Free holder or Free holders
notwithstanding: saving to every Woman her Interest of Dower, in such Lands to
be assigned out of the two parts thereof, severed from the third part, as
abovesaid, and not otherwise, and saving also the King the Reversions of all
such Tenants by joynt-Tenure and Dower, after the death of such Tenants, in
case they happen to die, during the Nonage of the Kings Ward.

CHAP. LIVE. Matrimony and Marriage.
ALl Marriages shall be adjudged lawful which are not prohibited by Gods Law.
What marriages shall be lawful. Spiritual persons may marry.
32 H. 8.38. All Laws, Canons, Constitutions, and Ordinances which prohibit
Marriages to spiritual Persons (who by Gods Law may marry) and all forfeitures
therein shall be void. 2, 3. E. 6.21. Bigamus is Felony.


A Bigamus shall suffer death as a Felon, unless he or she have had no notice
that the Husband or Wife was living within seven years before, or the Marriage
be severed by Divorce.

This Felony shall cause no corruption of blood, Bigamy causes no corruption
of blood, etc.
or loss of Dower or inheritance 1 Jac. 11.

CHAP. LV. Of Voucher.
VOucher is when a Praecipe quod reddat of Land is brought against a man, What
Voucher is.
and another ought to Warrant the Land to the Tenant, then the Tenant shall
Vouch him to Warranty, and thereupon he shall have a Writ called Summoneas ad
Warrantizandum: And if the Sheriff return, that he has nothing by the which he
may be Summoned, then there shall go forth a Writ called Sequatur sub suo
periculo, and when he comes, he shall plead with the Demandant, and if he come
not, or if he come and cannot bar the Demandant, then the Demandant shall
recover the Land against the Tenant, and the Tenant shall recover as much Land
in value against the Vouchee, and thereupon shall have a Writ called Capias ad
valentiam against the Vouchee.

CHAP. LIVE. Voucher and Connter-Plea of Voucher.
WHen any demands Land against another, A Tenant impleaded voucheth the
vouchee denies the Warranty.
and the party that is impleaded Voucheth to Warranty, and the Vouchee denies
his Warranty in this case, like as the Tenant should loose the Land in Demand
in case where he Vouched, and the Vouchee could discharge himself of the
Warranty: In the same wise shall the Vouchee loose, in case where he denies
his Warranty, and if it be found and tried against him that he is bound to
Warranty; And if an Enquest be depending between the Tenant and the Vouchee,
and the Demandant does desire a Writ to cause the Jury to appear, it shall be
granted unto him. West. 2.13. Ed. 1.6.

In a Writ of Mortdancester, of Cosenage of Ayel, nuper obiit, of Intrusion,
and the like, whereby Lands or Tenements are demanded, Counterpleading of
Voucher.
which ought to descend, avert, remain, or escheat, by the death of any
Ancestor, or other wise, if the Tenant Vouch to Warranty, and the Demandant
counterpleadeth him, and will avert by Assize, and by the Country, or
otherwise, as the Court will award, that the Tenantor his Ancestor (whose Heir
he is) was the first that entered after the death of him whose seisen he
demands the Averment of the Demandant shall be received, if the Tenant will
abide thereupon, and if not, be shall be further compelled to another answer.
And in a Writ of right, Voucher in a Writ of right.
if the Tenant Vouch to Warranty, and the Demandant will counterplead him, and
be ready to aver by the Country, that he that is Vouched, nor his Ancestors
had never seisin of the Land, or Tenement demanded Fee, or service by the hands
of the Tenant, or his Ancestors, since the time of him whose seisin the
Demandant declares, until the time that the Writ was purchased, and the Plea
moved; whereby he might have Enfeoffed the Tenant or his Ancestors, and then
shall the Averrement of the Demandant be received, if the Tenant will abide
thereupon, and if not, the Tenant shall be further compelled to another answer,
West. 1.3. E. 1.39.

And whatsoever Tenant do Vouch, and the Demandant will aver in form
aforesaid, his Averrement shall be admitted, whether the party Vouched be
absent or present, without any respect had thereunto, 20. E. 1. Stat. de
vocatis ad Warantum.

In all Writs of Enter which make mention of degrees, Voucher in Writs of Enter.
none shall Vouch out of the Line, or in other Writs of Enter, where no mention
is made of degrees, which Writs shall not be maintained but in cases where the
other Writs of degree cannot lie nor hold place, 3. E. 1.39.

If percase the Tenant has a deed that compriseth Warranty of another man
which is bound in none of the cases aforesaid, Warrantia chartae.
to Warrantie of an Elder degree, his recovery shall be saved unto him by a
Writ of Warrantia Chartae out of the Chancery, when he will purchase it, but
the Plea shall not be delayed therefore, West. 1.3. E. 1.39.

If the Tenant will Vouch to Warranty a dead man, Voucher of a dead man.
and the Demandants will aver, that the Vouchee is dead, or that there is none
such, their Averment shall be received without more delay, 14. E. 3.18.

If one being impleaded in the City of London do Vouch a foreign to Warranty,
One impleaded in London does Vouch a foreign.
the Mayor and the Bailiffs, shall adjourn the parties before the Justices of
the Bench at a certain day, and shall send their Record thither, and the
Justices shall cause the Warranter to be summoned before them, and shall try
the Warranty. And the Mayor and the Bailiffs shall surcease in the mean time in
the matter that depends before them by Writ, until such time as the Warranty
be determined before the Justices of the Bench: And when the matter shall be
determined, Commandment shall be given to the Vouchee to depart into the City,
and to answer unto the first Plea, and the Demandant at his Suit, shall have a
Writ from the Justices of the Bench, unto the Major and Bailiffs, that they
shall proceed in the Plea: And if the Demandant recover the Tenant shall come
to the Justices of the Bench, and have a Writ to the Major and Bailiffs, that
in case the Tenant have lost his Land, they shall cause it to be extended, and
and return the same extent unto the Bench at a certain day, and after it shall
be commanded to the Sheriff of the Shire where the Warranty was Summoned, that
he shall cause the Tenant to have of the Lands of the Warrantor to the like
value, and if it fortune that the Tenant make default, at the day that is
assigned him in the Bench, then shall there go forth a Writ from the Justices
of the Bench to the Major and Bailiffs to seize the Land demanded into the
Kings hands by Petite Cape, and to Summon the Tenant, that he be at the
Hustings at a certain day, whereat the Justices shall be advised to give
judgment upon the same default, if he cannot save it; And if he can save it,
then the Justices shall be Certyfied thereof by their Record, and by the same
record they shall plead the Warranty, Cloucest. 6. E. 1.12. An. 9. E. 1.
Articul. Stat. Gloucest.

None being Vouched to Warranty before the K. Just. in Plea of Land or Tenement
shall be amerced, Day given to him that is Vouched.
because he was not present when he was Vouched to Warranty, except the first
day of the coming of the same Justices. But if he that is Vouched to Warranty
be within the County, the Sheriff shall be commanded that he shall cause him to
appear with the 3d. or 4th. day according to the distance of the places, as the
Justices in Eire have used to do. And if he do remain out of the County, then
he shall have reasonable Summons of 15. days at the least, according to the
Justices discretion, and the Common Law, Marlb. 52. H. 3.26.

CHAP. LVI. Of Warranty.
WArranty is in three manners, that is to say, Warranty is of three sorts.
Warranty Lineall, and Warranty Collateral, and which begins by Disseisin.

Warranty Lineall is where a man seized in Fee, Lineall Warranty.
or in tail, makes a Feoffment by his deed to another, and binds him and his
Heirs to Warranty, and has Issue a Son, and dies, and the Warranty descends
to his Son, that is Lineall Warranty, for that if no deed with Warranty had
been made, then the right of the Lands should have descended to the Son, as
Heir to his Father, and he shall convey the dissent from the Father to the
Son. But if the Tenant in the tail discontinue the tail, Collateral
Warranty.
and has issue and dies, and the Uncle of the issue releaseth to the
discontinued with Warranty, etc. and dies without issue, this is a Collateral
Warranty to the Issue in the tail, for that the Warranty descends upon the
Issue, the which may not convey him to the tail, by mean of his Uncle. And in
every case where a man demands Lands in Fee-tayle by Writ of Formedon, if any
Ancenster of the Issue in the tail which has possession, or which has not
possession, makes a Warranty, and he that sueth a Writ of Formedon, by
possibility by matter that may be done, might convey to him Title by force of
the gift by him that made the Warranty, etc. That is then a Lineall Warranty,
and by such a Lineall Warranty the Issue in the tail shall not be barred,
except that he have assets to him descended.

But if be may not by no possibility that may be, convey to him Title by force
of the gift by him that made the Warranty then that is a Collateral Warranty,
and by such a Collateral Warranty, the Issue in the tail shall be barred
without any assets. And the cause that such a Collateral Warranty is a bar
to the Issue in the tail, is for that that all Warranties before the Statute of
Gloucester, which descended to them which be Heirs to them which made the
Warranties, were bars to the same Heirs to demand any Lands, except the
Warranties that began by disseisin, and for that that the said Statute has
ordained, that the Warranty of the Father shall be no bar to his Son for the
Lands which come to the Heritage of the Mother, nor the Warranty of the Mother
shall be no bar to the Son, for the Lands which come of the Heritage of the
Father by the Statute. 11. H. 7. Cap. 20. And none of the Statutes have made or
ordained remedy against the Warranty that is Collateral to the Issue in the
tail, and therefore the Warranty that is Collateral to the Issue in the
tail, is yet in his force, and shall be a bar to the Issue in the tail as it
was before the Statute. And it behooves that all Warranties, whereby the Heir
shall be barred, that the Warranty descended by course of the Common Law, to
him which is. Heir to him that made the Warranty, or else it shall be no bar,
for if the Tenant in the tail of Lands in Borough English, where the youngest
Son shall inherit by the Custom, discontinueth the tail, and has Issue and
Sons, and the Uncle releaseth to the discontinued with Warranty and dies, and
the younger Son brings a Formedon, yet he shall not be barred by such
Warranty, Causa qua supra. And if any man makes a Deed with Warranty, whereby
his Heir should be barred, and after he that made the Warranty be attaint of
Felony, then his Heir shall not be barred by such Warranty, for that that such
Warranty might not descend upon him, for that that the blood is corrupt.

Warranty beginning by diseisin, is, Warranty by disseisin.
if the Son purchase Lands, and after let the Lands to his Father for term of
years, and the Father by his Deed infeoffeth a stranger, and binds him and
his Heirs to Warranty, and the Father dies, whereby the Warranty descends to
this Son, but the Son may well enter notwitstanding his Warranty, for that
that this Warranty begun by disesin, when the Father made the Feoffment which
was a diseisin to the Son; And as it is said of the Father, so it may be said
of every other Ancester. And the same Law is, if the Ancester be Tenant by
Eligit, or by Statute Merchant, and make a Feoffment with Warranty, such
Warranty shall be no Bars, because they begin by diseisin.

In Deeds where it is contained, Warranty by dedi and Concessi.
Dedi and concessi tale cenementum, viz. I have given and granted such a
Tenement, without Homage or any clause that contains Warranty, and to hold of
the Donors and their Heirs by a certain service, the Donors and their heirs be
bound to Warranty; and where it is contained Dedi and concessi, etc. to hold of
the chief Lords of the Fee, or of any other then of the Feoffors, or their
Heirs reserving no service to himself, without Homage, or without the aforesaid
clause of Warranty, his Heirs shall not be bound to Warranty, but the Feoffor
by reason of his gift shall be bound to Warranty during his own life. The
Husband does alien his Wives Lands with Warranty.
Stat. de Bigamus. 4 E. 1.6.

If a man alieneth the Land, he holds by the Courtesy of England, his Son
shall not be barred by the Deed of his Father (from whom no Heritage to him
descended) to demand and recover by Writ Mortdauncester of the seisin of h s
Mother, although it be mentioned in the Deed, that his Father did bind him and
his Heirs to Warranty. And if any Heritage descend to him of his Fathers side,
then he shall be barred for the value of the Heritage that is to him descended.
And if in such case, Assets.
after the death of his Father, any Inheritance descend to him by the same
Father, then shall the Tenant recover against him of the Seisin of his Mother,
by a Judicial Writ, that shall issue out of the Rolls of the Justices before
whom the Plea was pleaded, to resummon his Warranty, as before has been done
in like Cases, where the Heir of the Warrantor comes into the Court, saying
naught descended from him, upon whose Deed he is vouched; And in like manner,
the Issue of the Son shall recover by Writ of Cosenage, Ayel, and Besaiel.
Likewise and in like manner the Heir of the Wife shall not be barred after the
death of his Father and Mother, to demand by acttion the Inheritance of his
Mother by Writ of Entry, which his Father did Alien in the time of his Mother,
whereof no Fine is leavied in the Kings Court. Gui in vita.
Glouc. 6 E. 1.3.

FINIS.

