Exceeding Joyful News FROM DOVER, Wherein is declared how a Noble man was
sent from the King, to demand the Castle to be resigned to Him; But was bravely
repul'st by the Governor of the said Castle. ALSO Horrible News from
Portsmouth, declaring How Collonell Goring has abused the inhabitants of the
said Town that stand for the Parliament. With certain Observations concerning
the particular actions of the said Collonell Goring, since the beginning of
this Parliament Whereunto is annexed the Parliaments Resolution concerning the
sending of forces to Portsmouth and other places, which are oppressed by the
Malignant party of this Kingdom.

It is Ordered that this be Printed and published.

John. Brown Cler. Parl.



London, Printed for Hen. Fowler; August 12. 1642.

Exceeding Joyful News from DOVER.
THe Governor of Portsmouth having at the beginning of this Parliament,
discovered a Plot to the Parliament, concerning the design of bringing the Army
up to London; which good service (being so acceptable to the Parliament) he
being made by the King Governor of the said Town, was likewise established and
confirmed Governor of the same by the Parliament; since which time he has
built Sconces and Fortifications, with several other works under pretense of a
good service done to the King and Kingdom, as indeed it had been, if rightly
employed, that Town lying open upon the Sea, and being one of the chief Ports
of this Kingdom: But he having strongly fortified himself, and with all
underhand by trifling favors and large promises, won to himself a party in
the Town, beside the Garrison. He now took time to declare his treacherous
intentions, and to bring that to light which he had long fostered in his bosom.

Wherefore finding that the difference between the King and Parliament, was
almost at the height, and fearing that the malignant party would have the
worst, he thought now while he had the power in his own hand, to requite the
Parliament with treachery for their honorable gratitude.

Wherefore he resigned the said Fort to the King, to the end that it might be
employed against the King; for however their pretense of standing for the King,
may appear for the present to those that look no further, yet let but the
discerning eye of reason look forward to the end, and quickly a discovery will
be made of their black and treacherous intentions.

Nevertheless, though the said Collonell Goring had resigned the Town to his
Majesty, and had a great party in the Town; Yet there were also a considerable
party for the Parliament, which if they had been timely seconded might happily
have reduced it to its first state of obedience.

Which Collonell Goring espying gave a strickt command through out the Town,
that upon pain of imprisonment, all men that were either capable of bearing
Arms themselves, or able to find men to serve for them, should meet on the
Bowling Alley compleately armed, for defense of the King, Parliament and
Kingdom.

This he did only to discover who went for the Parliament, knowing that they
would absent themselves.

Which was according to his imagination, for almost half the Town and of the
better sort declare too that they stood for the King and Parliament, but in a
contrary sense to that which he intended.

Nevertheless by reason of the Garrison Soldiers, and the party which he had
obtained in the Town, namely, poor mechanic persons, such whose fortunes are
desperate, and diverse of the Kings servants. The said Collonell Gorings party
was much greater than the other, by which means, Collonell Goring having given
command, they were forcibly disarmed their goods ceised or namely all manner of
Ammunition, and many other insufferable injuries done unto them, to the great
grief and terror of all the Inhabitanss there about, God grant that there may
be some speedy course taken to suppress the present, and to prevent future
mischiefs of the like nature.

For the malignant party did not only aim at that Fort only (if report speak
truth) but at Dover also, for it is credibly reported that the last week a
Nobleman came to Dover, and in his Majesty's name, demanded that the Castle
should be resigned to him but the Governor thereof asked him if he had
likewise authority from the Parliament, who answered no; neither cared he for
their authority, withal telling him that if he did not peaceably resign it,
ere long it should be too hot for him, with many other braving words, which the
Governor hearing, being incensed, called for a guard, telling him that he would
lay him where he should be cold enough till that time came; which the valliant
Lord seeing, like an unmannerly Courtier, turned tail and rid away, not so
much as thanking the Governor for his kind entertainment.

God grant that all those that are entrusted by the Parliament in matters of
such high concernment, may as truly and honorably discharge their duties.

The High Court of Parliament likewise will not be wanting in their care and
Counsels to be assistant in so religious design; for they declare that the war
being thus begun by his Majesty, they hold themselves bound in conscience to
raise forces for the preservation of the peace of the Kingdom, and protection
of the subjects in their persons and estates, according to Law. In the opposing
of all which, they desire the hearty concurrence of all the well disposed
subjects of this Kingdom, and shall manifest by their courses and endeavors,
that they are carried by no by respects, but by the public good, which they
will always prefer before their Lives and Fortunes.

So that it rests only that the free borne English Nation do consider whether
they will adhere to the King and his Parliament, by which they have enjoyed all
that is dear unto them (and without which they have no possibility of enjoying
any thing) or to the King, seduced by wicked Counsel and Cavaliers, who have
designed all to slavery and confusion, which by Gods providence and our joint
endeavor may be timely prevented.

FINIS.

