EXCEEDING JOYFUL NEWS FROM LINCOLNSHIRE.

OR The Resolution of the Gentry and Commonalty, inhabiting in the County of
Lincoln, concerning the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the High Court of
Parliament.

ALSO JOYFVLL NEVVES FROM LEICESTER Declaring how Mr Henry Hastings was taken
prisoner by the High-Sheriffe of the said County, on Sunday, August 14. 1642.

Whereunto is annexed the Resolution of the Lords and Commons assembled in this
present Parliament, concerning the Kings most excellent Majesty.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.



LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler. Aug. 17. 1642.

Joyful News FROM Lincolne-shire.
THe Inhabitants of the County of Lincoln, having by their Petitions to the
high Court of Parliament, declared their hearty affections to them, desiring
them to go on with confidence, promising them that their Lives, estates, and
all they could command, should be laid down at their Feet.

Likewise their Petition presented to his Majesty at York, wherein they
humbly entreated his Majesty to return to his Parliament, declaring the great
misery, and apparent troubles that were like to ensue, and fall upon this
Kingdom, if his Majesty should any longer deny his gracious presence and
Royal assent to his high Court of Parliament, wherein they declared the depth
of their affections to the Parliament, and their earnest desire (...) preserve
the peace of the Kingdom.

Nevertheless they having received an Answer to their Petition, were reviled
by the Cavaliers, and called Roundheads, with other abuses not fit to be
mentioned. At their return from York they by order of the Committee of
Parliament assembled to put the Ordinance of Militia in execution, where there
were assembled many thousands to the great admiration and not little
satisfaction of the Lieutenants of the Shire that were appointed by the
Parliament to see the said Ordinance put in execution.

Likewise they then gave such large testimonies of his love and obedience to
the Parliament, that the Committee thought it necessary to give imformation
thereof to the House, who returned them thanks for the same, animating them on
to a continuance in the same duty.

Which they had great reason to do, there being at that very instant Officers
appointed by His Majesty to put the commission of Array in execution:
Nevertheless, though His Majesty's Officers had put up the Proclamation
concerning His Majesty's disavowing the ordinance of the Militia, withal
giving strict command in His Majesty's name, that they should not yield
obedience to the said Ordinance, they still with cheerfulness pursued in the
due execution of the same.

His Majesty finding that his expectation was made frustrate and that he could
not prevail with his officers (being councelled thereto by the Lord Mowbray)
was resolved to go in person to put the commission of Array in execution.

Where being arived, he by his special command caused the gentry and cominalty
of the said County to be summoned, who according to their Loyalty and
Allegiance obeyed His Majesty's command.

By reason of which they have undergone many censures, some calling them
Turne-coats, and many other ignominious names.

For which cause they thought it convenient to declare their Resolution
concerning their obedience to His Majesty, and their duty to the Parliament.

For their obedience to His Majesty's commands, they declare that it stood not
with their loyalties to stand in flat opposition to His Majesty's commands,
(His Majesty commanding nothing which entrenched upon the Peace of the
Kingdom, or the privilege of Parliament) Withal they do declare, that if
His Majesty shall command them, they will march with him, and obey his just
commands, as loyal and obedient Subjects.

But likewise they are resolved so far to preserve their duty to the
Parliament, that if his Majesty, in his own person, or by his ministers, shall
command them to put any thing in execution against the Parliament, or employ
any others of His Majesty's Forces in any such design; that then they will not
only forbear the performance of any such act themselves, but also hazard then
lives in opposing of all such as shall any way endeavor the same.

Promising that they shall no longer wish a godly neace, a freedom in
Religion, nor the sweet enjoyment of ought that is good or dear unto them,
then they shall continue faithful to the commands of the high Court of
Parliament.

This is the Resolution of the Gentry and Commonalty of Lincolneshire, which I
have published for the satisfaction of the world, it being related to me by a
Gentleman of good worth of the same County.

Likewise a Letter was sent from Leicester to a Merchant of this City,
declaring how Master Hastings with a Troop of Cavaliers went up against the
High Sheriff of the said County, with an intent to have burnt his house; but
the High Sheriff having notice thereof, summoned some Troops of Horse, which
were raised since these troubles began in the Kingdom; and three miles from
Langborough, fell upon him, killed eight of his men, and took him, and some
other of his Cavaliers: which he having done, sent him to the City of
Leicester. But on the way Colonel Lunsford met with him, having a strong party,
and worsted them, taking the said Hastings away before the Country could come
in to their rescue. Nevertheless they were forced to fly as fast as their legs
could carry them.

Likewise it is resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, that in case any Force be brought out of one County into another
County of this Kingdom, to disturb the peace of the Kingdom, that the Lord
Lieutenants and the Deputy Lieutenants of the Counties adjoining, be required
to give aid and assistance to the said Lord Lieutenants or Deputy Lieutenants
requiring the same, etc.

The Parliaments RESOLVTION, Concerning the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY.
THE Lords and Commons to witness their constant and unshaken loyalty and
affection to his Majesty, do solemnly declare that if his Majesty shall
immediately disband all his Forces; and be pleased to abandon all those wicked
Counsels, and leave them to condign punishment and return and hearken to the
wholesome advice of his great Counsel, they will really endeavor to make both
his Majesty and his Posterity, as great, rich, and potent, as much beloved at
home and feared abroad, as any Prince that ever swayed this Scepter, which is
their firm and constant Resolution.

August the 17th. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. Do. Com.

FINIS.

