AN EXACT RELATION SHOWING, How the Governor of Portsmouth Castle delivered it
up in the name of the King to the Malignant Party. VVhereupon he thrust out the
Protestants placing ill affected persons in their Garrisons. ALSO A Terrible
Combat FOVGHT IN BEDFORDSHIRE BETWEEN TWO KNIGTS, The one sent in Commission
of Array by the King, the other for the Militia by the Parliament Wherein is
declared the mighty overthrow of the Kings Commissioner, who with great loss
was feign to fly for his life. LIKEWISE. The LORD Brook His Resolution
concerning the Lord of Northampton.

John, Brow. Cler, Parl.

August. 5. Printed for Io Hundgate, 1642.

A TERRIBLE COMBAT Fought in Bedfordshire between two Knights
IT is much to be wondered that tho our ears are continually taken up with
harsh sounding passages, yet we lie snugging in the feather bed of thought
security. All is well or if the State be extreme sick, it will recover if we
be without Gunshot; Penny Pamphlets make us pound foolish: and if in the
forehead of a book we are tickled with joyful News in a trice our herts begin
to Caper within us, cause easy belief soon crepes into our breasts, when
matters suitable to our minds, are acted; and to the pleasant Comedy of our
desires archeived, our affections sing a Plaudite; Nay, so wedded are we to
our one fancies, that we will dance after their pipe.

That discourse that carries always with it a sting in the tale, nothing, or
something, nere kin to nothing, moves us hopes future beguile useful fears and
not what is produced or acted, terrifies us, but what may be, yet never had
existence takes up lodging in our breasts, and as if what is thought only, is
prophecy, the sun of peace will at a wish unmask it self to the view of this
benighted Island.

Jf Hul or York speak to us in the languadg of blood, O then our joy bequeaths
it self to sorrow which is thrust out of the portall of our lips only or if it
find intertainment in these inward Closets of ours yet our Hand must not wa^ke
for redress.

In Bedfordshire were exercised in Commission of Array two worthies, on it may
be worthy of pity rather then praise, one bears the name of Dyer the other
Lucas; each honored Knighthood, on office only disunited. Notise indeed had
they placed their Contris good above their own according to their charg having
set in posture their diverse minded soldiers, of foul (...) holding for the
King the other for the Parliament (...) then the (...) Whereby (...) on for the
King (...)

A RELATION CONCERNING THE giving up of the Castle of Portchmouth
STill fearful occurrents come dropping with our, tears and throng together
as if each would be first, our safty is built on Castles in the air when the
Castles of our Kingdom are surprised that Portsmouth with the fortress
thereof by the faithless Governor thereof, is given up to the King stuffed with
flocking Papists emptied of true hearted protestants.

They who stood for King and Parliament were vnhoused; and upon command spewed
out, who leaned to the King solely were embraced, which black deed the Bishop
of Winchester applauding countenanced it with a Troop of Horse, with which he
furnished His Majesty, a Iadish trick against the renowned Parliament and is
imitated not lamented.

Warwick Castle fe^^es suggests if not Resigned, will be possessed by the
adverse piety, as appears by the Letters Patent of discovery.

For conspiracies swarm in the hive of our heartlesse Country. P^ay God such
^ooded, (...) in our Kinglesse City.

(...) tribute to (...) (...) it with joy. They fled I will not word it thus
that they turned fugitives for fear, or in that they faintly undertook and run
through their Charge that their Will went not with their courrage, or that they
disp^^red through the weakness of their cause, but they used their supporters,
as the best Weapons, else they had all received their presse-tokens for death;
they were not afraid to fight but they were not ashamed to fly.

It may be they disdained and scorned to paint their Weapons in those they were
of ability to discomfit, or else they showed only what they could do, but
would not teach them their art; however it was there was, a surcease from Arms.

Now the Parliaments Handful feared not to follow the Chase; it forced not for
if they had, For as if they had bin taught their Foot-doctrin in Ireland among
the Rebels, they were little beholding to the earth, for their light carried
burdens.

And now let us judge of causes by the effects: such events are dangerous, but
succesful, Such Causes work great impatience: but may beget a union.

We cannot be swallowed up in deep of dangers, when Our supposed enemies
shallow Cause gives not heart and hand together in Marriage.

THE LORD BROOK HIS RESOLVTION AGAINST The EARL of Northampton.
BEfore I can take my breath, as if our Kingdom were compassed with miseries,
I am overtooke by the Post af an accident of the diverse color. The Lord Brook
siding with the blessed Parliament, proved Loyal in spite of the enemy.

For after that rage and malice set their feet on the neck of goodness, his
actions received a blot from the Lord Northampton, who, rather to be pitied
then praised brusht him with an unexpected affront: and would have crushed his
proceedings to a non entity, which the Lord Brook not brooking, Strok not
sail and now with thousands more Protest to be limed and adhere to the
Parliament, mauger Norhamptons forces.

Whereupon there sprang a tumult, who for their quick appearance seemed to be
create only of the loud Alarm of his well couched speech. The Lord Brooks
courageously saw them stoop to his Iuges and become the Parliaments protectors,
but cause they started at his Proclamations, to know whether he could be
acquanted with such loyalty as his, in a sweet phrase he be spoke their
company that were his concomitants, that they would welcome the Morning of the
succeding day, though indeed most neded not have sleept and pawsed for a
resolution, the day as longing to see such a contract, glorified that specticle
for in the season prescribed, many bodies were assembled with one mind, and
both Gentry and (...) unananimously sang a part in the Knights on (...) as if
they could speak nothing but for the Parliament they bound themselves Prentises
in their service.

The Lords and Commons do declare, that a Garrison of Soldiers is at
New Castle Likewise Earl Rivers being put into the Commission of Array, exercise
it with much of our imprisoning all the that oppose him.

John Brown Cler. Parl^

FINIS.

