EXCEEDING True And Happy NEWS FROM POMFRET CASTLE.

Being a perfect description of a great Battle, fought by Mr. Hotham, Son
to Sr John Hotham, with 300. Horse and 500. Foot, against the Lord Savill, and
Sir Francis Nevill, With 1500. Horse and Foot, before the walls of Pomfret
Castle. oct. 7.

Also declaring how the Lord Savill was wounded and above 200. of his men
slain in the fight.

printer's or publisher's device

London, Printed for THO: Rider October. 11. 1642.

True and happy News from Pomfret Castle in Yorkshire, being a perfect
description of a great and wonderful Batrtaile fought by Mr. Hotham, son of
Sr. John Hotham.
THe noble and heroicke Acts that has oftentimes been performed and put in
Execution by that thrice worthy and undaunted soldier Sr. John Hotham, whose
name together with his prowes, is blazed through our wholl Kingdom, for
performing that charge and trust which was reposed in him by the great Assembly
of Parliament, at Hull, when his enemies spleen and invetterate malice burst
forth, thirsting after his blood, likewise that noble and heroicke spirit Mr.
Hotham, son to Sr. John Hotham does follow his fathers Steps, bearing the
same mind and constant resolution that his Prececessors has done, for when
that he beard say that the Lord Savill and Sr. Jervis Nevill, with diverse
others of their confederates, had taken Sanctuary in Pomfret Castle, in
Yorkshire, he humbly desired his fathers consent that he might march out of
Hull with some certain number of Forces, and to advance toward the said Castle,
and after sometime spent in contemplation thereupon, Sr. John Hotham gave
consent to his Sons desires, and ordered that he should have 500. Foot, and
300. Horse and by his command to march against the disturbers of the peace of
the Kingdom, which was immediately performed, and when Mr. Hotham was in
readiness to set forth, he propounded diverse propositions to his Soldiers,
which was as follows.

1. To know whether they were willing to serve under him, and to hazard their
lives with him in defense of he true protestant Religion, the Law^s of the
Land, and liberty of the Subject, in which he had no sooner expressed himself,
bu^ they all with loud acclamations cried out, and declared unto him that they
would loose their dearest lives with him then Mr. Hotham with his company
immediatlly marched from Hull, taking his leave or his Father, toward Keywood
Castle, not far from the City of York, when after some shot spent for the
space of two hours, they obtain^d the same. Then be set down his resolution
to march toward Pomfret Castle, where indeed he found great opposition.

For this news being with all have and possible expedition carried to the
Lord Savill, who was within the said Castle, giving him notice that he would be
besieged by the Parliament Forces, if not speedily prevented, whereupon be
orpered his men, being near upon a thousand, to march forth and to meet the
said Mr. Hotham, which they did accordingly.

At their first greeting master Hotham let sly a messenger to him from one of
his Cannons, where upon the Lord Savill sent a Herrauld of arms to master
Hotham, to desire to know what was the cause of his coming in that hostile
manner, who immediately rendered him an answer to this or the like effect. That
he came to preserve the peace of the County, and to execute the orders of
Parliament, and to apprehend all such as are delinquents to either one or both
Houses of Parliament.

Upon which answer the Lord Savill presently sent to the Earl of Cumberland,
requiring him to assist him with all expedition, but before that he could come
in, Mr Hotham joined battle with the said Sr. John Savill, playing with his
Ordnance with such furious courage, and also assaulting of him with his Horse
and foot both in the Front and Rear, and wing, insomuch that he was forced
soon to retreat, to the Castle, but the blades of Hull pursuing them so close
that they killed 300. of his men before they could get into the Castle, and
wounded Sr. Francis Nevill of Cheat, with the loss of very few men.

But the Lord Savill having gotten into the Castle with his Forces, immediately
shut the gates and began to make use of his Ordnance that were mounted upon the
walls of the Castle, shooting and discharging very furiously against Mr. Hothams
men, but lying under shoot, in regard they were so near the walls of the
Castle, Mr. Hotham presently commanded two of his greatest pieces of Ordnance
to be planted against the port of the Castle, on the south side, which speedily
made entrance for his men, where fourthwith they entered not doing of the least
injury that night, such was the care and charge of Mr. Hotham, in preserving
men's lives and shedding of blood, until such time as the Lord Savill with his
accomplices began to oppose them, which Mr. Hotham seting, forthwith commanded
all his men to make ready and to give Fire upon them insomuch that Skirmish in
the Castle began to grow hot, continuing for the space of one hour, but at the
last they in the Castle began to yield to Mr. Hothams mercy, and some of them
seeking to save themselves by flight, also it is credibly reported that the
Lord Savill is very dangerously wounded, thus has Mr. Hotham won the Castle
of Pomfret, which he now holds and maintains for the use of the King and
Parliament, clearing the Coast thereabouts, of all evil affected persons to
both.

FINIS.

