EXCEEDING HAPPY NEWS FROM OXFORD DECLARING, The Proceedings of the Lord Sey
against the Cavaleers, and how he beat Sir John Biron, and the rest out of
their Trenches, with the loss of three or four men, and has now placed a
strong Garrison in the City, so that there is not a Cavaleer left therein, or
thereabouts.

Likewise an exact Relation of a Remarkable battle, fought by Sir John Hotham
against the Earls of Cumberland and Newcastle, near Beverley in Yorkshire,
Septem. 14. and how he defeated the whole Army, killing many of them, and so
obtained a Glorious and joyful Victory.

Likewise true intelligence from Westchester, declaring the Kings Majesty's
Resolution.

Sep. 17. Printed for John Wight, by Authority.

Exceeding happy News from the City of OXFORD.
ON the fourteenth of this instant month, Letters came from Oxford, to many
worthy and eminent Persons Resident in this City, Declaring the Proceedings of
the Right Honorable, the Lord SEY in those Parts, against the Cavaleers, since
his first coming thither, and that he has done great service for the
Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT near Oxford, by defeating some of the Cavaleeres
Troops, and Relieving those that were sore oppressed by the said Rebels.

For at the first coming of the Cavaleers to that City, they committed many
Outrages against the well-affected Party, plundering their Houses, and taking
all that they had from them by violence, the Vice Chancellor, Masters, and
Scholars of the Colleges siding with them.

But when Sir John Byron and the rest of the Cavaleers had information that the
Parliament Forces were coming, and that they had set down their Resolutions to
fight it out to the last man, they marched out of the Town with all expedition,
and are now gore toward his Majesty.

Likewise two hundred soldiers more, immediately followed them, not daring to
withstand the Lord SEY, whose appearance near OXFORD, made diverse of the
Malignant party to fly, and are now likewise gone toward his Majesty.

But it is thought that they were met withal by some of the Parliament Forces
in other Counties, and are now in safe custody.

Yet Sir RICHARD CAVE stayed in the town and skirmished some certain while with
the Parliament Force, and after the space of two hours, they sounded a Retreat,
and betook themselves to flight, leaving many of their men slain and wounded,
and through Gods assistance, they having obtained this joyful and happy
Victory, our men marched into the Town with six hundred soldiers, together
with two Pieces of Ordnance, and were kindly received by the Townsmen.

Thus has that worthy Member of the Honorable House of Peers, the Lord SEY,
defeated the Cavaleers at OXFORD, having now strongly Fortified the Town, so
that it now stands firm and sure for the King and Parliament, and has now
cleared the whole County of all such Rogues, who formerly was a great Burden
and Oppression to the County.

By Letters from WESTCHESTER, it is declared and signified, That upon the
fourteenth of this instant mouth, three hundred of the Welch-men that were
billeted at the said City, began to through Fireworks therein, thinking to
fire the same, by Reason that the Major would not cordiscend to their Demand;
which was to have the City resigned up to them.

But before that they could bring their Designs to perfection, the Trained
Band of that County came in against them, and threatened to kill every man, if
that they persisted in their former Courses and ways.

Whereupon the VVelchmen began to leave the Town, and retreated back, and as it
is supposed, are gone toward Lancashire to the Lord Strange.

The Town stands well-affed to the King and Parliament.

Upon Tuesday last, Letters came to the Honorable House of Commons,
intimating, That the King is gone from Nottingham to Derby, and that it was
conceived he is resolved to take his Journey from thence toward Westchester
and that the Cavaleers are Resolved to go all thither, but what their
intentions be, are not yet known.

An exact Relation of a Remarkable fought by that Worthy Champion, Sir John
Hotham, against the Earls of Cumberland and Newcastle, near Beverley in
Yorkshire, Septem. 13.
Upon the 12. of this month, Sir John Hotham received information, from
Beverley, that the Earl of Cumberland, together with the Earl of New Castle,
had sent five troops of Horse thither, to keep the town in awe, and to
imprison all those that stood ill-affected to the King, and that they were
resolved to send some foot-forces, with some pieces of Ordnance likewise, very
suddenly, for the better securing of the same.

Whereupon Sir John having received these tidings, he resolved the next day
being the 13. of this month, to go himself in person with 500. Foot, and 100.
Horse toward Beverley, which was done accordingly, and coming within two
miles of the town, there was a Gentleman came from toward Beverley, certifying
unto him, that the Earls of Cumberland and Newcastle, was within 7. miles of
the said town and was resolved to advance their Forces against him.

But Sir John and his followers, hearing of these tidings, took much courage
thereat, and marched with speed toward Beverley, and coming thither assaulted
the same, discharging against the Cavaleers very furiously, continuing in a hot
skirmish till toward the Evening, where the Forces that were within the town,
sounded a Parley, and treating some while with Sir John, they desired, that the
Battle might be referred till the next day, but he would not condescend
thereto, and thereupon they fell to it, and about 9. of the clock at night the
Earl of Cumberlands Forces assaulted Sir John Hothams; insomuch, that he was
very dangerously beset, his own person being in great hazard; but by the
Wisdom and Policy of him, he defeated their whole Army, and forced the
Cavaleers to leave the town.

For when they were in the midst of the Battle Sir John caused Captain
Turvill to draw out 100. Foot to charge the Enemy on the Rear, which he
performed with much care and fidelity, and charged three of the Earl of
Cumberlands Forces in a very desperate manner, killed seven, and lost two of his
own men, then Sir John came up, and charged four troops more, and killed 14.
of them, two of them being Commanders of great note, and very able Soldiers,
immediately after, Captain Turvill having wheeled a little about with great
resolution gave a second Charge, shot diverse, and took Colonel Gibson prisoner.
Thus has Sir John Hotham with 600. men defeated the whole Army of Cavaleers,
but by reason it was dark could not pursue them.

FJNJS.

