EXCEEDING JOY^ULL NEWS FROM THE EARL OF BEDFORDS Army, brought to London by
Captain Johnson, September, 6. The said Army consisting of five thousand Foot,
seven hundred Horse, and 28. Ensigns, now ready to give Battle against the
Marquis of Hartford, and Colonel Lunsfords Forces, being in Shereborn Castle.

With the Resolution of Collonell Lunsford, to the High Court of Parliamed,
expressed and discovered by his making of Fireworks against the Earl of
Bedfords Army, the manner whereof is as follows, worthy of observation.

Likewise the Resolution of the Trained Band of Devonshire, concerning Colonel
Lunsford, being Resolved to march against him with 900. Foot, and was
accompanied with 200. horse and many brave Gallants from the Town of Dorchester
September. the third.

September 7. London Printed for John Wight, 1642.

THE RELATION OF Collonell Lunsfords Proceedings at Shereborn Castle, against
the Parliaments Forces, rout the 1. of September to the 6.
Loving Friend,
THE greatest news and chiefest, occurrences now stirring in our County, is
about the Marquess of Hartford, fortifying of himself at Shereborn, and of
Colonel Lunsford his Fire weeks, of which it is reported, he has made
abundance, and began to domineere in those parts, till the Parliament Forces
came, giving out diverse scandalous and seurrolous speeches, saying, that the
would keep the Castle against 40000. Round-headed Soldiers, and that he does
not esteem of such a Number, and he and diverse of the Cavaleers has entered
into an Oath of Association, to be true one to another, and to strive to the
utmost of their power to resist all those that shall oppose them, he is very
resolute.

Here has bin much pains used by Sir, Walter Earl, with the rest of the Deputy
Lieutenants, in raising of forces to go to Shereborn, but such is the base
nesse of the Gentry and scandalous Ministers, as that they will do nothing
themselves, but have discharged all our soldiers of our trained Bands, as that
very few of them will go.

Captain Gould and Captain Sidnam made great show of their forwardness at the
first, but it proved nothing but dissembling with our Lieutenants at last; for
they dishcartned their soldiers themselves, and then gave out that their
Soldiers would not go: their Lieutenants and under Officers are gone from
their service, and have listed themselves under other Captains, and so have
many of Captain Sidnams soldiers, daring him to his face to go with them.

Thus you see the wickedness of our County, occasioned by Malignant Ministers,
who do nothing else but preach against the Parliament and their Proceedings.

But I hope the Wisdom of that great Council is such, that they will take
notice of it, and take convenient time to rid the Kingdom of them and set
honester and faithfuller Preacgers in their places, that so Gods true Religion
may once flourish again in this Kingdom.

Upon Satterday being the 2. of this instant month, our soldiers being about
500. horse, and foot, marched out of this Town, accompanied with 900. of the
Trained Bands, and Volunteers of Devonshire, toward Shereborn, being all very
courageous and stouthearted soldiers.

They was also accompanied with our Deputy Lieutenants, and two Barronets of
Devon, with many more of the chief Gentry of that County, there was about 200.
and 50. went out of our Town, most of the young men being also gone, Mr. Hewet,
Mr. Edward Dashwood, Mr. William Whis, Meychant, are likewise gone in this
service, had it not bin for the forwardness of Dorchester few of the Country
would have gone.

Yesterday about two of the clock in the afternoon, the Earl of Bedford sat
down with his Forces before Sherborn, being a mile distance from the Town,
having with him 28. Ensigns, five thousand foot, and seven hundred Horse.

Our company having notice that the Earl was set down, marched yesterday night
to be there this morning. The Earl has promised to send them 300. horse, when
they are within three miles of Shereborn, to conduct them safe from the
Cavaleers, those that came out of Devonshire are very Religious people.

It is thought that the Marquess of Hartford is in the like condition that
Colonel Goring is in, by reason of the abundance of Forces that have now
besieged him in his strong hold at Shereborn Castle.

For upon Saturday last, it was signified to the Iouse of Commons, that the
Marquess is compassed in with 4. or 5000. men, and that they could easily
fetch him out, but that they are very unwilling to shed any blood.

The Devonshire Voluateers are very resolute, and stand fast for the Parliament.

They take much courage to hear of the happy and fortunate success of the
Parliaments forces at Portsmouth, and of the proceedings of Sir John Meldrum
there.

Having information of the brave Exploits that he has performed since his
going down, as it was signified to to the County by Letters from Portsmouth,
that Sir John Meldrum is raising of great Horn works against the Town, and that
his Advice much advantageth the service, daily endeavoring, and using his best
skill to further that happy work, he is a great encouragement to the soldiers,
and a man much esteemed of amongst them, being sent down by the consent of both
Houses of Parliament.

Published for the Encouragement of all those that are well-willers to this
happy Reformation.
FINIS.

