An Exact RELATION Of the Siege before YORK: Of the taking of the Suburbs, and
of the Approaches made within 40. yards of the Walls: Of the taking of the
Kings Manor house there: And how the Associated forces of Essex, Suffolk, etc.
under the Earl of Manchester, have several times repulsed the Enemy, and
preserved some part of the Suburbs from being consumed with fire.

As it is sent in several Letters, dated at the Leaguer before York, the 6.
and 7. of June.

Published by Authority.

London Printed for R. White. June 12. 1644.

A Letter from the Leaguer before York, the sixth of June, 1644.
SInce my last by the Post the 30. of May last, Prince Rupert has taken Bolton
in Lancashire, wherein there were a thousand five hundred Club-men, and
Colonel Rigby with 2000. Armed men drawn from the Siege of Latham, Colonel
Rigby himself who is come hither faith that he lost there five barrells of
Powder, two Drakes, and other Ammunition, and not 200. men in all killed, most of
the rest saving themselves by flight; but he conceives he lost near 500.
Arms, the vulgar report gives the loss to be greater; howsoever he is now
about to rally his scattered men, and hopes to get them shortly together.
Prince Ruperts forces range over a great part of Lancashire, but his principal
quarter is at VViggon, and to that Town he draws the forces raised by the
Commission of Array: His Army increases by the dependants of the Earl of
Darby, and the Popish Gentry there, that do all flock to him, and by the
addition of General Gorings forces, who came to him on Monday last at Berry;
and then it was also believed, that he intended presently to come to York to
raise the Siege: But this day the 6. of June, Sir John Meldrum, writes that he
conceives his forces not to exceed ten thousand men, and that they bend
Southwards, as he thinks, to take VVarington, and Leverpoole: but it is
thought he will march to meet the King, if he once pass South out of
Lancashire.

This day also Letters were intercepted from Sir Philip Musgrave to Prince
Rupert, whereby I perceive Rupert has sent for him, and all his forces of
Westmorland, and Cumberland; which Sir Philip promises to perform, but not
suddenly.

In Lancashire there are Garrisons of good strength, in VVarington, Leverpoole,
and Lancaster; and an Army of seven or 8000. Armed men in Manchester, where Sir
John Meldrum resides, and has the command of all the Country; and the
Parliaments ships lately come to Lever poole do much encourage the Soldiers
there; so that I do not give Lancashire for lost, though I am persuaded Rupert
will pillage the Country sore, and increase his Army; neither of which can be
prevented without a greater inconvenience.

From Bishopric we hear that all the forces of the enemy are retreated into
Newcastle (the Troops of Clavering excepted, that continue yet at Durham) which
gives some assurance of the public report of the Lord Calendars being at
Alnewick.

The third of June our forces took VValton-hall near Wakefield, and in it Sir
Francis VVortley, the elder, the first incendiarie in this County, that
publicly engaged a party for the King against the Parliament, and 120.
soldiers with him, who yielded themselves prisoners after they had killed
several of our men.

And third of June in the night, 60. horse sent by Sir Hugh Cholmley from
Scarbrough came to Buttercoms, where Mr. Henry Darley lodged; and the
Drawbridge being accidentally let down that night, they entered, and took him
in bed, and carried him prisoner to Scarbrough.

On Monday the third of June the Earl of Manchester drew to the Leaguer at
York, about 6000. foot and a thousand horse, and twelve field pieces, and his
men are quartered before Bowdom bar, and that side toward Clifton, they are
very brave soldiers, and every day fall upon some part, and beat the enemy.

And now having these forces added to our other Armies, the enemy is shut up
far closer then before: and the Generals consult how the work may be made short
with least loss of their men: and yesternight being June the fifth, they have
caused a work to be raised for a battery, upon a hill near Walm-gate, where
there are four pieces of battery already planted, that have played all this
afternoon upon the Castle, Tower, and Town; and they from the Town have sent
us at least an hundred Bullets from several Platformes in the Town, but they
have done us very little hurt, not above one man killed, and what execution our
Ordnance do in the City we cannot yet tell; But we are getting more pieces up
to our new work, which we know has already put them into a very great fear,
for this day they have fired most part of the Suburbs, and drawn their people
into the Town; our men fall into the Suburbs and beat them in when they Sally
our either to fire houses or fetch in goods; but whilst they skirmish the fire
consumes the houses, they will not suffer our men to quench it, for if the
houses could have been saved they would have been a great shelter for our men
in their approaches.

And the Suburb without Bowdom, where there were many fair houses, being
fired, the E. of Manchesters men nevertheless entered, and beat in the enemy
this morning, and have saved much of the houses from the fire, and do gallery
through them close to the walls, so that it is to be hoped, that unless
succors come speedily to them, the Town will be taken or yielded. And to
prevent Prince Ruperts coming, the most part of our horse and dragooneers are
laid toward Lancashire, who if they be not able to beat him back, yet will at
least stop his march until these Armies be drawn up to them, and then they
will, being all together, be able to fight with all the forces the King has on
the north side of Trent, if God give his blessing, which we all pray for.

There is a bridge made of boats over the Owse in Cliftonings, that the Armies
may on a sudden send succor one to another.

The first of June, the Scots forces fetched a great many cattle and horses
from the enemy near Miclegate bar, and killed many both horse and foot of the
enemy, I hear they left four and thirty dead, and brought away thirty
prisoners, but all sore wounded.

And yesterday June the 5. the Earl of Manchesters men fell on near
VValm-gate, and took Saint Nicholas Church; but disserted it again when they
had gotten away eighty head of cattle from the enemy: and there is no day
passes but something is done worthy commendations, for our men are full of
courage, and desire to fall upon the Town whenever the Generals think it
fit to command them: Sandall Castle near Wakefield was surrendered yesterday.

June the sixth, 1644. Leaguer before York.
Another Letter from the Leaguer before York, June 7. eleven a Clock at noon.
EVery day produces novelties, at present thus, Upon Wednesday night last, was
a battery made at the Windmil betwixt York and Leslington, about eight score
distant from the Walls, and five piece of great Ordnance yesterday placed in
it, and diverse shots made into the City, which have made visible batteries,
both in the Walls, Cliffords Tower, and other houses, another battery was
yesterday got at S. Laurence Church, made within the Churchyard next Wombgate,
about fifty yards from the gate, and here, and in the Church, and houses, there
are about 3000. of our men.

My Lord Eglington with 4000. Scots, yesterday entered, Gilligate, Marygate, and
Mary Tower, and have made a passage into the Manor under ground: This last
night a strong pary sallyed out of the City, and fell upon his men to beat them
back, but could not prevail, for 7000. of my Lo: Manchesters, and my Lord
Fairfaxes men fell into Wombgate, and so diverted the enemy, and had a sore
fight with them, the loss hitherto, I have not heard on either side: The Lo:
General Leven with his Regiment fell upon a strong Fort this last night, upon
a hill, about eight score distant from Skeldergate posterne, and have taken it,
and 120. men in it, whereof about 35. are brought in prisoners, the rest
killed, he lost some men in that service; and in this Fort, being very
considerable, my Lo: intends to make a battery, and so from thence make shots
at pleasure into Town, and I do believe to morrow, or the next day, they will
Summon the City once more, and if not yielded, then they may take the last
farewell, for the Soldiers are mightily enraged, and I doubt will not be
careful to distinguish persons: All this last night I saw great fires in three
several places of the City, much of the Suburbs was burned before, except such
as our men have saved, and we hear the enemy resolve to burn the City, rather
then yield it, we do hourly expect the issue.

York Leaguer, 7. of June, at eleven a Clock at noon.
FINIS.

