Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM SOVTHAMTON. BEING A TRUE RELATION OF THE taking
of two Dunkirk Ships which were laden with Powder and Bullets, bound for the
Relief of the Rebels in Ireland. ALSO Two Bloody Battles fought at Abavelly
in France, between the Duke of Guise and Don Lomboyle, General to the Spanish
King. Wherein after the loss of 1200. Foot, and 1000. Horse. The French
recovered both loss and credit, and gave the Spaniard a mighty overthrow,
whereby their intention for the relief for Ireland has been much hindered.

June 12. London, Printed for I. Green. and A. Coe. 1642.

Exceeding joyful News from Southampton, Being a true Relation of the taking
of two Dunkirk Ships, which were laden with Powder and Bullets, and bound for
the relief of the Rebels in Ireland.
ABout the fifteenth of this present Month of May, it happened that some Ships
of Southampton, who had been long at sea, were making homeward and by the
casualty of the weather and wind, were forced upon the Irish Coast, where they
lay until a better opportunity was given unto them to make homeward, which
according to their long expectation was at length offered unto them No sooner
almost had they loosed Anchor and hoysed sail, not having sailed three
leagues, but presently they espied two strange Barks, making with all possible
speed they could toward Ireland, those of Southampton perceiving what they
were, were very desirous to know whether they were bound, whereupon they halled
them but received but rugged and small satisfaction, upon this stubborn answer
they let fly at them, striving to force from them what they could not obtain
by a fair demand: The Dunkirks answered them again, but were not able to
abide long in opposition, but fearing their own power, endeavored to secure
their present hopes by flight, which they were in good hope to obtain by the
nimblenesse of their Pinnaces; their flight they did endeavor, and the pursuit
of their Adversary was as violently prosecuted, they were so hard chased that
the happiness of the wind forced them to take that way whither thtse
Southampton men were bound and at the length they were driven by the wind and
the enemy into the Harbor of Southampton, where they now stay, and searched,
and found to be laden with great store of Powder, for of that kind of
provision consisted all their lading, and being examined whether they were to
transport that commodity, they boldly answered, That they were sent to supply
the Lord Mountgarret and his Forces in Ireland, who they understood had very
much need of that kind of provision; upon this coufession the shipping were
stayed, and the Coods seized upon, and the men themselves stayed in
Southampton, until it shall be further determined of them. Thus it pleased God
to defeat the intentions of his enemies and to frustrate their designs
against his Children.

The Description of two Battles fought at Abavelly in France between the
Duke of Guise and Don Lomboyle.
Spain and France has always been forward and pregnant in their plots and
designs against the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom, and has oftentimes
by many strange and mischievous stratagems, endeavored the utter subversion of
this Kingdom, witness the manifold supplies, by which Spain has endeavored
to vex the peace of this Kingdom, sent over to the Rebels in Jreland, but God
has frustrated their Designs, and by some means or other has defeated their
purposes against this Nation, for much about the time when the forementioned
provision was sent into Jreland, (but did most happily and beyond expectation
miscarry,) the old grudge which was between those mighty Princes of France and
Spain brake out into action, and forced them to retire their thoughts and cares
homewards to defend their own Dominions.

Upon the second of this present Month of May, the Duke of Guise being chosen
chief General and Commander of all the French Forces, marched to a Town
called Abavelly, and their pitched every day expecting the approach of the
Spanish Army which then was in the Field, and was in strengeh and number about
44000 the French consisting of 32000. and 900. Horse. The French Forces had
continued in the Field above the space of thresdaiee, but they removed to march
toward Abavelly, in which march Don Lomboyle the Spanish General met them with
his Forces, and sent word unto him, that within two days he would give him
battle, which Message was welcome, and heartily entertained bv the Duke of
Guise, the French General: Upon the appointed time the Armies met, which were
both of that strength and multitude, that the Spectator might very well,
without almost a prejudice to his sense or Faith have believed them to be the
two great and mighty Cities of those 2. Kingdoms now walking from their fixed
and settled station. At their first encounter the Battle was very fierce and
hot, and confidering the continuance, the loss could not well be expected to
be less then it was on either side, which has much hindered their expected
relief for Jreland, by reason that they will need daily and continual
supplies at home. The Battle did continue two days and a half, where in the
second day toward the evening, the Duke of Guise himself was wounded and at
the length by Don Lomboyle the Spanish General, was taken prisoner. ^hey lost
beside the 1200. Foot 5000. Horse, and the whole Army forced to retire home for
new supplies, which were not long providing, for before the Spanish Army could
fully enjoy their new got Conquest they were encountered by a new French Army,
under the Command of Monsieur Salieur, which did vindicate both their Host of
men and credit sustained in the first Battle, and also redeemed the Duke of
Guise, by taking of the Spanish General prisoner, whose Liberty was obtained
by the Liberty of the Duke of Guise.

FINIS.

