Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM COVENTRY Declaring the happy Success of Col.
Hambden, Col. Goodwyn, and the Citisens of Coventry, against Prince Robert and
his forces, who besieged Coventry on Friday-last. With the number of them that
were slain, and the taking of Cap. Johnson and many other prisoners.

Also the victorious Proceedings of the Earl of Argile against the Earl of
Derbie, who while the E. of Derby besieged Manchester the second time, and was
from thence repulsed, seized upon the I Will of Man, the ancient Inheritance of
the Earls of Derby, and has there placed many strong Garrisons.

With exceeding good News from Holland, expressed in the fidelity of the States
to the Parliament of England, who made stay of four great Vessels laden with
men and Ammunition to assist the King against the Parliament.

Printed for Richard West, October 19, 1642.

Exceeding Joyful News from Worster.
SInce Prince Robert had those most happy Defeats given to him at Worster and
Ludlow, wherein the malignant party for a season something weakened, he has
since marched and lay with his forces within two miles of Burmegum, with a
Resolution to make a second attempt upon the City of Coventry.

And upon Tuesday last he advanced his Forces, and upon Friday notwithstanding
the violence of the weather, his Forces l^y before the City, but according to
the old Proverb, He that is forewarned, is forearmed.

The Citisens of Corentry having intelligence of his determination, did so
strengthen and prepared themselves for (...) coming, that his attempts will be
frustrated:

For besides other provision which was abundant, and strong they had planted 26
pieces of Ordnance, with which they could play upon his forces which way soever
he should assault them.

Upon Satterday according to his Resolution he made an attempt upon the City
but he found opposition to be beyond expectation, and all his Assaults and
Onsets were in vain and he not only was repulsed from his purpose, but with a
great loss and much hurt done to his forces he was constrained to retreat.

For the Citisens of Coventry besides the help and assistance of the
Inhabitants round about them were assisted with other power and Forces.

For Collonell Hambden and Collonell Goodwyn, and some other Troops which lay
near Banbury side came in, and so violently set upon the Cavaleirs, that with a
great loss they gave of their attempt, their were very many of them slain,
some taken prisoners.

The Number of them that were slain is not certainly known, for they buried
them in the place where they fell, and among many others one Captain Johnson
was taken prisoner, a man very active in the pr^motion of this their cause.

The said Captain is now in the Goal at Coventry, and with the rest that were
taken prisoners with him will be sent up to London, so soon as those places are
secured from the Cavaleers.

The Earl of Derby has lately made a second assault upon Manchester, but with
as much discredit, and as small success as his first was. For he was beaten
back with great loss and hazard of himself, and although he escaped with
life, yet that was also in great hazard, for he was shot in the shoulder from
the Town, and with much difficulty he got away, while the Earl did busy
himself in those tumultuous ways abroad, he little dreamed how his own estate
lay at stake at home, neither did he conceive the least fuspition of any
foreign enemy, but delighting himself with the public distractions, he
neglected his own estate.

For while he did molest the Countries of Chester, and Lancaster, the Earl of
Argile a man full of conscience and valor wit^ ten thousand men did besiege
the I Will o^ Man, which is the Inheritance belonging to the Earls of Derby, and
the siege was neither tedious nor dangerous.

For he got the Island almost without any opposition, and has there placed in
diverse places very strong Garrisons.

He has expelled the Country of all those whose integrity he does suspect, and
whom he does not find to be for the King and Parliament.

He has enriched himself with great store of treasure, and other necessary
provision for War, which the Earls Father, and he that now is Earl had laid up
there, this Earl intending that if his purposes should not take effect, that
then he would fly into the Island, and with that provision that he had sent
thither, and was there treasured up, and with the assistance of the Inhabitants
of the Island, of whose faith and constancy he seemed to be confident, to
defend and secure himself from any power that should pursue him, and that he
was resolved there to stand upon his guard.

But this his design is frustrate, for he is not like to regain it again, by
reason that the Earl of Argile has placed such strong Forces there.

There were lately in Holland, by means of the Queen 4. great Vessels
provided, rig'd and laden with great store of Ammunition and Arms.

But the States according to their formerly promised fidelity did make stay of
the shipping and all the rest of the provision, and caused the ships to be
unladen, and have also taken such order, that if any Commanders whatsoever who
are employed in the service of the States, under the Command of the Prince of
Orange, shall at any time come away, and leave their present service to assist
the King against his Parliament, that they shall for ever be casheerd of their
places, and be made incapable hereafter of the same office and place again.

And they did also by a Message sent to the House, intimate their good
affection which they bear to the Parliament, and although there has bin very
many plots and designs both there, and also in diverse other places set on foot
to promote the cause of the disturbers of the peace and quiet df this Kingdom,
yet that they hither have, and hereafter will, be vigilant to prevent all such
attempts whatsoever, and that they will not admit as near as possibly they can,
that any plot or conspiracy whatsoever shall take effect in those Countries,
that might any ways seem prejudicial to the present Proceedings of the
Parliament of England.

FINIS.

