An Exact RELATION Of Foureteen days PASSAGES FROM PORTS*MOUTH. The Isle of
Wight, and other parts.

Wherein is contained the manner of the proceeding of the Cavaliers, and their
Confederates the Papists, against the Christian-PROTESTANTS.

Sent in a Letter from a worthy Gentleman in that County, to his Friend in
London.

Whereunto is added some special Passages from Hall, Lincolnshire and York.



LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen, 1642.

A true Relation of fourteen days Passages, etc.
FOR News thus it is with us, The greatest p^r^ of our Western Gentry are
professed Royalists. Two of them near us are lately put into the Commission of
the Peace, enemies to the Pa^liament, and very unfit, though they were better
affected: but such will serve to do mischief well enough. At Chichester, Sr.
Thomas Boyer, Sr. William Morley, Mr. L^wknor the Recorder, a Man that is
thoroughly known for the New-Corporation, with three other me^ of note, came and
demanded of Captain Chittey, for the King, the Magazine of the City: the
Captain being a man well affected refused; they said very peremptorily, That
they would have it before the m^rrow morning; he replied very (...) should not:
so he caused a strong Watch to be set to keep it; and the next day appeared in
the City well Armed, with many both of the place, and of the Country near
adjacent, to assist him and Guard him in his Office. St. Thomas Boyer, and Sir
William Morly are Parliament Men, and so is Captain May another of those fix.

It is reported, that they with the men above mentioned, and Doctors and
Clergy men of the Cathedral Church had plotted to betray the City to
Collonell Goring* Mr. Lewknor wrote to Portsmouth to the Collonell, to sound
the depth of his design: the Collonell sent him word, That his Commission was
to make Portsmouth as strong as he could ^or his Master; and that he hoped,
that both (...) and ^^^^rs would be assistant to him if need were. Since we
(...) the Recorder is gone to Ports mouth: The (...) of our parts consists
mainely in honest Trades-me^* the (...) are ^aught, as was said before, and the
Country people are for the most part blinded and misled by their malevolent
Hedge-Priests, there being not above si^ or seven honest Ministers here
abouts. It is certain, that 2 Cavelliers ravished the same maid, one after
another near Ports-mouth, while one stood by and held their Horses.

It is related that three gallant Gentle-women desired to have a boat to wast
them over to Stokesbay a place between Portsmouth and the I Will of Wight but not
obtaining, they were in a friendly manner brought back to the above named Sr
Thomas Boyers house in his coach: It is thought that they were men in women's
apparel, because they three were alone without any man.

Doctor Hinshaw one of the Prebendaries of the high Church of Chichester sent a
load of wheat into Portsmouth; but lately, as we hear. The Churchmen there
are every day exercising of their Light Horses in the Bishops close: It is
reported that one of them sent his servant once, twice, and thrice, to Master
Cawley a worthy Parliament man, and the chief Pillar of our Country on this
side, entreating him to give him a meeting in the said Close, and other places:
but as Nehemiah refused to meet Sanballat and Gesalm in one of the villages of
the plain of One, where they thought to do him mischief; so did this
Gentleman very wisely and warily: He was willing to meet the Doctor at places
which were not for his ^urne, and (as they say) he was so often repulst, that
at length his servant was sent with an excuse, that the m^n was mistaken. By
these particulars you may a little discern the state of our Country* But
notwithstanding all this (the Lord be praised) the Parliament I hope has the
better end of the staff. There is a Merchant in our Town, which for three
days together, law near a man of War, lying before the Cows in the I Will of
Wight; in this great Ship there is a Scottish Noble man (as they say) that has
done very good service, he lies there and keeps provision from going out of
the I Will to Ports-mouth: he took a Boat la^ely freight with light Horse Saddles
and their, furniture going over into the Isle, and for the use of the malignant
Party, he asked the boat-man what was his freight, he said 9. shillings, there
it is quoth the Noble man, and paid him, and bad him withal to bring the Horses,
and he would give him another freight. This Noble man hearing that one Captain
Newland had sent provision over to Portsmouth, went a shore and sought about
for him, protesting that he would send him up to the Parliament, the Cap.
sculks and dares not be seen, he is a great fat tall man of a very Heathenish
behavior, and (as I hear by an honest man that has seen him there) lies at
Master Moulins, when he comes to London, on Fish-street hill. There is a
Captain that is possessed of a Castle near the Cows, he had inveagled the
Country round about, and by fair glozing speeches had persuaded them to bring
in their Arms into the said Castle, telling them that they would be there kept
in safety from the Cavaliers, and when there should be need of them he would
redeliver them. But of late they of the Island suspecting some treachery in the
Captain, because they heard that the Earl of Portland was put out of the
Government, went and demanded their Arms, the Captain denies to deliver
them: they had no present remedy, but went and made their complaint to the
above named Scottish Lord: he goes to the Captain and demands the Arms for
the Ilanders: the Captain stiffly denies, the Nobleman replied, that if he did
not deliver them, he would heat down his Castle about his ears, the Captain
remains stubborn still, the Lord came with his Ship under the Castle,
intending to make good his thretning: But when the Captain saw whereto he
must, he yielded at length and delivered the Arms.

There have bin three times Letters intercepted geing to, and coming from
Portsmouth. At Havant near Ports-mouth the Townsmen took a Travailer upon
suspicion, pulled off his clothes, and in his Boots found Letters from the
North to the Garrison, the Letters were carried to Mr. Richard Norton, a good
Gentleman hard by; he wished that they had brought the messenger as well as his
Packet; whereupon a few lusty men went out with their muskets after him, and
took him, and brought him to Mr. Norton, who sent him and his Letters up to
the Parliament.

Another time there were letters passing from Chichester to Portsmouth the
Messenger went of purpose through by-ways, there met him a man (conceive, the
simplest to see to, that ever you saw, and you have his Image) who demanded of
him whither he was going, he said to Ports-mouth, not suspecting that such a
simple fellow would, or could defeat him, but that simple unlikely man laid
hold of his bridle, bad him to stay, told him, that he was an Officer; with
that came another man, who helped him, and so they carried away the messenger
to Mr. Nortons.

This day Goodmen Faisters of Jews, having been at Havant whither he was sent
by the Lady Clearke, Mr. Staples Wife, to learn the certainty of occurrences
near Portsmouth, brings News of a woman that was sent out of Portsmouth, with
a puppet of clouts like a child in her arms, she came along by a Fort, which
was first built at Portsbridge within 3. miles of Portsmouth by the Cavaliers,
but is since abandoned by them, and they retired into the Garrison for fear of
our Men, and since there are hundreds at work about it, for King and
Parliament, and have planted Ordnance upon it. The Cavaliers when they left it,
drew away four Pieces, and their Carriage breaking, they were feign to leave a
fifth upon the way. But to come to the woman again, one of our Men asked her
what she carried, she said a child, prithee let me see thy Baby, said he, so
search being made, it was found such as I said, the lower part was only
clouts, but in the head of it was a black Box full of Letters, She and her
Stilborne, are carried to the right place, I warrant you. A Cavalier and his
Man rode into Havant upon lusty Steeds, laboring to raise there a Malignant
party, to help him in plundering o^ Mr. Nortons House, the good Gentleman had
news of it presently, he sends out some of his Men on Light Horses with
Pistols, who rode after the Cavalier and his Man, took them and brought them
to their Master, who dismounts them from their own horses, sets them upon a
couple of jades, and sends them up to the Parliament an honest man of my
acquaintance was at Mr. Nortons, when this was done. After this a Troop of
Cavaliers with certain foot came up to Portsdowne, and challenged Mr. Norton
forth, saying, where is this same Norton; where is he? I warrant him he is a
very coward, let him come forth if he dare; and at this time they held the
Fort; Mr. Norton hearing of it presently Arms himself, puts on his Buffe
coat, and was riding out to them with his Men, and just upon the speed of it
arrives at his house a 1^0. light Horse, from the Parliament, out they go with
him but when the Cavaliers saw such a strength come against them, they posted
down the hill toward their Fort with great speed, the Scots that were among
Mr. Nortons auxiliaries, would presently have flown on upon the Fort, but Mr.
Norton would not suffer them for fear of danger, there being Ordnance
planthere. Another time 30. of the Cavaliers came out in a vaunting manner,
against whom went but 6 of our light Horse: the Cavaliers all disch^rged upon
them, but hurt never a man of them, only hit one of their Horses on the
shoulder, easily curable; our six then made nearer up to them; the Cavaliers
seeing them so ventrous, were stricken with fear and fled, our men made after
them amain, and being within shot of them, discharged upon them, shot one
through the back, who fell down from his Horse dead in the place, another
they hit in the breech, who fell likewise, but made a shift to creep away into
a hedge, and a third they took alive on his horse, so they took a man and 3.
Horses, being but 6 against 30. praised be the Lord of Hoasts for so great a
victory. It is said that the old Soldiers do daily make escape out of
Portsmouth, and it is thought that the rest will gladly surrender the Town, if
once it were but formally demanded: for they begin already to be in distress
through want. One Mr. Bellingham a young Gentleman rode, armed capape from
Chichester into Portsmouth, but now wishes that he were out again, and is at
charges 5 shillings a day only for a boat, which lies at hand, still waiting
for an opportunity to make his escape home, but cannot yet get way.

Some of the Scots that came among the 100 Troopers to M. Nortons succor, are
of purpose billetted in one Bringsteds house the Parson of Havant, because
being a most pestilent man he had provided a Light Horse for the service of the
Cavaliers, the Scots are with him therefore, and M. Norton has charged him
with the keeping of 10 Light Horse for the King and Parliament, because he was
so brisk; and lately one of the Scots men being agreived with him, fell upon
him and basted him welfavouredly: and feign he would be gone, but they will not
let him; so he is forced to stay, waits upon them daily, gives them good
words, and tells them, that he will gladly lie out of his own bed to make them
room. And both here with us at Ar^ndell, and else where (as I hear) the
Psalmists words are true: Gods enemies are found liars to him, that is, they
yield him sained submission, speaking favorable of the Parliament, who not
many days ago, had their mouths filled with other manner of language; and as
it was in Mordica's time; many of the people of the Land became Jews, because
the fear of the Jews fell upon them: So I hope you will shortly hear it to
be among us every where; yet because abundant wariness never harteth,
therefore we neither are, nor will be secure, till there be no more cause of
fear. Good Man Masters brings news that the Papists near Ports-mouth do
much mischief and that himself was like to be taken by the Cavaliers, but
there coming after him 2 Travailers horsemen, accidentally, the Cavaliers
thought that there were more coming, so they fled away with all possible speed.

It is reported by them that fall off from the Gari^on ^t Portsmouth, that the
Colonel being angry with them of Gospar, a Village not far from the Town,
because they would not come into his aid, commanded a Canoneer to let fly at
their Houses, the Canoneer at first refused, but being threatened by the
Collonell, that he would run him through, if he would not, he shot, but it
was over the houses, and so did, no harm.

Dated, 16. August 1642.
From HVLL.
SIR,
the Forces are all gone from hence, and from Beverley, and we hope to have
trade again, for I hope we are now in the safest place of England: and though
some particular persons, have been robbed and spoiled of their goods in the
Country, yet God be thanked, our Country is not much worse in general, then
it was before the Cavaliers, for what hurt they did, we paid with dollers and
good English coin made good so long as it lasted, one thing remarkable of the
fainting spirits, observe by this passage tieir Centinells were so frighted
with some passengers that lost their way, coming near them, made them all
run away, fearing there were more coming behind, the wicked flee when none
pursues them: I pray God make us thankful for our deliverance. If God permit
us a meeting, I shall relate that to you, that I cannot commit to paper, but
this is certain, our Country is much firmer to the Parliament, then ever it
was before.

From Lincolne-shire.
THe News that we have here is little, for the present, only this is
certain, that Sir John Hotham is so dreadful to some of the Cavaliers, that
one of them and the one of no small house is mad, and once running under his
bed in his mad fit cried out, Sir John Hotham comes, Sir John Hotham comes, he
being here under cure for that disease, and there came a Company of them to our
Town, but they were such Hell Hounds, Blasphemous Villains, Drunken Sots, and
for the most part so meanly acoutred, that they are ashamed to see, and are now
gone, as we here: for Lincoln Town, we want but some encouragement from
London, and we should do well enough here.

From YORK.
We have here as great preparations, as you have in London, and we hope we
have Warwick Castle, and the Guns sure, and Portsmouth and Sommerset-shire we
hope, we have also sure, and so in the end we hope to have all; we had a
meeting here yesterday and to day, but not so great an appeataance as some
could have wished, its said that Sir John Hotham and Dr. Bastwick will be tried
here this Sessions, it may go hard with Dr. Bastwick. but how they will come
by Sir John Hotham, I leave to judge, I know not.

FINIS.

