Exceeding True NEVVES From Newcastle.

Declaring the manifold Distractions, Fears, and Iealousies of that City, and
several other places of Note in the Country.

Likewise a real and exact Declaration of the particular causes of their
distempers.

Set down in as ample and exact a manner as can be desired, for the
satisfaction of all those that desire to be informed of the present estate of
those parts.

May 17. London, Printed for J. Horton, 1642.

Exceeding True News from Newcastle.
IT is not unknown to most men gentle Reader what great Distractions, fears,
and Jealousies are fostred in all parts; Nay in every Corner of this Kingdom,
as has been made apparent by many circumstances which will be too tedious for
me to insert in this following Relation.

Only give me leave to give you a taste of the great Distractions, growing
Fears and frantic Iealousies of the Inhabitants in Newcastle, Durham,
Northallerton, Morpat^, and many other places in the Bishopric and
N^rthumherland.

And first touching their (...) ^actions. Merchants are distracted for want of
Traffic, they are in such a pitiful rage, that they have sworn not to
carry Coals for any man, they swear, that since the Peace was concluded,
Coals are fallen at least six pence a Bushel, which makes them curse Peace
and fall together by the ears amongst themselves, likewise your Gunsmiths
begin to bounce and break with a powder, for since the Army marched away they
have had nothing to do but to make Key-Gunnes for which they curse peace
likewise, and make the black Pots five one against the other, they are all to
pieces on that side too. The Citizens wives that had decrepid Husbands, they
are distracted for the loss of their loves honest Gentlemen Troopers (whom
they in pity) of their Husbands weakness (...) suffered to hunt in their
Conyberies: Your Alewives and Tapsters likewise, are distracted to see their
Ale sour for want of good fellows, their Beer converted to Vinegar, they
likewise curse Peace till they are a dry; drink till they are mad, then let
the rest about the Cellar, then run Tap run Tapster, all is gone, nothing lest
but the empty Hogs-head for the Brewer to make him a Helmet on to cover his
Logger-head.

The Baker that in the time of War made his bread of half wheat and half
sand now, cries out that his bread is dowe baked, he swears he had rather have
stood in the Pillory then to have had Peace concluded, for now he makes his
bread but two ounces to light in a two penny loaf, and then he made it four
ounces two light, yet now his bread lies on his hands, which makes him pray for
war or a dear year, and then the mealey mouth Rogue swears he will make
them pay for it.

But O the general Lamentation that there is amongst the Maids that should be
the wives that would be, and the whores that must, be those that were Maids
curse their own weakness, the Brittlenes of their wares that would not endure
one knock, but ever after be esteemed cracked Commodities, those that have
gotten their bellies full they curse their greedy stomachs, that they could not
be contented with a bit or so but that they must take so much as to make such
a damnable timpany, in their ungodly guts, nothing can cure but Lusts Lacrimie,
and the virtue of that white sheet, which was guilty of that Venerable Banquet.

Likewise Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor are in a pitiful
perplexity, they are compelled to turn Quarter Masters, and take up all the
Barnes, Stables, Stocks, and Cages, to lodge a great invisible Army, every day
being more visible then other, to wit; young Soldiers, or the fruits of the
last years war; who now are drawn together to an almost incredible number,
for lusty Soldiers finding no employment in the fields of Mars, chose to run a
Tilt in Venus Bowers, or to run at a Ring of a Maids setting up.

Likewise the late Maids but now Whores are resolved so to continue, which puts
the Country Fellows into a lamentable fright, for fear they should like
Cowards be forced to father those Children, which by the Soldiers were so
valiantly gotten, wherefore they were resolved to Petition (but whom they know
not.)

FINIS.

