EXCEEDING JOYFUL NEWS From the Cavaleers at NOTTINGHAM.

Declaring their Resolution and Propositions to the Lords at Nottingham, now
attending his Royal Majesty, being happy and welcomed Tidings for London. With
their terrible threatenings against Colonel GORING.

Likewise, happy Tidings from Shereborn Castle, declaring the Proceedings of
the Parliaments Forces against the Marquis of Hartford, and the state and
condition he is now in. Signified by Letters to the House of Commons, upon
Satterday last, being the 3. of September.

Also the manner of Captain Browns coming to London on Satterday last, with 7.
Troops of horse, bringing with him 5. Cart loads of Arms and Ammunition, and
six Prisoners, which he took in Kent, namely the Lord Roper, Mr. Adrian Scroope
the Duke of Lenox Stewart, and 4. more.

September 6. London Printed for John Wight, 1642.

THE CAVALEERS PROPOSITIONS. To the Lords at Nottingham, now attending his
Royal Majesty.
With the threatenings of the Cavaleers against Collonell Goring.
THe Cavaleers having information that Colonel Goring was desirous to yield up
the Town of Portsmouth and to come with all Expedition to hi Majesty, where
having spent some time in consultation thereupon, they resolved to propound
certain Propositions to the Lords at NOTTINGHAM, who are now attending his
Royal Majesty, which was to this effect VIZ. I. That as Collonell Goring is
resolved to yield up the Town of Portsmouth, to the Parliaments Forces, upon
condition he may have free liberty to come to the King, therefore their humble
desires are, that they would be pleased to yield their consents, that he may
not be admitted to come to his Majesty. II. That seeing he has proved false
and treacherous to the King and Parliament, they are resolved, that wheresoever
they light on him, to be his Executioner, and to cut him in pieces.


These Propositions were presented unto the Lords at Nottingham, August 31. by
many thousands of the Cavaleers.

And upon Saturday last, being the 3. day of this instant September, the
Honorable house of Commons received information from Portsmouth, that
Collonell GORING has sent several Treaties to the Committee that lies at
Suthicke five miles from the Town of Portsmouth, and would gladly yield up the
Town to the Parliaments Forces, but first he is resolved to know what
punishment he shall undergo before that he will resign up the same, and to
that end desired the Lord WENTWORTH to go to the Committee at Suthick, with
these Propositions. I. That if they would be pleased to grant unto him a free
pardon for this Crime which he has committed, by betraying the Trust confided
in him by both houses of Parliament, he would resign up the Town. II. That if
they would be pleased to to do him that favor, to give him leave to go
beyond the Seas, and to promise, that he should be transported over with
safety, he would yield up the Ordinance, and all the rest of the Ammunition.
These Propositions and Desires of Colonel GORING was propounded to the
Committee by the Lord WENTVVORTH, but they could not give him an Answer of
them, till they knew the Houses pleasure therein.


The said GORING does now endeavor by all possible means to make an escape out
of the Town of Portsmouth, and to go beyond the Seas, but by reason of the
great vigilancie and care of the Earl of Warwick, it is thought he cannot make
an escape without the consent of both Houses of Parliament.

The great spleen and malice that the Cavaleers has took against Colonel
Goring can by no ways be appeased, they having generally Resolved to be his
Executioner, and to cut him in pieces, and to punish him with such torments,
that never any Christian as yet endured, because he proved false and
treacherous on both sides.

He is now in a lamentable condition, and the Soldiers that are within the
Town are in a great perplexity, ready to be his Executioner.

He has also sincs his first shutting up of the Gates held out very stoutly,
and has beaten down many Bulwarks and Fortifications, which the Parliaments
Forces had raised, playing with his Ordnance very fast against them, but now he
has almost spent all his powder and shot, so that he cannot hold out very long.

The Parliaments Forces has now finished their Rampeer, and are resolved to
make an attempt against the town very suddenly, being in great hopes of gaining
the same.

It is thought that the Marquess of Hartford is in the like condition that
Colonel Goring is in, by reason of the abundance of Forces that have now
besieged him in his strong hold at Shereborn Castle.

For upon Saturday last, it was signified to the House of Commons, that the
Marquess is compassed in with 4. or 5000. men, and that they could easily
fetch him out but that they are very unwilling to shed any blood, and therefore
it may be they will try his patiencr for want of food.

Likewise upon Satterday last, Captain Brown came from Kent, and was brought in
by seven Companies of Horse, and came to the Lord Generals House, and having
disarmed all the Papists in the County of Kent, brought six prisoners with him,
whereof one was called Master Adrian Scroop the Duke of Lenox Stewart, at whose
House they took five Cart Loads of Arms and Ammunition, and likewise the Lord
Roper was one of them.

It is reported by Letters from Portsmouth, that Sir John Meldrum is raising of
great Horn-works against the Town, and that his Advice much advantageth the
service, daily endeavoring, and using his best skill to further that happy
work, he is a great encouragement to the soldiers, and a man much esteemed of
amongst them, being sent down by the consent of both Houses of Parliament.

Published for the Encouragement of all those that are well-willers to this
happy Reformation.
FINIS.

