An Exact NARRATIVE OF THE ATTEMPTS Made upon the Duke of Gloucester.

BEING The Extract of diverse Letters written out of France to Persons of
Quality in England.

AND Published for the satisfaction of all true Protestants.

London Printed, and are sold by F. Eglesfield, at the Marygold in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1655.

A Narrative of an ill favored attempt to pervert the Duke of Gloucester,
extracted out of diverse letters from France.
Paris, Novem. 7. 1654. Sir,
THere are newly come to my notice some untoward passages, whereby one of our
great Pledges has been exposed to the hazard of his Religion; which my Pen is
very loath to impart, were it not for prevention, lest being impossible to be
conceald in England, it might be represented by others either more desperate,
or more faulty than yet it is in truth.

The King when he went away from hence was over-intreated by his mother to
leave the Duke of Gloucester with her, which to content her in some things, whom
he could not please in diverse others, he consented to grant her that request,
upon promise that she would not force him to change his Religion, and so
conditions of liberty of prayers, etc. were established. But of late they do
some sayby the French Courts instigation) press it very hard, and even
profess an attempt of it. Mr. Mountagu Lord Abbot of Nanteul etc) and his
Instruments have gotten him, under pretense of weaning him from young French
gallants company (that on occasion of being in the same Academic were indeed
grown but too kind to him) to Pomosse, and after a weeks stay there, his Tutor
coming on business to Paris for one night, (whether they had designed this
absence of his, or only did make use of it, I cannot tell) they all set upon
him with motives Spiritual and Temporal to become a Roman Catholic; the
Spiritual ones such as the subject would afford, little and many; more
trusting on number than weight, he and (his only help then) Mr. Griffin,
answered with the best skill they had, and with much more resolution and metal
both of them than you can imagine: and rejected the Temporal ones with
contempt, and with the danger of incurring the Kings displeasure, who had both
given him a charge, and engaged his Mother, that there should be no change in
Religion labored for. But to both the Duke added a complaint, that they should
offer to assault him, with either of those considerations in the absence of his
Tutor, who was fittest to judge of their proposalls.

When he came therefore the shock was renewed, and sustained so firmly, that
the stay at Pontoyse was sooner ended than we hoped for. To our great content
we see our young Prince again frequent and constant at the same devotions with
us, but complaining much he should be troubled by his Fathers and Brothers
subjects, especially to become of another Religion, than they and his
conscience directed him to keep to.

But the Queen now must appear to own the thing, and to profess that she
cannot but labor to have her son showed the right way to Heaven; and though
she promised he should not be forced by her, yet to have that way proposed
to him she found requisite: and since Mr. Lovell (his Tutor) had expressed he
could not, nor must not see him so assaulted, and therefore pressed the
forbearance of such discourses in the Dukes presence, being ready to satisfy
any one himself; she would put him into another Governors hands, for a while
at least, and so under Mr. Mountagus wing he is carried to Mr. Crofts house,
being contrary to his own earnest entreaty hurried away on Saturday, and not
suffered to stay till Monday, though he pleaded hard for it upon want of a
warm coat, and there he must tarry till Monday sevennight after. Meanwhile no
body with him that might help his resolution save Mr. Griffin of his
Bedchamber: a young Gentleman, though an old servant of his (once my Lord of
Manchesters Page) who is indeed zealous against their design, even with
resolution to quit the service, if any change should happen; but his years and
breeding make him not invincible as to himself, and if he yield any
considerable assistance to his Master, must be left behind too, the next
remoove at least.

They have sent notice of these straights to the King and Duke of York long
since, but it is carefully provided that the Duke of York must not come home
yet, and when he does prepare to come, if they cannot find themselves
Conquerors and secure, they will (rather than hazard the loss of this Prey) not
scruple to encloystre him from any Heretics view whatsoever.

In such a case as this, you cannot presume enough of the zeal and indignation
the little Prince has against his Usage here, against the wrong done him by
the Council that left him in such dangerous hands, against every obtruded
Servant of that pack about him, against his new Governor, himself crossing him
in diverse things, even of lesser moment, as if he were the only English, whom
experience has taught, how narrowly men ought to watch against Usurpation; in
fine, he apprehends his danger seriously, and the honor of resisting most
nobly and heroically, both for resolution of Endeavor, and for confidence of
Success: that and the odds of the cause, and Gods power to perfect praise ex
ore infantium, is almost the only hopes we have.

Let us have yours, and all good Protestants Prayers for this Confessor, who as
he sees (unmoved) an evident want of all things fit for a Gentleman of better
sort, slighted of the French Court, his Mothers Frown and endless importunity
before him, if he be not perverted: So I doubt not is now under the
Mew-Discipline, and the Manage of their Spiritual, or rather Ecclesiastical
Faulconers, who will not ever cease watching and dieting, etc. and whatever
else is necessary to bring this young Eaglet to stoop and veil, and to do all
things at their Lewre, even to take Hood too, if need be. For they that make
such a Court-worke of every little childs, and discontented debauched servants
conversion, will spare none of their little or great Arts to get this Noble
Bird of so Royal a Wing, as being the only one of that Airay they hope for
now, having lost so much pains on the two former, and so fit to awe and dare
lesser Birds by; of which there are Wagers laid of no few or mean ones already.

I foresaw this unmeasured excursion before hand, and was therefore so loath to
write at all: and the truth is, I can neither scribere, nor nonscribere, til
this Crisis be over Though I foresee what news this will be in Gath, furnishing
the Parliament with a ready answer, when the next bold man asks, What have the
poor Gentlemen done abroad? And there are sagacious souls that would never
understand till now the reason why the Parliament decreed to send him abroad,
ere he was out-grown the danger of perversion. But certainly they that pretend
to have true Protestant hearts, and will for either fear or love of money,
suffer the Defenders of their Faith, to be led into the Wilderness of want, and
prepare them with hunger for the Devils temptations of Turning any stone to get
Bread, do deserve the lash of persecution, which in time may justly light upon
them, if God and they do not timely prevent it.

Paris, 25. November. 1654.
By former Letters you may perceive how they prevailed with the Queen to take
the Duke out of his Tutors hands, hurrying him first to Pontoyse, and then to
Mr. Crofts house. During which, as fully as they possessed him, every hour and
much less parts of the day, one or other of the Bees ever humming about him;
yet at night he had one that lay in his Bedchamber, who entertained him more
to his hearts desire, and (like Penelope's Web) unspun (as well as they could
two little young things some few years above thirty between them) what ever had
past in public, or the day before.

And indeed they did well to spend and improve their nights in this manner; for
when once they were up (as his Grandfather said of my Lord of Carliste, he was
in perpetual torments, Eatings, Huntings, Dancings, Visits, Journeys,
Entertainments of Males and Females; so) our little Duke was continually
tortured with Arguments finely imbelish'd with, True Church, Roman Catholic
Church; To be of the King of France, his Mothers Religion: Being made a
Cardinal, To become that King which must restore what Henry 8. took away, and
the appendices.

However he was not so strictly looked unto at first, but that there might be
now and then stolen into his hand a Confortatory Letter from his Friends at
Paris; but these shifts were to last but for a while: A terrible Ferule was
polished for him, and such a one, as the a we of it kept him from flat
rejecting and affronting his new Governor Mountagu, lest he being thoroughly
vexed, might resign him up into the Jesuits hands; to whose College the Duke
knew himself destined within few days, even by Violence it self, it relief
came not from Germany.

And now when all his stock of Replies (which my Friend tells me, were hugely
ingenious, and indeed solid, such as one would say, could not be in those
years but Ex traduce) were spent, and his last refuge of peremptory silence,
and upbraiding them for pressing their Sophismes on such a one as he was, while
the Deane his Tutor and friends were declined basely, grew stale helps, behold
a grave friend of his Fathers, Sir G. R. comes with a Letter in his pocket from
the King; and was indeed admitted to see him, and talk with him before
witness, but so far from possibility of privacy, that he was feign to leave
the Letter behind him to be conveyed at an opportuner occasion into his hand.
That Letter, says my Intelligencer, begins and ends so Brotherlike, so
Christian-like, so King-like, that he has set my longing on fire to hear it:
it is promised me I shall, and when I do, I shall be careful to present you
with that Jewel.

It puts him in mind of the strict command he left with him at parting; of
the monstrous injury to his conscience; to his state; to his Family; the vanity
of their Motives, the emptiness of their promises; the more Eligibleness of any
degree of suffering; Gods promises, whose love he must reckon to lose as well
as his so loving a Brothers, if he were perverted by any inticings whatsoever:
And to make all he said more valuable; that he would reflect on their dead
Fathers last charge, which he solemnly gave him, with the entaile of his
blessing annexed.

In fine, he closed his instructions with that which would have been severe
enough alone; That if he either changed his Religion, or put himself into the
Jesuits College, he had the last letter from him, and must never look to see
England or his Face again: And that if (which God forbid) their business
miscarried, the whole ruining of their Family, and all the Nations too, must
lay the mischief at his door as the great Cause of it.

Now no sooner had he read this Threatening Comforter, but he hugged it in his
Bosom, and with all possible speed transcribed a Copy of it for his Mother,
sending it forthwith to her; and begging her leave to come to Paris, both upon
those commands of the King, and upon the news of his Brothers being come from
the Army. Of this the Answer was, she could not cease wishing his so great and
eternal good; but she would not force him; but wished him to hearken to what
Mr. Mountagu should further deliver unto him: and that was, that he would be
willing to go to the Jesuits College however, where he should have strange
freedom in every thing. But all would not persuade on the one side, nor secure
on the other, till most welcomely about ten days since, my Lord of Ormond came
from Germany with letters, and instructions to boot; to second with a
duplicate, and new Charges by word of mouth, the force of the former Letters.
His business (namely, the setting free of this young Prince,) was of high
concernment, else so great a person would never have been spared from his
Master at such a time, in so ill a season of weather, to take so long and
dangerous a Voyage, just upon the dissolving of the Armies, who had beset all
ways, and robbed all Convoyes; and had he staid but four days longer, he
might as well have staid four years, it would then have been too late to have
done any good.

But now the Duke is returned to his old Prayers, and to old Faces, to whom he
tells such Stories of his Adventures, as (he says) has made him almost mad. But
others say, have made him much wiser then a longer time and better Tutor could
easily have done.

Nov. 28.
Since the Dukes return to the Palais-Royal, his Brothers company, and the
exercise of his own Religion, he has met with many assaults: obedience to his
Mother in all things possible, engaged him not to refuse whom she set over him
and sent about him; and though she has promised him some respit for a while at
least, in respect to his Brothers straight charge, yet she finds enough that
pursue a truceless war. How he answers all their Variety of smooth and sharp
Assaults, it is very pretty to hear, and did not the Posts interruption give me
suspicion that our Letters keep not their days to you, no more than yours to
us, I should send you constantly the proceedings in the business.

But if there be not strange unnatural carriage used, we shall enjoy his
Concurrence in Communion with us as we do every day, and which will most vex
them, on Sunday next at Church at the Residents house: which he is resolved
shall not be neglected or omitted upon any persuasion whatsoever: though that
be not in the number of those things which he is fortified for by the Kings
Letter. For he has a serious indignation against them that have with so many
wiles hindered him (indeed by plain moral Violence, which no entreaty, no policy
of his could either prevent or mollify) so many Sundays from Paris; and at
the Reports which were begotten between lying tongues and credulous cares,
that he was already turned, upon no other ground of his giving, but bare being
away from Church; which could no way be effected but by hurrying him out of
Town; nor could that be obtained of him without establishing a new Governor
upon him, which thing so indirectly trenching on Religion, he could not have
refused without disobeying his Mother: Yet the advantage of that, as it was
really great against the poor Youth, produced so great a pledge to the Roman
party, that the Curates in diverse Churches gave thanks for his Reconciliation a
Sunday or two agone; So that they will be now exposed to disrepute of their
Parishioners, and mockery of the adversary, the first Sunday of their supposed
Proselytes appearing at our Church, which is likely to kindle no small wrath
amongst them, and therefore we stand in fear of some shrewd Crisis between
this and Sunday morning as near as it is: I do not mean of hazard, but of
greater violence of assault.

He has been on his Visit at the Louvre, and past those pikes already: though
both Queen and Cardinal jointly, and both severally, have pressed him, that he
is now to obey his Mother since his Father death; and they cannot find any
occasion he should have to regard other directions. Here he thought he had
most need of his Brothers Letter, which enjoined him silence to any disputes:
But manners would not suffer him to say nothing, and much less to say what he
could have done, of the inconvenience of preferring Mothers commands before his
Sovereigns: But it would have been too hot; and therefore glad he was to come
off that brunt, with a general promise of dutifulness to his Mother as much as
any Son in the world could or ought to use; and a protestation that it was ever
a thing abhorred of him to harken to any Counsel to the contrary. And besides
that the very getting off was a Triumph, he made great prize of their promise,
that it was but for his greater good, and the advantage they should have of
highlyer doing him good, that they looked upon the hopes of his change of
Religion; they knew however that they ought to look on him as a Child of
France, of whatsoever religion he was.

There was besides, a passage which he was not very free of relating, yet it
came out; that there had been a promise between the Crowns articled upon at
the Marriage-Treaty of his Father and Mother, that the Queen should have the
bringing up of all the children till twelve years of age, in lieu and
compensation of which being so notoriously violated, it was but reason and
great condescension, that the third Son should be entirely committed to her
disposal, especially she being in France. You will easily grant it out of the
Sphere of his Age to reply to such high assaults: it was highly enough for his
honor that he was thought fit to be so pleaded with; but that it wrought not
with him, is a sign of Gods great vigilance over him, and a Pledge that he
has a Blessing for him.

In fine, all these Addresses abroad, and other renewed at home, gave such a
testimony of his firmness, that the Queen on Saturday morning took him apart
from all his and her Servants, and very seriously bemoaned her case with his
too, in that the earnest desire of his and the whole Families good met with
such difficulties, as should put her to use such severity with him. She could
not but pity him, as wearied already with so many persuasions; and truly the
tender affection she ever had for him, and had constantly showed to him, could
not but make her self weary of such tedious courses: Therefore she was
resolved to make a sudden end; and for that cause charged him to retire
himself, and give one hearing more to Mr. Mountagu, and afterward to lay her
and his words seriously to his heart, and bring her an answer full and final
ere night. What the particular Proposals she made were, may come out hereafter:
At the first appearance of this intended privacy with him, he very dexterously
contrived an opportunity to speak to his Servant Griffin, to seek out my Lord
of Ormond to be ready to speak with him, by then he might come from his
Mother; which is a fair Omen: But the Post must not be presumed on, etc.

December. 2.
You were left I think at the state of things on Saturday morning, and was come
to the charge the Queen had given him to attend her alone. The Duke had in the
little Interim of clearing the room, sent Griffin for my Lord of Ormond
presently to be with him, or at least so soon as the Queen had done: And it
was but Prophetical Providence; for the Queens business was of so great import
as might require it well. She began with all sweetness possible, repeated the
manifest signs of her great and tender affection for him, and how much it
grieved her that that very love it self should compel her to proceed now with
such seeming severity: She presumed he was weary of it, and truly so was she
too, therefore for his ease sake, she would shorten his Time of Trial; and
therefore proposing all the good she aimed at in this design of hers, and the
Duty he owed her, and the disability of the King to maintain him, etc. She
wished him to withdraw presently, and sequestring himself from any diversion
after he had given Mr. Mountagu the hearing, for a while to ponder seriously
what she and he had said, and bring her his final answer ere night.

The Duke obeyed; for reply then he must not: Goes to his Chamber; Mr. Mountagu
comes, presses, is refused: but after an hours Discourse, retires, begs to be
sent for again when my Lord of Ormond was come, within an hour; if not, he
must come of himself. But my Lord of Ormond comes, no Mountagu sent for, or
comes for two hours. The Marquess and the Duke soon resolved what should be
answered: spent the time only in ordering circumstances for the manner.

After these three Discourses, it was time for a young Prince to have a little
breath, and therefore he retires to a Lady's Chamber on the other side, where
he might give his ears a little ease, and if he must hear more, that it might
be less material discourse, therefore chooses one that would beat no more
upon that Theme. No sooner is he gone, but Mr. Mountague comes, misses him,
hunts up and down for him, chides him for being off his station of
pensiveness, for not having sent for him.

Well Sir says the Duke, my Task is done, I have resolved: what did my Mother
bid more? there is time enough to tell. And so it was, as it proved to be; for
the answer was such, that the entertainment it had, was a charge to see her
face no more. Which Sentence was no sooner pronounced, but executed by French
haste: Out he must; and then he that had nothing but amazement to reply with,
had now a Cue to speak on, and beg the parting Blessing at least, till he
could prevail for her pardon. It will not be; Out he must; and so full of
Tears and Astonishment, to find out his Brother he goes, and they share the
sorrow till Youth and Night parts them by drowsinesse.

But the Edict, that it may not seem Scenical, or in terrorem, goes forth to
all the Officers of the House; neither to provide nor lend any Necessary either
to spend, or so much as to use. While the young Innocent slept soundly, and upon
the advantage sorrow had given, long in the morning; dreaming but of one Task
at most, stealing a Blessing of his Mother, either by Sisters or Brothers
Intercession; or stealing at least a means of begging it ere she went to her
Monastery, or himself to Church, a much longed for (and often wrangled for)
contentment. But in stead of a Mother, he is admitted to no converse on her
side but of a Step-Tutor, who again solicits, aggravates the peril of his
Mothers anger, knowing indeed more then the little Duke did of it (as Causes
can prophecy, and Counselors know all that was already.) Now was the time, if
ever, says Mountagu: Get to her this very present instant, (almost
Sermon-time,) she has easier Proposals for you, but I cannot name them now.
The Duke answers; Then will I; where ere I go, I must have not a quiet only for
a while, but the exercise of my Religion; neither her Proposals, and less
yours, promise that.

The Coach went now by with his Mother for the Nunnery: The backside whereof
made him warm: Mr. Mountague need not aggravate the sadness of the spectacle,
which as appeared afterward, was more like the last remote View, than the
child could think of. He answered; Such as it is I may thank you for, Sir; and
it is but reason, What my Mother says to me, I say to you; I pray be sure I see
you no more; and so showed his back. And to the last question, Whither are you
going, good Sir? The Duke answered (over the shoulder) To Church. Where he was
indeed somewhat sadder than became the cheerfullnesse of the rest of the
Congregation: But ere night we all pardoned him, finding much of its cause the
story which we knew not then, and besides that a great deal of Augurie which
he could expreslie then know: for after Sermon he had a (No-Sunday) thought
lay on him to find a Dinner: to the Cooks he must send; neither Meat, Wine,
Bread, Napkin, nor diet to be had else; so heavy, so general the Proscription.

Yet after Evening Prayer he hoped one interval of content, by his Mothers
absence to go see his Sister. The news of his adventure frights her poor
child into Tears and shrikes; and though the visitant was by his servant
named a Gentleman only, yet she starts up, and cries out, Oh God, my Brother!
Oh me! my Mother! I am undone for ever! What shall I do? Not one among her
attendants old or young, could answer her but in Tears and shrikes as impotent.
The poor Duke attends; the messenger dissembles their postures till he was got
farther off. Ere long home, was the Queen come, and how full by this time she
was of his Reply to Mr. Mountague, a new advance of the sentence shows; a
Groom comes up at 8, or 9, at night to know what he should do with the Dukes
two Horses: the Comptroler was come with a charge to put them out instantly:
The Clown pleaded, To morrow would be time enough; Now 'twas too late: with a
great oath or two, the young Comptroller replies, Yes, and I shall be out of my
place ere morning.

The resolutions on Monday of the Duke were to give way to this Passion; and in
order to it since his verbal Pass was given him on Saturday night, Dee what
you please: only see not my face: he would not be so near his Mother (all the
while he was providing necessaries wanting for a Germany journey,) but retire
to Mr. Crofts his house a while, a little out of the way, whence he might beg a
grant to be admitted to take leave. The Queen hears of this also: checks
Crofts for now seeming willing to receive him, whom she has often commanded to
invite. The like penalty almost lay on him if he lent him his house: he tells
the Duke, and submits however to his pleasure. The Duke thanks him, but would
not displease her so much: and so resolves after Dinner, when the Queen of
France was to come, (and it would be uncomely for him to be in the house, and
not wait on her; as in his Mothers lodgings he might not) to go over the
water and visit my Lord H. but even in that there would be a danger to the good
Lord from London: yet considering there was great odds between his and his
Brothers presence, he adventured, though the deliberations made it somewhat
over late: but there grew on an occasion, that the next night he was to lie
there also, for there was no longer staying in the Palais royal

The Lord and his Lady cannot refuse (a double exile, for his Fathers and his
own Religion, and for his own crime loyalty) to admit such a Guest, while
he can provide for his Voyage, for which it was presumed he could find but two
Horses, and the relikes of his new-given 10 l. for the monthly privy purse.

We were last night in some apprehensions too of danger by reason of the
situation of the house, alone in the utmost Fauxbourgs, from either the zealots
welwillers to the horribly and notoriously disappointed; or from the disrellish
of the Courts that might happen. But all is well to day, saving that his abode
there is not yet so known, but that diverse of each French Religion think he
removed from the Palais to the Jesuits College: all things being there so
confidently ready long agone, and the desires of both Queens so concentrally
tending to that design, even since the peremptory commands of his Brother from
Coloigne triplicated to him, and seconded with diverse fince.

December, 5.
On Monday the Queen had not forgot her severe threat and interdict to the
Duke: yet having taken all the courses she could find in her own Sphere,
had it seems engaged the Queen of France to try once more her Authority with
him. But the expectation of her coming to the Palais was diversely interpreted,
some imagined it was to make the Dukes peace; some that she might retract his
resolution by fresh assaults; some to show him how little he must look for the
favor of their presence: but his Highness could not endure the uncouthenesse
of his confinement to his chamber, nor cared much to hazard the sight of the
Queen of France, he had been so fearfully assaulted of late.

But so it was, that so soon as she came, she sent her son the Duke of Anjou
to visit him, who returned with news he was not at home: The Queen of France
sent then his Governor to enquire where he was, and having heard, sent him
immediately over to the Lord H. to labor to bend him to the Queens resolution
for him, and the Jesuits College was vehemently pressed again. To the Kings
contrary command, the Marquess (Duke of Anjou his Governor) replied with the
greatest advantage of his own parts, that it belonged to the Queen to dispose
of her son since his Fathers Death entirely; he disputed whether he was in his
Brothers power, only for being his Sovereign: and the discourse growing now
somewhat publicker, and the Lords joining in with the Duke, the Marquess had
now his match; and the debating that ill favored nicety of Authority between
Queen Mother, and Brother King, was so agitated by the English, that the French
Gentleman, a man of huge parts indeed, was put out of hopes of prevayling in
his Errand. The Queen, in confidence of her Envoye, expects he should bring her
home entire news of the change of the young Prince his mind, and till almost 8.
she tarried for him there; but the report of the Discourse did soon satisfy
her, no alteration could be made in his Resolutions.

The next day therefore a Report is raised how uncivilly the Queen of France
her Message was received with affront, and the last step of alienation and
distance between the Queen and her Son came to the height: The great Palace of
Cardinal Richelieu is not big enough for these two great Hearts extracted from
Henry the 4.

Since his departure all things are better then we imagined, save that the
presumption they had of him heretofore is not yet worn away. It lasted to my
knowledge till Thursday, in so great a strength of Tumor, that one of the
French Ministers assured an Englishman that came to visit him, that the Duke
was for certain in the Jesuits College. The Duke had made a Resolution that
would have confuted the very Relikes of that mistake, by an intention to have
come every day to Prayers to us, but because that might perchance have
aggravated the heat, and looked like a fresh affront, it was advised to be
omitted.

We begin now, since I began writing, to be assured the Passion begins to
abate: The Queen they say, has condescended to give him leave to go with my
Lord of Ormond, and it is hoped may admit him to beg her blessing: which makes
my Letter somewhat the shorter: and I presume you will be content to go to the
burying of past four circumstances as soon as may be with the Vindication of
the Dukes sincere and heroike constancy.

FINIS.

