AN ELEGY ON THE Most Reverend Father in God WILLIAM LORD ARCHBISHOP OF
CANTERBVRY;

Attatched the 18. of December. 1640.

Beheaded the 10. of January 1644.

Printed, 1644.

AN ELEGY ON THE MOST REVEREND Father in God WILLIAM, Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, Attatched the 18. of December. 1640. Jan. 1644.
Most Reverend. Martyr.
THou, since thy thick Afflictions first begun,
Make Dioclesian's days all Calm, and Sun,
And when thy Tragic Annals are compiled,
Old Persecutions shall be Pity styled,
The Stake and Faggot, shall be Temperate names,
And Mercy wear the Character of Flames:
Men knew not then Thrift in the Martyrs breath,
Nor weaved their lives into a four years Death,
Few ancient Tyrants do our stories Tax,
That slew first by Delays, then by the Axe,
But these ( Tiberius like) alone do cry,
It Is to be Reconciled to let Thee Dye.
Observe we then a while, into what Maze,
Compass, and Circle, they contrive Delays,
What Turns, and wild Perplexities they chose,
Ere they can forge their slander, and Accuse:
The Sun has now brought his warm Chariot back,
And rode his Progress round the Zodiac,
When yet no Crime appears, when none can tell,
Where thy guilt sleeps, nor when 'twill break the shell,
Why is His shame deferred? what is it that bring's
Your Justice back, spoils Vengeance of her Wings?
Has mercy seaz'd you? will you rage no more?
Are Winds grown tame? have seas forgot to Roar?
No, a Wild fierceness has your minds possessed,
Which time and sins must cherish and digest:
You durst not now let His clear Blood be spilt,
You were not yet grown up to such a guilt,
You try if Age if seaventy years can Kill;
Then you have your Ends, and you are Harmless still,
But when this failed, you do your Paths enlarge,
But would not yet whole Innocence discharge;
You Will not be Devil All, you fain would prove
Good at fair distance, within some Remove,
"Virtue has sweets which are good Men's due gain,
"Which Vice would not Deserve, yet would Retain.
This was the Cause, why once it was your Care,
That Storms and Tempests in your sin might share,
You did engage the Waves, and strongly stood
To make the Water Guilty of His Blood,
Boats are dispatched in Have. and it is His doom,
Not to His charge, but to His shipwreck come;
Fond men, your cruel Project cannot do,
Tempests and storms must learn to Kill from you,
When this came short; He must Walk Pilgrimage,
No Coach not mule, that may Sustain His Age;
Must trace the City (now a Desert rude)
And combat salvage Beasts the multitude.
But when his Guardian Innocence, can fling
A we round about and save Him by that Ring.
When the Just cause can fright the Beast away,
And make the Tiger tremble at her Prey.
When neither Waves dare seize Him, nor the Rout,
The storm with Reason, nor the storm without:
Lost in these streights, when Plots have Vanquished bin,
And sin perplexed has no Relief, but sin.
Agents and Instruments now on you fall,
You must be Judges, People, Waves and All,
Yet 'cause the Rout will have't performed by you,
And long to see done what they dare not Do.
You pur the Crime to use, it swells your Heap,
Your sin's your Wealth, nor are you Guilty cheap,
You Husband All; there is no Appearance lost,
Nor comes He once to the Bar but at their cost;
A Constant Rate well Taxt, and Levied right,
And a Just value set upon each sight.
At last they find the Days by their own purse,
Less known from Him then what they do disburse:
But when it now strikes High for Him to appear,
And Chapmen see the Bargain is grown dear;
They Muster hands, and their hot suits enlarge,
Not to pursue the Man, but save the Charge.
Then least you loose their Custom, (a just fear)
Selling your sins and others Blood too dear.
You grant their suits, the Manner, and the Time.
And He must Dye for what no Law call's crime.
The Afflicted Martyrs, when their pains began,
Their Trajan had, or Dioclesian.
Their Tortures wear some Color, and Proceed,
Though from no guilt, yet 'cause they disagreed;
What League, what Friendship there? They could not join,
And fix the Ark and Dagon, in one Shrine.
Faith, combats Faith, and how agree can they,
That still go on, but still a several way?
Zeal, Martyr's Zeal, and Heate' against Heat Conspires,
As Theban Brothers fight, though in their fires.
Yet as two diffrent Stars unite their Beams,
And Rivers mingle Waves, and mix their Streams,
And though they challenge each a several Name,
Conspire, because their moisture is the same.
So Parties knit, though they be diverse known,
The men are many, but the Christians, one.
Trajan, no Trajan was to his own Heard,
And Tigers are not by the Tigers feared,
What strange excess then? what is that menstrous Power,
When flames do flames, and streams do streams devour?
Where the same faith, 'g^inst the same faith does knock,
And sheep, are wolves to sheep of the same flock?
Where Protestant the Protestant defies,
Where both Assent, yet one for Dissent dies?
Let those that doubt this, through his Actions Wade,
Where some must needs Convince, All may per swade;
Was He Apostate, who your Champion stood,
Bathed in His Ink before, as now in Blood.
He that unwindes the subtle Jesuit,
That Feels the Serpents Teeth, and is not Bit?
Unties the snake, finds each Mysterious knot,
And turns the Poison into Antidott.
Does Nicety, with Nicety undo?
And makes the Labyrinth the Labyrinth's clew?
That slight by sleight subdues, and clearly proves,
Truth has her Serpents too, as well as Doves?
Now, you that blast His Innocence, Survey,
And view the Triumphs of this Glorious day;
Could you (if that might be) if you should come,
To seal God's cause with your own Martyrdom,
Could all the Blood whose tides move in your veins,
(Which then perhaps were Blood, but now is stains,)
Yield it that Force and strength, which it has took
(Should we except His Blood) from this His Book,
Your Flame or Axe would less evince to Men,
Your Block and Stake would prop less then his Pen;
Is He Apostate, whom the Baits of Rome
Cannot seduce, though all her Glories come?
Whom all her specious Honors cannot hold,
Who Hates the snare although the Hook be Gold?
Who Prostituted Titles can despise,
And from despised Titles, greater Rise?
Whom Names cannot Amuse, but feats withal,
The Protestant above the Cardinal*
Who sure to His own soul, does scorn to find
A Crimson cap the Purchase of His mind?
"Who is not Great, may blame his Fates Offense,
"Who would not be, is Great in's Conscience.
Next these His Sweat and Care how to advance,
The Church but to Her Just inheritance,
How to gain back her Own yet none Beguile,
And make her Wealth her purchase, nor her spoil:
Then, shape Gods worship to a joint consent;
'Till when the seamlesse Coat must still be Rent:
Then, to Repair the shrines, as Breaches sprung,
Which we should hear, could we lend Paul's a Tongue.
Speak, speak! Great Monument! while thou yet art such,
And Rear Him 'bove their Scandalls, and their Touch;
Had He survived, thou might in Time Declare,
Vast things may comely be, and Greatest Fair.
And though thy Limbs spread high, and Bulk exceed,
Thou Would proved that Giants are no monstrous breed:
Then 'bove Extent, thy Luster would prevail,
And against Dimensions Feature turn the Scale;
But now, like Pyrrha's half adopted Birth,
Where the issue Part was Woman, Part was Earth,
Where Female some, and some to stone was Bent,
And the one half, was to others Monument,
Thou must imperfect lie, and learn to Groan,
Now for His Ruin, straight way for thine own:
But this and Thousand such Abortives, are,
By Bloody Rebels Ravished from His care,
But yet though some miscarried in the Womb,
And Deeds Still-Borne have hastened to their Tomb,
God (that Reward's him now) forbad his store,
Should all lie hid, and He but give in the Ore;
Many are Stamp't, and shaped, and do still shine,
Approved at Mint, a firm, and Perfect Coin.
Witness that Mart of Books that yonder stands,
Bestowed by Him, though by another Hands:
Those Attick Manuscripts, so rare a Piece,
They tell the Turk, he has not Conquered Greece.
Next these, a second Beauteous Heap is thrown,
Of Eastern Authors, which were all his own.
Who in so Various Languages appear,
Babell, could scarce be their Interpreter.
To These, we may that Fair built College bring,
Which proves that Learning's no such Rustic thing;
Whose structure well contrived does not Relate,
To Antic finenesse, but strong, lasting state:
Beauty well mix't with strength, that it complies,
Most with the Gazer's Use, much with his Eyes,
On Marble Columns thus the Arts have stood,
As wife Seths Pillars sav'd'em in the Flood.
But did He leave here Walls, and only Own,
A glorious Heap, and make us Rich in Stone?
Then had our Chanc'lour seemed to fail, and here
Much Honor due to the Artificer:
But this Our Prudent Patron long foresaw,
When he Refined rude Statutes into Law;
Our Arts, and Manners to his Building falls,
And He erects the Men, as well as Walls:
"Thus Solons Laws his Athens did Renown,
"And turned that throng of Buildings to a Town.
Yet neither Law nor Statute, can be known
So strict, as to Himself, He made His Own,
Which in His Actions Inventory Lies,
Which Hell or Prinne can never Scandalize:
Where every Act His Rigid eye surveyes,
And Night is Bar, and Judge to all His Days;
Where all His secret Thoughts He does comprize,
And every Dream is summond to' an Assize*
Where He Arraignes each Circumstance of Care,
Which never Parts dismissed without a Prayer,
See! how He sift's and searches every part,
And Ransackes All the closters of His heart;
He puts the boures upon the Rack and Wheel,
And all His minutes must confess or Feel:
If they reveal One Act which forth did come.
When Humane Frailty crept into the Leome,
If one Thread stain, or fully, break or saint,
So that the Man does interrupt the Saint,
He hunts it to it is Death nor quitts his fears,
Till't be Embalmed in Prayers; or drowned in Tears.
The Sun in all his journeys nere did see,
One more devout, not one more strict then He.
Since His Religion then is Unmixed, and Fine;
And Works do warrant Faith, as Ore the Mine:
What can His Crime be now? Now you must say,
The Kingdoms Laws subverted in His way;
See! no such crime does over His Conscience grow,
(Without which Witness nere can make it so)
A clear Transparent White, bedecks His Mind,
Where naught but Innocence; can shelter find,
Witness that Breath which did your stain and Blot
Wipe freely out, (though Heaven I fear will not)
Witness that Calm and Quiet, in His Breast,
Prologue and Preface to His Place of Rest;
When with the World He could undaunted Part,
And see in Death nor Meagre Looks, nor Dart:
When to the Fatal Block His Gray Age goes,
With the same Ease, as when He took Repose.
"He like old Enoch to His Bliss is Gone,
"'It Is not His Death, but His Translation.
FINIS.

