An Extract out of Several LIBELLS.
Remarques upon Sir W. Smiths Speech at Hicks-Hall.
1. ALL Considering People will now see that Conventiclers are not Baldwin.
Punished and Ruined for Holding Conventicles, but for being zealous for the
Protestant Religion, and Government by Advice of Parliament against Popery, and
Clandestine Arbitrary Counsels. Postscript.

The Third Part of the No Protestant Plot.
2. The Best and Wisest of the Kings Subjects are filled with Jelousies Baldwin*
that it is through a Concert with the French Monarchy, that Parliaments are
either Called, Prorogued, or Dissolved, etc. Page 21. Line. 1.

3. Such is is the Papists Influence upon Public Ministers, and so great
Baldwin.
is their Power in all our Counsels, that we can neither obtain the having the
Principal Conspirators brought to Legal Trial, nor procure any Effectual
Provision toward the Saving our selves, and securing our Religion, from their
Cruelty and Rage, and Deinceps. Page 25. Line 18.

4. Macnamarra told Smith that He had been with Sir L. J. who had given Baldwin.
him a Long Lesson, which nevertheless he had learned, though it was very long.
To that height of Impudence and Villainy was this Varlet arrived, through the
Encouragement, and Protection, which he received from Some Great Persons, whom
it would have better become to have Employed their Authority and Power
according to the Rule of Justice, and Honor. P. 96. 97.

5. That called Treason in the Earl of Argyle, which the Common Reason Baldwin.
of Mankind, and all the Law of the World Justifies. P. 15. Line 12.

Rights of the Kingdom.
6. Let us Discuss it by Law and Reason, what is our Legal Fealty? how Jo.
Kidgell and Ri. Baldwin.
made? how Limited? how Kept, or how DISSOLVED, P. 11.

7. Allegiance was ad Legem; to the Laws, the Kingdom, and the Kingdoms Kidgell
and Baldwin.
Good or Profit, together with the King, P. 18.

8. [If an English King was Elective by the Common Law, the Kingdom Kidgell and
Baldwin.
might Prescribe against Late Statutes. P. 25.] And then he says that the King
was Elective by the Common Law, referring to Huberts Speech at the Coronation
of King John.

9. Which seems most Rightly to State the Nature of Succession, as it Kidgell
and Baldwin.
was in This Kingdom. So that All did Amount but to this, that if a King had
such Children, so Qualified, and so Educated that they were above others in
Virtue, Wisdom and True Worth; (or at least Caeteris Pares) they were the most
likely Candidates for the Crown. P. 75.

The Ignoramus-Justices. Being an Answer to the Order of Sessions at Hicks-Hall.
10- Some Directions to the Officers that may be Threatened or Persuaded
Janeway.
to Act by such Unwarrantable Orders, from such IGNORAMUS-JUSTICES. Title Page.

Reflections.
Tyrranny, and Popery, Number. [1] Confederacy with France, [2] Popish Ministers
and Counsels, [3] Subornation in the Kings Ministers, [4] Argyle Justified,
[5] Our Allegiance may be Dissolved. [6] Allegiance to the Kingdom, [7] If the
Kingdom was Elective by the Common Law it continues so, [8] He Pronounces that
so it was, and Concludes that so it is. [9] The Middlesex Bench called
IGNORAMUS-JUSTICES. [10]


