A LETTER From a Person of Honor in FRANCE, concerning The late Transactions
in England, in Reference to the Rights of the People in Electing of
Parliaments. And also reasons the Case, answering some Objections made against
the late KING, And his POSTERITY.
SIR, PARIS, February 1659.
I Have received from the hands of Monsieur Grammont yours of the 11. and 13th.
instant, and cannot find that cause of so great rejoicing as both express: for
all does but amount to filling up the House, and by their Qualifications,
Elections shall be so ordered, that it will be nothing more then a Free
Parliament, which consists in electing, voting and fitting (as formerly) at
the pleasure of the Sword. If the old continue, then those worthy Gentlemen
which are excluded, ought to take their places: If a new one be called, then
all parties as Subjects equally concerned without Restriction or
Qualifications, (as they call it) ought to be capable of Election; but if their
malice be so rooted against the Cavaleer, or Kings party (who have as much
reason to wish and act the good of those nations as any others) that they must
not be admitted: Then it is but reason and justice, that those that have
purchased great estates, and enjoy offices military and civil, should be so
too. For they are the only people that keep up these distractions for their own
benefit.

If Loosers (as the Proverb is) may not have leave to speak; it is not fit
Gainers should, whose Interest now denies Liberty to those Sufferers, and is
but particular to the grand general one. And shall the Royal party always
loose a national Right, who have paid a compounded price of miseries for their
Estates, which did surely give them a like Freedom as before? Otherwise what
signifies their concernments to the public in any thing? And how they can make
them more then Equals in the payment of Taxes and Pressures, and deny them
liberty in this, is altogether unreasonable, in that it destroys them their
Birthright, and in every respect lessens the Liberties of the Subject so much
pretended or contended for. So that unless this be allowed, that party is still
liable (as not having the benefit of the Laws) to the thraldom and lash of
every Innovator and Power whatsoever; witness their Decimation by the late
Tyrant, who renewed their sorrows at his pleasure. And whereas some Pamphlets
would persuade a belief, that England will never endure its primitive practice
or worship in Religion; and that Kingly Government, by reason of present
Interests must needs be extinguished; For a sufficient Answer, it will be worth
our time to reflect upon those Interests. And what has followed thereupon
since the Interruption of that Parliament (famous for theit Vote in order to a
peace with the late King) Anno, 1648. but confusion in great measure,
occasioned by the disobedience of the then Army Officers, animated thereunto by
some Members whose Interest is thus declared for? Therefore to urge any thing
which is apparently destructive to a known and solid experimental Welfare in
Estates and Kingdoms, cannot be lasting, safe or rational. Neither so long as
Armies guard, and force Parliamentary Counsels (to comply with their rude and
indigested Models, to uphold corrupt Interests, which has cost the people so
many millions contesting against, and for their lawful King) no foundation can
possibly be laid but what is arbitrary and perfectly destructive to the whole.
For if the wisdom of the Rulers be thus obstructed, all other Essays shall for
ever be fruitless; and this I think may without error pass as a Doom upon
those Kingdoms; and fondly to conclude from their confused Notions and
circumstances that a pretended Commonwealth of 8. or 10. years troublesome
growth, is or can be better then a Monarchy of above a thousand years
continuance that comparatively imposed no grievances, is a weakness to believe.
Therefore, you Pharisees, if this shall not convince, observe the Order,
Government and Rule of Heaven and Earth, of God in the Trinity, of Nature, and
since the Creation, of Families, of every particular Country and people, nay
the beasts of the field: And then tell me, if you can, if this does not proclaim
Monarchical Government to be according to the Will of God and our Savior?
There can be no Competitors in dominion in one and the same thing, without
enraging the hearts of men; therefore unsafe is that Nation who has such
Rivals. A Commonwealth is consistent with, and most splendid under Regal
Government, insomuch as it unites all to that center.

Now if this be not duly considered, I have one step farther to stifle their
Objections and fatal interest so much pleaded for, if they will stand to that
purity of Spirit which they pretend, viz. The solemn Leagues and Covenants made
by themselves, in which they swore Allegiance, forces this as a duty to the
person of the King, and his Posterity; and yet the one by violence is cut off,
and the other an exile exposed to the mercy of strangers, hazarding both soul
and body: In sum, Restitution is one great mark of the people of God: And so
long as the gain thus cleaves to their fingers, Repentance is not in their
hearts.

Then, is it not great folly to countenance such interests as these which has
cost that Nation more in 10. years to defend, then would maintain the other in
honor almost a thousand years, had he nothing of right belonging unto him. And
how they can expect a settlement by (shadows of Authority) men of corrupt
principles laden with its spoils, (by which they continue the force put upon
their Fellow members by the violence of Armies) no man has yet discovered.
Unless (with the late tyranical Usurper Oliver Cromwell) we should look upon
Perjury and Disobedience as no sin, we cannot tolerate Armies (which are but
servants) to be Lawgivers, or impose them upon the Rulers; from whence I hope,
that victorious General consulting with his Army, the expectations of the
world, will conclude, that bare suppositions against a King, is no solid
Argument for a Commonwealth as yet unborn: Hence therefore let England sing
out the praises of God for their lawful King, who with his Royal Father prayed
for, and loved them in the days of their extremity.

Farewell, I am Your affectionate friend, S. E.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pool, 1659.


