AN EYE SALVE FOR THE CITY OF LONDON: Discovering unto them the great
Engagement that lies upon them in point of Duty and Interest, to join speedily
with the Kingdom for the restoring of His Majesty, and the re-setling of the
lawful Government and Peace of this Nation.

By a Lover of Peace and Truth.

PROVE. 24.21. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change. Printed in the year, 1648.

A short Advertisement to the Common Counsel of the City, and to all other
Citizens, concerning the Contents of this Book.
Gentlemen and Fellow Subjects,
IT was a wise saying of a wise man, Prove. 27.6. Faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful. And truly I am afraid you
have had many such kisses, and some of them, too like that of Judas, from the
mouths of pretended Disciples, and Apostles as it were, who have soothed you
up in your sins, and sought by fair words and deceitful colors, to dawbe
over your flawes with untempered mortar: not to cure them, but to cover them,
and to make sure your ruin. I am sorry to think that this has been the
business of some Pulpits now so lately amongst you, when the paint of Religion
and Piety that has been drawn over the horrid mischief you wot on, is grown
so fading and withered, and the ugly wickedness of the strumpet of Sedition is
so visible to the whole Kingdom, and she forsaken and hated of so many that
formerly doted upon her sophisticate beauty, that yet they should be so
impudent, and go about to make so clear a merchandise of your souls unto
your faces, as to persuade you still to entertain such a loathsome and hateful
-- in your bosoms. I shall say no more to them at this time, but as Michael
did once unto Satan, The Lord rebuke them; Not unto you concerning them, but
to advise you, that you will not so far betray your selves to those that walk
in the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward,
having received, as you may too probably suspect, the hire of your destruction,
as to let them bewitch you into an incurable condition.

As for me, I come to you with sincere affections, both to your own and the
Kingdoms good. And though you may perceive me to deal plainly with you, yet I
assure you I mean nothing but benefit unto you. If my pen have the sharpness
of a lance in some things, yet you will find my Ink to have Balsome in it in
other things. My searching is to make way for healing. Let me entreat you not
to be impatient of the one, and I hope you will find much comfort in the other.
Genus quoddam Martyrii est non ignobile, says Saint Augustine, reprehendentem
aequanimiter far. It is a noble kind of Martyrdom to endure the stroke of
Reproof with a patient mind.

Be pleased therefore to read it through without prejudice, and I doubt not
but you may find Cordials at last for every irksome purgative in the
beginning. Let me not become your enemy because I tell you the truth. I will
say no more for my Apology then what Quintius the Consul said once unto the
Romans in a case not in all things unlike unto this wherein I have to do with
you. The Romans it seems were then in a slothful and stupid condition, and
he does not spare like an honest man to tell them of it, that he may rouse them
from it. Sedemus desides domi, says he, mulierum ritu inter nos altercantes,
praesenti pace laeti, nec cernentes ex otio illo brevi multiplex Bellum
rediturum. We sit lazily at home, like women holding debate with one another.
We please our selves with our present peace, not foreseeing how many wars will
shortly rise up out of that sloth. And as he draws to a conclusion with them,
so give me leave to make my entrance with you: His ego gratiora dictu alia esse
scio: sed me vera pro gratis loqui, etsi meum ingenium non moveret, necessitas
tamen cogit; vellem equidem vobis placere Quirites, sed multo malo vos salvos
esse: qualicunque, erga me animo futuri estis. I shall English it thus: I know
well that other language might be more acceptable unto you then that which I am
now to deliver: But although mine own disposition did not admonish me, yet
very necessity does exact it of me, rather to speak things true then
acceptable. I would most gladly please you (Grave Senators, and Citizens) But
I much more desire your safety and preservation, however you shall be affected
toward me. And since there are so many that are plotting both within you and
about you, to engage you to expose your selves unto ruin, that you may serve
the turns of their sins and wicked interests. Be not offended at one
plaine-dealing friend, that desires to move you unto your own preservation.

To the City of LONDON.
ARe you not ashamed to see the spirit of Courage and Loyalty, moving so
cheerfully in the Country round about you, for the restoring of His Sacred
Majesty, and the re-settlement of the Peace and Government of this Kingdom, and
you to sit still and say nothing, nor put to the least of your fingers to set
it forward? Were you so early and so hasty to be a wretched example unto
others, in kindling the flames of Sedition and Confusion in this Nation, to
satisfy the lust of your pride and rebellious hearts; and will no exactions of
Conscience stir you up? nor no examples provoke you, to bring so much as a
bucket to the quenching of them? Have you no regard of the miseries and
oppressions of your pious and gracious King, trampled upon by base and unworthy
vassals, with more then Turkish and Heathenish cruelty? Suffering so many
barbarous injuries and persecutions in his Crown, in his Honor, in his
Liberty, in his Revenue, in his Queen, in his Children, in his Servants, in his
very soul, being not so much as allowed a Chaplain to assist him in Religion,
no regard of the sad and bleeding condition of this Church and Nation, ready to
be embroyled again in blood and ruin, and to become a prey unto foreign
Nations? no sense of the heavy Calamities that hang over your City, which is
like to be made the prize of our ensuing contentions? Do you not yet see that
there is no way probable upon earth, no course allowable or approveable from
heaven, to repair those ruins which are already broken in upon us, or to
disperse those other clouds that threaten us round about, but our returning
unto God, and restoring of his Anointed? Are the eyes of the whole Kingdom
opened, and are you only incurably blind? Are the Country people sensible of
their engagements, and can your City be so stupid as to think themselves less
obliged than the rest? Have not your sins as well as theirs, been the sad
Factors of our National miseries? Were there no fountains in this City that
fed the flood of these public calamities, that have so overwhelmed the King
and people? Was it not a seditious and seduced party in this City, that by
their tumults and mis-guided zeal first violated the liberty and freedom of
the Parliament, by threatening, and over-awing the loyal and faithful members
thereof? Was it not the undutifull carriage of some unruly people there unto
His Majesty, siding against Him with the forgers of Confusion, that caused Him
to withdraw Himself for the safety and preservation of His Person, to avoid
the fury of their popular tempests?

Was there nothing of the womb and of the nurcery here of this accursed and
monstrous rebellion? had it no supply from the strength and riches of this
City? Was it not the Money, and the Plate, and the Thimbles, and the Bodkins,
and the Magazines, and the Arms, and the Contributions, and the Forces of this
City as well as others, that has continually supported and kept in motion that
ungodly design that has brought such desolation upon these three Kingdoms?
were there no treasuries emptyed here, to purchase the blood and ruin of this
Nation, and turn this Paradise into an Aceldama? Have there none of your
plumes been carried to the feathering that neast, where the Cockatrices have
laid and hatched up their poisonous Issues that have been so venomous and
deadly in the destruction of our People? Have none of those Seeds of Schism
and Faction, of Heresies and Blasphemies sprung up out of your field, that have
since so overspread the face of this wasted Church of England? Can you say,
you are more free then all others, from those oppressions and persecutions, and
injustices and destructions, that have seized upon the King and People, to the
wasting of so many Families, the utterundoing of so many thousands of poor
people? And is all this nothing to be Answered for? Is there no restitution due
from you, for so many injuries you have caused? were you with the first in the
mischief? and can you hope that it will content either God or Man, that you
should be the last in the remedy? Were you so active, so busy, so zealous, so
bountiful in the work of division, and can you not so much as stir a foot
for peace, for the restoring of your wronged and abused KING, and for the
recovery of your wasted and distressed Country: mistake me not. I lay not this
charge upon your whole City, I doubt not but there have been all this while,
and are still many loyal hearts that have groaned and sighed to see the growth
of these mischiefs. Neither yet would I be so understood, as if I intended to
imbitter the hearts of any, against all those that have been heretofore engaged
in unlawful actions; we shall easily admit the fault to have been more in your
Leaders, and False-teachers, than in you: we believe you have been seduced and
abused, and that your intentions were not half so bad as the actions have
proved: we presume many of you were cheated with pretenses and colors of
making the King Glorious, and reforming the Church and State. Though no such
aims had they been never so sincere in those that imposed upon you, could have
justified the actions which they were made use of to countenance, which being
in themselves evil, can be made good by no circumstances. But now that you see
the plain meaning of this wicked and accursed Rebellion, and that God himself
has begun to show himself against it: Be not I beseech you still bewitched to
side with it. Are you so fast entangled in the snare of Satan, that you cannot
so much as stir to get out of it? consider the gracious dealings of God with
you, how he has provoked you to emulation by the loyalty of others. The good
people of Surrey (your near neighbors) are sensible of their Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, and that no power on earth can absolve them from
them: have you not taken them as well as they? Did not your -- Mayor take them
at his Installation? Have not all the Officers of your City taken them at their
entrance upon their Offices? are they not the tenure of your Authority and of
your honor, of your Charter and Freedom, if you have any of these left? Are
these dreadful bonds become mere formalities and ceremonies with you? or what
Pope have you to absolve you of them? But perhaps you have ill memories since
you have drunk of that Lethe of your Covenant; it seems you have forgotten
those sacred Oaths. But give me leave to remember you a little, and to set the
great obligation of them before your eyes, that you may examine your actions,
and know your duties by them.

The Oath of Supremacy is this:

I A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience that the KING'S
Highness is the only supreme Governor in this Realm, and of all other His
Majesty's Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual and
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal: and if he be the only supreme
Governor, there is none upon earth either above Him to correct or limit him,
to regulate, or interrupt His Power and Authority, or equal to Him to
encounter it or justle with Him in it, or that can require any duty of
subjection from you but only in order to and subordination under His power, and
with reservation and maintenance of, and without any prejudice to that
obedience and subjection that we owe unto Him immediately under God, who only
is higher than the highest, and above the supreme upon earth, whoever they be
whether Houses or Armies, you are sworn to acknowledge His superiority above
them. It follows, and that no foreign Prince, Person or Prelate, State or
Potentate, has, or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm:
and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions,
powers, superiorities, and authorities, granted or belonging to the KING'S
Highness, His Heirs and lawful Successors.

The first clause of this Oath is in general terms, and does clearly exclude
all superiority or equality of power either in Parliaments or people, either
domestique or foreign, to the power and authority of the King, and that in all
causes both Ecclesiastical and Civil. This part does particularly exclude the
power of the Pope, or foreign Princes, in Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
matters. If any shall ask why intestine, as well as foreign power is not
mentioned in this clause? I answer, first, it is abundantly provided for in the
former part of the Oath, and Tautologyes become not an Oath, which ought to
consist as of clearness, for the judgments, so of brevity, for the memories of
those that take it.

Secondly, that the reason hereof might be something like that which was
auntiently given for the omission of the express provision against Paricides:
that it was an offense so great that it was supposed that none would be so
wicked to commit it, so it may seem to be the candor and charity of this law
not to seem to admit of any such thing as possible in this Commonwealth. That
any domestique members of this body should forget so clear and so evident a
duty, or fall into so high and so heinous a sin as to violate the power and
authority of their own King.

But yet if any thing be wanting here, it is supplied in the last clause, which
is general also, and runs thus, and I do promise that from hence forth I
shall bear faith and true allegiance to the KING'S Highness, His Heirs and
lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all jurisdictions,
privileges, preeminences and authorities, granted or belonging to the KING'S
Highness, His Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the imperial
Crown of this Realm.

Where note, first, that you have bound your selves to keep faith and true
allegiance to His Majesty, His Heirs and lawful Successors, that is, That you
will faithfully perform your duties of allegiance, obedience and subjection
unto Him, and them after Him.

Secondly, that you will to your power, that is, as much as you shall be able
by strength, counsel, personal service, intelligence, supply by your estates,
or otherwise, Defend (first) all the Jurisdictions belonging to the King and
His Crown; such is the Jurisdiction of the supreme Government in this and all
other His Kingdoms and Dominions, with all the Branches thereof. The generality
and fullness whereof is set down in the Statute of the 24 of Hen. 8. chapter 12.
where this Realm of England is declared to be an Empire governed by one
supreme head and King, and the Body politic, compact of all sorts and degrees
of people, said to be bounden, and to owe and bear, next to God, a natural
and humble obedience: and sure the Houses of Parliament in the most perfect and
uncorrupted constitution thereof are yet no Gods, and therefore can challenge
nothing of the subject before, or in prejudice of, or in competition with the
King; and the King is there said to be institute and furnished by the goodness
and sufferance of Almighty God, with plenary, whole, and entire power,
pre-eminence, authority, prerogative, and jurisdiction to render and yield
justice, and final determination to all manner of folk resi^^^s, or subjects
within this Realm, etc.

The several branches of this Jurisdiction of His, you may see declared in the
several Laws of this Kingdom, See Parliament Writs. 1 K. Iam, c. 1.
as the power to Call, prorogue, and dissolve Parliaments; of making Laws by
His royal and free Assent, 25 H. 8.19.
and his Negative voice; of Calling Convocations or Assemblies of the Clergy;
of Pardoning Treasons, Murders, Manslaughters, 27 H. 8.24.
Felonies, etc. of making Justices in Air, Justices of Assize, Ibid.
Justices of Peace, and Justices of Gaole-delivery, by Letters Pattents under
the Kings Great Seal, in his Name and by authority of the King's Highness,
and His Heirs Kings of this Realm, in all places of His Dominions, at their
pleasure and wills. The power of raising Armies, 7 Edw. 1.11 H. 7.18 and 19 H.
7.1. f. 42. Stat. at large. 4 and 5 P. and M. cap. 3.
and making War, and concluding Peace; granting Commissions to Commanders and
Officers, etc. The power of all Cities, Castles, Forts, etc. within His
Dominions.

Secondly, You have sworn, that you will defend all His Privileges,
preheminences and authorities.

Such is sure the Liberty of His Person, that He ought not to be made a
Prisoner by His Subjects.

Such is His privilege, to come when He pleases and to sit in Parliament.

Such is His exemption from all Judicial proceeding against His Person or
Authority. See Judge Ienk. p. 11.


The power to dispose of His own Estate.

To choose His own Counselors and Servants.

The Conferring of the great Offices of the Kingdom.

The making and disposing of the Great Seal, See Judge Ienk. page 45. and 25
Ed. 3.
etc.

And all these you have promised to assist and defend to your power, binding
your selves with that dreadful and sacred bond, So help you God, and the
Contents of the Gospel; so that your wilful failing herein is a renouncing of
Gods help by the Gospel, and so of the salvation of your souls.

And now Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he pluck you away, and
there be none to deliver you. Assure your selves this Oath of yours is upon
Record in the Court of heaven, and will one day be produced, and you called to
a reckoning for it. Consider how you have behaved your selves in order to this
sacred Oath, and the Contents thereof, for these seven years last past, and
repent, oh repent, London.

Consider what this Oath requires of you now. Do you not clearly see, that
all the Jurisdictions and Privileges, and Preheminencies and Authorities of
His Majesty are invaded, and spoiled by the insolency of wicked and ungodly
Rebels? You have sworn and engaged your souls to defend and assist them to
your power, and you have pawned your salvation for it; how do you perform
this when you see His Crown ravished from his head? His Sword wrested out of
His hand? Himself robbed not only of all His Kingly Power, but of the liberty
and comfort that belongs unto the meanest Subject? of the liberty of His
Person? and the liberty of His Conscience? and you sit still, and will not so
much as stir in His defense and assistance? Oh how will this be answered at
the day of Judgment? Do not say you have not power to do it; if you would
make use of that power that you have, by Gods blessing and the assistance of
the whole Kingdom, (which is even ready to join with you, and so many whereof
have begun before you to your shame) you may quickly make an end of the
business, and prevent the shedding of much blood, and the ruin and
destruction of your selves and this whole Nation.

By thus doing, you may satisfy the duty of your Oaths and of your
Consciences, and make some recompense unto your Sovereign and your Country,
for those great injuries and mischiefs that they have suffered by the means of
your City-disturbers. They expect this restitution from you, without which, how
can you ever look that your sins should be forgiven you?

Do not bring an incurable odium from your King and Country upon your selves;
it may have heavy consequences hereafter: At least do not heap Gods wrath
upon your selves, by continuing in perjurious leagues with barefaced
impieties. Read the 17. Chapter of Ezekiel, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and
see what a severe revenger God is of perjury, of perjury unto Kings; mediate
seriously upon that question of God, it is a threatening question, v. 11. Shall
he escape (says God) that does such things? or shall he break the Covenant
and be delivered? he means not your National Covenant, but the Covenant of
fidelity made unto a King; it amounts to thus much, and will come home to you,
if you take not heed. They shall not escape that do such things, if they
repent not, if they continue in them. Read your Oath of Allegiance, I cannot
stand now to set the whole before you here, much less to enlarge upon it; only
let me mind you of that one clause in it, I will bear true faith and allegiance
to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and Him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which
shall be made against His or THEIR PERSONS, (note that) their Crown and
Dignity, etc. Oh, this has been bravely kept by some, let no man's false
glosses deceive you, equivocations and evasions, and secret reservations are
all excluded by the very express words of the Oath.

In truth I am loath to remember you of the Covenant, I wish it may be
forgotten to all purposes, but repentance, lest it prove a perpetual Seminary
of blood and ruin to these Nations. I am sure it cannot abolish the force of
your oaths formerly taken, nor make void any duty that was due from you to His
Majesty. But where it joins with your former oaths and duties, it may
aggravate both your sin and punishment, if you perform them not. And did you
not there Covenant to maintain the Kings Person and Honor?

I am not ignorant of that wicked loope-hole that was left you there to take
aim at his destruction, through that deceitful mound that was pretended to be
made for His preservation. But let me tell you, that deceitful Collusions in
the framing or taking of Oaths, will prove no abatements to our duties, nor to
our condemnation in the neglect of them. Those are your sins, and will not be
your excuses.

If there be any amongst you that have not taken any of these either Oaths or
Covenant, yet the general duty that they owe to God and his Ordinance, is
sufficient engagement to bind us to the King, as to obey him, and submit unto
him, not to resist him, and that under pain of judgment or damnation, so to
preserve Him, to defend Him, to relieve Him and succor Him, to vindicate Him
from the vile oppression of Traitors and Rebels: And if you do it not, here I
charge you with all the farther mischiefs that may befall His Sacred Person,
and with all the blood and ruin, and destruction and desolation that shall
succeed in this Church and State, and shall break in upon us for want of your
concurrence: and remember that you have been admonished. Read the 26. Chapter
of the first Book of Samuel, at the 16. verse and see what comfortable news
David there tells Abner and the people for neglecting the defense of the
Anointed of the Lord, though a wicked and ungodly tyrant: and see what our
Savior says unto Pilate, Joh. 18.36. and consider how you will answer unto
God for your disorderly carriages to your pious and gracious Sovereign. It was
a question that the hard-hearted Jews could not answer, that Pilate asked
them, Joh. 19.15. Shall I crucify your King? They were not grown so impudent
in wickedness, as openly to admit of so great an impiety, and therefore they
evade it, by denying him to be their King, crying out, We have no King but
Caesar: and when in the title of his Cross they saw written, JESUS OF NAZARETH
KING OF THE JEWS. They seem to look upon it as their shame and dishonor, as a
charge of impiety and horrid treason upon them, that he should suffer so much
disgrace and misery though but under the name and title of their King, and
therefore the chief Priests of the Jews make it their request unto Pilate that
their honor might not be crucified thereby upon the Cross of Christ: Write
not (say they) the King of the Jews, but that he said I am King of the Jews.
But the City of London can be content to see their King trampled on and
oppressed, and imprisoned, and abused, and trodden under foot by those whom
they have hired, and to give countenance and encouragement, and protection to
those that do it.

But do we not hear some (I hope not many of you) ready to cry out now, in
opposition to all this, if we forsake the Devil, the Devil will forsake us,
and then what shall we do? we have gone so far in wickedness against God,
and committed such intolerable insolences against our King, and given such
provocations to the loyal and honest Party, that we can scarce hope for the
mercy of the first, or pardon of the second, or of reconciliation to the third.
This was, indeed it may seem, in part the case of Judah, 2 Samuel 19.11. They are
noted to have been the highest Actors in the Rebellion with Absalom, and
therefore they were slow in entertaining the thoughts of bringing the King
back, when all the people of the land besides were earnest in the business:
and is not this the very case upon the matter of London at this time? of such a
clammy and engaging nature is this kind of rebellous wickedness, that when men
are gotten into this net of the Devil, it is too hard a matter to get out
again. The old trick of Satan, first to engage men in wickedness by
presumption, and then to hold them in it by despair. Such difference is there
between the logic and argumentations of the flesh and spirit; the flesh
teaches men to conclude from wickedness to wickedness. I have committed so
much sin, that there is no hope of mercy; that it is to no purpose to return.
We have done so many and so great injuries to our Sovereign, that there is no
way for us but to commit greater, because there is no likelihood that He should
pardon us. But grace and the spirit argues thus, We have been the first and
most active in Rebellion and wickedness, in chasing away the King, and in
causing the ruin of Him and of the Kingdom, therefore we will be first and
most active in repentance, the first and most active in making amends for our
miscarriages. This former is observed to have been the case of Judah there:
Viros Judae (says one) Domi continebat conscientia sceleris and perfidiae, qua
prae reliquis tribubus pecearant, and forte primi rebellionis Absalomi fautores
ac sequaces fuerant. Vt qui perdito Juveni propius frequentiusque asseverant,
the men of Judah were kept at home by the conscience of their wickedness and
perfidiousnesse, wherein they had offended more than the rest of the Tribes, as
having been perhaps the prime favorers and followers of the rebellion of
Absalom, and having had more near and frequent commerce and intimacy with that
desperate young man; Look, look into this glass of Judah, and see thine own
face London; examine your consciences and deal sincerely with your selves, are
not the secrets of some of your hearts here laid open unto you? He that deals
plainly with you loves you best. Oh, the wonderful searching power of the word
of God! how it lays open the treacheries of men's hearts, that falling down on
their faces they may worship God? Is not this your very case? the men of
Israel, that were not so deeply engaged in the rebellion, they are forward and
ready to bring back their King, their eyes are opened by the strange judgment
upon Absalom. They begin to acknowledge now that they were seduced and abused
by his glosing promises, and false entertaiments. They remember now the
goodness of David, and the manifold benefits that they received by his
Government, and they were at strife throughout all the Tribes of Israel,
saying, the King saved us out of the hand of our enemies, and he delivered us
out of the hand of the Philistims, and now he is fled out of the land for
Absalom, and Absalom, whom we anointed over us (not God, but we) is dead in
Battle; now therefore, why speak you not a word of bringing the King back? and
is not this now in the hearts of all the people of the Land upon the matter at
this time? but Judah sits still, being bound like some of you in the fetters of
their evil conscience and high impieties. But what does the good King? his
heart yerneth after Judah, all their wickedness could not extinguish his love
unto them, and herein he was a man after Gods own heart. He sends to Zadok and
to Abiathar the Priests, saying, speak unto the Elders of Judah, saying, Why
are ye the last to bring the King to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel
is come to the King, even to his house. Ye are my Brethren, ye are my bones and
my flesh; wherefore then are ye the last to bring the King back? He takes this
unkindly and no doubt the King will take it unkindly: But yet Judah is
persuaded, for so it follows, he bowed the hearts of all the men of Judah,
even as the heart of one man; so that they sent this word unto the King, Return
thou and all thy Servants: so the King returned and came to Jordan, and Judah
came to Gilgal, to go to meet the King, to conduct him to Jordan. They get the
honor of it at last from all the men of Israel; oh, let your hearts be bowed
also, let this blessed example work upon you, let one that heartily wishes
your good, that longs for your preservation prevail with you. Come, though I
have been perhaps a little irksome in searching your wounds, yet I have balsome
for you if you will be healed. You have highly offended God in violating that
Authority that he has set over you. Yet despair not, he is ready to forgive,
if you be but half so ready to seek it at his hands. Humble your selves, and
return, and you cannot fail of mercy. It is his glory to pass by great
iniquities.

You have committed great offenses against a gracious King, this aggravates
your sins, but withal, it is an encouragement to your conversion, He is a
gracious King: He that is so glorious in patience under obdurate Rebels, cannot
but be abundant in meekness to relenting Offenders; and if he had the liberty
as David had, doubt not, but he would send to you as David did unto Judah.
Imagine you heard him expressing himself unto you out of the bowels of those
tender compassions that are in him. Ye are my Subjects; ye are my children, ye
are my bone and my flesh, so dear and precious are ye unto me. I long for your
good, I am ready to pardon all. I pity your errors, you have been abused as
well as I. My arms are open to receive you, let not your arms be engaged
against me. I am willing to forget all former miscarriages, let God be
glorified in all; only persist not now, now you see how both I and you have
been wronged. I never meant you ill, your jealousies were your oppressors, not
I; why then are ye the last to bring back the King?

Fear not but that you may more oblige him by your return unto him, if you
do it speedily, and do it heartily, then ever you dis-obliged him by your
departure from him. You have been the occasion of many oppressions, and of
great ruins to the Loyal people, and to your Country; but you may now (if you
please) make amends for all, and our Christianity engages us to accept it from
you.

Be not jealous of your friends, let not vain fears affright you from your
share in so glorious a work, as is the restoring of your King and Country, the
re-establishing of Religion, and Peace in this Church and Nation.

Do that which God requires, and leave consequences to him; Nourish those
Serpents no longer in your bosoms, that have returned so many Stings for the
warmth you have afforded them: when they are in need of your help, then they
fawn upon you; but when they can but think themselves able to subsist without
you, or to maintain themselves against you, then they scorn you, and oppress
you, and affront you, and destroy you; take heed of those friends that are held
unto you only by the chains of their own necessities; when they are made
strong enough by you, to break those chains, they are like enough to find
other chains to hamper you withal.

Consider well what it is that makes them fly unto you now; is it not to hide
themselves under your gowns, from the present storm that they know not how
otherwise to avoid? let them not buy their safety, by engaging you unto ruin.

Remember how you have been paid for your former services; whilst they had
their dependence upon you, then you were their White Boys, their Darlings,
their Patrons; then you had the Militia, the Tower, and all: But when they
thought themselves strong enough without you, to deal with you; what then?
then that Army which you fed, and nourished, and supported, is brought against
you. Then your Works are demolished. Then they ride in triumph through your
City. Then they scorn your Presents. Reject your Remonstrance, making enquiry
after the Authors of it to bring them unto punishment. Then they deprive you
of the Militia and the Tower. Imprison your Lord Mayor and Aldermen: Slaughter
your Apprentices: and most wickedly solemnize a day of Thanksgiving for their
Murders. Take away your Chains, to expose you to the rapine of the Soldier.

Remember the instability of their Votes; one while when they are low, putting
power into your hands: and then upon a small shadow of success, ready to
retract it again.

Remember the Affidavit you had lately of the pious resolutions at Windsor
against you, and the worthy repair you have had for it.

Consider well the fallacies and the reserves of their late Ordinance, and how
little trust they repose in you therein: rest not your selves upon such false
friends, that change their Adherences as the weather changes.

In their Adversity they are for you, in their Prosperity they are against you.

If you make them prosperous, then is it not to make them your enemies? and yet
they say, your Common Council has taken them into protection: well, are you
resolved to make them your Masters? if you are? I doubt you will find them
costly ones.

Let me ask you seriously, will you be content to maintain them in a War
against the whole Kingdom? against the Scots, the Welsh, the Irish: Take heed,
you are like to find it a chargable undertaking: you know what it cost you,
when you had many more to contribute with you; you will find it something more
to maintain it alone, when your enemies are multiplied, and your friends and
assistants have left you, and are decreased. Beware you engage not your selves
to an utter ruin. It will be much cheaper, and easier for you to recover your
peace, then to procure your destruction; and which do you think is the better
merchandise?

Restore the King, and you may repair your Honor, preserve your Lives, secure
your Estates, reinforce your Trade, re-establish your Religion.

If you will play the other game of Rebellion, remember your stakes; all these
will be put in the mouth of danger: and what think you of your souls? will they
be safe? And what think you of your liberty? have you not sworn to maintain the
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom? do you not see what liberty grows at
Westminster? remember the work there upon Tuesday the 16 of May, those vesperae
Westmonasterienses, those Westminster vespers, when so much cruelty was used
against your Neighbors for but so much as petitioning for Peace. What freedom
is left us, if we may not so much as ask our freedom? what security can we
have either of our lives or liberties, under them, who take away our lives for
but asking our liberties? Is this the freedom you have fought for and
purchased at so dear a rate, with the waste of your Estates and Consciences?
(I hope all the Kingdom will be sensible of this liberty) for shame awake and
join with your Country to redeem your King, and your selves from slavery.

Let it not be the dishonor of our Nation (by your means) that the Scots were
feign to be the Redeemers of our KING. Prevent the coming in of foreign
Nations, lest they fall in love with your treasures, and make you pay dear for
that which you would not have at a cheaper rate.

I must tell you, whoever does this work without you, you of all men are like
to be their Pay-masters.

Well, do not make your selves incapable of pardon: do not heap judgments upon
your selves. How long halt you between two Opinions? if Mammon be God, serve
him: If the Lord be God, serve him: If Fairfax be King, serve him: If CHARLES
be King, restore Him.

You know what right the King has to you; but who made them at Westminster or
Windsor to be Kings over us? what title can they plead to Govern us? or how
come you or we to be their Subjects? have they it by election? who chose them
to be Kings? have they it by succession? where is their royal pedigree? have
they it by conquest? it is like they would have it so. But (by their leaves) the
matter is yet in question, and you and we are the wretchedst slaves alive (for
ought I know) if we will admit it, when it is so easy to prevent it.

Give me leave to deal plainly with you as a friend, The truth is, you are
looked upon as the great obstacles of the happy recovery of this Nation. As the
prolongers of the present miseries thereof, the great question hangs upon
your resolutions, Whether this Nation shall be engaged in another bloody War or
no? If you will be honest and Loyal, you may prevent it by Gods grace, and
make a speedy end of our calamities, by restoring the KING, and re-establishing
the Laws; it wants but your fiat under God, and it is even done already. And
thereby you shall bring honor upon your selves, and endeare unto you the
hearts of your Sovereign and this whole Nation, and procure the peace of your
own consciences by discharging so great a duty unto God.

If you will still persist in your cowardice and wickedness, notwithstanding
all this warning and admonition which you have received, be sure you be able to
answer for all the blood, and ruin, and destruction that follows; and that
you know how to secure your selves from that great share of it, that is like to
befall you.

And take heed of the saying of the Prophet to Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25.16. I know
that God has purposed to destroy thee, because thou haste done this, and haste
not hearkened to my council. And remember what message Mordecay sent to Esther,
Esth. 4. v. 13. Think not with thy self that thou shall escape, etc. for if
thou altogether hold thy peace at this time, then shall there enlargement
and deliverance arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy Fathers
house shall be destroyed, etc.

Consider of it in time and be wise; you will in the end find the French saying
to be true, C'est la grand finesse du monde d'estre honest, it is the finest
trick in the world to be honest; this is the best husbandry and the best
policy. Go therefore speedily in the first place, humble your selves to God for
what is past, ask his pardon, resolve upon amendment; Let there be a Common
Hall of your City called, it is just it should be so, in a matter of so great
and general concernment, join your selves together as one man; send to those
at Westminster to require the enlargement, the restitution, the re-enthroning
of your KING according to the splendor of his Royal Ancestors, and the
re-inforcing of the known Laws and legitimate Government of this Land,
together with the Liberties of the Subject, by Disbanding those Forces that
tyrannize over all. If they refuse peaceably to do it, you know what you have
to do. The God of Heaven direct you, and work upon your hearts; to his Glory,
and the recovery of this poor Church and Nation. Farewell.

A Postscript.
SInce I writ this advice unto you, I have heard that there are diverse Listed
in your City to Engage with the Rebels against the Loyal Subjects of Kent and
Surrey, etc. a word or two therefore to the^; if you shall go on in any such
employment, take this along with you; That as you engage your selves against
your Oaths, your Covenants, your Protestations against God, and your King, and
your own Country, for the maintenance of Tyrants and Oppressors, and for the
shedding of Innocent blood, and for the destruction of your own Liberties; So
you must expect a reward answerable to your work, to be abhominated by the
people of the Kingdom: and if God for your sins shall suffer you to prosper in
so wicked an enterprise, remember that such prosperity is the way to
destruction and damnation; and if hereafter you suffer the greatest share of
that slavery which you now shall fight for against those that stand for you and
the Kingdoms Rights, you will pay dear for so bad a bargain; but it will be a
just return upon your base and traytorous enterprises.

FINIS.

