THE SHEPHERDS Letters: 1 To his Sovereign Lord King Charles his Sacred
Majesty. 2 To the Renowned Noble Princes, Grand-sonnes to Great James of famous
memory, late West-Emperour of the World, Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice. 3 To
all the late Bishops, Doctors, and Ministers reputed Malignants in the
Kingdoms of England and Scotland give these.


London printed 1646.

The Shepherd of Easeingtons Letters.
Gracious, Glorious:
I Beseech thy Majesty suffer thine abject Subject to speak unto thy Majesty
without offense; God made thy Father the glory of Christendom, and gave him
one to suceeed according to reason, a man hopeful to command Nations as heart
could desire, yet it pleased the Almighty to take him home to himself, and
left thy Majesty to supply his place, and have established thee in thy fathers
Throne, given thee his Crown, State, and Dignity, with all his Authority, and
placed thee in this pleasant Canaan, whose borders is from the North Isles of
Scotland and Jreland, to the South Isles of Barbados and Barmoodus, and so
made thee a great West Emperor of the world, yet for all these Dominions I
beseech thy Majesty remember thou art still but a mortal man, mutable and
transitory, subject to alteration and change, and shall one day be called to a
straight account for all thy Talents received, which is more then yet is
mentioned, for he has given thee Wife and Children, which is most near and
dear to man, and blessed thee above that great Monarch, that Daniel calls a
head of Gold in respect of our Iron Age; for when he called his great Assembly
out of all People, Nation and Languages, they wanted understanding to discern
and judge aright save the three Children; but God has blessed thy Majesty with
men of many Languages in thy Nations, to discern and judge, with sanctified
wills to choose the good and refuse the bad. Now seeing God has blessed thy
Majesty so abundantly in thy Subjects, and these distractions in thy Kingdoms,
and bloodshed in diverse quarters of thy Countries, I beseech thy Majesty under
corection, How will thou answer it before the eternal Tribunal? For David was
driven from Jerusalem by Absalom, but thy Majesty left thine own House
voluntarily, without any inforcement, or color of cause that thy Subjects can
tell of, save that they took two Royal Prerogatives, which fact may be
answered by the old saying; A man seeing his Neighbors house on fire, has
fair warning for his own, etc. for Hypocrites creeping into credit with thy
Majesty, and put in place of high Authority, have greatly disturbed the State.
Then seeing these perrilous effects proceed, it is the proper appointed Office
of the Parliament to take away such dangerous causes, that the effects may
surcease. Moreover, if thy Majesty shall say with thy Grandfather Adam, Yon
woman which thou gave me, deceived me, etc. as that excused not him, much
less can it profit thee, which has all former things written for our
instruction, upon whom the ends of the world is come; and that Noble Princely
Lady thy loving Wife, being borne and brought up in the Egyptian darkness of
Idolatry may be tollerarated, but thy Majesty which was borne in Sion, and
brought up in Jerusalem, is doubly bound to convert her, and not to be deceived
by her, etc. I see no more can well be said save this: The Priests that sat in
Peter's Chair being fallen from the purity of Paul's Doctrine has deceived thy
Majesty, this I confess, four hundred false Prophets is forceable to persuade
the King contrary to Micah his counsel; but most Noble Prince, if they were
possessed with that dumb and deaf spirit the Apostle speaks of, that would
neither suffer to hear nor speak the words of their Office and duty, I
beseech thy Majesty to drive it far off from thee by hearty Prayer unto God,
to give thee the spirit of Wisdom and true understanding to Guide and Govern
this his mighty people of Israel. Wherefore I most entirely beseech thy
Majesty, with those Noble Plants of Paradise that is with thee, to take it into
your good considerations, and for binding up the bleeding wounds in the bosom
of Christendom Command a cessation of Arms amongst you and signify it to the
Parliament, that the Noblemen of Jerusalem may strive who shall come first to
guard thee our King David home to thine own House, that the joy of thy happy
return may extinguish the grief of all our sustained sorrows; which Grace I
beseech God of his great mercy in his good time grant us, to the good of his
Church, and the praise of his glorious Name, to whom be all glory and praise
for ever.

Thy Majesty's abject Subject, whose prayers passes to God for the
preservation and continuation of thy Crown, State, and Dignity to thee and
thine for ever: That he which has given thee the glory of a Crown; may give
thee also a Crown of glory.

The Shepherd of Enseington Thomas Ellyson.
December. 25.
Most Noble Princes:
THe remembrance of that happy Government of these Kingdoms under your
Grandfather forbideth my very Conscience to keep back my counsel when it
may do good to his Posterity; wherefore I humbly Petition your Princely
Persons patiently to hear me speak without offense, though for the present it
be not pleasant to you, yet afterward it may be profitable for you and yours. I
need not be tedious to dispute the Cause, the case is so plain that Shepherds,
Swineherds, Cobblers, and off-scourings of the Kingdoms does and may discern,
that this great Conflict consists in transferring the Land from Protestanisme
to Papisme, which if it please your Princely minds well to remember, what
perelous Pro^ects they have plotted against your Predecessors and others ye
would loath to love or be though in the least fellowship with them, as the
Powder Treason, in which their only aim was to have blown the glory of the
World, with all his Noble Parliament into the Skies like Chafe, which venomous
invention was so very monsterous that Historians write, the very Heathens hiss
to hear it. King John denying their request, being far unfitting for a
Prince to grant them, was forced to Farm his own Inheritance for it. And
Henry the fourth Emperor of that name, for not reserving the Temple of
Jerusalem for the Popes purpose, was set to fit barefoot at his Gates without
admittance to his presence till he bought it with a sum of money, far more
then sight of him was worth; and after show of Absolution he sent a Bull of
Excommunication to gore the Emperor through, commanding Rodolfe his German
Deputy to rise in Arms and rende away his Crown, which precept being put in
present practice, and Justice justly took his life away, the Emperor set his
eldest Son to rule the States of Germany in his stead. But mark, I beseech
you, to make their matchless malice more appear, Pope Hildebrand sent his
second Bull of Excommunication again to gore the Emperor, commanding the
Son in Arms against his Father, which Action is so repugnant to Order, so
odious to Reason, so urgent to Nature, so contrary to Custom, nay the very
Conscience and all, I beseech you to consider it, etc. But to leave relating
their impious Projects in these places, their limbs unluckely leapt to our
English Stage to act the like Tragedy, which in the Reign of Elizabeth Queen
of famous memory, the Earls Rebellion in the North will well witness, and many
may remember to this day, that being insatiable they ceased not to assault her
Successor with the Powder Plot, as is said, etc. But now to keep their gall of
bitterness in continual action, with all their Fox-like subtle Sophismes,
they have assaulted, seduced, deceived and drawn away our Sovereign Lord the
King from his royal Throne, and edged him in Arms against his Parliaments of
both Kingdoms, which I dare engage both life and soul is as truly Noble,
Learned, loyal and loving Subjects as ever King have had that wore these
Crowns, so that with the Prophet I may truly say, There is a wonderful and
horrible thing committed in the Land, the Prophets have spoken falsely, the
Priests bear rule thereby, the people please to have it so, but what will be
the end thereof, Jeremiah 5. Wherefore I most entirely supplicate your Princely
minds very seriously to consider for what cause God has appointed you to
spring from the loins of Princes, surely to have regard to Gods eternal
Decree, and to be Fronteers in fighting of his Battles against such
Butcher-like, bloody, and tragecall attemptors, and to apply your Princely
powers to deliver our Sovereign Lord the King from their poluted Papist Jaile
whether he be holden by force or by persuasion. But if they say they be good
Protestants I do answer; If the Tree be good let his fruit declare it, for I
find Divinity-Logicke in a short rule, He that is not with me is against me,
etc. now seeing Religion is of highest concernment, I beseech you remember, If
one man trespass to another a Judge may determine, but if a man fight against
God none can releeve him: Wherefore, howsoever bring our Sovereign Lord the
King to fit upon his Throne, to Govern the many Thousands of Israel, to the
great joy and comfort of us all, for it is the only very ordinary means for
preservation and continuation of his Crown, State, and Dignity to him and his
for ever, and also for his Princely Power, with Potent strength to establish
Peace in the Palatinate Countries, for the endless good of you and yours, that
so all our Israel from Dan to Beersheba may sing Halelujah to the Lamb of God
for so great deliverances; which Graces I beseech God of his great mercies in
his good time grant us, to the good of his Church, and the praise of his
glorious Name, to whom be all glory and praise for ever.

His Majesty's abject Subject, whose prayers passes to God for the
preservation of his sacred Person, with the continuation of his Crown, State,
and Dignity to him and his for ever.

The Shepherd of Easeington. Tho. Ellyson.
January 1645.
Right Reverend and well beloved:
I Do stand up to speak unto you; But I profess and also protest, I do it
not by way of insultation over your decayed estates, for I do acknowledge my
self ten time triple bound to the good mercies of God for preserving me to
stand, when he suffers many much better to fall; But I do it by way of
exhortation to your edification and comfort, though I confess many millions of
men far fitter for it then I, yet I will not suffer great Clearks only, and
to be saved alone, for it is of necessity for me to be saved also: and what the
Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, whereof I am one, and does
apply that precept of Moses as spoken even unto me, which says, Thou shall not
hate thy Brother in thy heart, but thou shall plainly rebuke thy Neighbor and
suffer him not to sin; which precept the Apostles does itterate double and
triple over, willing and requiring us to admonish one another, exhort one
another, edify one another, etc. which portions of Scripture your selves often
times have treated upon, to the great edification and comfort of your hearers:
Wherefore I humbly petition your patience, permit me to surrender the same
comfort to comfort your selves, for your neglect is greatly accused to because
of this gseat confusion amongst us, and I do believe it, but that I may not
wrong you upon bare report, I desire to examine your Commission, and compare it
with your execution of action for mine own discharge. For unto you it is said,
Son of man I have made thee a Watchman to the House of Israel, etc. if I send
a Sword through the Land, and if you give not the people warning, yet they
shall die in their transgressions but their blood will I require at thy hand,
etc. Here is a fearful accusation, what excuse can you make? for if you say,
The great Archbishops sat in the stern of the Churches to turn it as their
wisdom might direct them etc, It will be replied, That if they were deprived
of wisdom, it is pity ye were deprived of grace to resist their folly; for
when a free Parliament was called you had both place and voice as well as they,
so that your best friends can frame no excuse, but that you are so grievously
fallen that that admoniiton appointed for that great Church of Ephesus may fitly
be applied unto you. Remember therefore from whence ye are fallen and repent.

And you inferior Ministers, that may seem to shelter your selves under the
shadow of great Doctors, even you also are inexcusable, for although for orders
sake they did hold priority of place, yet your Commission for binding,
loosening, demolishing, and building is equal to them, so that convincing
Truth does testify, that with Demas you are fallen from Paul and followed this
present World, remember therefore from whence ye are fallen, and repent.

For my love to the Ministers of the Gospel would willingly solist your cause
by excuse if I could find fit ground for it, but if I should plead your
obedience to God from that Precept which appoints us to Honor the King, I
should be answered, that as you have applied that obedience you have
dishonored both God and the King; you have dishonored God which had given an
absolute order, that to Egypt we should never return again, for if we did,
he ordered two inresistable Armies to pursue and ass^ult us till we be
destroyed, for although mercy would willingly preserve us, yet very Justice
must justly inflict the Sword and Pestilence upon us; which has greatly
enlarged the Grive revived and advanced Death, which is an enemy to Nature for
it destroys the Creature, a great dishonor to God, a most grievous fall;
remember therefore from whence ye are fallen and repent. And your honor to the
King is according to it, for it has greatly distracted his Government,
endangered his sacred Person, demolished the glory of his Kingdoms, which
consists in the multiplicity of Subjects, made many a Wife to want her Husband,
and many a Wives Son has his blood mingled in the dust, which no doubt will
be required at your hands except ye repent.

For if a man's own transgressions do often draw him into a dangerous strait,
when the blood of many is laid upon him, his condition must needs be most
desperate; but my desire is not to drown you in the deapth of desparation, but
to draw you to repent.

For Abraham denied his Wife, Joseph swore by the life of Pharaoh, David
committed two deadly facts, Paul persecuted the Church of God, and Peter
forswore that he knew his Master, yet by repentance all these obtained mercy
and is amongst the most glorious Sons of God; and so may you be if with Peter
ye will wait upon Christ till he look back upon you with one glimpse of
Grace, which is indeed the very bottomless Ocian of all excellencies;
wherefore I beseech you free your selves from all corrupt mixtures flowing from
humane devices, and receive with meekness that which is able to save your
souls, to wit, repent.

And if one spark do kindle to your comfort, I beseech you certify our
sovereign Lord the King what dangerous ways you have walked, and inform his
Majesty that to go forward there is no hope, for the Prophet says, That the
true fear of the Lord is to depart from evil. Wherefore persuade his Majesty
to use all possible means speedily to return to his own Jerusalem, to
govern his people prudently with all his Power, to the great thanksgiving of
us all, etc. I beseech you do not slight my Petition which does so nearly
concern your selves, for as I am bold without blushing to speak in the faces
of men, I have also a good Conscience in the presence of God, whose Judgments
you cannot escape. Wherefore I beseech you, let the remembrance of our
mortality by Sword and Pestilence so mortify your corrupt affections, as to
make a true recollection of the time that is past, and apply a true Christian
resurrection for the time to come. Henceforth put on such an habit of holiness
as may practice true Piety hereafter, to the praise and glory of God, the
prosperity of our Sovereign Lord the King and his Posterity, the common good
of all his Kingdoms, and our eternal Thanksgiving through Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost one God, be all honor and praise for
ever. Amen.

His Majesty's abject Subject, whose Prayers passes to God for the
preservation of his sacred Person, with the continuation of his Crown, State,
and Dignity to him and his for ever.

The Shepherd of Easeington. Tho. Ellyson.
January the 10th. 1645.
FINIS.

