AN ELEGY Sacred to the Immortal Memory of the most Worthy, and most
Lamented, JOHN PYM, Esquire.
Who having done most remarkable Service to the State, was on Friday being the
8. of December. 1643. translated from the House of COMMONS, to the Upper House of
Glory, and Parliament of Angels in Heaven.
The Memory of this never to be forgotten Patriot deserves truly to be
observed by every Man, who stands well affected to the True Religion, the
Laws, and Liberties both of Parliament and Kingdom: His Body (both the
Houses, and the Assembly of the Divines being present) was carried with solemn
Honor and Magnificence by Six of the House of Commons: The Reverend Divine,
Mr. Stephen Marshall did Preach the Funeral, who did take his Text out of the
Seventh of Micah, the first and second Verses. The words were, The Good Man is
perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright among Men, etc.

WHat Sacred Light is this? What glorious Guest
Is pleased to lodge in my unworthy Breast,
And with a hidden touch my Soul inspires,
Rapt't in amazements and transporting fires;
It Is THOU (Great shade) THOU, whosoere Thou be
That leave the World in Darkness, THOU art He;
In me 'twere vile Ingratitude to rue
Thy loss, whose lustures warm me thus, yet who
(When all dissolves) can with a careless eye,
(Untouched at Fate) stand unlamenting by?
Let us call home our Griefs then, all which show
Those the most worthy where most high they flow,
We must dispatch them unto Heaven, to tell
This Murder done, for since he did excel
So pure, so just in all things, Who can quit
The hand of Death, that now must answer it:
When Death does life to innocence deny,
Death sins himself, and Death himself must die.
Be kind unto thy self (dull Fate) and stand,
And breath awhile, let not thy wilful hand
Pursue an erring rage: for each new blow
Would interrupt; and not increase our woe.
Thou can do nothing that may render us
More fond of Grief, or thee more tyrannous,
Since room we want to vent our VVooes: our Eyes
Bedew the Earth, whiles Clouds of thronging sighs
Oppress the air; as if the world were all
Too close, and lesser then his Funeral.
What man is yet so dull, so much to Fame
And worth a stranger, as to ask what Name
So great a loss does bear: let him that wears
An arted Grief, and complements with tears,
(Fortunes and Heralds Pageant) who for deeds
On airs and titles of swollen Greatness feeds;
Admire such pomp, whiles I his soul, which stood
So fair; that had some Angels bin as good,
So many Spirits punished for their pride,
(Backed on the Northern clouds) should never ride
Down Taurus Mountain; when with rage ore'gone,
They lead the Vaward of the Tempest on.
But how can He be paralleled, whose birth
Did claim such high pre-eminence of worth
And happiness to come; no planets jarres
Annoyd the healthful Influences, his Stars
Sang to his destinies, his precious thread
With richest Art they spun, and promised
It should more lasting prove. the GRACES flocked
About him smiling, and his Cradle rocked,
And giving each a kiss, did each conclude
ROMES Laws quite lost, and super stitions Rood.
Sure He was here a little Heaven, which then
(Touched by the hand of Death) he witnessed, when
(Like a divine Intelligence) at strise
With dull corruption, he expressed what life
His mind enjoyed, which still his Deeds more young
And perfect rendered, and his faith more strong.
Whiles thus we saw him growing great and high,
Who would have thought He had got leave to dye.
Or who is He that him alive did know,
That would not think but he must still be so?
Let those deluded Sophisters who take,
Delight in wrangling, and do laughter make.
The Argument of Reason, now agree
To Truth corrected, and make Grief to be
Their best Demonstrance, which they most do show
Who most in tears and lamentations flow.
What Tongue can voice his Merits who was known
To love our lives far better then his own.
And though the Honors of his worth him sent,
A close Committee to the Parliament.
The man was public Good, and still his zeal
Observed the King, and loved the Commonweal.
Nor did the Fate or Anger of the Crown,
Traverse his hopes, or beat his Counsels down.
But moving still (in what he had to do)
He was our Patriot, and our Martyr too,
But that more fully we may here declare
Our plaints, we should lay by all tears which are
Too weak for such a loss, we now should shake
With a just sigh the Center, and awake
The Spirits of Grief, that so our Accents may
Make our love known, where ere his purer ray,
Where ere his Star does shine, if now he is
Spreading his light where rugged Par^hasis
Shines at the Northern Pole, or if he please,
Rather to grace the Southern Hyades:
Thou where the beauties of the Morn their clear
Reflections bend on Ganges streams, or where
When ere he in the Ocean dives, they run
From Calpe Hill, who mourn the fainting Sun,
Or wheresoere thou do thy beams dispense,
It is no sin to beg their Influence;
VVhiles thus on us thou shall thy beams employ,
We more shall crave them; and we shall enjoy
And mourn thee taken from us, and a flight
Shall daily practice, till we reach that height
Which thou have gained; O why should Heaven ordain,
That where they there do joy, we here should plain.
Why should it urge to Good, yet from our view
Steal the Example, and rejoice in it too,
Grief is of kin to Heaven, and does improve
The glorious Consorts and blessed Quires above,
And unto us of greater power does seem,
Since their joys move not us, our Griefs help them;
Heaven is the Center of our souls, the Grave
Is of our bodies, this short life we have
Does of a middle Nature seem, yet sent
In holy actions to be chiefly spent
A true assurance that these Dusts shall rise
(Awaked from death) above the lofty skies.
This his whole life so much assured, so much
Made it his business, that when Death did touch
His willing Body, and the Quire propense
O^ Heaven attended, to translate him hence
The sacred words he spoke, did leave such high
And rapt Impressions in the standers by,
That they did seem to have themselves forgot,
As if the Virtue of their sounds had wrought
Them more then mortal, and now dying, He
Had clothed them all with Immortality.
Sad House of Peers and Commons, whose Desert
Was here the chosen joy which crowned his heart,
VVhiles now each word you speak his Elegies
VVhiles from the soul of Love, your precious Eyes
Rain down religious tears; He makes it known
By these memorialls, you best raise your own:
Lodged in your Breasts, He still does live, and you
Are both his Mourners, and his Ma^ble too;
From you he seems to take half your Breath,
And you from him to borrow half his Death,
FINIS.
Printed for Lawrence Chapman, 1643.


