AN EXTRACT OF A LETTER FROM YORK.

Dated on FRIDAY night, August 5, 1642.

August 9. London Printed for Abel Roper. 1642.

An Extract of a Letter from York, dated on friday right, being the 5 of
August, 1642.
NOtwithstanding his Majesty's warrant commanding a strict appearance of Horse
and Foot of all the Trained Bands of this County, which are near upon 12000, yet
not one in sixty appeared, and those that did, were such as are professed
enemies to the Parliament, and to make their number the more, their Brethren in
Confederacy against the Parliament, the Papists, appeared with good store of
Horse, but their Riders, as was desired, were of the Protestant Profession, an
expression that much enlightens our eyes, as it has Relation to Papists, which
next to the fear of having our Arms taken from us, caused so slender an
appearance: look to your selves in the South, for they will suddenly appear
there also in Arms, with Riders of the Protestant profession. To digress no
further, let me return to our Thursday meeting, and be pleased to peruse this
enclosed speech of his Majesty's, a part of that days work, wherein his
Majesty declares that he takes it as a reproach cast upon him, that any should
say he has laid siege against Hull, and yet such is the impudency of some of
the Members of Lords and Commons in Parliament, as after that Speech made in
their presence, to fram and conclude a Petition to the Parliament, wherein they
express the King laid siege to Hull, and has now raised the same, I hope his
Majesty for this offense will make them examples, I mean the L. Faulckonbridge,
M. Bellasis, Sir William Savile, and diverse others, I may add this further,
concerning that Petition, if they have not altered it since it was engrossed,
it is the most daring Challenge, the most insolent language that ever was used
to Parliament, indeed a thing insufferable, and was subscribed by the
aforenamed persons, and also by the Lord Savile, the L. Darcy, S. George
Wentworth, Sir Tho. Denby, Sir Will. Penniman, M. Mallorie, M. Al^brough, M.
John Bellasis, Members of Parliament, and also by Sir John Mallorie, who was
drawn to it against his will, and by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, formerly well
affected, who has the Straffordian slavery still in his memory, having never
indeed beer in his right wits since his Lordship frighted him it is signed as
I hear by none bu^ by Sir John Gothericke, Sir Francis Wortley, and that Crew,
that under pre ence of a Guard, have endeavored to raise an Army (as you now
see) in this County, if they could: Let not the Parliament think that this
handful of ill-affected and malecontented persons, have such power in this
County, as to be seconded by the Commons in this Bold-face Petition; As soon
as the Cavaliers are gone (till then we will be silent) they shall know our
minds are contrary to theirs; they fear it; And therefore they are raising
800. Horse, (Master Benson their Clarke can tell you; he has the list) to be a
Guard to this County, but is indeed to disarme the Roundheads, and
Separatists, a^ they call them, and under that name to leave naked all
religious and well-affected persons, and arm none but Papists and Malignant
Spirits; and this is the design through the Kingdom: and look to the arms
of your Trained-bands betimes, or it will be too late. The design of the
Germain Horse will be executed by these men, they often vow they will all dye
but the Act that this Parliament shall not be dissolved without consent of both
Houses shall be made void, and then they say there shall be a tryenniall
Parliament, and dissolved as soon as it is called, if they continue to oppose
the King. They are much perplexed here, that Sir John Hotham caused a Drummer
of the Cavaliers to be hardly used as they say; whereas it is a mis-report, the
affront he gave in the garrison was great, his punishment but a sport. There
are diverse of the Trained-bands at Beverley, guarding the Magazine which is to
follow the Cavaliers (but I had like to have erred, and said the Siedge is
raised) the Trenches are cast down, the Ordnance at Paul and Hasell, that
endeavored to stop all passages by water to Hull, are removed; the
Proclamation on pain of death, that no provision should go to Hull, is not in
force, or not observed, for they keep open Market, there is no burning of
wind-mils nor other hostile acts, here is a Proclamation in Print, of which
also I send you a Copy, that the Commissioners of Array should attach the Lord
Brook, as a Traitor, but it is since called in again: ten Earls, five Lords,
one Secretary, the Chancellor of the Exchequor, Master Controller, Sir Jacob
Ashley, and eight Cavaliers, are all of the Council of War, they follow it
close; especially since news came that Portsmouth is in a posture of
opposition to the Parliament, they swear as soon as they come to Portsmouth,
they will have Goring out by head and shoulders, for that he that betrayed the
King before, and the trust of the Parliament now, will be true to neither King
nor Parliament, but turn like a Weather-cocke. The Earl of Essex is slow in
appearance, Counties will be overawed with Horse, before supplies come, the
Cavaliers Horse are on their march. There is news newly come of the roaring of
Cannon at New Castle, the Fort at Tinmouth shooting at the Kings Ships, which
have seized of some arms coming out of Holland, the Prebends and some of the
Gentry of the Bishopric of Durham are here, and are so ready to advance
moneys, to raise force against the Parliament, that they part with the
Billet-money due to the County.

FINIS.

