AN ELEGY On the Death of the LORD RUSSEL, Who was Beheaded in
LINCOLNS-INN-Fields, On Saturday the 21st. of July, 1683.
WHat Powr's, what Saints, or who shall I invoke
To Charm the Axe, before the mighty Stroke?
Gods will not do it; for Man it is vain to Plead,
What if Caligula should interceed?
What if I raise great Nero from his Urn?
Or he that did the Ephesian Temple Burn?
Can Cataline, Cethegus, Mahomet,
Judas, or Jack of Leyden, do the Feat?
Will these evade the Stroke that Fate portends?
No! these are too much Envious to be Friends.
Who then, my Lord, shall I invoke for you?
Will Shaftsbury, Luther, or Jack Calvin do,
Oats, Bedloe, Prance, Dugdale, Turbervile,
That, with your help, made Monarchy to reel,
And like to have turned it to a Commonweal.
Nor these, my Lord, cannot these Patriots do it,
That once had Power to bring all things about,
And cut off poor old Staffords Head to sho'at.
Then! must the Mercenary Axe proceed,
Since you have not cheated Ketch, as Essex did;
For which, perchance, there may Disputes ensue,
Who was the better Subject of the Two,
He that d^d save Five Pounds, or had his due.
But these are Feuds I never shall desire,
Though 'twas not fairly done to cheat th'Esquire;
I pity Greatness; not because it is you,
But from my Nature, and to Greatness due:
So th'Miracle be done, I ear not how,
Whether to Axe or Hal er they do bow,
My moderate Zeal would any way allow;
The most Expedient surely best should please,
That ridds the Nation of her worst Disease;
Essex showed some remorse, which fain would be
Mistaken for an ill-shap'd Loyalty.
Would Monmouth, Armstrong, Ferguson, and Gray,
Reflect as deeply, they would take his way;
But who can hope for such a Consequence
From Natural Fools, and hardened Impudence?
Those who have raised their Fortunes by their Prince,
Lived by the warmth of his kind Influence.
From Pardons and Indulgence, sucked their Breath,
And now to seek their Great Preservers Death!
Inhumane Vipers! pass the Prollick round,
And save your injured Prince two thousand pound;
Or else cum in, who knows but you may find
An Ignoramus Jury to your mind?
Such as once saved your dear Achitophel,
Which then did Authorize you to Rebel.
David has been too merciful, it is known,
And may perchance, forgive Young Absalom.
Now give me leave to call my Fancy in,
And talk of Russel, where I did begin.
To what unequal heights did thou Aspire!
What was it thou could want or could Desire?
Greatness thou had, and all the Plumbs of The Earth,
Only a Crown, that did not fit thy Birth:
And how seemed that to thee? a Glorious Thing!
Which thy own Power did make so Tottering.
Farewell fond Russell, those may mourn thy fate,
That hope, like thee, by Treason to be Great.
Essex's dispairing factious Hand did do,
What neuter Ketch th'Esquire performed for you,
And what I hope will follow all your Crew.
LONDON, Printed for P. Brooksby, at the Golden Ball, near the Hospital-Gate,
in West-Smithfield, 1683.


