An Extract of A LETTER From York, dated the 31. of December. 1659. concerning
The Lord FAIRFAX'S Raising that County in Arms against Illegal Taxes and
Free Quarter, and for the Freedom of Parliament, as it was in the Year, 1648.
HAving done with our particular concernments, give me leave to acquaint you in
brief with matters more public, and perhaps very strange unto you: The Gentry
of this County are universally up under the Conduct of the Lord Fairfax, such a
rising on a sudden has not been known. That which first occasioned it, is
Free Quarter, and the Tax that has been lately imposed upon this County by
military Power, to which the Gentry of these parts are unwilling to stoop,
being loath to receive Law from the Sword, having drawn their Swords to
maintain the Laws of the Land, which declares, that no Tax be imposed upon the
People, but by Consent in Parliament, and the Gentry in these parts explain to
be by Consent in a Full Parliament. The manner of their Rising was in three
Divisions; the Lord Fairfax for the West Riding of the County had his
Rendevouze at Leeds, where multitudes of People resort unto him both Horse and
Foot. And the Trade of Clothing being dead, by reason of the Wars with
Spain, makes those Parts rise in abundance, to do any thing for the having of a
Free Parliament, which (they think) will procure the opening of Trade again.
There is come unto the Lord Fairfax's Assistance also three Troops of Horse of
Colonel Lilburn's Regiment, under the Command of Major Smithson, Captain
Strangwayes and Captain Wilkinson. The Forces in the North Riding are raised by
Colonel Hugh Bethel (with one eye) and Sir Francis Boynton: And the Forces in
the East Riding are raised by Sir Henry Cholmely, and other Gentlemen in that
Riding. These two last Divisions at a Rendevouze yesterday had fifteen hundred
Horse completely armed; And this day, or upon Monday, do meet the Lord Fairfax
at the General Rendevouze. I have endeavored to understand the Bottom of this
Business, and do perceive they intend to declare upon these Heads following,

I. For the Restoring of this Parliament to the Due Freedom which it enjoyed
in the Year, 1648. before it was Garbled by the Army.

II. That the Soldiers of the Army may have their Arrears paid, and that for
the future military Forces may be put into such hands as may be of Public
Interest, and likely to submit to Civil Authority.

III. To remove the present Illegal Assessement now in Leavying upon the
County; and

IV. To prevent the Quakers Anabaptists, etc. from meeting at their Rendevouze,
who did intend as we are informed to join with the Lord Lamberts Forces on the
third day of January. The Lord Lambert is upon a speedy March Southward from
Newcastle, (where he has left ten Companies of Foot, and two Troops of Horse
to secure it) (and the report goes that General Monk will March after him, but
we have not the Certainty of it) the Lord Lambert horses many of his Foot, we
expect them at Witherby the second of January, and various are the Opinions
what he will do. Some think he will not trust to Indemnity from above, should
it be granted unto him, and therefore it is conceived, that since the Quakers,
etc. do prepare for a Conjunction with him, that he will declare for Liberty of
Conscience; and by the help of the Garrison of Hull, Arm and Array those men,
in hopes of which the Papists do not a little rejoice. But others think, that
he will hold those people too narrow an Interest to build so great an
undertaking upon, having Monk behind him, the Lord Fairfax on the Flank, and
the Southern Army if real, against him in the Front, and therefore that he
will rather Declare to join with the Lord Fairfax for the Restitution of the
Members in 1648. and rather receive Indemnity from them, then from the Present
Parliament; one of those two in all likelihood he will be constrained to do, if
he do not submit, unless he intend to Go by to hasten up to London, whereas, we
now hear, he expects to find the Army as pliable to his design as when he
left them.

Postscript.
I Forgot to acquaint you that the Irish Brigade (who have refused to receive
Orders from the Lord Lambert,) have sent a very Civil Message to the Lord
Fairfax, (their old General) and there is a right understanding between them,
as I am told; We expect hourly to hear that Colonel Rossiter is up in
Lincolnshire; It Is said that that County, Darbyshire, Lancashire, and Cheshire,
will join in association with Yorkshire.

London, Printed in the Year 1659. Jan: 4


