AN EXTRACT OF SEVERAL LETTERS, Which came by the last Post, or otherwise,
from all parts of the Kingdom, since the fifth of November to this present
November the twelfth.

LIKEWISE, A COPY OF PRINCE ROBERTS Warrants from his Majesty's Army in the
Countries about for a contribution of money, and cloth toward the maintenance
of his Army.

LONDON, Printed by Luke Norton 1642.

An Extract of several Letters which came by the last Post; or otherwise, from
all parts of the Kingdom, since the fifth of Novmber to this present November
the twelfth.
Imprimis.

London.
A Letter to the Lord Major and Aldermen of London, that they forthwith
proclaim his Majesty's Proclamations the one dated from Edghill the 24. From
Edghill and Ayno.
of October. the oher at Aino, the 27. of the same, promising his freepardon to
all that shall lay down their Arms and become dutiful Subjects to his
Majesty; except all those excepted in his Declaration, dated the 22. of August
1643.

Cornwall.
Secondly, a Letter from the Lievtenants of the County of Cornwall, that Sir
RALPH HOPTON, has taken upon him to assesse the Inhabitants of that County,
and forces them to raise great sums of money toward the maintenance of his
Army, and that he has caused the drums to beat up there for Volunteers which
he has gotten together, near upon 10000. soldiers; and if in case they have
not their weekly pay, they shall have what pillage they can seize on, which
will be far more beneficial to a soldier then their weekly pay, the rather
for want of pay; it is his Majesty's pleasure because his Majesty preceiveth
that the Parliament does endeavor to depose the King and after the present
Religion, this is confirmed under the hands of Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir Bevill
Greenevile, Master Arnudell and others.

Thridly, there was a Letter from Banbury, Banbury.
that the Town was surrendered to the Caverleers, and that diverse of the Maimed
soldiers were since dead, and that the Arms therein was first seized on, and
all the Shopps pillaged, and great store of Cloth therein taken which are since
made in Cassocks and Hose for the Kings, soldiers, and that some certain
persons were by command from his Majesty, sent for to Oxford, which are there
at this time in Goal, by his Majesty's appointment.

Fourthly a letter from the Lord Fairefax and captain Hotham, York.
that at Leeds they met with Sir William Savill, Sir Thomas Glemham, Sir John
Gothericke, and others of his Majesty's Forces going toward York, and in the
way they fell upon each other and wounded and slain of each side near thritie
and took Sir John Gothericks Colonel, and the rest fleed upon the approaching
of Sir Hugh Chomleys Regiment, and all that the Parliaments forces have
beseiged the City of York with 5000. foot and 500. horses, with an Assurance
to have possession within 14. days.

Fifthly a letter from Devond was read that the Cominaltie there are in great
Combustions, and that the poor for want of trading have gotten a head and have
done great spoils forceing those of abillity, to relieve their distresses,
whichith many repulses diverse at Sonthmoltod Tingmonth and other places have
bine slain.

Manchester.
Sixthly a Letter from the Lord Brewerton Sir Richard Brevverton and others that
the Lord of Darby, has sent them threes; commanding them to lay down their
Arms or else he would put them all to the svvord vvhereupon he was answered
that for his own part we took Cmissory Willmott his word that he was a
Covvard and durst not dr^vv his svvord and so he parted in great fury.

Seaventhly a letter from Holland that her Majesty is at the Hage and there
intends to remain this whole vvinter, Holland.
and that she has sent to the King of France her brother for men and money
for his Majesty but, there has not been an answer concuing the one or the
other as yet.

Eighthly, Oxford.
a letter from the Lord Genrall that his Majesty, was this day at woodstocke
and intends to be at Oxford, this night the 1. of November, and that the Lord
Genrall will follow his Majesty Army wheresomever he shall remove. This letter
further menconed that his Excellency had sent the Lord Durgarney and
Scotchman, fleing from the Kings Army after the sight at Kinton which is since
committed to master Maxwell gentleman usher of the black Rodd.

Ninthly, Darbishire.
a letter from Darby that the Cavaliers have done great spoil at Buxton and
Wealy, and that Sir Francis Wortly keeps the passage between Brassington and
Manchester that none can pass to and fro. But that since Sir John Gill, have
raised great forces, and made the high way clear, though before they made
great spoil and plundered the County very much and Robbed the Carryers and
waggous in all passages in this County.

Tewthly a letter from Abbington Redding and Twiford that they have bine all
three pillaged and lost many thousand of yares, Barkshire.
of Cloth in Reding but the gratest spoil in that Town was done by the,
Inhabitants, and those of the malignant partly, there the said letter menconed,
also that his Majesty had sent a Message to the high Sheriff of Berks, to
raise the County for his safe passage through the shire, but the Sheriff
refused it, and left his house and fled into Wilthshire, whose house is also
since pillaged.

Hereford.
Eleventhly, a Letter from the Earl of Standford that he has taken Master
Price, a Member of the Commons and others, and still keeps them in custody
till further Order from the Parliament.

Oxford.
Twelfthy, a letter from Oxford relating the certain number of the slain and
wounded soldiers being 2000. and the number of maimed soldiers which came in
10. or 12. Wagons near upon 200 besides 3. or 4. Lords who is since dead and
the Earl of Craford is dangerously wounded if not since dead.

Gloucestershire.
A letter from Gloucestershire, that the Kings Forces have taken 5. Wagons of
cloth going to Abbington and that the Marquess of Hartfords Forces is lately
come over to Shrewbury and have gotten great strength and is coming to his
Majesty.

Newcale
14. A letter fom Newcastle that the Town is threatened to be pillaged but have
not a^ yet attempted it, for fear that the Scots should come after and reward
them for their labor.

Northhampton.
15. A Letter from the Lord Say, that hi^ house have been pillaged, near
Banbury, and his Park broken open, and all his Dear droven out, with other
great spoils to his nurseries and young trees.

16. Redding
A Letter from Mr. MARTYN a member of the House that Redding has been
plundered and the Cavelliers are at this day at Colebrooke and Windsor, and
that Prince ROBERT have sent a party to Windsor to deliver up the Castle, but
he had a short answer, That he should win it and wear it, and that the
Cavalliers have unript three or four Waynes coming from the West-country, and
made prey of what they liked.

17. A Letter from the L. General, Buckinghamshire.
that his Forces being about 12000 foot, and 2000 horse, were all found and in
good health.

18. A letter from Ipswich in Suffolk, Ipswich.
that they have raised 10000 l. of Plate and Money, and are raising of 3000.
Soldiers to add to the Earl of Warwick.

19. Letters from Devon. Sommerset, and Dorset; Devon, Sommerset and Dorset.
that they have taken the oath of associaton and assistance, and that they have
raised great Forces and will warrant to keep Sir Ralph Hopton and his Agents
where they be; as also to hinder the passages of his Majesty's Forces to come
to assist him.

20. Norfolk.
A Letter from Norwich informing that the Posts are all made stay of, for that
there is no expectation of Intelligence to and fro except some speedy course
be taken to root out the CAVALIERS in those parts and the great companies of
the poorer sort of people which pillageth and have gotten weapons as well as the
CAVALEIRS and stand upon their own guard neither for the King nor Parliament.

Surry.
21. A letter that Sir Richard Ouston, having the charge of the trained bands to
march to Kingston upon Thames, was refused admittance and Lodging for his
soldiers calling them Roundheads, whereupon the said SIR Richard left them to
their ill dispositions and marched toward VVinsor, where he heard that the
CAVALIERS was there but sudenly departed.

Hartfordshire.
22. A letter from his Excellency that he was come to St. Albons with his
Army on monday following he would come to London and certify the Houses of
the state of things past.

A copy of Prince Roberts Warrants to the Gentry and Freeholders in the
County of Borkshiere and Oxfordshiere
Whereas there is a great Army of his Majesty's now upon march and have not
sufficient provision for them, you the Knights. Gentry and Freeholdes of the
Counties of Berksh. and Oxfordsh. We charge and Command you and every of you
that you forthwith upon sight of these our Warrants to bring in or cause to
be brought sufficient Food of Butter Bpead and Cheese and other such like
provision to his Majesty's Army We will and Command you likewise to gather
such contributions of Money as you are able and agreeing to every man's
particular estate, and upon fight hereof fail you not as you will answer the
Contrary at your prill.

Given at Oxford.
FINIS.

