portrait of Queen Elizabeth I of England (1533-1603) supported by the English
royal lion on the left and the Welsh dragon on the right, symbolizing that she
was queen of England and Wales UERA EFFIGIES PRUDENTISSIMAE PRINCIPIS
ELIZABETHAE ANGLIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBE: REGINAE. ETc.

HONEY SOI^ (...) MAL Y PNSE depiction of the English royal blazon from
1558-1603 (actually the arms of King Henry IV of England, 1366-1413, restored
by Queen Elizabeth) surmounted by a crown SEMPER EADEM depiction of a blazon
with the Welsh dragon surrounded by the personal motto of Queen Elizabeth I

QVEENE ELIZABETH'S SPEECH TO HER LAST PARLIAMENT.

The 30 of November 1601, her Majesty being set under State in the Council
Chamber at Whitehall, the Speaker, accompanied with Privy Councillors, besides
Knights and Burgesses of the lower House to the number of eight-scoore,
presenting themselves at her Majesty's feet, for that so graciously and
speedily she had heard and yielded to her Sub^ects desires, and proclaimed the
same in their bearing as follows.
Mr. Speaker,
WE perceive your coming is to present thanks unto Us* Know I accept them
with no less joy then your loves can have desire to offer such a Present, and
do more esteem it then any Treasure or Riches, for those We know how to
prize, but Loyalty, Love, and Thanks, I account them invaluable; and though
God has raised Me high, yet this I account the glory of my Crown, that I
have reigned with your Loves. This makes that I do not so much rejoice that
God has made Me to be a Queen, as to be a Queen over so thankful a
People, and to be the mean under God to conserve you in safety, and preserve
you from danger, yea to be the Instrument to deliver you from dishonor, from
shame, and from infamy; to keep you from out of servitude, and from slaverie
under our Enemies, and cruel tyranny, and vilde oppression intended against
Us: for the better withstanding whereof, We take very acceptably your intended
helps, and chiefly in that it manifests your loves and largeness of heart
to your Sovereign. Of My self I must say this, I never was any greedy
scraping grasper, nor a strict fast-holding Prince, nor yet a waster, My heart
was never set upon any worldly goods, but only for my Subjects good. What you
do bestow on Me, I will not hoard up, but receive it to bestow on you again;
yea Mine own Properties I account yours to be expended for your good, and
your eyes shall see the bestowing of it for your welfare.

Mr. Speaker, I would wish you and the rest to stand up, for I fear I shall
yet trouble you with longer speech.

Mr. Speaker, you give me thanks, but I am more to thank you, and I charge
you, thank them of the Lower House from Me, for had I not received knowledge
from you, I might a fallen into the lapse of an Error, only for want of true
information.

Since I was Queen yet did I never put My Pen to any Grant but upon pretext
and semblance made Me, that it was for the good an^ avail of my Subjects
generally, though a private profit to some of my ancient Servants who have
deserved well: But that my Grants shall be made Grievances to my People, and
Oppressions, to be privileged under color of Our Pattents, Our Princely
Dignity shall not suffer it.

When I heard it, I could give no rest unto my thoughts until I had reformed
it, and those Varlets, lewd persons, abusers of my bounty, shall know I will
not suffer it. And Mr. Speaker, tell the House from me, I take it exceeding
grateful, that the knowledge of these things are come unto me from them. And
though amongst them the principal Members are such as are not touched in
private, and therefore need not speak from any feeling of the grief, yet We
have heard that other Gentlemen also of the House, who stand as free, have
spoken as freely in it; which gives Us to know that no respects or intrests
have moved them other then the minds they bear to suffer no diminution of our
Honor, and our Subjects love unto Us. The zeal of which affection tending to
ease my People, and knit their hearts unto us, I embrace with a Princely care
far above all earthly Treasures. I esteem my Peoples love, more then which I
desire not to merit: And God that gave me here to sit, and placed me over you,
knows that I never respected my self, but as your good was conserved in me;
yet what dangers, what practices, and what perils I have passed, some, if not
all of you know: but none of these things do move me, or ever made me
fear, but it is God that has delivered me.

And in my governing this Land, I have ever set the last Judgment day before
mine eyes, and so to rule, as I shall be Judged and answer before a higher
Judge, to whose Judgment Seat I do appeal in that never thought was
cherished in my heart that tended not to my Peoples good.

And if my Princely bounty have been abused, and my Grants turned to the hurt
of my People contrary to my will and meaning, or if any in Authority under me
have neglected, or converted what I have committed unto them, I hope God will
not lay their culps to my charge.

To be a King, and wear a Crown, is a thing more glorious to them that see it,
then it is pleasant to them that bear it: for my self, I never was so much
enticed with the glorious name of a King, or the royal authority of a Queen,
as delighted that God has made me His Instrument to maintain His Truth and
Glory, and to defend this Kingdom from dishonor, damage, tyranny, and
oppression. But should I ascribe any of these things unto my self, or my sexly
weakness, I were not worthy to live, and of all most unworthy of the mercies
I have received at Gods hands but to God only and wholly all is given and
ascribed.

The cares and trouble of a Crown I cannot more fitly resemble then to the
Drugges of a learned Physician, perfumed with some Aromaticall savor, or to
bitter Pills gilded over, by which they are made more exceptable or less
offensive, which indeed are bitter and vapleasant to take; and for my own
part, were it not for Conscience sake to discharge the duty that God has laid
upon me, and to maintain his glory, and keep you in safety, in mine own
disposition I should be willing to resign the place I hold to any other, and
glad to be freed of the Glory with the Labors, for it is not my desire to live
nor to reign longer then my life and reign shall be for your good. And though
you have had and may have many mightier and wiser Princes sitting in this Seat,
yet you never had nor shall have any that will love you better.

Thus Mr. Speaker, I commend me to your loyal Loves, and yours to my best
care and your further Councels, and I pray you Mr. Controullor, and Mr.
Secretary, and you of my Council, that before these Gentlemen depart into
their Countries you bring them all to kiss my Hand.

FINIS.

