AN EXTRACT OF CERTAIN PAPERS OF INTELLIGENCE, FROM CAMBRJDGE, Concerning His
MAJESTY and the ARMY.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

An Extract of certain Papers of Jntelligence, from Cambridge, concerning His
Majesty and the Army.
Sir,
I Believe you are big in expectation of receiving News from these parts. Thus
therefore. The King on Saturday was brought by a very small party, under the
conduct of no greater an one then a Coronet, within four miles of this place;
and all the noise was, that he would be here, the Harbingers in the mean time
buying up the whole Market. But we (who usually are not taken with the first
reports of things) thought not fit hereupon to assemble together either in the
Head or Body; whereas the Major and Aldermen (somewhat more credulous) fitted
their Saddles and Foot-^loathes unto their Horses, and had provided a Present
for His Majesty; which quickly after came as acceptable to his ears, as if to
his hands. The Towns-folkes had in all those streets, through which it was
conceived he would pass, decked their stalles and windows with green boughs
and whole Rose-bushes, and the ground all along with Rushes and Herbs. But the
King turned aside unto my Lady Cuts her house; and there yet abides, whither
people flow apace to behold him. He is exceeding cheerful, shows himself to
all, and commands that no Scholar be debarred from kissing of his hand: and
there the Sophs are (as if no farther then Barnwell) in their Gowns and Caps:
it was mirth to see how wett yesterday they were admitted into the presence.
General Brown signifying, and furthering the Kings pleasure unto them. Then
the King had a large table of Diet: but this day (I believe) about to have a
far greater. For the General, Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell, and others of
the Commanders and Council of war, are gone this noon to dine with him. It is
conceived, that by to morrow somewhat may be discerned.

Sir, Your unfeigned friend.
CAMBRIDGE. June 7. 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
THe General quarters at Master Buck Seniors house: but the report is, that it
will be this night the Kings quarters.



Sir.
THe court is still at the Lady Cutts's house. The Officers of the army
returned last night, all of them highly extolling the King for his great
Improvement. He argued his own, and his subjects Case with each of them (one
by one) to their no small Astonishment. He desired a speedy Remoove from that
place: but back to Holmby, and those parts, he will by no means. He told the
General, that those, which brought him hither, promised, That they would carry
him to New Market; and he hoped, that they were men of Honor, who would make
good their words. Recreation he much desired: and told them withal; That, if
they would not take order for his Removal, he would remove himself: For
confident he was, that there were those about him, which would further him in
it. This afternoon therefore he passes through Cambridge to New-market-faire;
for this is the day. To morrow at Botsom-beacon is to be the General
Rendevouz, as is yet intended, though some do fear deep inconveniences may
ensue thereon; the Counsels being yet various, and the soldiers talking high,
So that it is thought the appearance shall be but of some part of the army. The
Vice Chancellor had the General last night to a great supper: and this
morning he made a Spiritual breakfast at St. Mary's; but neither the General,
nor any of them, were thereat: The King sent on Saturday (So that you may
discern, that then he thought he might have been for New Market) for Doctor
Brounrigg, Doctor Collins and Doctor Comber to be in the way: because he
intended to see them: and so they then were: and no doubt will be to day, if so
be the first be yet in town, or can have timely notice of this his March. It
were infinite to set down the facetiousnesse that flows from his lips upon
all occasions to all: That one day may be in his Chronicle. Major-Generall
Brown is much his Attendant, and gains credit of all for Gallantry and great
civility. It is conceived, that after the Rendevouz, they may fall back into
these their quarters again, or else incline somewhat more near Royston; and
Royston become the Headquarters, Meethinks I foresee eminent Ruin, if not a
speedy peace. God of his mercy avert the former, and guide, whom it concerns,
into the best and safest means of the latter. This from him, who (doubtless)
may safely write thus, even from

Camb. June 8 1647. Sir, Your Friend.
POSTSCRIPT.
THe King is now (being two of the clock) gone by: He left Cambridge, and went
as low as Granchester: to New Market, still they say: but perchance it is to
Royston. The Rendevouz holds to morrow, but to be on Og-Magog Hills.



Sir,
I Told you yesterday that the Rendevouz, intended for this day, was like to be
but of part of the Army: and it will prove true: and it is not to be at
Botsum-beacon, but at Bennet Church, and the rather by way of an
Humiliation-day, then a numbering their Host: There is to be three Sermons
preached by Mr. Peter's, Mr. Saltmarsh, and Mr. Vice Chancellor. God grant,
that they may promote his Glory and our Peace. The more General Rendevouz is
put off until to morrow: and to be (as is now reported) about Fulmore. The
King is at New Market; and it is conceived, that they will not bring him into
the Head of the Army at the Rendevouz, but still quarter him at the back of the
Army, rather then he should be accounted pertaining unto it. The Great Ones
still speak high in his worth, whose presence and aspect caused trembling in
some of the greatest, and their stoutest; as if it had been some Angelical
salutation. What is good, or may with safety be, I communicate unto you: But
the wickedness of some is so great, as not to be made so open, as in paper:
and I fear it will have too great an influence (in time) upon the hearts of
many. Let me know when you return, that I may not lose my labor in sending a
letter more, then you in friendship may expect from

Sir your Servant.
June 9 1647.
Sir
THe humilliation day was kept at St. Mary's, and Mr. Seaman came in for the
fourth man: you have (I know) a presumption, that I was not there; but I hear,
that Mr. Peter's is still Mr. Peter's. That day and yesterday a fellow preached
against him (I think, or else against his way) on the market-hill. I, with the
rest of my company, kissed the Kings hand, and saw him at supper. So long we
stayed; because he was all that afternoon alone in his Closet; at his prayers
or pen; as who can conceive otherwise? For his treasure might in far less
time (sure) have been run over. He came out very cheerfully, looks very
well, and communicated himself very freely in Discourse, with some two or three
that attended him. That day Colonel Thomson (formerly of the Kings Army)
endeavored, as others, to have a sight of the King, but was not only refused
at the Guards, but alo dispatched out of the Town. Yesterday the three Doctors
were with the King, whom he lifted from of their knees; and he had opportunity
of some lit le discourse with them.

The Army removed yesterday from us, took with them ten loads of Ammunition
from the Castle: and the Ordnance follow them this day. They seem truly to
look more toward such Ordnance still, then the Ordinance of Parliament. I know
not, how they come to take so great a distaste against the Houses. After all,
that the Commissioners brought, was read at the Head of each Regiment, and
Major Skippon had in like manner glossed thereon, and in a plausable way
assayed to be a Mediator; they first were ask't by Major I. Skippon, whether
they had heard, and understood, what had been delivered, who answered; Yes,
yes: being asked, next, whether they were satisfied therewith? replied: No, no:
What would they then? They cried out; Justice, justice, justice. And so went it
through the whole Army: most saying, they long enough have had fair words;
others wondering, how the Commissioners durst come unto them, and some crying,
lets vote them out of the field. By the rules of some knowing ones I discern
that they intend to purge the Houses and Synod of somewhat which they account
destructive to the whole. Could they truly descry it, and set about it
impartially, it might be the Crown to (what they yet have not) a victory. Their
headquarters were last night at Royston, and inclining (as I am informed)
toward Ware. W. tells one, they are expected this night at Theobals. Well then
may this be Barnaby-bright, by such a March, and by my letter. But I march on;
though chiefly, if not freely, to tell you, that, if you fear such approaches
may (as doubtless it will) breed distraction in the City, then my affection
bids you, Come out of her, come out of her etc. To the best cause, I wish the
best success; and to my friends, safety, and (if it please God) Peace unto us
all.

Let me not be forgot to any that likes well of my being

Sir. YOUR SERVANT.
Cambridge. June 11. 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
I Cannot hear how the General and Commissioners parted: but by the Soldiers,
they were hooted out of the field. Neither was there so good Correspondency
between them and the General, as to sup or break fast together, whilst they
were here in Town.



FINIS.

