AN ELEGY, Upon the much lamented Death of that Renowned and ever to be
Honored Patriot of his Country JOHN PYM Esquire, Lieutenant of the Ordnance,
and a Member of the Honorable House of Commons.
IT will not be: our sins do yet outcry
Our prayers: as if we aimed at Misery.
Still we decline; and our calamities
Insensibly steal on us by degrees:
That, being more secure, our Judgment may
Appear more horrid at our payment day.
How many glorious Stars have shot of late
From the inconstant sphere of our sad State,
Spangled ere while with happy lights; from whence
We hoped, and found auspicious influence?
But now, deprived of their rich splendour, we
Freeze in the shadow of despair, and die.
Am I designed griefs servant, that my Pen
Thrice vowed to silence should be raised again?
I call no Muse my mother: yet am still
Babbling out Elegiack Notes: my Quill,
N'ere dipped in Agavippe, sorrow calls
To pay its Tribute at sad Funerals.
But oh! what Muse can lend a strain to express,
The measure of this days unhappiness?
What wing may yield a quill, which can compose
Fit Characters of sorrow? or who knows
What kind of sorrow there is fit to be
Exercised at such Scenes of misery?
Tears are too common: every petty loss
Exacts that duty; every trifling cross.
Sighs are poor empty things; and aerie Verse
An ornament to enrich a vulgar Hearse.
Unless we could shed tears of blood: and sigh
Our lives breath out unto his memory:
Or breath our souls forth in sad numbers; these,
Indeed, are griefs fit Ephemerides.
What less can suit the obsequies of him
Who spent himself for us? whose eyes grew dim
In searching out our buried Liberties:
Who in pursuance of the Kingdoms peace
Contracted many deaths; and by his care
Purchased diseases: holding nothing dear.
Advance the public: who (to speak in few)
To save his Country his own body slew?
For which his soul, translated to the bliss
Of Heaven, with Angels there instated is.
Where now a spotless Saint, he sweetly sings
Land Halelujahs to the King of Kings.
Where he (above the reach of humane spite)
Enjoys the comforts of the Son of light.
NOw you bold Imps of fury, who shall now
Pluck that bright wreath of glory from his brow?
Who shall receive the Guerdon of his fall?
Or preach State-Treason at his Funeral?
Now you may rail, and curse, and threat, whilst he
Derides your malice; scorns your tyranny.
Now you may lie, and swear and for swear too
To blast his Name (more then Hells self can do)
He, from the glorious Throne of happiness,
Laughs at your poor revenge, and gladly sees
The book of Conscience spread before his eyes:
Where all the actions, which your perjuries
Call Treason and injustice, be beholds
Flourish't with glory in bright lines of Gold:
Presented there, unto the God of Peace,
Most perfect, through his Saviors worthynesse.
There rests his soul, his body let us lay
With mournful tryumphs in its bed of clay:
About which, since pale death, by fates decree,
Has drawn the Curtains of Mortality.
That after ages may this loss bemoan;
Trouble the Hearse with this Inscription.
HEre lies the Pillar of the English State:
The Peoples violent love; their greatest hate.
His Countries Patriot; Religions friend:
Laws Champion: one that dared to defend
Just Liberty against Prerogative:
That scorned (his Country perishing) to live.
That durst impeach the bosom favorite
Of's Prince; and against greatness maintain right
That hated Honor bought with flattery:
And did the favors of a King deny,
To keep his faith with Heaven; that dared profess
Virtue, in the age and Land of wickedness.
That singly durst make power: do any thing
Allowed by Heaven; and this against a King.
This did he: yet, with this, he did maintain
A soul, so Loyal to his Sovereign:
That had a Traiterous thought but moved within;
There it had judged and executed bin.
A Man so good, that it was imputed to him
A sin, and that alone which did undoc him.
Full fraught with Wisdom, Virtue, Grace,
Of parts admired; of gentle race.
A Noble mind, a pious heart
Humility, with great desert.
Courtesy, bounty, innocence,
A pleasant wit, void of offense.
Here lies in short whatever can
Be called perfection in a Man.
All these lie here comprised in one;
(Alas) where shall they harbor now he is gone?

