AN EXTRACT Of Several LETTERS From SCOTLAND: Concerning the Defeat given to
the Rebels Forces under the Command of James Ghrame, Earl of Montrosse, at
Dundy, by the Army of the Parliament of Scotland, under the Conduct of
Lieutenant-Generall Baylie, and Generall-Major Urry.

Together with their pursuit of the Rebels after the Victory: Dated at
Killimure the 7. of April. 1645.

15. April. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that public
Thanksgiving be made on Sunday next in all Churches and Chapels within the
Lines of Communication for the great blessing God has given to our Brethren of
Scotland, in the late Victory obtained against the Forces under the Command of
the Earl of Montrosse: And it is further Ordered, That this Relation and Order
be forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands. 1645.

An Extract of several Letters from Scotland, concerning the defeat given to
the Rebels Forces at Dundy.
Upon Thursday the third of this instant, the one half of our Army being
quartered on the South Side of Tay, the other half on the North-side; the
Rebels apprehending that all our Army was marched over, at ten at night begun
their march toward Dundy, with intention to surprise it; which being
discovered, we sent presently advertisement to the town, to be in a readiness
to enterain them, promising them assistance very speedily: VVhereupon the
Citizens and Jnhabitants (for there were but few Soldiers there) put
themselves in a posture of Defense, and within very few hours after, the Enemy
approached about twelve of the clock the next day, with the greatest part of
his strength ( The late Earl of Montross their chief Commander slain upon a
hill, with about Five hundred, at a reasonable distance within view of the
Town:) They assaulted the Works very furiously at four several places, but
were gallantly repulsed; yet after a hot dispute, the Enemy gained one of their
Forts, and turned the Canon upon the Town, but they were quickly beaten from
it, especially by the valor of Leiutenant Coleburn, who was lying sick of the
Gout when the Enemy assaulted the Works; but having notice in what danger the
town was, and knowing how few Soldiers were in it, desired to be carried out
in a chair, not being able to walk, But upon the first sight of the Rebels he
forgot his pain, and with an hundred Musketeers which he called to him, he
made the Enemy to quit the Fort; The Enemy notwithstanding continued fighting,
till their Forces on the Hills perceived the advance of our Forces, which was
about five of the clock at night, whereupon they sounded a Retreat; Wherein,
though they made great haste, yet General Major Urry did overtake their Rear,
and did good execution upon them; It were hard to determine, whether the flight
or pursuit were more eager; Our Foot went on so cheerfully, that they cast away
all that might hinder their march (Arms excepted) and marched, or rather run
with the Horse, and the Irish and Highlanders cast away their Plaides and Arms,
to the number of six or seven hundred, and left all their Baggage and
Ammunition behind them, so that if the night had not come on very dark, few
had escaped. At the Town, and in then flight, there were killed between four
and five hundred, amongst whom, two were much lamented by the Jrish, for when
they fell, there was a terrible howling among them, and they fought desperately
to recover their bodies, one of their Faces was so disfigured and mangled by
the Irish, themselves not being able to carry away his Corpse, that it was not
possible to discern who he was; Some say it was Col: Kittogh, others say it was
O Cain, a man of great esteem amongst them; the Town left not in all above
seventeen or eighteen persons: we continued all night in the fields both Horse
and Foot, and the next morning before daylight we marched after their
greatest body, which, as we understood afterward, had marched that night as
far as Melgum, twelve miles from Dundy, and crossed Carreston before
daylight; vvhereupon our Horse followed with all the haste they might, and did
overtake them marching toward the hills, they were in such confusion, that
notwithstanding we had no Foot there, they did never so much as turn Faces
about, but marched from one plain to another; many of them are fallen off from
the rest, and many were killed by our Horse, and some by the country people;
we have pursued so quickly, that they got neither leave to harm the country,
nor to take rest or meat to refresh them. Upon Sunday at night Gen: Major Vrry
met with a party of them near Edyell, whereof he killed fourscore, and put
the rest to flight. Our Army is now divided, one part lies between the Rebels
and the hills, the other hall is marched to Atholl, the ordinary place of their
Retreat. So that, by Gods blessing upon our Forces, we trust within a short
time there shall be no Enemy here to oppose us.

Killimure, 7. April, 1645.
FINIS.

