THE EYE CLEARD; OR A PRESERVATIVE FOR THE SIGHT.

Being a quaint Composition without Fenell or Eyebright, to restore the
Poreblind, and make the Squint-Eye to look forthright. With the grateful
acknowledgement of much comfort already received in that kind by diverse,
through this, and other Remedies applied by the Author.

Such as were blind, and now can see,
Let 'em use this Receipt with me,
'Twill clear the Eye, preserve the Sight,
And give the understanding Light.
depiction of a vial of collyrium A Vial of preservative Water for Clearing ye
Eyes


Printed according to Order for G. Bishop, June 25. 1644.

The Eye Cleared, OR A PRESERVATIVE FOR THE SIGHT.
What Is here! another pair of Spectacles? No, it shall not need, the world's
well amended; such as of late appeared to be mere Barbarians both in their
carriage and expressions are now recovered, come home, and grown penitent!
their sights are cleared already, and the mistak's discovered, as will appear
by this their voluntary recantation in honest English, their own Country
language.

Why how have we been couzened, how blinded, how enchanted? when we consider
how unreasonably our reasons have miscarried, we cannot but doubt that there is
more Art then honesty at Oxford; Is this England? Is this our own Country?
Were we bred and borne here? Had our Parents and Kindred of whom we descended,
their births and burial here? and is it possible we should forget all this, or
remember (...) without infinite love and affection to this dear mother of us
all? But we have been basely deluded, and have had villainous conceits conjured
into us; we have not only neglected our duties, but contrary to reason, and in
contempt of all Laws Divine and humane, we have either in words or actions, or
both, showed our selves agents in, or furtherers of the most horrid design
against our own Country, that ever the devil put his. Instruments upon: from
which we have nothing to clear us, but that that condemns us, our ignorance.
But we are now become sencible of our faults and follies, and willing to
confess them with shame and sorrow.

When Consideration our new Pilate had discovered the Rocks we were running
upon, we presently altered our course, and steered for the I Will of Security,
for upon notise taken of the lading, the freight was found to be of no less
value then the prosperity of three Kingdoms, besides our own lives, 'twas time
to look about us: and now we have escaped the danger, we cannot but think it
our duties to express as well our sorrow for our errors, as joy for our
deliverance, that we may once again be held worthy the society of Christians.

We are not the first that have been mistaken, but we must confess ingeniously
that we are the first that ever were so fowlie mistaken, and led ( by Will with
a Wispe) so far out of the way. It had been much for one of us to have
plotted the death of his own Father, to have set a Town or two on fire, or (by
the Popes advice) have endeavored to poison a Prince for being a Protestant,
the least of these had been enough to have brought a black day, and a blacker
night upon him, but we have been favorers of a hell-bred conspiracy, wherein
Religion, Laws, Liberties, Father, Mother, Prince, people and all were to
suffer, a business of so strange a nature that no Heathen Chronicle can fit it
with a name. Thus had ignorance brought us so near the brink of confusion that
providence seemed to have much ado to recover us. All our cry was wont to be,
Shall we not fight for our King! shall we fight against our King? When allas
we knew not what we said; but now our eyes are open we cannot but confess
that we have abused the King, abused the State, and abused our selves all this
while; we acknowledge that we have deserved the reproachful name of
Malignants, and may be ashamed to say, We have had either eyes or
understandings, we have made so ill an use of them. We have cried up the
Papists, and cry down the Protestants, we have dignified the Court, and
vilified the Parliament, we have exalted the King in his Title, and pulled him
down in his power, we have extolled the Prerogative and slighted the laws; and
in all this we have assisted his Majesty in a quarrel against himself, been
his enemies in taking his part, and in standing for him betrayed him. Allas what
durst the Papist have undertaken, if we had not countenanced 'em, and what
could they have effected if we had not assisted them? when the Plot was
thoroughly digested, and the intelligence dispearc'd, that the poison newly
taken began to work; when the name Roundhead became odious to it is own
Godfathers and Godmothers, and when we were made to believe that all the best
people in England were Annabaptists and Brownists, then the Catholics began to
be courageous and cry Vive la Roy. Then they began to fall to work for
themselves that had served out their times with the Devil, and we forsooth
must be their journey-men that we might afterward become sharers in their flame
and ru^ne: In all their damnable proiects (by our compliance with 'em) their
work has been promoted, and their crime lessened, such has been their
subtilitie, and our simplicity; so that though they are before us in villainy,
we are before them in infamy: They have their old and well beloved Rom^n
Ca^^oick Religion to plead for the, but allas we (many of us) have no Religion
at all to excuse us; indeed we have stood most for Popery bec^^^e that has
stood most for ignorance, and we have ma^e li^^e doubt of salvation, because
we have been always furnished with a pleasant conceit, that it is an easy
matter to go to heaven blinde-fold. Thus we have endeavored to wrong our
own souls, insure the State, and dishonor his Majesty; Was it like that
we should be friends to the King, when we were enemies to the Kingdom? is it
possible that men should be so blind, so stupid, so mad as to conceive that
the most horrid murders and massackers that ever were heard of, could be
begun, countenanced and continued for the honor of his Majesty, can we
without shame confess that we thought it fair play for the basest Rebels
in the world to kill the best Subjects by Authority (for they have so publisined
it, and were never yet repreved for saying so) who would have thought that the
broad Seal had been so broad as to reach into Ireland for such a purpose? But
we were still kept to our Byas, by Declarrations and Proclamations (O remembor
bleeding Ireland) by reading of which our eyes became so daz^^'d, that 'twas
long before we could discern truth from selfhood; And then again we were
intoxicated with whimsies of (this they say, and that they say,) They say the
King fights for the Protestant Religion; they say he will go over himself, and
quell the Rebels in Ireland: They say he would feign come to London, and
complie with his Parliament, but his wicked Counsel will not suffer him, and a
hundred more says, That seemed to be pretty stuff, and to have a good color,
so that we were mightily taken with 'em for a long time; but at last we heard
of other Says, Northern Says, and Western Says. They said, The King is
coming up with an Army to London, to break up the Parliament: they say, He
was loath to have his good Subjects of Ireland any longer proclaimed Rebels,
who have murdered about 200000. Protestants. They say he has sent for them to
come over hither to wash off that blood with as much more here; and many other
Says of the same weaving, and the same color, crimson Says, or scarlet
Says, stuffs of so deep a dye, that 'twill hardly be washed out withal the
rain will fall betwixt this and Domes-day. Now these Says we liked not so
well, but as the former had inveagl'd us to be constant hunters, so these
spoiled all the sport, and utterly frighted us out of the Forest of fools.
Indeed these bloody Says were the first motives that drew us into a
consideration of our fearful condition, and so by degrees to become
Reformadoes in Colonel Roundheads Regiment. In which we doubt not but to make
it appear by our valors, that we are friends to our King in fighting for our
Country. And our hearty desires are, and shall ever be, that his Majesty
would seriously consider (since he will fight) whether it be not better to
fight to make his enemies his friends, then his friends his enemies, and to
protect and preserve his people that would preserve His glory, then to set good
and bad both together by the ears, till there be none left but a few
fatherless children, that when they shall come to pray for him, will be put
out with the sad remembrance of their Fathers death.

But since we must fight, let us (if it be possible) mix reason with our rage,
at least in our controversy of words, what ever we do in our blows. Is it
not madness for a man to say, He fights for his King, that fights against his
Country; is not the King a man? and what makes a man a King; if a King cannot
be King without a Kingdom, then whether is he more friend to the King, that
fights for the Kingdom that makes him so, or he that fights to destroy it? Are
your eyes open yet? you that say ye fight for the King, when ye fight to take
away the Inheritance with the Title? But when you have granted this Truth
(which cannot be dem'd, then you fall upon his command, his will and pleasure,
which you call his Prerogative; this must be granted him, and so if his will
and pleasure be to have his People destroy one another, his Prerogative that
should preserve his Power must bring it to nothing, and then you have done him
good service. Fie, fie, you are blind still, if Spectacles will not help you,
the fault's not in your fight; you are wilful and obstinate, you have not
discretion enough left to inform you, that the house you are pulling down will
beat your own brains out. We that have been in the fire, are glad we have
escaped with singing, and if we come there again, we deserve to be burned; but
our resolutions are now not so much to shun the flame, as to quench it, not to
leave it burning, but to put it out, he that help's not now, does but hinder,
and he that shows not himself a friend, must needs be taken for an enemy.
We are now in a Purgatory from whence we shall never be redeemed with sleep
and silence, (and the only prevalent Prayers of the Papists will hardly be
purchased) we must pray to the King of Kings (for here we are despised) to
stand for us, if we humble our selves, and pray as we ought, he will hear and
help us, if we can once get into his favor, we shall not need to fear the
Plotts of the Papist, the rage of the Rebel, nor the might of any Monarch: If
we will be content to be ruled by him, serve and follow him, he will put us into
such a posture, that if the Prince of Darkness shall bring up all his reserve,
and join 'em with those already in arms in his service, they shall never
prevail against the Gospel, and then we shall march against our enemy with
courage, and fight without fear, if we lose our lives, then we are sure to get
well by the bargain; not a man that dies in such a cause, in such a quarrel,
in such a condition, but gains a better Kingdom for himself, then that he
redeems with loss of his life for another.

Are not these good encouragements my masters? who would not fight for a
Kingdom? Come, you that are behind hand with the Covenant (or have taken it
with an ill resolution) lift up your eyes a little, see how gloriously the
heavens look, and consider their Maker, ye have sworn many thousands of
Oaths, enough (indeed) to damn you (i^ God should be as harsh with you, as
you have been with him) spare one now for a good purpose, do as your betters
have done, enter into Covenant with your Maker, and then join with those that
had rather loose their lives, then live to see the King lose his Kingdoms
through the malicious practices of the Known enemies to God and Religion; this
is the only way for ye to show that ye love the King, and to bring you into
favor with God, that sets up, and pulls down at his pleasure.

If you have honors, this is the way to increase 'em, if you have estates, by
this means ye may preserve them, if you have honest friends, this is the way
to keep 'em; but if ye want all or either of these, this is the way to purchase
'em: Is It not wonderful that all men generally should be so apt and active
with hazard of their lives to purchase gold and glory, and that now there
should be a generation of men living, that will hardly be entreated with the
gain of both, to procure their own safeties? how many of us have already paid
deerly for our obstinacy? and hazarded our souls by loosing our estates, an
unparral'd mark of malice. We have given to help on out ruins willingly,
and by that means, have been forced to give again for our preservations
against our wills: we have parted with a great part of our estates, for the
hurt of the Kingdom, and a small part given for the preservation of it has
undone us; O miserable wretches! we have studdied Objections against the
present taxes by the Parliament, and defenses against the former by the King;
unlawful Monopolies, then to pick our purses for ever, and keep us without
Parliaments we talk of with content, but legal impositions now, to help put
an end to our miseries, and to end with them, we cannot endure. This has been
our best condition, and (indeed) the condition of the best of us; For many of
us have run our selves by worse practices into greater perils, we have had
strange hopes to become gainers by changing our constant securities for
apparent dangers; we have left our houses in the City, where we might have
lived safely, and gone to our loving friends at Oxford, that we might be undone
quickly; we have been always forward to receive the Cavalieres into our
habitations, and they have been always as forward to carry away that we had at
parting. How many houses, how many Towns, how many Cities, how many Counties
have by our favoring that party, been brought to misery; look upon York the
fountain of that River of calamity, that keeps still the vvinding current
through Lincolnshire, Lancashire, Cheshire, Darbishire, Staffordshire,
Nottinghamshire, Warwickshire, Lecester-shire, Northamptonshire,
Buckinghamshire, Barkshire and Oxfordshire; (where it has so overflovvn, it
has almost spoiled the whole Country) from whence he runs on in his
Malignant course tovvard Bristow, Tanton, and Exeter, and by the way consider
what a multitude of people in all these parts have been guilty of their own
undoings, and therefore deserve no pity, but how many thousands of Innocents
(besides) have they been the destruction of, for which they are to answer?
Allas poor York, thou have suffered wonderfully in thy own person, thank thy
Malignants; these unnatural wars were first bred in thee, and now thou art
like to be buried in them. Thou art full of Soldiers within, and begirt with
Soldiers without, thou were the first City that raised them, and art like to
be the first razed by them; how ever thy affrightments are great, and thy
inward distractions no doubt are worse then thy outward allarmes, who are our
friends says one, they that are our enemies says another, who fights for us,
they that fight against us, our enemies are within, and our friends are
without, what shift shall we make to be conquered? we perish if we prosper;
these are strange words, and they must needs be strange wars, when the City
is in more danger by them that defend it, then by those that raise Batteries
against it.

When you have seen enough herein to make you sorrowful, conveigh your
thoughts to Redding, there you shall find all quiet enough now, (at least in
outward appearance) but the poor people have a war still within them, they
grieve at their poverty, yet a number of them have gained by their losses, for
humilitie's better then riches, there is a great deal less pride (now) then
there was, and a great deal more repentance, but all the Country cries out,
we are undone by 't, and Redding must not only bear his own blame and loss,
but be subject to a perpetual reproach for undoing his neighbors, this it is
to be drunk with Maligo. Then surveigh Bristoll, and consider their bargain,
they have got the purchase they longed for, and that some of their great ones
(before) hanged for, whose example could not fright the rest out of their
humors, but made them more eager in persuit of the gain and honor they
dream's of; O how fearful they were of being preserved; many that had hardly
praid of a month before, fell now to their devotions, with such zeal, that
God heard their prayers, granted their requests, and made 'em slaves and
beggars: and now they have nothing to say, but that they are miserable, and
have deserved it: But that that heightens their callamitie, is the prosperous
condition of glorious Gloucester, in whose story they read such fidelity, and
valor, so much honesty and honor, that they are ashamed to look upon their
own.

But to make an end with Thee Worcester, (that have taken a course to make an
end of thy self) in former ages, a City, now (to thy own people) a prison;
thou were wont to look beautifully, be clad richly, fear daintily, and trade
freely, now thou look ugly, go beggarly, fear hardly, and live
slavishly; it seems Obstmacie has so bewitched thee, that misery and infamy
are thy choice familiars; But it is pity thou should be suffered to perish,
though thou desire it: no doubt the Parliament will consider what thou have
been, and be a means shortly to recover thee thy ancient Immunities, and make
thee a City again, whether thou will or no.

FINIS.

