The Christian COMMONWEALTH: OR, The Civil Policy Of The Rising Kingdom of
Jesus Christ.

Written Before the Interruption of the Government, by Mr. John Eliot, Teacher
of the Church of Christ at Roxbury in New England.

And Now Published (after his consent given) by a Server of the Season.

LONDON: Printed for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in Popes-Head-Alley.

To the Chosen, and Holy, and Faithful, who manage the Wars of the Lord,
against Antichrist, in great Britain; and to all the Saints, faithful Brethren,
and Christian people, of the Commonwealth of England: Grace and Mercy, with
Peace and Truth be multiplied, through Jesus Christ our Sovereign Lord and King.
Ever Honored, and Beloved in Christ,
THe late great Changes, which have fallen out in great Britain and Ireland,
have so amazed the most of men; and the black, and confused Clouds, which have
overspread the whole Land, have so darkened the way of those wheels of
Providence by which Christ is coming to set up his Kingdom, that they whose
eyes the Lord has begun to open, to see Christ coming, in power and in great
glory, according to his Promise, do also see the other part of his word
verified, namely, that the coming of Christ is in the Clouds of darkness; by
means whereof it is long ere all men can see him, or be persuaded that it is
he, who is now coming; though afterward, they shall see that even those Clouds
were needful, a while to obscure the bright appearance of his design.

Lately reading a Book called a Plea for Non-subscribers, or the grounds and
reasons of many Ministers of Cheshire and Lancashire, etc. though I had before
heard of the sad differences, distances of spirit, and dissatisfactions among
the people of the Lord: yet then my heart bled to see such precious holy men,
pleading (as they believe) for God, with a pure and sincere Conscience, and yet
in so doing strongly to speak against the glorious work of the Lord Jesus, in
casting down Antichrist, and setting up his own Kingdom foretold in Scripture,
and now fulfilling, as also strongly and sharply speaking against those whom
the Lord has pleased to employ, and improve as his Instruments in
accomplishing thereof.

On the other side, those writings which that Book Answers, have so missed
the Principles on which the Cause stands, whereby the Consciences of others
should be satisfied, who oppose; as that the Answerers have clearly the upper
ground of them in many things: and therefore stand firm in that which they
suppose to be a right Cause, and weaken those who have indeed a right Cause in
hand, insomuch as that hereby the difference is exceedingly increased and
sharpened.

Now though I am the most unmeet of all men, to undertake to interpose and
speak unto such learned, grave, holy, and eminent persons, every way beyond me
in all accomplishments for the Lords work, and in a Cause so much above me; yet
was I pressed in my spirit, considering whose Cause I plead, to take the
boldness to propound that unto them, which I believe to be the true state of
the Cause, and which (by the blessing of God) may reach to their satisfaction;
when they see that they, into whose hands the Lord (to the wonderment of men)
has been pleased to put power, do follow the Lord, and accomplish his Word,
aim at the fulfilling of his ends and design, denying themselves, that they may
advance Christ Jesus in the Throne, and let him reign over them. The prayers,
the expectation, and faith of the Saints, in the Prophecies and Promises of
holy Scripture, are daily sounding in the ears of the Lord, for the downfall of
Antichrist, and with him all humane Powers, Polities, Dominions, and
Governments; and in the room thereof, we wait for the coming of the Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus, who by his Divine Wisdom, Power, Government and Laws, given us
(although hitherto sealed up in a great measure) in the holy Scriptures, will
reign over all the Nations of the earth in his due time: I mean, the Lord Jesus
will bring down all people, to be ruled by the Institutions, Laws, and
Directions of the Word of God; not only in Church Government and
Administrations, but also in the Government and Administration of all affairs
in the Commonwealth. And then Christ reigns, when all things among men, are
done by the direction of the word of his mouth: his Kingdom is then come
amongst us, when his will is done on earth, as it is done in heaven; where no
Humane or Angelical Policy or Wisdom does guide any thing, but all is done by
Divine direction Psalm. 103. 20. Angels do his commandment, hearkening to the
voice of his word.
; and so it shall be on earth, when, and where Christ reigns.

It is Prophesied, Dan. 2. 34, 35, etc. Thou saw Dan. 2. 34, 35, etc.
till that a stone was cut out, without hands, which smote the image upon his
feet that were of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. 35. Then was the
iton, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, broken to pieces together,
and became like the chaff of the summer threshing-floors; and the wind carried
them away, that no place was found for them: and the stone that smote the
image, became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth, etc. Which
Prophecy does clearly foreshew the forenamed points: for there is an epitomy
of all the Monarchies, Governments, and Polities of men, who have had their
Humane Glory in this world: the last, and strongest of all which Dominions is
the Roman; so mixed and interwoven in many States, by the combining of that
dirty Roman Religion, with civil Powers, as that when that stone Christ, by his
faithful Instruments, shall overthrow, and beat in pieces that Religion, they
must and shall, according as it is written, beat down withal the strongest
Iron sinews of oivil States, which are propugnators, and supporters thereof,
whether professed or secretly.

Yea, moreover, when Christ that stone, shall by his chosen Instruments, smite
in pieces all the Romish Religion, and civil States, which are complicated with
it, and supporters of it, (who though they greatly care not for it Dan. 2. 43.
They shall not cleave one to another, even as iron is not mixed with clay.
, yet for their own ends they are supporters of it) then, down comes the whole
Image from top to bottom; all Dominions and Governments of man, by Humane
Policy, forms of Government and Laws in all places whatsoever, in Gods order
and time; who by their fall shall be so pashed in pieces, that though they were
before, a terror to men, yet now they shall be light and contemptible things,
of no more account with men then dust or chaff: because Divine institutions,
both of Government and Laws, arising in the room of Humane, they will be quite
darkened, even as the Stars are by the rising-Sun: for in the room of them
shall arise the Government of the Lord Jesus, who by the Word of his Mouth,
written in the holy Scriptures, shall o^der all affairs among men; And great
shall be his Dominion: for the Stone Christ shall grow to be a mountain filling
the whole earth: all men submitting to be ruled by the Word, in civil, as well
as Churchaffairs.

Now it seems to me that the Lord Christ is now accomplishing these things in
great Britain. The faithful Brethren in Scotland gave the first blow at the
dirty toes, and feet of this Image; with whom the faithful brethren in England,
presently concurred. But the Iron of the Civil State, stuck so fast to the miry
clay, that according to the Word of Christ, they are (beyond all the thoughts
of men) both fallen together; they are fallen, they are fallen, they are both
fallen together: Oh that men would therefore praise the Lord, for his faithful
Word, and goodness; for his mercy endurteh for ever! and all his faithful Word
shall be accomplished. Amen, Amen.

There be many other Prophecies of holy Scriptures touching these things (as
the Saints well know) the application whereof to what is now done in England, I
will not undertake, it being a work rather for a Treatise then a Preface. Yea,
some Prophecies, (as I apprebend) do more particularly describe what is now
done; but I shall not mention them, hoping that others will do it, according as
the Lord shall please to open that door.

Now these things being so, it does deeply concern those holy and faithful ones
of the Lord, who have been Instruments in his hand, to accomplish these great
and glorious works, whether by Councils or Wars, or otherwise, to be wise, and
discerning of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, in this great work of
bringing about the Kingdom to David, to lay the Government upon his shoulders:
that after all these clouds and storms, the peaceable Kingdom of Christ may
rise up, and the Lord may reign in England. Much is spoken of the rightful Heir
of the Crown of England, and the unjustice of casting out the right Heir: but
Christ is the only right Heir of the Crown of England Psa. 2. 8. The uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession.
, and of all other Nations also Rev. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of this world are
become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign, etc.
; and he is now come to take possession of his Kingdom, making England first in
that blessed work of setting up the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus: and in order
thereunto, he has cast down not only the miry Religion, and Government of
Antichrist, but also the former form of civil Government, which did stick so
fast unto it, until by an unavoidable necessity, it fell with it; which while
it stood, and as it stood, was too high to stoop to the Lord Jesus, to be ruled
by his command. Now therefore by these preparations made by the naked Arm of
the Lord Jesus, to set up his Kingdom in England, he calls upon those
Worthies into whose hands he has betrusted the managing of this great work,
now to advance Christ, not man; not themselves, but Christ; which doing, takes
off those heavy imputations of investing themselves with Authority, of taking
the Inheritance to themselves -- God forbid, God forbid, that it should enter
into our hearts, to think so unworthily, so unchristianly, so dishonourably of
such renowned servants of the Lord, who have so graciously, and humbly ever
given unto the Lord, all the glory of all their Victories, that now at last
they should rob him of his Crown, Dominion, and Government; which to set up in
England, has been the mark and Scope of all these late great works of God; and
if it be not yet done, surely it is either because the Lord has not yet fully
revealed to them, what his will is they should do in the midst of these
confusions, or because the unquietness of the times permits them not to go
about it.

That which the Lord now calls England to attend, is not to search humane
Polities and Platformes of Government, contrived by the wisdom of man; but as
the Lord has carried on their works for them, so they ought to go unto the
Lord, and enquire at the Word of his mouth, what Platform of Government he
has therein commanded and pr^scribed; and humble themselves to embrace that as
the best, how mean soever it may seem to Humane Wisdom. Faith can see beauty,
power and glory in any Divine institution, when Humane Wisdom may think it weak
and contemptible.

There is undoubtedly a form of Civil Government instituted by God himself in
the holy Scriptures; whereby any Nation may enjoy all the ends and effects of
Government in the best manner, were they but persuaded to make trial of it. We
should derogate from the sufficiency and perfection of the Scriptures, if we
should deny it. The Scripture is able thoroughly to furnish the man of God
(whether Magistrate in the Commonwealth, or Elder in the Church, or any other)
unto every good work.

And when a Christian people are to choose their Government, should they take
their Pattern from the Nations of the World 1 Samuel 8. 5. Make us a King to judge
us like all the Nations.
, we know what an offense that would be to Christ, who intends to Rule them
himself, by his own Divine Pattern and Direction. Christ is now about to ruin
the Roman-Image; Wisdom therefore it is, to look above all such Paterns to find
out a Divine Platform, taught by God himself, which he will delight to bless
unto such men as shall submit unto it.

And if there be a Divine institution of civil Government that may suit the
State of England, I doubt not but all the godly in the Land would choose that
way of Government before any other in the World: for every Divine institution
has a Divine blessing in it. Yea, God himself is more eminently present,
ruling thereby; and the Spirit of God does breath in and bless every
institution of the Word, to make it powerful and effectual to attain its end
better, and more effectually then any Humane Ordinance and Institution in the
W^^ld can do. The Promise also of Gods blessing and protection is unto all
those, who walk in Scripture-ways and Ordinances. Moreover, that uncomfortable
difference among the people of God about that great business of changing the
Government in England, would hereby be reconciled, and all things brought unto
an holy peace, every one readily yielding that the Lord Jesus should assume the
Sovereignty, to appoint them what Government to set up over them: and would
most readily embrace that, whereby the Lord himself, should reign in England.

I think it needful to insert this word of Apology for my self; That it pleased
the Lord of his free mercy to me (in my self being no way fitted for such a
work) to put me on, to instruct our poor, blind, and dark Indians, in the good
knowledge of the Lord: who when (through grace) they tasted of the knowledge of
God, of themselves, of Christ and redemption by him; they desired to leave
their wild and scattered manner of life, and come under Civil Government and
Order; which did put me upon search, after the mind of the Lord in that
respect. And this VOW I did solemnly make unto the Lord concerning them; that
they being a people without any form of Government, and now to choose; I would
endeavor with all my might, to bring them under the Government of the Lord
only: Namely, that I would instruct them to embrace such Government, both Civil
and Ecclesiastical, as the Lord has commanded in the holy Scriptures; and to
deduce all their Laws from the holy Scriptures, that so they may be the Lords
people, ruled by him alone in all things. Which accordingly they have begun to
do through grace, covenanting with the Lord, in a day of fasting and prayer, to
be the Lords people; and to receive that form of Government, which they had
learned to be a Divine institution in the holy Scriptures. This occasion did
first put me upon this Study, who am no Statesman, nor acquainted with matters
of that nature; but only spend my time in the Study of the holy Book of God.
But having collected by the Lords help out of the holy Scripture this following
form of Government: and seeing the excellent harmony and order thereof, both
in the several Courts, gradually ascending one above another, and all cases
among the people coming under such a certain, and orderly way of receiving
speedy issue; and all Appeals, having such a free and unprejudiced passage, in
their gradual ascent, even to the highest, and final determination: These and
such other things made me think, that it is a most desirable, and peaceable
form of Government, and suitable to any Christian people, who reverence the
Word of God; yea, the more eminent and Christian they be, the more suitable it
is for them.

Especially also considering, that though the single form of tens, fifties,
hundreds, and thousands, will be but of small capacity in great Commonwealths,
and populous Cities: yet the superior orders, of Myriades or ten thousands,
fifty thousands, hundred thousands, and thousand thousands, are exceeding
comprehensive, to extend Government to the greatest people; and yet with that
certain and peaceable order (without any interfering or confusion) for speedy
Justice, and determination of all Causes, as that it seems to me to be the
most excellent Government that ever was in the World. And adding to this, above
all considerations and commendations, that it is a DIVINE INSTITUTION, sprung
from heavenly wisdom commanded in Scripture, filled with the Spirit of God,
which is able to carry on the Wheels of this Government, with a most
irresistible and successful force and power, to the attainment of all the ends
of Government among men most effectually. Yea, it seems to me, that this is
that form of Government, by which Christ means to rule all the Nations on
earth according to the Scriptures. Yea farther, repenting-believing Israel and
Judah, I believe, shall serve and obey Christ in this way of Civil Government;
and who knows but our obedience hereunto, may hasten and farther their coming
in?

I would not exceed bounds of humble modesty; yet let me make bold to adventure
the producing a farther Meditation, touching the Divinity and heavenly
excellency of this Government of the Lord; namely, that the Angels of Heaven
are governed by this order of Government, according as it is applyable to their
condition. It is past all doubt, that there is an heavenly order, (I do not say
Judicature, as with us) among the Angels: for as Hell is a place of confusion,
so heaven of order; and if God is the God of order in the Church, whereby the
place of his feet is beautified; much more is heaven beautified, by a most
heavenly order of the Church there residing. And if Solomon's Court was in that
respect of a ravishing glory, namely, by the order of it, and of his
attendants: much more is heaven in an excellent order, and all the Angels the
holy attendants of Gods Throne, attending in comely order. And if the order of
Solomon's Court, was one effect of his great wisdom, can we think that the
infinite wisdom of God, attended by Angels, Spirits of such wonderful wisdom,
should not be attended in a most glorious order, and his attendantss
excellently beautified, by walking in an heavenly order? therefore there is an
heavenly order among them. And that it is this order of tens, hundreds,
thousands, etc. does appear in several Scriptures, where we find mention made
of them in this order; wherein it is observable, that so great is the number of
them, that they are not mentioned in their single order; but the lowest that I
have observed, is Myriades of Angels, Heb. 12. 22. and so the Saints shall find
them ordered when they come to heaven Mat. 26. 53. Christ makes mention of
twelve Legions of Angels, for his present assistance, if he thought good; which
is all one with Myriades.
. They are also mentioned by the highest degree of the Superior order, viz.
thousands of thousands; and not only so, but by a Supreme order, viz. Myriades
of Myriades, Rev. 5. 11. which I call Supreme, being the highest I find
mentioned in Scripture: but whether that be the highest order of Angels, is not
revealed that I know of: but thus it seems unto me, that the Angels are in
this order of Government. Likewise the Saints in heaven seem to be in the same
order; for when Christ comes to judgment, and all the Saints with him, 1
These. 4. 13. they shall come in this order, Jude, verse. 14. With Myriades of
his Saints, behold the Lord comes.

Now if this be the order of Government in Heaven, what an heaven upon earth
shall that be, when all the Kingdoms and Nations on the earth shall be so
ruled? and then shall the will of God be done on earth, as it is done in
heaven, when he reigns over men on earth, in the same order of Government as
he does in heaven It is not nothing, that when Christ fed the people
miraculously, he set them down by hundreds, and by fifties, Mar. 6. 40. as if
Christ delighted in that order.
.

Let me be yet farther bold to propound another Meditation, under the
correction of better judgments, according as I do the former, upon that text
Dan. 7. 10. where is set forth the judgment of God executed upon Antichrist.
Many things might be showed out of the context, to prove, that it is not the
last judgment, which is there spoken of. The means of execution of that
judgment, is by the Wars of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus, as appears in the Book of
the Revelation; and the people executing those Wars, by this text seem to be a
people ruled by this order of Government: which if it be so, may it not give
some light to find out the ten Kings, which shall hate the Whore, make her
desolate and naked, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire?

These things considered, touching the excellency of this form of Government,
and especially the Divinity of it, and now also by a wonderful work of God,
England being in a capacity to choose unto themselves a new Government, and in
such deep perplexity about that great Question, where to set their foot in
peace; some pleading for the unjustice of casting off the Kingly Government,
others unsatisfied with the present, and all expecting what will be the
conclusion. And seeing no Humane Form, quiet and safe, to set down their foot
upon, in rest and tranquillity, hereby all hearts are perplexed, sighing up to
heaven for direction what to do, and where to find rest and quiet to the Land.
By this means, all hearts are prepared to embrace any help or counsel from the
Lord; and when they have wearied themselves with differences, they will gladly
all concur together, to set open the door, to let in the Lord Jesus, to give
them rest; who has been all this while knocking at the door, by these
perplexing troubles: that his Government might be on all hands galdly embraced,
and himself find a free and peaceable entrance, to begin his blessed and
waited-for reign over the Nations of the earth, according as it is Prophesied
in the holy Scriptures.

Therefore in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Saints (whose
Kingdom I desire to advance, with all my might and heart) I do beseech those
chosen, and holy and faithful Saints, who by Councils at Home, or by Wars in
the Field, have fought the Lords Battles against Antichrist, and have carried
on the Cause of Christ hitherunto, That you would now set the Crown of England
upon the head of Christ, whose only true inheritance it is, by the gift of his
Father Psa. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I will give thee the uttermost parts of the
earth for thy possession.
: Let him be your JUDGE, Let him be your LAWGIVER, Let him be your KING! take
the pattern and form of your Government, from the Word of his Mouth, which will
have power over the Consciences of all the people of the Land, and compose all
differences about that point, into a sweet harmony of obedience and subjection
to Christ our Lord and King, with one heart and consent; and will bring about
all the people with one heart, and shoulder, to promote the designs of Christ,
and yours also, when they see that yours are not for your selves, but for the
Lord, to accomplish all the remainder of the great works of the Lord, even
until Antichrist be destroyed, and the Throne of the Beast burnt with fire, and
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus set up in many Nations.

You blessed ones of the Lord, who have so eminently, beyond the wont of
Conquerors, humbled and abased yourselves, as no-bodies in the work, and
ascribed all the praise and glory of your Valiant Atchievments, unto the Lord
Jesus, whom by faith you did always see fighting for you, and (to your
admiration) getting the Victory for you! You that have with an holy boldness of
faith, made those dreadful appeals (unheard of in other stories) unto the Lord
Jesus, to witness to the sincerity of your Cause and Conscience by his own arm,
and in all your straights have never found him to fail you, or farsake you; but
still made you Conquerors, not only of your Enemies, but (which is more) of
your selves also, not to arrogate praise unto your selves; nor to improve your
Victories beyond the bounds of Christian patience and love to the conquered;
and all for the honor and glory of Christ, and his grace; that his Name and
Cause might find room and acceptance in the hearts of your Enemies, whom you
therefore used like Christian Brethren, and not like Enemies.

Shall such holy ones as you, need persuasion to set that Crown upon the head
of Christ, which he has put into your hands to dispose of? where can you make
a better choice, then to take the Lord to be your King? and where can you think
to find, a better pattern of Government, then in the Word of God? and where can
you think to find better Laws, then in the holy Scriptures?

This following Platform of Government, I do no farther urge, then you shall
find it to be purely deduced from the holy Scriptures. It is the holy
Scriptures of God only that I do urge, to be your only Magna Charta, by which
you should be ruled in all things; which being, Christ is your King and
Sovereign Lawgiver, and you are his people ruled by him in all things.

And you my dear Brethren, the faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, and
all Christian Brethren, who do not yet see cause of submitting, and yielding
unto this Change; I do beseech you to consider the times, and compare the
Prophecies of Scripture, with the present providence; and see if you find not
all things to come to pass, according as it is written; and that these
wonderful providence are not without Scripture-authority, and much to be
regarded by the people of God. Nor be they the executions of Divine wrath upon
either Church or World, by profane hands, who act their own wills and lusts,
though they accomplish Gods ends; but they be the pouring out of the wrath of
God upon Antichrist, for his destruction, and overthrow of his Kingdom, by the
hands of holy Saints, according to the command of Christ; Christ himself riding
forth Victoriously among them, and performing his great works, written and
foretold in the holy Scriptures. May not Queen Mary's coming to the Crown by
the help of the Saints, be seasonably called to remembrance? or if not, yet now
the time is come, to change Governments, and to cast down all at the foot of
Christ, that he may Reign, and fill the Earth with the glory of his Government.

No Oaths or Covenants of Gods People are against Christ, but in subordination
to him, and to the advancement of his Kingdom. If therefore these great Changes
are carried up to that head, that is the true scope, and end of those Vows and
Promises. It were not lawful to terminate such a Vow or Covenant, as that is,
upon any Person, Family or Creature; it were Idolatry; nor was it so; nor is it
now broken, by breaking all Creatures in pieces, that stood in the way of
obtaining the true end thereof, namely, the advancement of the Lord Jesus, and
his Kingdom.

I beseech you therefore help forward this work, which Christ has put into the
hands of those whom he has made eminent, in accomplishing the works of his
glorious coming, to set up his Dominion on earth. Be not behind in bringing
Christ to the Throne in England! You, you, the holy Watchmen of the Lord, have
given God no rest by your uncessant Prayers, for the bringing about what is now
done; follow on therefore to follow the Lord, and, as Antichrist falls, with
whatever else stood in the way of Christ: so now let Christ come in, and help
ye for ward the setting up of his Kingdom.

I am bold to present this Scripture-Platform of Government, to public view,
(if advice so carry it) at this season; because I do believe it to be a Divine
Institution of a Civil Government; and seems to me to be such, as will well
suit the present condition of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any other
religious people in the World, who fear the command of God, and tremble at his
Word: and being persuaded in my heart, that it is the mind of the Lord, that
Nations should be governed by Scripture-Institutions, the time being come that
the Lord is about to shake all the Earth, and throw down that great Idol of
Humane Wisdom in Governments, and set up Scripture-Government in the room
thereof. It may please God to give acceptance unto this poor beginning, and
move the hearts of such as are wise, to prosecute this design of Christ, and
more accurately to search the Scriptures, to find out the perfect will of God
in this point, which yet is but in its birth, and dawning; many things being
yet dim, and dark: in the morning twilight, we cannot see far before us, nor
round about us; but the Rising-Sun, will through grace, bring greater light
with him.

As for such wholesome, just, and wise Laws, as any Nation has already made,
the Wisdom of the Lord will teach his People to refer them to their
Scripture-principles, demonstrating the truth and equity thereof, by the Word
of God, whereby they will appear to be the deducts from the Word of God; and
hence they that are governed by them, are governed by the Lord; they that break
them sin against the Lord, by breaking his Commandment and Law.

It were a Work worthy the labors of the best Divines, and the best of Men, to
demonstrate the equity of all the wholesome and wise Laws of ENGLAND by the Word
of God; the effects of which Work would be of admirable consequence to
sanctify the whole Land, to make the Rulers more expressly to govern for the
Lord, and the People to obey the Lord, in obeying their Governors; and so the
Lord himself should Reign over them.

My continual Prayer in this behalf, at the Throne of Grace is, that the Lord
would so far scatter those black Clouds, which do darken the minds of God's
People in ENGLAND, that they may see some Beams of the brightness of CHRIST his
coming to Reign; and that the Lord would please to bow their divided hearts, to
meet with one consent and accord, to make CHRIST their LAWGIVER, and JUDGE,
and KING, in whom alone they shall find settlement and assured peace.

Amen, Amen.
THE CHRISTIAN COMMONWEALTH: OR, The Civil Polity of the Rising Kingdom of
Jesus Christ.
CHAP. I.
IT is the Commandment of the Lord, that a people should enter into Covenant
with the Lord to become his people, even in their Civil Society, as well as in
their Church-Society Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12, 13. You stand this day all of you,
before the Lord your God; your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders and your
Officers, with all the men of Israel* (11.) Your little ones, your wives, and
the stranger that is in thy Camp, etc. (12.) That thou should enter into
Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his oath which he makes with thee
this day, (13.) That he may establish thee to day for a people unto himself,
and that he may be to thee a God, as he has said unto thee, and as he has
sworn unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob.
Whereby they submit themselves to be ruled by the Lord in all things,
receiving from him, both the platform of their Government, and all their Laws;
which when they do, then Christ reigns over them in all things, they being
ruled by his Will, and by the Word of his Mouth (b). (a) Isai. 33. 22. The Lord
is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he shall save us.


The substance of which Covenant, and subjection of themselves unto the Lord,
to be ruled by him in all things, is this. That they do humbly confess their
corruption by nature, and lost condition; that they acknowledge the free grace
Deuteronomy. 26. 1. ad 12. I profess this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come
into the Country, which the Lord thy God swear unto thy fathers to give us,
etc. verse. 5. And thou shall speak, and say before the Lord thy God, A Syrian
ready to perish was my father, and he wont down into Egypt, etc. verse. 7. And
when we cried unto the Lord, he heard us, etc. ver. 8. And the Lord brought us
forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, etc.
of God, in their redemption by Christ, and in the promulgation of the Gospel
unto them, and making application thereof effectually unto their souls: and
therefore the Lord has showed his everlasting Love unto them, and caused them
inwardly by faith, to give up themselves unto him, to be for ever his, to love,
serve, and obey him, in all his Word and Commandments: so now they do
outwardly, and solemnly with the rest of Gods people join together so to do in
their Civil Polity, receiving from the Lord, both the platform of their civil
Government, as it is set down (in the essentials of it) in the holy Scriptures;
and also all their Laws, which they resolve through his grace, to fetch out of
the Word of God, making that their only Magna Charta; and accounting no Law,
Statute or Judgment valid, farther then it appears to arise and flow from
the Word of God.

Such as with a lively faith enter into or walk in this Covenant, do perform
every Act (wherein they are free from temptation) of civil conversation among
men 1 Cor. 10. 31. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
glory of God.
by faith in obedience unto God. Instructing, that all should do so, who take
this Covenant; and if they do not, they are guilty of breach of Covenant,
before God. A willing subjection of a man's self to Christ in this Covenant, is
some hopeful sign of some degree of faith in Christ, and love to God; and as a
good preparative for a more near approach to Christ in Church Fellowship, and
Covenant: he that is willing to serve Christ by the Polity of the second Table
civilly, is in some degree of preparation to serve him, by the Polity of the
first Table Ecclesiastically.

The Child is implicitly comprehended in the Fathers Covenant Deuteronomy. 29. 14,
15. Neither with you only do I make this Covenant this day, but with him that
stands here this day before the Lord our God, and with him that is not here
with us this day.
, the Wife is explicitly comprehended in her Husbands, insomuch that in her
Widowhood she and her Family are one, under the order of the Government of God.

The particular form of Government, which is approved of God Exodus 18. 23. If
thou shall do this thing, and God command thee so.
, instituted by Moses Exodus 18. 24. Moses hearkened, and did all.
among the sons of Israel, (and profitable to be received by any Nation or
People, who reverence the command of God, and tremble at his Word) is this;
that they choose 18. 21. Thou shall provide able men. With Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Take ye
wise men, and I will make them Rulers.
unto themselves Rulers of thousands Exodus 18. 25. Deuteronomy. 1. 15.
, of hundreds, of fifties and of tens, who shall govern according to the pure,
holy, righteous, perfect and good Law of God Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Fear not the face of
man, for the judgment is Gods. 2 Chro. 19. 6. And said to the Judges, Take
heed what ye do: for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in
the judgment: Ezekiel. 44. 24. They shall judge it according to my judgment.
, written in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

The forming of which Platform of Government, deduced from the Scriptures, is:
as follows.

CHAP II.
THe several degrees of tens, fifties, hundreds, and thousands; may fitly be
called orders of men, governed by God, the God of order Isa. 9. 7. Of the
increase of his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of
David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it.
.

Which orders of men are 1. Those of the single Platform. 2. Those of the
Superior arising upon the first.


First for the single Platform, which is Gods Standard, according to which the
Superior is delineated, or measured out. God has commanded that ten men should
choose unto them a Ruler of ten.

Hence, if they be not ten, they cannot choose unto them a Ruler of ten. Hence
also the Ruler makes the eleventh man; or rather, is the head Exodus 18. 25.
Make them heads ov^^ ^he people, Rulers of tens, etc.
of the order of ten.

Hence also one Ruler of ten, may Rule over nineteen men; but if they become
twenty, then by Gods institution, they must choose another Ruler of ten; for God
has said, Choose you Rulers of tens.

Servants, or Sons living with their Parents, as in the condition of Servants
Gal. 4. 1. Tho heir so long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant.
, they may not explicitly, politically, personally, choose public Rulers;
while they live under the Authority of Family-government, they are not
personally capable of interest in public Political Elections: it is enough to
attain Gods ends, that they be virtually comprehended in their Fathera Covenant.

But if they Marry, or live in the state of allowed public Freemen, then are
they capable of, and are bound personally to act, in the choice of their
publickRulers. The Rulers of the Father are virtually Rulers of the Child: but
when the child puts forth an act of choice, he has liberty to choose, in due
order, another Ruler of ten, unto whom he does personally submit himself: for
all men are commanded to choose unto themselves Rulers.

By that one act of choosing his Ruler of ten, and subjecting himself unto him,
he does choose, and subject himself unto all the Superior orders, under whom his
Ruler of ten is ruled.

No man may lawfully, or without sin, live out of the order of Gods Government:
and should any man refuse to (...) and subject himself unto the same, he cannot
justly challenge any privilege, benefit, or protection thereby, though his
virtual interest (in such as have it) has hold upon him, until his actual
choice does more expressly engage him; and Love will improve every thing for the
good of those, who know not what is good for themselves. He is beneath the
condition of a stranger, who shall Apostatize from the Government of the Lord;
yea, beneath the condition of Barbarians, who are not yet come in, either by
themselves, or their Progenitors.

As the Ruler of ten may rule over more then ten, even any number under twenty:
so it is with the other orders, One Ruler of fifty, may rule over nine orders
of ten; but if they become ten, then they must choose another Ruler of fifty:
for the Lord has said, Choose you Rulers of fifties; that is, every five orders
of ten shall choose a Ruler of fifty.

Again, one Ruler of an hundred, may rule over three orders of fifties; but if
they become four orders of fifties, then two of them must choose another Ruler:
for God has said, Choose Rulers of hundreds; that is, of ten orders of tens.

Again, one Ruler of a thousand, may rule over nineteen orders of an hundred;
but if they become twenty orders, then they must by Gods institution choose
another Ruler of a thousand: for the Lord has said, Choose you Rulers of
thousands.

Hence one Ruler of a thousand may, in case all the orders under him be at the
fullest, rule over 8436. men; which ordinarily, amounts to 33687 souls: which
does thus appear.

One Ruler of ten may rule over nineteen men. One Ruler of fifty may rule over
nine orders of ten; and nine times nineteen, makes one hundred seventy one.
One Ruler of an hundred, may rule over three orders of fifty; and thrice 171,
makes 413. One Ruler of a thousand, may rule over nineteen orders of an
hundred; and nineteen times 413, makes 7847. Add therefore to the people,
their Rulers, thus: One Ruler of 50. with his nine Rulers of ten, make ten
Rulers. One Ruler of an 100. may rule over three orders of 50. which makes 30.
Rulers. One Ruler of a thousand, may have under him nineteen Rulers of an
hundred. So that 19. times 30. and 19. added to them, makes 589 Rulers Add to
them 7847 People Summa totalis is 8436
And generally among mankind, for one head of a Family, there be at least three
more souls of women and children: so that four times 8436. amounts to 33687.
souls. But it will be rare for all orders to be full at once.

Again, these orders of men, may be multiplied thus: when such as are
Supernumerary in several orders, agree together to make another order. For
example, if two Rulers of ten, have each of them fifteen men under them, then
five men of one order, and five of the other order, may agree together to make
another, a new order: and so in all other orders it may be.

But if they do this, if they make a new order because they desire it, and not
because the Word of the Lord commands it; when they multiply orders by
choice, and not by necessity of institution: then their next Superiors shall
guide and direct them in peace and mutual love: for Moses guided the people in
all their Elections Exodus 18. 21, 25. Thou shall provide able men. 25. Moses
chose able men. Deuteronomy. 1. 15. So I took the chief of your Tribes.
.

If they cannot agree, then they may appeal to their next Superiors, and so
unto the highest Deuteronomy. 1. 17. The case that is too hard for you, bring it unto
me.
Council, if need be: For the Council is (in ordinary dispensation) in Moses
stead; and the Scriptures are the Mouth of God, at which they must enquire, and
by the guidance thereof determine of all Cases, so far as the Lord gives
light; and until the mind of God be known, the Case must stay, whatever it be
Number. 15. 34. And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should
be done unto him. Numb. 9. 8. Stand still, and I will hear what the Lord will
command concerning you.
.

CHAP. III.
THe Lord has given this Commandment in the ordering of his Government, that
judgment should be executed speedily Ezra 7. 26. Let judgment be executed
speedily upon them. Eccles. 8. 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men, is fully set in them
to do evil.
; and also that it should be managed with the greatest respect to the ease,
both of the Governors, and People Exodus 18. 17, 18, 22, 23. This thing is not
good; thou will surely wear away, both thou and this people that is with thee:
ver. 22. So shall it be easier: ver. 13. Thou shall be able to endure, and all
the people shall go to their place in peace, viz. having judgment among
themselves in their own Quarters, and places of abode, and not be troubled to
come to the chief Court, with every cause.
.

But particular times, means and other circumstances, the Lord has not
particularly commanded Exodus 18. 22. Let them judge the people at all seasons.
. Hence it is left unto the wisdom of the Rulers, to order time, means and
other circumstances, for the best, and most effectual attainment of the
forementioned speedy and easy determination and execution of Judgment, in all
Cases whatsoever, and in all places, Cities, or Towns where the people dwell
Exodus 18. 23. All the people shall go to their own place in peace.
.

Hence again, it well accords with Gods institution, that every order do
co-habit together Deuteronomy. 1. 15. I took the chief of your Tribes, and made them
heads over you.
as near as may be; because that does tend to facilitate both the watch, and
work of the Lords Government.

Hence also limits of place Deuteronomy. 21. 2, 3. Thy Elders and Judges shall measure
unto the Cities about, and the City which is next unto the slain man. Deuteronomy. 16.
18. Judges shall thou make in all thy gates throughout thy Tribes.
(in a general observation with allowance to some particular exception, as
prudence and piety may require) may be useful to attain this end.

Hence again, if any shall remove his habitation to a more remote place; meet
it is that he do change his Rulers, by choosing a Ruler of ten in the place
whither he goes to dwell: and hence it is meet that such removings and changes
be made by a due approbation of the Rulers whence he goes, and with the
acceptance of those to whom he removes, lest by such unstable changes, as some
may affect, they may slip out from under the Government of the Lord, at least
from under the watch and use thereof, though from the right thereof they
cannot, because it is a general command to honor thy Father and thy Mother;
and lest by the confluence of unruly persons to a place more remisly governed,
the Government of the Lord should be undermined, and scandalized.

Because sin will grow apace, like ill weeds, if it be not always watched, and
often weeded out; and fire of strife will soon flame out, if it be not speedily
suppressed and quenched: and it edifieth many ways, that justice should be
speedily done; especially it promoteth peace and piety.

Hence it is meet, that Rulers of ten appoint one day in a week, solemnly to
hear and determine Causes, and guide the common Affairs of his ten, for the
more orderly, easy, and speedy proceeding of justice and peace, which are
facilitated and expedited, by a stated and appointed time Exodus 18. 26. They
judged the people at all seasons: (...)* does frequently in Scripture signify
a stated time.
.

Again, it is meet that the Ruler of fifty keep the Court of six, consisting of
five Rulers of ten, and himself the Ruler of them, once in a month, for the
more solemn proceeding of Justice, and Appeals, if need be: because the higher
Cases ascend, the more solemnity is in them Exodus 18. 22. Every great matter
they shall bring unto thee.
; and need the more time and deliberation.

I call these a Court, because they are an Assembly of Judges, among whom God
promises to stand Psalm. 82. 1.
. Six is the lowest number of this Court; but they may be more, according as
the orders of ten be more under a Ruler of fifty; but they cannot exceed ten;
because a Ruler of fifty cannot by Gods institution, have more then nine orders
of ten under him.

Again, it is meet that the Ruler of an hundred keep the Court of three,
consisting of two Rulers of fifty, and himself the Ruler of them, four times in
the year, upon the former grounds.

Three is the lowest number of this Court, and it cannot exceed four; because
by Gods institution, he cannot have more then three orders of fifty under him.

Again, it is meet that the Ruler of a thousand keep the Court of eleven,
consisting of ten Rulers of an hundred, and himself the Ruler of them, twice in
a year: and here judgment runs with greatest Solemnity and Majesty; I say,
Greatest in the single platform.

Eleven is the lowest number of this Court; but there may be more, according as
the orders of an hundred under him be multiplied; but they cannot exceed
twenty, because he cannot have above nineteen orders of an hundred under him.

It is necessary that every Court have such Officers Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Judges and
Officers shall thou make, Vide Ainsworth in Loc.
to attend, as are necessary to accomplish and execute those ends for which the
Lord has instituted those Courts: because the appointment of the end, does
command all means requisite for the attainment of that end, being such as
accords with Justice and Prudence.

It is also necessary to have persons Lev. 24. 12. Number. 15 34. They put him in
ward.
, and all other Instruments, for the inflicting of all kinds of Punishments,
which the Law of God appoints.

But touching the several Punishments of Cost, Shame, or Smart; and touching
the several ways of putting to Death, by Stoning, Burning, Strangling, or by
the Sword; as also touching Banishment, I am here silent. They more properly
appearing in the handling of such Laws which do inflict several punishments,
according to the demerit of the sin, or use of terror unto others,
proportioning them to the Standard in the holy Scriptures.

CHAP. IV.
UPon the forenamed grounds of speedy Justice, for the stablishing of firm
peace, all Causes betwixt man and man, pertaining to the Congnizance of the
Ruler of ten, must be put upon Suit or Trial, within the space of one month
Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not suffer sin upon him.
. Cases belonging to the Court of six, must be put upon Suit or Trial within
the space of three months. Causes belonging to the Court of three, must be put
upon Suit or Trial, within the space of nine months. Causes belonging to the
Court of eleven, must be put upon Suit or Trial, in the space of one year and
half; or else to be frustrate, and lose the privilege of receiving judgment
by man; unless it appear that the providence of God did hinder, or that the
Defendant or Delinquent party did disappoint it: in those cases it may be
admitted to Trial, and receive Judgment, though it be of a longer standing.

But Criminal Offenses are to be judged, at the time when, and in the place
where they be discovered, and that with the most speed that may be.

Such Cases as are difficult, weighty, and worthy such attendance, and cannot
attain an acceptable issue in the Court where they firstly appertain, may
ascend from Court to Court, either by Appeal, or by Transmission to the Court
of eleven. And whatsoever Cause of weight cannot receive issue there, may yet
ascend either by Appeal or Transmission to the highest Council Exodus 18. 22.
Great matters they shall bring to thee. 26. Hard matters they brought to Moses.
Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. If there arise a matter too hard for thee, etc. thou shall come
to the Priests, Levites and Judges that shall be in those days.
, where by Gods appointment it must receive final determination And thou shall
do according to the sentence, etc. Deuteronomy. 17. 10.
.

In lesser Commonwealths, where there be no Rulers or Courts of the Superior
order, Cases ascend to the highest Council from the Court of eleven: but where
there be Rulers and Courts of the Superior order, there the Cause must ascend
from the Court of eleven in the single Platform, to the Court of one Myriade,
or the lowest Court in the Superior order; and so proceed until it come to the
Supreme Council.

Every Appeal in this Platform of Government which the Lord has instituted,
does ascend to an higher Court, and to other Judges. There is one of the Judges
from whom he appealeth, a member of the Court to which he does Appeal, truly to
inform the Court of the Reasons of their Judgment: and but one, lest they
should sway overmuch, and the Appealant want the privilege of new and
unprejudiced Judges.

Whosoever shall trouble the free passage of Justice in the ending of Causes,
through a perverse will, or base ends, or captious and quarrelsome wit, besides
the charges of such agitations, he is worthy of some other medicine, as may
most effectually do him good, and warn others.

In all Courts, he that has power to call the Court, has a double Vote: as
for example, in the Court of Three, if the Ruler of an hundred differ from the
two Rulers of fifty, the Court is equally divided: if there be three Rulers of
fifty, and one of them concur with the Ruler of an hundred, their sentence
stands.

When the Court is equally divided, it is a difficult Case, and must ascend to
the Court next above them by Transmission; or if the lesser part of the Court
oppose the sentence of the Court, as judging it sinful, then it must ascend by
Transmission.

If a Judge of any Court shall oppose the rest in point of sin, without weighty
and considerable grounds, in the judgment of the Court whither it ascends or
is transmitted; his first offense shall be corrected with the charge of such
transmission, and admonition from the higher Court: after, offenses in like
kind are to be considered and judged, by proportion to the process of Christ in
the Church, even unto rejection from his Place and Office.

The highest Council is to consist of a convenient number of the most holy and
able men Number. 11. 16. Whom thou know, to be Elders of the people. With Exodus
18. 21. Able men, such as fear God; men of truth, hating covetousness.
orderly chosen for that purpose, by all the orders of Deuteronomy. 1. 13. Take ye
wise men.
men under their jurisdiction, every man in order having an equal voice
therein, from among all the Elders of the people: both in the Commonwealth, and
in the Churches Deuteronomy. 17. 9. And thou shall come to the Priests, Levites, and
Judges that shall be in those days, and enquire, and they shall show thee, etc.
2 Chro. 19. 8. Moreover, in Jerusalem did Jehosaphat set of the Levites, and of
the Priests, and of the chief of the fathers in Israel, for the judgment of
the Lord, and for controversy. Deuteronomy. 21. 2. Then thy Elders and Judges shall
come forth, and shall measure, etc. ver. 5. And the Priests the sons of Levi
shall come near, and by their word shall every stroke and every controversy be
tried. Deuteronomy. 19. 17. Both the men between whom the controversy is, shall stand
before the Lord, before the Priests and Judges. Ezekiel. 44. 24. And in
controversy they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge it according
to my judgment.
, the biggest number being civil Elders Numb. 11. 16. Gather to me seventy men
of the Elders of Israel. Vide Ainsw. in Loc. Hence the Hebrews gather, that
they were chose out of all the Tribes, and therefore there was not less then
five of a Tribe, and so many of Levi, who before the institution of the
Sanhedrim, were taken of God instead of the first born, to be Priests unto God:
for they were taken to be Priests at Sinai, Numb. 3. 14. And this institution
was at Kibroth-hattaavah, Numb. 11. 34. with Numb. 31. 15, 16, 17.
.

The Lord commanded Moses that seventy Elders should stand with him before the
Lord; hence there were seventy one of the Council, and Moses was the chief, and
ordained the rest.

According to which pattern, the people are to choose their chief Ruler first;
who being installed by some, instead of the whole people, must instal the rest,
and is chief Ruler of the Supreme Council, who must call and manage their
Assemblies.

As the overburdensomness of the work of Government by one man, was the ground
of the institution of the forenamed orders of Government: so the
overburdensomness of the work for one man to hear all hard Cases, and Appeals,
together with other Cares to provide for the welfare of the people, was the
ground of the institution of the Supreme Council Deuteronomy. 1. 9. I spoke to you,
and said, I am not able to bear you alone. Numb. 11. 11. ad 16. ver. 11. And
Moses said unto the Lord, Wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant, and
wherefore have I not found favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of
all this people upon me? ver. 14. I am not able to bear all the people alone,
because it is too heavy for me.
.

The convenience of the number of this high Council, is thus to be measured,
and judged by Gods Standard. Israel had at least three Millions of people,
(though not one Million of men in order, or not much more: for the Soldiers
were but six hundred thousand) now their Supreme Council consisted of seventy
one; therefore that is the highest number that will be needed among men
ordinarily; yea, though a people should be much bigger, I see not but that
number may suffice: But that number is not limited; because God denies not
this Government to fifty who are the least Court, and a lesser number of men
then the highest Council in Israel had, by Gods appointment; and if it be not
limited on the one side, so nor on the other.

Again, the lowest number of the Supreme Council that may be, is five; because
that Council must consist both of Magistrates, and Elders of Churches; Elders
of both sorts; one of a sort suffices not, and the bigger part must be
Magistrates.

This Council must always be in being, personally or virtually, to give answer
to all Cases propounded, touching the Law of God, and the application thereof,
to any particular Person or Cause, and to take care for the general Protection,
Provision, and Government of the whole, in truth, holiness, and peace.

CHAP. V.
THe duties of all the Rulers of the civil part of the Kingdom of Christ, are
as follows.

The Office and Duty of all the Rulers, is to govern the people in the orderly
and seasonable practice of all the Commandments of God, in actions liable to
Political observation, whether of piety and love to God, or of justice, and
love to man with peace.

Hence they are keepers of both Tables, and are so to look that all the
Commandments of God be observed, as to compel men to their undoubted duty, and
punish them for their undoubted sins, errors and transgressions.

A Case, a Duty, a Sin, is said then to be undoubted, when either it is
expressly, or by general approved consequence, commanded or forbidden in the
Scriptures; or when it has passed the circuit of Gods Polity, and received its
final determination according to the Scriptures; unto which not to submit, is
capital presumption.

Hence again, Rulers are eminently concerned to maintain the purity of
Religion, with all care and power; holiness, truth, and peace being much
concerned herein.

Hence again, all Rulers must be skilful in the Scriptures; they must read and
meditate in the same all the days of their life, that thereby they may be
enabled to do their Office faithfully, and religiously so long as they live.

Hence again, they are to give counsel and command for the well ordering of all
the Public Affairs of their people; both in Education of Youth, whether in
Schools or other Occupations; in walking in their Callings, in their
Neighborhood, commerce and converse with men, in subjecting themselves to
Government, with Religion, Justice and Peace.

CHAP. VI.
THe Office of the Ruler of ten, is to see all his people walk as becomes Gods
people in their several places, furthering the same upon all occasions. And at
appointed times to sit alone, to hear and determine Causes of Justice, and of
evil conversation; to declare Gods sentence and counsel in every Case, and see
it executed.

Provided it be with the consent and submission of the party or parties
concerned.

All difficult Cases, and Appeals, he shall bind over to the Court of six; and
Capitals in life, limb or banishment, to the Court of eleven.

These Rulers are next the people; hence they see them Each other.
most: and therefore they need be singularly wise, patient, loving, faithful,
and zealously holy men. So great is his work and charge, that it had need
extend but to a small compass. If he well perform his Office, it does prevent
much trouble to Superior Courts.

The Office of the Ruler of fifty, is to see that all the Rulers often under
him, be faithful in their Office and Duty; and to help on their work, in all
Cases, and toward all persons, as he has occasion.

As also to call and keep the Court of six in their seasons; where all Cases,
pertaining to the public good of all his order, and particular Cases betwixt
parties of the several of the orders of ten under him, are nextly to be tried
and determined, together with Appeals from any of the Rulers of ten under him:
and difficult Cases transmitted from them to this Court.

This Court has power to end strifes, judge Causes, declare and pronounce the
sentence of Gods Word, in mulcts, and punishments, and see them executed.
Difficult Cases they shall transmit; and also Appeals they shall bind over,
unto the Court of three. But capitals in life, limb or banishment, to the Court
of eleven.

The Office of the Ruler of an hundred, is to see that the Rulers of fifty
under him, do perform their Office and Duty faithfully; to help them what lies
in him, in any of their works toward their Rulers of ten, or any particular
person under him. Also all Causes which concern the Public good of all Orders
under him, are in his charge. And also to call and keep the Court of three,
where Causes betwixt parties of his several orders of fifty, are properly to be
tried and determined; with Appeals from the Court of six, and such difficult
Cases as that Court shall transmit to them.

This Court has power to end all strifes, judge and determine Causes, declare
and pronounce the sentence of Gods Word, in mulcts and punishments, and see
them executed. Also to take care of the Public good of all their Orders.
Appeals, difficult Cases, and capitals in life and limb, and banishment, they
shall bind over and transmit to the Court of eleven.

The Office of the Ruler of a thousand, is to see that all the Rulers of
hundreds under him, do perform their Office and duty faithfully; to help them
what lies in him in any part of their charge toward their Rulers of fifties,
or Rulers of ten, or any person under him; also all Cases which concern the
Public good of all the orders under him, are in his care and charge. As also
to call and keep the Court of eleven, where all Causes betwixt persons in
several of his Hundreds, are properly belonging; with Appeals from the Court of
three, and difficult Cases transmitted to them. Also all Cases which concern
the Public good of all the Orders under them.

Also all capital Cases of life, limb or banishment, belong this Court: because
it is the highest and most solemn Judicatory in the single Platform, and
fullest of Majesty. The highest punishment is fitly pronounced, in a more
solemn Judicatory, then is the Court of six, or three; unless the smalness or
paucity of the people have no higher.

Also Cases betwixt parties of several thousands belong to this Court: at the
choice of the Plaintiff in which Court of eleven, either that which himself
does belong to, or that which his Adversary is under. But this consideration
does belong to lesser Commonwealths, where they have no Governor of the
Superior order, and yet more then one Ruler of a thousand.

This Court has power to hear and judge all Causes brought before them;
declare and pronounce the sentence of Scripture, in all mulcts and punishments,
even death it self, and see them executed.

Also to pronounce, and see executed, all such sentences as the Supreme Council
does determine, and remit unto them. Namely, thus it is in lesser
Commonwealths, where there be no Courts of the Superior order, difficult Cases
they must transmit to the highest Council, and bind over Appeals unto them,
where there be no Courts of the Superior order, betwixt the Supreme Council
and them.

The Office of the Supreme Council, is to see that all the Rulers of thousands,
yea, all Rulers and Officers, of all orders and degrees, do their Office and
Duty faithfully; and to receive difficult Cases and Appeals, from the Court of
eleven; to search the Scriptures with all faithfulness, to find out the pure
mind of God, impartially and sincerely to apply the Cause propounded thereunto;
to declare the will of God in the Case, and so return it to the Court of
eleven, whereto it appertains, there to receive judgment accordingly. And
whosoever will do presumptuously, and not hearken unto that sentence, shall be
put to death, Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 12.

In the single Platform, the Court of eleven is next to the Supreme Council,
for transmission and remission of Causes; but where there be Courts of the
Superior order, it is not so.

Also they are to declare the Counsel and Will of God, touching War and Peace,
and accordingly transmit the work to such of the Rulers as they judge most meet
to accomplish the same.

Also to take care for, and provide means for Public welfare and subsistence,
by Trading, both Foraign and Domestic, Fishing, Tillage, etc. with all other
necessary and useful Occupations.

Especially they are to take care for peace and truth in Religion, in all the
Churches, and among all the people; and the propagation also thereof. As also
the furtherance of all good learning in all the Liberal Arts and Sciences.

The Supreme Council, and all Courts, yea, and all Rulers, have power to bind
Offenders, and Persons concerned, to appear, or prosecute in due order and
season; punish for offenses in that kind; and if need be, commit to prison for
security.

If Rulers offend either morally or politically, by rigor, partiality or
remisness, his or their next Superiors have power to correct such evils,
according to the Word of God; and as need may be, the Case may orderly ascend,
from Court to Court, even to the highest Council. Heresy, Blasphemy, and other
gross (especially if capital) sins, are just cause, in due order, of deposition
from his Office, by the Supreme Council; the Cause coming to them either by
orderly ascent, or taken in immediately, as a notorious scandal, which calls
for speedy remedy.

CHAP. VII.
SO much for the single Platform of Christ his Government: now follows the
Superior, arising out of the first.

When the Lord shall bow the hearts of great Nations, to embrace this form of
Government, there being populous Cities, Provinces, and Countries, where the
Rulers of thousands will be greatly multiplied, and Causes frequently fall out,
betwixt parties of several thousands; yea, and betwixt the Rulers of thousands
sometimes, being so numerous, insomuch that the Supreme Council will be
overburdened, even as Moses was.

Hence there will be a necessity of erecting the Superior platform of the
Lords Government: which by proportion unto the single Platform (which is more
fully expressed in Scripture) does arise from it, and is builded upon it.

Namely, that every ten orders of thousands, should choose a Ruler of ten
thousand, or a Myriade; and five orders of Myriades, a Ruler of fifty thousand,
or five Myriades; and two orders of five Myriades should choose a Ruler of an
hundred thousand, or ten Myriades: and ten orders of an heundred thousands, or
ten Myriades, should choose a Ruler of a thousand thousand, or an hundred
Myriades, or a Million.

I am led to believe, that this Superior order of Rulers, is a Divine
institution, not only by consequence of proportion to the single Platform; but
expressly, and that it was practiced by Moses in Israel: namely, that ten Rulers
of thousands had a Ruler over them of ten thousands, or of a Myriade; and that
the order of Myriades or ten thousands, were as duly and orderly observed, as
the orders of thousands were. For Numb. 10. 36. when they rested from their
marching, Moses blessed them, and said, Return O Lord, to the Myriades of the
thousands of Israel: therefore there were orders of Myriades, as well as of
thousands.

Furthermore, it is expressly said, by Moses in his song, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. The Lord
came from Sinai (namely, where the order of Government was first instituted)
and he came with myriades of Saints. Therefore orders of Myriades were
instituted and acted from the first foundation of this Government.

Likewise, Deuteronomy. 33. 17. he speaks of the orders of Myriades among the
Tribes, as familiarly observable, as the orders of thousands. So that we may
see this Superior order and platform of Government, observed in Israel, and
expressed in the holy Scriptures.

The Ruler of a Myriade has this eminency, above a Ruler often in the single
Platform, that all his ten whom he immediately rules, are eminent Rulers.

Hence they are an Assembly of Judges, and a Court, for number every way
proportionable to the Court of eleven: but for eminency and distinction they
are more properly called the Court of one Myriade.

The Ruler of fifty thousand or five Myriades holds a Court for number
proportionable to the Court of six in the single Platform: but for eminency and
distinction, they are more properly called the Court of five Myriades.

The Ruler of an hundred thousand, or ten Myriades, holds a Court for number
proportionable to the Court of three in the single Platform: but for eminency
and distinction, it is more properly called the Court of ten Myriades.

The Ruler of a thousand thousand, or an hundred Myriades, holds a Court for
number proportionable to the Court of eleven; but for eminency and distinction,
it is more properly called the Court of one hundred Myriades.

The times or seasons, Officers or other means for the most effectual ordering
of these Courts, will be most fitly discerned, and agreed, by such a people as
may have use of them.

The Causes which most properly belong to the Court of one Myriade, are such as
fall out betwixt parties of their several thousands; as also difficult Cases
transmitted from the Court of eleven, and Appeals from them.

Also all such Cases as concern the Public good of all under them.

All Courts of the Superior order have power to judge all capital Cases
whatsoever.

The Court of one Myriade has also power to judge any Cause betwixt the Rulers
of the thousands of that Myriade, who are not to judge in the Court when their
own Case is judged. Difficult Cases they transmit, and Appeals they bind over
to the Court of five Myriades, if there be such a Court betwixt them and the
Supreme Council: otherwise they transmit them to the Council.

The Causes which properly belong to the Court of five Myriades, are such as
fall out betwixt parties of the several Myriades under them.

I will ascend no higher, in describing the Courts of the Superior order:
party because Gods Method is plain, and also it will be rarely of use in any
Commonwealth; especially considering that which I farther propound.

Namely, seeing God himself was pleased to appoint a Prince, a chief Ruler,
over every Tribe in Israel, who were distinguished, by that civil distinction
of kindreds:

By proportion thereunto, in populous Nations, where there be other civil
distinctions of societies and cohabitations of men, viz. by Cities, Provinces,
Countries, etc. should not they choose a Prince, a chief Ruler of those several
Precincts of civil society?

Whose Office is chiefly to take care of the good Government, firstly, of all
the Superior Rulers under him; as also of all the rest, as he has
opportunity, that the Lord may rule among them.

Likewise to hold a Court, consisting either of the Rulers of Myriades, or of
five Myriades, or of ten Myriades, or of an hundred Myriades, according to the
greatness of the people in his Precincts.

This Court to be called the Court of the Prince, or Lord, or chief Ruler of
such a Precinct; and to be next unto the Supreme Council: from which Court,
only difficult Cases and Appeals have access to the Supreme Council, and to
which they remit the determinations of the Cause, to receive its judgment:
Lest the Supreme Council be oppressed with business from so many Courts, and
thereby the people with delays of hearing and issue, occasioned thereby.

It seems to be right Orders, and according to Gods institution, that these
Princes of the several Tribes or Societies of men should be members of the
Supreme Council: The whole Dominion being distributed unto the Supreme
Counselors, or to so many of them as may be meet. For the Princes of the
Tribes of Israel (it seems to me) were members of the Sanhedrim or Supreme
Council; because God commanded that they should be chosen very carefully from
among the Elders of the people. Hence they will choose the most choice of their
Elders to send up with Moses to stand before God. Now they could not choose
better, fitter, and men more acceptable to God, out of all their Elders, then
those whom God himself had chosen by name, to be Princes of the Tribes.

Besides, it is exceedingly harmonious, in the frame of this Government, that
it should be so: for though whoever of the other Elders, whether of the single
or Superior Order, be chosen to the Supreme Council, it may seem requisite,
they should leave the lower station, lest when Appeals have passed in the
circuit of Gods Government, and come to the highest Council, there should be
sundry of them, through whose judgment the Cause had formerly passed, which
may prove prejudicial both to their persons, and to the Cause.

But when it has lastly passed through the Court of the Prince of the Tribe,
meet it is that one of the last Court through which it passed, should be
present in the Supreme Council, to give true information, how they lastly after
all former Trials did find the Cause.

But this is to be observed in the distribution of the whole Dominion to the
several Supreme Counselors, that no such civil Dominion is to be put upon or
accepted by such Elders of Churches, as are Members of the high Council; as
being such whose only Office and Work is to search the holy Scriptures, and
give all attendance to declare the Divine Oracle of God in such Cases as are in
hand, of what nature soever they be: yea, and if the Council see need, to call
Eccesiastical Councils, greater or lesser, to search out the mind of Christ;
for his presence and blessing is in every Ordinance; and all jointly conspire
the advancement of his Kingdom, and the doing of his will.

The Election of all Superior Rulers, is to be after the same manner as in the
single form, viz. by all the people Or orders of men.
, over whom they are to rule.

Some of the Princes of the Tribes of Israel, may seem to be Rulers of fifty
thousands, or of five Orders of Myriades: yet the Office of the Princes was not
only under that notion, but also as an head of a civil society, a kindred, an
eminent part, a division of the Commonwealth: for some of the Tribes had but
four Myriades, and some but three, and therefore could not in that way and
order have a Ruler of five Myriades. Therefore they must needs be instituted
under another consideration, viz. as being the head or chief Ruler over an
eminent part, or division of the Commonwealth, being civilly divided into such
Societies.

CHAP. VIII.
SO much for the Platform of the Lords Government. Now it remains to consider
of the Laws by which these Rulers are to Govern the Lords people. The written
Word of God is the perfect Systeme or Frame of Laws, to guide all the Moral
actions of man, either toward God or man: the Application whereof to every
Case according to its circumstances, must be by the wisdom and discretion of
the Judges, guided by the light of the Scriptures, and a pure Conscience.

The judgment and determination of a Cause, is nothing else, but the
particular application of the Cause, according to all its circumstances, unto
the Rule and Standard of Gods Word.

The Records of which judgments, are equivalent to Humane Laws. Which so far
as the Case with all its circumstances considered is rightly applied to the
Rule of the Word, is a deduct from Scripture, and binds the Consciences, both
of Judges always so to judge in the like case, and the people so to walk.

Which Records to order wisely, and publish for common instruction and
edification, is a work of great wisdom, and tends much to Gods glory, the
good of the people, and the facilitating and expediting justice, among them.
All Strangers, are ^o be accounted under the Government of those Orders where
they reside, and where their business lies; so as to have the benefit of the
Government of the Lord, as our own people have.

FINIS.

