Charles' royal blazon C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

AN EXTRACT Of all the Passages from HULL, YORK, and LINCOLNSHIRE, being taken
out of sundry Letters, and sent by the last Post.

BEING A true relation of His MAJESTY'S Proceedings in those parts.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen and John Bull. July 19. 1642.

Kind Sir,
I Thank you for your news of your proceedings in the South, I pray continue
the same, and I shall weekly write to you the news out of the North, if it may
be conveyed safe; for we have so many intercepting Cavaleeres, or rather
Cavaleeres upon the high way, that we are neither confident of our peace nor
safety of persons nor goods.

On Wednesday the King was at Lincoln with the Prince, and the Lord Linsey,
where was two pieces of Ordnance presented to him by Sir James Stroobe, to make
an atonement to procure pardon for killing one some 14 nights since. There was
many of our County of Lincoln came in, but with no courage to sight against
Hull, and I am sure they have no mind to starve Hull; for there is diverse Hull
people comes to our Town daily, and they are heartily welcome to us, and we
shall do our best to releeve them.

When all the people came together to the King at Lincoln, there was not one in
twenty had so much as a Sword about them; you may perceive by that, they came
not to fight. The King desired to be excused of his not speaking to them, for
they should have his mind in paper. He bid them not to fear for he would not
make their County the seat of War, but as I remember it was so declared to
the County of York: but we hear they are now drawn forth upon pain of death,
and forced with Swords and Pistols to stand in danger of their lives.

Sir John Hothams son, had a Horse taken from his man of good value, being at
his house, eight miles from Hull he has since got satisfaction and has taken
8 Cavaleeres with their Horses, one Horse amongst them worth four score pound,
and amongst them a Gentleman that did owe his father two thousand pounds, he
has laid out these four years to catch him, but could never lite on him till
now, and now he has him in safe custody; he might well fight against Sir John,
for he had no mind to pay his money.

We have the Country people come to us every night, and tell us of the
proceedings of the Kings army, the Lord Newport was over head and cares that
night they burnt our Mils, and had much ado to escape drowning: they came
again the third night to burn our other Mils, but our Ordnance was so fierce
upon them there, that they run away. We hear of 5. of Captain Duncombs
Soldiers slain.

We sent out a small Pinnace toward Becton where espying some of the
Cavalceres that would starve us, we shot two or three Guns amongst them; and
now we are resolved to kill them if we can, that would starve us if they can.

SIr, in much have I have writ two words of that I have seen, God be thanked
our Town is safe and strong, and if supplies come from the Parliament we fear
not for all their words, although yesternight it should have been fired by some
ill disposed in our Town, but God be thanked we are all in general in an
union, and are resolved to fight it to the last man. We pack out knows daily
which makes the rest conform, it is marvelous to one to see all men in our
Town muster and fight, that was on the other side before. Yester night there
was diverse before our Town, but the great Guns and Muskets did sing sweetly on
them; we are daily yet ^eere victory, for Captain Paget that let the Providence
loose for want of care, has now played his part, and redeemed his credit, in
taking a Hoy and three great Guns that we agoing to be planted on Cuntolpher
side for stopping passage by Water to us and did beat all the Musqueters, and
made them run ashore by the West, to fly his Ordnance; our Mils was three of
them burnt one night, which is the worst they have done us, but I believe it
cost them dear, for the next morning some of their swords, bridies and saddles
were got from them by the way, being full of pats beds; the Country does loath
them but that they constrain them to fight, and with spader to work for them,
to make Forts. I cannot have leave to enlarge it further, Farewell.

15 July 1642.
SAturday, we hear that Sir John Pennington is gone to Sea, Pollard, Barkley,
Ashburncham to Holland, yesternight one Master Reeve had his windows all
broke, and the pillars of his windows cut by Soldiers in Walmegate;
yesternight the King was exceeding serious which some of the Nobility, the Lord
Keeper, and the Lord Banks, to day a Declaration came out concerning his
Majesty's intentions.

Sunday, about two a clock in the morning, the Trumpets sounded out 200 Horse
speedily to horse away, at five a clock I heard of it, about 8 a clock 200 rid
away completely armed, at noone a command came from the King to the Lord Major,
for horses for 300 foot because they had have, and could not march fast enough
on foot, upon a Common they call Knaismire was driven some 200 Horse, another
they call Tinghall was driven about 100 horse, at one a clock out Belman cried
that all which had Horses in those pastures should go with bridles and sadles
thither, or else if bridles and sadles were not brought when the Horses came
back, we were to pay for the bridles, and sadles as they cost, to night they
went away, a Ship within 10 miles of Hull run a shore with provision with came
from Holland, which we hear had like to have been taken; Mr. Murrey being one
was in it.

Monday, we hear L. Digby is come to York, and has been at Hull 3 days in a
mariners coat all tar and pitch, this day 300 foot and 100 horse are
presently commanded to be at an hours warning. Also the Regiments of Sir
Wlliam Pennyman, and Sir Thomas Mettam, are commanded on pain of death
presently to go forward, we hear that 6 Regiments shall incompasse Hull
suddenly. the high Sheriff was on his knees to beg that he might persuade with
Sir John Hotham to yield the Town ere it was besieged, he was confident to
persuade him, which his Majesty consented to, this day there was about 300
horse brought out of adjoining Towns, and our City, for more foot to rid, and
about 300 horse more went with the^; Colonel Ashburnham with Sir Edward
Stradling, and another was taken in a boat on Humber when the Ship came in
that the trouble was about, the Ship they call the Providence, so these are
with Sir John Hotham. Lincolnshire we hear and believe is secured for the King.

Tuesday, there was abundance going toward Hull, both horse and foot, only a
few lest at Court, we hear that Sir John Hotham made trial of his fluces to
let out the water, and it would not do, his Majesty goes on Friday to Hull,
and intends to have Hull ere he come back as we are informed, many aspersions
are reported of Mr. Pim that except 3 voices, he had been cast out of the
house, that the Militia by the Parliament is yielded to his Majesty on
condition, that he call in his Commission for Array, Sergeant major Duncombe is
made Knight and Barronet; also we hear to day that one of kindred (I think
brother in Law) to sir John Hotham, was by entreaty allowed to persuade him to
yield the town, but I hear he sent a resolute letter back that he would not.

Wensday morning at 4 a clock, the King rid with a few attendants to Paul, and
came back about 5 a clock, out of the ship which is for his Majesty, 34 pieces
we hear are mounted near Paul, with 2 other huge ^^ces. Five miles from
Hull, they have taken a flax ship, and out thereof 4 pieces of Ordnance, and
let the ship (...) Also a ship with coals and one with cheese; this they
report, but unless at night ships cannot pass them. Lincolneshire shore is
planted with Soldiers for the King, that ere long it is thought the men of Hull
will scarce got victuals, or supplies.

To day its reported that one Mr. Thorneton for (...) expelled Hull, being upon
this expedition, is (...) Captain of a troop of horse, who yesterday (Or this
morning) with his soldiers, and to A^laby (whether with, or without
commission, I know not) he plund^ and pillaged Lieutenant Colonel Legards
house, (...) hearing this news at Hull, Legard plundered with (...) Company,
and pillaged Thornetons houses in the Town, at which news Thorneton) and his
troop come (...) and cleares the fields of his sheep, horse, kine and other
Cattle: Captain Jossard with 60 musk (...) comes by a compass upon them, and
they must (...) fight or leave their prey, but they run away, (...) Ieffard,
Captain Thorneton I will s^nd away my (...) dier^, send you away yours, (...)
it, (...) gave no heed to these vain words, but they al (...) we hear that sir
John has drawn a writing, and (...) that will stand by him in the Town are
to under (...) it, 300 have already done, what intention has how) to deal
with the other is not yet known.

FINIS.

