THE AXE, AGAINST SIN and ERROR; and the Truth Conquering.

A Sermon on Matthew 3. 10.

Now also the Ax is laid to the root of the trees, therefore every tree, that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

At which, a Christian confessed, she was converted; and because it did good to
her, desired it might be preached again at her Funeral, that it might do good
to others, (saying, they must be hewn down, before they can be converted, or
builded up) which Satan (as he did Paul) hindered, which caused me the rather to
write it out, and send it to the Press, because the Enemy hate it, lest it
should convert more, and endamage his kingdom, which I have sent foth as John,
a forerunner, to make way for a more excellent Work of the counsel of Christ
to England; wherein are showed the causes of the sword upon England, and on the
Lutherans, and the remedies that must be used, before the Judgments cease.

Written by John Eachard, M. A. of Trin. Col. Camb. and Pastor of Darsham in
Suffolk.

Matthew 12. 33. Either make the tree good, and the fruit good; or the tree
evil, and the fruit evil.

Rev. 3. 5. and 12. A white-rayment Christian, and a citizen of the new
Jerusalem.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, and are to be sold by John Hancock at his
Shop in Pope's Head Alley, 1646.

To all the friends of the Bridegroom, the White-rayment Christians, and
citizens of the New Jerusalem.
Dear and faithful Brethren, Mr. Brightman fore-prophesied of a Church to
arise, that should be the Woman clothed with the Sun, which should glitter on
every side round about, with the most clear light of the Scripture, of the Sun
of righteousness, in the doctrine of justification (as you may see, on Rev.
19. 17. and chap. 12. 1.) with the clear knowledge whereof, she being adorned,
as it were, with a goodly garment, came forth abroad, and laid her self open to
the view of the world. And Rest (says he) shall be the natural daughter of
the woman, clothed with the Sun, (meaning a spiritual rest) which are the most
entire and chaste Congregation of all the rest, (yet no Sect) which above
others shine with this glorious array; And it seems, (says he) that all the
chief stresse and violence of the last battle in the West, shall be turned
against that holy Congregation, which we said right now, to stand glittering in
the Sun, which are the hill of precious fruits, and the mountain full of holy
pleasures, of which God makes more account then See 2 Esdr. 7. 26. 34, 35. See
2 Esdr. 6. 28.
of all delight some things in the world. Now you white raiment Christians, are
this woman, clothed with the Sun; for you all believe that you are clothed with
the Sun of Righteousness, and stand in him before God: Here is an Ax for you;
for the blessing of Joshua belongs to you, which he spoke to the children of
Joseph. Thou art a great people, and have great power, therefore the mountain
stall be thine, for it is a wood, and thou shall cut it down, and the ends of
it shall be thine, and thou shall cast out the Canaanites, though they have
iron Chariots, and though they be strong, J^sh 17. So here are mountains of
sins, errors and false religions, in England and Ireland, it is a wood of
Sects, Schisms and Heresies, but thou have cut them down, for thou art a great
people, and have great power (with the Lord in prayer) and England shall be
thine, and thou shall cast out the Canaanites of sin, Idolatry, and false
Religions, though they have Ordnance of iron, and though they be strong, lay
this Ax of the Law to the root of them; and show them, that now also every
tree, i. Religion, Church, Sect, or man, that brings forth sin before God, (
Isai. 1. 16.) is hewn down and cast into the fire of God wrath, for the wrath
of God is now revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men, which
withhold truth in unrighteousness ( Romans 1. 18) for the hour of temptation is
come, to try them that are upon the face of the earth, Rev. 2. 10. in which
friends shall fight with friends, as with enemies, and the earth shalll fear
with them, 2 Esdr. 6. 22. when there shall be seen an earthquake in the world,
and an up^ore of the people, that is, the time wherein the most High will begin
to See 2 Esdras 15 ^. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 8, 19. 22, 23, 24, 26, 26, 37. See 2
Esd 16. 10, 11. 14, 15. 19. 5. 33. 8. 46.
visit the world which he made, 2 Esdra. 9. 4. and 3 hard it is for men to keep
faith and a good conscience now, yea, the strongest faith shall find it
difficult. Would not you be glad to be delivered from this hour of temptation?
and were it not labor worth the pains, to show that you shall be delivered?
And though all evil trees shall be cut down with the a^ of the Law; yet that
you are good trees of righteousness, of his own planting, that God may be
glori^ied, and shall be saved? Isai. 61. ^. Come forth, come forth thou Kings
daughter, all glorious within, all light in the Lord, the Sun of
Righteousness, show thy self to the world, thy garments are of broydered gold,
Psalm. 45. 13. that is, of the merits of Christ crucified, death and
resurrection, given you freely in your Baptism into Christ's death, for
remission of sins, Romans 6. 3, 4, Acts 2. 38. and are made glorious in the Sun
of Righteousness, that is risen upon you, Mal. 2. 4. show your selves to the
world, for the stress^ of the ba^^ell in the West (you hear) shall be against
you, but you shall overcome by faith, 1 John 5 4. when the ax shall cut down
the wicked, yet fear not; you are got into the Sun, and therefore are out of
gunshot for your souls, yet put on the whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 14. and
gird up the loins of your minds, with the girdle of verity, and put on the
breast plate of Christ's righteousness; and above all, take the shield of faith
in your Baptism, and in the blood of the Lamb, wherewith you may quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked, and take the helm^t of salvation in Christ, that
you are in him that is true, 1 John 5. 20. and the sword of the Spirit, the
Word of God; and your feet thod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace,
that testi^ies of Jesus, that came by water* and blood, not by water only, but
by water and blood; it is the Spirit that bears witness, and that Spirit is
truth, and shall conquer. Therefore stand fast, and pray, with all manner of
pra^er, and supplications, in the Spirit that testifies of the water and blood
of Christ, for remission of your sins, and you shall overcome: For you have a
strong city, (of the new Jerusalem) salvation shall All that get into this city
are safe.
God set for wa^ls and bulwarks, Isai. 26. 1. open ye the gates of it, Rev. 22.
14. that you the righteous nation, that keep the truth, man enter in; for by an
assured purpose, will Christ preserve perfect peace for you, because you
trusted in him verse. 3 O trust in the Lord Jesus for ever, for in the Lord (our
righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.) is strength for evermore, verse. 4. for he will
bring down them that dwell on high, that fight against you, the high city (of
Rome) will he abase even unto the ground, and bring it unto the dust, v. 5.
that your fee^ shall tread it down, and all doctrine of infidelity. I call you
White-rayment Christians; if any ask my reasons, they are these:

First, because you are the few names in Laodicca, of England, (as well as in
Sardis) that have not defiled your garments, (^ by a false faith, or reigning
sin) therefore you shall walk with Christ in white. for you are worthy, Rev 3.
4. M^. Mi. Con. M^. Mi. Con.


Secondly, whosoever overcomes, shall be clo^hed with white raiment, says
Christ. Rev. 3. 5. but you have overcome, 1 John 4. 4. Ergo, you shall be
clothed with i^, and therefore shall be white-rayment Christians: for
whomsoever Christ says shall be clothed with white raiment, I may truly call a
white-rayment Christian; but you overcommers are they, that Chist says shall
be clothed with white raiment, E^go, I may truly call you white-rayment
Christians.

Thirdly, whosoever have bought of Christ white raiment, that he may be Ma.
clothed, that the shame of his nakedness may not appear, may be called a
white-rayment Christian, because he has bought it, Rev. ^. 18. But you are Mi.
Con. Ma. Mi. Con. Ma.
they, Ergo. Again, whosoever watches, and keeps Christ's garments that are
white, as ( Rev 3. 18.) lest he walk naked, and they see his shame, is a
blessed white-rayment Christian, as Rev. 16. 15. But you are such, Ergo, you
are blessed white-rayment Christians.

Also you are citizens of the new Jerusalem; for on whomsoever Christ will
write upon, the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes
down from my God out of heaven, Rev. 3. 12. shall rightly be called a citizen
of the new Jerusalem; but on you that have overcome, Christ will write the Mi.
Con.
name of the new Jerusalem, Rev 3. 12. Ergo, you shall be called citizens of
the new Jerusalem.

This was spoken to Philadelphia, not to us of Laodicea. I answer, whatsoever
Object.
was spoken to any one of the seven Churches, runs into the last: for let him
that has an ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, Rev. 3. it
says it to you, overcommers in Laodicea, in England, for, what I say to you, I
say to all, Mark 13. Now concerning the Philadelphians, that were admonished
by Christ, to hold fast that they had, that no man take their crown, Rev. 3.
11. I gather the Philadelphians being admonished, to hold it fast, should lose
it, for if man must hold fast a crown, he will lose it, and that the La^d ceans
should take it from them; for the white-rayment Christians that have overcome,
and taken Christ's counsel, Rev. 3. 18. shall take their crown from them, to be
called, first citizens of the new Jerusalem; And you shall take the crown from
the Lutheranes* (because they defiled their garments, and their works were not
perfect before God, Rev 3. 2, and 3.) and shall be called first White raiment
Christians.

Secondly, whosoever is come to the celestial Jerusalem, and to be citizens
Ma. Mi.
with the Saints, and of the household of God, are citizens of the new
Jerusalem; but by the blood of Christ in Baptism, and by faith, Ephesians. 2. 13.
Rev. 1. 5. you are come to the celestial Jerusalem, Heb 12. 22. and to be
citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. Ergo, you
are citizens of Con.
the mew Jerusalem; therefore call your selves no more the Church of England,
or of the Lu^herans, or the like, for they are shaken, and shall be removed,
Heb. 12. 27. but call your selves White-rayment Christians, and citizens of the
new Jerusalem, for you see God calls you so. Now your city is of pure gold,
like clear glass, Rev. 21. 18. for your city of the new Jerusalem, is built of
pure gold, that Christ has counseled you to buy of him, Rev 3. 18. which is
the lively faith, in the merit^ of Christ's death. in our baptism, for
remission of sins, ( Acts 2. 38.) in the first love of Christ, (not of such as
have taken a new baptism, and so forsaken their first love of Christ, as the
Church of Ephesus did, and therefore the candlestick of the Church was removed
out of their place, Rev. 2. 5. because they took a second baptism, and
forsook their first, for which cause, the Council of Nice made it an Article of
their Creed ( I believe one Baptism, for the remission of sins) and it is like
clear glass, because through this golden glass of your baptism, wherein you
were washed, sanctified, and justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by
the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 1^. you may see the face of God through it,
what a reconciled, merciful, and loving Father he is to you, that has sealed
a new Covenant to you, to become your father, and you his children, and that
your sins and iniquities shall be remembered no more, Heb. 8. 12. and you may
see through this Hebr. 8.
glass of your baptism, the face of Jesus, what a blessed, meek, and loving
Savior he is to you, that has loved you, and gave himself for you, ( Gal. 2.
20.) and washed you from your sins, in his own blood, and made you Kings and
Priests to God his Father, Ephesians. 5. 25. Rev. 1. 5. and you may see as in a
glass, (1 Cor. 13. 12*) what a blessed, holy, and sweet Comforter you have,
that has washed you in the new birth, and the renewing of the holy Ghost,
Titus 3. 5. And the street of your city is of pure gold, like to transparent
glass, Rev. 21. 21. O walk in this golden street, for it is transparent, like
perspective glass; for, as he that has a good perspective glass may see far
off, so may you, even your sins, set as far as the East is from the West, Psalm.
103. 12. Peter complains 2 Pet. 1. 9.
of many that are blind, and cannot see far off, because they have forgotten
their baptism, wherein they were washed from their old sins; they have
forgotten this transparent glass. But all you citizens of the new Jerusalem,
walk in this golden street of your baptism, it is a perspective glass; and as
in a perspective glass, men look through two glasses, so in this there are two
glasses, the first is made of the pure river, of the water of life, clear as
Crystal, which is the pure water of baptism, Heb. 10. 23. the second is the
blood of the Rev. 22. 1.
Lamb; both these meet in one, look through them both together, and anoint your
eyes with eye salve of the Spirit, and you shall see far off, even into heaven,
and behold Christ to be your wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and your blessedness, happiness, holiness,
eternal life, everlasting glory, immortality; yea, thou may see thy name
written in heaven: through this golden clear glass of thy baptism, which thou
receivedst in thine Infancy, and now walk in this golden street by faith, you
may be assured, and rejoice, that your names are written in heaven, Luke 10.
20. Quest. How know you that? Answ. There be three which bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost, these three are one, and
bear record in heaven, that he has given you a new name, Rev. 2. 17. in
baptism, for all your names were Adam before, Genesis 5. 2. but they bear
record, that he has given you a new name and his own new name, Rev. 3. 12. And
there be three which bear record in earth, the Spirit, and water, and blood,
these three agree in one, that your names are written in heaven; for to
whomsoever Ma. Mi. Con.
God has given eternal life, which life is in his Son Jesus Christ, his name
is written in heaven. But the three in heaven, and the three in earth, do bear
witness, that he has given you eternal life, 1 John 5. 7, 8. 11. Ergo, your
names are written in heaven, that believe it on this ground, and you are let
into Paradise again; for though Adam, and all his children, were shut out of
it, and the Cherubim with a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep the
tree of life, Genesis 3. which signifies this axe of the fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33. 2*
See 2 Esdra 8. 52, 53, 54, to 63.
given by Angels ( Acts* 7. 53.) keeps every man from the Paradise, of
assurance of salvation; for this axe of the Law cuts men off, and shuts them
out, every way, for original or actual sins, man's merits, or humane
righteousness; whosoever has but one sin is cut down by the Law. But by your
baptism into Christ, you are let into Paradise again, and have now right and
title by your baptism, and by faith, to eat of all the trees in the garden, i.
title to all things to be yours, and you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. And you may
eat of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. that
is, of Christ in the Supper, and be more sure of eternal life, then the tree
of life could have made Adam, and shall be kept in the Paradise of Gods
protection: For thus says the Lord, Because you have kept the word of my
patience, I will deliver thee from the hour of temptation, that is come upon
all the world, to try them that are upon the face of the earth, Rev. 3. 10.
Now, what is the word of Christ's patience, but the faith of baptism into
Christ crucified, for the remission of our sins? for the word of Christ's
patience, is the faith in Christ crucified, which Paul desired only to know, 1
Cor. 2. Now what is a man the better, to 1 Cor. 2. 2.
say, I believe Christ was crucified, dead and buried, except he keep the faith
of it for remission of his sins? for the devils believe so much. But the word
of Christ's patience, which you keep, is this, that you say, and believe, that I
am in him that is true, in that his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 5. 20. in whom I
am crucified, and dead, and buried, and risen again with Christ in my baptism,
into Christ's death, for the remission of sins, and have put on Christ, Romans 6.
^, 4 Col. 2. 12. Gal. 3. 27. That Church that keeps the word of Christ's
patience, i. faith in their baptism into Christ's death, for remission of sins
(though they knew not what Christ did for them, when he washed them, as he told
Peter, John 1^. but know it afterward) shall be delivered from this hour of
temptation; but all other religious plants, which my heavenly Father has not
planted, shall be rooted out. The axe of the Law cuts them off, for one sin
before God; but he that is holy, and true (says) be that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. (that is, he that believes one baptism
into Christ, for remission of sins, shall be saved) but he that believes not
his one baptism into Christ for remission of his sins, shall be damned, as
Heathens, Turks, Jews, Witches and Apostates, that have denied it: For this
Nicen Creed. Athanasius.
is the Catholic faith, I believe one Baptism for the remission of sins,
which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot be saved, the axe cut them
off. Now when men have lost this Paradise, then they must go till the earth,
full of false religions, all serve an angry God. The Heathen run to Jupiter,
the Turks to Mahumet, the Jews to Moses ceremonies, the Papists to Saints, to
Pilgrimage, a wilderness and Purgatory: Lo, here is Christ, say the Papists,
in the Popes chair, and pardon: Lo, here is Christ, say the Luberans, in
consubstantiation; and lo, here is Christ, say the Anabaptists, in our new
Jordan, and yet it carries them into the lake Asphaltes, mare mortuum, the dead
sea, for he that denies his first baptism, to take a second, it is a dead and
damnable sin, as Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and Heb 10. 29. ^5. 38. Lo, there, say all
sects, in our Church way, and yet never a one of them have assurance of
salvation, because they have not faith in one baptism, for remission of sins,
for no man can have the knowledge of salvation, but by the remission of sins,
as Luke 1. 77. Well, you see the hour of temptation is come, a flood of
judgments flow upon earth for sin. Here is an axe for you, to cut down sin,
and an ark for you white-rayment Christians, and citizens of the new Jerusalem,
namely, the ark of our baptism into Christ's death, for remission of sins. It
has been building in England about an hundred years, you only have God seen
righteous in this generation, an end of all false religions is come, and God
will destroy them with the earthly men: Enter you, your wives, and your
children, into the faith of this Ark, Genesis 6.
but leave not your children out of this Ark, nor take a new one; for that is
cursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. For, as the Ark saved Noah, so (...), the same Antitype
which now saves us, Baptism, (the translators were to blame, to call it a
figure, for there is as much difference between a figure and an antitype, as
between the brazen Serpent and Christ, 1 Pet. 3. 21.) meaning of the inward
Baptism. Now, as you know many before the flood might come into the A^k, and
look upon it, and yet, because they did not abide in it, they all perished: So
now a blood of Gods judgments are come in this hour of temptation, and many
people have seen baptism, and been within it sacramentally, but all that do
not stay in it by faith, shall perish. Therefore little children, abide in him
(that were shut or graffed into him by one baptism) that when he shall
appear, we may be bold, (1 John 2 28.) for behold, Christ stands at the
door, and knocks, in Laodicca in England (and he will not leave knocking with
judgments, till they take his counsel, Rev. 3. 18.) if any man will hear my
voice, (says he) and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him,
and he with me. You see Christ raps loud with the sword and cannons, and he
will knock with an earthquake, and with pestilence, Luke 21. 11. In England
and Scotland, where are Saints, with the sword and pestilence, but in Ireland,
where are most Idolaters, with sword and famine: reasons I give in a book to
come out, in Christ's knock at the doors of England. Now, is it not good letting
of Christ in to sup with us, and we with him, when he knocks, and calls to us
to take his counsel? to buy of him gold to make us rich, in the lively faith of
the merits of Christ's death, in baptism, for a perfect remission of sins, (for
he likes not this lukewarm, lame remission of sins to halfes, which many
profess) and white-rayment justification to cloth us, that the shame of our
nakedness may not appear, and eye salve of the Spirit that takes of Jesus,
water and blood, to witness to your spirits, you are the children of God, Romans
8. 17. that thou may see, Rev. 3. 18. Christ will not leave rebuking, and
chastising England, and knocking, till they hear, and let him in. Now
therefore, let the loins (of your minds) be girt about (with verity) and your
lamps (of faith) burning, Luke 12. 35. and ye your selves, like men that wait
for their Master, when he will return from the wedding; that when he comes and
knocks, they may open unto him immediately: Blessed are those servants, whom
the Lord, when he comes, shall find waking, i. in the wedding garment; Verily
I say unto you, he will gird himself about, and will make them sit down at
table, and will come forth, and serve them; and if he come at the second watch,
or in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants, verse. 36,
37. Now, you blessed White-rayment Christians, understand, that Christ our
Master, is now returning from the wedding; for I believe not any more Churches
of the Gentiles, (before the marriage of the Lamb, to the Jews) shall be
called, and the third watch is come, and the dawning of the day of the Jews is
at hand, and our Master now knocks, the dinner of the wedding of the
Gentiles, has lasted about 1623. for the marriage of the Gentiles, was called
a dinner, Mat. 22. 4. and the marriage dinner was furnished with guests of good
and bad, for all had not a wedding garment, and therefore bad. Now, as noble
Bridegrooms often times will bid a multitude to dinner, but none but his
special friends are bidden to supper; So Christ, the most noble Bridegroom,
has bidden seven Churche^ of the Gentiles to the dinner of the marriage, and
now he is returning from the wedding of the Gentiles, and he knocks and calls,
Rev. 3. 20. Rev. 3. 20.
Blessed are you that let him in immediately, for he calls for you, his
friends, the White raiment Christians, to come to supper. Give me leave to show
you, the friends of the Bridegroom, why Christ now knocks, and calls in
England; it is to call you to supper, all that were bidden to the
wedding-dinner: were not blessed: But now (he says) write, Blessed are they
that are bidden to the marriage supper of the Lamb; these are the true sayings
of God, Rev. 19. 9. The wedding-dinner is past, and Christ is returning from
the wedding, as Luke 12. 36. and behold, he stands at the door, and knocks in
England, with the sword and pestilence, let him in; for it seems, some have not
let him yet; say, it is the voice of my well beloved that knocks, saying, Open
to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for mine head is full of dew,
and my locks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5. 2. for men that are let in,
use not to knock, but those that are shut out. Christ is about to marry his
wife, of the Jews, that shall make her self ready by baptism and faith, and
he will grant to her to be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure, (...), the
justifications of the Saints, Rev. 19. 8. And now Christ knocks at the door in
England. to call his friends, to go with him to the marriage-supper, with his
wife, and will begin his supper in England, he will sup with them, Rev. 3. 20.
The most rarest junkets are kept for the marriage-supper. Now therefore hark;
he says, I will sup with him (that lets me in) and he with me; see how Esdras
prophesied of you, 2 Esdras 2. 38. Arise and stand up, and behold the number of
those that are sealed for the feast of the Lord, which are departed from the
shadow of the world, and have received glorious garments of the Lord: Take thy
number, O Sion, and shut up them that are clothed in white, which have
fulfilled the Law of the Lord. Here you see, he prophesied of you White-rayment
Christians, sealed for the feast, as Christ does, Rev. 3. 4. and 18. and 16.
15. Now therefore all you, that have put on Christ in infant baptism, Gal. 3.
27. and made your long robes white in the blood of the Lamb, as my Sermon of
the blood of the Lamb declares, prepare a supper for Christ; the cheer must be
prepared of hearts, My son, give me thy heart, and it must be broken, and
contrite, for he loves no stones that will not break, for the sacrifices of God
are a broken spirit, A br^ken and a centrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise, Psalm. 51. 17. Secondly, these hearts must be served in at your supper,
in gold, that he counsels you to buy of him, Rev. 3. 18. which is the lively
faith in the merits of Christ's death, in one baptism, for remission of sins;
for thus Peter served in three thousand hearts that were pricked by the Law, in
baptism, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins, Acts 2. 38.
Thirdly, you must serve it in, in the white-rayment justification, wherein no
shame of nakedness do appear, for Christ cannot endure sin. Fourthly, you
must buy eye salve, of the Holy Ghost, to anoint your eyes, that you may* see,
Rev. 3. 18. For Christ will not sup with blind sinners. Fifthly, the
marriage-chamber must be paved with the love of the daughters of Jerusalem,
Cant. 3. 10. i. with love to all the citizens of the new Jerusalem, and now
invite him, saying, Arise thou North Wind, and come thou South, and blow upon
my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out; let my well beloved come into
his garden, and eat of his pleasant fruits, Cant. 4. Now Christ has prepared a
supper for you; for thus he says, I am come into my garden, my sister, my
spouse, I have gathered my myrrbe, with my spice, I have eaten mine honey comb,
with mine honey, I have drunk my wine, with my milk, eat, O friends, drink and
make you merry, O well beloved, (Cant. 5. 1.) for the first dish that you shall
have at my supper, says Christ, is the tree of life; for, to him that
^vercometh, will I give to eat of the tree of life in the midst of the Paradise
of God, Rev. 2. 7. Eat of Christ therefore, the tree of life, at supper, and
drink his blood, and make you merry. Secondly, you that are faithful, shall
have a crown of life, and not be hurt of the second death, Rev 2. 10, 11.
Thirdly; you shall have the hidden Manna, this is good cheer indeed, Eat, O
friends, and make you merry, for you shall have a white stone, with a new name
written, that no man knows, save he that receives it, (yea, no man can
understand these things that I write, but he that has the white stone,)
Fourthly, you that are bidden to the marriage-supper, shall be a conquering
people; for you shall have power over nations, and rule them with a rod of
iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel, and shall have the
morning Star, which is Jesus, the root and the generation of David, to be your
light, Rev. 22. 16. and Rev 2. 26. Fifthly, be merry, for you you shall be
clothed with white-rayment, and he will not blot out your names out of the book
of life, Rev. 3. 5. True faith in the White-rayment, is an argument, your names
are written in the book of life. Sixthly, be merry in the Lord, for he will
make you a pillar in the Temple of God, and you shall go no more out; and I
will write upon you the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God,
which is the new Jerusalem, which comes down from my God, out of heaven, and
my new name, the new Christian, a new creature, Gal. 6. 16. Seventhly, be
merry, for you shall fit with Christ in his Throne, as he overcame, and fit
with the Father in his Throne, Rev 3. 21. Eat therefore, O friends, drink and
make you merry, O well beloved, much good do it you at this supper. You see
therefore, that all the promises of the seven Churches, run into the last,
which is ours, and to the supper of the Lamb. Therefore you see, that the most
conquering and reigning Church that ever arose in Christendom, is now arising
in England; for you Whiterayment Christians, shall sit with Christ in his
Throne, therefore you shall reign: For Christ has loved you, and washed you
from your sins, in his own blood, and made you Kings and Priests, to God his
Father, and you shall reign on earth, ( Rev. 5. 10.) for Christ will be clothed
in a garment dipped in blood shortly, if he be not already, and you the hosts of
heaven, shall follow him on white horses, for you are clothed in ^ine linen,
white and pure, Rev. 19. 13, 14. There be many religions now in England, and
maay m^se, which shall prevail; some say the Papists, some the Prelate, some
the Anabaptists, some say the Brownists, and every sect now think to prevail;
but I say the Whiterayment Christians are the Israel of God, that have not
defiled their garments, and they shall walk with Christ in white, for they are
worthy, Rev. 3. 4. Peace be upon that Israel of God, Gal. 6. 16. for they shall
fit with Christ in his Throne, Rev. 3. 21. And therefore, because you can sing
the song of Moses, and of the Lamb, Rev. 15. 2. therefore I set Moses blessing
upon you, Deuteronomy. 33. Blessed are thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee? O
people, saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy glory;
therefore thine enemies shall be in subjection unto thee, and thou shall tread
upon their high places. Christ is now shaking the heavens of the Churches, and
the earth of the Heathen now; and shaking of the Churches, shows the removing
of those things that are shaken, that the things which are not shaken, may
remain, Heb. 12. 26. But the Churches of the Lutherans and of England are now
shaken, by a civil war, they are Churches divided against themselves, Ergo,
they must not stand, but come to naught, as Christ says, Mat. 12. 25. and Rome
shall be shaken too, and come to destruction, Ergo, they shall be removed from
being Churches, that the things which are not shaken may remain, and that is
the Church of the White-rayment Christians, and citizens of the new Jerusalem,
which shall remain; for we receive the Kingdom which cannot be shaken, Heb.
12. 28. and are the pillars in the Temple of God, Rev. 3. 12. Therefore leave
your wrangling for a Discipline, and hear Christ's voice, for behold, he
knocks, and will never leave rapping, until you take his counsel in
England, to buy gold, white-rayment and eye salve: mark, he knocks to be let in
for doctrine, for scarce one of a thousand have bought these three: say with
the White-rayment Christians, Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and after
receive me to a glorious Throne, Psalm. 73. 24. and city, for they shall enter
into the gates of the city, and have right to the tree of life, R^v 22. 14. And
now, dear friends, I have set before you in this Book, and in that of the
blood of the Lamb, as it were, the two sides of Jacobs ladder, whose foot was
on earth, but the top reached to Heaven, and the Angels of heaven ascended, and
descended upon it, Genesis 28. ^^. The two sides of this ladder on earth, are
Baptism, and the blood of the Lamb, though the foot of it be on earth, 1 John
5. in visible signs, yet the top of it reaches to heaven, for we are baptized
into Christ in heaven, and by faith feed upon Christ, and are sprinkled with
Christ's blood in heaven: The Angels of heaven will ascend, and descend for your
protection Heb. 1. You friends of the Bridegroom, and children of the
marriagechamber, that are clothed in white-raiment; make much of this ladder,
for though the foot of it be on earth, in water and blood, yet it reaches unto
heaven, unto Jesus that came by water and blood, to send Angels down to you
upon it: they that have no faith in their baptism into Christ, and in the
blood of the Lamb, cannot tell, whether the Angels of God descend or ascend for
their protection, as Heathens, Jews, Turks, Devils, Witches, Papists, and all
unbelievers. I have writ a little book of Good news for soldiers, or, the way
to overcome the Devil, by the blood of the Lamb: I find by Luke 21. 11. there
is See 2 Esdras 13. 31.
an earthquake, pestilence and famine coming; for thus says my Lord, and my
God, When ye hear of wars, and seditions, that nation rise against nation, and
Ma.
kingdom against kingdom, there shall be great earthquakes, (...), i. in,
according to, or through those places, and famine, and pestilence, Luke 21. 11.
Mark 13. 8. these are the beginnings of sorrows. But in England, Scotland Mi.
and Ireland, we hear of wars and seditions, that nation rise against nation,
and kingdom against kingdom. Ergo, there shall be great earthquakes, Con.
(...), i. in, according to, or through those places, and famine and
pestilence, these are the beginnings of sorrows; of which I have writ more
fully in the Counsel of Christ to England. Now, as Moses, when a pestilence
was coming, counseled the Israelites a way to escape the destroying Angel, by
sprinking the blood of a Lamb, upon the two dore-posts, and the upper dorepost
of their houses, that when God saw the blood, he said, he would pass over
them, and the plague shall not be upon you, to destruction; so ^ counsel you,
the Israel of God, buy one of them books, for every house, and sprinkle the
faith of the blood of the Lamb upon your two dore-posts of your bodies and
souls, and the upper dore-post of your spirits, that when the destroying
pestilence shall come, God may see the blood of the Lamb upon your consciences,
he may cause it to pass over your houses, where the Israelite of a good
conscience is within; and whatsoever comes to your bodies, yet your souls shall
be safe: for as the Angels of heaven went up and down on Jacobs ladder, so they
shall ascend, and descend for your protection, that believe your bodies were
washed with pure water in Baptism, and your hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, by the blood of the Lamb, you may keep your profession without
wavering, (of deliverance) Heb. 10. 22, 23. For he that dwells in this secret
of the Lord, shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, Psalm. 91. 1. and he
shall give his Angels a charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways, to
bear thee in their arms, that thou dash not thy foot against a stone, v. 11.
and peace shall be upon them, that walk according to this rule (of a new
creature) and upon the Israel of God, Gal 6. 16.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, JOHN EACHARD.

JUDGMENT Denounced against Unfruitfulnesse in grace.
MATTHEW 3. 10. And now also is the ax put to the root of the tree, therefore
every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewne down, and cast into the
fire.


JOHN the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, was prophesied of, by two famous
Prophets, Isaiah, and Malachi: For, this is he of whom it is spoken by the
Prophet Isaiah, saying, The voice Isaiah 40.
of him that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make
his paths straight: And Malachi calls him the Prophet Eliah, that Mal. ^.
should turn the hearts of the fathers to their children, and of the children
to their fathers. He exhorts them* to prepare a way Prepare away in their
hearts, Joh. 1. 12. As Kings.
(in their hearts) for Christ, that they may receive him; for so many as
receive him, he gives them prerogative to become the sons of God: That as
Princes and great Kings have forerunners, that prepare their ways, and
foretell of a kings coming, to prepare him lodging; so did John prepare the way
for the Lord, by showing their lost, miserable, and cursed condition by sin.
The Valleys are Valleys.
exalted, when men escape out of the mire of sin, and go to Christ: the
Mountains and Hills are brought low, when men cast away all pride of their own
righteousness, and trust in their merits, and embrace Christ's; and then
crooked things are made straight, when men cast away hypocrisy and simulation,
and receive the Gospel sincerely. And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers
to the children, He shall turn the hearts as Elias did.
i. as Elias did, when there was such a dissension in Religion, that some
fathers were for Baal, and the children for God; so on the contrary; But Elias
brought them all to acknowledge the true God: So John the Baptist seeing the
dissension of so many sects, the fathers Sadduces, and the children Pharisees,
or Esses, he by a He thundered out the Law.
divine zeal, thundering out the Law, did convince them all of sin, that they
were great and damnable sinners, and needed to be baptized, and confessed their
sins, and were baptized in Jordan, and Was a pointer.
was a true pointer, for he pointed out Jesus Christ to be the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world, that men should receive him; and this
he was fore-prophesied he should do, lest the Lord should smite the earth with
cursing, ( i.) to bring a destruction Lest he smile with a curse.
upon the whole land for their dissension; for when one part of a Commonwealth
opposes another, Ipsa Salus non potest talem Rempublicam conservare, Salvation
it self cannot preserve such a kingdom, for, a kingdom divided cannot stand.
God has smitten our land with this cursing, that the hearts of the fathers
were not toward the children, nor the hearts of the children toward their
fathers in the true Religion. Fathers are for an Episcopacie, and children for
another way; fathers for one sect, and children for another, none of both for
Christ. O that the Lord would Oh that the Lord would raise such another.
raise up some prophet, or John the Baptist, that might thunder out the Law and
Judgments of God against all the sects and divisions, both of Cavilleers, and
all others, to show them they are all cursed and damnable sinners, the best of
all but lukewarm Gospellers, and therefore wretched and miserable, and poor,
and blind, and naked, that they may seek the remedy in Christ for their sins,
and buy of him gold tried in the fire, that they may be rich, which is the
lively faith in the merits of Christ's death received in baptism, which Rev. 3.
18.
makes men rich members of Christ, children of God, and inheritors of the
kingdom of Heaven, which would make them leave fighting, if they did believe
it; and white raiment, that their filthy nakedness might not appear; they
would then leave stripping one another of their garments; and eye salve, that
they might see how the Papists set them together by the ears, and laugh at
them, when they kill one another, they would then leave fightinng one with
another, and both sides fight only against them, for murdering of their
brethren in Ireland.

Now Christ's testimony of John was this: that he was that Elias that was to
come, and is come already and they knew him not, but have done to him
whatsoever they would, Mat. 17. 12. (i.) many Mat. 17. 12.
of the Jews knew not the Majesty and office of John the Baptist, but said he
had a devil. Herod added this to his sins, that he cast John into prison, and
beheaded him; his birth was foretold by an Angel, which appeared at the right
hand of the Altar of incense, saying, Fear not Zacharias, for thy prayer is
beard, (signifying, that he had prayed for a son) for thy wife Elizabeth shall
bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name John, which signifies the grace
of God, John signifies the grace of God, therefore should be a Preacher of free
Grace.
signifying he should be a Preacher of the free grace of God to wretched
sinners, pointing with the finger at the Lamb of God, for whose sake we are
received into free grace and favor of God: And thou shall have joy and
gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth, because he shall have a new
birth; for parents may have great joy Great, for he shall be a Baptist.
and gladness at the new birth of their children: for he shall be great before
the Lord, although the wicked world shall contemn him, and say he has a
devil, yet he shall be great, for he shall be a Baptist.

They are the greatest before the Lord, that preach most soundly of Baptism;
Paul the greatest of the Apostles, preached most of Baptism, Luther was famous
for Baptism; and Calvin, the fourth Angel; and name any that ever was famous
in the Church, that was not sound in the faith of his baptism; for no
Anabaptist, nor any other shall be great before the Lord in his Church, which
is not sound in that point, that do not thunder out the Law to Filled with the
Holy Ghost from the womb.
men that may drive them to the faith of their Baptism in Infancy. He shall
be filled with the Holy Ghost from his mothers womb, which is not so to be
understood, that all the elect do now receive the Holy Ghost in their mothers
womb, but that all the elect should receive the Holy Ghost in their mothers
womb of the Church, which is baptism in their Infancy; when their godly
parents, i. all the true Church, pray for the holy Spirit to be given to their
Infants. As Peter told the Jews, Be baptized every one in the name of Jesus
Christ for the remission of sin, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost, Acts 2. 38.
For why should not the Lord give his holy Spirit to Infants at baptism, as
well as to John? And as Peter told the Jews, Be baptized, and ye shall receive
the Holy Ghost. He shall drink neither wine, nor strong drink, ( i.) he shall
be no drunken Minister: the Holy Ghost shall teach him sobriety. And he shall
convert many of the children of Israel unto the Lord God. The Baptist, and all
that preach most soundly of Baptism, convert most to Christ. I have observed
that those men, and that those Ministers, that have preached the Law, and
Baptism most soundly amongst men, have converted most, and the reason, why so
few are converted in these days, because few preach the Law clearly, in the
spiritual breach, and Baptism, as Luther prophesied Baptism after his time,
would be lost; so there be few preach Baptism clearly to make the tree good,
and the fruit good, for the tree is evil, and the fruit evil by Adam. And
here is the rule to know all Sermons to be good or bad, by The rule to know all
Sermons by.
converting, or not: if they make the tree good, and the fruit good, or the
tree evil, and the fruit evil, as it is Christ's own rule, Mat. 12. 33. This
is the first main ground of a faithful Minister, to prove all his Doctrine and
Sermons by, if he miss this ground, he cast out his net on the wrong side, and
catch no fish, convert no souls, though he labor all his life. This is the
right side that Christ Make the tree good, and the fruit good, or the tree
evil, and the fruit evil.
bad Peter cast out the net on, ( i.) the net of the Gospel, to make the tree
good, and the fruit good, or the tree evil, and the fruit evil; and this is
the reason, why hearers get no assurance of salvation, because they do follow
such Preachers, that make neither the tree good, nor the fruit good, nor the
tree evil, nor the fruit evil, but partly good, and partly bad: We must do
something to make our selves good before God, which is the greatest abomination
The abomination of Antichrist.
that Antichrist can set up against God, to affirm that we can make our selves
righteous in whole or in part, as the Homily of our Church, for then Christ
died in vain.

Now, seeing John the Baptist was fore-prophesied of by so many Seeing that
there is such a testimony of John Baptist.
Prophets, and by so many Apostles, and by Christ himself, that a greater then
John have not sprung up among them, that have been born of women; that he was a
burning and a shining candle, and thus testified by an Angel from heaven; Let
us believe his baptism was from Heaven; let us know that those that are
Baptists, that preach most of Baptism, their doctrine is most heavenly, and
Let us be Baptists.
they shall convert* most to the Lord; for they point most to the Lamb of God,
that has taken away the sins of the world, who drew all his obedient hearers
by preaching the Law, from the sundry sorts of sects; 1. to Baptism, and then
showed them Christ He drew all sects, 1. to baptizing, then to Christ.
the Lamb of God, that took away the sins of the world. Wherefore hearken to
this Elias; Repent, and receive Christ, the Lamb of God by Baptism, to take
away your sins; for so many as received him, to them he has given prerogative
to become the sons of God, so many as believe in his name, which are born, not
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God: So
he that would draw all the sects and divisions of England into one, he must
first thunder out the Law, and show how cursed they are, all because He that
gathers not into Christ's baptism, scatters. The cause of all the sects and
divisions of England, for when men have lost baptism, then to work for
remission of their righteousness.
they have not taken Christ's counsel, Rev. 3. 18. Then he must bring them to
the faith of their Baptism, he must teach them there is one God, one Faith,
one Baptism, and he that does not gather with John and Christ too, into
Baptism, scatter; and here is the cause of all the sects and divisions in all
the Churches in Christendom; for when men have lost Baptism, some will have
justication from all eternity; some from the cross, all born, and unborn, some
in the womb, some at faith, some at conversion; some at death, and some after
death, and then they must go wash to get remission of sins: Thus he that
gathers not into Christ, by Baptism, scatters abroad; for, except I wash
thee, thou shall have no part with me: so, except thou take thy part with
Christ from thy Baptism, thou can have no assurance of salvation.

John* preached, saying, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand; this is
not only to be understood that he preached nothing The Law the sum to bring
them to repentance.
else, but the sum of his doctrine was by the Law; he showed them what
horrible sinners they were, the generation of Vipers, detest your sins, and
your own righteousness, believe in the Messiah* he shall baptize you with the
Holy Ghost, and with fire: for all that are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ, for in our Baptism we received remission of our sins, in the death of
Christ, into which we were baptized and buried, and in Christ we received
everlasting righteousness, in whom, by baptism we are raised; and he
preached, The Kingdom of Heaven was at hand. In Christ, righteousness, and
peace, and joy.
the kingdom of heaven is hand, because Baptism was at hand, for where
Baptism is truly preached, there the kingdom of heaven is at hand. Christ and
his righteousness is at hand, in Baptism peace is at hand, to them that
believe their baptism, they have peace with God, and assurance of salvation;
and all the sects and professors of England, have no peace with God, nor
assurance of salvation but they that believe they have peace with God, from
their baptism into Christ in infancy, and joy in the Holy Ghost is at hand by
Baptism, as the Eunuch found true, and the Jailer and his household after
Baptism rejoiced. And I can testify Acts 8. 39.
that my God shall fill you full of joy and peace in believing, ( i.) that you
are in him that is true, in that his Son Jesus Christ, the same is very God,
and eternal life; and this I know by faith in my baptism into that Jesus,
that came by water and blood, not by water of Baptism only, but by water and
blood, it is that Spirit that bears witness, ( i.) (unto our spirits, that we
are the children of God, Romans 8. 16.) that Spirit is true, and those Christians
that hold the true faith in their baptism, that by it and by the blood we know
we are in him that is true, and by the Spirit that bears witness by both
these, they are the right joyful Christians in all the world; the Devil and
the world are mad at them for their joy, and are the citizens of the new
Jerusalem, the street of it paved with pure gold, like transparent glass,
signify the lively faith of our Baptism.

And this John had his garment of Camels hair, he was no velvet 4. Garment.
or silken Preacher, with long Camels hair on his head; no, his garment was
hairy, like Elias, free from softness, or pride, and a lethern girdle about
his loins, not broydered with silver or gold, but like Elias in his lether
girdle, 2 King. 1. and his meat was Locusts, and wild Honey, to show
Humble-Bees honey, and Locusts could content him, as the Pulse did Daniel and
the three children, Daniel, he did not desire delicate fare, but he was in his
apparel and diet far from pride or luxury.

There went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region 5. Went out
to see a Prophet sent of God.
round about Jordan; and they were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their
sins. They went out into the Wilderness to see a Prophet, he was not a Reed
shaken with the wind, to run after every wind of doctrine, but he taught that
doctrine and baptism that he was sent to teach from God; for so he testified,
he that sent me to baptize with water, said unto me, Joh. 1. 33. But when they
Ioh. 1. 33. He so preached the Law.
came to see him, he so preached the Law, and the wrath of God to come upon
them for sin, they confessed their sins, (i.) they humbly confessed they were
sinners before God, by the Law, and had deserved eternal damnation, and prayed
to God to forgive them their sins, and took the Sacrament of Baptism unto
repentance, for the remission of sins, and bad them believe in Christ, that
should baptize them with the Holy Ghost, which John's baptism could not do, as
the twelve men, Acts 19. For by our baptism Acts 19. By baptism we are made
made clean.
now we are made clean from all our sins before God, and regenerate, that of
the children of Adam, we might be made the sons of God; and as Ananias said to
Paul, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, in calling on the name of
the Lord, Acts 22. And Paul Acts 22. 16.
testifies, that Christ does cleanse his Church in the laver of water through
the Word, Ephesians. 5. and Christ says, Except ye be regenerate Ephesians. 5.
of water, and the Holy Ghost, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Joh. 3. And Paul says, that Baptism is the laver John 3. 5.
of regeneration, Tit. 3. that we might have this ground of consolation Titus
3. 5.
in all afflictions, that we are baptized, and so regenerate, and are adopted
to be the sons of God. And seeing Baptism is a means, says the Expositor,
whereby we obtain remission of sins, and the benefit of regeneration; let us
beware of that doctrine of Devils, Doctrine of Devils.
that through malice, or foolishness, we deprive not our children to come unto
Christ, to obtain remission of sins, and the benefit of regeneration in
infancy: For, if Christ say, Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid
them not, for of such is the kingdom of heaven, then they must be baptized,
for they can come no other way John 13. 7.
to Christ, but by Baptism, nor any other way be of the kingdom of Heaven, as
Joh. 3. 5. but by that of themselves, or of their parents, if they die in the
womb, for Baptism is as the Ark for a man and his household, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

When he saw many of the Pharisees and of the Sadduces come to Verse. 7.
Pharisees and Sadduces.
his baptism, he said unto them, O generation of Vipers, who has forewarned
you to flee from the wrath to come? What, you Pharisees? that think your selves
good, and contemn others? you that trust to your own righteousness, you that
say, stand apart, I am holier then thou, you that think your selves better then
other folks; the Law does declare you are a cursed generation, for you are a
poysonable generation, and desirous of hurting; you are the generation of
Vipers, for your fathers slew the Prophets, and you are of the same viperous
mind, to kill them that discover your hypocrisy, for all your plots are
against them that discover you: And you Sadduces, What, are you come to my
baptism? What need you Sadduces.
be baptized? as if he should say, you believe no resurrection, nor Angel, nor
Spirit, you are all cursed by the Law, for you have not continued in all
things, you shall go cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his angels, you shall find a Devil in Hell, that will not believe there are
Angels in Heaven: Well, both of you are come to my baptism, look you be both
of one faith, to believe in the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
Pharisees, and the sins of the Sadduces, and of the whole world; and thus he
reconciled these Sects to be all one in their baptism: So the only way to
reconcile all the Sects in the world, is, to show them their abominable estate
by Adam, the generation of Vipers, and how cursed they are by the Law, and the
wrath of God hangs over them, and bring them all to faith in baptism, to
obtain remission of all sins, past, present, and to come, and how they put on
Christ in baptism, to make them everlastingly righteous: For here is the cause
The loss of Baptism is the cause of all sects.
of all the sects and divisions in Christendom; for when men have lost
baptism, then one sect will devise to get remission of sins one way, as by a
Popes pardon, by pilgrimage, or in Purgatory. The Anabaptists by a new
baptism, and by a new Church Way, not appointed by Christ, but invented of
themselves, to make them more righteous, and holy, and clean then others, that
are not of their way, and therefore will not communicate with others, for they
think they are more holy then others, by strictness of their order; and thus
all sects imagine, that in that way they walk in, they are less sinners then
others, and more righteous then others, and therefore will not communicate with
others, and you will be a Church by O ye sects, flee from the wrath to come.
your selves: But I say unto you, O generation of Vipers, all you sects in
Christendom, come home to the faith in your baptism into Christ, there is wrath
coming upon all Christendom; Christ is come as a thief, by the judgment of a
plundering, robbing, spoiling, stealing, Christ is come as a thief, John 10.
10.
pillaging, civil war, upon all sects: Here is an Ark for you to be saved in,
come unto your baptism; what foolery have you professed? Can you get a better
remission of sins then Christ has procured for you in his own blood in your
baptism? If you should wash your selves an hundred years, with all your tears
and mortification, and holy walking, though these may give some satisfaction to
the conscience, yet you cannot wash your selves more clean from sin before God,
then Christ has made you in baptism, and by his blood: And seeing Christ has
made you everlastingly righteous in baptism, by putting on of Christ, you
cannot make Not make your selves more righteous then Christ.
your selves more righteous before God, by all the works in the world, then the
wedding garment has made you already; and if you go about to make your selves
more righteous by works before God, you defile his garments; you may make your
selves more righteous before men, but you cannot make your selves more
righteous, or more holy then Christ has made you in baptism; and therefore
all you sects, come to your baptism, into this Ark, and be saved from the
blood of Gods wrath coming upon Christendom, for the contempt of Christ's
counsel. And all you Sadduces, that are profane and loose livers, that
believe not your resurrection, for you purify not your selves, as he is pure,
1 John 3. 3. Come home to believe your baptism, and you shall have your part
in the first resurrection: for, blessed and holy is he, which has part in the
first resurrection, and the second death shall have no power over you: The
first resurrection before God, is in baptism, as Col. 2. 12. though before men
it be at conversion and faith.

Bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life; (i.) bring forth Verse 8.
fruits in Christ, believe you are in him that is true, in that his Son Jesus
Christ, and let this faith cause you to bring forth fruits of piety and charity.

And think not to say, we have Abraham to our father; for I say unto Verse 9.
you, that God is able of these stones, to raise up children to Abraham. He
told them of their thoughts: nourish not such proud thoughts as these, that you
have Abraham to your father; you have a Church, you have the Word, and you have
Sacraments, you are the children of the martyrs; for I tell you all, you are
cursed by the Law for not continuing in all things written in the book of the
Law to do them; and therefore come and believe your baptism, or else you are
cursed for ever: For God is able of these stones, yea, stony hearted people, by
baptism, to raise up children unto Abraham, and give them faith to believe it,
Gal. 3. 9. and to take away the stony heart, and give them hearts of flesh,
Ezekiel. 36. 26. For, Ezekiel. 36. 26.


Now the ax is laid to the root of the trees; every tree that brings Verse.
10.
not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into: he fire. Now Christ is come
by baptism and faith, to make you good trees, to bring forth none but good
fruit; every tree, every church or sect, or particular man, that brings forth
sin before God, is hewn down, and cast into the fire of Gods wrath: Every man
or church, that will not believe his baptism, that by it he is baptized into
Christ, and ingraffed into him, and made a good tree in Christ, and bring forth
good fruit before God, he is hewn down by the Law, and cast into the fire of
Gods wrath; for he believes not that he has the Son, that he has his blood,
that has washed him from all his sins before God, nor Christ's righteousness
to make him everlastingly righteous, therefore the wrath of God abides upon
him, John 3. verse. last.

What is meant by the Ax? It is taken materially for an^strument, What the Ax
signifies.
to cut down trees: So Deuteronomy. 20. 19. Thou shall not cut down the fruit trees
with an ax, when thou besiegest a city, for thou may eat of them, for the
tree of the field is man's life, but it is taken metaphorically for Gods Decree
and Judgment, as in this place. Now is the decree of God come forth, that
every one that is not made a good tree by baptism into Christ, is hewn down,
and cast into wrath. In the time of the Law, there was sacrifice for wrath, but
now baptism for men to get into Christ, now no more sacrifice for wrath: So
Dan. 4. 11. 14. 21. Hew him down, is the Decree of the most High: So Zeph. 2.
1, 2. Gather your selves together, gather your selves together, O nation not
worthy to be beloved, before the decree come forth; for Gods decrees are never
to be recalled. The ax at the root, is baptism.

What is meant by trees? Metaphorically by trees, are meant What is meant by
trees.
men, as is plain by Jothams Parable, Judge. 9. 8. The trees went forth to
anoint a king over them; and they said to the Olive, Come thou reign over us,
but the Olive said, Should I leave my fatness, whereby by me they honor God
and man, and go to advance me above the trees? No, I am content with my estate,
to honor God in that estate I am created, I will be content with my calling,
to honor God and man, in that I must forsake my fatness, and by taking of an
higher calling of a King, I may so dishonor God and man; and the Figtree would
not forsake his sweetness and good fruit, to be a King, nor the Vine would not
forsake his wine, whereby he cheered God and man, to be King, to which he was
not called of God, he should displease God and man; but the Bramble would be
King, though most unfit for it, that would do no good to them, but scratch and
fire them: Also where the tree falls, there it lies, whether toward the
South, or the North, Eccles. 11. 3. ( i.) in what estate men die, whether in a
good estate, or bad, to heavenward, or to hell, so they lie: So the persecutors
of Jeremiah said, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit, i. let us destory
Jeremiah, and his Prophecy, Let us destroy the Preacher, and his preaching,
but thou, Lord God of Sabbath, that judge right, let me see thy vengeance
upon them, Jer. 11. 19. declaring the destiny of all such as plot to destroy a
faithful Pastor; and the tree to be hewn down, was Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 21.
So Jude 12. Corrupt trees, whose fruit withers, twice dead, and plucked up by
the roots, are men that are dead by original sin, and then dead by actual
sin. Reprobates that cannot repent, are cast into the fire of Gods wrath, and
then heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the just
judgment of God, Romans 2. 5.

What is meant by hewn down? i. They are cut down before What meant by hewn
down.
God, that refuse, or will not believe baptism, by Gods Law and Decree; for as
Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gilgal, 1 Samuel 15. 33. so are
all men that will not receive Christ by baptism hewn down, and cast into the
fire of Gods wrath, Joh. 3. 36. as Jews, Turks, and Heathens. Sometimes it is
taken for hewing by degrees, as Exodus 31. 4. Hew thee two tables of stone.
Metaphorically it is taken for the preaching of the Law by the Prophets: So
Hos. 6. 5. Therefore I have hewn them by my Prophets, and slain them with the
words of my mouth; by punishments and plagues, and curses of the Law, for their
sins. Therefore the Law and the Prophets endured until John (i. hewing them,
and slaying them, (as in Hosea) for their sins;) and since that time, the
kingdom of Luke 16. 16.
Heaven is preached, and every man presses unto it.

How is the Kingdom of Heaven to be preached?

By faith and baptism; for remission of sins is preached by baptism, Answ.
and the righteousness of Christ, without which, no kingdom of Heaven; but by
baptism we come into the large heaven of remission of sins, as Luther calls
it, in which we have remission of all sins, past, present, and to come; for the
doctrine and work of Baptism, it came down from heaven: as Christ posed the
Pharisees, The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? intimating it
was from Heaven: But why did he call it the baptism of John, not the doctrine
or ministry of John? Answ. To show, that his baptism was the most heavenly
thing: For, there was a man sent from God, whose name was John, Job. 1. 6. And
what was he sent to do? Answ. To baptize: He that sent me to baptize with
water, said unto me, Upon whom thou see the Spirit of God come down, and
tarrying still upon him, that is he which baptizeth with the Joh. 1. 33.
Holy Ghost. By all which, you see that where baptism is truly preached and
administered, there the Kingdom of Heaven is preached, and is at hand; and in
it the Kingdom of Heaven is set open to all the elect, and according to the
established doctrine of the Church of England, which all that have taken the
Protestation, are sworn to maintain; that in my baptism I was made a member of
Ephesians. 5. 30.
Christ, a child of God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven; Gal 3.
26* 27. Joh 1. 12. Romans 8. 17.
which is a heavenly point of doctrine, that agrees with the reformed Churches
and Scriptures; for if any be made an inheritor of that Kingdom, it must be by
baptism: For, Verily, verily I s^y unto thee, (says Christ) Except a man be
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3. 5.
For, that which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and unclean, and unfit for the
Kingdom of heaven, until it be new born.

What is meant by good fruit? All the fruit that man brings forth What is meant
by fruit.
before God, is sin, or righteousness: every evil man brings forth evil
fruit of sin, and every good man brings forth good fruits of righteousness;
A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, neither can a bad* tree bring forth
good fruit, namely before God, Matthew. 7. 17. So that every man, Church or
Nation, that will not now receive baptism, or believe, by baptism into
Christ, he is made a good tree, and brings forth nothing but good fruit before
God, through remission of sins and Christ's righteousness, he is hewn down, and
cast into the fire.

What is meant by fire? By fire in this place, is not meant hell fire, though
they shall go afterward into hell fire, that do not escape, but they are cast
into the fire of Gods wrath; signifying, that every man that brings forth
evil fruit of sin, before God, that believes not by baptism his sins are all
forgiven, and that in Christ he brings forth fruit of righteousness before
God, he is hewn down, and cast into the fire of Gods wrath, as is plain, Joh.
3. 36. He that believes in the Son, (which none can do, before he be baptized
into him) bath everlasting life: he that obeys not the Son ( i. to let him
wash him) Joh. 13. 8. shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him;
For fire is kindled in my wrath, and it shall burn to the bottom of hell, and
set on fire the foundation of the mountains, Deuteronomy. 32* 22.

Now, in that he says, Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, Doctr.
That all men are good trees or bad trees.
we gather, that all men, now baptism is offered, are good trees, or bad,
there are none indifferent; or partly good, and partly bad. This is proved,
Matthew. 12. 33. Either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or the tree
evil, and the fruit evil. Augustine says, he commanded Augustine, 12. Sermon*
de verbis ^om. Mat. 12* 33.
the Jews, that they should be good trees, and to bring forth good fruit; and
in that he says, make the tree evil, he admonishes them, that they should
not be evil; for the Pharisees declared themselves to be evil trees, by their
evil fruit. Others take it, that Christ spoke of himself, as of a tree. Thus,
the tree is known by the fruit, and the fruit is like the tree. The casting out
devils is a good fruit, as you grant in your children; therefore, if you in
your words and judgments make the fruit good, then also make the tree good,
for an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Mat. 7. 18. Say of him that
cast out devils, he is a good tree, not the prince of devils; but if you make
the tree evil, and say, I am an evil man, and have the devil, Beelzebub, do
not attribute the casting out of devils, which is good fruit, to an evil tree;
for an evil tree, as Beelzebub Chrysostom. Emth. Hieron* Theoph.
is, cannot bring forth good fruit; nor an evil man by Adam, cannot bring
forth good fruit before God.

This you may see, Matthew. 7. 17. So every good tree that is made good by
baptism into Christ, brings forth good fruit before God, and a corrupt tree
by Adam (as all are by generation) brings forth evil fruit, i. before God.
Calvin notes, that this was Opinion of the Pharisees.
the opinion of the Pharisees, that they were partly good trees, and partly
bad, and that they brought forth some good fruit before God, and some bad, for
which they did sacrifice, as some say now, they are partly flesh, and partly
spirit, and therefore do bring forth some fruits good, and some bad; and this
was the opinion of the old Pharisees, for their fained sanctimony was such,
that the people perceived them not. Now Christ puts away this vizird, and
uncaseth all Hypocrites, and tells them, that all men are good, or bad before
God; a good tree brings nothing but good fruit before God, and a bad tree
nothing but bad, as Matthew. 7. 18. for there is nothing such an enemy to true
Christianity, as to counterfeit a man in a twofold estate before God; but they
do in vain think themselves righteous, that are not made good trees by baptism
into Christ, for such justify themselves before men, and think to make
themselves righteous in whole, or in part, which is the abomination of
Antichrist, but God knows their hearts, i. to be evil trees, Luke 16. 15. Now
they bear themselves in hand, that they were good and righteous men, though
they brought forth some fruit that was evil before God, they should sacrifice
for that, and take it away well enough, but they were deceived; for John
tells them, now baptism is instituted to wash away all sins; now you must
make the tree good, and the fruit good, i. the person and the actions all good
through the remission of sins in baptism, or the tree evil, and the fruit
evil, i. the person evil by Adam; for, every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, i. if it bring forth any evil fruit (before God, now baptism is
administered) it is hewn down, and cast into the fire of Gods wrath, Christ has
done nothing for them.

For all men now that baptism is administered, are in Adam, or in Reason 1.
Christ; either they are regenerate of water and the Spirit, or else they are
not; either they are ingraffed into Christ by baptism, and made good trees, or
else they are not ingraffed, but are still in Adam. This the Lord showed in a
vision to Jeremiah, by the two baskets of Figs, the one had exceeding good
Figs, even like the first, that are Jerem. 24.
first ripe, the other had exceeding naughty Figs, they were so evil, the Lord
in this place, says the Expositor, has respect unto the Kingdom of Christ,
in which both Jews and Gentiles being ingraffed by faith and baptism, they are
made good trees of the celestial Paradise, to bring forth good fruit, and the
other that are evil by Adam, should have all the curses and plagues of God to
seize upon them, and be under wrath; For, thus says the Lord, of the men of
Jerusalem, that have obeyed me, I will know them to be good, but the evil, I
will give them for a terrible plague; So, now the ax is laid to the root of the
trees, every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire. Erasmus, in the old Latin translation, It is hewn down, in this
present time, it is laid to the root of all bad trees, that bear evil fruit,
and of such as bear no fruit, as the unprofitable Fig Tree, that bare nothing
but leaves, was cursed; and the tree, the Lord came three years, seeking for
fruit, and finding none, he says, Hew it down, why combreth it the ground? it
has been dug by the Law, and dunged these three years of Q. Elizabeth's,
King James, and King Charles, and I find no fruits of faith, in this lukewarm
Hierarchy and people, the sword is come to cut thee down that combred the
ground.

For seeing now Christ is come, and appointed Baptism, which Reason 2.
is the righteous branch of the root of David, every one that is not by
baptism and faith ingraffed into him, and made a good tree, bearing good
fruit, is hewne down by the Law, and cursed of God, and cast into the fire of
Gods wrath, that will burn to the bottom of hell: but to so many as received
him, he gave prerogative to become the sons of God: So many as believe in his
Name. And what are they? Ans. Such as are borne of God, Joh. 1. 12. Whereby we
see how men are made good trees, by receiving Christ by baptism, and by
believing: but all others have the wrath of God abiding upon them, because they
are evil trees, and the axe of the curses of the Law, will cut them down, or
the sword, or famine, or pestilence.

For though God let many trees alone in the time of the Law, Reason 3.
that bare some fruit good, and some bad, as Moses, Miriam, David, Jehosaphat,
for which they did sacrifice, and God was appeased: and some branches of the
Israelites were hewne off by the axe of the Law, because they bare bad fruits
before God, of Idolatry; as the Danites, and the Ephraimites; yet Judah bare
good fruit, as Hosea 11. 12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the
house of Israel with deceit; but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful
with the Saints. But now seeing Christ is come, and appointed baptism to graff
all men into Christ, to be made branches of the vine Christ..i. to be taken out
of Adam, and of the Law, to be graffed into Christ. Now if any man abide not in
me, (or will not be graffed into me, by baptism, and faith; for baptism is
the foundation of the lively faith; baptism, that is the work of the Father,
Son, and the holy Ghost: wherein is not only water, but water and blood; 1 John 5. 6. Tit. 3. 5.
and the washing of the new birth; and the renewing of the holy Ghost) if any
branch of man abide not in Christ, by faith, in his baptism into Christ, that
he is made a good tree of righteousness, to bear good fruit before God; he is
cast forth as a branch, and withers,.i. in the assurance of salvation, and
bring forth no fruits of righteousness before God, and men gather them, and by
Excommunication, or in the judgment of men, are judged none of the Church, and
they cast them into the fire of Gods wrath, and they burn. Now men are cut off
from Christ three ways. Joh. 15. 6. As the confession of witches


First, When a man forsakes his baptism, and turns Turk, and will be
circumcised, or turns Witch, that will make a Covenant with the Devil to deny
her baptism, and deny God and Christ; or turn Anabaptist, to be rebaptized,
he does not abide in his baptism Ephesians. 4. 5.
into Christ; these will have a new baptism, which is not of God, for he has
but one, the second must be of the Devil; these are gathered in the judgment
of all Churches, and justly excommunicated, and cast into the fire of Gods
wrath. Such as turn Turks, Witches, or Anabaptists, have denied their first
baptism, because they have trod underfoot the blood wherewith they were
sanctified, and done despite to the Spirit of Grace, and withdrawn themselves
By hypocrisy.
to perdition, Heb. 10.

Secondly, Men are cut off, that by hypocrisy fall from Grace, given of God in
baptism, to seek for remission of sins, in whole or in part, or to make
himself righteous, in whole, or in part, before God, and will not believe he
has free remission of all his sins by the blood of Christ in baptism, and
an everlasting righteousness, given of God freely in his baptism, when he
puts on Christ, that man is cut off to his faith, that he does not abide in
Gal. 3. 27.
Christ, and then seeks for remission of sins, and righteousness in some of
man's invention, these abide not in Christ.

Thirdly, Men wither in this faith, and are cut off to their apprehension,
which have forgotten they were washed from their old sins. i. in baptism, 2
Pet. 1. 9. and fall to a beastly life, and Epicurisme; which by repentance and
faith in their Baptism, may get out of this snare of the Devil, of whom they
are taken prisoners, to do his will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Now such as do not abide
in Christ indeed, such says Bullenger, not only shall be, but are cast out
already from the society, and inheritance of Christ, and his Saints; as he
says of the faithful, not that they shall have eternal life, but they have
it already, as Joh. 3. 36. because Christ is possessed, which brings with him
righteousness, and the fruit of eternal life; as Calvin, and Bullenger, that
he says, not he shall have eternal life, for now as his own he possesses it
already, and has it, and by hope expecting that which he knows most
certainly shall be. i. He is freed from death, from malediction, and
condemnation, and has justification, absolution, felicity, and eternal
happiness. And so he says of the incredulous, that believe not The Devil
likes a second Baptism well enough, for he never persuaded any to deny their
second Baptism.
they are in the Son; he says not, they shall have the wrath of God upon
them hereafter when they die, but the wrath of God abides upon them, ( i. now)
for all men by the sin of Adam, are fallen under the wrath of God, as
Augustine, and Ephesians. 2. 3. They have with them by natural birth, the wrath of
God upon them, and that for the sin of Adam; But the Son of God came not
having sin, and clad with flesh, that he might turn away the wrath of God; if
men receive the Son of God in Baptism, as all the Elect, and grace offered
by him, otherwise wrath abides upon them. I hear the Anabaptists brag they
have a Church, but I would know of them, whether the witches of England can
make a Church? No; why, because they have denied their Baptism; no more can
Anabaptists, because they have denied their baptism, that made them of the
Church.

Because where Baptism is refused, there grace is refused; as is Reason 4.
Where Baptism is refused, grace is refused, as in Jews, Turks, and Heathens,
and Anabaptists to their children.
plain Luke 7. 30. The Pharisees, and the Expounders of the Law, despised the
counsel of God against themselves, and were not baptized of him, but the
people that heard, and the Publicans justified God, being baptized with the
baptism of John, ver. 29. for the remission of sins. So that you see, that
they that despise baptism, for their Infants, despise the counsel of God,
against their own children, that will not suffer little children to come to
him. And all they justify God, that receive and believe baptism, for the
remission of sins, and put on Christ to make them everlastingly righteous
before God, Gal. 3. 27. they which believe it not, are as with an ax cut down
by the roots before God; as all Heathens, all Jews, all Turks and Tartars, and
all Anabaptists, and all Papists, and Protestants, that do not justify God by
baptism for the remission of sins, and righteousness, are cut down in
conscience, and have no assurance of their salvation, because they will have
remission of sins and free righteousness, by some other way then God has
appointed. This is the most mournful and lamentable thing in the world, as our
Savior wept over Jerusalem, saying, O if thou had even known, at least in
this thy day, the things that concern thy peace; how often would I have
gathered thy children together, as the Hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? I would have gathered your children by baptism and
faith in me, under the wing^ of the Father, and of the sun of righteousness, and
of the holy Ghost. (...) 23. 37.
Behold, your habitation shall be left unto you desolate. Here is the cause,
why many places shall be left desolate, now Christ is come as a thief by the
judgment of a civil war, because they believe not their baptism; the axe is
laid to the root of the trees, they bring forth sin, they are hewn down, and
cast into the fire of Gods wrath.

Now this will appear more plain by the second Doctrine, which Doct. 2. That
all men by nature are evil trees, and can bring forth none but ill fruit.
is this: That all men by nature are evil trees, and can bring forth nothing
but evil fruit; all men now that baptism is preached and administered, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; that are now out of
Christ, and bring forth evil fruits before God of sin; he is hewn down by the
ax of Gods Decree, and cast into the fire of Gods wrath, that is, every man
that will not receive, or believe his baptism into Christ, that he has an
eternal redemption through Christ's blood, the forgiveness of his sins, and in
him he has everlasting righteousness, his person, or his conscience, is hewn
down, and cast into the fire of Gods wrath. This is proved* not only by the
doctrine of John, by the Text, but ^at. 7. 17, (...) 19.
also by our Savior Christ himself, Mat. 7. 17, 18. So every good tree
brings forth good fruit, i. that is made good by baptism, and faith in
Christ before God; and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. A good tree
cannot bring forth evil* fruit, neither can a corrupt tree, (as all that are
in Adam are) bring forth good fruit: Every tree that brings not forth good
fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire: So Luke 6* 43, 44. For it is not a
good tree that brings forth evil fruit, i. of sin before God; it is not in
Christ by baptism, it has no benefit of Christ's blood, or righteousness,
that brings forth sin before God; neither is it an evil tree that brings
forth good fruit; i. before God: For every tree is known by his own Luk^ 6. 43,
44.
fruit; if it say, it brings forth before God righteousness by faith in his
baptism, it is a good tree; but if it bring forth sin before God, it is an
evil tree; for neither of Thorns gather men figs, nor of bushes, or Thistles
gather they grapes; neither does God of natural men, which are but* Thorns
and Thistles, gather any fruits of righteousness, for they that are servants
of sin, are freed from righteousness: Romans 6. 20. i. they are evil trees that
are out of Christ, Romans 6. 20.
that can bring forth no righteousness before God, but being made free from
sin, i. by baptism, and faith, they are made servants of righteousness, and
to bring forth fruits of holiness before God; for he that is made an holy
tree, shall bring forth holy fruit.

Reasons why: For, all men are evil trees by generation, all Reason^^. For all
men are evil by generation.
conceived in sin, and born in iniquity, all the parts of soul and body are
corrupted by that sin of Adam; so that their throat is become an open
sepulcher, which sends forth stinking smells before God; their feet are bloody,
yea, swift to shed blood, their tongues are deceitful, their lips poysonable,
for the poison of Aspes is under them, their lips, their mouths are full of
cursing and bitterness, destruction and calamity are in their ways, and the
way of peace have they not known, there is no fear of God before their eyes:
thus all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, Romans 3. 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. 23. and so all men by generation Romans 3. 13* to 19. Crab-trees.
Serpents.
are evil trees, bearing nothing but evil fruit: A Crab-tree bears nothing
but Crabs, and as the generation of Serpents and Vipers do not bring forth
Nightingals, but a serpentine, viperous, and a poysonable brood; so all men,
that are all evil trees by generation, can bring forth nothing but evil fruit.

A second reason, why all men are evil trees by nature, and Reason 2. For he
has an evil treasure.
bring forth nothing but evil fruit, because he has an evil treasure of sin
and wickedness in his heart, which cause him to bring forth sin before God,
that defile the man; as our Savior speaks plainly, an evil tree out of the
treasure of his heart, brings forth evil Luke 6. 45. Mar. 27.
things; and what are they? see Mar. 7. 21. Out of the heart proceeds evil
thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness,
wickedesse, deceit, uncleanness, a wicked eye, backbiting, pride,
foolishness, all these things come from within, and defile a man. What an
evil treasure is here? there is not some fruit evil, and some good; for the
thoughts of his heart are evil continually: Genesis 6. Genesis 6. 15.
For, the very thoughts of the foolish are sin, and an abomination to the Lord,
Prove. 15. 26. And so for their words, they are evil continually, for the
prayers of the wicked are all sin, and are turned into Pro^. 15. 26.
sin, and shall be a wickedness against them; for what have thou to do, to
take my covenant in thy mouth, or my name, when thou hate to be reformed by
baptism and faith, which would have brought forth reformed words? And as for
their works, they are all evil before God; for as Thorns and Thistles cannot
bring forth Figs, or Grapes, so cannot these cursed trees bring forth good
fruit, but cursed, whose end is to be burned; The works and sacrifices Prove.
15. 8.
of the wicked, are an abomination to the Lord.

Why all are such evil trees, because sin is of such a defiling nature, Reason
3. For one sin is of such a defiling nature, that it defiles the person and
actions. Heb. 11.
that it defiles the person, and all his actions; as one sin in the Angels,
and one sin in Adam, and sin in Cain, defiled his sacrifice; so that God had no
respect to Cains person, nor his sacrifice, Heb. 11. for sin had defiled him
from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, that there was nothing but
blains, and sores, and putrefying wounds, which had made his person so evil,
and abominable before God, that it could bring forth nothing but evil and
abominable fruit: Thus all men by original sin are deprived of the glory of
God, and are deprived of power to bring forth good fruit, for there is none
that does good, no not one, all are corrupt trees, and can bring forth nothing
but corrupt fruit, and an evil tree, says Christ, cannot bring forth good
fruit.

Cannot an evil man do any good works? Do we not see, that Ob.
they give alms, build churches, mend high ways; are not these Alms.
good works?

An evil man may do good works before men, as the Pharisees Answ.
did, they justified themselves by works before men, but God knew their hearts,
i. that they were abominable, Luke 16. 15. and Luke 16. 15.
not justified before God; therefore he says to such, that which is highly
esteemed before men, as great alms, building of Temples, and the like, yet are
abomination in the eyes of God, because their persons are not in Christ,
neither are their consciences justified by faith in the blood of Christ,
therefore impure, Tit. 1. 15. Titus 1. 15. Use. Bewail thy generation.


Is it so, that all men are evil trees by generation, conceived in sin, and
born in iniquity? learn to bewail thy generation, and see how wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked thou art by the same; what an evil
tree art thou by the same? Rev. 3. 17.
think not to say, you have godly professors to your parents, we are Gentlemen
born, or of Noble blood, for all you that boast of such things, are no better
then the Pharisees, which boasted they had Say not Abraham.
Abraham to their father, and yet being not in Christ, God was not their
Father, but they were the generation of Vipers before God, so are you that are
not born of water and the Spirit, and will not believe it, you are by nature
children of wrath, and by generation as abominable before God, as the
generation of Vipers before men, Generation of Vipers.
a deadly and poysonable generation, for the she* Viper in copulation, biteth
off the head of the fire, and kills him, and when she has conceived, the young
Vipers gnaw out the bowels of their dam, and kill her, and therefore a most
cursed generation; so art thou so poisoned with sin, that thou will destroy thy
father that begat The Anabaptists against Luher at Munster, show what
generation they are of. Fly to Baptism, to be washed as David.
thee in the faith, and mother Church, as the Anabaptists, and the people of it
by persecuting the children of God. Let this be a means to teach thee to bewail
thy old birth, with David, saying, I was conceived in sin, and born in
iniquity, and so to be cast down for thy old birth, that thou may fly to
thy baptism, as David desired it, Wash me with Hyssop, and I shall be clean,
purge me, and I shall be whiter then snow; desire the Lord to manifest thy
baptism unto thee, for no man can truly desire the new birth, until he see
how miserable he was by the old; for if thou could see how many sins thou
have brought forth, by reason of the old birth, it would be a means greatly to
move thee to desire the new birth for your children, and desire to understand
your baptism which Christ promised to Peter, that knew not what Christ did,
when he washed him, Peter knew not.
but he told him he should know it afterward: So it would make us to desire to
know afterward what Christ did for us at our baptism. When David saw that he
had committed adultery and murder, he cried out of his old birth; but thou
have committed adultery before God; for he or she that looks on a woman or
man, to lust after them, has committed adultery in his heart; and thou which
Mat. 5.
hate thy brother, art a murderer before God; and he that says to his
brother, Thou fool, is worthy to be punished with hell fire, and art in debt
ten thousand talents of sins, have committed them; O fly to Christ for to
reveal thy new birth, or else thou must be damned with the Devil and his
angels, because they are not born of water and the Spirit, they cannot see the
kingdom of God, and no more shall thou, if thou be not of that faith.

Is it so, that all men by nature are evil trees, bearing evil fruit? Use. 2.
An evil treasure in the heart.
because they have an evil treasure of their heart, that brings forth evil
things? As evil thoughts, which defile a man before God? Then consider what an
evil treasure thou have in thy heart, all this while thou have been ready to
boast of it, and to say thou have a good heart to Godward, though thou can
not speak so Foolishnes to boast of a good heart.
much, or pray as others, yet thou meanst well, and serve God, and say the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments every day. But I tell thee, thou
have an evil treasure in thy evil heart, that has brought forth evil things
to Godward; as evil thoughts, evil words, and evil works, and these are
they that have defiled thee. Does your heart that is so good to Godward, as
you say, bring forth such bad fruit, which defile the man before God? I tell
thee thy heart is naught; for how many thousand naughty thoughts has it
brought forth before God? How many idle words to be accounted for at the day of
judgment? and how many How many thousand naughty thoughts.
evil actions has it brought forth? If thou have not a new birth, and therein
remission of all these sins, it had been better for thee, that thou had never
been born; therefore learn to see the naughtiness of thy heart, and pray for a
new heart with David, Create in Pray for a new heart. Psalm. 51.
me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. For they that
think they have a good heart to Godward, never saw themselves to have a bad
heart, such are in a woeful condition, poor, and blind, and naked; but they
that see themselves to have a bad heart, and cry to the Lord for a new one, and
by faith wash his heart, with the Hyssop of Christ's blood, by receiving the
other sacrament of the blood of Christ, to sprinkle his heart. That man that
cries unto the Lord against the corruption of his old heart, and prays unto
the Lord to create in him a new heart, and goes unto the Lords Supper, that
man has a new birth, and has a new heart, though he cannot feel it so new as
he would.

Did not the good trees in the time of the Law bring forth bad Ob.
fruit before God? as David, Moses, Miriam, Jehosaphat, and yet they were not
cut down, and cast into the fire? And so why may not good trees now do so?
bring forth some fruit good, and some bad before God?

I answer, in the time of the Law, the axe was not laid to the Answ.
root of the trees, it was laid to the boughs and branches; for God said, I
hewed them by my Prophets, Hos. 6. 5. And you see how David for his ill fruit,
had four branches cut off, the child conceived in adultery was smitten of the
Lord, and died, and the Lord said, The sword shall not depart from thy house;
three other of his sons were cut off by the sword. And Hiel the Bethulite had
two sons cut off by the axe of the Law, as you may see, Josh. 6. 26. Joshua
said* Cursed be the man before the Lord, that rises up, and builds Jericho,
he shall lay the foundation thereof in his eldest son, and in his youngest son
shall he set up the gates thereof; i. his eldest son shall die by this curse,
when he begins to build, and his youngest shall die when he set up the gates
thereof. This curse seemed to lie asleep many hundred years, and forgotten, and
therefore in Ahabs days, Hiel the Bethulite, builded Jercho, he laid the
foundation thereof in Abiram, his eldest son, and set up the gates thereof in
his youngest son, Segub, (i. they dyed) according to the word of the Lord, that
he spoke by Joshua; and thus many Tribes of Israel Hos. 11. John 3. 5*
were cut off by the Law, though Judah remained still. But now Christ is come,
preaching the kingdom of heaven by Baptism into Christ, to put on Christ: now
the ax is laid to the root of the trees of all Nations, Churches and particular
men, to show that all men now must be made good trees in Christ, to bring forth
none but good fruit before God, or else the ax of the Law and Gods Decree, and
sword, or judgments of curses, is laid to their roots, and are hewn down and
cast into the fire of Gods wrath, as Christ's No more sacrifice.
own words declare, Mat. 7. 19. for there is no more sacrifice for sin. Christ
has now set open such a fountain in Baptism, that does more then all the
sacrifices of the Law: with one offering, he Ephesians. 5. 26. Heb. 10. 14.
h^th perfected for ever, all them* that are sanctified, Heb. 11. 14. i. in
Baptism: For, every person that will not hear that Prophet, ( i. Christ) to
be washed in Christ's blood, (in baptism) shall be Acts 3. 23*
destroyed out of the people, Acts 3. 23* i. he that will not let Christ wash
him he may have part in him, without which he shall have none, Joh. 13. 8. as
the Pharisees, i. he that will not be graffed John 13. 8.
into Christ, to bring forth none but good fruit before God, he is 1 Ioh. ^.
20^*
hewn down by the Word of God; he that will not believe, shall be damned, i. he
that will not believe he is in him, that is true, in that Ioh. 3. 5.
his Son Jesus Christ, which no man can believe* but by his baptism, as Joh.
3. 5. Every person that will not make the tree good and the Make the trees*
good and the fruit good*
fruit good by baptism and says, or the tree evil, and the fruit evil by
Adam, and infidelity, shall be destroyed out of the people. O this civil war,
wherein Christ is come as a thief, or with a judgment, like thieves, shall
destroy multitudes of people, because they will not obey Christ, to let him
wash them, because they will not believe their Christ is come as a thief.
Baptism into Christ in infancy; for evil trees bring not forth good fruit,
for some bring forth none, as the Civilian, Hew him Civilian.
down, why combreth he the ground? some bring forth lukewarmnesse, some
infidelity, some ignorance, some drunkenness, swearing, lying, banning and
cursing, all these are bad fruit, such are hewn down, and cast into the fire;
howsoever, they are hewn down in conscience; and that remains under wrath,
without any assurance of salvation, though the person, if it be elect, may be
under mercy, graffed into Christ, and all these sins forgiven in his baptism,
which he knows not till he repent and believe.

Is it so, that all men by nature are evil trees, bringing forth Use.
evil fruit, because sin within them is of such a defiling nature, that Is sin
of such a defiling nature.
it has made both person and actions filthy and unclean? Consider the horrible
filthiness of sin, how it has polluted and defiled the heavens and the earth;
for they shall wax old as does a vesture, and as a garment shall thou change
them; they shall be burned, because they be subject to vanity, for the sin of
man, they groan and travel in pain for the pollution of sin, so are thy person
and actions become unclean, by the defilement of sin. O bewail thy sin, make
haste out of thy miserable and wretched condition by sin, make haste to Christ
by says, who came to take away our sins, for thy sins have made thee subject
to burning. The heavens and the Heavens.
earth, and all things therein shall be burnt, because they are subject to
vanity for the bondage of corruption. The Angels that are polluted Romans 8. 20,
21.
with sin, shall be burned in hell, for ever burning, and never consumed: The
wicked that are not graffed into Christ, shall be burned with the Devil and
his angels, where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out, and yet
dare thou remain in sin, and pollute thy self more and more? Well, make haste
to believe thy baptism, for the world will not hold thee long, nor God endure
thee to behold the light of this Son, that will walk in darkness of infidelity
out of Christ; for, the ax is laid to the root of the trees, every tree that
brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire; but thou
do bring forth bad fruit of sin, Ergo, thou art hewn down, and cast into the
fire.

In the second place we gather, that all that are made good trees Doct. 3. All
that are made good trees by Baptism into Christ, shall be saved.
by Baptism into Christ, to bring forth fruit before God, shall be saved, and
not be cut down and cast into the fire: All men have now the ax of Baptism laid
to their roots (except Jews, and Heathens, and Anabaptists, which despise the
counsel of God to their damnation) to cut them out of the old Adam, to graffe
them into the new; for it is certain, that in Baptism, we put off the old man,
and put on the new; for thereby the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, do Gal. 3. 27.
graffe us into Christ, and make us trees of righteousness, trees of his own
planting, that the Lord may be glorified, Isai. 61. 3. Now, Isai. 61. 3.
should Gods good trees of righteousness bring forth bad fruit of sin before
God? He says, no, Mat. 7. 17. Every good tree brings Matthew* 7. 17.
forth good fruit, a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit; for, by the
remission of all sins in the blood of Christ in Baptism, the actions are made
good, by the eternal redemption, and the everlasting righteousness, which few
men understand; for by an eternal redemption by Christ's blood in Baptism, we
have remission of all sins, past, present, and to come, for ever, before the
Throne of God, though we cannot yet believe it; and we have an everlasting
righteousness given unto us freely, which makes us righteous for ever before
God. Hence, says Calvin, is to be noted, that men cannot Calvin.
do well before they be made good; and therefore Christ says to the Pharisees,
O generation of Vipers, how can you speak good things, when your selves are
evil? i. not graffed in Christ by Baptism and Faith in him: For, out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks; i. from the abundance of good or
evil in the heart; and in Luke 6. 44. for, every tree is known by his fruit,
for it is not a good Luke 6. 44.
tree that brings forth evil fruit, i. of sin before God, neither an evil
tree that brings forth good fruit, signifying, that the good tree cannot but
bring forth good fruit: and hereupon the trees of the Lord are said to be full
of sap, i. full of the Spirit of Christ, which cause them to bring forth good
fruit; for, the seed remains in him, says St. John, for whosoever is born of
God, sins Psalm. 104. 1 John 3. 9.
not, for his seed remains in him, neither can he sin, because he is born of
God, i. though he do sin before men, yet he cannot fall out of Christ's blood
and righteousness, that he need a new sacrifice before God, For with one
sacrifice he is made perfect (before God) for ever, Heb. 10. 14. For David's
blessed man, is campared to the tree planted by the rivers of water in infancy
(yea, into Jesus Psalm. 1.
that came by water and blood) not by water only, but by water and blood, it is
that Spirit that bears witness, and that Spirit is trtuh, 1 John 5. 6. that
brings forth fruit in due season; for they 1 Ioh. 5. 6.
that are planted in the House of God in their youth or infancy, planted into
Christ by Baptism, shall bring forth much fruit in their age; for, herein is
my Father glorified, that you bring forth much fruit, and be made my Disciples.
And how shall any bring forth Ioh. 15. 8. Psalm. 19.
much fruit before God? except the words of his mouth, and the meditations of
his heart, and all the works of his hands be made acceptable unto God, but
through Christ's work in Baptism; for we cannot make them good, by all the
devices, that man's brain can imagine: but Christ must make them all good by his
blood and righteousness freely, without any works of man, and give us faith to
believe it.

But how is any man made a good tree before God, that were all Quest.
such evil trees by Adam?

First, as trees are made good before men, by planting or graffing, Answ.
before they can bring forth good fruit before men, so must all men 1 By
graffing.
be planted or graffed into Jesus Christ by Baptism, before they can bring
forth good fruit before God; this is plain, Romans 11. 17. Romans 11. 17. 24.
and 24. and though some of the branches be broken off, and thou being a wild
Olive tree, wast graffed in for them, and made partaker of the root and
fatness of the Olive tree; for if thou wast cut out of the Olive tree, which
was wild by nature, ( i. by Baptism wast cut out of Adam) and wast graffed
contrary to nature in the right Olive tree, how much more shall they which are
by nature be graffed in their own Olive tree? for if we be planted with him
into the similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his
resurrection, Romans 6. 5. And how is that; that Romans 6. 5.
we are graffed or planted into the similitude of his death? The Answer is in
the 4th verse, We are buried with him by baptism into his death; that as they
buried a man in the Sepulcher of Elisha, that when the man was down, and
touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood upon his feet, 2 King. 13.
21. so the elect that were dead in sins, in trespasses, when they are cast into
the grave of Christ, when they are down, and touch the virtue of Christ's death
by Baptism, they revive, and stand upon their feet before God.

We are made good trees, because we are made branches of the 2. For we are made
branches of the Vine. John 15. 5. Two trees.
Vine Christ: as John 15. 5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches; Adam and
Christ are compared to two trees, Adam a wild Olive, the root of all men by
nature, Christ a sweet Olive, or a Vine, the root of all men by grace, that are
graffed into Christ by baptism; he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing, i. he that abides
by faith in Christ, by baptism, he brings forth much fruit of righteousness
before God; but he that abides not in Christ to bring forth good fruit, but in
such a dead faith, that he brings forth sin, he is cast forth as a branch, i.
unprofitable, by the judgment of God, and withers in the assurance of
salvation, and men gather them and cast into the fire of Gods wrath, and they
burn; as they that turn Jews, Turks, Heathens, Papists, Witches, and
Anabaptists, all these are justly excommunicated out of the true Church of God,
and judged to be under wrath, because they have denied or forsaken, or
forgotten their Baptism into Christ.

Why because by Baptism, we are made members of his body, of his Reason 3. For
we are made members of his body.
flesh, and of his bone, i. spiritual members, straightly coupled together unto
him; for, seeing Christ has loved his Church, and sanctified it, and cleansed
it through the washing of the water, through the Word, Ephesians. 5. 26. he so made
us to himself a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing,
but that it should be holy and without blame, verse. 27. and by that Baptism
are we made members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, as verse. 30.
And therefore Christ does feed us with his body Ephesians. 5. 30.
and blood, by faith, that we might dwell in Christ, and Christ in us, that we
might be certain that we are incorporated into him by Baptism. Therefore he
took flesh of the Virgin, to testify that he acknowledges us for his
members; for Christ may as truly say (of his elect, that are baptized into
Christ, and have put on Christ) as Adam said of Evah when she was married to
him, She is now bone Genesis 2.
of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; so Christ may say of all the elect that are
married to him by Baptism, They are members of my body, of my flesh, and of my
bones.

And by this means, i. by Baptism, and by faith, is the heart How is the heart
made good. Ezekiel. 36. ^5.
made a good treasure; for God said, I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
you shall be clean from all your filthiness: and a new heart, and a new spirit
will I put within you; I will take away the stony heart, and give you an heart
of flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26. and this heart is purified by faith, Acts 15. 9.
for when the heart is made pure, it is made a good treasure, for all things are
pure to it; so that as it is said on the one side of them that are not
sanctified, that the unbelieving and impure, they are defiled, Tit. 1. 15, 16.
But also as the Prophet Hagg^i cries out, so are all the works of these
peoples hands, and that which they offer in the Temple is unclean, Hag. 2. 15.
signifying all comes from an unclean treasure: So on the other side, to the
pure, that is, to them that are washed and sanctified, and justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our God in Baptism, and their hearts
purified from their sins by faith in the blood of the Lamb, all things are
pure, and all the 1 Cor. 6. 11.
works of their hands; what they offer in the Temple is made good fruit, in the
Spirit of God freely, and thereby acceptable in the sight of God, whom nothing
can please, but that which is pure; and hereupon David gives this answer to
his own question, Who shall dwell in the Tabernacle of the Lord; and who shall
rest in his holy hill? even he that has innocent hands, which no man can have,
but by remission of sins in Baptism, wherein a man's hands are washed in
Christ's innocence, and a pure heart, which Christians obtain by faith in the
blood of Christ. Thus having our hearts John 1. 7.
sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water, we
may keep our profession without wavering, Heb. 10. 22, 23. with innocent hands
and a pure heart, which shall see God, Mat. 5.

Men are made good trees by putting on Christ's white raiment, 4. By planting on
Christ.
righteousness, as a garment: as Gal. 3. 27. Now if a man had such a garment,
that would make all his thoughts, words, and works good, it would make him a
good tree. Adam, you know, has so clothed all natural men, that he has made
all their thoughts, words, and actions evil; shall we not grant as much to
Christ? to make the tree good, and the fruit good? If a man can bring a green
tree to grow over a dry, the green tree will make the dry green also, and
find sap enough, and make it bring forth much fruit; as we have seen in a part
of a tree, being green, growing over a dead and dry part, it makes it
fruitful. So Christ is a green tree, and we dry, as he says, If they have
done thus to t^ green L^ke 23. 31.
tree, what shall be done to the dry? Answ. Truly, if Christ do not grow over
it, and over the fruit of it, it shall burn.

Men are made good trees by his Spirit; for by one Spirit, we are 5. By his
Spirit. 1 Cor. 12. 13.
baptized into one body, and made all to drink into one Spirit, i. in Baptism
we are regenerate, and new born of water and the Spirit, that we might be one
spiritual body, whereof Christ is the head; and he that has not the Spirit of
Christ, is none of his. Therefore in the Supper we drink the blood of Christ,
that we might be made partakers more and more of the Spirit of Christ, to be
all of one mind and spirit. Now he that brings forth fruit before God, in
the Spirit of Christ, shall be saved, otherwise he is hewn down, and cast into
the fire.

What, are none made good trees but those that are graffed and Quest.
baptized into Christ, to bring forth good fruit before God? Was not Cornelius
his prayer and alms good fruit before God, which came up to God before
Baptism? Acts 10. And what say you of Infants dying before Baptism?

I answer, that Cornelius did pray in faith, that Christ was to Answ.
come, as the Jews did before his coming, which brought forth some fruits of
faith, that Christ should come, and take away their sins; and they brought
forth some bad fruits of transgression of the Law, as David, for which they
sacrificed: Now therefore Cornelius Psalm. 130. 8.
being an elect vessel, that he might not stand in a twofold estate before
God, to bring forth some fruit good, and some bad, God sent an Angel from
Heaven to him, and bade him send for Peter, and he shall show thee what thou
ought to do, i. to be made a good tree, to bring forth nothing but good
fruit; signifying, Acts 10. 6,
he shall show thee by faith, in the death and resurrection of Christ, and by
baptism into Christ, the tree shall be made good and fruit good, Matthew. 12.
33. For by the Law they were under the heavy yoke, that we nor our fathers were
able to bear, which bare some good fruits, and some cursed, as Jehosaphat, 2
Chro. 19. 2. and Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 23. 25.

Now, if a twofold estate had been good enough for Cornelius, what needed an
Angel be sent from Heaven, to send for Peter to bring him into a better estate
before God then he was in? which shows that we have now a better estate before
God by Baptism into Christ, then the Fathers had under the Law, as the Apostle
says, God providing a better thing for us, Heb. 11. 40. we have a perfect
remission of sins, and no more sacrifice for sin, are with one offering made
perfect for ever that are sanctified; and how is that? Heb. 10. 14.
by Baptism, Ephesians. 5. 26. and by Faith, Acts 26. 18. by Baptism to the
person, and by faith to the conscience; as Heb. 10. 22, 23.

And concerning Infants dying before Baptism, if either of the parents be
faithful, they are said to be holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. that is, within the holy
covenant of Baptism: for Baptism is the Antitype of the Ark; that as Noah
prepared the Ark, not only to save himself, but also his household; so the same
sign which now saves 1 Pet. 3. 22.
us, baptism, I mean the inward Baptism, is received to save a man's self and
his household, that die before they can come unto it, as Peter and Paul told the
Jailer, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and thy household,
Acts 16. which he could not do without baptism; and therefore it is said, that
when he was baptized, Acts 16. 34.
he rejoiced that he and his household believed in God; for no man can believe
in Christ before he be baptized into him; for if he should say, he believes he
is in Christ, he should believe a lie, for no man can truly say he is in
Christ, before he is baptized into him; and this caused Paul to say, Andronicus
and Junius his cousins, and fellow prisoners, that were notable among the
Apostles, and were in Christ before me, i. they were baptized before me,
professors and believers before me, they were ingraffed into Christ before me,
when I was without Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. and a murderer.

If all be done in Baptism, that men be made good trees to bring Ob.
forth none but good fruit, and have perfect remission of all sins, and an
everlasting righteousness freely, what need men repent, or mortify sin, or
pray for remission?

I answer, though God has sealed such a free covenant with us Answ.
on his part, yet we cannot know it, until we repent, and believe, and
mortify sin, and pray for remission; for these are to usward signs, that the
covenant of Grace was sealed upon us in baptism to Godward; as that we were
made so to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot, to be holy, and without
blame, Ephesians. 5. 26. And as Athanasius, that Champion of the truth, Ephesians. 5.
27.
says, that as a woman with child by the springing of the Babe in her womb,
knows for certainty, that she has conceived fruit, so the soul of a true
believer knows by the springs of his heart, and by the inward joys, that he
received the Holy Ghost in Baptism. Mark the word, springs in the heart, they
are repentance, mortification, praying for remission, mourning, hungring and
thirsting after righteousness, love to Christ, these would never have come up,
if no seed had been sown in Baptism; therefore he that is 1 John.
born of God, is said to have seed remain in him, which comes up afterward.

What? Are the elect justified in Baptism before God, and receive Quest.
the Holy Ghost there, and are made Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in? How
can we believe this, when we see many live loosly, and walk in all kind of
sins, a long time after? I will not believe it, except I could see some
workings of the Holy Ghost in them.

I answer, thou art a faithless Thomas that would not believe, except Answ.
he might see and feel; did not Christ say to him, and so to thee, Be not
faithless, but believing; blessed is he that believes, and has not seen. The
Temple of Jerusalem was made you know for an holy house of prayer, but if you
had gone in Christ's time, you might have seen, that they had brought in Oxen,
and Sheep, and there was tables of the money changers, and seats of them that
sold Doves, and such a multitude of buyers, and sellers, that they had made the
Temple of God a Den of thieves, but they did not untemple it, but it was a
Temple still; but Christ made a scourge of small cords, and drove all the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple: So the elect by Baptism, are made the
Temple of God; for the Temple of God is holy, which are ye, 1 Cor. 3. 17. and
they buy and sell Oxen, and Sheep, and Doves, and bring in the tables of
moneychangers, covetousness and usury, and make the conscience a Den As
Arminians and Papists.
of thieves, yet the man is not untempled; therefore Christ will come to his
Temple with a scourge of small cords of the Law, and drive them sins out of the
conscience; and the Temple of God shall become a house of prayer, that was made
a Den of thieves; therefore such Antinomians that will not have the Law
preached, will be wiser then Christ, for Christ made a scourge of small cords,
i. of the Law, for small sins, saying thus, He that is angry with his brother
unadvisedly, is culpable of judgment; he has broken the Law, is accursed by
the Law^ he is of the Devil that loves not his brother, 1 John 3. 10.
1 John 3. 10. all the curses of the Law belong to him; for he that breaks
the Law in one point, is guilty of all, James 2. James ^. 10.


A second cord, but he that says unto his brother, Rac^h, i. gives a taunting
speech to his brother in anger, that is, unadvised, he is a greater sinner, he
is worthy to be condemned of a Council; he loves not his brother, is of the
Devil, is cursed by the Law; what will become of mockers and scoffers of their
brethren?

A third small cord, but he that says unto his brother, Thou fool, is worthy
to be punished with hell fire; he is of Cain that hates his brother, and is a
murderer, and you know, that no murderer ^ John 3. 5.
has eternal life abiding in him; thou art a railer, thou art cursed by the
Law, for not continuing in all things written in the Book of the Law to do the
same; Woe unto thee, thou railer, thou art shut out of the Kingdom of Heaven, 1
Cor. 6. 10. What will become of you that practice railing against your
brethren? calling some Rogue, Rascal, Knave, Villain, Drab, Puritain; yea, the
most godly, by one gross name or other? woe unto thee, the Law tells thee thou
art cursed, and all crosses and calamities are punishments and plagues for thy
sins. Now, if a spiritual murder be so great, what is actual killing?

A fourth small cord, he that looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery with her in his heart, (or the woman on a man) he has
broken the holy and pure Law of God, is a damnable adulterer, and accursed by
the Law of God, that says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things, written in the book of the Law to do them: Whoremongers and Adulterers
God will judge, Heb. 13. 4. But thou continuest not, as thy conscience tells
thee; Ergo, thou art cursed by the Law. Let these whip sin out of thy
conscience, and whip thee to Christ.

A fifth small cord, Thou have been an usurer, or a seller, that have
defrauded, or cozened thy brother of a penny; he or his wife, or some of his
children, or childrens children, or childrens childrens children, to the end of
the world, may want that penny, and starve and die for want of a peny-worth of
bread, or drink, thou art guilty of his death; for he that takes away a man's
living, kills him: Thou that have oppressed or defrauded thy brother, in any
thing, God is the avenger of all such things, thou have slain thy brother, woe
unto thee, thou manslayer, as Luther says to the objection of the Usurer, that
said he lent his money to usury, not to the poor, but only to the rich; I thank
you, Master manslayer, you will kill no poor men, but only those that are
rich; but you will make them poor by usury, and so kill them: if a penny be so
much, what shall become of you that have defrauded, cozened, spoiled, and
plundered your brethren of many shillings and pounds, woe unto you, let this
scourge of small cords, or sins driye out all these sins out of thy conscience
by contrition, confession, mortification, vivification, prayer against sin,
love of righteousness, that Christ may dwell in the Temple that was made good
by Baptism, but you have made it a den of thieves by your sins, and it will
remain an house of Prayer, for which it was built of God; for the Temple of God
is holy, which are ye. And for you that will not believe it is so, because you
cannot see it, it shows you are not dead unto reason, you have not slain the
beast reason, you are nor resolved to believe whatsoever God says, though it
be never so contrary to reason, you will believe no more then you can mould up
with sight and reason, you are but Dunses in Christ's School. Do not you know
that the Kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and
should sleep, and rise up night and day, and the seed should spring and grow
up, he not knowing how? for the earth brings forth fruit of it self, first
the blade, then the ear, and after the full corn in the ear; and as soon as
the fruit shows it self, anon he puts in his sickle, because the harvest
is come: What, will you say there was no seed sown, because you see none for
many days? The Kingdom of heaven is sown in Mar. 4. 2^* to 29.
Baptism, wherein the seed is sown into the ground, and men sleep, and rise up
night and day, and walk in their calling; the seed grow and spring downward
first, with a fear of hell, and grow to some knowledge of a way of salvation,
he not knowing how, yet by thundering and lightening, hail the law, and rain of
the Gospel, the ground of man's heart brings forth fruit of it self, by the
Sun of righteousness: first, the blade of godly sorrow, then the ear of
faith, after the full corn in the ear, fruits of righteousness and
holiness, and anon he puts in the sickle, and reaps men unto Heaven because
the harvest of such a man is come.

Are we graffed into Christ by Baptism, and made good trees, Use 2.
because we are made partakers of the fatness of the stock? See that ye abide
in Christ; for though ye be wild Olive branches by Adam, yet such is the
nature of the sweet Olive Christ, as Psalm. 52. Christ is this true Olive tree,
that is both fat and sweet, and we are graffed into him by Baptism to bring
forth fruit in the stock Psalm. 52. 8.
Christ; know that it is the nature of a fat, and sweet Olive stock, to change
the nature of a wild Olive branch, and contrary to our manner of graffing, to
make it bring forth sweet Olives: So Christ the sweet Olive, will change the
nature of thy person and actions before God, and make them all good, that abide
in him by this faith in thy Baptism.

Is it so, Christ is a Vine, and are we the branches? and how were Use 2.
you made branches, but by Baptism? look you bring not forth evil fruit
before God, for he that brings not forth fruit in Christ, but evil fruit of
sin, God takes it away, cuts it off, it withers in faith, and men gather them
together, and they burn, such are hewn down, and cast into the fire.

Are we members of his body, flesh and bones? For he can say Use 3.
as Adam did to Evab, and so may we say, Ephesians. 5. 30. Then are any of Christ's
members in a twofold estate before God; partly Adam, and partly Christ; what do
any of Christ's members, hands, feet, legs, arms, fingers, toes, bring forth
good fruit, and bad too, before God? no, all Christ's members are good trees,
and a good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit before God: here is comfort for
thee, if thou abide in this faith, no man shall take thy joy from thee; many
lose their joy, by believing they are in a twofold estate before God.

Again, are you members of Christ by Baptism? where is your love to the
members of Christ, that are baptized into Christ, as well as you? Here is the
reason of all the sects* and divisions, and wars in Christendom, and no more
love, because they have forgotten their Baptism: as 2 Pet. 1. 9. they have
forgotten they are members of Christ, and children of God, and inheritors of
the Kingdom of heaven; they say not, why do we wrong one to another, for we
are brethren? they have forgotten they were washed Acts 7.
from their sins, (says Peter) and therefore, if they have not put off the old
man, must needs live in old hatred, malice, envy and lying; wherefore labor
to bring all men to the faith of their Baptism, that in it they were made
members of Christ; for this faith would teach them to say, Should one hand
fight with another? though the children of the Devil fight, and could never
agree, should not the members of Christ love one another? O quam iniquum est,
ut ii dissideant in terris, qui in omnem aeternitatem una victuri sunt in
coelis! O! how unfit is it, for those to disagree, fight, and hate one another
on earth, which shall live together for ever in heaven? So that he that forgets
his baptism, i. his washing from his old sins, i. from original and actual
sins, that man cannot make his calling and election sure, that has forgot his
Baptism, for he has forgot the true faith, i. that he is in him that Joh. 5.
20.
is true, and he has forgot to add to faith virtue, i. of Christ's death and
resurrection, and he has forgot to add to virtue, knowledge, i. of salvation,
by the remission of sins, which was in baptism; and he has forgot to add to
knowledge, temperance, for want of the knowledge of salvation by remission of
sin, cause men to fall to intemperance; and he has forgot to add to
temperance, patience, and thus they wrangle and fight with his comembers; and
he has forgot to add brotherly kindness; he believes not his own sins are
forgiven; he forgives not his brother, and he adds not love, for he has
forgot Christ has loved him, and washed him from his sins in his own blood, he
covers not a multitude of offenses in his brother; so that you see, the
forgetting of a man's Baptism into Christ, is the cause of all the divisions,
sects, wars, and mischieves that are in the world, and of the damnation of so
many thousands; for he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; but he
that will not believe his baptism into Christ, shall be damned; for he cannot
believe he is in Christ, or has remission of sins, or an everlasting
righteousness, for he that will not believe he is baptized into Christ, and
has put on Christ, shall be damned, if he never will be baptized.

What, Do you hold that Baptism do confer grace ex opere operato?

I answer no; for then all the reprobate that are baptized, should receive
grace at it, but Judas and Simon Magus did not. But I believe that all the
elect do ordinarily receive grace at baptism, as many Scriptures, Fathers and
Churches declare, Acts 2. 38. Joh. 3. 5. Gal. 3. 27. Tit. 3. 5. And Cyprian,
Gregory Nazianzen, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Basil, Jerome, Ambrose, Augustine,
Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Zanche, Mourton, Marlorat, Hooker: the confession
of Helvetia of Scotland, Belgic, France, Argentine, Augustan, Saxon,
Wittenberg, Palatine, and our Church of England; in all which ten Churches, the
gross and damnable heresy of the Anabaptists is condemned; and of all such as
hold that grace is not given to the elect Infants at baptism. And here is the
reason, when the Jews are called, they shall never scatter more into sundry
opinions and sects, and fight one with another, because they shall be so
soundly grounded on the faith of their baptism into Christ, that they are in
him that is true, and so are members and children of God, that they shall love
one another so in Christ, as they shall never fight one with another more; and
then shall the seventh Vial be powered out on the air, which is the kingdom of
the Devil; for he shall never have any power to set them together by the ears,
as he does now: Heathens against Heathens, Turks against Christians, Papists
against Protestants, and Protestants one with another; for herein consists the
subtilty of the Devil and the Pope, to set Christians together by the ears,
that he may get both; for he gets more by their killing one another, then by
any other way, but after that the seventh Vial be powered out on the kingdom of
the Devil, by the preaching of Baptism, and Faith that we are in him that is
true, the Devil shall never have any power to set them at variance any more,
for all the true Church shall by the faith of their baptism into Christ,
believe they are members, and love as brethren, and then the Prophecy of
Micah, Mic. 4. 2, 3. for the Law Thorah, signifies in general, doctrine, and
so may be taken for Baptism, as John's Baptism was from heaven, shall go forth
of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, i. that men are clean by the
word that Christ has spoken in Baptism: And he shall judge among many people,
and rebuke mighty nations a far off of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment, John 16. because they believe not in Christ that believe not their
baptism, he shall bring them to it, and then they shall break their swords
into mattocks, and their spears into sithes, nation shall not lift up a sword
against nation, neither shall they learn to fight any more, but they shall sit
every man under his vine, and under his fig tree, and none shall make them
afraid, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, i. between Jews and Gentiles,
which shall be truly graffed into Christ by Baptism, there shall be no
dissension, as there is now under the corrupt state of the Church, for under
that pure state of the Church, they shall strive to show all offices of love,
as they do now practices of hatred, which is not so to be understood, as if it
were not lawful now for Protestants to take up arms, as the Anabaptists have
held absurdly, for so long as Antichrist fight against Christ, they must defend
See Brightman on that place.
themselves against him; for the Church is terrible, as an army with banners,
she must fight: But in the elect justified Church by baptism into Christ, and
faith in the same, among the right Olive branch, Christians shall show such
love, peace and concord, that they shall fight no more; there is such love
already to be seen among the white-raiment Christians, that they had rather die
then fight one against another. And this is for the comfort of you the citizens
of the new Jerusalem, that are no Anabaptists, nor Antinomians, though the
world may falsely call you by some gross name, for you hold the Law is to be
preached in the killingest manner that can be; and believe your baptism in
infancy, and are sound in the faith of your baptism, you are the people that
God will deliver in this bloody civil war: For thus says the Lord Jesus,
Because thou have kept the word of my patience, therefore I will deliver thee
from the hour of temptation, which will come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon earth. Now the word of Christ's patience, is the true faith in
our Rev. 3. 10.
baptism, wherein we are baptized into Christ his death, Romans 6. 3. and buried
with him, and crucified with him, and raised with him; for the word of Christ's
patience is the faith of Christ crucified (as Meyer) dead and buried, and risen
again, which are all included in the faith of our baptism, that we are in him
crucified, dead and buried to sin before God in him, and risen again in him by
baptism, which belongs not only to the Church of Philadelphia, but to all
other Churches, that hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, I will deliver
thee from the hour of temptation, i. from the last persecution of Antichrist,
which is now come upon all the Christian world, in these our days, which is
like to last till the Pope be destroyed. Use.


Are we made good trees by putting on of Christ as a garment? for if a man had
such a garment as would make all his thoughts, words and actions good, it would
make him a good tree. Now Christ is such a garment of righteousness, that is
put on at baptism, and by faith, that it makes the tree good, and the fruit
good: Behold, Christ is come as a thief, and the last persecution of Antichrist
is begun; blessed is he that keeps his garments unto him, i. which were put
on at baptism, Gal. 2. 27. lest he walk naked, and there see his filthiness,
what an evil tree he is by Adam, to bring forth sin before God, in thoughts,
words and actions, which should have been all covered, if he had kept his
garments that he put on at baptism; they are all cursed trees, that keep not
Christ's garments.

Again, are men made good trees by baptism and faith, because Use.
they are made to drink into one Spirit? Then the way to bring all men to be of
one Religion, and to cease all wars in Christendom, is to teach them, how they
have all received one Spirit in Baptism, and baptized into one body, that is,
a loving Spirit, a peaceable, 1 Cor. 12. 13.
meek, and quiet Spirit, that takes of Christ's water, and shows unto us, and of
Christ's blood, and shows unto us, and of Christ's righteousness, and shows unto
us, Joh. 16. 14. But have thou an hateful spirit, a wrangling, angry fighting
spirit, that do not take of Christ's water, but of the Popes holy water, and
show to thee, not of Christ's blood, and shows unto thee, for remission of sins,
but of St. Frances his blood, or some works of man for remission of sins, or
not Christ's righteousness in Baptism, but man's righteousness, and show unto
thee, this is not the Spirit of Christ that the Saints are made to drink into
at baptism, but thou have forgot thy baptism, and so lost the Spirit of
Christ; for as the Spirit of God moved upon the waters, i. as it were, hatching
and nourishing the cr^atures in the Genesis 1.
creation: So does the Spirit of Christ still move upon the waters of baptism,
i. on the preaching of the faith of the same, regenerating, converting and
nourishing these trees, to make them bring forth fruit unto eternal life. And
therefore the Preachers of Baptism shall convert most unto Christ, because his
Spirit will move upon the waters. Mr. Perkins rule is this, If a man would be a
Student On Gal. 2. 27. page 265.
in Divinity, let him learn and practice his baptism; Commentaries are
needful to the study of the Scriptures, and the best Commentary to a man's own
self, is his own baptism; for if a man has learned to practice his own
baptism, he shall be the better able to understand the whole, and without this
help, the Scriptures themselves shall be but a riddle unto us: I desire to
prize this rule, and to make as much use of it, as ever any Christian man did;
for until men understand by this rule, what is meant by this counsel of
Christ to England, under the type of Laodicea, (for it now appears to all the
Churches, what Christ wrote to Laodicea, he would spue out him and his
Hierarchy out of his mouth) until this counsel of Christ be taken: I counsel
thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou may be made rich, Rev. 3.
18. that is, the lively faith in the merits of Christ's death, in our baptism
into Christ, which makes us rich sons of God, Gal. 3. 26, 27. and white
raiment, justification, wherein no shame of nakedness of sin appear, and
eye salve of the Spirit of Christ, that takes of Jesus, and shows unto us, that
came by water and blood, not by water of Baptism only, but by water and blood,
it is that Spirit bears witness, and that Spirit is truth, 1 John 5. 6.
Until this counsel of Christ be taken in England, and of the Lutherans, the
sword shall not cease, 1. For, as many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; Christ
will not leave rebuking and chastening, until they be zealous of this
counsel, and repent of luke warmness, Rev. 3. 19. 2. For, behold, I stand at
the door, and knock; Ergo, he will not be gone, nor leave rapping with sword,
famine, and pestilence, until they hear his voice to buy gold, white raiment,
and eye salve, and let Christ in to sup with them, and they with him, Rev. 3.
20. Then there shall arise in England, the most conquering and reigning Church
that ever arose in Chrstendome; for to him that overcomes will I give to sit
with me in my Throne, as I overcame, and sit with my Father in his Throne, i. I
reign and conquer, and so shall my Church of England, that take my counsel;
they shall conquer the Throne of the Beast, and the false Prophet, they are the
woman clothed with the Rev. 12. 1.
Sun, white raiment, Christians, and citizens of the new Jerusalem. Rev. 3. 4.
Of this I have written at large, and of the causes why this sword is upon the
Land, and what remedies must be used, before it will Rev. 3. 12.
cease. O thou sword of the Lord! How long will it be ere thou be quiet? Turn
again into scabberd; rest, and be still; how can it be quiet, seeing the Lord
has given it a charge against Askelon in England, Scotland and Ireland, and
against the Seashore? There has he appointed it, Jer. 47. 6, and 7. He has
appointed the sword in Germany and England, until Christ's counsel be taken,
Rev. 3. 18. For when they will be guided by his counsel, they shall be received
to the glory of his Throne to conquer and reign upon earth, Rev. 5. 10.

FINIS.

