AN ELEGY UPON The much lamented Death of the Right Honorable, THE LORD
BROOK.
WEep not unthristy Mourners: Why so fast
These weak devotions due unto his last?
Hoard up such poor expressions of the eye,
Till either Wife, or Child do chance to die,
Or till thy aged Mothers knell thee call,
To solemnize her petty Funeral.
Tears are wrongs here, for where such sorrows come,
The Land it self should groan, the men be dumb:
The heart should summon down the spirits all,
Till sense benumbed, and apprehension fall,
Congealed into a Trance, and each man be
A mournful Statue unto Memory:
Or if you needs will weep, as fits the loss
Of such a Friend, so serious a Cross,
Breathe all the air to sighs, the drops o'th year,
At once be all contracted to a Tear.
Then let each Mourner, that has a desire,
Weep out a part, and weeping so expire.
Pardon's great Lord, and thy diviner Ghost,
If by remembering what in thee we lost,
Out of that honor and love we owe to thee,
We lose our selves in an Hyperbole.
Thus much is just and fit, that all may know
What they unto the name of BROOK do owe:
The Commonwealth's a debtor to thy fate,
Which destined thee a sacrifice to the State:
But this is the least part, that thou did die
For us; we wrong thy sacred Memory
If we confess no more; thy highborn Soul
Sought by death deaths Cov'nanters to control,
And to disarm those Engineers of hell,
Whose villainies must write their Chronicle.
It was the Gospels late eclipsed light
For which thou li'st thus low in death and night,
And strov'st to shame and quell each hinderer
In peace by example, by thy sword in war:
For this thy resolution stirred thee up
To give truths enemies and thine the cup
Of GODS great wrath, and with the avenging sword
To fright all superstition from the Word.
This made Romes base abettors toil and quake
When ere they heard what thou did undertake;
This filled their mouths with slanders, and their hearts
Sworn to revenge with poisoned envious darts
To wound thy pure Profession with the name
Of schism, and a newfound Brownistick frame:
This made that base inhumane particide
With unexampled treachery divide
Thy soul from body (and them both from us)
To heaven with a strange desperate Mittimus.
Thus thou did fall, thus diedst thou, but to live
In heaven, and here with us, whilst we can give
Or tears, or marble; the portraiture of fame
Upon two pillars reared to thy Name
Shall stand, where shall be read and understood
Thy deaths cause, Gods glory, and the Kingdoms good.
Printed by Robert Austin, and Andrew Coe. 1643.


