AN ELIGIE UPON THE Universally-lamented Death of the thrice Noble and Virtuous
Prince, Henry Duke of Gloucester.
ANd is his breath expired? has His Chaste Soul
Shak'd off her clayie fetters? Ah, condole,
Mourn and lament your Fate Distressed Isles
Of Britains growing Empire, hence all smiles
Adieu. Up, said Melpomenie, Ah, rouse
Thy thirsty soul, and in thy tears carouse
Thy fill; come, banquet on the Sable Verse,
My Muse shall sacrifice unto His Hearse:
Turn from all other Objects, for here is One
Presents thee with an Inundation
Of lasting Grief. But what is my private woe,
When all the Nations Tears do overflow.
Yet stay, forbear a while, let us not believe
He thus could dye, and yet the Heavens not grieve
At th'worlds Great Loss! what? do impetuous showers
Of tears from the Weeping Clouds (preventing ours)
Distill; Or does the Day's Bright Lamp straight burn
Dull as a Torch to light us to His Vrn?
Is the dismantled Skies Bright Azure-Back,
Straight over-clad in Sad and Mournful Black?
No, see Olymphus face serene and clear,
Free from the signal of one Crystal tear;
Phoebus in's wonted luster shines, the Skies
Are not adorned for His Obsequies;
Sure then He still survives, and his soft breath's,
But whispering Mercy in the ears of Death:
View but His cheeks, where though the Roses are
Seeming t'retreat, the Lillies spring more fair
Then ere they did: Though's eyes they do not keep
Their Rays in ure, they are but closed in sleep:
The former luster of his Ruby Lips,
(Which now seem Snow) feel but a short Eclipse:
By want of Sanguine heat, life does impart,
And send at present to His drooping heart
His dormant pulses (which erewhile expressed
His health) are laid but sweetly down to rest:
Cease then to think Him Dead, wait but a while,
And gently he will awake, see, see Him smile.
But ah, our expectations are deceived,
And those so sweet Idea's we conceived
Would turn to Substance, are but Shadows fled
Away on Airy Wings, for lo He Is DEAD:
He Is dead, and coffined up, fit to receive
The cold embracing of His ROYAL GRAVE.
False Fancy, why have mocked us? why betrayed
Our lingering Hopes thus into Lies? and staid
The current of our Tears so long? Ah, why
Would thou persuade us that He could not dye,
Unless the troubled Heavens had mourned and wept
To see Him dead, whilst thou feigned He but slept;
When often we see the best of Nature falls,
Unmourned for by Supernaturals.
He Is gone: Open wide the floodgates of your eyes,
That streams may pass. When common beauty lies
Interred in dust, when death has cropped the Rose
Of Youth scarce blown, what flinty hearts are those
Vent not a tear? But now that Death takes hence
The Lovsly'st of the Land, our YOVNGEST PRINCE,
Shall we be parsimonious of our store?
No, we'll even weep, till we can shed no more.
Now if I could, I Would mount the Radiant Seat
Of Sacred Angels, humbly to entreat
A Quill plucked from their Wings, and crave a Fount
Of Highest Eloquence, and then recount
The Grandeur of His VERTVES; for below,
No Pen, no Strains are found that can them show.
To say He was a PRINCE of Noblest Blood,
Great by His Birth, yet not so Great as Good:
To say He was so Learned, ere's age could reach,
A score of years, He could His Tutors teach:
To say He was a PRINCE whose Life was spent
In Grief and Cares, yet never discontent:
To say He was but Young when ravished hence,
Yet Old in WISDOM and EXPERIENCE:
To say (what shall I say?) He was become,
The PRICNELY DARLING of all Christendom,
Were but (by these unworthy lines) to tell
A Truth the World already knows so well.
Go ask the Church of Rome, she (sighing) says,
Ah, all my Batteries could not shake His Faith.
Go ask the nimble French, what was His Wit,
They Will quickly tell you they admired it.
Go ask the serious Spaniard, they will aver,
He was a PRINCE did need no Counselor.
Go ask the German Princes, ask the Dutch,
The Nations round, they will say they found as much:
We only (soon unhappy made) alas,
Have scarce experimented what He was.
Now what is Man, O what is the Noblest Man?
The Slave of Death (whose Life is but a Span,)
A weary Passenger, still on his way,
Here much esteemed, a Nothing in a day.
What is this Life? but even expected Death,
A Stage of Mockeries, a little breath
Reserved in a Bladder, pricked it is lost;
A doleful Warfare, and to all (not most)
A Sea of Miseries, a Vial filled
With blood, which being quickly broke, it is spilled.
How infinitely happy then is His
Bright Soul, released from such a Life as this:
There blessed Spirit rest, rest in that Peace,
And these Celestial Joys shall never cease:
GLOVSTERS Great Name on Earth never can b' involved
In Laethes Streams, until the Worlds dissolved.
London, Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the lower end of Cheapside.


