CR

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ET MON DROIT.

royal blazon or coat of arms
AN ELEGY, Sacred to the memory of our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES, who was most barbarously murdered by the Sectarie of the Army January
30. M Dc lxix.
TUmble ye Phaetons, since you have your desire,
For you have set the Universe on fire,
Which burns like sulpherous Erna's flame,
From whence at first your Fiery spirits came.
What will you next, since your Great Work is done,
With murdered Carcasses scale the bright Sun
And so take Heaven by Storm: Mighty Jove,
At Cromwells presence quickly will remove.
You Have murdered many thousands at one blow,
And wrought Three Kingdoms final overthrow;
You all-exceeding Tyrants, thirst you still
For Royal Blood? If It be your Trade to kill,
Then Kill us all; we had far better die
Then live enslaved to Rebels Tyranny.
His Blood was but a draught for to swill up,
Alas, it could not yield you each a supp;
You are the Ocean, from whence does spring
Rivers of Murder; Your cursed souls can sing
Nothing but Bloody Aathems; can contract
The Quintisence of mischief, and enact
What pleases you, Murder, Theft, Blasphemy;
Grow rich and thrive by Rapes and Robery.
Such a prodigious Magic ever thrived,
TO make that treason, Traitors themselves contrived.
Had you none else to murder but your King? sad Fate!
Your legal King, whose Virtues were your hate;
Why might not Goring or Capel have led,
The way for him unto Death's frozen Bed!
And in his swarthy Kingdom taken place
Which lesser loss to us, and Death's more grace?
Was there no other left that might give light
None else but the King, the chiefest of all men!
Might serve his turn in his sad gloomy Den*
It is too true, that He alone might best
Appease Death's wrath, if ever he would rest;
For they have slain at once in Him alone,
Virtues for many, a miracle for One.
B^adshaw beware; go tell thy mates in evil,
But why do I thus lavish breath in vain,
On those whose Fury has no ears; Refrain
My weeping Muse -- Bloody Saints farewell,
Judas betrayed his King, roars now in hell.
But is he Murderd: -- too too true, Alas
My heart is full, -- I cannot let him pass
Without Deep Sighs, -- nor can any eyes forbear
To waste his sad Remembrance with a tear.
I saw him dye, pursued through crooked ways
To's end; would make sad England blush out her days.
Is this your way Kings Glorious to make,
To Butcher Him; when Virtue, for His sake
Was growing into fashion with the great,
The which alone makes Noble Lines complete,
Extinguished now in him, when was most need;
Oh cursed, cruel, and abhorred Deed!
A sad Presage, no doubt, of future ill,
Or dire Prognostique of the angry Will
Of Heaven, disposed to refine away
The Ore of Ophier from the Drossie clay.
The weeping Sacrifice which on thy Shrine
We offer here to that bright Name of thine
Great Monarch: By'all that worth, or virtue prize;
Would back Redeem with treasure of their eyes
The World thou had in thee, if not a Sphere
That compassed the World, touched not there;
Measured the magnitude thereof, and knew
Was nothing in the world t'admire, but Rue,
As, although wrapped here in this frail mould,
Thy Contemplations they were raised; nor could
Thy gentle Soul in highest Union, bend
Her towering wing to any second end.
The happy souls above, were those with whom
Thou Treatedst daily; nor had other home
Then Heaven; less Jacobs Ladder did attend,
By which they stooped to thee, and thou ascend,
And by your mutual visitts either great,
Until for all ye might together mere.
Fair-faux I would know (were not Treason) why
He might no longer live! Thou have hereby
Gained nothing; we lost much; we lost our King.
And in Him lost our selves, and every thing, --
Our skillful Pilate, to advise us sound,
Whether we were, or in, or outward bound,
Not to adventure, having sprung a leake,
The Treasure of our Souls, in Bark too weak,
To know the Shelfs that under water lay,
Might stop our Course, and wrack us in our Way;
So shun the Bay whereat the Sirens wait
T'insnare frail Mortals with their Magic Bait.
Sure Jove was angry He should longer stay,
Because in Heaven 'twas Coronation Day.
Though He was Martyred, yet he now does bear
Honor on Earth, in Heaven a Blazing Star.
Rest then in Peace, the Glory of this Age,
Whose forced Death does direful Plagues presage;
We weep our own, nor any loss of thine,
That with sad tears do wash thy Sacred Shrine;
No strained Hypurboles adorn thy Hearse,
Thy SELF art both a Monument and Verse.
FINIS.

