THE Extravagant Spend-thrift, OR, Wit Dearly Bought.
For what he spent he did repent,
when he beheld his grief,
To end the strife, his loving wife,
afforded him relief.
To an Excellent new Tune,
This may be Printed

R. P.





ATtend a while and I will declare,
what did occasion my woeful fail,
And you that hear me, I pray beware,
let me a warning be to you all.
A Wife I marry d who loved me,
as sweet a woman as e're had man,
was I brought her to misery.
For I to ruin did then run an.
I haunted Caverns both day and night,
I made my Gold and my Silver fly:
And those in whom I did take delight,
in time of need they did me deny.
With Harlots daily I led my life,
while I had Money they took my part
And likewise set me against my wife,
when there was never no due desert.
My aged Father and Mother mild,
entreated me that I would refrain
Such company, but I still reviled,
for I did in disobedience fell.
My wife her Portion I clearly spent,
I pawned her Kings and I sold her close
I shipped my self then to Sea I went,
For my chiefest friends I made my foes.
THen while our vessel was under sail,
a storm and tempest did soon arise,
We had no hopes of a pleasant Gail,
and nothing seen but waves and Skies.
Alas we had little hope at all,
our ship she ran foul upon the sand,
And there was staved in pieces small,
when we were many leagues from land.
Upon our rack then we did contrive,
to save our lives then if it might be,
And I was one that did soon arive,
where I came a shore at Barbury.
Then I beholding myself forlorn,
so weak and feeble I could not stand
Almost as naked as I was born,
quite succourless in a foreign Land,
I got my passage in a short while,
of one that freely gave it me,
Thus I arrived to my native Isle,
but I was as poor as poor might be.
Then to my Harlot I took my way,
on whom I had freely spent my Tol^,
But when she see me in poor array.
she did not know me, her love was co^^.
She would not grent me the least relief,
though I with her h^d went (...)e*,
My heart was ready to break with grief,
for she kicked me and should me out of door
Then I was in a most dismal case,
of my old Father I made a proof,
But he would not let me see his face,
no nor once come underneath his roof.
What course to take then I did not know,
my former friends has forsook me quite,
Then to my Wife I resolved to go,
and though I was in a woeful plight,
When she beheld my calamity,
she was not able for to suffice,
Her very bowels did earn for me,
the tears did trickle down from her eyes.
How I was slighted I made appear,
laid she my save then he ruled by me,
Though all the world should forsake my dear
I will prove a constant wife to thee.
She then forgave me all that was past,
and Resolving to work for more
And now as long as ever life shall last,
my loving wife I will thee adore,
Those men that have such virtuous wives,
let their affection now never cease,
There Is none that lead more quiet lives,
then those that live here in love and Peace.
Printed for I* Back, at the Black Boy, on London Bridge.


