AN ELEGY On the Death of that most Noble and Heroic KNIGHT, SIR CHARLES
LVCAS, Governor of Colchester, and General of the Essexian Forces, who was
Murdered by the Excellent Rebel Fairfax, the day on which Colchester was
Surrendered, August 27. 1648.
I Cannot weep, their Ponniards that do fall
My eyes, refuse to drop: but were my gall
Transparant, all might see, a bitter flood
Wafting my soul away, with Lucas blood;
Though but a Rivelet, more strong then Nile
The Loyal Blood, that flowed from him and Lile,
Like a huge torrent, bears Rebellion down
To Carisbrooke, conveighing Charles his Crown.
Have all the Gods, signed Edicts unto Mars,
And covenanted, for perpetual Wars,
That we must wade in Blood, and dive in Gore,
And all for less, then for a Spartan Whore?
Menalaus fought against Illium, for a face
We boar each other, but to win disgrace,
A square Cap, pair of Linen Sleeves and Hood
Draws Swords, swells Battles, and destroys all Good.
Say ye sly Sophisters, whose Votes are Acts,
Who plow up Pluto's mansion with your Facts:
Who Flaunt in Gaudy Triumph, feeding hie,
Lucullus-like to heighten Luxury,
Whom tumble on your Yvorie Beds, whose will
For to Act mischief, does surpass your skill;
Whose madness make you Antic, such as they
Who taste the bite of the Tarantula.
Must Brittaine's Caesar, be a Monk for ever,
An Anchorite, Manumited never?
Whiles Hammond's worship feeds Him with a bit,
Sometimes a knock, if he remember it,
While you his gracious Masters think it meet
To toss to Air, three Kingdoms with your feet.
Damned Nero like, minding your Sports and Games,
While Ireland swallowed by devouring Flames.
And England, though by Mulciber not burned,
Yet by your Jarring, to a Chaos turned:
The fiery Anabaptist is in Fight
Perpetually with the cold Adamite.
The hardy Independent does make War
Against the easy natured Presbyter:
And both of them fight jointly with the Arian,
Against [the truly good] Episcoparian,
Whiles that Religion, with Astraea's gone
For to seek out some safer mansion.
It Is so; you have agreed still Kings to be,
Although you crack the Kingdom's Axeltree:
'Twill break if you sit long, mean time all those
That love their Sovereign, are the Kingdoms foes:
Strange Paradoxes these, that those must die
As Traitors, who graspe steel for Soveraigntie:
And those who drench their Swords in Loyal Blood,
Are the sole seekers of the Kingdoms good:
Some Sphinx salve this Aenigma unto me,
And by the Gods, I will a Rebel be.
But all my Faith, although conjoined in one,
Cannot persuade me it is Religion
To murder pious Kings; to Plunder lie,
And to grow Great, by Blood and Treachery;
To fat my self, augmenting others woes,
Selling the needy, for a pair of shoes.
Pim's spectacles with a Geneva Print,
Although fresh coined in learned Calvin's Mint,
Must not so tame my sense, but that I Will swear
There Is no true Subject, save the Cavaliere.
But you most mighty Monsters, who outvie
The strange man-eating Anthropophagi,
With Cataline, have sworn to Level all
To your distinction Diabolical.
Was It not enough, ye Vipers, that ye flew
Tomkins and Challoner in open veiw?
Sucked Bourchers blood, and took great Burleighs breath,
By Wild, Steel, Steel and Wild betrayed to Death
Against the course and current of the Laws,
Which doomes to Death, your cursed Rebellious Cause,
That you this seven years, whilst none controules,
Have quafft our purple Blood in mazor Bowls.
But to conclude, your cruelties immense,
In butchering true spotless Innocence,
Wounding fair Truth, and dooming Zeal to die,
By murdering Lucas for his Loyalty;
Whose worthy farewell challenges applause,
Though dead be, yet survives (Fame pleades the Cause)
Fallen in his middle Age; but what of that?
He fell full ripe, snatched by the hand of Fate.
Goodness does measure Age. I Will cease to moan:
He lived long, although he died so soon.
When Fates impartial hand shall summon me,
It will increase my joy to visit Thee.
Blame not the THREE for this sad fate; They do
Consume themselves in tears as well as you.
They had resolved, upon the common Stage,
He should have Acted out old Nestors age:
But Jove would have him near him, and decreed
He by the hands of Perjured slaves should bleed:
No other way there was, for him to come,
With happy speed, to blessed Elysium:
Where next Jehovah's Throne, he now does sit,
Beholds the Rebels Acts, and smiles at it;
Knowing, at last they shall receive their Hire
With Cataline, in never dying Fire.
FINIS.

