CHRISTIANITY in Short OR The way to be a good CHRISTIAN.

Recommended To the use of such as want either time or capacity for reading
longer and Learneder discourses.

Mat. VII. 13.14. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is the Gate, and
broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in
thereat:

Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto Life, and
few there be that find it.

Ver. 21. Not every one that says unto me; Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.

By C. Ellis Author of the Gentile-sinner.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Guy, at the Oxford Arms, on the West side of the
Royal Exchange 1682.

To my Beloved Neighbors, for whose Use this little Book is written.
My Dear Friends,
I Hope some of you need not much the help this little Book can afford; and
indeed it is a shame either for you or me, that any of you should need it,
except Children. Yet I fear it is too needful, I pray God it may prove as
useful to many of you. I have often told you, that neither an Ignorant, nor a
Carnal, nor a Worldly, nor a Formally Religious course of Life, can ever bring
you to Heaven. I now ^ell it you again; and at you love your Souls, let me
entreat you to believe me; except you become other men than some of you, yea
than the most of you yet are, you cannot be saved. You have God's Word to read,
you may hear Sermons when you will, you may be instructed privately when you
will, you have many good Books to instruct you, you have so much sense as to
know you are a dying, you have understandings to consider what is like to become
of you, you have sure, the wit to know that all things here will have an end,
and that nothing can concern you so much as the Salvation of your Souls, to all
Eternity. I am confident were you dying, you would say so. Can it be any thing
then, but a brutish inconsideration that keeps you in the state you are in?
Awake, awake, and see here in short what you have to do. It Is short, that you
may not plead you want time to read and learn it; It Is plain, that you may not
plead it is above your capacity, it is cheap, it shall cost you nothing but the
pains of reading it for your instruction in the way of Life. You will in a
little room see what it is to be a Christian. Practice then what here you read,
and then dye in Peace. But if you slight these easy helps, and will go on your
old way, I must leave you to God, and comfort my self in this, that I have not
dealt deceitfully with you. The good God make us all wise unto Salvation; Amen.

Consider seriously. Learn industriously. Pray devoutly. Believe firmly. Repent
sincerely. Love unfeignedly. Resolve deliberately. Practice constantly. Hope
Patiently. Receive Thankfully, And Enjoy Eternally.
The Entrance into CHRISTIANITY.
I Must shortly dye, and after death I must for ever be either endlesly happy,
or endlesly miserable.

It concerns me therefore, above all things in this short time of my Life, so
to prepare for Death, that after Death, I may be Eternally happy.

To this end two things are altogether necessary, a sound Knowledge, and a
sincere Practice.

Two things are needful to be well known, the End which I am to aim at, and the
Way which will lead me to it.

My daily practice must be to walk in the way, in hopes of attaining the End.

What both these are, JESUS CHRIST has abundantly taught us in his Gospel,
which it therefore highly concerns me diligently to read and learn.

Christ has instituted two Sacraments, the one for our entrance into, the
other for our confirmation and strengthening in the way of Life. Baptism, and
the Supper of the Lord.

In both these the whole substance of Christian Religion, which is the way to
happiness, is summarily comprehended and represented.

Christ JESUS commanded his Apostles to go up and down in the World, and by
Preaching the Gospel to persuade men to be his Disciples, and learn of him the
way to Life.

He commanded them to admit men into his Church, or the Society of his
Disciples by Baptism, or washing them with Water, in the Name of the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost.

This Ceremony of Washing with water, did signify and assure them, that as
many as continued Christ's faithful followers, were washed from the guilt of
their past sins, and should be daily more and more Sanctified and prepared for
Eternal Glory.

Persons of years to understand, were thus in Baptism to give up themselves in
an Holy Bond or Covenant to God, and thus my Parents when I was an Infant, did
give and dedicate me to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

In this Baptismal Covenant, God the Father does give himself to be our
reconciled Father, and God the Son Jesus Christ to be our Savior, and God the
Holy Ghost to be our Sanctifier.

In the same Covenant, we do accept of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be
our only God, submitting to him as our Owner and Governor, and choosing him as
our chief good and portion, and heartily consenting to be taught and ruled,
made Holy, and ^saved by him, in a firm belief of his word, and humble
Obedience to his Laws.

We do also promise, and resolve not to follow, nor be led by the Devil, the
World, nor the Flesh, but to watch against, and resist all their temptations,
and to persevere so doing unto our lives end.

Every one that keeps this Covenant sincerely is a good Christian, and has
the pardon of his sins, and Eternal Life sealed and assured unto him by God in
this Sacrament of Baptism.

As I therefore desire to be Eternally happy, and would avoid Everlasting
Torments, it concerns me to see that I keep Covenant with God; which I cannot
do, without learning and knowing what I am to believe and do.

If I have not already learned this, it is no time now any longer to delay it,
seeing my Eternal happiness depends upon it. And I know not how soon, no not
whether this night, God may call me out of this world by death, when if I be
either ignorant or wicked, I am undone Soul and Body for ever.

The Christian Faith.
THere is a GOD, and but one God, the FATHER, SON and HOLY GHOST.

God is an infinite and most glorious SPIRIT, a most pure and living substance,
without body, parts or passions.

God is invisible, cannot be seen or perceived by sense.

God is incomprehensible, cannot be perfectly known by any but himself.

God is Immortal, cannot dye; Impassible, and cannot suffer.

God is Immense, not limited to place, but is every where.

God is Eternal, not limited by time, but without beginning or end.

God is Independent, not caused or governed by any other.

God is Immutable, not subject to change, but necessarily what he is, the same
for ever.

God is Almighty, able to do all things: Omniscient, knowing all things;
infinitely Wise, in ordering all things.

God is Infinitely good, and the Fountain of all goodness, Holy and Just, and
Merciful.

God is self-sufficient, perfectly blessed, and happy in himself alone, needing
nothing, but Infinite in all perfections.

The Father begetting the Son, the Son begotten of the Father, the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father and the Son, are Three Persons, but one
uncompounded, undivided GOD, blessed for ever.

God is the Maker or Creator of all things, the Preserver and Vpholder of all
things.

God is the absolute Owner and Lord of all things.

God is our Sovereign King, Supreme Lawgiver, and Righteous Judge.

God is our chief good, and loving Father, and bountiful Benefactor.

All Life, and Power, and Wisdom, come from God, and our final rest, and
perfect happiness is in Him alone.

God is a most free Agent, and does what, and when, and how he will.

In the Beginning, by his Word of his own good pleasure, he made the World, and
all things in six days, when before there was nothing but Himself.

All that God made was very good.

God by his Providence preserves, rules and orders all things, great and
small.

There is no goodness in any thing, but what God gives, nothing can come to
pass, but as God permits it.

God may justly do what he will with every thing, he can do no wrong to any
thing, he orders the whole course of the World wisely, and for the best.

God made an innumerable company of Angels, or pure Spirits.

A great multitude of these Angels continue holy and happy in loving, praising
and enjoying God, doing his Commandments, and serving him in such Ministries as
he pleases to employ them in, for the good of his people.

Many of the Angels did sin, and were cast down to Hell, into Everlasting
torments. These are Devils, under Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, the Old
Serpent, and Satan.

The Devil is the Spirit that works in the children of Disobedience; the
Father of Evildoers, going about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour.

God made Adam the first man, of the Dust of the Earth, and the first woman
Eve, of a Rib of Adam.

Man has two parts, a Body of Flesh and Bones, and a Soul which is a Spirit.

God made Man after his own Image, he gave him an Immortal soul, endued with
understanding, a free will, and a power to do good, and authority to rule and
use the creatures, for such ends as God designed them.

God made not man a Lawless creature, to live as it should list him, but God
made him for himself, and to serve him in Holy Love, and perfect Obedience.

Man understood God's Will, and that Will understood, was the Law in his heart,
whereby he was to live; Knowing God to be his Owner and Governor, and chief
good, he was bound to resign himself to his disposal, submit himself to his
command, and to delight himself in him above all.

If Man had done thus, he should never have dyed, but have lived for ever happy
in the love and enjoyment of God.

God having placed man in the garden of Eden, gave him free leave to eat of all
the Trees thereof, only excepting the Tree of the knowledge of good and evil;
which upon pain of death, he charged him not to eat of.

But the Devil in a Serpent Tempted Eve, and by her he tempted Adam to eat
thereof, and so sin against God in breaking his command.

By breaking God's Law, they lost their Holiness, and became Mortal under the
curse of Death; hearkening to the Devil they fell under his power, loving their
own pleasure more than God, they lost their Happiness. Thus they who were made
Wise, and Powerful, and Happy, made themselves foolish, and weak, and miserable.

We are all the children of sinful Adam, and of unholy Parents are born unholy,
ignorant of God, our duty, and our happiness, dead to goodness, forward to
evil, easily conquered by the temptations of the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh; and if left to our selves must perish Everlastingly.

If God had punished Adam according to his sin with death; He had cut off
Mankind from the Earth; But he was graciously pleased to show mercy.

God suffered man to live for a time upon Earth, but so, as he might be
sensible of the great evil he had brought upon himself by breaking God's
Commandment.

The creatures are accursed to bring forth for him vanity and trouble, and
vexation, hard labor, pains and sicknesses come upon his body, he becomes
ashamed of himself, and is filled with terrors of Conscience, and having
struggled through many evils and difficulties must at last dye, and return to
dust.

Yet God opened unto him a new way to Eternal happiness after death; in such a
way as to magnify his Love and Mercy to Mankind, and manifest his hatred of
sin, and Zeal for the keeping of his Laws, that he might at once show grace to
the Offender, and secure the honor of his just government.

God did graciously promise that a man should be born of a woman, who should
conquer the Devil, and deliver man from his Tyranny, and give such satisfaction
unto God's Justice, that for his sake, all they should be Eternally happy that
would accept of him for their Savior.

Accordingly, God so loved the world, that he gave his only Begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish; but have Everlasting Life.

God the Son took to himself our humane nature, Soul and Body, and was made
truly man, yet ceased not to be truly God, but is both God and Man in one
Person, God manifested in the Flesh.

He was wonderfully made Man, by being Born without all stain of sin, of a pure
Virgin called Mary, who conceived him by the Divine power of the Holy Ghost,
when she had never known man.

An Angel from Heaven revealed his conception to the Blessed Virgin, and
commanded his name to be called Jesus, because he was to save his people from
their sins.

Being Born and Circumcised according to the Law, he lived many years upon
earth in an humble and low condition, gave us an example to imitate in his
Life, doing the whole will of God, and conquering all the temptations of the
Devil, and the World.

This is that Messia whom many Prophets had foretold, the very CHRIST, or
anointed of the Lord to be a Prophet, a Priest and a King, and in this
Threefold Office the Mediator of a New Covenant between God and Men.

As a Prophet he has in his Gospel, and by his Apostles made known unto us all
his Fathers will concerning our salvation, and the way to it.

As a Priest, he was Crucified, and dyed under Pontius Pilate, so offering
himself once for all, a perfect and sufficient sacrifice for the forgiveness of
our sins, in consideration: whereof, God has granted pardon and Life to all
true Believers.

Being dead he was buried, and wentiamong the dead, and the Third day rose
again to Life, now to dye no more, and having sealed the Covenant in his Blood,
he left instructions with his Apostles to admit men into it by Baptism, and
teach them how to keep it, and promised them the gift of the Holy Ghost.

After some days, he in their sight went up into Heaven, and is glorified at
God's Right Hand, in Power and Majesty; And as King, rules and protecteth his
Church, Reigns in the hearts of his subjects, subdueth all his Enemies, and
is our Advecate with the Father, rendering our persons and services accepted of
him, and prevaising for all good blessings on us.

Shortly after his Ascension, on the day of Pemecost, Christ sent the Holy
Ghost, the Eternal Spirit of the Father and the Son, upon the Apostles, to
guide them into all saving truth, to enable them to Preach to every Nation in
its own Language, to write the Holy Scriptures, and to seal and confirm the
truth of them by many Miracles, and wonderful works, and to encourage them to a
constant suffering for Christ, even unto death.

The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the very Word of God, which
Holy men of God spoke, and writ as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and they
contain all things necessary to Salvation, and are the standing Sealed Rule of
Faith and Life.

The Holy Ghost is Christ's Advocate, pleading his cause with men. He is our
Sanctifier, enlightening, opening, softning, changing and renewing our hearts
and minds to receive, and grow in knowledge and grace: Making the word
effectual for our conviction and conversion, helping us to pray, and stirring
us up to goodness, comforting us with a sense of its operations, and
strengthening us to withstand temptations, and hold out in a Christian course
unto the end.

All those that are regenerated, enlightened and converted by the Holy Ghost
are one Holy Church, whereof Christ is the only Head. All that outwardly
profess Christianity, and have been Baptized, are to be accounded Holy by a
visible separation and dedication to God, till they cut themselves off by
Schism, or are justly cast out by Excommunication.

Christ's Church is not limited to any Nation or People, but extends to all
places, is propagated in all Ages, and contains all saving truth; and in this
sense is Universal or Catholic.

All the Sanctified Members of this Mystical Body of Christ, have Fellowship
with the Father, and Son, by one Holy Spirit; with Angels in their love, care
and Ministries, with the glorified Saints in Heaven in their love and prayers,
and with one another on Earth, in the same Faith; and Hope, and Love, Word and
Sacraments, bound to hold the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

All these have in consideration of Christ's satisfaction, a full pardon of all
past sins given of God, and Sacramentally sealed unto them in Baptism, with an
assurance of final justification and Salvation, upon condition of their
perseverance in Repentance and Faith.

At death the souls of the faithful rest with God in peace and happiness, and
the souls of the wicked go into an endless state of misery.

The bodies of all men shall be raised again after death, and shall be again
united to their souls.

All men shall after the Resurrection appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ, where the wicked shall be condemned to Everlasting torments, but the
Righteous shall be finally acquitted, and go into Everlasting Life and Joy,
happy in the constant and perfect love of God, praising him, delighting in him,
amongst all Blessed Angels and Saints to all Eternity.

The heads of the Christian's Duty.
IF any man would be saved, he must first be born again of the Holy Spirit, be
converted, and become a new creature, Holy in Heart and Life; otherwise he
cannot enter in the Kingdom of God.

The grace of God has appeared, teaching us that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly and Righteously, and Godly in this
present World.

I must not think my self to be my own, so that I may live as I list; but must
humbly acknowledge there is a God above me, whose I am, and whom I am bound to
serve all the days of my Life.

I must take the true God alone for my God, even the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and worship him as my Maker, Redeemer and Sanctifier.

I must by a daily diligent reading, studying and meditating on his word, and
considering of his works labor, get a true knowledge of God, and not content
my self in ignorance of him.

I must worship God in Spirit and in Truth, with the heart and soul sincerely.

I must steadfastly believe the whole Word of God, the History for my
instruction, the Precepts for my direction, the Promises for my encouragement,
the threatenings to affright me from sin, bewaring of all temptations to
unbelief or a false Faith.

I must live in a patient expectation, and hope of what God has promised,
neither despairing of mercy if I repent, nor presuming of Mercy, if I repent
not.

I must love God as the chief good, with the highest love, choosing him for my
only portion, delighting in him as my only comfort, willing to part with Life
it self to enjoy him, and making light of all things, so I may please him,
loving his Image as far as I see it in every man, especially in Jesus Christ my
Savior.

It is my duty to stand in awe of God's threatenings and judgments, and to be
very cautious and circumspect in all my ways, watching over my thoughts, words
and actions, fearing to offend him in any thing; neither fearing nor loving any
thing else so much, as to venture upon the least sin.

I must entirely trust and confide in God, both in all wants and dangers,
whether of Soul or Body; Conscientiously using such means as he allows:
Praying devoutly unto him for his Blessing, and casting all my care for the
success upon him, not doubting of his never failing power and goodness:

I must walk humbly before God, thinking meanly of my self; renouncing all my
own worth or merits, acknowledging all that I am, have or hope for to be of his
gift, taking patiently and thankfully all his chastisements, and laboring to
profit by them, and confessing that he does all things wisely and well.

I must behave my self uprightly and sincerely, as in his presence; and do all
I do as unto him, with a pure heart; avoiding all guile, dissimulation and
hypocrisy; not indulging the least evil thought, inclination or desire;
keeping up high and honorable thoughts of him, and preserving my Conscience
tender, and my heart soft and easy to take the impressions of his word and
spirit.

I must shun all gross representations of God, or likening him so much as in my
thoughts to any creature. I am not to worship him after my own conceit or
fancy, but according to the rules he has given in his word; not with a formal,
but a spiritual worship; drawing near unto him in Prayer and praise, and all
his Ordinances with my heart and affections.

I must use the sacred name of God with all due reverence, not profaning it by
blasphemous, idle or impertinent talk; or by false, common or needless
swearing; or by breaking my Holy Vows and Covenants; nor any way giving
occasion by my insincere profession of his name unto others, to blaspheme or
profane it.

I must honor the Lord in his day, by spending it in his Worship, meditating
on, and praising him for his wonderful works of Creation and Redemption.
Especially in the Public Assemblies, bearing my part devoutly in the Prayers
of his Church, attending to his word Preached and Read, and Communicating in
his Sacraments.

I must not think too highly of my self, nor be proud of any thing I am, have
or can do, seeing all is the undeserved gift of God.

I must not humor my passions, but labor to be of a meek, and quiet, and
docible Spirit.

I must make use of my reason, in considering what I am, and whence I came, and
whither I must go; why I live, and how I must dye, and what shall become of me
after death; what I owe to God, and men, and my self, and how I pay it. I must
often examine the state of my Soul, and whether I be converted from the state
of sin, into the state of grace, and all my thoughts, words and actions,
whether they be conformable to the will of God. I should often think of the
vanity of this World, and sinful pleasures, the certainty of death, the
impartiality of judgment, the glories of Heaven, the terrors of Hell, the
comforts of a good Conscience, and what I must do to be saved, with the
necessity of a Godly Life.

I must be heartily contented with my present lot and portion; not murmuring or
repining at God's dealings, not ambitiously seeking a more high or plentiful
condition, not fretting at my wants or sufferings, nor vexing my Soul with
Worldly cares, nor envying the more flourishing condition of others, but
conclude that best which God chooses for me.

I must be a good husband of my time, industriously improving it to the good of
my self and others; not wasting it unprofitably in idleness, sports and
vanities, but laboring in an honest calling.

I must be chaste and clean in Mind and Body, entertaining no wanton thought or
desire, or look, or dress, shunning all lasciviousness and obscene discourse,
books, gestures, and enticements to lust and uncleanness.

I must be temperate and moderate in eating, drinking, sleeping, recreations
and apparel; not pleasing my Appetite, or wasting my Estate, or loosing my time
in any of them, but using them only in such a measure as may best preserve my
bodily health, to serve my Soul in serving God.

I must love my Neighbor as my self, and do to all men, as I would they should
do to me, that is, all the good I can, rendering to every man his due.

Especially I must love, and do good to those that are of the Household of
Faith, and love every man the more, by how much I see more of God's image upon
him.

Above all, I must labor to do good to men's Souls, by teaching, reproving,
exhorting, comforting and Praying for them; Not hurting, grieving, scanda^izing
or tempting them to evil, by advice, countenance or example.

Parents must dedicate their children to God, instruct and educate them in the
knowledge and fear of God, correct all vice in them, and give them good
example, maintaining them, and providing honest callings for them, as they are
able.

Children must love, honor, obey, serve, and as there is need relieve their
Parents with all thankfulness.

Husbands and Wives must live in an holy, mutual, conjugal love to each other;
helping one another in serving God, Educating their Children well, Ruling their
Servants, and managing their necessary Affairs; the Wife living in a quiet
subjection to her Husband.

Masters must be kind and just to their servants; instructing them in God's
service, as well as in their own; and servants must obey, and be faithful to
their Masters.

All Superiors are to rule in Justice and Holiness, seeking God's Glory, and
the public good: and all inferiors are to be subject to the higher powers,
paying tribute, and obeying their just Laws for Conscience sake, not
resisting, but to taking it Patiently, though they suffer wrongfully.

Ministers must fced and rule, and watch over the Souls of their flocks, and
their flocks must freely contribute to their maintenance, honor them in love,
and be obedient to them.

I must not take away another Life, nor hurt his Body, nor so much as be angry
with him without a cause; but must preserve, as much as in me lies, his bodily
welfare, even as my own.

I must not defile another's Wife, nor be guilty of Fornication, nor so much as
look on any woman to lust after her; but do all I can to preserve the chastity
of all.

I must not wrong another of any part of his Estate, by theft, robbery, fraud
or deceit of any kind, but must secure his right, as much as my own, pay my
debts duly, bargain honestly, and make restitution and amends for every wrong.

I must not wrong another's good name or credit, by false-witness, slandering,
false-accusing, tale-bearing, reproaching, backbiting; but I must vindicate it
as far as with truth I can; acknowledging all the good I see in every man,
groundlesly suspecting no man. I must not make or speak any lie, but speak the
truth plainly.

I must utterly cast off all selfishness, and not be tempted by any desire of
pleasing my self, to covet any thing that is another man's.

I must love, pray for, and do good to my enemies; not rendering evil for evil,
or seeking revenge, but forgiving, as God for Christ his sake has forgiven me.

The matter of our Desires and Prayers.
I AM not able naturally either to understand the mysteries of Faith, or to do
the Spiritual duties, which I am bound as a Christian, to believe and do. I
must not therefore trust to my self, but by frequent, fervent and humble Prayer
apply my self to God, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the help of his Holy
Spirit to quicken my deadness, enlighten my ignorance, and strengthen my
weakness.

Of my self I know not how to pray, or for what to pray; I must therefore learn
of Christ, who has taught me thus to Pray,

Our Father, etc.

I must with all Humility, as an undone sinner, approach unto God, in a true
sense of his right in me, and dominion over me, as my Owner and Governor, and
of his love to me as my Father, so far reconciled unto all men in Jesus Christ,
that he pitieth us, and has as a gracious Father, provided all things needful
to make us happy, and that he delights not in our death, but would have us
turn and live as his children, happy in our Father's love and providence.

I must draw near unto him, as a penitent, dutiful and loving child; heartily
sorry that ever I offended him, restlesly longing to be reconciled unto him,
resolvedly willing to resign and give my self up unto him, to be governed
wholly by him; steadfastly believing and trusting in his power to save and bless
me, and his willingness to receive me for his own adopted child in Jesus Christ.

Yet I must remember the greatness of his Divine Majesty, and the infinite
distance betwixt a powerful, wise and good God in Heaven, and me a weak,
foolish and sinful worm of the Earth; and so come with all humble reverence,
falling down at his feet in a devout Adoration of his Majesty, longing to be
made more Holy and Heavenly, that I may be capable of a nearer Communion with
him.

I must first heartily desire, that all the World may give him the glory due
unto his Name; That He may be more perfectedly known, and loved, and honored
by men; and that in his Person, his Name, his Attributes, his Word, his Day,
his Ordinances, his Ministers, and all his children. That he may be chosen, and
Magnified as the supreme good, have the chief place in our hearts and
affections, and glorified in the World by our Godly lives.

I must next pray, that the Yoke of sin may be broken off, and we freed from
the Tyranny of Satan; that we may joyfully own, and submit to the authority of
God. That Christ's Church may flourish and be enlarged on earth, and that the
Civil Powers may cherish and protect it; that the Power and malice of it is
enemies may be restrained and frustrated; that Christ may rule by his Spirit in
our hearts subduing our Corruptions and ruling us in the way of Godliness; that
we may earnestly long for, and diligently prepare for, and patiently wait for,
and finally enter into God's Kingdom of glory.

I must in the 3 d. place pray, That men may not make the will of the devil,
the Customs of the world, or their own inclinations and appetites, but the will
of God alone the rule of their lives. That we may all sincerely obey his
commands, and submit to his wisdom, and rest in his government. That we may
always endeavor after the perfection of duty, and as the Holy Angels of
Heaven, rejoice and delight in an Holy Obedience.

My next petition is, That I may have all things needful to preserve this
life, till I be fitted for a better. That we may have health and Strength to
serve God, and other outward good things, as they are expedient; that we may be
free from the temptations of riches or poverty, contented with our present
portion; and wise to use it piously and Charitably. That God would prosper our
honest labors, keep us from immoderate cares and desires, from all idleness
and intemperance.

In the next place I pray, that God would grant us soft hearts, and repentance
unto life, a perfect hatred of sin, and power to leave it. That He would
through Christ forgive all our sins original and actual; and grant us grace in
thankfulness to him to forgive all that offend us, and to return good for evil.

Lastly, That God would enable us to watch against, and manfully to resist all
temptations, that they may never prevail with us to do evil; that he would
frustrate all the malicious designs of the devil, and all our enemies, and
protect us by his grace, that we may persevere in obedience to our lives end.

I conclude my Prayers with ascribing unto God the honor of all his works,
acknowledging his Dominion and Sovereignty over all, and my self happy in being
his Subject; his infinite power, and my self happy in being under his
protection; I acknowledge all things to be from him, our total dependence to be
upon him, and that the glory of all goodness is due unto him. I desire this may
by all the World be acknowledged for evermore; And with all hearty desire, and
filial confidence, to all this I say, Amen; So be it.

The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
CHrist Jesus has instituted the night before he was betrayed a solemn
Sacrament, and Christian Feast, to be celebrated by Christians, even till his
coming again, in remembrance of him.

The outward matter to be received, is Bread and Wine, signifying the Body and
Blood of Christ, as the food and refreshment of our Souls.

The Bread is Blessed-broken, and given to be received and eaten by us; The
Wine likewise Blessed, poured out and given to be received and drunk by us; to
signify that Christ was Consecrated and Crucified, his body wounded, his blood
shed for our sins, and that he gives himself Crucified to be received and
believed on as our Spiritual nourishment and comfort.

All that preparedly receive the Bread and Wine, do with it really receive
Christ Crucified; and with him the pardon of their sins, and Assurance of
Eternal Life, scaled a new unto them in this Sacrament for the confirming of
their Faith, and growth in Grace.

We join in the celebration of this Feast to signify, that we though many, are
yet Members of one Body, the Church, joined unto one Head, Jesus Christ, whose
Death and Sacrifice we unanimously commemorate, with all thankfulness;
Professing that we all own the same Lord, the same Faith, the same Laws, and
are to live in love, peace and holiness, as the Members of the same body.

He that Communicates in this Sacrament unworthily, is accounted by God, as
guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ.

That we may avoid this guilt, we must examine our selves, whether we discern
the Lord's Body, and understand what he gives there unto us, and what we there
come to do.

We are also to examine, how we keep our Baptismal Covenant of Repentance,
Faith and New Obedience, and if we find our selves truly thankful for the
Blessing of our Redemption, by Jesus Christ.

If we find our selves sincere Christians, resolving to keep Covenant with God,
we are there to renew our Covenant most seriously, praising God in Christ for
this inestimable privilege, rejoicing in his Salvation, and so go our way, and
sin no more.

Some Texts of Scripture often and seriously to be Read, and thought on.
IT is appointed unto men once to dye, but after this the Judgment. Heb. 9.27.

Go to now, ye that say, to day or to morrow, we will go into such a City, and
continue there a year, and buy and sell, and get gain; whereas you know not
what shall be on the morrow; For what is your Life? it is even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Jam. 4.13, 14.

Behold now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of Salvation. 2 Cor.
6.2.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Heb. 4.7.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. Ecclesiastes 12.1.

We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.

Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. 2 Cor. 5.11.

If you call on the Father, who without respect of persons judges according to
every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. 1 Pet. 1.17.

God will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, honor and immortality; Eternal
Life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the truth, but obey
unrighteousness, indignation and wrath. Romans 2.6, 7, 8.

Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.

Give diligence to make your calling and election sure. 2 Pet. 1.10.

The heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing,
and their eyes have they closed, least they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should be converted,
and I should heal them. Act. 28.27.

Save your selves from this untoward Generation. Act. 2.40.

Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. Act.
3.19.

Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew 18.3.

Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Luke 13.3, 5.

Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Joh. 3.3.

Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord. Heb. 12.14.

Neither is there Salvation in any other, [but Christ:] for there is none other
name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.12.

He that believes on him is not conlemned, but he that believes not is
condemned already. Joh. 3.18.

There is no condemnation to them ^^at are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. ^om. 8.1.

To be carnally minded is death, ^^t to be spiritually minded is Life and
^eace. Ver. 6. If ye live after the ^esh ye shall dye: but if ye by the spirit
do mortify the deeds of the Body, ye shall live. Ver. 13.

Now the works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adulteries,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred,
Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness; Revellings, and such like; -- They which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5.19. etc.

If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans 8.9.

If any man be in Christ he is a new creature. 2 Cor. 5.17.

They that are Christ's have Crucified the Flesh, with the affections and
lusts. Gal. 5.

Love not the world, nor the things that are in the world: For if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

Whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the world. 1 John 5.4.

Let him that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. 2 Timothy 11.19.

By this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil;
whosoever does not Righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother; 1 John

Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envying: But put ye on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof.
Romans 13.13, 14.

If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and
Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. Luke 14.26.

If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross,
and follow me. Matthew 16.24.

For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
Soul? Or what shall a man give in Exchange for his Soul? Ver. 26.

The Grace of God which brings Salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching
us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
Righteously and Godly in this present world: Looking for that blessed hope, and
the Glorious appearance of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Tit. 2.11, 12. etc.

Ye are all the children of the light, and the children of the day: we are not
of the night, nor of darkness; Therefore let us not sleep, as do others; but
let us watch and be sober. 1 These. 5.5, 6.

How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation. Hebrews 2.3.

If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly, and the finner
appear? 1 Pet. 4.18.

The Trial of a Christian's State.
IT highly concerns me to examine and try, whether I be in a State of Sin, or
in a State of Grace: that if I be in the former, I may hasten out of it, to
escape damnation; and if in the later, I may bless God for his goodness, and go
on to Salvation.

Now thus I must try my self.
If I understand so much of GOD, as that I do really esteem and value Him, his
grace and love above all the world, and am heartily willing to take Him alone
for my portion, counting him enough, though for him I should lose all the world
besides: If my care and delight be to do his Will, and my chief rejoicing be in
his love, and my heart's desire and longing be to enjoy him more fully in
Heaven.

If to this end I apply my self to Jesus Christ, trusting in him alone for
Eternal Life in the presence of God, and giving my self entirely to be governed
by him, willing to obey his Laws, whatsoever it shall cost me, though it be
with the loss of all worldly advantages, and earthly pleasures, and even Life
it self; If I can for his sake love enemies, bear wrongs, forbear revenge,
mortify lusts and passions, bridle my appetite, disregard my own will and
pleasure, endure shame and reproach, lose wealth, friends and liberty, yea and
life too.

If I watch as narrowly over my heart, affections and thoughts, as over my
outward actions; and earnestly desire more than any worldly treasure, to be
thoroughly renewed and cleansed by the Holy Spirit, from all inward corruptions.
If I hate every sin in my self, and strive all I can against it, and am
restless till I conquer it, and troubled at my heart at my own imperfections,
longing to be freed from them.

If I really delight, and find pleasure in the worship and service of God, and
do not come forcedly and constrainedly to it, as rather willing to do otherwise
if I durst, if I find holiness and obedience sweet and pleasant, and no burden
or wearisomness to me; If I can, and do heartily resign my self to God, not
minding what I naturally would have or do, nor what any thing else would
persuade me to, but merely what is the will of God, and going on cheerfully to
do his will, pray fervently for his assistance, and cast my self confidently on
his mercy, through Jesus Christ for Salvation.

If I find this in my self, my state is comfortable and good.

But on the contrary.
If I yet love this world, and mind Earthly things most, and prefer not God,
his grace and Heaven, before all earthly joys and pleasures.

If I dare not trust in Christ alone, nor forsake all for him, nor am willing
to obey his Laws, how hard soever they seem, or what cost or loss soever they
put me to.

If my heart and life be not thoroughly changed, but I yet must have my own
will, and please my own appetite and senses, and cannot want my own desires, or
cross my own inclinations.

If I keep any known sin unmortified, and not cast off, if I do not watch
against all temptations, and pray heartily and frequently for grace to conquer
all sin.

If I delight not in God's Word, and in all Holy duties, and esteem it not my
greatest privilege to serve him.

If my greatest care be not to please him, and if his command prevail not more
with me than all the world besides.

If I cannot content my self with him alone, nor suffer any the greatest evil
for him.

If I have not resolvedly given my self up to be wholly at his disposal, and to
be made in all things conformable to his will.

If the case be thus with me, I am in a state of sin and death, and cannot be
saved, till I be converted and made a new man.

The Christian's Confession of his Faith, with a full Resignation of himself to
God, and binding himself in Covenant with GOD.
I Believe, Lord help thou my unbelief. I do most freely and heartily own, and
with humble admiration and reverence, I do adore the great and dreadful, and
incomprehensibly Glorious Majesty of Heaven and Earth. Most joyfully do I
accept of thee, O Father, Son and Holy Ghost, for my only God. Thou, and thou
alone art the inexhaustible Fountain of all Being, Life, Power and Goodness. I
acknowledge my total dependence upon thee for my Being, Life, Motion,
Understanding, and all things; and it will be my happiness to enjoy thy love
and blessing.

Thou O God, art an Infinite, Eternal and Immortal Spirit, and the God and
Father of Spirits, who though unseen, art every where present, about me, and
within me; by thy infinite power, quickening, upholding, and protecting me; by
thine Infinite Wisdom providing for me, ordering and directing me; and by thy
goodness blessing me.

To thee, one Glorious God in Three Persons, Blessed for ever, do I freely and
wholly give my self, cheerfully dedicating and resigning my Soul and Body, with
all the powers and faculties of both, to be wholly disposed of by thee, in the
service of thee, O Blessed Trinity in Unity, Eternal Life, Light and Love,
Power, Wisdom and Holiness, the Author of my preservation, Sanctification and
Salvation.

Thou in a wonder of condescending love, offerest thy self as a gracious
Father, in Jesus Christ to all Believers.

Thou art the Maker of me, and all the World; I am nothing, I have nothing, I
can do nothing, I hope for nothing but from thy power, wisdom and goodness; to
thee alone be the honor and praise of all. I will more study my self, and
other creatures, that I may learn to know, admire and love thee more. I can be
proud of nothing, glory in nothing but in thee, in whom I live, and move, and
have my being. I am not my own, I and all things are thine, and unto thee I
freely resign my self, and all my concerns, to use and dispose of me and them
as it pleases thee. Whatever thou do with me, thou can do me no wrong, no
creature without thee can do me any good. It Is my perfection and happiness to
know and love thee, and delight in thee; Thee alone I choose for my portion, and
thou alone shall ever be enough for me.

To thee, as the Almighty Ruler of the World, I heartily submit my self;
accepting thy Divine Will, for my only Law, by which my thoughts, words and
actions are to be all governed. All thy Laws I consent to, as most holy, just
and good, and most thankfully acknowledge that nothing can be better than to
rest in thy will: I will study thy will diligently, do it heartily, cheerfully
submit unto it, be well contented with, and joyfully praise thee in whatsoever
thou do. I will readily obey thy commands, patiently bear thy chastisements,
and wholly confide in thy blessing and protection.

I confess Lord, that I am born a corrupt thing, and have added a thousand
times more to that corruption; I am fallen from that knowledge, power and
uprightness, wherein thou made Adam, and am exceeding ignorant, weak and
wicked, averse from truth and goodness, inclined mightily to falsehood and evil;
all this I sadly feel in my self, it is an heavy burden unto me.

Except I be born again of thy Spirit, be converted by thy word, made a new
man, and a real change wrought both in my heart and life, I must remain under
thy wrath and curse, Everlastingly wretched. Our misery lying in our fall from
thee our Creator, to the creature, and in our desire to please our selves more
than thee our God; our due portion is to perish by our own wretched choice, and
having chosen to sin with devils, it is but just we share with devils in
Everlasting torments. Having wilfully broken thy Laws, we cannot hope for
impunity from thee, the just Governor of the World, except some satisfaction
be made unto thy Justice.

O the wonder, even ravishing and astonishing wonder of thy rich mercy! How
should I ever be able to acknowedge thy unspeakable goodness in thy compassion
to sinful men? Early and freely did thou promise us a Redeemer and a Savior;
and I do very feelingly own thy faithfulness and truth in performing to the
full that gracious promise. How do I admire and adore thy wonderful wisdom, in
the rare contrivance of our rescue, by sending thine own Eternal, and only
begotten Son, to tender himself unto us for a Savior, and make us new and
easy terms of peace and reconciliation.

Lord, on the bended knees of my Soul I do accept thy mercy, offering thy self
again unto me as a reconciled Father, desiring to love, honor and obey thee
for ever, and humbly beseeching thee to own me amongst thy adopted children.

I do humbly admire, and joyfully embrace thine infinite love, O blessed JESUS,
who being the great God blessed for ever, yet humbledst thy self to be clothed
in our weak and frail nature, to be born of a woman, made under the Law, to
live a mean life in a wicked world, to expose thy self to the temptations of
Satan, to suffer all indignities from sinners, to shed thy precious blood upon
a cursed tree, and lie in a grave, and undergo the condition of the dead for us
sinful wretches.

Lord I am fully satisfied by thy rising again to life the third day, that thou
have overcome the devil and death, and given satisfaction to thy Father's
Justice, and finished the great work of our Redemption. I know thou art now
triumphant in Heaven, invested with all power and glory on the Right Hand of
thy Father, our prevailing advocate making intercession for us: and thee I
comfortably expect to be our Judge at the last day.

Thou O Glorious Jesus have Established an Everlasting Covenant of peace, and
sealed it with thy blood: and with all my Soul I praise thee for this thine
inestimable love, not doubting keeping of that pardon and grace, and glory
which thou therein have assured unto us, if I unfeignedly accept of thy mercy,
and enter in this Holy Covenant.

O JESUS CHRIST, in all sincerity of heart, and with all thankful love and joy
I do accept of thee my only Savior. I do most humbly submit my self to be
taught by thee, and will make thy Gospel my daily study: I trust in thy merits
only, and give my self to be governed by thy Laws, and denying my self I am
ready to take up thy Cross, and bid open War to all thine enemies, and take thy
easy Yoke and light burden upon me.

Lord the unfeigned desire of my Soul is, that thou may be formed in me, and
take full possession of me, that I may henceforth live by the Faith of thee the
Son of God. I resolve thy will shall be my will, thy life my pattern, thy Law
my Rule. I will set my self to resist the temptations of the devil, despise the
vanities of the world, and mortify the carnal desires of my flesh; all
afflictions shall seem light to me, and death it self better than life, that I
may obey thee, and live with thee.

I consecrate my self unto thee, to dye daily unto sin, to Crucify the flesh,
to rise again unto Righteousness, to have my Conversation in Heaven, my heart
and affections with thee my only treasure. My confidence is in thy merits, my
Prayers sent to God in thy name and intercession, my practice to be conformable
to thy example, the longings of my Soul to be with thee for ever.

I will do my endeavor that my thoughts, words and actions may be such as thou will approve of in the day of Judgment; I will not envy the present happiness
of the wicked, nor be dis-heartned by my suffering, but referr all to thy
Righteous Judgment; I will watch over my heart and life, and daily examine my
Conscience, and keep it tender and good; and labor that the accuser may have
nothing to lay to my charge before thy Judgment Seat.

I do heartily accept of thee, O Holy Spirit of the Father, and the Son, for my
Sanctifier, my Guide and Comforter. I embrace the Holy Scriptures, given by thy
inspiration, as the infallible truth of God; I own the Ministry as thine
Ordinance, and every good motion of my heart, as thy work. To thee, O Holy
Spirit, do I give up my self in a constant attendance on the Word and
Ordinances, and secret workings, longing to be quickened, enlightened, renewed
and cleansed, strengthened against all temptations, carried on toward
perfection, confirmed in the hopes of Eternal Life, and sealed unto the day of
Redemption.

I look upon my self as a member of the common body of all Christians, and own
thee, O Blessed Jesus, the only head of this thy Body the Church. I acknowledge
it my Eternal Interest and Duty in the Holy Communion of all Believers to
Worship thee, O Glorious God, in the Assemblies of thy Saints. I look upon all
Christians, and my self amongst them, as men separated from the wicked world,
enlivened by one Spirit, professing one Faith of the Holy Trinity, all
Covenanted together with God in one Baptism, bound to hold the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace, loving God above all, and each other as our
selves, with a fellow feeling of one another's sufferings, a free Communicating
to one another's necessities, Temporal and Spiritual, and a mutual rejoicing in
one another's happiness.

Continuing in this Holy Society, whereinto I have been graciously called by
thy Word and Holy Spirit, I will endeavor to solace and comfort my self in a
joyful sense of the blessed privileges thou therein affordest us: Especially
in the pardon of my sins by thy free mercy, through the merits of Christ my
Savior, and Sanctification of thy Holy Spirit, tendered unto me in the
Ministry of thy word, and sealed in the Sacraments: I should deserve a thousand
Hells, should I go on any longer in sin, under so much mercy. I resolve
therefore to attend on the Ministry of reconciliation all the days of my life,
and to strive against all sin for ever.

To this end my death shall be much in my thoughts, and my life a continual
preparation for it. I will look upon every day as if it were my last, and every
day renew my Covenant; So shall I be ready with joy when thou call, O Lord,
to bid farewell to all below, and come to thee. I doubt not but my body shall at
the last day be raised again a glorious body, no longer a burden or temptation
to my Soul. I will no longer wast my time in immoderate caring for it, feeding,
adorning and pampering of that which must shortly be loathsome rottenness,
Stench and Worms meat, which now loads and tempts my Soul to sin, and hinders
its Ascensions toward God; but I will mortify it, and keep it low, that thou
may exalt it to glory.

O thy wonderful goodness who have provided for us poor sinners, a Life
Everlasting, who deserve not one single moment of this Life. Lord, grant me
grace to be pure as thou art pure, that I may see thee, and rejoice in thee for
ever, in thy Heavenly Kingdom. O when shall I come and appear before God? Lord,
it is certain that a worldly, carnal heart, unconverted, unrenewed, is not
capable of taking any pleasure or delight in thee, nor can it find any
happiness in Heaven it self, nor any relish in those Heavenly pleasures, which
are at thy Right Hand for evermore. Cleanse me O Lord, and renew me daily by
thy Spirit, then shall I cheerfully bid adieu to a vain world, empty pleasures,
frail life, and a (...) self, and feed only on the hopes of Eternal Life, and
enjoying, loving, praising thee my God, my All for evermore; This O Lord thou
have promised in thy word, this thou have assured us of, and sealed unto us in
the blood of thy Son; This thou confirmest unto all the Sanctified Members of
thy Church by thy Holy Spirit. To all this I here most heartily say; Amen.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.
FINIS.

