AN ELEGY, On the most Barbarous,Unparalleled, Vnsouldiery, Murder,

Committed at COLCHESTER, upon the persons of the two most incomparable, Sir
CHARLES LUCAS, AND Sir GEORGE LISLE.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. Printed in the Year, 1648. Sept 28

AN ELEGY On the most Incomparable, Sir CHARLES LUCAS, and Sir GEORGE LISLE.
THough all the Trophies Rebels can bring in,
Are but succesfull guilt, and prosperous sin:
And each defeat their savage heat can buy,
But outrage be, and highway victory:
Though there be Juries due for all they have flaine,
And the just Bar each conquest must arraigne:
Though what they Charge, and vigorous Onset call,
Is downright, Stand, Deliver, and that is all:
Though Forts reduced, and Holds suppressed by awe,
Here Is S^ (...) Siege, but Burglary in the Law:
And COLCHESTER it self, in Truth's free scope,
Is no Town Taken, but a Town Broke open
That from the Booty gained, and wealthy prize,
Not their renown, but their Indictments rise.
Whence they can naught but Tyburne Triumphs raise,
And Sessians-Laurell, where the Hemp's the Bays:
Yet they had some Pretext, some Title still,
Though not to virtue, yet to generous ill:
And the next Age, by our Records, might say,
They went well on, though they mistook their way.
So aged Rome even in her out-lawes shines,
Some luster gains even from her Cataline's.
But ours are sunk and fallen, have stained their Name,
Things beneath Rebels, bashful Annals shame.
Traitor! though the wild sound affrights beget,
Though it be Villain deep, it is Manly yet:
And in the Herauldry of Crimes may find
Kin and Allies amongst Sins of humane kind.
But this unpattern'd By-blow, base offense,
Must fly disclaimed, and unaffianc'd hence.
Chained and immured in un-frequented Cell,
And live an Anchorite in Populous Hell.
The stout Besieged, whom Force could never subdue,
Now long begirt with Foes, and Famine too,
When the last drop lay gasping in the cruse,
And no accession worn supplies renewes,
While clean, and unclean they alike imbarke,
Like the Creations shelter (once) the Arc,
When the exhausted Town defended hears,
'Bove the distress of Troy, though not the years:
At last they do subscribe, but leave this Fame,
They knew no Conqueror, till Hunger came:
So Tire yields to the Pellaean Youth at length,
The purchase of his patience, not his strength;
When now dis-abled, they for rescue come,
To private Shrines, to public Altars some,
The Victor checked their flight, and bade them know,
No Sanctuary saves like a just Foe.
But oh the difference 'twixt two Heathens gone,
'Twixt him of old, and Fairfax Macedon!
In doubtful conflict, where the equal day
Smiles fair on both sides, and gives neither sway,
Slaughter may prudence seem, and blood allure,
Since it is not then to kill, but to secure.
But all contest laid by, and steel let go,
To cull, and slay! the Shambles vanquish so.
A Coward's still unsafe; but honor knows
No other Foe, but him that does oppose.
Nor would this blasted act such field afford,
Were It the Escape or Heat of some Rash Sword,
The ghastly monster might be then disguised,
And savage Murder sound but Un-advis'd.
But this was Tame debate, and was let fall,
Thy cool result, deliberate Cannibal.
Is this the Mercy? are we pitied thus?
Had your Committee-Prisoners such from us?
We grant ten thousand such heaped in one pile,
Can never poize a Lucas, or a Lile:
Yet be the diff^rence vast, the change is true,
And you are paid, if those be dear to you.
If Aesop's Cock for Pearl would Barley get,
Who makes that change is nothing in his debt.
Persons and things are as their Prizers deem,
Not rated from their Worth, but our Esteem.
With Indians Beads of Glass 'bove Diamonds go,
The Traffick's just, because they count them so.
Safe and untouched we sent your men in peace,
And must our Blood requite for their Release?
We not expect Returns in our own way,
For then we must be Free as well as They.
Yet sure a full complete discharge from thrall,
May for un-injur'd Bondage safely call.
But since no danger in their Lives remains,
Since shackles scare not, and none awes in chains:
Nay since their Safety, is their Purchase now,
And equal Trade will men for men allow:
Since their comerce does on a level stand,
And all is but ware for ware at strictest hand;
Why then these crimson streamas, this Sea of Blood?
Is there no Head, no Spring derives this Flood?
Yes, a pale hoof the Ruthlesse mountain hit,
And rising thence, proclaimed Revenge was it.
Revenge is she, that great incensed Power,
Whose Altars humane sacrifice devour.
Revenge is Honor, Justice, Country, Laws;
Your selves at least should have concealed this clause.
Say, was that Scar received from Lucas hand,
(That which was once a Scar, but now a Brand)
Received in Fight, when what he then did give
They Cheek, had sped thy Heart, but He cried, Live?
Was it a crime thou could so not endure,
That Blood must balsome it, and his Life cure?
Have thou complexion, lines, or ought to pass
For less then Vizour in thy affrighted Glass?
Then we might prize, not think the damage small,
But wail the loss of Lady General.
But in thy course, tought visage, homespun face,
Wounds may imprint, and scar, but never disgrace.
Yet know, who muse why Lisle and Lucas die,
They fall to Fairfax injured symetry.
That beauteous feminine Buffe dispatched them hence,
That featured General, He Her Excellence.
But, there were friendship yet in destiny,
If those who kill, would but lend space to die:
Mark then how they are hudled to their fate,
How the next Sun would call their murder late:
To live till morn would seem a slow Reprieve;
To respite Death is almost to let live.
No, they are posted hence, and butchered go,
E're they can fancy you can murder so.
This tyranny alone belongs to you,
To slaughter Men, and expectations too.
On to the Tragic Amphitheater,
And see these Hero's in the Bassive War,
Whose fortitude had deep this bottom laid,
The Valiant must affright, not be afraid.
E're this, your busy care sweats to digest,
Some that can aim, and act the Villains best.
Can single out the eye, the brain, the heart.
(For Murder now is but their kind of Art)
Know each recesse, and all deaths secret maze,
Which path leads to Dispatch, which to Delays.
With nice Dissectors they must enter Lists,
And Naked combat armed Anatomists.
When Force does force, and Army Army meets,
Where wounds give wounds, and slaughter slaughter greets,
Blind Fortune Fate in her own darkness wraps,
Our falls are often not Courage, but Mis-haps.
But here the guided ruin none can shun,
Keen death must on, and has no track but one.
No Bullet reaves or wanders in the dark,
But unperplex'd designs one single Mark.
While they in the threatening storm undaunted rest,
And taketh' whole peal of thunder on their Breast.
To Gideon's fleece alone the Shower did fly,
While the whole World was else untouched, and dry.
Thus Peasants, England's Worthies veins do broach,
Who were their Terror once, now their Reproach.
Whom to Subdue, their Foes must first Betray,
Whom Fairfax durst assault no other way.
Whom Norwich, Capel, Loughborough, Compton, all
Must see avenged, or in that Justice fall.
Two of a matchless, yet a different heat,
A various mingled flame, where both defeat.
LUCAS, possessed a stout Majestic fire,
Wound up to a just pitch, but yet no high'r.
Not shunning pride as he his worth not spied,
But making it his Worth to scorn all Pride.
Where Vigorous was Assisting: to be strong
Enabled not to Inflict, but Shroud from wrong.
Not stern, yet fit to have instructed sway,
To make none Tremble, yet make all Obey.
LISLE, Soft even to tears, yet stout as Adamant:
So nature does stiff Rocks amongst Waters plant.
Gentle and Melting into Valiant came,
As supplest Oil draines in and heightens Flame.
Slain in his Friend, expiring in his groan;
Tender of all men's blood, besides his own.
Both were so Peerlesse such, 'twas fit that they
Had not fallen this, and yet this only way.
Vespasian thus when his renown was full,
And could not add to his thronged Chronicle:
Surprised, despises fate, and Rouzing, cries,
The Valiant falls Erect, and Standing, dies.
THE END.

