EXTRAORDINARY NEVVES from Constantinople, November the 27. 1641.

Being a Letter sent from thence to the Lord Dominicco, Mugliano, Florantino,
dated the second of September. 1641.

Containing a most certain and true Relation of the late and strange visions,
with the aspects of two Commetts or blazing Stars with forked Tails.

Appearing to the great Turk, and perpendicularly hanging over his Seraglio in
Constantinople, as also his incredible dreams, together with their
Interpretation by the wisest of his Divines, Astrologers, and Magicians.

Written in French, and faithfully Translated by W.C.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Constable, and John Thomas. 1641.

Extraordinary news from Constantinople, November. 27. 1641 being a Letter sent
from thence to the Lord Dominico, Mugliano, Florantino, dated the second of
September. 6. 1641.
IT is a wonder to all the world, that in the selfsame time, that the
Imperial Council was in Labor to Accommodate the King of Hungary with the
great Turk, there were published throughout all Germany, Prognostications of
the Ruin of the Turkish Empire, by that of Germany, some took these
impressions at the first sight, only for dreams, as their whimsie brains
apprehend it, and their bold Intepretations accompanied with so many
circumstances, of which we have received other news, but by the self same
writing, so that many imputed all to be but the Ruings of some cract brains,
But the most avised believed that it was an Artifice, though something gross,
to appease the coffeehouse of those who found it strange to reduce and unite
the King of Hungary to the Turk, to oppose which as heretofore it has been
said, the Empire was Established: be it what it will, Italy and Germany, having
both had their part in this news, I will give it you, such as it was sent to
us under the name of a Letter from Constantinople, to the Lord Dominico,
Mugliano, Florantino, dated the second of September 1641.

From the tenth of August last, to the 13. of the same Month there was so
furious a wind in the plains near unto Constantinople, that it did disroote
and blow up many Trees, and ruinated a great number of stately Edifices, and
amongst those persons who received great loss, it is perticularly observed,
that four of the Turks grand Courilers, and a Captain of his Troops, were
by the vioence of this Tempest, thrown into deep precipices, and were never
since seen: This turbulent storm was accompanied with so many fearful
Thunders and Lightnings, that it killed many of his Ianizaryes, not far from
his own Seraglio, and this Lightning and Thunder was followed with so great a
Rain, that a good part of the Territories of Constantinople were swallowed up,
and the fi^lds converted into a Marsh or Bog; all this was made the more
fearful and destroyable by the Aspect of two Commetts or blasing stars with
double tails, or forked posteriums.

The one of which appeared from two of the clock in the morning until
midnight, just over against the great Turks Seraglio, and the other over the
Church or Mosque of Sancta Sophia, from three of the clock in the afternoon
till five a clock the next morning: these strange sights did affright and
amaze all the Turks in general, but now behold what more troubled the great
Turk in particular.

The Twelft of the same month, about three of the clock in the Morning, the
great Turk dreamt, that he was seized upon by many Lions, the greatest of
which having bitten him upon the breast, his excellency made so great a cry and
noise, that all his guardes run up to him in Arms, believing that some
sudden disaster or misfortune had befallen him; But the great Turk commanded
them all to retire, after he had assured them, that he had received no harm,
and so his excellency pleased to fall asleep again, but upon break of day he
had a second vision of many Centaures, who made and fought a bloody Battle one
against the other, after this there came from the East a great number of
Griffens, who fell upon the Centaures with such a fury, that they put them all
to flight, one part of them retired into Pits, and Caves to hid themselves, and
the other joining themselves unto the Grissens, killing the most part of the
Centaures, who had retired themselves into pitts and Caves, the grand Turk
seeing this disorder, would needs assist them, with a flaming sword in his
hand, but as he lift up his sword against the Griffens, the Eagle conducting
them, disarmed him, upon which the great Turk being surprised, awakens with so
great confusion and trouble, at these visions and appararions, that he must
needs know the signification of these, and the foregoeing commets, for the
accomplishment of which he commandes, all his Divines, Astrologers, and
Magicians, and other the wifest men of his confines, who undertake to forefee
things to come, to make their address to Coustantinople, within ten days
after the publication of this his decree, under pain of perpetual banishment
from out his Empire, which Divines came at the time prefixed, in great numbers,
unto whom his excellency having deelared punctually his visions, and the
appearing of the two blazing commetts.

He expressly commanded them, to tell the explication on within three days,
without any disguising of the truth, although he should wish the contrary, if
it might prove against himself, at last they all assembled upon that subject,
where after long time spent in the conference and dispute, they withdrew
themselves, each apart, the better to recollect their thoughts, then conveening
the second time, they found themselves all of one opinion, whereupon they made
choice of one of the most ancient, and the most gravest amongst them, named
Mossa Egypsiano, to give a true account to the grand Turk, of the
Interpretation which they had agreed upon of his dreams, so that the third day
being expired, the fornamed Mossa Egypsiano, come to make his report to his
excellency, which he did after this manner.

Our thrice invincible Lord, thy highness having permitted us to relate unto
you without disimulation, the true explication, of the two cometts and visions,
which thou have propounded unto us, after we had exactly considered, and
calculated the conjunction of the planets, with thy excellencies, Nativity,
which gave us no small in sight in this our divination.

Let thy highness know, but be not astonished, since that the evil influences
of the stars, may yet be our masterd by thy wisdom) that the present estate
of the Caelestiall signs, following the opinion, of Ptolomee, and of all the
Astrologers, who jointly accord, it to signify a dimunition of thy states, and
a rebellion of thy subjects.

First, For the Lions which thou saw in thy sleep, they represent the
Christians, who joining themselves together, shall unanimously oppose
themselves against thy highness, and shall become Masters in a short time of
the most part of thy Kingdoms.

Secondly, The Lion which seized upon thy breast, shall be an Emperor of the
Christians, who shall chase the from thy throne.

Thirdly, That the Centaures, which fought each against another, does
demonstrate thy subjects, who shall beat one, another, and shall destroy
themselves by rebellious and civil war.

Fourthly, that the Griffens signify, a great army of the same Christians, who
shall overclog, and suppress thee, The head and Cheiftaine of which,
represented by the Eagle, who has taken away thy sword, which thou did hold
in thy hand, shall deprive the of thy Imperial seat.

Fifthly, that the two commets with their double Tails, represent the power of
the same Emperor.

And that which yet more confirms us in this opinion is, that they have
appeared over thy Seraglia, and over the principal Mosca of this City.

Know then thrice Clement Prince, that all our Ancestors have believed, as we
also believe our selves, that thy reign shall be the last of the Turks.

To which must be added to this divination of his sages, that as the Monarchy
of the Turks, took his beginning from the yeate 1300. Under Albert the first
Emperor of the house of Austria, so it shall end under an Emperor of the same
house, which they say is the King of Hungary, the most powerful and the most
happy that the Romans have had since Iuliuss Caesar.

The news in the letter adds thus much, that after this interpretation, and
Paranymphe of the King of Hungary, the Diviners withdrawing themselves, the
great Turk fell into a profound meditation, and amazement upon this their sad
sentence, and so rising from his seat, he commanded that these diviners should
be speedily recalled, whom he instantly caused to be imprisoned; and that the
next morning they should make many little houses of straw, in the form of a
Cage without a bottom; into which he severally made them all be put, and soon
after caused every one of these Cages to be drawn up into the Air by four
strong men; and putting fire with powder, and pitch, he made them pass and
repasse many times, burning as they were upon the heads of those miserable
diviners, and Astrologians, who notwithstanding were not at all hurt, no not so
much as blackt, or singed by the smoke of the Powder, or flame of the Pitch;
all which being beheld by the inhabitants of Constantinople, they were greatly
astonished at this miracle, insomuch that some of them procured themselves to
be baptized, but privately, nevertheless the grand Turk was in such sort
surprised and amazed, that he was three days without giving audience, and
dispatched many posts throughout his dominions to raise and Leavy men of war,
fearing least the Imperialls should hereafter come upon notice of this news,
to revoke and call in question, our faith and mohammedan belief.

FINIS.

