AN ELEGY On The Meekest of Men, The most glorious of Princes, The most
Constant of Martyrs,
CHARLES the I. etc.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year, 1649.

AN ELEGY, etc.
Most cruel men,
CAn you a winged souls swift flight restrain,
And lure her to her widowed home again?
Or bound the wanderings of the floating blood?
And to his purple channel charm his flood?
Can you a gasping hearts fallen heat repair,
And into breath coin the unfashion'd air?
Can you unweave the Nerves, then twist their thread,
And to th'unravell'd corpse re-fit the head?
Who can do less then this, should fear to kill:
Best pulling down is by a Builder still.
But cool debates you can embrace no more
Then Cesars Lion, who his Teacher tore.
From meaner gore, and Subjects courser flood,
Your curious Treason thirsts your Princes blood:
And flesht in under-slaughter, boldly brings
Raised appetite to diet on your Kings.
No Epicure like thriving Murder's found:
Her Stream tastes foul, unless her Spring be crowned.
But though who Thrones and Majesty betray,
As largest guilt, so reap the largest prey,
And sage projecting Hell her snares might fear,
But that she bids, high pay, and damnes some dear:
Yet few have levelled at a Princes fall,
But such whose claim did for succession call:
Whose bordering title tired to be kept down,
Cast trains less for his ruin, then his Crown.
But here the desperate Rebel strikes at sway,
Not for who shall succeed, but that none may:
Deeming the crime less daring, of less hight
To ravish Scepters, then to break them quite:
As if an ampler beam of power were hurled
To hatch a Chaos, then create a world.
No shie concealment leads this murder in;
That were too much the Modesty of sin.
No closet-ambush, unsuspected pill,
No mingled cup, no secret drug must kill,
Success has raised them up to opner crimes,
Rolfe was an Instrument for doubtful times.
A mock Tribunal's built, a pageant Court,
Which but for matchless crimes, might pass for sport,
So frail and lawless; Faith has no defense
To credit, it is at all but insolence.
No fond Romance, no famed Arcadia treats,
Of such Eutopian, frantic Judgment Seats:
At whose dire black decrees, we wondering stand,
As some pale Ghoasts dim taper, and cold hand
Did waft us through the shades, until he brings
Where Fairie Traitors murder aerie Kings:
While slumbring we invoke the mornings light,
To chase the Legend-vision from our sight.
High in this dream, in this fantastic Bench,
Bold apparition Bradshaw does entrench.
One whom the genuine Bar did seldom see,
Whose obscure tongue scarce boasts a seven years Fee.
Whose Lungs are all his Law, whose pleading noise,
And silence, dearer then discreeter voice.
Whose conscience wears a face for every dress;
Religion justifies the Savages.
Faction'd, and byas'd, for who gives most fair,
Camelion through, only not hired with Air.
Whose insolence no presence can relaxe,
Whose carriage wounds his King worse then the Axe.
This needy Orator, now richer dressed,
And higher placed, is Image still at best:
Who though from hell, he his glib dictates hold,
As Satan talked in the Idols tongues of old;
Yet the close drift of this bright pomp and shrine,
Is nor the Devil; nor He, but worse design.
The Ephesian workmen great Diana made,
Not for Diana's sake, but their own trade.
Our Sovereigns sighs, the Peoples louder groan
Is not black Incense burnt to Bell alone,
But strew their Altars round, and we shall meet
An undistinguisht rapines numerous feet.
The Bloody Rebels conscious of their slain,
Like the first murderer, the guilty Caine.
Though just Remorse looks nobler then offense,
Prefer continuance to penitence.
Weigh crimes against mercies, down the Balance bear,
Much with their sins, but most with their despair.
Their own pale fears arm to this desperate thrust,
Their King can pardon, but they cannot trust.
The haughty Tigers dare the Lions spite,
And force bold inrodes through their Sovereigns right;
But if retireing from incroaching pride,
They make their proper confines bound their tide:
A faithful truce is struck, peace shuts in wars,
And fresh assurance springs even from their jarres;
One equal desert shrowds their pastime still,
And each entrust their slumbers to one hill.
But jealous guilt, nor fence, nor safety has:
A Rebel is a Tiger without faith.
But though stung conscience press to be secure,
And would be wary when she cannot be sure;
Yet often she most encounters what she flies,
And all her ruin in her Refuge lies.
For had their Foes conspired, and framed a pit,
Whose train, whose deepest artifice should hit:
They none so speeding, none so fleet could bring,
As what them selves have shaped, their slaughtered King.
By this, they naked lie to weakest eyes,
And quit their ablest guard, their long disguise;
Whose strength like men's in ambush, still has been,
Not from their strength, but cause their strength's unseen.
Whom shall they combat now in's own defense,
And whom bring home only by driving hence?
Whom shall they disobey to serve his will?
Whom shall their Canon court, and humbly kill?
Whose omnipresence space shall reconcile;
Be here, and yet be hence a hundred mile?
Whose doubtful seal shall, while it is betwaine,
And burnt from phenix-cinders bud again?
They, whose thick vows, exalted hearts and eyes,
High as the skies, and stable as the skies;
Who know their lives are frail, short recompense,
And cheap oblation weighed with conscience:
Will now no longer gorge their venomous pills,
Nor by elusions steer enlightened wills;
Nor prize the shame of finding former sin
At the sad rate of wading farther in.
But haste returns as vigorous as mistake,
And hate the ghastly dream the more they wake:
No longer brook a Tyler or a Cade,
Those Dunghill Tyrants whom themselves have made:
Which like dire comets mounted in the air,
Rain plagues on earth, whose vapors placed them there.
They find this hot impatience against the throne,
Is by its embers but to light their own.
Like him, who raised his Gods adored head,
To make his own blaspheme it in the stead.
Hence their Agreement, chains and shackles throws,
As not what we Agree, but they impose;
Gilding the peircing'st flames with specious smoke,
Glossing it our consent, which is their yoke.
Were their dark arts soft as their glistering shows,
Did their thronged chapplets scatter naught but Rose:
Did they a Freedom give, was ours before,
Which the Kings slaughter were but to restore,
Yet the Acceptance ought to prove ours still,
And none obtrude a bliss against our will:
It Is not a Liberty we needs must have,
And he is only free, who may be slave.
Nay, were it our keen request, and eager cry,
It might so fall, 'twere nobler to deny;
Their bounty, us might to our ruin arm,
And better not bestow, then give to harm:
Who weapons one, who seeks himself to kill,
Bestows a murder, and a Liberal Ill.
And such is theirs, and worse, for they afford
Not only means to kill, but prompt the Sword.
Men's frenzy bated now, and could endure
To hear of physic, though 'twere far from cure;
When cruel they break in, and crying, save,
Intombe the Nation in their Sovereigns grave.
The Heathen Brutus did at murder stay,
Who, though he durst eject, he durst not slay:
His bare deposing too, no shelter brings,
But that it fastened on the wrost of Kings:
The Public curse had blasted all his praise,
Had his attempt been up ere Tarquins days.
Where shall they build their plea, who at once do
Destroy the best of Men, and Princes too?
Whose rooted Thrones fair growth did less improve
From clear unenvied claim, then Subjects love,
Whose boundless worth, and rate had given Him sway,
Though His descent and title were away.
And now, since virtue vice does best descrie,
As straight shows straightness and obliquitie;
His prudent sway, her beauty best affords,
Drawn out, and shadowed by usurping Lords.
Whose early first decree so loathed has stood,
By framers guilt, and injured Straffords Blood.
Who suppled Laws, and gagged them to their wills,
Not to support their Rights, but strenghthen Ills.
No resolves steady, no vote tumult strong,
But ratified, or cancelled by the next throng:
Such floating levities their coin disgraced,
Till cheap irreverence the mint defaced.
Whence poorly conscious of their ticklish sway,
They sweat to husband and improve their day;
Working to steer their low designs about,
Ere the next Faction shake their title out:
They lease their interest, each suffrage rent,
As the two Houses were their Tenement:
Who chaffers best, buys mercenary throats,
Reaps plenteous harvest in the next days votes:
They sheare the People, bear their fleece away,
Not as their Orphan-wards, but happier prey;
Place and preferments pass their market-curse,
Not to the worthiest men, but strongest purse
Succeed by families, relations scale,
Make Patriots not our choice, but their Intail
Desert, or hold their stations with the Tide:
Ruin, or ruined, as Factions side.
Nere acting right, now suffering this alone,
Their Usurpation fell with CHARLES His Throne.
Who Antidote to all the ills of these,
And all their poisons strict Antipodes,
Who when his crowns foar'd highest, did even then
Remember still he was a King of men,
Made their advantage compass to his own,
And rankt their freedom equal with his throne.
Never checked their Liberty till 't license stood,
Nor asked their goods, but for their greater good.
Who i'th'loud prejudice five Members sin,
(Which hung Reforming out, but Ruin in)
Armed with the Guards of unoffended State,
Like one that would not crush it, but debate:
Like Titus tamely wished confederates leave,
Ask (bate his Empire) and they should receive.
Which fertile showers of grace so thick expressed,
They fell too weighty on their narrowed breast:
And as the clamorous channells shallow womb
Would force the bounteous Sea her streams resume,
And from his banks does soul contractions take,
And for a Crystal flood re-payes a Lake:
So their unsound receipt his bounty slew,
Returned in Poison, what He shed in Dew.
Nor did a happier arm His gifts dispense,
Which private threw but vast munificence:
When hands Himself had raised would reach Him down,
And nerves His Alms had strengthened, shake His Crown.
The Vultur's Rapine does at Bounty stand;
Who though she gorge the prey, she spares the hand.
The Giant Elephant obeyes for bread;
And can forgo his rage where he is fed.
Where shall unthankful men for place intrude?
Nor Air nor Desert shrowds Ingratitude.
Yet as the equal Sun ore all does tend,
Though some use light only to see to offend:
And both the barren Bramble and the Flower
Partake the juice of the undistinguisht shower:
Because the teeming Clouds descending flood
Designs the many only, not the good:
So His impartial bounty Blessings threw,
Nor did the Recompense, but Gift pursue.
His Temperance might an Anchorite rigor tell,
And make the Palace Standard to the Cell.
Not that its Laws from the thin board proceed,
Where to abstain is Avarice or Need;
Or that the coursenesse of the cates might please,
Like the great Conful caught a parching pease,
But from the strict chastising Plenties wings,
And the severest use of highest things.
His Table grasped the seas, the earth, the air,
Yet never His surfeit was, nor others snare.
His Bowls massacred none, nor did inrage,
Till Subjects blood the Princes wine assuage.
No Orphans swam about his riotous cup,
Like his who killed, but first drank Clytus up.
Unbatter'd Chastity his reins and law,
Firm against the luster of all threatening thaw,
Which though it want the checks of mean restraint,
Where charge chills sin, and makes the goatish faint;
Where Continence is dread lest Vice succeed,
And trembles at the issue, not the deed:
Nay though 't seem fortified with plea, and they
Who sin with Him, might seem but to obey,
At least the guilt might large allayes endure,
Since few deny where Scepters do allure:
Or stand the vigor of a storm or rape,
Where He was King, as by descent, so shape:
For He their title had to back his own,
Who to the goodly features give the throne.
Yet all was frail to Him, and soon suppressed,
Who set His Scepter first ore his own breast:
And that His Crowns be in full square combined,
He made His fourth Dominion be His mind.
Not like that Romans chaste, but timorous care,
Where to be chaste, was not to see the fair:
Who found his breast not proof against the flames,
But to escape, did bid remove the Dames.
But as firme-sighted Eagles range the skies,
And eye the Sun when strongest luster flies;
So His keen managed view severely sees,
Not frailty to corrupt, but judge the piece.
And could in the dazeling round securely stay,
To bless the Potter, not abuse the clay.
Wise Justice, such as mercy might dispense,
To spare the Men, but punish the offense.
Not to endanger Law, but temper doom,
To kill despair, and yet make none presume.
And here to match the births of strictest wills,
Where naked virtues are but glistering ills,
He lays His balance at the Temple gates,
The Sanctuary Shekles are His weights.
He quarters all His day with constant prayers,
No business shall dispense, no pleasure dares.
Limnes Copies to His Court: does reine and hold
By Constancy the careless, Zeal the cold.
His intent thoughts do their perplexed decry,
His bent knees, stiff, His fixed, the wandering eye.
Humble, the arrogant; His vigorous, dead;
His awe, irreverence; affiance, dread:
Makes all His practice dictate this alone,
They had two King's to obey, Himself had one.
But Calm and Sunshine, undistracted ease,
Yield but the Trophies of well-ordered peace;
But He was furnished through, and had a stock,
As for Fates fawn and courtship, so their shocke.
And though some cases make the task as great
To manage temper, as to master heat,
Though a sound prudence may deserve as well,
To wave assaults, as courage to repel;
Yet, here the generous luster justly springs,
Less from the Scepter, then the Sufferings.
For as the rage of these tempestuous times
Was His Misfortune only, not His Crimes,
('Less Socrates the Lightnings blame must bear,
Because it Lightened when he took the Air:
Or 'lesse the drought lies still at th'Christians gate,
'Cause Drought and Christians were contemporate)
So His harsh draught had some ingredients mixed,
Which never on Prince or Man till now were fixed.
No Agony so tempered, no such Cup,
Unless when God helped Man to drink it up.
Where though the sufferings, rival none endure,
'Cause one so sound received so sharp a cure;
Yet we may safely give Persuasion this,
Those Jews then these less knew they did amiss.
His first affliction from rude Tumults came,
From them the fuel, but elsewhere the flame.
Their trunk and boughs build the instructed pile,
But worse men light and fan the flames the while.
That waves and winds should mix united stocks
To bruise, and threaten Ships with shelves and rocks,
Provokes our wonder less then moves our grief,
Because they want the sense of our relief.
Nay, were their rage, design, and ship-wracks, spleen,
Yet there might clear pretense, and plea be seen,
Since our encroachments they but pay with spite,
And do but check usurpers of their right:
For words we to commerce and traffic melt,
By them is inrode and invasion felt.
But should this sea, these winds conduct their threats,
To the awful palace, where great Neptune sets,
Should their swelled surge make his bent Trident groan,
And dash their foaming billows against his Throne:
Then might they pattern us, then we might see,
That winds and waves at least are wild as we.
Nor was our frenzy, fit, our uproares, blasts,
Or cloud that outs not light, but overcasts;
But, like that fatal inauspicious day,
When all the less and larger birds of prey,
Conspired to force the Eagle from her throne,
Because her eyes were clearer then their own:
When the vast air seemed to the thronged muster scant,
And with oppressing load the Element pant.
The injured Eagle girt in this distress,
When reason nothing could, and force could less,
She arms her active plumes with swiftest spring,
Darts through their ranks, and saves her by her wing.
But Eagles they are well when freed from rape,
And need no reparation but the escape:
Re-view the sun with undishonoured eye,
And build again their towering nests as high.
But Princes escape not, though they are not slain,
They may the wound, but cannot fly the stain.
Yet has our mischief farther arts, and can
Distress Him both at once, as King and Man.
Our sharp alarmes forbid his shortest stay,
He may advise for gone, but not which way.
We set His mazed resolves at gaze, and start,
Else it were not to drive hence, but bid Depart.
Else had our fury lessened of its spite,
W' had forced Him to a progress, not a flight.
But like a pilot huddled up in the dark,
Himself surprised, and His unfurnish't bark,
Whom unexpected tempests do constrain,
And from His harbor drive into the maine:
No tackle tight, no anchor weather proof,
But waves invade below, and winds aloof;
D^stract and tossed, not bound for any road,
Nor can return, nor can hold out abroad.
Such was His mixed distress; how, what, or where,
Uncertain all, but dangers certain were.
By this selfe-pregnant sin improves to th'full,
Affront at London, Treason grows at Hull:
A bold repulse succeeds perplexed abode,
Despised at home, thrives to refused abroad:
Place tutours Place, on Cities Cities call,
He may not here be safe, nor there at all.
When lo the spreading mischief not content
To force up breaches in one element,
Invades His Navy, does insulting stand
Over the joint Trophies both of Sea and Land.
To gild this rapine for the vulgar eyes,
They chase Him through all His capacities;
Shift lights and distances, until they see
Another self in Him, which is not He.
Vex stills, and Crucibles, the furnace ply,
To sift and draine a Chymick Majesty.
At last their careful sweats auspicious how'r,
Drops Him apart, distinguished from His power.
But the afflicted quill, whose penance lies
Through all His thorns, must stories martyr rise:
What hardy plume dares register His cares?
When foreign close, to sow'r His home affairs;
When Ireland charitable fame untells,
Adopts the worst of ven'mous beasts; Rebels.
When Edenburge out-villain'd Carthage has,
And Scotch more slippery proves then Punick Faith,
When they can trade their King, and beat a price
For's Blood, to ingraine their crimson Avarice.
Whilst we un-king His Fame, de-throne's repute
Word our artillery, and libels shoot.
Shift His restraints, and bound him with new hedge,
Not for enlargement, but fresh pawn and pledge
To now prevailing Gaolers; snare Him with Shapes
Of nearer ills, to prompt him to escapes.
So the close practiced foulers treacherous gin,
Already seized of prey, the lost bird in:
Yet has attendant dogs, whose disciplined throat,
And busy roavings aid their threatening note;
Till the feathered prisoner scared with mixed mishap,
Un-skill'd in the guile of the industrious trap,
Struggles and flings with unsuccessefull coil,
Till motion weaves inevitable toil.
When varied bondages some beams afford,
To checker plots, dissembling some accord;
Which though smooth-phras'd rough sense does still control
TO un-crowne his head, or else un-king His soul.
When all of Meniall trust, whose cares expense
Hearty with long experienced confidence,
Paid diligent homage to his justest will,
Must see their desolate ranks, and courses fill
By rough unpracticed homespun Colonies
Of Russet Courtiers, and instructed spies,
Whose treacherous attendance, and sly drift,
Makes all their service but an Officious shrift.
When the pure Altars sacred sons must flee
His reverent approach, when single He
Must both His Priest, and Congregation stand,
Or some rash Korahs foul unhallowed hand
Corrupt His virgin gums, and raise a smoke,
Not to appease His deity, but choke.
When the revolted Cassocks plume their darts,
With crooked Sophistry's perverted arts:
To reason down His faith with studied power,
And drown His soul in that confederate shower.
To heighten these, when some, whose nobler name
In His declining Banner arms their fame;
Whom yet ignoble envy bent awry,
Or Faint Devotion, cooled to Indifferency,
Conspired the Churches battery; His weights,
Took balance from her cause, not from their hates;
He poised thin calumny, by ponderous good;
Her sole, and yet unconquered champ on stood.
When warmer onsets, like the searching ploughs,
More fertile wounds on natures yiedling brows:
Were not the scar, but tillage of his heart,
Cares thriving husbandry, and fruitful smart,
Where what was sown a Cross, sprung up a sheafe,
And Virtue, Harvest, though the Furrow grief.
His glorious own Record gave this presage,
Which next to hallowed writ, and sacred page,
Shall bufie pious wonder, and abide
To Christian pilgrimage the second guide:
Which reconciles (till now) the eternal hates
Twixt simple piety, and fraudulent States.
Shows how all Machiavell in Solomon lies,
And cunning makes men wilely, but not wise.
Bottomes a stable Throne, whose secure chance
Shall steady sit, or in her fall advance.
When ghastly Death's astonishing Arrest
In all her terrors, and grim wardrobe dressed,
From a green Treaty nipt ere fully blown,
And soft amusements of a restored throne,
He meets with cheerful combat, and armed breath,
A vigorous Resignation, not a Death.
When His unlimited forgiveness flies
High as His Blood's shrill voice, and towering cries,
Not spun in scanty half denying prayers,
But Legacy obliging to His Heirs.
THE END.

