GOOD NEVVES FOR ALL CHRISTIAN SOVLDIERS. OR The way to overcome the Devil by
the blood of the Lamb.

As it was delivered in a Sermon BY JOHN EACHARD, Pastor of Darsham in
Suffolk.

REVEL. 12. 11. They overcame them by the blood of the Lamb.

Published according to Order.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
The Question of a Presbytery or Independent decided; and also of Christmas day.
Dear Christian Reader, bought full dearly with the precious blood of the
Lamb; There is a Question in our tottering and falling kingdom of England,
divided against it self, and therefore as our Savior testifies, cannot
stand, Mark. 3. 24. Which I conceive, if it be not taken up, will bring it to
desolation the sooner. And that is the Question now in agitation; Some for a
Presbytery, and others for an Independent- Government of the Church. Unto whom
I answer, as our Savior did, to the two Sons of Zebedee, Mat. 20. 20.
desiring a Petition; The one to sit on his right hand, and the other on his
left, in his Kingdom. Christ told them; You know not what you ask; Are ye
able to drink of the cup, that I shall drink of, and to be baptized, with the
baptism, that I shall be baptized with? And though you may; yet that shall be
given of my Father, to them for whom it is prepared, Mat. 20. 20. As if he
should have said; Do you dream of a temporal Kingdom, wherein you desire to
be chief? This is but Ambition; you know not what you ask. For my Kingdom is
not of this world: Prepare your selves for the Cross, and through many
afflictions, to enter into the kingdom of heaven, Act. 14. 22. You must drink
of the cup and baptism of afflictions. And though they said, They were able;
yet it was not in their power; for they fled in his passion: ye shall be
baptized with the baptism of affliction, which you cannot escape; but to fit
at my right hand, and at my left, it is not mine to give, nor wisely done of
you to ask it; for that shall be given of my Father: So I say to you,
Presbyters, and Independents; You would sit on the right hand, and at the left,
in his Church, and Kingdom; I tell you, you know not what you ask; for our
Church of lukewarm Laodicea, shall drink of a bitter cup of calamities, and be
baptized with great afflictions: And do you dream of a temporal Kingdom?
Wherein you desire to be chief? You know not what you ask; for the Government
of a Church, must be given of the Father of heaven; not such as you imagine;
and also to whom he please. What did the two brethren get, but disdain of the
ten? So there be ten to two against you in heart, for your Petition, and think
themselves as wise, as you, and have the disdain of five to one against you;
and you two Brethren, are ready to destroy each other, for the pre-eminence.
Do you not know that old Axiom of Satan, and of the Jesuits? Divide, and
vince, divide them, and overcome; it must needs be of Satan; for God is the
Author of peace, and lover of concord, and blesser of it, Psalm. 133. 1, 2, 3. I
desire you to love it also. Satan by his instruments has buzzed into the
fantasies of many people, that we shall have a worse Government, for the
Conscience, then before; to set them against the Parliament, and one side
against another; and they have tossed this ball, up and down, by many reasons
in print; and they strive for the live-childe; it is mine say the Presbyters,
and thine is dead; nay, it is mine, say the Independents, and thine is dead: and
many people desire a new Government, before they be handsomely rid of the old.
Are not you like the couple of men, that strove for the Bears skin before she
was dead? And she bit them both: So this Bear of a civil war, will bite
you both, before it end. For there is a Solomon that has called for a sword,
to divide the living Child, as you suppose, that you strive for; for thus
says the Lord: Behold, that which I have built, will I destroy, and that which
I have planted, will I pluck up, even this whole Land: And seek thou great
things for thy self? (a Presbytery, or Independent) seek them not; for,
behold, I will bring a plague upon all flesh, says the Lord; but thy life will
I give thee for a prey, in all places whither thou go. i. If thou desire not
great things, of a Presbytery, or Independent; for they shall not have their
lives for a prey, that desire great things, in such dangerous times as these
are; for others will make a prey of them; for if man seek for great things of
a Presbytery, the Papists, and Prelates, and Independents, will seek to make a
prey of them: and if men seek the great things of an Independent, all others
will make a prey of them. Therefore seek them not, Jer. 45. 4. and 5. Consider
what the Lord says in Hag. 2. 22, 23. I will shake the heavens, and the earth,
and I will overthrow the Thrones of Kingdoms, (beware England) and I will
destroy the strength of the Kingdoms of the Heathen, and I will overthrow the
Chariots (or Ships) and those that ride in them, and the horse, and the riders,
shall come down, every one by the sword of his brother. i. By a civil war.
This was spoken about the time of the building of old Jerusalem, and how know
you, but that it does agree to this time, wherein the New Jerusalem, shall
begin to be built? and Rome shall be burnt, and the Jews called. I do find
that the Lord threatened the Angels of the Church of Sardis, of the Lutherans,
for lying in the dead faith, and not watching, but sleeping in sin, that he
would come on them, as a thief, and they should not know what hour he would
come upon them, Rev. 3. 3. That is, by a plundering, robbing, and spoiling
civil war, that Germany shall be like an house robbed of thieves: as Mr
Brightman prophesied, of the sword to come upon the Lutherans, sixteen years
before it began. Do you think it were a fit time now, for the Lutherans, and
Protestants in Ireland, now the sword is upon them, to quarrel one with
another, for a new Church Government, when they know not whether they shall
have any or no. So Christ is now come, as a thief upon our lukewarm Church of
Laodicea, in England; with the judgment of a plundering, robbing, spoiling,
stealing, civil war; that both England, and Ireland, shall be like an house
robbed of thieves; for Christ is now come, to fulfill his promise, or threat,
against the lukewarm Angels, of our Church of Laodicea, in England; Because
thou art lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, it will come to pass, that I shall
spue thee out of my mouth, Rev. 3. 16. Is not this Scripture fulfilling in your
ears, this day? That Christ is spuing out the lukewarm Angels of England, out
of his mouth. And some have a little hope to remain, and yet you cannot tell,
whether Christ will spue them out also; they fall to strife for a
Church Government, when you do not know, whether Christ will spue out the
lukewarm Church of England out of his mouth; as well as the Angels? And you
reasoned so fair both, that you have divided your City, and Armies; as you
remember lately at Dunnington Castle: If you go on with this Controversy, the
kite is at hand, to catch both at strife. See another place of Scripture, Rev.
16. 15. Behold, I come as a thief; blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, that he may not walk naked, and they see his filthiness, I
would feign know why this Scripture is not fulfilled in our days. This place
troubled Theodore Beza, as if it had come into a place unmeet: but I gather
this is the Reason, that it might not be known, at what time, Christ would
come upon all the world, whether under the fourth, fifth, or sixth Vial, and
therefore you see it comes in by a parenthesis, that it might not be known;
Revel. 3. 3.
for Christ said to Sardis, he would come on them, as a thief, and thou shall
not know, what hour I will come upon thee, as a thief. So this general
coming of Christ as a thief, by a civil war, on all the world, is so
brought in, that it might not be known, until he came, which now it appears,
is come upon England, and upon all the world. For when the fourth Angel had
powered out his Vial on the Sun, Rev. 16. 8. here in England, and it was
given him to torment men with heat of fire, and men have boiled in great heat,
and blasphemed the Name of God, ( i. by railing on the truth, and the Children
of God; as Brightman) therefore behold Christ is come as a thief upon England,
and on all the world. Now he says, Blessed is he that keeps his garments,
which are neither an Episcopacie, nor Presbytery, nor Independent, but they are
the white wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, that is bright, and
shining, the righteousness of the Saints; which make us trim and ready for
our bridegroom; which was put on at Baptism, by the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, when she was baptized into Christ, and put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27.

And what say you to this Scripture; Son of man prophecy, and say, A sword,
a sword, both sharp, and furbushed. It is sharpened, to make a sore slaughter,
Ezekiel. 21. 9. I will overtune, overturne, overturne it, and it shall be no more,
until he come, ver. 27. A kingdom divided cannot stand. The reason why,
Because thou remainest in thy filthiness, and wickedness. Because I would
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged from thy
filthiness, till I have caused my wrath to light upon thee; I the Lord have
spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go back,
neither will I spare, neither will I repent; according to thy ways, and works,
shall they judge thee, Ezekiel. 24. 13, 14. But God has purged the lukewarm
Angels, and Church of England, by Baptism, but they will not believe it, and I
have counseled thee, and thou will not be counseled, Rev. 3. 18. to buy of me
gold, white raiment, and eye salve, for thou will not believe, that I have
purged thee from thy sins in Baptism, and clothed thee with white raiment,
that no filthiness of sin should appear. Ergo. Thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness, till I have caused my wrath to seize upon thee: I the
Lord have spoken it, it shall come to pass, and I will do it, I will not go
back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent; I will spue thee out of my
mouth, Rev. 3. 16. And here is one cause why the lukewarm Hierarchy is spued
out of Christ's mouth, and when God can lie, they shall be in hope to remain
there still.

Tell me, you that strive for a Presbyteriall, or Independent garment, whether
you be sure, that Christ is not come in now, to see his guests? that have been
a bidding to the Marriage of the Kings Son of Heaven, by faith, and Baptism,
these 1600. years; for no question those by the hedges, and high ways, are
the Gentiles, which were called by faith, and Baptism, to be married to
Christ. When the Jews refused, and would not come (says Brightman) his
servants have called the Gentiles to the marriage, and the marriage is
furnished with guests, of good and bad, Mat. 22. 10. Then the King came in to
see the guests; signifying not before it was furnished with guests; which is
now accomplished; For Christ is now come as a thief, unexpected, to view all
the guests of the Churches of Christendom, whether they have a wedding garment
or no; not whether they have an Episcopal, or a Presbyteriall, or an
Independent; but white raiment of the righteousness of the Saints, which is
Christ's, wherein no sin appears; such as have none, shall be bound hand and
foot, and cast into hell, as Mat. 22. 13. And such as have defiled their
garments, shall be spoiled by a civil war, Rev. 3. 3. and 4. And so the
Jews shall be called, and that bride shall make her self ready, and trim,
for her bridegroom, by faith, and Baptism; for the word, (...), in the
Parable, signifies, that there shall be two marriages; the one of the Gentiles
(the last called, was first married) and the other of the Jews; (the first
called, shall be the last married) for there shall be an Hallelujah sung in
heaven, for the marriage of the Church of the Jews unto Christ, Rev. 19. 6.
and 7. Well, Christ is come as a thief, by a civil war, and to view his
guests; you must make account, he will not return until he have put them all
out of the marriage-chamber, that have not on a wedding garment, and he be
married to the bride of the Jews. Now he says, Blessed is he that keeps his
garments, that he may not walk naked in sin before God. That Church, or
people, is blessed, and shall have a Government given them of my Father. For
they keep the word of my patience, which is the faith in the merits of Christ's
death in baptism, and Christ's blood; therefore I will deliver them from the
hour of tentation that is come upon all the world, to try them that are upon
the earth, Rev. 2. 10. Now let any man show that there shall come another hour
of tentation, i. a more general judgment of a civil war upon all the world,
but this, which is now come. For my part, I look not for another; but that this
civil war begun, shall last till Rome be burnt, and the Jews called; and
therefore is it time now, to strive for a Presbytery, or Independent, in such
an hurly-burly, of a civil war? where no face of a Church shall searce remain,
when it is more needful to strive for a wedding garment; for to him that
overcomes, and keeps his garments, Rev. 16. 15. will I give, says Christ,
to sit with me in my Throne, Rev. 3. 21. signifying that shall be the
conquering and reigning people, whom Christ has loved and washed from their
sins in his own blood, and made Kings and Priests to God his Father, and they
shall reign upon earth, Rev. 1. 5. and 5. 10.

Let England consider Christ's words; Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me
gold, tried in the fire, that thou may be made rich; which is the lively
faith, in the merits of Christ's death, in baptism which make men rich, that
were poor by Adam: and white raiment, that thou may be clothed, that the
filthiness of the wickeness of sin may not appear, which is the white wedding
garment of justification, which makes a Christian know, he is ready for
Christ, when he has it; and eye salve of the spirit of Christ, that we may
see, how to walk by the Spirit, and in discipline of the Word; for, until this
counsel of Christ be taken in England, both of the Angels and Church, this war
will not cease: for until a man's ways (or Churches ways) please the Lord, he
will not make all his enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16. 7. And when
shall that be in England, think you? when they will be guided by his counsel,
i. Rev. 3. 18. he will then receive them to glory, Psalm. 73. Now many men dote
so much about Discipline, that they think to make a rare Church by it, but are
greatly deceived. For if a man should take a company of Vipers, to make them
Nightingals, do you think he can make them such by Discipline? all the orders
and skill, let him order them how he can, will not make them become Nightingals;
but if he can make them new creatures, they may be made Nightingalls, as well
as any other creature. There were two Pharisees which were the generation of
Vipers, Matthew. 3. which were made sweet Nightingals by baptism, wherein they
were made new creatures, and sang sweetly in the night; as Nicodemus, that
having learned the doctrine of regeneration, of water and the Spirit in
baptism, he was so changed, that in the night, when the other Pharisees as
Vipers, would have condemned Christ, sang for him thus; Does our law condemn
any man before it hear him? and he sweetly buried him with sweet odors: And
another notorious Viper, that was a murderer, and a blasphemer, Saul, was so
changed by baptism, when he did arise and was baptized, he washed away his
sins, in calling on the name of the Lord, that of a murderer and blasphemer,
he became a sweet Preacher of the Gospel, by night, and till the dawning of the
day, and sang Psalms in the night, so sweetly, that the Lord heard him, and
sent an earthquake, Acts 16. Wherefore, if you would make a good Church, it
must be by faith in our baptism into Christ, when we were little children;
and by the white raiment of Christ's righteousness applied by faith: Discipline
may order a child in good manners, but he must have a soul and body first. Now
Baptism and the white raiment, is as the soul and body of all Christianity, he
that wants faith in this, cannot tell, whether he be in Christ or no:
Discipline may order a Church, but cannot make one. Truly, I never look to see
a pure Discipline, until the Jews be called, (which I wish all the faithful
to pray for) except the woman clothed with the Sun, begin to make one, which
has the bright morning Star, which are that chaste and holy Congregation, as
Mr. Brightman calls them, which are the place of Gods pleasures, and the hill
of his delights, wherein God takes more delight, then in any thing of the
world, as Rev. 19. 17. which Church is now arising out of the corruption of the
Church of Laodicea, Corruption unius est generatio alterius, for though he will
spue the lukewarm out, yet there is a few names in Laodicea, that shall sit
with Christ in his Throne; wherefore if you be brethren, and going to the new
Jerusalem, remember Joseph's words to his brethren, Fall not out by the way for
a Discipline, who shall have the preeminence: Let not him that puts on the
armor, boast as he that puts it off; for as victory is of the Lord, so is
government. If you look for government before we have peace, the gift of God,
you reckon without your host; wherefore I command you from the Lord, study to
be quiet, and do your own business, 1 These. 4.
and work out your salvation with fear and trembling, and persuade Euodius of
the Presbyters, and beseech Syntiche of the Independents, to be of one accord
in the Lord, and labor all to overcome the Devil by the blood of the Lamb, as
this Sermon shows you, who would set you together by the ears, to kill one
another, that he might get both.

I have writ of the miseries of England, and of the remedies of the same, and
have shown at least forty causes, how the Bishops have brought the sword upon
the land, and therefore are justly put down of the Lord and his Parliament,
which I purpose to set in print, if Satan hinder it not. Let it not be said,
that the Presbyters and Independents have set dissension in the Parliament, and
City, and in the Armies, and brought the sword into their own bowels, to make
the Papists sport; wherefore let no man speak any more of any government, in
the Church of England, except by Parliament, until the wars cease; those that
shall remain, shall pray unto the Lord, to show them such a Discipline out of
Gods Word, as shall be pleasing unto him. Men may imagine, that there may be a
smiling show of peace, but they shall find, that Male sarta gratia nequicquam
coit, there is so much blood in the mortar, that it will not daub, love will
not grow within, there is so much blood without; and yet for my part, I desire,
if the Lord will, and pray for the peace of Jerusalem, that peace may be within
our walls, and plenteousnesse within our palaces; for no peace, no plenty: for
where wars and sedition remain, we must look for earthquakes, famine, and
pestilence, Luke 21. 9, 10, 11. you shall have little pleasure in a
Presbytery, or Independencie, before these wars cease; for there is a flood
of Gods judgments coming now on all the world; there shall none escape, but
those that get into the Ark of the faith of their baptism into Christ, 1 Pet.
3. 21. and such as take Christ's counsel, Rev. 3. 18. which are the blessed
people, that keep Christ's garments unto them, that their filthy nakedness may
not be seen, Rev. 16. 15. and such as keep the word of his patience, Rev. 3.
10. these shall be delivered from this hour of tentation.

th day of December ought to be kept, for Christmas day, as an holy day, in
remembrance that Christ was born on that day; for how know you, say many, that
Christ was born on that day more then another? the Papists keep it ten days
before us, and other Churches not on our day, and they say it was the shortest
day of the year, and therefore seeing it is so uncertain, let it be abolished,
we will keep none.

Jews know which was the right Sabbath, but by the Manna the day before? And
how did they know by the rods, which was chosen to be Priest; but because one
budded and blossomed, and brought forth ripe Almonds? So I know that England
do keep the right day that Christ was borne on, above all the Nations in
Christendom, because we have a miracle has often been seen in England upon
that day; for we have a tree in England, called the Holy thorn, by Glassenbury
Abbey, nigh the Bathe, which on the 25. day of December, which is our
Christmasse day, has constantly blossomed; which the people of that place have
received from antiquity, that it was that kind of thorn, wherewith Christ
was crowned: Which I have received from credible men, that have seen the
thorn, that have inquired, and took the testimony of the substantialst-men in
that Country, which did affirm, that if you come to that tree overnight,
there appears nothing, but a bare thorn; but come on Christmasse day, and it
is blossomed; Many people have come, and seen it, so that they would cut off a
piece with their knives, that it is much whitled; and some nigh that place have
graffed some of that thorn upon others, which do also blossom on that day.
You may read of this Miracle in many Authors, and especially in Cambdens
Britannia, a Chronicler to be credited, for that matter, because there are so
many eyewitnesses of known credit, that have seen, and testified of the
same. Wherefore so long as that Thorn shall blossom in England, on Christ's
Nativitie day, or can be proved, that it has blossomed on that day, England
shall keep that day of praising God, for the birth of Christ. Because the
Angels sung an hymn on that day, Glory be to God on high, peace on earth, and
good will toward men; never more need for us, to pray, and sing so; for peace
is taken from the earth, and there is ill will toward men. I am persuaded that
the Jews shall receive their Christ's Nativitie day from England, and from our
blossoming Thorn, rather then from any other Church in Christendom. I wish if
there be any Jews in England, that are incredulous, in this point, that they
might be sent to that place, to prove the truth of it; for what do we know,
but that some of the Jews may be convinced by it, to be sorry that they
crowned Christ with Thorns, and desired his blood to be upon them, and their
children, by whose blood we must overcome the Devil?

Brethren, we say, that Omni and nulli credere, utrumque nefas, for to believe
all the false miracles of Papists; as of the coming of souls out of Purgatory,
which is but the delusion of the Devil, were evil; and for me not to believe
this of the Thorn, were also naught. Because for these Reasons, I am bound to
believe it.

1. Because my Father, which dedicated me to the Ministry, before I was borne,
to be for the Lord. (And the world should see I was dedicated to the Lord, if
they would let my Books come out.) He having seen the tree, told me the
discourse of it, and the blossoming on that day. I pondered it in my heart,
with Mary. After that my brother went to the Bathe, and saw the tree, and took
the Testimony of honest, and substantial men in the Country, which told him,
of the constant coming of people to see it, and how that some have graffed of
it, upon other thorns, which also do blossom on Christmas day; and how it
was whitled; caused me further to ponder it; and then hearing it confirmed by
many that came from the Bathe, and by the testimony of credible Chroniclers,
Cambden, and others, that writ so of it, being a thing that has been seen of
five hundred Brethren. Now for me not to believe my Father, and brother, and so
many honest Witnesses, and Historiographers, that write so of it, were to
account them all liars, which in me were a sin. Well, you see my reasons, why
I am bound to believe it. I will also show some reasons, why such a perpetual
miracle shall remain in the world. All will grant thus much, that Christ was
crowned with thorns; for the Scripture is clear, Mat. 27. 29. and that
thorns and thistles were the curse of the earth for Adams sin, is plain,
Genesis 3. 18. Now it is certain, that Christ being crowned with thorns, took
the curse upon him; for as God the Father has thrown upon him the iniquities
of us all, Isa. 53. 6. and so he threw on him the curses of us all, and set the
curse of the earth upon his head, in that he was crowned with thorns by the
Soldiers; it was the determinate counsel of God, that Christ should be made a
curse for us; Gal. 3. 13.
for cursed is every one that hangs on a tree; and that he should bear the
curse of the earth also, which was imposed, as the fruit of man's sin, and
therefore he did not only bear our sins in his own body upon the tree, 1
Pet. 2. 24. but also the curse of the earth, which was thorns, which came for
man's sin. Now when sin was thrown upon everlasting Righteousness, sin
must needs be overcome, says Luther; for Righteousness was infinite, and
could not be overcome; and therefore must needs conquer sin: So the curse of
thorns being set upon Christ's head, which was everlasting holiness, Christ
has turned away the curse of that Thorn, and in token that it was set upon
the head of (...), God-man, that he has taken away the curse of the earth to
believers, Gal. 3. 13. That Thorn by a perpetual miracle shall blossom on
Christmas day morning, to the end of the world, for the convincing of
unbeleeving Jews and Gentiles. That Christ did come on that day, and for the
confirmation of the faith of believers, not only by the world of God, Gal. 3.
13. but by that miracle also, that Christ was made a curse for us, and has
taken away the curse of thorns of the earth to all believers; and being
everlasting blessedness, has made the cursed thorn to become a blessed
thorn, and therefore called an Holy thorn to this day; and that as the Angels
sung on that day, so should we sing with them that sung on that day; Glory be
to God on high, peace on earth, and good will toward men. And I wish that all
faithful Preachers of England might preach on that text, on every Christ's
nativitie day, because the Angels have given us that text from heaven; saying,
Behold, I bring you tidings of great joy, that unto you is borne this day in
the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Therefore sing and
make melody in your hearts to the Lord: Glory be to God on high, peace on
earth, and good will toward men. They which do this in faith, that they are
in him that is true, in that his Son Jesus Christ, which is very God, and
eternal life, 1 John 5. 20. by Baptism into him, shall find more peace with
God in conscience, and find good will with men, that are the children of God.
I speak not this, that I would have a carnal Christmas kept, in
profaneness, as it has been much abused, but a spiritual day, in duties of
piety and charity to the poor, to show our selves Christians, by honoring
Christ in his birth day.

Thine in the Lord Jesus Christ, J. E.

The Contents of the Doctrines, Reasons, and Uses, handled in this ensuing
Treatise.
GOod News for Soldiers, or the way to overcome the Devil, by the blood of
the Lamb, Rev. 12. 11. The Exposition from the 7. verse, to the 12. to make
entrance.

1. Doctrine, That all faithful Soldiers, that love not their lives to the
death, shall overcome the Devil by the blood of the Lamb: and the proofs.
Three things requisite for to make a man able to overcome the Devil, and all
his enemies. 1. He must have the golden faith of his Baptism for his
Regeneration. 2. He must have a lively faith in the white raiment of Christ's
Righteousness. And 3. Eye Salve of the Spirit of Christ.
Six Reasons. 1. Reason. When Satan tempts to sin, or despair, show him the
blood of the Lamb. 2. Reason. When he shows to Conscience the curse of the
Law, show him the blood of Christ. 3. Reason. When he fights against Conscience
with the fear of death, say, O death, where is thy sting? here is the blood of
the Lamb. 4. Reason. When he fights against Conscience with the fear of hell,
show him the blood of the Lamb, saying, O Hell, where is thy victory? 5.
Reason. For by the blood of the Lamb we are Conquerours already. 6. Reason.
For by the blood of the Lamb, we are more then Conquerours. And that in four
Respects. Uses how to disarme Satan.
Objection. I am not afraid of the Devil, but I am afraid of the Papists, and
Rebels of Ireland, to cut my throat. Answer. If thou have prevailed over the
God of this world, thou shall prevail with men. Object. They are wonderful
strong; They have great Iron and Brass Ordnance. Ans. So had the Canaanites
Chariots of Iron.
2. Doctrine, That all that fight against the Devil, with the shield of Faith,
of the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony, shall surely
overcome him; for they by it quench all his fiery darts. 1. Reason. First,
Because by the word of our testimony, we give God the glory of his holiness.
2. Reason. Because by it, we give him the glory of his wisdom. 3. Reason. We
give him the glory of his truth. 4. Reason. We give him the glory of his power.
5. Reason. We give him the glory of his mercy. 6. Reason. We give unto God the
glory of his Justice, in three points of Justice.
Four sleights of Satan, to take this shield of faith out of thine hand. 1.
Use. If Soldiers will give God the glory of his holiness, then they must beware
of whoredom, and keep their bodies chaste, and pure, Temples for the Holy
Ghost. 2. Use. If you give God the glory of his wisdom; then ask counsel of
the Lord for every battle; as David did; and you shall prevail, as he did. 3.
Use. If you give glory to the truth of God; then Soldiers must speak and
practice truth; accuse none falsely, and then plunder them. 4. Use. If you give
glory to the power of God; sprinkle the blood of the Lamb well, and you shall
be shot-free; howsoever, Devill-free. 5. Use. If you give glory to the mercy of
God; you must be merciful, as your Father is merciful; not cruel: and to
whom Justice. 6. Use. If you give God the glory of his Justice; you must
practice Justice toward men in three points. Against the Anabaptists, which
would not have the Law Preached.


These things may do good to many Christian Soldiers. Let none stop them from
the Press.

Written by J. E.
GOOD NEVVES FOR ALL CHRISTIAN SOLDIERS.
Dear Christians, in stead of complementing Eloquence, I shall endeavor to
show you, that love not your lives unto the death, how to overcome the Devil,
by the blood of the Lamb, and by that word of your testimony. Revel. 12. 11.
In the 7th verse, we hear there was a battle in Heaven, i. in the Church,
says Brightman; and so there is now; Michael, and his Angels fought* Michael,
which is by interpretation, Quis sicut Deus, he was sent to destroy his
enemies, that rose up against his Church, when it lay in the Wilderness; for
the wrath of the Dragon, as it does now lie in war by the wrath of the Dragon
the Devil, and the Beast, and false Prophet. Michael, the Lord Jesus Christ,
then whom none is stronger in heaven or earth. For who is like our God (as
Meyer notes) in heaven? i. in the justified Church, which is rightly called
heaven; as, Gal. 4. 26. Jerusalem which is above, is the mother of us all; is
the holy Catholic Church (says Luther) out of which Satan was cast, which led
the people to dumb Idols, Ephesians. 2. 2. And so he shall in this battle; for
Michael, and his Angels, will fight for you, which is called the great Prince,
for the people of God, Dan. 10. 21. i. Christ Jesus, whose Angels are (as
Bullenger notes) those blessed ministering Spirits, and all faithful
Christians, which serve the Lord Jesus, to fight against Antichrist, and his
instruments.

And the Dragon, and his Angels fought, i. all evil spirits, and all evil
men, as the wise and rich of this world, that fight against the Gospel, and
against a reformation: whose power, and subtlety, are their armor, to fight
against the Church; against whom you must fight with spiritual armor, Ephesians. 6.
13. For you have Michael your Prince, that will give you the crown of victory,
Rev. 2. 10. Marlorat.

A great battle; first, in respect of the Soldiers, all believers on the one
part, and all unbeleevers on the other part.

Secondly, In respect of the time; the Enmity between the seed of the woman,
and the seed of the Serpent, is the cause of it; and therefore as the seed of
the bondwoman persecuted the seed of the freewoman, so it is now, Gal. 4. 29.
that now reached to you, and will be to posterity.

Thirdly, The manner of the Battle; all believers fight by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, which are invincible. But the
adversaries fight with infidelity, and armed with lies: the justified must
fight by faith in the blood of the Lamb, that he has loved you, and washed you
from your sins in his own blood, to make you without spot, or wrinkle, or any
such thing, Ephesians. 5. 26. and made you Kings and Priests to God his Father; and
prove it by the Word, Rev. 1. 5. Col. 1. 22. That he has thrown upon Christ
the iniquities of us all, i. e. guilt and punishment. The other fight by
infidelity, which do not believe this, but by hatred, lies, and sword,
persecute them that believe so; for the Devil was a liar from the beginning,
and a murderer, as his children are.

Ver. 8. But they prevailed not. Here is comfort for all you faithful
Soldiers, they shall not prevail against you; for the gates of bell shall not
prevail against the faith of your free justification by Christ, Mat. 16.

His place was no more found in heaven. i. The Devil was cast out of heaven,
that accused the Saints before God day and night, by the victory of Christ upon
the Cross, (says Elton.) And the Heathen Emperor, a Dragon, was cast out of
the heaven of the Church, by Constantine, says Brightman; and the Beast and
the false Prophet must be cast out of the heaven of the Church, by our Michael.
i. Christ, and his Soldiers, which all you are, that are faithful; For by our
Michael, he is cast out of the hearts of the Elect; as the Apostles saw Satan
fall like lightening from heaven, Luke 10. 18. as Meyer. For now is the
Judgment of this world, now shall the Prince of this world be cast out; so now
shall Antichrist be cast out of the Church of England; not so much for the
sword, as by the Word preached. For where the death of Christ is preached, and
by faith received, ( that he bare all our sins in his body upon the tree, 1
Pet. 2. 24. That we being dead to sin, should live in righteousness, by
whose stripes ye were healed) the Devil must needs be cast out, says
Marlorat. So that here is the cause why Satan dwells in the hearts of the
wicked, they believe not, that the blood of the Lamb has purged their hearts
from all sin; therefore Satan an unclean spirit will dwell in that heart
that is not washed by faith in the blood of the Lamb. But where the heart is
washed by faith in that blood, Christ dwells there, as Ephesians. 3. 17. For where
Christ is received into the heart, for Idolatry and superstition, true Religion
and piety comes in; for carnal reason, the Spirit of God comes in, which
illuminates the mind, and changes the will to God, from uncleanness, to
sanctity; as Marlorat.

Ver. 9. And the great Dragon, the old Serpent, etc. The Devil is called the
old Serpent (says Pignetius) because he has always deadly poison, prepared
to infect men.

Secondly, He is the same that labors by all means, to hinder you from
Paradise, as he caused our first parents to be cast out, and therefore so much
the rather to be taken heed of, in his practice, to bring thee to sin; for if
he did thus to our first parents, when they were pure from all spot of inherent
sins, what will he do against thee that art inherently unclean by sin, if
thou have not the blood of the Lamb?

Which is called the Devil, (...), i. Calumniator, a Caviller, or an Accuser;
so that you see, that cavillers against the faithful, and accusers of the
Brethren, for the true faith in Christ's blood, and righteousness, change names
with the Devil, called Satanas, i. adversarius, an adversary. i. because he is
such an enemy, as his children are, and adversary to the professors of free
Justification, that by the blood of Christ, and his righteousness, men should
be saved and be made without spot, before the Throne of God, Rev. 14. 5. Satan
cannot abide that doctrine.

Which deceives all the world; Because he persuades men, contrary to the Word
of God (as Bullenger and Musculus. i. the Reprobate) by his fallacies, and
lies, (as Paul says) to fear, lest as Satan seduced Eve, so your minds should
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 3. He was cast
down to the Earth, even to be trodden under foot of men; as Psalm. 91. 13. Thou
shall go upon the Lion, and the Aspe; the young Lion, and the Dragon, shall
thou tread under thy feet; as Luke 10. 19.

He is cast down to the earth. i. to hurt earthly minded men only; for woe to
the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, because the Devil is come down
amongst you, that has great wrath, because his time is but short: So you shall
find that these wars shall be woeful to the Inhabitants of the earth, and
Sea, by the Devils means; but it shall not hurt the true Church. For Satan
departing from them that are faithful, and overcoming him by the blood of the
Lamb, he shall hurt only earthly-minded men, that prefer earthly things
before heavenly, and contemn the truth, as Erasmus. And they are cast into the
earth, in respect of any power to do hurt to you the children of God, but
shall hurt earthly men by Sea and Land.

Ver. 10. Then I heard a loud voice in heaven. For the faithful cannot but
praise God for the confusion of Satan, their deadly enemy, says Pignetius. Hic
ergo (...), a song of triumph, of the Church triumphing over the Devil that is
overcome; which shows the cause why many men do not praise the Lord with a
loud voice, they believe not the Devil is overcome, therefore they are afraid
of him.

In Heaven. i. In the Church, which dwells in the large heaven of remission of
sins, and in the kingdom of heaven, which is righteousness, and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost, as Luther. And has her conversation in heaven, Phil. 3.
2^.

Now is salvation; For where sin reigned, there perdition had a place; but
where the Gospel reigns, i. the glad tidings, that Christ has purged your
sins in his own person, and is set down at the right hand of God, Heb. 1. 3.
there is life and salvation.

And strength; Not of men, but of God; for the right hand of the Lord has the
pre-eminence, and therefore he will give his Church the victory.

And the Kingdom of our God, wherein the Devil reigned (says Musculus) by
Idolatry.

And the power of his Christ: for his power appears especially in converting
men to his righteousness.

For the accuser of the Brethren is cast down; for this is the property of the
Devil and his Instruments, and if he can, to lay open to damnation, those that
he suspects shall be heirs of heaven, and ascend to that place from which he
fell, which he does most commonly by Scripture, Matthew. 3.
as to Christ; wherefore I have labored in these fourteen differences, to
disarm Satan (against the consciences of all true believers) of his strong
holds to accuse the conscience, and to show you a most certain victory by
Christ's blood, as you may see: but they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb,
i. Verse. 11.
they got victory, not by their own strength or merits, but by the free grace
and favor of Jesus Christ, they overcame the power of the Devil, as Meyer.

By the blood of the Lamb, i. By faith in the death of Christ, which makes men
conquerers (as Marlorat) over all enemies; for we are to understand, that
Christ has not only got victory over the Devil in his person, but has left
power to his justified children, to get victory also over him in our person,
and in our consciences, and that is, by the blood of the Lamb.

Hence I gather, That all faithful soldiers, that love not their lives unto
the death, shall overcome the Devil by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of
their testimony.

All you that truly believe, that the blood of the Lamb has purged you from
all sins, shall get victory over the Devil; this is not only plain by the
Text, which says, They overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, etc. the word of
their testimony, but also by the Apostle Paul, that gives thanks for the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. And what victory is that, but
even over sin, death, and the Devil? for Christ by his blo^d on the Cross,
spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and destroyed him that had the power of
death, the Devil, Ephesians. 2. 15. for he took away the sting of death, which is
sin: By his blood, etc. and the strength of sin, which is the law, which was by
that blood blotted out, Col. 2. 14. And therefore we say, Thanks be to God,
which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, to our
faith, and has given you power to get victory over the Devil to your selves
and consciences, by the blood of the Lamb; for that must needs be fulfilled in
the members, that is fulfilled already in the Head, says Meyer.

The second proof is 1 John 4. 4. Little Children, ye are of God, and have
overcome them; for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world.
For where Christ's blood dwells he dwells: in verse. 3. he says, that every
spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of
God; but this is the spirit of Antichrist. Some may object the Devil, and the
Pope confess so much, therefore to the word come in the flesh you must
understand, And washed us from our sins in his own blood, and made us Kings and
Priests to God his Father, and that the blood of the Lamb has made us clean
from all sin, before the Throne of God, Rev. 14. 5. That neither the Devil nor
the Pope believe, 1 John 1. 7.
for he has invented a Purgatory to purge them from sin after death; for he
believes not the blood of the Lamb has purged them from all sin in this life.
But little children, ye are of God (i. all you true Believers, that have faith
that the blood of Jesus Christ has purged your sins) and have overcome them,
i. Satan, Antichrist, and all his servants; for seeing Christ has given you
victory over the Devil, certainly you have victory over his servants, says
Aug. Marlorat; for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in world; for
Christ dwells in your hearts; where his blood dwells by faith, that is greater
then the Devil that dwells in the hearts of all unbelievers, where the blood of
the Lamb is not sprinkled by faith. And therefore we overcome not by our own
power, but by the strength of Christ; for we must needs be overcome, if we
trust to our own strength, says Calvin: as to the arm of flesh, or great
ordnance, ammunition, etc. which he will cause them sometime to lose, to cause
them know, that their victory must be by the blood of the Lamb.

Now there be three things requisite to make a man able to overcome the Devil,
and all his enemies.

First, he must be born anew in Christ, of water, and the holy Ghost, as 1
John 5. 4. for so by regeneration, he is freed from the bondage of sin, death,
the Devil, and Hell: he must believe his Baptism, that he is new born of
God, which is the foundation of our victory over the Devil; as the Virgin said
to the Devil, tempting her, I am a Christian, and am baptized, and the Devil
fled. This is that gold of a lively faith, in the merit of Christ's death in
Baptism, Rev. 3. 18.
in our infancy, when we knew not what Christ did for us; as John 13. 7. but
do know it after that we are there buried with Christ, and new born, and so
were made capable to overcome the Devil by the blood of the Lamb, when we
should have faith in the same afterward. If we do not forsake our first
baptism to take a second, for that is to depart from the faith; for if God
have but one baptism, the second is of the Devil, and all that are baptized
again shall be overcome of the Devil, which do not believe Christ's words, that
he that is washed, i. in baptism, if elect, is clean every whit, needs not
save to wash his feet, i. his conscience and conversation in the blood of the
Lamb, in the other Sacrament, but like fools, will have their hands and head
washed again, which is a thing abhorred of God, and of all his true Churches,
that ever have been since the Apostles time.

Secondly, he must have true faith in the virtue of Christ's resurrection; that
he is risen again for our justification; that he has clothed you with the
white raiment of his own righteousness, that your filthy nakedness should not
appear: as Rev. 3. 18. for if any sin be imputed before God, the Devil will
be too hard for thee; for thou that believe not, that the blood of the Lamb
has washed away all thy fins before God, and that the white raiment of Christ's
righteousness has not covered all thy sins, Psalm. 32. 1.
thou art not fit to be a Captain, or soldier, for the Devil and the World
will overcome thee; for by this, a man denies himself, to be all in Christ, and
in his righteousness: for whosoever is clothed with the garment of salvation,
he shall be saved, and overcome the Devil and the World; but by faith in the
white raiment, we believe we are clothed with the garment of salvation, Es^.
61. 10. therefore we shall overcome. Thus, when a man will be nothing in
himself, or in his own righteousness, or sanctification, but to be altogether
in him, 1 John 5. 4.
Phil. 3. 9. therefore St. John says in the same place, this is our victory
which overcomes the world, even our faith; What faith is that? Verse. 20.
he tells you in 20th verse, that we are in him that is true: in that his Son
Jesus Christ, the same is very God, and eternal life: for when a man is in
Christ by baptism, for his person, and in his white raiment by faith to his
conscience, he is made partaker of Christ's victory upon the Cross, over sin,
death, the Devil, and Hell; for by faith in the white raiment, that Christ is
risen again for our justification, and has justified us, we receive power to
subdue sin, the world and the Devil, which are all overcome by faith in our
first resurrection, which is to our persons and baptism, when our bodies are
washed with pure water, Heb. 10. 23. but the first resurrection to our
consciences, is when we are converted, and believe the white raiment is ours,
that clotheth us, that our filthy nakedness should not appear, Rev. 3. 18.
wherein we show we are risen with Christ, Col. 3. v. 1. for all that appeared
to bring tidings of Christ's resurrection, appeared in white, or shining
raiment, to show, that no man can tell of his first resurrection, until he can
tell of his white raiment: as Matthew. 28. 3. Mar. 16. 5. Luke 24. 4. Jo^. 21.
12. all in white; so must you, if you be risen with Christ, you must appear in
white, or else no victory over the Devil.

Thirdly, he that would overcome the Devil, and all his Instruments of the
world, he must not be a blind soldier, as many are that fight for money, and
by ends, but get the Devil into their hearts by covetousness and cheating
soldiers, as Judas did, and the Devil gets them, as he did him; you must
therefore buy of Christ, eye salve of his Spirit, i. to walk by the Spirit, to
fight by the Spirit, i. by the directions of the Oracle of Gods Word: for men
ought not to fight any battle, before they have asked counsel at the Oracle of
Gods Word, as David did, to know whether God do approve of that war or no; and
eye salve to discern the true Religion from the false, for else he may fight
for the false Religion, for Antichrist, and not for Christ; and also for
eye salve of the Spirit, he may keep himself from all wickedness when he
goes forth with the host, Deuteronomy. 23. 9. to keep a good conscience before God and
before men; for he that will plunder, rob, spoil, and steal, and whore, and do
wickedly, shall not overcome the Devil, but is overcome of him. Thus must a
true Christian soldier stand out in life and death, against all adversary
power whatsoever.

Now, being thus prepared by Christ's counsel, to fight against the World, and
the Devil, I will show you, how you shall overcome the Devil by the blood of
the Lamb, by diverse Reasons.

against all men by sin, either tempting men to sin, or to despair for sin
committed. Now when a Christian, tempted to commit sin, shows unto Satan the
blood of the Lamb, (as Joseph said) How can I do this evil, Genesis 39. 9.
and sin against God? So say thou, How can I do this evil, and sin against
the blood of the Lamb? Thou shall overcome him, as Joseph did. Or if Satan
tempt thee to despair, as he did Judas; if thou show him the blood of the
Lamb, he must needs be conquered; for by that, thou will testify thy
redemption, and the murder of Satan, that thou have redemption through the
blood of the Lamb, the forgiveness of thy sins; but the Devil has not; for
this blood of the Lamb testifies that Satan was a murderer from the beginning,
to our first parents, to the first Adam, and that he has slain the second
Adam, the Lord Jesus Christ; here is the blood of the Lamb, that thou have
shed; for, who put into the heart of Judas, to betray him, and into the hearts
of the Jews to crucify him, but thou Satan? Therefore this blood of the Lamb
testifies the remission of my sins, and it testifies that thou art a murderer;
and thus the red colors of Christ's blood, being displayed, Satan cannot endure
the field, but will fly like a beaten Soldier; for hereby the Devil is
redargued to be the sinner, and must despair.

cursed is every one that hangs on a tree; that we might obtain the blessing
of Abraham. And this testifies my blessedness, that Christ has blotted out
the handwriting of the Law, that made us cursed, by his own blood, Col. 2.
14. Thus by the blood of the Lamb, thou shall testify against the Devil, that
thou art freed, John 8. 36.
and if the Son has made thee free, thou art free indeed, Joh. 8. But this
blood of the Lamb testifies, Satan is a murderer, and so a transgressour of the
Law, and therefore cursed. Now as men that have committed murder, and they see
it is discovered, will presently run away; so Satan, seeing men fighting against
him, by the blood of the Lamb, that testifies their freedom from the curse of
the Law; and how they stand fulfillers of the Law; and also testifying how the
Devil is a transgressour, a murderer, and so cursed by it; he will not endure
the field, it is time for him to run.

Thanks be unto God, that has given us victory over death, by Christ's blood;
so that death is unto me advantage; and by the blood of the Lamb testifiest to
Satan, that he is guilty of the blood of thy husband. Now what murderer
amongst men, will endure, when he shall hear a faithful wife making an
outcry against him, thus; O this man has murdered my faithful dear husband,
here is his blood, that this man has shed, Murder, murder, murder, make hue
and cry after him, lay hold of him, carry him to prison, to the bar, and to
the Gallows; so when Satan hears the faithful say, O thou art guilty of the
blood of my dear and faithful husband, the Lord Jesus Christ, here is his
blood, carry him to the prison of hell. Now as Satan is like his children, that
are murderers, he must run, and be fearful, as murderers are afraid, and flee
when none pursue them; so is Satan the most fearful coward in the world, that
will flee fast enough, if you show him the blood of the Lamb; Resist the Devil
by it, and he shall flee from you, Jam. 4. 7.

Paul, O hell, where is thy victory? thou have no victory over me; for here is
my discharge, and victory in the blood of the Lamb; hell is for murderers; it
is for thee Satan, that wast a murderer from the beginning, and therefore hell
has victory over thee; for hell is prepared for the Devil, and his Angels;
but heaven for you that overcome by the blood of the Lamb; For to him that
overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my Throne; as I overcame, and sit
with my Father in his Throne, Revel. 3. 21.

Thanks be unto God, that has given us victory, is a conqueror already. But
all true believers can say so, 1 Cor. 15. Ergo, they are conquerers already.

Again, All that are saved already, by the blood of the Lamb, are conquerers
already.

But all true believers are saved already, as Ephesians. 2. 8. and 2 Timothy 1. 9. They
are conquerers already. i. to faith, though not to feeling; for you are
conquerers over the world by faith; as, 1 John 5. For this is our victory, that
overcomes the world, even our faith. And you are conquerers over the flesh, by
self-denial, and mortification; for he that so conquereth himself, is better
then he that wins a City; and you are conquerers over the Devil, by the
blood of the Lamb; as the Text.

Romans 8. 37.

How can that be, may some say? Can a man get more then the victory?

I answer, By faith in the blood of the Lamb, if thou will believe, thou art
washed in it by Baptism, it makes thee such a famous, renowned conqueror, that
thou shall be a noble triumpher for ever in Christ, which is more then a
conqueror; for as concerning conquerers of this world, they may have victory to
day, and lose it to morrow; as Saul did; and many conquerers in the world, as
Alexander when he had conquered the world, he was conquered of his own lust,
Gladio vicit, vitiis victus, he overcame by the sword, but was overcome of
vice; but he that gets victory by the blood of the Lamb, is more then a
conqueror; because he is a conqueror over sin, the world, and Devil, through
Christ for ever.

Objection. How can this be? Does not the Devil cast some into prison, and
persecute some to death; how are they then conquerers over him?

Rev. 2. 9. It Is but for a trial of your faith, in the blood of the Lamb* God
will deliver you, as he did Joseph out of prison; and though Satan persecute
some to death, yet shall you be more then conquerers, even triumphers in
heaven; for as the Martyrs were more then conquerers in four respects, so
shall you be.

1. In regard of the torments; they put the Martyrs to death, to make them deny
the blood of Christ, they rejoiced in tribulation; as the Disciples when
whipped, rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer any thing for Christ's
sake, they were more then conquerers by the joy which they have in suffering;
but conquerers of men or Cities, when they have got the greatest victories, may
sit down, and weep; as Titus Vespasianus, when he had conquered, and saw the
destruction of Jerusalem, wept to see the greatness of the misery of his
enemies; saying, This is not I, but the hand of God for their sins; but
triumphant joy belongs to the conquerers by Christ's blood; as Hawks in the
Acts and Monuments, page 1447. in token of triumphant victory, to give a figne
to his friends, when his eyes were burnt out, and his hands on a flaming fire,
yet lifted up both the stumps of his hands, and clapped them over his head,
declaring he was more then a conqueror.

2. They are more then conquerers, in respect of the tormentors; for they
strive to make them deny the blood of Christ; but the true believers, for all
their torments, confess Christ so much the more; the one fumes and chafes,
that he has not his will, and is overcome; but the Christian rejoices, and
goes away with the victory; as the tormentors of Blandina confessed that she
overcame them.

3. They are more then conquerers, in regard of the unconverted; for they put
them to death, that they may convert no more; but as Sampson slew more
Philistims at his death, then he did in all his life; so do the Martyrs often
convert more at their death, then they did in any time before; for when men
seek to conquer Christianity, it conquers them (says Justin Martyr:) as the
Papists confessed in the Marian days, it was in vain to burn any more
Heretics, as they called them; for the more they burnt, the more they
increased; and the converted were the more confirmed by the patient sufferings
of the Martyrs; because they would suffer for it, they believed it was the
truth.

4. We are more then conquerers; because we slay our enemies with their own
sword; Bis perimitur qui suo gladio interimitur, he is double slain that is
killed with his own sword; for true believers take the sword out of their own
hands, and kill them with it; as David did Goliath with his own sword; so said
the Martyrs; Thou sit here to judge me, but I shall judge thee one day;
thou by killing my body, crownest me with life, but killest thy self with
eternal death; as 1 John 3. 15. Thus the sword, which the wicked have drawn,
shall go through their own bowels.



First, for sin; Does Satan tell thee, thou art a great sinner? display the
red colors of Christ's blood, tell him, it is true, I confess, I am by Adam a
great sinner, and if I were not a sinner, I should not need the blood of the
Lamb; for he came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance;
therefore I repent, and the blood of the Lamb by faith purges me from all
sin. I have read in Luthers every days Sacrifice, p. 59. who reports of a
poor man in Friburge in Misnia, being distressed for his sins, and crying
out of the greatness of his sins; the Devil appeared unto him with a
writers Inkhorne, and bad him he should repeat all his sins, and he would
write them down for him; the man perceiving it was the Devil, bad him write,
The seed of the woman shall crush the Serpents head; and with that, the Devil
fled, and left such a stink, as if he would have choked them all; so if thou
shall tell Satan of the blood of the Lamb, thou do thereby declare, that the
seed of the woman has broken his head, he will flee.

Secondly, Does he tell thee of the curse of the Law, and come against thee
with that armor? take this sword of the blood of the Lamb; you may read of
David, when he asked for the sword of Ahimelech, they told him there was none
but the sword of Goliath; O said David, there is none to that; so if thou desire
a sword to go disarme the Devil with, take the blood of the Lamb, it is like
the sword of Goliath, for his head was cut off with it; so take the blood of the
Lamb, for the Devils head was broken with it; does he cast the curses of the
Law upon thee? cast on him the blood of the Lamb.

Thirdly, Does Satan fight against thee with the fear of death, and hell? show
unto him the blood of the Lamb, bid him read, Here Is thy victory, O Death, O
Hell; I have victory by the blood of the Lamb; I have an eternal redemption,
through his blood, the forgiveness of my sins, and I am a conqueror over
death and hell. But as we read of men, that have committed wilful murder, the
blood of the slain will hang upon them, that although they rub and wipe, yet
still the blood will hang upon them, and discover them, they cannot get it off,
especially not from their consciences, that tells them of death and hell; so
when thou do tell Satan of the blood of the Lamb, thy faithful dear
husband, he cannot wipe nor rub off the cry of that innocent blood, it will
hang about him, especially upon his conscience, and tell him of death, and
hell. Now when Satan hears thee testify the greatness of his sins by the
blood of the Lamb, he will be gone; for he is like a mere civil honest man,
that can be content to hear of any thing rather then his own sins; he can
be content to hear of other men's sins, and laugh at them; for fools make a
sport of sin; they rejoice at other men's sins, especially of professors; if
they fall but once, the Devil, and all civilians, will rejoice at it; but tell
them of their own sins, and they will be gone; and so will Satan not endure
to see the terriblenesse of his sins in the blood of the Lamb.

1 Cor. 15.
because you have victory already given unto you, and are saved already? see
Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Blessed art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people!
saved by the Lord; the shield of thine help, and which is the sword of thy
glory; therefore thine enemies shall be in subjection unto thee, and thou shall
tread upon their high places. Here is admirable comfort for you that are the
faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to encourage you to the war, against all
your spiritual enemies, because you are sure of victory; for what is the
reason that many are so loath to go to war? because they know not whether
they shall have victory, or no; but if you could assure every one of victory,
of a crown, and of a kingdom, you should have Soldiers enough; I tell thee
that art a faithful Soldier of Jesus Christ, fight valiantly with the blood
of the Lamb till death, against the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and thou
shall be sure of victory; for Christ having overcome already, his victory is
thine; Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a crown of life,
Rev. 2. 10. And fear not little flock, (i. that fight by the blood of the
Lamb) for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you a kingdom, Luke 12. You have
conquered the world by faith, 1 John 5. 4. conquer your selves, for so shall
you be wiser then he that conquers a City; be an enemy to the world, be an
enemy to the Devil, but especially to thine own flesh; as a Martyr wrote to
his wife, fight by the blood of the Lamb, and fear none of these.

Object. O may, some say, I am not afraid of the Devil, but I am afraid of the
Papists, and Rebels of Ireland, that they will cut our throats, and take all;
they are Devils incarnate; they do more harm then the Devils to the
Protestants.

Ans. I answer, as the Lord said to Jacob, Thou have prevailed with God, thou
shall also prevail with men; though his brother Esau came against him with
four hundred men; so I say to thee, thou have prevailed with the blood of the
Lamb, over the God of this world the Devil, thou shall also by the blood of
the Lamb prevail with men. Therefore fear not thou Jacob my servant, and
Israel whom I have chosen. Thus says the Lord, that redeemed thee, fear not,
he will help thee; as Isa. 44. 1, 2. and 44. Thou have overcome the Devil,
the Prince of the world, should thou fear men?

Object. O they are wonderful strong, for they have great brass and iron
Ordnance.

Ans. I answer thee, as Joshua did the Children of Joseph, when they objected
that the Canaanites had chariots of iron; He said unto the house of Joseph,
Thou art a great people, and have great power, and thou shall cast out the
Canaanites, though they have chariots of iron, and be strong, Thou shall not
have one lot. Therefore the mountain shall be thine, for it is a wood, and
thou shall cut it down, and the ends of it shall be thine, and thou shall cast
out the Canaanites, Josh. 17. 18. For the blessing of Joshua, and his telling
them of victory, made them valiant in battle; so when the Protestants
understand what the Lord says to them in that place of Joshua, and in the 25.
of Numbers, 17. and 18. and learn to fight against them by the blood of the
Lamb; they shall vex those Midianities, and Canaanites, and smite them that
have beguiled them with their wiles, concerning Idolatry, and as concerning
their sister Cozbi, the daughter of a Prince of Midian. By these two wiles, are
England and Ireland beguiled, and the plague is come of a civil war, you
shall overcome them by the blood of the Lamb.

It follows; And by that word of their testimony. This is added, says Meyer,
that we should know that the blood of Jesus Christ shall not be profitable to
us, except we believe it, and give testimony of it. Many will boast that they
are redeemed by the blood of Christ, when in the mean time, they refuse the
Gospel. i. they refuse to believe the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses them from
all sin before God. And when men have lost this, how many inventions do men
deceive themselves with, to take away their sins? Some hope to take them away
by pilgrimages; some by the Popes pardons, or by Purgatory; some by their holy
walking, almsdeeds, or repentance a little before they die, or good meaning;
but such are deceived, because as Christ has sanctified his Church and
cleansed it by the washing of water, through the Word; so the way to overcome
sin, and the Devil, is by the blood of the Lamb, and by that word of their
testimony. Hence we gather this Doctrine,

That all that would overcome the Devil, by the blood of the Lamb, must fight
with the word of their testimony. i. must not only have the shield of faith in
the blood of the Lamb, but the sword of the Spirit, the word of God, whereby
we give testimony, or testify of the blood of the Lamb. i. we must show our
true faith by the word of our testimony. Ephesians. 6. 6. Above all, take the
shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked; for he that can quench all his fiery darts, shall surely overcome
him. This shield of faith that quenches, is the blood of the Lamb. Above all,
signifying that this is the most special thing, of greatest weight, to
overcome the Devil by, which is called the wicked; and when the children of
the wicked shoot fiery bullets, the best way to quench them, is by faith in
the blood of the Lamb. Now you know, if a man had such a shield, as would
stop, and quench, and fence all the fiery bullets of the enemies in war, what
man would go to war without it? so when you know that the blood of the Lamb
will quench all the fiery darts of the Devil, who would go to war without
it? When the enemies shoot wildfire into a Town, you Soldiers know, milk
will presently quench it, though it be shot upon thatched houses, though it be
the fiercest fire; for it is a secret in nature, for milk to quench wildfire.
Now we are all in respect of the fiery darts of the Devil, like unto thatched
houses, ready to fire presently, by reason of original sin, dwelling in us.
That if the Devil shoot his fiery dart of lust, we are ready to fly on
fire, as David did by looking on Bathsheba; we must quench it by the blood of
the Lamb. If he shoot his fiery dart of covetousness, we are ready to burn,
as A^han, if we have not the blood of the Lamb, that quenches covetousness.
If he shoot the fiery dart of anger, and wrath, and revenge, we are ready to
burn, as Joah; power on the blood of the Lamb, and it will quench it. If he
shoot the fiery dart of despair, as to Caine, and Judas, we are ready to
flame, as they did; quench it with the blood of the Lamb, for the Apostle
says directly, by the shield of faith ye may quench all the fiery darts of
the wicked; then if you do not take it, thank your selves, if you burn, for
here is a secret in divinity, that the blood of the Lamb will quench all the
fiery darts of the Devil; therefore, above all, take the shield of faith,
signifying that this is the most special thing for a Soldier, and of greatest
necessity, to be sure he take the shield of faith, in the blood of the Lamb,
the helmet of salvation, and the brestplate of Christ's righteousness, and the
girdle of verity, and be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace; yet
Satan may shoot such a fiery dart into thy heart, as may set thee on fire;
therefore above all these, take the shield of faith, whereby ye may quench
Satan's fiery darts.

Things in Scripture that have the speciallest Item, are of most special use;
as when he says, Do good to all, especially to the household of faith. i.
that are known to be the true Disciples of Christ; that are the children of
the marriage chamber; so the Apostle says, The Elders that rule well, are
worthy of double honor, especially, they that labor in the word and doctrine,
1 Timothy 5. 17. So above all pieces of spiritual armor, especially take the
shield of faith, of the blood of the Lamb, to overcome the Devil by, to quench
his fiery darts.

And by the word of their Testimony. i. by that word which testifies of the
blood of the Lamb we overcome him.

In John's testimony of Christ, we read that he called Christ the Lamb of
God, that which takes away the sins of the world. i. he was come to take
them away. But now the Apostles and faithful Ministers of Christ, that are
greater then John, for they bear a greater testimony; for they testify by
the word, that the blood of the Lamb has washed away our sins; for so it is
written in the word, and we testify of it, Rev. 1. 5. 1 John 1. 7. Col. 1.
14. That he has loved us, and washed us from our sins, in his own blood, and
in whom we have redemption, through his blood, the forgiveness of our sins.
Mark, he testifies we have, not we shall have, and he has loved us, not he
will. Now there be six Reasons, why the Devil is overcome, or a Christian
overcomes the Devil by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of that testimony.

First Reason, Because by our testimony of that blood, we give unto God the
glory of his holiness, against the Devil, and sight, and feeling; for when
Satan says, Thou art an unclean sinner, and unholy, how should thou come
near so pure and so holy a God? seeing thou art so unclean, and filthy by
sin, and sight, and feeling, will help Satan to condemn a man's own
conscience. Now first we must confess it; For if we confess our sins, he
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness, 1 John. 1. 9. By confessing the truth, we shame the Devil;
for we well know, we are defiled with sin by Adam; but by the word of our
testimony of the blood of the Lamb, that has purged us from all sin, and
having our garments washed white in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7. 14. He has
made us holy, and unblameable, and without fault in his sight, Col. 1. 22. and
we are made the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 3. 17.
that is holy, which are ye; that so we may appear beautiful in the fight
of God. And by this manner of appearing before God, by the blood of the holy
Lamb, we acknowledge God to be so perfectly holy, that he cannot endure the
sight of any unclean thing. And thus we give God the glory of his holiness,
Hab. 1. 13.
and overcome the Devil, and sight, and reason, that we are made holy in the
holy blood of the Lamb, and of the holy Catholic Church. For should the blood
of Adam make us unholy, and should not the blood of the Lamb make us holy? when
God says, we are holy; and tells us, how he has made us holy; for Jesus, that
he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate,
Heb. 13. 12. Thus by our word of testimony of the blood of the Lamb, God has
the glory of his holiness, the Devil and reason are redargued, and overcome,
and our souls comforted by believing.

foolishness, and the bringing Infants to holy Baptism a foolish thing, as an
Anabaptist said, and by counting him unwise in his providence, as all do, that
are discontented with their estates; Now the word of our testimony of the blood
of the Lamb, persuades us to believe that God is wisest, and best knows how
to save Infants by Baptism, as 1 Pet. 3. 21. and therefore commands them to
be brought to him, as all true Churches have done. And he knows by his
wisdom to save them that believe, by preaching the Gospel, which the world
calls foolishness. Also this faith persuades us to believe, God is wisest,
and best knows what estate is best for us; that so against the Devil, sense,
and reason, we wholly resign our selves unto his wise providence, and in that
respect to be thankful, in all estates, as Rev. 1. 5. As thus the faithful
say in all estates, health, or sickness, wealth, or poverty; Unto him that
has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, etc. he glory
and wisdom. And thus Job overcame the Devil, that would have had Job charge
God foolishly, as if he had been unwise in his providence. No; Job 1.
The Lord has given, (health, wealth, and children) and the Lord has taken
away; Blessed be the Name of the Lord. As if he should say, Blessed be his
wisdom, I am his, let him deal with me according to his wisdom. Many men
would have cried out, I am undone; I shall starve; have I served God for this?
I Will serve him no more; I Will go serve the Queen of Heaven, as the Jews said,
Jer. 44. 17. No, but he says, the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken,
blessed be the Name of the Lord; He is wisest, blessed be his wisdom; I Will
serve him still, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13. 15. So
when we see and feel sin rebelling in us, and see our houses burnt, and all
we have taken away, and our bodies sick and sore, then to give glory to the
wisdom of God, that God has thrown on Christ the iniquities of us all; the
sins I see and feel, and weep for, and mortify, Christ has borne them all
in his own body on the tree; he is wise enough to let sin remain in me, to
my feeling, and yet by the blood of the Lamb to make me without fault before
his throne. Thus the Devil, and sense and reason are overcome, and all the
glory given to Gods wisdom.

Eve, that she should not die at all; and all that believe not, make him a
liar, because he beleveeth not the testimony that God has given of his Son,
namely, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; but he that
believes this, has sealed that God is true, Joh. 3. 33. he has set to his
seal, that the blood of the Lamb has made him clean from all sin; for what
makes a man believe, but that they judge him faithful and true? Faith then in
this blood, is the acknowledging of Gods truth, which is an high honor given
to God; for he makes a great reckoning and account of this truth. Thus faith
in the blood of the Lamb, gets victory over the Devil, when he persuades men
not to believe, but makes God false; but faith in the word of our testimony of
the blood of the Lamb, testifies that the seed of the woman has broke the
Serpents head; and so the Devil and infidelity are overcome.

Cain, his sins were greater then could be forgiven him. Many of the promises
of God to his children, are of things which seem impossible, yet faith gives
assent thereunto, and testifies that God is Almighty; as Abraham when he
heard that he should have a son by Sarah, when she was barren, and when it
ceased to be with her after the manner of women; here was a battle of faith
against sight and reason, and above ^ope, yet he believed under hope, and gave
glory unto God, that he which had promised, was able to do it, and got victory.
So it is against sight and reason, that the justified should have sin dwelling
in them as long as they live, and rebelling; and yet the blood of the Lamb
should take away their sins before the Throne of God; this cannot be, said
Bildad, against Job 25. For how should a man be clean that is born of a woman?
and therefore reproved of God for it, Job 42. 7. but faith in the word of our
testimony in Christ's blood, teaches us to believe the Almighty power of the
blood of the Lamb, that it is able to do it against sight and reason, and
persuasion of the Devil, and gives glory to the Lamb, that his blood was able
to do it, that promised that the new covenant was sealed in his blood, i. that
our sins and iniquities should be remembered no more, and thus the Devil and
reason are overcome.

Abraham and the Righteous, and for others, but not for them that are great
sinners; therefore they despair, and do not believe the pardon of their sins.
But by faith in the blood of the Lamb, we give God the glory of the riches of
his mercy; for had he not been rich in mercy, he would never have given such a
rich price as the blood of Christ, which is more worth then all the world; and
by it, we prove God is rich in mercy, and the Devil is overcome, that
persuades us that God is poor in mercy, or has no mercy for us.

for sin, there can be no hope of mercy. But now by the blood of Christ, that
was of infinite value, we testify that satisfaction is made to Gods justice;
and therefore we believe that Gods justice will not exact that of us, for which
Christ has satisfied with his own blood, but will manifest his mercy and
favor, which is purchased for us with the blood of God, Act. 20. 28. Thus
justice and mercy are met together in the blood of the Lamb, the justice of God
is satisfied by throwing upon him the iniquities of us all, by shedding his
blood, and mercy is showed unto us, that he suffered for us, the just for the
unjust to bring us to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

For there are three points of Justice:

First, to require satisfaction for a trespass committed.

Secondly, to remit that for which satisfaction is made.

Thirdly, to bestow that which is merited and purchased.

Now, faith in the testimony of the blood of the Lamb, gives glory to the
justice of God in all these: For,

First, it gives testimony, that God has required satisfaction for all our
sins in his Sons blood, when he bare all our sins in his own body upon the
tree, 1 Pet. 3. 24.

Secondly, faith knows justice has forgiven that, for which satisfaction is
made by the blood of the Lamb.

Thirdly, it believes that that shall be bestowed, that Christ has purchased
and merited by his blood, i. life and eternal glory; thus by our testimony of
the blood of the Lamb, we magnify the justice of God, as well as his mercy,
and so the Devil is overcome. I have stood the longer, to show you how to get
the victory over Satan, because he that can conquer and prevail over the god
of the world, shall prevail and overcome the world.

Now, for as much as Satan knows, that faith in the blood of the Lamb will
overcome him, mark his wiles and sleights to wrest the shield of faith out of
thine hand; for you must not think to go away conquerers without a combat: for
he assaulted Eve, Genesis 1. and Christ himself, Matthew. 4. 3. and Moses, Numb.
20. 12. and Peter, Luke 22. 32. and the Thessalonians, 1. 3. 5.

faith, that the blood of Christ is his? whosoever has any such conceit, it is
but presumption, say the Papists.



First, because when a man has seen himself wounded by sin, both person and
actions, his own righteousness and sanctification, all unclean, and an
horrible sinner, by the curse of the Law, then faith in the blood of the Lamb
drives a man out of himself, to cast himself wholly upon Christ (as Esther did
upon the Kings mercy) as upon the precious blood of the Lamb undefiled and
without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19. But presumption finds some good heart or meaning,
some righteousness, as he calls it, to trust to.

Secondly, faith in the testimony of Christ's blood, rests on a sure
foundation, which is Gods Word, that both commands us to believe, and
promises to perform that which we do believe: as 1 John 3. 23. and Joh. 16.
24. but presumption relieth upon fantasy, to do as well as others.

Thirdly, true faith delights in the blood of the Lamb, and can never hear
too much of it, and uses the means whereby it was first bred; as David said, I
will never forget thy promise, for by it thou have quickened me, Psalm. 119. so
faith will never forget the blood of the Lamb, for by it thou have cleansed me;
they will not be weary to hear of it. But presumption hates that doctrine, and
the professors of it, and such as preach most of it, and most purely, shall
have some gross name or other.

Fourthly, true faith increases by degrees, from faith to faith, from a weak
to a strong: as,

1. To know the virtue of it.

2. To grieve for the want of it.

3. To hunger and thirst after it, and set an high price of it. Presumption is
a sudden flash, and so continues, it had no assurance forty years ago, and no
more it has yet.

Fifthly, true faith in the testimony of the blood of the Lamb, makes a man
truly valiant; for he that believes, the blood of the Lamb has cleansed him
from all sin before God, and is a child of God by his Baptism, as Gal. 3. 26,
27. What need he fear? he does not fear to go to heaven, and therefore he
does not fear death, the Devil or man; for the righteous are bold as a Lion,
Prove. 26. 1. but presumption, though it be foolhardy at first, yet will fly
at the last, where no fear is.

Sixthly, true faith in that testimony, makes a man depart from all iniquity,
and keep a good conscience before God and men, in hope of the resurrection. But
presumption has an evil conscience before both, by reason of sin.



Solomon says, Knowledge is easy to him that will understand, Prove. 14. 6. i.
if he be willing, and love it: so faith is easy to him that will believe, not
that it is in man's power, but where the Spirit of God works a desire to ask,
seek and knock, Wisdom will open the door; for, none that come unto me put I
away, says Christ.

Quest. What is the reason then, that so many never get faith for the assurance
of salvation?

Answ. 1. Because they ask amiss, not in faith of the blood of the Lamb, that
he has washed them from their sins in his own blood (in Baptism) Rev. 1. 5.
If they miss this mark, they shoot wide of the assurance of salvation; For if
I wash thee not, thou have no part in me, Joh. 13. 8.

Secondly, because they seek faith in themselves, carnal reason, fleshly
devices by wit of man's fantasy, and not in the blood of the Lamb; the god of
this world blinds their minds, that the glorious Gospel of the blood of the
Lamb and his white raiment should not shine to them.

Thirdly, because they oppose the doctrine of free justification by Christ's
blood and righteousness, and wink at it, and embrace not the purity of that
doctrine, but count it an error, and receive not the love of the truth, they
are given over to believe an error and falsities, which can give thee no
assurance of salvation.

Fourthly, because they turn to the greatest multitude which scoff at, and
persecute the truth; God gives them over to walk in blindness as the Pharisees
did.



Heb. 11. 6. And if a good hope were enough; why did the Apostles pray, Lord
increase our faith, Luke 17. 5. and Mark. 9. 24. For, as all things are
possible to him that believes; so all things are impossible to him that
believes not, Heb. 11. 6.



Joh. 5. 20. And this is the true Jesus that came by water and blood, not by
water (of baptism) only, but by water and blood, and it is the Spirit that
bears witness ( i. to my spirit, that I am a child of God, Romans 8. 16.) and
that Spirit is truth, 1 John 5. 6. therefore having my heart sprinkled (with
the blood of the Lamb) from an evil conscience, and my body washed with pure
water, i. in baptism, I may keep my profession without wavering, Heb. 10. 23.
This faith works by love, and a desire to live honestly, Heb. 13. 18.

for the Temple of God is holy, which are ye, 1 Cor. 3. 17. If you say you
give glory to the holiness of God, give him glory in keeping your selves holy
Temples of God. But, if any man destroy the Temple of God, him shall God
destroy. He that destroys it by whoredom, for thereby thou becomest one flesh
with an whore, Latrina Diaboli, for as the Temple of God was destroyed when it
was made a Jakes, so is the Temple of God destroyed when it is made the devils
Jakes; for he that is made one flesh with an whore, which is the Devils Jakes,
1 Cor. 6. 16.
is thereby made the Devils Jakes; but all whoremongers are made one flesh with
his whore; that is the devils jakes, Ergo, they are made the devils jakes, and
so the Temple of God is destroyed, and therefore their destiny is to be
destroyed, that do not repent; for, Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge,
Heb. 13. 4. he will destroy such as destroy the Temple of God; therefore you
may perceive such to prove cowards, for fearfulness goes before destruction,
and an high mind before a fall. There is a conceit among soldiers, that Wine
will make men valiant, but it is false; for whoredom, wine, and new wine take
away the heart, i. whoredom and drunkenness make men arrant cowards, Hos. 4.
11. For whoredom and drunkenness make an evil conscience, and an evil
conscience make men fearful, and flee where no fear is, Prove. 28. 1. For an
evil conscience, and the curse of God runs after him, and will overtake him.

Psalmist said, Thou shall guide me by thy counsel, and afterward receive me
to glory, Psalm. 73. 24. And therefore, as David did, so do you, ask counsel of
the Lord for every battle, at the Oracle of Gods Word, i. whether God does
allow it or no, as Jehosaphat said, 1 King. 22. 5. Ask counsel, I pray thee of
the Lord of day; for there can be no war or battle lawful, but that we may
find some warrant out of the Word of God, that does warrant it to be lawful;
so shall you be sure, both to overcome your spiritual enemy the Devil, by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of your testimony, and also your temporal
enemies, by faith in that blood, and by the word of your testimony; for should
not a people inquire at their God? signifying yes, they should, to the Law and
to the testimony, if they speak, or fight not, according to this word, it is,
because there is no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. So shall you say, Thou have made
me wiser then mine enemies by thy commandments, for they are ever with me,
Psalm. 119. 98, my delight and counsels.

John the Baptist gave you this caveat: that as you would be true soldiers of
Jesus Christ, so you must practice to speak the truth, and accuse no man
falsely, and then plunder them; for what shall it profit you, to say God is a
true God, if you in the mean time be liers? you declare that the God of truth
is none of your God; there are so many lies fly among men, that the honest
cannot tell what to believe. Now you that have received his testimony, that the
blood of Jesus Christ has cleansed you from all sin before God, and that the
righteousness of Christ has made you everlastingly righteous, Rev. 1. 5. you
have sealed that God is true. Let the power of this grace teach you to love to
speak the truth, and to shame the Devil. For, as he that tells lies shall
not tarry in Gods sight, because he credits the Devil, that was a lier from
the beginning, but he that speaks the truth overcoms Satan with his tongue, as
he that believes the truth has overcome the Devil in his heart, and he that
fights for the truth shall overcome the enemy with his hand, for the God of truth
will uphold his children that fight for the truth, by the blood of the Lamb.

Israelites overcame the Destroyer, that slew all the firstborn of Egypt; by
faith they slew the Paschal Lamb, and the effusion of blood, Heb. 11. lest he
that destroyed the firstborn should touch them, they sprinkled the two side
posts, and the upper door post, with the blood of the Lamb, with a bunch of
Hysop, and they overcame the Destroyer by faith, that he could not hurt them,
for they gave God the glory of his Wisdom and Power, that he was able to
deliver them: so seeing Christ your Passover is sacrificed for you, look that
your two door posts of your life, body and soul, and the upper door post of
your spirit be sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb; 1 These. 5. 23. Now the
very God of peace, sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit, and soul,
and body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ; and
how are they sanctified? even by the blood of Christ: for, Jesus, that he might
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate, Heb. 13.
12. Now should they overcome the destroying Angel, that he could not hurt them,
when by faith they sprinkled the two door posts, and the lintell, with the
blood of the Lamb, with a bunch of Hysop, and the Destroyer passed over all
their houses, and could do them no hurt, when he destroyed all the firstborn
of Egypt, both of man and beast: So you Christian soldiers, that fight under
the banners of the Gospel, the blood of the Lamb, and the white raiment of
Christ's righteousness, which you shall find to be the conquering banner: For,
if the blood of Bulls, and Goats, and Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling them that
are unclean, sanctifies concerning the purifying of the flesh; how much more
shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal Spirit offered himself
without fault to God, purge ^our consciences from dead works? Look the blood of
the Lamb begin there first, to purge your consciences from sin: confess your
selves to be wretched, miserable poor and damnable sinners by Adam and
original sin, the tree evil, and the fruit evil, and by the Law accursed, in
debt ten thousand talents of sin; For if we confess our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighte^,usnesse 1 John 1. 9. then confess that the blood of the Lamb is able to wash away all
your sins from your consciences, and rely upon it, take the Sacrament upon it,
that when you take the cup of the new Testament in Christ's blood, and drink of
it, the warm blood of the Lamb will testify in thy conscience, the remission
of all thy sins, and that God is become my father, and I am one of his
children, and my sins and iniquities shall be remembered no more: and we may
conclude as Paul, for, if the blood of Bulls and Goats, etc. If the blood of
the Lamb sprinkled, did deliver from the Destroyer that slew the Egyptians; how
much more shall the blood of the Lamb of God, being sprinkled by faith on your
bodies and souls, and spirits, deliver you from the destroying bullets that are
sent to destroy your firstborn, all the true believers of the Gospel. There is
a strong delusion that goes among ill soldiers, that Amulets or Charms, or
enchantment will make them shot-free, but I will warrant them, they are not
Devil free, for by such means they have made themselves an abomination to the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 18. 10, 11, 12. and the Devil will destroy them, they shall not
escape the Devils shot, but he that shall fight against his enemies by faith
in the blood of the Lamb, and in his lawful calling, asking counsel of the
Lord for every battle at the Oracle of Gods Word, whether God does approve of
the war or no? he shall not only be Devil-free, but shotfree also; Psalm. 91. 11.
for, he shall give his Angels a charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways;
and they shall bear thee up in their hands, that thou dash not thy foot against
a stone; keep thy calling, and the Angels shall keep thee, but if thou keep not
thy calling, the Angels will not keep thee; take heed to keep thy general
calling, to be a faithful Christian, and keep thee from all wickedness, Deuteronomy.
23. 9. And keep thy particular calling, and the Angels shall keep thee.

as your heavenly Father is merciful; for what though your heavenly Father be
merciful? if you be cruel, you shall be of your father in Hell; for his works
you will do, he was a murderer from the beginning; and if you be cruel
murderers, you shall be of him; therefore if you give God the glory of his
mercy, give him glory in the practice of mercy; to be merciful as your
heavenly Father is merciful, even to your enemies.



Ahab did Benhadad to be slain, thy life shall go for his life, thy people
for his people. By sparing Benhadad, he was cruel to the Israelites; for he
was the cause of the death of all those Israelites, that Benhadad slew
afterward, whom if he had slain, If the King be in the battle, you must sight
flying, to save his person; as David; but if the Phil^stims besiege K^^^^, you
shall overcome by the blood of the Lamb.
he had showed mercy to Israel. So concerning the Rebels of Ireland, that have
cut the throats of your brethren in Ireland, and are come over to do the like
here; seeing the sword is put into your hands, by the Parliament, send an
Herald or Trumpetter before every battle unto your enemy, or send men
through all the Army, or Shire, saying, What wickedness is this that is
committed of the Rebels, Jesuits, and Papists of Ireland? Now therefore
deliver us those wicked men, which are in your Army, or City, that we may
put them to death for their villainy, and put away evil from England, Judge.
20. 12. and 13. If they refuse to deliver them, they shall maintain
murderers, and you shall overcome them by the blood of the Lamb; Proclaim
free quarter for all true Protestants, which are forced to fight against you;
show your selves unto them; saying, Sirs, we are brethren, why do we wrong
one another, Act. 7. 26? Send messengers unto them; saying, What have we to
do to fight with thee, thou King of Judah? we come not against thee this day,
but against the house of our enemy; and God has commanded us to make haste;
leave off to come against God, which is with us, lest he destroy you; see 2 Chronicles. 35. 21. And when God gives them into your hands, say unto Zebah and
Salmana, What manner of men were they, whom ye slew at Tabor, in Ireland, or
England? As thou art (a Protestant) so were they; every one was like the
children of a King; say, They were my brethren, even my mother (Churches)
children; As the Lord lives, if ye had saved their lives, I would not slay
you, Judge. 7. 18, 19. signifying, if you had showed mercy, you should have
found mercy, but you have been merciless enemies to my brethren, therefore I
will slay you; as your sword has made women childlesse, so shall your mother
be childlesse among other women; with Samuel, I will hew you in pieces before
the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 33. for though you come pleasantly, and say truly, the
bitterness of death is passed, by a pacification, yet you shall not escape the
sword; for he that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9.
6. Therefore show mercy unto your brethren, by slaying of those that have and
will slay more of your brethren; for if any lead into captivity, he shall go
into captivity, if any kill with the sword, be must be killed by a sword; true
is the patience and faith of the Saints, Rev. 13. 10. that is, to kill them
with the sword, that have killed their brethren with the sword, as Gideon did.

justice and mercy are met together in the blood of Christ, his justice has
full satisfaction, and his mercy is showed to us, Isaiah 53. 6.
in throwing upon him the iniquities of us all; and Righteousness and peace
have kissed each other. i. Christ's righteousness is ours, and therefore we
have peace with God, Romans 5. 1. Now can you give God the glory of his justice,
and then practice no justice to your brethren, but plunder, and rob, and
spoil, and steal? be it far from you; can you be children of the just God
of heaven and earth, and practice such unjustice to your brethren? for how can
you say, there is satisfaction made to Gods justice, for thy trespasses, by the
blood of the Lamb, but that must move thee to give satisfaction for the
trespasses you have done to your brethren. And secondly, does his justice
require that, that should be remitted, for which satisfaction is made by the
blood of the Lamb? so does justice require, that they should be plundered,
which have made satisfaction by their weekly pay? should not a faithful
Soldier be content with his wages? Yes, says the Soldier, if he could get it.

Ans. Will you wrong yor brethren, and plunder, and spoil them, because some
deceive you of your wages? enquire who have received it, and that true
satisfaction may be made; be not unjust to others, because others are unjust to
you; for the unjust shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Lose not your souls for a little pay. And thirdly, does Justice require that
that should be enjoyed, that is purchased by the blood of the Lamb, as
remission of sins, and an inheritance in heaven? let the power of this grace
move all Soldiers to suffer the fatherless and the widow, enjoy that which is
purchased for them, and not to destroy your brethren, and their inheritance.
The sheep and the oxen made an ill sound in Samuels ears, though they were
brought for a good intent to do sacrifice, but they made a worse sound in Gods
ears, which made Saul lose his kingdom for disobedience. What an ill sound
do all the sheep and oxen make in the ears of God, from all armies that are
taken, with an ill intent, to do mischief to the poor and needy? the tears
of the oppressed cry in the ears of the Lord of hosts; Woe unto him that
increases that which is not his; and woe unto him that covers an evil
covetousness, Hab. 2. 6. and 9. Woe unto you that spoil, and thou ^^st not
spoiled; for when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: I^ you
magnify the justice of the great God of heaven and earth, practice justice to
your brethren, or he will practice justice toward you. Remember the counsel of
the Lord often in Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When thou go out with the Host against thine
enemies, keep thee then from all wickedness; for thou art in danger to be
slain every hour, and a good conscience by the blood of the Lamb is a
continual feast; it is murus aheneus nil conscire sibi, null apallescere
culpa. i. it is a brazen wall to have a good conscience, the Devil cannot shoot
through that; and the destroyers that are sent by fire out of the mouths of
guns, shall pass over the houses where such an Israelite is within, namely, a
good conscience, sprinkled with the blood of the Lamb. Cause the Law, and the
Gospel to be preached powerfully in your armies. There be some Anabaptists,
that would not have the law preached. I met with an Anabaptist lately that
heard me preach the Law, and the Gospel, and he told me to my face after the
Sermon, that he had been oftentimes scared by the Law; he would have heard none
of the Law, but only the Gospel; and to speak so much of Baptism was an
offense to him. Herein are two Doctrines of Devils; 1. To forbid the Law to be
preached: 2. To forbid children to be married to Christ. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
Now the Spirit speaks evidently, that in the later times, (which are now)
some shall depart from the faith. i. of their Baptism, and counts the blood
of the Covenant, as an unholy thing, wherewith he was sanctified in Baptism,
and does despite to the Spirit of Grace. i. in despite of the Spirit, that
says, he that is washed. i. in Baptism, in Christ's blood, is clean every
whit, needs not save to wash his feet. i. his conscience and conversation in
the blood of the Lamb, but will have their hands and their head washed again,
contrary to Christ's counsel, Joh. 13. For my part I believe, one God, one
faith, and one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. The first is of God; the second must needs
be of the Devil, that deny little children to come to Christ, which can come
no other way to him, but by Baptism, either of themselves, or of their
parents; for Baptism is the Arc, for the parents, and their household, 1 Pet.
3. 21. and then withdraw themselves from the children of God to perdition, Heb.
10. 39. Now the Law has most need to be thundered out in the most killing
manner that can be, in the Armies, to make them flee, and stand a far off from
injustice, and all sin; for although the Law is not given to the righteous
man, who are freed from the condemnation, accusation, malediction, and coaction
of the Law, as they are in Christ; but it is given to the lawless, and
disobedient, to the ungodly, and to sinners, to the unholy, and to the
profane, and to the murderers of fathers and mothers, to manslayers, to
whoremongers, to buggerers, to menstealers, to liars, to the perjured, and to
whatsoever is contrary to wholesome doctrine, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And therefore it
must be preached to them; you must hold out to them, first the glass of the
Law, to see their faces how foul they are, they may go wash their hearts in
the blood of the Lamb; and then show them the glass of the Gospel. Thus did
Christ, Mat. 5. Thus did Peter, when he converted three thousand, he showed
them by the law, what betrayers and murderers they were of the Lord of glory;
and then be preached baptism unto them, for salvation, and showed the promises
were made to them, and to their children, and as many as the Lord shall call.
i. to believe that Baptism belongs to them; and all the true Churches of
Christ have ever so understood it.

FINIS.

