Elijahs fiery-Chariot, OR GLOWING-COALS Taken from GODS ALTAR: Being excellent
Prayers and Meditations, fitted for all Persons in all Conditions.

Composed by diverse learned Fathers and Martyrs in the Church of God. The like
never before extant.

London, Printed for Thomas Rooks, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the sign
of the Lamb, at the East End of St. Paul's Church, 1659.

The Epistle.
Reader,
LEt no prejudicate opinion divert, or fiery passion impede^ thy ^erusual of
this little Manu^l, because it adventures in^o a litigious world without (...)
Guardian, for know ussu^edly, it is no other than a Dove, sent out of the Ark
(Gods Church) to view the frame of the children of men, and amidst the various
actions of contentious spirits, will certainly return with the Olive branch of
Peace to each faithful Soul; for indulgent mercy, being always ready with
unwearied beams of Love and Light, to guide the staggering steps of the
rebellious and sinful; yet returning man, will never permit the great Abaddon
to destroy the lives of precious Souls, either by devouring their Religion in
the flames of pretend^d, but ignorant zeal; or devouring their devotion in the
overflowing deluge of a licentious tolleration; for Heavens prop^^ious eye, is
ever watchful over his own peculiar Flock, taking care that his inheritance may
not be destroyed by that strange fire, which is daily offered up from the
usurped unlawful censors of pretended gifts; by the many presumptious Corahs,
which like the Egyptian Flies, have of late overspread the whole Land: and that
the grand Impostors of the world may no longer prevail upon the hearts of good
people; It has pleased Almighty God to inspire, and stir up the hearts of
some, and they of the faithfullest, and most eminent Watchmen of our Israel, in
this ensuing Treatise to furnish us the unlearned, and ignorant, with Prayers,
Arguments, and fervent ejaculations; so to cast some glowing coals into the
hearts and minds of the most excellent Christians, whereby the fervor of their
devotions may be increased. The work is short, but pithy, as containing in it
the Elixar of all religious service, the epitomy of all piety, and the whole of
every man, furnishing them with Prayers and Meditations, for all times, in all
conditions, and upon all occasions. In short, it is the platform both of prayer
and meditation, wherein is copied out Elijahs fiery-Chariot that with speed
will carry fainting Souls to the place of comfort and rest, Jacobs Bethel,
wherein the strongest man in Christ Jesus, may strive and wrestle with his
maker; the Key of David, which if turned by the hand of Faith will open the
door of Heaven to the greatest of sinners.

AN INTRODVCTION to Prayer.
FOrasmuch as of our selves we are destitute of all good things, and utterly
void of all necessary helps to salvation, the Lord our God of his own free
mercy and goodness offers himself to us in Christ, and in him, he gives
unto us in the stead of our misery, al felicity, in the stead of our poverty,
the unspeakable riches of his grace, he opens unto us in him the treasures of
heaven, that our faith might wholly behold him, and our hope be fully fixed
upon him Jn whom it has pleased him that the fullness of his grace should
dwell, that from thence we might all draw (as out of a most plentiful
fountain) the waters of eternal life. This secret and great mystery is
revealed to such only, whose eyes the Lord has opened to see light in his
light. Therefore since we are taught by faith that whatsoever we have need of,
and is wanting in us, the same is laid up with God for us in Christ: it
remains that we seek it in him, Rom 10
and with prayer crave it of him,

The Apostle therefore to show that true faith cannot be separated from the
invocation of Gods holy name, has set this order that as faith comes by the
Gospel, so by the same faith our hearts are stirred up to call upon the name
of G^d, and therefore he says that the spirit of adoption which seals in our
hearts the witness of the Gospel, raises up our spirits that they dare with
boldness show forth their desires: it stirs up in us unspeakable gronings,
and causes us to cry with confidence, Abba Father. By the benefit of prayer
therefore we attain to those riches which God has laid up in store for us:
for thereby we have familiar access to God, and boldly entering into the
sanctuary of heaven, we put him in mind of his promises: so that now by
experience we feel and find that to be true indeed, which by the word we
did before but only believe: now we enjoy those treasures by Prayer, which by
faith we did before but only behold in the Gospel of our Lord Jesus.

Now how necessary and profitable this exercise of prayer is, appears in that
the Lord himself witnesses our whole salvation to consist in the calling upon
his name, whereby he is wholly present with us, namely by his providence and
fatherly care, by the which he watches over us: by his power, by the which
he sustaineth and succoureth our weakness, being every moment ready to
perish: and by his goodness and mercy, by the which he receives us into
favor, being miserably laden and pressed down with sin. And hereby grows
singular rest and quietness to our conscience. For when we have disclosed to
him our necessity, herein we find most joyful and perfect quietness, that
none of our evils are hidden from him, whom we are persuaded to be both most
willing and also most able to help us.

Now, that our prayer may be made in such wise as it ought to be, first we
must see that we be in heart and mind no otherwise prepared, then becomes
those that enter into talk with God, as we are taught Eccl. 28. Before thou
pray, prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts God.

We must consider therefore when we pray, in whose presence we stand, to whom
we speak, and what we desire. We stand in the presence of the Almighty
creator of heaven and earth, and all things therein contained, to whose
eternal Majesty innumerable thousands of Angels do assist, serve, and obey: we
speak unto him, who knows the secrets of our hearts: before whom nothing is
more odious then hypocrisy and dissimulation: we ask those things which be
most for his glory, and the comfort of our consciences. We must therefore
diligently endeavor our selves to remove all such things as may offend his
divine majesty. And first, that we be free from all worldly cares and
fleshly cogitations, whereby our minds are carried hither and thither, and
being drawn out of heaven, and from the pure beholding of God, are pressed
down to the earth.

And here let us call to mind how irreverently we abuse the great goodness of
God, calling us into familiar talk with him: when we have not that reverent
fear of his sacred Majesty, that we would have of an earrhly creature, or a
worldly Prince: but suffering our hearts to be carried away with wandering
thoughts and worldly imaginations, are otherwise occupied, and forsake him in
the midst of our prayers.

As God is a Spirit, so will ^e be worshipped in spirit and truth; that is in
the inward affections of the heart, and with a true faithful and unsained kind
of worship. And therefore as at all other times, he requires the heart, so
specially in the time of prayer, when we show our selves in his presence, and
enter into communication with him: and thereupon when he promises to hear all
those that call upon him, he makes a restraint, and says, that call upon him
in truth. Seeing therefore that the chief duty of prayer consists in the
heart, we must with our whole heart pour out our prayers unto God the searcher
of all hearts, and with a sincere, unfeigned and ardent affection and opening of
our heart before God, call upon him, or else we shall not find him.

Let us know therefore, that none prepare themselves right to prayer, but such
as have a reverent fear of Gods Majesty: which they cannot have that come not
to it unburdened of earthly cares and affections.

And this is that is meant in the Scriptures, by the lifting up of hands, that
we should remember our selves to be far off from God, unless we lift up
our hearts and minds also on high. And therefore it is said in the Psalm; To
thee have I lifted up my soul. The Scripture uses also this manner of speech,
To lift up prayer: that they that desire to be heard of God, should not have
their minds carried away with earthly cogitations and vanity. And though it
be hard to be so bent to prayer, but that we shall find that m^nie
by-thoughts will creep upon us to hinder our prayer, yet the more hard it is,
the more earnestly we must wrestle to overcome all lets and hindrances, and
labor with inward groanings unto the Lord, that he will link our hearts fast
unto him, and not suffer us to be led away from him, by the vain suggestions
of Satan, Psalm. 8^
who at all times compassing us about, is never more busy, then when we
address our selves to prayer, secretly and subtlely creeping into our breast,
and calling us back from God: so that oftentimes when we with all reverence
should speak to God we find our hearts talking with the vanities of the world,
or with the foolish imaginations of our own hearts.

Finally, we must be in christian charity* love and concord with all men:
seeking unfeigned, hearty, and brotherly reconciliation, if we have offended any
man, before we enter into prayer or else God will not hear our prayers: yea
they are otherwise execrable, and full of damnable hypocrisy in Gods sight.
And this that is spoken of prayer, may be said also of hearing of Gods word, or
any other service of God.

We must therefore lay aside all malice envy, wrath, grudge, contention,
wrangling, dissimulation, all guilefull, crafty, and subtle dealing, and with
a single heart do to others, as we would they should do to us. 1. Pet. 8
Peter wills, that such as have once tas^ed how good and bounteous the Lord
is and are become new creatures by the heavenly regeneration through the
doctrine of the gospel, should like holy and innocent babes lay aside all such
works of the flesh, which do deprive a man of the kingdom of God: Galat. 5
and Saint Paul commands us that laying a side all those cursed works of
darkness we should in the stead thereof, put on (even as the elect of God,
holy and beloved) tender mercy kindness* humbleness of mind, meekness,
long suffering; forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if one have
a quarrel to another, as Christ forgave us. And above al these things [saith
he] put on love which is the bond of perfection, and let the peace of God rule
in your hearts. When ye shall stand and pray (says Saint Mark Mark 11
) forgive if ye have any thing against any man tha^ your Father also which is
in heaven may forgive you your trespasses: for if ye will not forgive, your
father which is in heaven will not pardon your trespasses.

Moreover we must have such a feeling of our own misery and wretchedness, as
may work in us an earnest sorrow and vexation of mind for the same. Example
whereof we may see in the dear servants of God, when they say, that cut of the
deep deepenesse, and out of the midst of the iaws of deaths they utter unto
the Lord a sorrowful voice. He that desires mercy must have a feeling of
his own misery. And therefore says David, Heal my soul O Lord, for J have
sinned against thee. There is nothing in my flesh [saith he] because of thy
displeasure, neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

This anguish and sorrow stirs up in Gods children a fervent desire to
obtain comfort help and succor at Gods hand, and therefore such as feel
themselves oppressed with great calamitie^, having by the help of man no hope
of deliverance, do cry unto God with afflicted hearts, as David did in his
distress: My soul thirsts for God, even for the liu^ng God: and as the Heart
being wounded braieth for the rivers of waters, so pants my soul after thee
O God.

This is that godly sorrow which S. Paul says works in Gods children
repentance to saluatio: The Lord is nigh to them (says David) that are of a
contrite heart, and vvil save al such as are afflicted in spirit. To him vvil I
look, even unto him (says the lord) that is afflicted and broken hearted and
trembles at my words. Therefore David calls the time of trouble the fit and
convenient time for the faithful to fly unto God by prayer. And albeit they
be not at all times in like distress, or continually groaning under the burden
of present evils, yet they must needs be ever in dread of new dangers, and
carefully afraid of fur^her troubles to follow. As trouble and fear therefore
are the very spurs to stir them up to hearty and fervent Prayer, so by
occasion thereof they have more free access unto God, as though he did
thereby call them unto him.

This godly sorrow for sin, and fervent desire and longing for Gods loving
mercy and favor, comes not of our selves, but of the special goodness of
God, for we are of our selves dull, and without all list to pray, yea, so
great is our imperfection, that we know not how to pray as we ought; and
therefore the spirit helpe^h our infirmitie^, and instructs us what is right,
and guides our affections. He makes intercession for the Saints (says Saint
Paul) according to the vvil of God, and that with sighs and gronings, which
cannot be expressed: that is, he stirs up out hearts, gives us a desire and
boldness to pray, and causes us to mourn when we are by any means hindered
from it, and feel not our selves moved thereunto with such fervent zeal and
affection as we should be.

Now although we know that it is the only work of the holy Ghost thus to move
and incline our hearts to prayer, notwithstanding we may not be negligent and
slothful to dispose and stir up ourselves thereunto, but rather
contrariwise, so often as we feel our selves cold and not disposed to prayer
as we ought to be, we must make our supplication unto the Lord, that it would
please him to inflame us with his holy spirit, whereby we may be framed to pray
with such feruency of mind, as we ought to do.

When we are cast down by the sense and feeling of our own infirmity, sin
and misery: yet must we pray [notwithstanding] in sure and steadfast hope to
obtain our requests. These be the things indeed contrary in show, to join
with the feeling of the just vengeance of God, sure affiance of savor, which
things do yet very well agree in that it is the goodness of God only that
raises us up being oppressed with our own evils from the which of ourselves
we cannot rise. For as repentance and faith are knit as companion^ together
[albeit the one drives us down with fear, and the other lifts us up again
with comfort] so in praying they must needs go together. And this agreement
David expresses in few words. I will [saith he] in the multitude of thy
mercies enter i^to thy house, Psalm. 5.
and in the Temple of thy holiness I will worship thee with fear.

Therefore when we are once touched with true repentance and feeling of our own
misery, we must withal have such a persuasion of Gods favor and mercy toward
us in all our prayers, that they shall be accepted of God, so far forth as it
shall be necessary for us. This is the assurance, says S. John. that we have in
God: 1. John 5
that if we ask any thing according to his will he hears us. Jf we have not
a sure trust and confidence in the mercy and promises of God, it is impossible
to make our prayer to him aright: and whosoever doubts whether God hears
his prayer, that man obtains nothing: to such prayers God has made no
promise. But contrariwise he says, wha^soeuer ye shall ask in prayer, if ye
believe, ye shall receive it. And again, Whatsoever ye desire, believe that
ye shall obtain it: Mat. 31 Mark 12
and it shall be done unto you. Ask, says Saint James, in faith, and waver
not, for he that wauereth is like to the waves of the Sea, James 5
which are tossed of the wind, and carried away. And why should we waver or
doubt, seeing the holy Scriptures testify of God, that he is faithful, just
and true in all his words and promises, saying: The Lord is faithful in all
his words, he will ever be mindful of his covenant: the truth of the Lord
indureth for ever.

And although our faith be not so strong, and therefore our prayer not so hearty
and zealous as i ought to be: yea, though our faith be saint and cold, yet let
us hold fast this principle, that our prayers are not frustrator in vain.

For our comfort therein, we have an example in the father which brought his
son first to the Apostles, and afterward to Christ, and said, Mark 9
If thou can Lord, help: and yet afterward he acknowledged the weakness of
his faith, and desired to be made strong. J believe Lord [saith he] help my
unbelief. How often do the children of God complain of this imbecilitie and
weakness of faith? Such as are exercised in true prayer do feel, that in
craving of God the forgiveness of their sins, they bring scarce the tenth
part of that sacrifice which David speak th of, where he says; An acceptable
sacrifice to God, Psalm. 52
is a troubled spirit, a broken and an humb^e heart, O God thou will not
despise Many times they are driven to wrestle with their own dullness and
coldness in prayer. Many times their minds slip aside, and wander away in
vanity. Many times they feel not their own lack, and misery to prick them
sharply enough to prayer: yea and many times they are so beaten down with the
sense and feeling of their own sin and misery, as though they were forsaken
of God, and their faith utterly extinguished.

In what horror and anguish of he art was David, when he said unto the Lord?
Psalm. 88 Psalm. 39
Why do thou reject my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? And again^
Cease from me until I go away and b^^^^ (...) ^^^erby it might seem that he
(like a (...) man) desires nothing else, but that (...) of God c^asing, he
might rot in his e^^^ but it is not so, for he says it not, for that he
would have God to depart from him, as the reprobate does; but only he
complains, that the wrath of God was too heavy for him to bear. A hard
temptation is it when the faithful are compelled to cry, Psalm. 80
How long will thou be angry against the prayers of thy servants? As though
their very prayers made God more angry. Lamen. 3
So when Jeremy said: The Lord has shut up my prayer, no doubt he was shaken
with a vehement pang of temptation.

These are the imperfections of Gods ch ldren, which even the believing and
hoping do oftentimes utter some unfaithfulness, and in the very remedies
fall into new diseases: for there is no prayer they make, which the Lord would
not worthily loath and abhor, if he should not wink at their spots and
imperfections. And such examples are common in the scriptures. Whereby we see,
that the Lord oftentimes suffers his to be grievously tempted and afflicted,
and hides from them the comfort of his spirit, as though they were clean
forsaken: but to their great consolation in the end.

This is the school wherein the wisdom of God nurtureth and ^^eth her
children, as we may see, Ecclesi. 4. First she will walk with them [saith he]
by crooked ways, and bring them unto fear and dread, and torment them with
her discipline, until she have tried their souls, and have proved them by
her judgments: then will she return the straight way unto them, and comfort
them, and show them her secrets, and heap upon them the treasures of knowledge
and understanding of righteousness. Thus we see the state of Gods children,
that when the Lord has showed them what they are of themselves, by the sight
and horror of their sins, and terror of Gods judgment for the same* then
will he show them what they are in Christ, as Esaias says: For a time, a little
while I have forsaken thee: but I will gather thee together in wonderful
mercies. Jn a short time of wrath I hid my face a while from thee: but I will
have mercy on thee for ever, says the Lord thy redeemer.

Such is the loving kindness and mercy of God toward the afflicted when they
are sorry for their sins, lamenting and mourning in their hearts, to be
delivered from the same that they might serve God in the freedom of conscience.

This is that mourning, this is that hunger and thirst that Christ speaks of:
Mat. 5
Blessed are they that mourn for they shall be comforted: Blessed are they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied

God for his truths sake, will put the righteousness of Christ on them, and
wash their unrighteousness away in his blood. Esaias 42
The bruised Reed will he not break, and the smoking Flax will he not quench.
The afflicted, the heavy and broken hearted, the weak and feeble will he not
forsake. Yea, be they never so feeble and so frail, yet so long as this lust,
desire and mourning to be delivered from their sin and misery remains in
them, God sees not their sins, reckons them not, and lays them not to
their charge: for his truths sake and love of Christ; he is not a sinner in
the sight of God that would be no sinner. He that would be delivered, has
his heart loosed already, his heart sins not, but mourns, repents, and
consents to the law and will of God, and justifies God, that this is, he
bears record that God which made the law is righteous and just, and such an
heart trusting in Christ's blood, in Christ's righteousness, is accepted for
righteousness: and his weakness, infirmity and frailty is pardoned, and his
sins not looked upon, until God put more strength in him: the increase
whereof he shall daily feel in such sort* that at leng^h he shall in all
troubles be ab^e to say with David, Psalm. 23
If I should go through the shadow and danger of death, I will not sear what
soever happen.

Now to stir up our hearts to consideration of our great misery and
necessity, to a more fervent prayer, the Lord himself has commanded us to
call upon him for help and succor. Therefore let us have the commandments
of God always in our sight touching Prayer, and whiles we pray let us call
them to our r^membrance, Ask, seek, knock, Mat. 7 Psalm. 50 Ephesians. 6
watch, pray. Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, pray always with
all manner of prayer and supplication, and watch thereunto with all diligence.
Rejoice always, pray continual^y, 1. Tim. 5
in all things be thankful, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
toward you. Col. 4
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same unto thanksgiving. Let your requests
be showed unto God in prayer and supplication, with giving giving of thanks.

And this we are also no less bound to do by commandment, whereby we are
forbidden to take the name of God in vain. For in that we are there forbidden
to take the name of God in vain, we are commanded also to take it and use it
to his glory giving unto him the praise of al goodness, help and succor,
whiles we ask and look for the same at his hand. Wherefore except we fly to
him in our trouble and necessity, except we call upon him for relief and
succor, we provoke his difpleasure no less, then if we should make unto our
selves Jdols, or worship strange gods: for in the contempt of every one of the
commandments, we show like contempt and disobedience to the will of God, and
all these sentences which command us to call upon God, do appertain unto this
commandment. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: and so
prayer is a work and chief service belonging to his commandment. We may not
therefore think that there are no sins, but idolatry, murder, theft,
whordome, and such like, but that it is undoubtedly a great sin also, not to
render this service to God, that is, not to pray, not to a^ke, not to look for
help from God in our necessities, not to render thanks for the benefits we
have received.

Therefore if our unworthiness at any time do cry out against us, stop or fear
us in such sort that our consciences are astonished and fly from God: if we
doubt whether god has respect to our prayers, groanings, and tears, we must
set before our eyes, how that we are commanded, though we be never so unworthy,
and our sins never so many and great to pray for reconciliation, Gods favor
and forgiveness of our sins. For else, whereas God commands us to abstain
from theft, murder, whordome, etc. we may in like sort excuse our selves and
say, that we are unworthy to obey Gods commandments: great is our iniquity,
and manifest is our contempt and despising of God, when we neglect and delay to
call for his help. Such as fly unto God therefore, to call upon him in their
necessities, obey his will, and find therein no small consolation, knowing
that thereby they do unto him most acceptable service: forasmuch as he
pronounces that nothing is to him more acceptable then obedience to his will
and commandment.

As we are commanded of God boldly and without all respect of our own
unworthiness, to come unto him as a merciful father, and one that knows our
necessity and pittieth our misery: so has he promised very graciously to hear
us, and grant our requests. And hereof rises yet a far more comfortable and
greater consolation wherein consists our whole confidence and trust of
obtaining su^cour and mercy at Gods hand, Mat. 7
wherefore he allureth us with many sweet promises to call upon him A^ke says
he, and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find knock, and it shall b^e
opened unto you: Iere. 25 Psalm. 50 Psalm. 145
ye shall cry unto me, and I will hear you: ye shall seek me, and ye shall
find me Call upon me in the day of trouble and I will deliver thee. The Lord
is nigh to all them that call upon him, that call upon him in tru^h^ he does the
will of them that fear him, and he will hear their prayers. He shall call upon
me, and J will hear him: Psalm 91
I will be with him in his trouble. I will deliver him and glorify him. At
the voice of thy cry he will cer^ainly have mercy on thee when he hears thee
he vvil answer thee. He that is Lord over all, Esaias 7.5 Rom 8 Psalm. 149
is rich and bountiful toward them that call upon him: He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him, he will hear their cries, and will save them.
And God to declare his readiness in hearing of sinners, Esa. 16.5.
says, Before they cry I will answer and whiles they are yet thinking what
to speak, J will hear.

Among many sweet promises of GOD, though these might be sufficient to provoke
us to fervent and hearty prayer, yet there be certain other notable and
comfortable promises which we should specially have in remembrance, as these:
If ye which are evil can give good gifts to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? Luk,
12. Eccles. 2.
Consider the old generation, and mark them well, was there ever any
confounded that put their trust in the Lord? or who has continued in his
fear, and was sorsoken? or whom did he ever despise that called upon him? And
of all other, that is the most notable which by the Prophet Joel is added
imediately after the prophecy of that horrible destruction that was at hand
saying: Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

Here let us consider the order of promises, which pertain either outwardly to
the body, or inwardly to the soul. Which part [the soul I meane] because it
is much more precious then the other, we must first crave such things as
properly belong to the salvation thereof. But first of all confessing our
sins unto God with most humble and penitent hearts, let us set before us the
promises of remission of the same. For this sentence is true, God hears no
sinners: that is, such as delight and continue in sin. Wherefore in all other
prayers, yea when we be about to ask any other things, whatsoever they be, let
us first think of the remission of sins, having always in our sight some
comfortable promises thereof, as this: If we confess and acknowledge our
sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive our offenses, and to cleanse us
from all iniqui^ies. And herunto let us have the light of the holy Ghost, to
kindle and confirm in us the true knowledge of God. Let us pray for the
continuance of Gods holy word and gospel among us, for the enlarging of his
Kingdom, and the advancing of his glory. Let us beg the gifts of faith, 1
John 12
repentance, fear, patience, prayer, hope, love, joy, peace of conscience,
with such other fruits of the spirit, and for everlasting life.

And here also we must remember that we do not only call our selves
continually to account for our new sins, craving at Gods hand mercy and
forgiveness of the same, but also for those sins which might seem to have
been so long ago forgotten, as David having confessed an heinous offense,
Psalm. 52
by that occasion returns even to his mothers womb, wherein he had gathered
the infection heaping together the sins of the whole life: even so in another
place when he asks another thing, he says, Remember not the sins of my
youth, remember me according to thy mercy for thy goodness sake O Lo^d. Psalm.
25
Again, Look upon my affliction and travel, and forgive all my sins.

When we have thus praide for things pertaining to the soul, and to the
kingdom of God, we must pray also for corporal benefits, as well common as
private, as peace and tranquillity of those countries which give harborough to
the true professors of the gospel and godly congregati^ns, b^ing in this life,
Psalm. 88
as Daniel in the midds of the Lions. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem faith
David: also for defense from misery deliverance from trouble, for happy
success in the works of our vocation, for health living, protection of life,
and goods, name, etc.

And although the Lord knows before we ask what we have need of, and is
ready to give liberally, yea and does give oftentimes undesired, and
furthermore has promised that seeking first the kingdom of G^d, and the
righteousness thereof, all other things shall be given us: yet he commands
us to ask corporal benefits, and that for three causes.

First, that we should know that he is the author and giver thereof, and
therefore should not only be thankful for the same, but also stirred up
thereby to seek, love and worship him.

Secondly, that we should be well persuaded of his good providence toward us,
when we understand that he does not only promise that he will never sail us,
but also has his hand always stretched out to help them that call upon him.
Joshua.


Thridly, that our faith of reconciliation, and forgiveness of sin should be
exercised through the asking of those corporal things.

And herein we must specially and above all things seek the glory of God, and
therefore we must pray for these corporal things in such sort. that we may
offer therewith our obedience unto God Here of we have example of Christ, when
he said: Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me: nevertheless
not as J will, but as thou vvilt. With this obedience to the will of God spoke
David when he desired to be brought again into his kingdom, ^. Reg. 15
saying, If I shall find favor in the sight of the lord he vvil bring me again:
but if he shall say unto me, thou do not please me, I am ready, let him do
as i^ seems good. And Job says, Job 30
Though he kill me, yet will I put my trust in him.

Therefore forasmuch as we do know- that it is the lot of Gods children to be
always under the cross, and therefore concerning those corporal benefits, we
know not how or what to ask as we ought: we must herein offer our obedience
unto God, abiding his good will and pleasure so long as it shall seem good
unto him, to exercise us in the want thereof, who suffers us sometime to be
afflicted for our chastisement, and for the probation of our continuance, and
also that we may receive with great gladness (if to his divine wisdom it
seem expedient for us) that which with ardent desire we long looked for. 1.
Cor. 15
S. Paul says, When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, because we
should not be condemned with the world. But when we pray for spiritual things,
we must ask them absolutely, and without condition, for hereunto do pertain
the chief promises of the gospel, of the which God would have us most
assured. Verily, verily, I say unto you [saith Christ] he that believes in me
has everlasting life. John 6
As sure as I live [saith the Lord] I will not the death of a sinner, but that
he return and live.

To the promise of God we must join examples, Eze. 3.3
whereby we learn that God has heard and helped those that call upon him for
all deliverance, whether they be of other [whereof the Scriptures are full] ^r
our selves [whereof we have experience] are examples of Gods promise. Hereby
did David comfort himself in the anguish and heaviness of his heart, saying;
Psalm. 77
I will remember the works of the Lord, and call to mind thy wonders of old
time. Thou have mightily delivered thy people, even the sons of Jacob and
Joseph. Psalm. 31
Again, I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy, for thou have seen my
trouble, thou have known my soul in aduersi^ie. And thus being warned both by
promises and examples, let us learn to cast our care upon the Lord, to call
upon him, and to look for help at his hand. So shall our faith by little and
little be more firm and certain, and our heart shall rest in hope and
expectation of Gods help.

But forasmuch as of our selves we are unworthy to appear in Gods sight,
whose terrible majesty coming once into our mind, it is impossible but that
we should fly from him as a fearful Judge: therefore he has given unto us a
Mediator, even our Lord Jesus, 1. John 2
that he being a mean between God and us, might change the throne of dreadful
glory in the throne of grace, and that we by his merits having access unto
God, might have assured trust to find grace in his sight. If any man sin,
says S John we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the just, and
he is the Reconciliation for our sins. Acts 10
To him, says Saint Peter, bear all the Prophets witness, that through his
name all that believe in him shall receive forgiveness of their sins. Ephesians. 5
Heb. 4
By whom says Saint Paul, we have boldness and entrance in all confidence
through faith in him. And again. We have not an high priest which cannot have
compassion on our infirmity, but was in all points tempted like as we are,
sin excepted: let us go boldly therefore unto the throne of his grace, that
we may receive mercy, and find grace to help in time of ^eede.

And as we are commanded to call upon God, and have a promise also to be heard:
even so we are commanded to make our prayers unto him in the name, faith and
confidence of this our mediator, and we have no promise to be heard without him
in whom are all the promises of God, 2. Cor 1 Luk 11
yea and Amen, confirmed and fulfilled. And no man comes to the Father but by
the son.

For he is our mouth whereby we speak to the Father, he is our eye whereby we
see the father, and he is our right hand whereby we offer our selves to the
father. Whansoeuer therefore we ask in his name, we have a promise to obtain
it. Veri^y verily [saith Christ] I say unto you, whatsoever ye shalaske of
the Father in my name, he shall give it you in my name, that is for my sake,
your high Bishop pray^ng for you. John 14
Hitherto you have not asked any thing in my name: ask and ye shall receive,
Jn that day ye shall ask in my name and whatsoever ye ask J will do, that
the father may be glorified in the son.

Of prayer there be two parts, petition and thanksgiving. By petition we power
forth our desires before God, requiring first those things that may set forth
his glory, and then such benefirs as are profitable and necessary for us. By
giving of thanks, we praise and magnify his benefits bestowed upon us,
acknowledging that whatsoever good things we enjoy, we have received them of
his free goodness and liberality. Therefore David joined those two parts
together in one verse, when he says, Psalm. 50
Call upon me in the day of necessity, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me.

The Scripture commands us to use both, and that continually. For our
necessity is so great, our life is so full of troubles and calamities, and so
many dangers hang over our heads every moment, that we have all cause enough,
yea even the most holy, with sighs and groanings continually to fly unto God,
and call upon him in most humble wise. But this we may better perceive in
things pertaining to the soul.

For when shall so many great sins whereof we know our selves guilty, suffer us
to be without care, and not to crave pardon of God for the same? when will
Satan give us rest and quietness, when will he cease to range about, seeking
whom he may destroy? when shall our tentations give us truce, so that we shall
not need to hasten unto God for help. Finally, the desire of the kingdom and
glory of God, ought to draw us wholly unto it, not by fits, but continually
that all times should be fit and convenient for us to pray. Wherefore not
without cause we are so often commanded to pray continually. And though we be
not driven with like necessity at all times to pray, yet in this case Saint
James teaches us what we ought to do, If any man be heavy or afflicted,
says he, let him pray, that is* let him crave Gods help and comfort, and who
so is merry, let him sing: that is, let him praise God.

Moreover, the benefits and blessings of GOD, are large and plentiful toward
us, which way soever we turn, that we can never want matter and occasion of
praise and thanksgiving. And seeing we ought to acknowledge God to be the
author and giver of all good things, we should always receive the same at his
hand with thanksgiving: for to that end God continually bestows his good
blessings and benefits upon us, that we should continually show forth his
praise, and be thankful unto him for the same, and so we render unto him his
due honor. And S. Paul when he says, that they are sanctified by the word and
prayer, signifies that to us they are not holy and clean without the word and
prayer: and therefore David says, when he had felt the liberalite of the Lord,
that there was put into his mouth a new song, that is, a new occasion of praise
and thanksgiving. Whereby he signifies, that it is a wicked silence if we
pass over any of Gods benefits without praise, seeing that as often as he does
good unto us, so often he gives us occasion to speak good of him.

We should therefore continually, that is, as much as is possible, at all
times, in all places, and in things as occasions are continually offered unto
us lift up our prayer unto God in craving help at his hand, and confessing his
praise, whereby we may both obtain of him all good things, and also praise and
magnify his name for all.

How this perseverance in prayer is required of us. Christ himself teaches us
by the parable of the three Ioanes, and of the widow and wicked Judge. Whereby
we are taught to continue in prayer with all earnestness and fervent
supplication and never to faint or give over, Luk 11.18
until we be assured in our spirit that our prayers be heard.

The prayer of the humble (says the Son of Sirach) goes through the
clouds, Eccles. 53.
it cease not until it come near, and it will not depart until God the most
high God have respect thereto. Behold (says David) as the eyes of the servants
look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand
of her mistress, so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until he have
mercy upon us. Psalm. 12 3
And thus must we not cease to do, until we may boldly say also with David:
The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, the Lord has heard my humble
petition, the Lord has received my prayer.

Now concerning the form and manner of praying, least we should follow our
own fantasy being of our selves so blind that we know not how to pray, or
what is meet and expedient for us: the Lord himself has sufficiently
instructed us: who as he has taught us through the whole Scripture, how and
for what things we ought to pray, so has he set forth one manner of Prayer, in
the which he has briefly comprehended all such things as we ought, yea, or in
any wise may ask of GOD. Wherein he has expressed what is due, pleasing and
acceptable to him, what is necessary for us, and what he will grant: so that
there is nothing herein omitted, that might be thought upon to the praise and
glory of God, or come into the mind of man for his profit and commodity. Mar.
6 Luke 11.
And this is that prayer that our Lord Jesus Christ taught his Disciples, when
they asked him how they should pray.

Whosoever therefore shall ask any thing that is not contained in this prayer,
they presume to add something of their own to the wisdom of God, they are
not obedient to his will, and they pray without faith, having no word of God to
warrant them: and therefore they shall obtain nothing. This prayer says
Tertullian, is the doctrine of the wisdom of God, wherein he has taught
whatsoever he willed, and willed whatsoever was needful. Albeit we are not so
bound to this form of prayer, that we should not use any other kind of words
then the Lord himself herein has used. For there are elsewhere set forth in
the scriptures, many ptayers, far differing from this in words, and yet
written by the same spirit, and very profitably to be used of us. And many
prayers also are continually uttered of the faithful by the same spirit, which
vary from the same in words. But this is required of us, that none should
look for, seek, or ask any other thing at all, the^ that which is briefly
comprehended in this prayer, and which though it differ in words, yet differs
not in sense and substance: like as it is certain that all the prayers which
are found in the scriptures and which do continually proceed from the heart of
the faithful, are referred by the d^rection of Gods spirit unto this prayer,
how soever they differ in the variety of words.

Many good and godly men, even in our days, well exercised in prayer, have
left unto us most worthy examples and testimonies hereof, furnished with ample
and large matter to form holy and true prayers, and full of power to inflame
the heart to a fervent invocation of Gods holy name; whereof we have given here
some taste to the godly, and specially to the simple not yer well exercised.

Read, meditate, and pray, and you shall find comfort in your souls.

A meditation concerning prayer.
THe mind of man has so large room to receive good things that nothing
indeed can fulfill it, but only God; whom then the mind fully possesses
when it fully knows him, fully loves him, and in all things is framed after
his will.

They therefore (dear Lord God) that are thy children, and have tasted
somewhat of thy goodness, do perpetually sigh that is, do pray, until they
come the^eto, and in that they love thee also above althings it wonderfully
wounds them that other men do not so; that is love thee, and seek for thee
with them

Whereof it comes to pass that they are inflamed with continual prayers and
desires, that thy kingdom might come every where, and thy goodness might be
both known and also in life expressed of every man.

And because there are innumerable many things which as well in themselves, as
in others, be against thy glory, they are kindled with continual prayer and
desire, sighing unspeakably in thy sight, for the increase of thy spirit. And
sometimes, when they see thy glory more put back then it was wont to be,
either in themselves, or in any other, then are they much more disquieted and
vexed.

But because they know, that thou do rule all things after thy good will: and
that none other can help them in their need, they oftentimes do go aside,
all business laid apart, and give themselves to godly cogitations and talk
with thee, complaining to thee as to their Father, of those things that grieve
them, begging thereto, and that most earnestly, thy help, not only for
themselves, but also for others; specially for those whom singularly they
embrace in thee, and often do repeat and remember thy gracious benefits both
to others, and to themselves also: where through they are provoked to render to
thee hearty thanks; thereby being inflamed, as well assuredly to hope well of
thy good will toward them, and patiently to bear all evils as also to stude
and labor to mortifiy the affections of the flesh: and to order all their
whole life to the service of their brethren and to the setting forth of thy
glory.

This they know is that prayer which thy Son Jesus Christ our Lord commanded
to be made to thee in the chamber, the door being shut. In this kind of
prayer he himself did watch often, even all the whole night. Herein was Paul
frequent as all the Saints be. This kind of prayer is the true lifting up of
the mind to thee. This stands in the affections of the heart, not in words
and in the mouth. As thy children be endued with thy spirit, so frequent they
this talk with thee. The more thy spirit is in them, the more are they in
talk with thee. Oh give me plentifully thy spirit, which thou have promised to
power out upon all flesh, that thus I may with thy Saints talk with thee night
and d^y, for thy only beloved Sons sake, Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

Moreover, the Sain^s, to provoke them to this kind of prayer, do use first
their necessity, which they consider in three sorts: inwardly concerning
their souls: outwardly concerning their bodies: and finally concerning their
name and fame, whereto they add the necessity of those that be committed to
them, the necessity of thy Church, and of the common wealth.

Secondly, they use thy commandments: which require them under pain of sin,
to pray to thee in all their need.

Thirdly, they use the consideration of thy goodness, which art naturally
merciful to young Ravens calling upon thee: much more then, to them, for whom
Ravens and all things else were m^de, for whom thou have not spared thy dear
son, but given him, etc.

Fourthly, they use thy most sweet and free promises made, to hear and help
all them that call upon thee in Christ's name.

Fifthly, they use examples how that thou which art the God of all, and rich
unto all them that call upon thee in Christ's name* have heard and helped others
calling upon thee.

Sixthly, they use the benefits given them before they asked, thereby not only
provoking them to ask more, but also certifying their faith that if thou wast
so good to grant them many things vnaskt, now thou will not deny them any
thing they ask, to thy glory and their wealth

Last of all, they use the reading and singing of Psalms, and other good
prayers, because they know that thereby peculiarly, besides the other
Scriptures, there is no small help: as may appear by Paul Ephesians. 5. whereby
he wills the congregation to use Psalms Hymns, and spiritual songs; but so
that in the heart we would sing and say them. Not that thy children do not
use their tongues and words, in praying to thee: for they do use their
tongues, speech, and words, to stir up their inward desire and feruencie of
the mind, full well knowing that else we were a plain mo^king of thee, to pray
with lips and tongues only, Oh that I might feel now thy spirit so to affect
me, that both with heart and mouth, I might heartily and in faith pray unto
thee.

Now concerning the things that are to be prayed for, thy children know that
the prayer taught by thy Son most surely and plainly does contain the same
and therefore they often use it; first asking of thee their heavenly father
through Christ, that thy name might every where be had in holiness and praise:
then that thy kingdom by regeneration and the ministry of the Gospel might
come: and so thirdly, that willingly, perfectly and perpetually, they might
study to do, yea do indeed, thy will with thy holy and heavenly Angels, and
spirits. These things they seek and pray for, namely, thy kingdom and thy
righteousness, before any worldly benefit.

After which petitions, because all things, yea even the benefits of this
present life do come from thee, they do godly desire the same under the name
of daily bread, being instructed of thy wisdom, that after spiritual benefits
to ask corporal, is not unseemly unto thy children: which know both
spiritual and corporal to come from thy mercy.

In the other petitions, they pray for things to be taken from them; beginning
with forgiveness of sins, which were impudently prayed for, if that their
hearts were not so broken, that they could forgive all things to all men. For
their part, they add their profession, that is Charity, whereby they profess
that they have forgiven all offenses done to them.

Howbeit because it is not enough to have pardon of that wh ch is past, except
they be preserved from new offenses, they pray thee, not to lead them into
temptation by permitting them to the perverse suggestions of Satan; but rather
to deliver them from his importunity and power, understanding Satan the author
of all evil. Oh (dear God) that thou would endue me with thy spirit of
grace and prayer, with thy children accordingly, to make this prayer always
whenever I do pray.

As for outward evils, so long as they do not (as it were) enforce thy people
to sin, in that christian perfection does account the^ amongst thy benefits:
thy Son has not taught thy Church to pray for the taking away of them, in
their prayer: for here he has contained but those things, for the which al
Christians generally and particularly may of faith pray at all times.

It often comes to pass, that exterior evils because they be not evils
indeed, that is, they be not against Gods grace in us, therefore they cannot
of faith be prayed for, to be taken away: for thy children, that have faith,
do always prefer thy judgment, before their own. The which judgment,
when they know by that which happens to them, they submit themselves thereto
wholly: although the spirit make his unspeakable gronings to help their
infirmities by prayer, not to have them taken away, but that they might have
strength and patience, to bear the burden accordingly. Which burden, if it be
to heavy in the bitter sense and feeling thereof they in their prayers do
complain something rather then pray to have it taken away, as our Savior did
in the garden, when he added to his complaint: Not my will, but thy will be
done.

So do thy people in all their complaints add, not as we will but as thou will. For they are taught by thy spirit, no otherwise to pray for the taking
away of corporal evils, either from themselves, or from others, unless they
by the same spirit do certainly see the same to make to thy glory: as did
thine Apostles and servants, when absolutely and without condition, they did
ask health or miracle for any, when they healed or raised the dead by prayer:
for they knew nothing can be better then when it is according to thy will. Oh
that I might always know thy will in all things, and for ever apply my self
thereto.

Hereof it comes that thy saints and dear children, which love their
neighbors as themselves, do yet notwithstanding in their prayers ask
vengeanes of some (as we may read in the Psalms of David) because in praying
and talking with thee, they see by thy holy spirit (for without it is no true
prayer) sometimes thy judgments upon some, which they perceive to sin to
death, and therefore ought not to be prayed for, because thy glory cannot be
set forth as it should be, without their destruction.

Thy will is always best, and the thing whereto they frame all their desires.
Therefore, when they perceive that it is decreed with thee, such and such by
their destruction to set forth more mightily thy glory, how should they but
desire and pray for the same, and write as David has done, that the godly, in
reading and weighing such prayers, might receive comfort, and the ungodly be
afraid: else when that they perceive not so manifestly the determined judgment
of God, they in their prayers do most heartely pray for them, as Samuel did
for Saul, Mo^s s for the Isralites, and Abraham for the Sodomites. O good
Father, for thy mercies sake, give me the true love of mankind: but yet so
that I may love man for thee, and in thee, and always prefer thy glory
above all things, through Christ our Lord.

Now, though thy children do know that thy will cannot but be done, and
nothing can be done, but that thou of thine own will have determined to do,
although no man should desire the same, yet are they earnest and frequent in
prayer: first, to render obedience to thee, which requirest prayer as a
spiritual service to thee: secondly, because thou have ordained prayer to be
as an instrument and mean, by the which thou workest things with thee already
decreed and determined.

Thy children do use prayer, to offer thee their service, if it shall please
thee to use the same: and as they do eat and drink, which is a mean ordained
of thee for the conservation of their life, not looking thereby to lengthen
their days above their bonds which already thou have appointed, but as it
becomes them, to use the means, which thou have ordained to serve thy
providence: so do they (as men herein not curious to know thy providence
further then thou, reueilest it) use prayer as a mean by the which thou art
accustomed to work many of thy childrens desires, that according to thy good
will, thou may use the same.

They do not think a mutability in thee (for thou art God, and art not
changed: with thee there is no variableness) and therefore they pray not as men
which would have thy determination and ordinances (which are in most wisdom
and mercy) to be altered, but rather that they might submit their wills to
thine, and make them more able to bear thy will and pleasure.

They know thou have promised to help them calling upon thee: wherefore they
doubt not but so thou will do, and therefore pray accordingly

They love thee har^ely, and therefore they cannot but desire much to talk
with thee, that is, to pray: even as a well mannered and loving wife will not
take upon her to ask any thing of her husband at al, but what she hope^h he
will take in good part, and do of his own f ee will, al^hough she had spoken
nothing thereof.

When she knows what her husbands will is in things, she gladly talks with
him thereof, and according as she sees he is disposed to do, she will often
desire him to do it. Even so thy children (I say) which heartely love thee, in
that they know thy wisdom and will is best, how can they but often talk with
thee, and desire thee to do that which they know is best? which they know also
thou would do; if none should ask or pray for the same.

Thy chi^dren use prayer, as a mean, by the which they see plainly thy power,
thy presence, thy providence, mercy and goodness toward them in granting
their petitions, and by prayer they are confirmed of them. Yea, thy children
use prayer to admonish them, how that all things are in thy hands. In p^ayer
they are (as it were) of thee put in mind of those things which they have ione
against thee, their good Lord By reason whereof repentance ens^eth, and they
conceive a purpose to live mo^e purely ever afterward, and more heartily to
app^y themselves to all innocence and goodness.

Who now con^id^ring so man^e great commodities to come by reason of prayer,
would marvel why thy children are much in prayer, and laboring to provoke
others thereunto. For as none that is a suter to any other, will use any thing
which might offend or hinder his suit: so no man that uses prayer will flatter
himself in any thing that should displease thee, to whom by prayer he moves
suit, whenever he prays: so that nothing is a more provocation to all kind
of godliness then prayer is.

As concerning outward things which thy children pray for, although they know
thy will and decree is not variable, and thy purpose must needs come to pass,
yet do they receive by their prayer no small commodity. For either they
obtain their requests, or not. If they do obtain them: then prove they by
experience that thou do the will of them that fear thee and so they are more
kindled to love and serve thee. And indeed for this purpose thou art wont, when
thou will do good to any, to stir up their minds to desire the same good of
thee, to the end that both thou and thy gifts may be so much the more
magnified and set by of them, by how much they have been carnest suitors and
petitioners for the same. For how can it but inflame them with love toward
thee, to perceive and feel thee so to care for them, hear them, and love them?

If they do not obtain that they pray for, yet undoubtedly they receive
great comfort, to see that the evils, which press them and whereof they
complain still, do not oppress and overcome them: and therefore they receive
strength to bear the same the better. O good father help me that I may
heartily love thee; complain to thee in all my needs, and always by prayer to
power out my heart before thee. Amen.

John Bradford.

A meditation upon the Lords prayer.
Our Father.
THou good Lord, which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that is
therein, Exodus 1.
together with thy dear^ly beloved son Jesus Christ, and with thy holy
spirit; thou the same God which openedst thy self to Adam by thy promise: Genesis
3. Gen 12.22.23.24.25. Exodus 13.14 15. Exodus 19.20
thou the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: then which broughtest thy people of
Israel forth of Egypt with a mighty hand, and a stretched out power: thou which
gave the Law upon Mount Sinai: thou which spakest by thy prophets, and last
of all in these latter days, Heb. 1
by the dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, whom thou would should be made a
second Adam* that as by the first we are children of wrath, 1 Cor. 15. Romans 5.
carnal and full of concupis^ence; so by him we might be made children of
grace and spiritual by communicating with him in quality, merits, virtues and
grace of his flesh through the operation of his holy spirit, as he
communicated wi h us the substance of our flesh, in the womb of the Virgin
Mary, Man. 1. Luke 1.
in the operation of the same holy spirit, being that blessed seed which was
promised to Adam, Abraham, ^saac, Jacob and David, which should bruise the
Serpents head, Genesis 3.12.26.^8. Psa^ 89 2. Reg. 1 Luke 1. Psalm. 110.
which should bring the blessing on all Nations, which should reign over his
house for ever, and mightily overcome thine and our enemies, as indeed he did
by his incarnation, nativity, Romans 8.
circumcision, exile, baptism, fasting, temptation, doctrine, miracles,
watchings, agonies; bloody prayer, passion, death, resurrection and ascension,
Mat. 24. 2. Cor. 15. 2. These. 4. 2 Cor. 5. Exo. 31.33. Joel 3. Psalm. 15. Genesis 6.
and yet still so does by his mediation and intercession for us, and at the
length will on all parts fully accomplish by his coming to judgment, which
will be suddenly in the twinkling of an eye, with the blast of a trumpet, and
shout of an Archangell, when he shall be seen with thousands of Saints, and
innumerable thousands of Angels, all the whole world being on fire, and all the
people that ever were are, or shall be, then standing before his tribunal, or
judgment seat, to render an account of that they have done in this body, be
it good or bad: Thou I say, this God which are holy, righteous, true, wise,
pure, chaste mighty, merciful, good, gracious, an hater of sin, and a revenger
of unrighteousness, etc Our heart is by nature so corrupt and vnsercheably
evil, that out of it springs al wicked concupiscence, so that the
inclination thereto is prone to evil ever from our bir h up, and our mi^de and
understanding is so darkened that of our selves we cannot perceive those things
that ^e of God a^ is all the wisdom which we receive from Adam na ural^y or
othe^wise a^taine by labor or study before regenera^io^.
would that I, which am borne in sin, and conceived in iniquity, which by
nature am a child of wrath, and in whom dwells continual enmity against
thee; that I which am nothing but sin, and one that does evil always before
thee, should call thee, and believe thee, this God and Father of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, to be in very deed my Father: that is thou would I
should be most assured that thou of thine own good will which thou barest to
mewards before I was, yea before the world was have in Christ chosen me to be
thy child, and through him art become my most loving Father, from whom I
should look for all good things, and be most certainly persuaded that lo^ke
how much thou art more then a man, so much thy love and fatherly providence,
toward me, passes the love and providence of any Father toward his child, in
loving me, ca^ing how to help me, providing for me, nurturing me, and
he^ping me in all my needs. So certain thou would have me to be of this,
that to doubt of it does most displease thee, and dishonor thee as though
either thou were not true, or not able to do these things, or else becamest
not my father in respect of thine own goodness in Christ only, but also in
respect of my worthiness and deserts.

Causes to comfort our f ith that God is our father.
And that I should not waver or doubt of this, that thou art my dear Father,
and I thy child for ever, through Jesus Christ, it is required in the first
commandment, which says: I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other
Gods but me

Again, thy son does here command me to call thee by the name of Father.
Moreover, in the f^rst article of my belief, I profess the same in saying: I
believe in God the Father almighty. Besides this there are many other things
to confirm me herein: as the creation and government of the world generally,
and of every creature particularly: for all is made and kept for man, and so
for me, to serve me for my commodity, necessity, and admonition. Again, the
creation of me, in that thou have made me after thy image having a reasonable
soul, body, shape, etc. where thou might have made me a Toad, a serpent, a
Swine, deformed, frantic, etc. Moreover, thy wonderful conservation,
nourishing and keeping of me hitherto in my infancy, childhood, youth, etc. All
these (I say) should confirm my faith in thy fatherly love.

But of all things, the opening of thy self by thy word and promise of grace
made after man's fall, f^rst to Adam, then to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and so to
other, being published by the Prophets from time to time, and last of all
accomplished by thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in whom thy promises are yea and
Amen: the opening of thy self thus (I say) in and by Christ is the most chief
and sure certificate, that thou art my Father for his sake: and I thy dear
child, although of my self I am most unworthy. For thou, according to thy
promises, have not spared thy dear Son Jesus Christ, but given him to the
death of the Cross for my sins. Thou would he should be made flesh of our
flesh, and blood of our blood, in the womb of the Virgin Ma^y, by the
operation of thy holy spirit, that we by the working of the same spirit,
through the merits of his flesh and blood, might be made flesh of his flesh,
and blood of his blood: that is, as he has the substance of our flesh and
blood: even so we might have and for ever enjoy in him and through him the
qualities, virtues and gifts o^ righteousness, holiness, innocence*
immortality, and glory wherewith he has endued our nature in his own person
for us all: that as now in faith and hope we have the same, so in his coming,
Phil. 3,
we might fully enjoy them in very deed: for then shall our bodies, now vile,
be like to his glorious body.

Herein appears thy love, not that we loved thee, but that thou louedst us,
1. John ^
and have given thy Son for us. Herein do thou commend unto us thy love,
that when we were yet sinners, Christ thy dear Son died for us: Romans 5.
so that nothing should separate us from the love in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.
neither affliction, anguish, persecution, famine, neither life nor death, etc.
For when we were enemies, Romans 5.
we were reconciled unto thee by the death of thy Son, much more, we being
reconciled, shall be saved in his life.

And that I should not doubt hereof, but certainly be persuaded all this to
pertain to me, where I might have been bo^ne of Turks and infidels, lo thou
would I should be borne of Christian Parents, What Baptism is and what it
requires.
brought into thy Church by Baptism, which is a Sacrament of adoption and
requires faith as well of remission of my sins, as of sanctification and
holiness, to be wrought of thee in me by thy grace and holy spirit.

Where I might have been borne in an ignorant time and Region, thou would I
should be borne in this time and Region, wherein is more knowledge revealed,
then ever was here or many place is.

Where I might have been of a corrupt judgment, and entangled with many
errors; lo, thou of thy goodness, as thou have reformed my judgment, so do
thou keep it, and now for the same judgments sake, do vouchsafe, What is
the effect or frui^ that comes of this certain persuasion, that God is our
father.
somewhat by the Cross to try me. By all which things I should con^^rme my
faith of this, that thou always have been, art, and wilt be for ever my dear
father.

In respect whereof as I should be certain of salvation, and of the
inheritance of heaven for ever: so should I be thankful, cast my whole care
on thee, trust to thee and call on thee, with comfort and certain hope for all
things that I want.

For in that thou have given to me this benefit to be thy child, undeserved
and undesired on my behalf, simply and only in respect of thine own
goodness and grace in Christ, least at any time I should doubt of it: how
should I but hope certainly that nothing profitable to me can be denied, in
that thy power is infinite? For as thy good will is declared in adopting me, so
nothing can be finally wanting in me, which may make for my weal, for then
should not thy power be almighty: and therefore my belief requires that I
should believe in thee the father almighty.

In consideration whereof, I should in all things behave my self as a child,
rejoice in thee, praise thee, trust in thee, fear thee, serve thee, love thee,
call upon thee, etc.

But alas, how heavy hearted am I! How unthankful am I! How full of unbelief;
and doubting of this thy rich mercy! How little do I love thee, fear thee*
call upon thee. etc.

Oh be merciful unto me, forgive me good father for thine own sake; and
grant me the spirit of thy children to reveal thy self unto me, and Jesus
Christ thy dear Son our Lord by whom we are made thy children, that I may
truly know thee, heartily love thee, faithfully hang upon thee in all my needs
with good hope call upon thee, tender faithfully this honor to thee, that thou
art my God and Father, and I thy dear Child through thy grace in Christ, and so
always be endued with an assured hope of thy goodness, and a faithful
obedient heart in all things to thy holy will.

As thy hands and from thee, as I must look for all things, so come I unto
thee, and pray the to give me those things, which thy dear children have, and
thou requirest of me that I come and ask them of thee as now I do, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

As by this word (Father) I am taught to glory of thee and in thee, and all
that ever thou have (for thou art wholly mine, my Lord, my God, my father): so
by this word (Our) I am taught to glory of all the good that all and every of
thy servants that ever were, are, or shall be had, have, or shall have. For
now I am taught to believe, that thou have called me into the communion of thy
Church and people, whom hereby I perceive thou have commanded to be as careful
for me, as for h^mselues, and in all their prayers ^o be as mindful of me,
as of themselves.

Again as by this word (Father) I am taught to remember and render my duty I
owe to thee-wards, faith, love, fear, obedience, etc, so by this word (Our) I
am taught my duty toward thy people, to be careful of them, and to take
their sorrow poverty, afffiction, etc. as mine own, and therefore to labor to
help them in heart and hand after my vocation and ability, utterly abhorring
all pride, self-love, arrogance, and contempt of any.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament,
because I am so far from consideration, much more from doing my duty to thy
people, in thoughts, words, and deeds. To rejoice, because I am called of thee,
and placed in the blessed society of thy Saints, and made a member and citizen
of the heavenly Jerusalem; and because thou have given in commandment to all
thy Church, to be as careful for me as for themselves.

But alas how far am I heerefrom? As I am guilty of unthankfulness for this
thy calling me unto the blessed communion of thy dear son and Church, yea
of thy self: so am I guilty of self-love, unmercifulness, pride, arrogance,
forgetfulness, and contempt of thy children, for else I could not but be
otherwise affected and otherwise labor then I do.

Oh be merciful unto me, good Father: forgive me, and grant for Christ's
sake, that as my tongue sounds this word Our, so I may in heart feel the
true joy of thy blessed communion, and the true love and compassion which thy
children have and feel toward their brethren: that I may rejoice in all
troubles in respect of that ioifull communion: that I may deny my self to
honor thy children upon earth, and endeavor my self to do them good for thy
sake, through Jesus Christ our Lord, I come only to thee, to give me that which
I cannot, nor must not else where have, and thou requirest it of me, that
therefore I should as thy child, come and crave it to thy glory,

Which art in heaven.
AS by these words, Our Father, I am taught to glory and rejoice for the
blessed communion which I am called to, with thee, dear Father, with thy
Christ, and wi^h the holy Church: so also am I here taught by these words,
Which art in heaven, to rejoice in respect of the place and blessed joys
whereunto at the length in thy good time I shall come. For now I may perceive,
that as heaven is thy home, so is it mine also, being (as I am) thy child
through Christ, although here for a time I am bodily on earth and in misery.

Again by these words, which art in heaven, I am admonished not only to
discern thee from earthly Fathers, and to know how that thou art almighty,
present in all places, and of most purity, to confirm thereby my faith, to be
provoked the more to fear thee, to reverence thee; etc. But also I am
admonished to judge of thy fatherly love, by heavenly benefits, and not by
corporal, simply and alonely. for oftentimes the wicked prosper more in the
world, and have more worldly benefits then thy children. So that by this I
see, thou would pull up my mind from earth and earthly things, to Heaven
and heavenly things, and that I should see further by corporal benefits, thy
heavenly providence for me. For if thou place me thus on earth and thus
bless me as thou do and hitherto have done from my youth up, in that thou
art nothing so careful for my body as for my soul: how should I but think
much of thy providence, for it is thy home where is such glory as the eye has
not seen, etc Of which things these corporal benefits of thine given me on
earth, should be (as it were) inductions, and the takng of them away,
admonitions to be more mindeful of permanent things, and less mindful of
transitory things.

By reason hereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament,
because I am so earthly minded, so little desirous of my home, so unthankful
for thy providence and fatherly protection here on earth.

To rejoice, because of my home, and the great glory thereof: because thou
do so provide for me here, because thou do so correct and chasten me,
etc. But alas, I am altogether a wretch, earthly, and unthankful, not only
for these corporal benefits, health, riches, friends, fame, wisdom, etc. for
thy fatherly correction, sickness, temptation, etc. but also for thy heavenly
benefits, for Christ Jesus, for the promise of thy spirit, for thy Gospel,
etc. yea even for heaven it self and thy whole glory, as the Israelites were
for the land of Canaan, Psalm. 106.
and therefore never enjoyed it, but perished in the wilderness: I am proud
in prosperity and forget thee, waxing secure and careless. I am impatient in
the cross and to much consider worldly discommodities.

Oh dear Father, forgive me for thy Christ's sake a^l mine unthankfulness,
love of this world contempt, and oblivion of thy heavenly benefits, and grant
me thy holy spirit, to illuminate the eyes of my mind with the light and
lively knowledge of thy presence, power, wisdom, Col. 3 ^hil. 3.
and goodness, in thy creatures but specially in Christ Jesus thy son, and
so by the same spirit, inflame mine affections, that I may desire nothing in
earth but thee, and to be present with thee, that my conversation may be in
Heaven continually, from whence grant me still to look for the Lord Jesus, to
make this my vile body like unto his own glorious and immortal body,
according to his own power, by which he is able to do all things. As thou have
given me to be thy child: so I pray thee give me these things which be the
properties of thy children, given from thee in thy good time.

Hallowed be thy name.
THy name is that whereby thou art known, for names serve to discern and know
one thing from another. Now though thou art known by creatures, yet is this
our corrupt estate, Romans 1,
they serve but to make us excuselesse. Therefore most properly, lively and
comfortably thou art known by thy holy word, and specially by thy promise of
grace, Psalm 84.138. How Gods name is hallowed.
and freely pardoning and receiving us into thy favor, for Christ Jesus sake.
For the which goodness in Christ thou art praised and mag^ified, according to
thy name, that is so much as men know thee in Christ, they magnify thee and
praise thee, which here thou call hallowing or sanctifying. For that thou
art the more holy, not in respect of thy self, but in respect of men, who the
more they know thee, the more they cannot but sanctify thee, that is, they
cannot but as in themselves by true faith, love, fear, and spiritual service
honor thee: so also in their outward behavior and words, they cannot but live
in such sort, The chief desire of Gods children.
as other seeing them, may in, and by their holiness and godly conversation,
be occasioned, as to know thee, so to sanctify thy name accordingly: and
therefore thou set forth here unto me, what is the chief and principal
wish and desire of thy children and people, namely, that ^hou in Christ
might be truly known and honored, both of themselves and of other
inwardly and outwardly: as by the contrary a man may easily perceive, The
greatest grief of Go^s people.
that the greatest sorrow and grief thy people have, is ignorance of thee,
false service or religion and wicked conversation. Against the which they pray
and labor diligently after their vocation; as they for the obtaining of the
other, both to other, and to themselves, do take no small pain in prayer,
study, and godly exercise.

By reason hereof I see, that I am far from this desire and lamentation
which is in thy children, I see mine ignorance of the true knowledge of thee
and thy name: for else it had not needed thee so by thy word to have revealed
thy self. I see also mine own ignorance of the excellency of the same: Our
ignorance.
for else would thou not have told me, that the sa^ctifying of thy name is
the chiefest thing thou requirest of every man.

Again, I see my great want of holiness: Our great need.
for else thou need not to teach me to seek and pray for that I want not.

Moreover, I see my great peruersity, which would not seek at thy hands for
sanctification, although I see my need thereof. For the which thou would not
have commanded me to pray, if I seeing my want, would have prayed unto thee
for the same.

Last of all, Gods love.
I see thy wonderful goodness, which wilt undoubtedly give unto me
sanctification and holiness: for thou would not that I should ask for that
thing, that thou will not give me.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because I am so
far from this desire and lamentation which thy children have also because of
mine ignorance, poverty, peruersity, unthankfulness, etc. But most of all,
because thy holy name, word, and religion is so blasphemed both in doctrine,
and in living of many, especially in this Realm.

To rejoice I have great cause, for thy exceeding goodness and mercy, which
would so disclose thy self by thy works, word and Gospel: which would
open these things thus unto me and also give unto me and others sanctification
in thy sight by faith, and in the sight of men by pureness of life, and godly
conversation. But alas, I do heartily neither the one nor the other, that is,
lament or rejoice, as thou father which searchest my heart, do right well
know.

Oh be merciful unto me and forgive me, yea, give me for thine own pity, thy
holy spirit to reveal and open to my mind effectually my miserable estate and
condition, my ignorance, peruersity, and my carelessness for thy true honor
and dishonor: in such sort, that I may heartily lament these evils, and have
them pardoned and taken from me through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Again, good father, give me the same thy holy spirit, to reveal to me thy
name, word and Gospel, that I may lively know thee, unfeignedly love thee,
heartily obey thee, and above all things desire and labor by all means
lawful that all godliness in doctrine and conversation may be exercised both
in me and all others, for whom thou would I should pray.

Here think upon the state of religion, and the life of the professors of the
Gospel, that thou may lament some, pray for some, and give thanks for some.

Let thy kingdom come.
Gods kingdom in respect of his power.
THy kingdom is in two sorts to be considered: universally and particularly,
Universally, according to thy power, wherewith thou gouernest all things every
where, in earth, Heaven, hell, devils, Angels, men, beasts, fowls, fishes, and
all other creatures.

Of this kingdom spoke David, when he said. This kingdom rules over all.
Psalm. 10 4.
Particularly thy kingdom is to be considered according to thy grace
wherewith thou rainest only in thy Church and elect people, Gods kingdom in
respect of his grace.
ruling and governing all and every member of thy Church, to thy glory and
their eternal comfort. Not that out of this Church I exclude thy power, (for
as therewith thou defendest thy people, so thou punishest thy enemies:) but
because thy grace is specially considered, being (as it were) the very keeper
that keeps and guides thy people. God^ kingdom in respect of his glory


The time will be when this kingdom of grace and power, now being as distinct,
shall be united and made one kingdom of glory: which will be when Christ
shall give up his kingdom into thine hands, that is, in the resurrection, when
death the last enemy shall be subdued, and thou shall be all in all.

In the mean season, How Gods kingdom is here conside ed and enlarged.
this kingdom of grace is miraculously and mightily propagated, enlarged, and
governed by the true ministry of thy word and Sacraments through the working
of thy holy spirit. And this is the mean and way whereby, as thou did first
plant, so do thou enlarge, amplify and preserve the same.

This kingdom of grace begun, continued and enlarged by the true preaching of
thy Gospel, and ministration of thy Sacraments is the thing which Christ
teaches here thy children to pray for, that it might come: that is to say that
the Gospel might so mightily, purely, and plenteously be preached (maugre the
head of all thine enemies) that the number of thine elect might be brought in,
and so the kingdom of thy glory might appear. So that as I see thy children
desire, pray, and labor that thy Gospel might be truly preached, heard, and
lived in themselves and in others: so they lament the not preaching and
refusing, the not living and not believing thy Gospel: yea, they lament the
lingering of the coming of thy Christ: for in his coming they know they shall
be like unto him, and having this hope, they purify themselves as he is
pure. By reason hereof I see, first, that I am far from this desire and
lamenting which thy children have, I see my ignorance of thy kingdom and power
every where, also of thy grace in thy Church only, and of thy glory when all
the enemies of thy grace shall be cast down, and thy glory and power shall
embrace each other. I see my ignorance, how acceptable a service to thee is the
true preaching, and the hearing of thy Gospel: for else thou had not needed
to have placed this petition next to the petition of the sanctifying of thy
name.

Again, I see here mine unableness to enter into thy kingdom, and to
attain to it: for else what need should I have to pray for that to come from
thee, which otherwise may be achieved?

Thirdly, I see my peruersity and contempt of thy Kingdom and grace: for
although I see my want, Our peruersity.
yet I would not desire thy kingdom to come, if thou did not command me so
to pray: and if I would have prayed for it, thou would not have commanded me.

Gods goodness
Last of all, I see thy goodness which wilt bring thy kingdom and that as
generally, by sending forth ministers to preach truly: so particularly, by
regenerating me more and more, and by giving me as grace here so glory else
where: for thou would not I should pray for that which thou will deny.

So that I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because of my
miserable state and condi^ion, because of my sin, ignorance, rebellion,
peruersity, Satan's power, contempt of thy grace, thy Gospel, and ministry
here or elsewhere. To rejoice, because of thy goodness and great mercy which
have brought me into thy Church, keep me in it, and wilt do so still: Also
because of the ministry of thy word and sacraments by which the holy Ghost is
and will be effectual: and finally because of the great glory whereunto thou
have called me, and which now thou will give unto me asking the same.

But alas how unthankful I am and sorrowlesse, Lord thou know, for my heart
is not hid from thee. Oh be merciful unto me and forgive me good father, and
grant me the spirit of thy children, to reveal unto me my ignorance of thy
kingdom, my poverty and peruersity, that I may lament the same, and daily
labor for thy help and thy holy Spirit, to suppress the kingdom of sin
in my self and others.

Again, grant me that same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy kingdom of
power, grace and glory, to kindle mine affections, to regenerate me more and
more, to reign in me, as a piece of thy kingdom, to give to me to desire to
pray and to labor for thy kingdom both to my self and to others effectually
to thy glory, and to assure my conscience of thy goodness that thou will give
me grace and glory. etc.

Here call to mind the state of the ministry and ministers, the light and life
of Gospelers, the errors and heresies which men be entangled withal.

Thy will be done.
AS thy power is infinite, so is thy wisdom accordingly.

Whereby we may perceive that nothing is, or can be done against thy power,
or otherwise then by it, so is there not, nor cannot be any thing done
against, or otherwise, thou by thy omnipotent and secret will, which is always
(as thou art) good holy, and just, how far soever it seem otherwise to our
foolish reason and judgment, and therefore here we are taught to pray, that
thy will may be done here without sin on man's behalf, as it is on the
Angels behalf in heaven.

Again, for as much as thou art incomprehensible of thy self as well
concerning thy power, as concerning thy wisdom; we may not according thereto
search thee, but rather adore and worship thy majesty and tremble at thy
judgments and works, and therefore pray always, we may be content with thy
will and be buxome and obedient thereto.

And for as much as thou have revealed unto us so much of thy will in thy word
written, as is necessary for us in this life to know, yea, as we can attain
unto and a little further: we ought to take all things done against the same,
as sin and transgression, although thou can use the same sin, to serve
thy providence: of the which providence we cannot, nor may not judge further
then thou have and shall open it unto us.

So that this petition, Thy will be done, is not simply to be understood
concerning thy omnipotent will unrevealed, against the which nothing is nor can
be done, but rather concerning thy will revealed in the law and Gospel,, the
which thou here teach me that we should desire not only to know it, but
also to do it, and that in such perfection and willingness as it is in
heaven. The which thing I perceive hereby that thy children do desire daily in
and for themselves and others, and do lament the contrary, Psalm. 109.
in whom soever it be: so that often their eyes gush our with rivers of tears,
because me^ keep not thy laws.

By reason hereof I see that I am far from the sighs and tears of thy people.
Our ignorance.
I see my ignorance of thy will if thou had not opened the same by thine own
mouth I see my ignorance, how acceptable a service obedience to thy will is,
and therefore do thou place this petition among the first and continual
desires of thy children.

Again, I see my poverty in Godly obedience, Our necessity.
which had need to be taught to pray for it, there by to signify unto me my
want and inability to attain it but by thy gift.

Thirdly, I see my disobedience, Our disobedience.
for else never would thou have commanded me to have prayer for the doing
of thy holy will, if I seeing my want, would have prayed so.

Gods goodness.
Last of all, I see thy goodness, which wilt give to me, and others to obey thy
will that is, to love thee with all our hearts, to love our neighbor as our
selves, to die to our selves, to live to thee, to take up our cross, and to
follow thee, to believe, to repent, etc. for else thou would never have
bidden us to pray for a thing which we should not look for.

So that I have great cause to lament, and rejoice. To lament, because of my
miserable estate and condition, because of my sin, ignorance, poverty, and
peruersity: and because thy will is every where, either not known or contemned,
an Satan's will the will of the world and of the flesh, readily obeyed.

To rejoice I have great cause for that thou have opened thy self and will
unto mankind for that also thou peculiarly have taught me these things and
because thou will grant me grace to do the same. But alas, how unthankful I
am, and how hard hearted, thou Lord do know.

Oh be merciful unto me, and forgive me, I beseech thee, gracious God Grant
me thy holy spirit, to reveal to me my ignorance of thy will, my poverty and
peruersity, that I may hartyly bewail it, etc and by the help and working of
the same spirit, may suppress the will of the flesh Again grant me thy holy
spirit to reveal to me thy will declared in thy Law and Gospel; that I may
truly know the same, and inflame so my affections, that I may will and love the
same in such sort, that it may be my meat and drink to do thy will.

Here call to mind the ten commandments of God particularly or generally, what
therein he requires, and pray for the same particularly as you see your need,
and that not only for your self, but also for others.

Pray for patience to suffer what cross soever God shall lay upon you, and pray
for them that be under the cross, that they may be patient: pray for spiritual
wisdom in every c^osse peculiar or public, that you may see and love Gods
will.

Give us this day, our daily bread.
BY Bread Bread.
the food of the body, are understood all things necessary for this corporal
life, as meat, drink, health, success in our vocation, etc,

By this word Give, Give.
we should understand that not only spiritual things, but also corporal
benefits are Gods free gifts, and come not for our worthiness or travel taken
about the same, although our travels be often times means, by the which God
does give corporal things.

By daily Daily.
we understand the contented minds of thy children, with that which is
sufficient for the present time as having hope in thee that they shall not
want, but daily shall receive at thy hands plenty and enough of all things.

By this word Our Our.
are as well understood public bene^^ts, as peace in the common weal, good
Magistrates, good laws, reasonable weather, etc. Also particular benefits
namely children, health, succes in the works of our vocation, etc. And besides
this, by it we should see the care even for corporal things which thy children
have for others, as well as for themselves.

So that here I may learn how far I am from that I should be, and that I
see thy children are come unto, I see my ignorance also how that, as spiritual
things d^e come from thee, so do temporal things, and as they come from thee,
so are they conserved and kept of thee: and therefore thy children are
thankful and look for them as thy mere gifts, notwithstanding the means
which they use if they have them: howbeit they use them but as means, for
except thou work therewith, all is in vain.

Again, here I am taught to be content with that which is sufficient for the
present time, as thy children be, which have the shortness of this life,
always before their eyes: and therefore they ask but for daily sustenance,
knowing this life to be compared to a day, yea, a watch, a sound, a shadow,
etc.

Moreover I may learn to see the compassion and brotherly care which thy
child^en have one for another. Last of al, here I may see thy goodness, which
as thou will give me all things necessary for this life, (or else thou
would not bid me ask. etc.) so thou command all men to pray and care for
me, and that bodily, much more then, if they be able, they are commanded to
help me both in body and soul.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
I am not so affected as thy Children be, because of my ignorance, my
ingratitude, my peruersitie and contempt of all goodness, and of the necessity
of thy people, which (alas) be in great misery, some in exile, some in prison,
some in poverty, sickness, etc.

To rejoice I have geat cause, because of thy goodness in teaching me these
things, in commanding me to ask whatsoever I want, in giving me so many
things unasked, in keeping the benefits given me, in commanding men to care
for me, to pray for me, to help me, etc.

But alas, how far I am either from true lamenting or rejoicing, Lord thou
know. Oh be merciful unto me, and help me, forgive me and grant me thy
holy spirit to reveal to me my neeed, ignorance, great ingratitude and
contempt of thy mercies and thy people, and that in such sort, that I might
heartily lament and bewail my misery, and through thy goodness be altered, with
thy people to mourn for the miseries of thy children, as for mine own.

Again, reveal to me thy goodness, dear father, even in corporal things;
that I may see thy mercy thy presence, power, wisdom, and righteousness in
every creature and corporal benefit, and that in such sort, that I may be
thoroughly affected truly to reverence, fear, love, and obey thee, to hang upon
thee, to be thankful to thee, in all my need to come unto thee, not only
when I have ordinary means, by the which thou commonly workest, but also when
I have none, yea when all means and helps are clean against me.

Here remember the state of your children and family: also your parents,
neighbors, kin^folks: also your friends, country, magistrates, etc. as you
shall have time thereto, and by Gods good spirit shall be provoked.

Forgive us our debts, as we forgive them that are debtors unto us.
BY Our debts Debts.
we understand not only the things we have done but the omission and leaving
undone of the good things we ought to do.

By Our Our.
we understand not only the particular sins of one, but also generally of
the sins of all and every one of the Church.

By Forgiveness Forgiveness.
we understand, free pardon and remission of sins, by the merits and deserts of
thy dear son Jesus Christ, who gave himself a ransom for us.

By Our Forgiving Our forgiving.
of other men's offenses to us ward, we understand thy good will, not only
that it pleases thee that we should live in love and amity, but also that
thou would have us to be certain of thy pardoning us of our sins. For as
certain as we are, that we pardon them that offend us, so certain should we be
that thou do pardon us, whereof the forgiving our trespasses i^ as it were a
sacrament unto us.

So that by this petition I am taught to see that thy children, although by
imputation they be pure from sin, yet they acknowledge sin to be, and remain
in them, and therefore do they pray for the remission and forgiveness of the
same.

Again, I am taught hereby to see how thy children do consider and take to
heart, not only the evils they do, but also the good they leave undone, and
therefore they pray thee heartily for pardon.

Moreover, I am here taught to see that thy children are careful for other
men, and for their trespasses, and therefore pray that they might be pardoned
in saying, our sins, and not my sins.

Besides this, I am taught here to see how thy Children not only forgive all
those that offend them, but also pray for the pardoning of the offenses of
their enemies, and such as offend them: So far are they from malitiousnesse,
pride, reuengement, etc.

Last of al, I am taught to see how merciful thou art, which wi^t have us to
ask pardon (whereof thou would that we should in no point doubt but be most
assured, that for Christ's sake thou hear us) and that not only for our
selves, but also for many others: for thou do not command us to ask for any
thing which thou will not give us.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
of my miserable estate which am so far from these affections that are in thy
children, which am so ignorant and careless of sin not only in leaving good
undone, bu^ also in doing evil, and that daily, (...) thought, word and deed,
etc. I speak not of my carelessness for other folk^ sins, as of my parents,
children, family, magistrates, etc. neither of the sins of them, to whom I have
given occasion to sin.

To rejoice I have great cause, because of thy mercy in opening to me these
things, in com^anding me to pray for pardon in promising me pardon, and
commanding others to pray for me. And surely I ought to be persuaded of thy
mercy, though my sins be innumerable: for I see not only in this, but in
every petition, how that every, one of the church prays for me, yea Christ
thy son, who sits on thy right hand, prays for me, etc.

O dear father be merciful unto me, and forgive me all my sins, and of thy
goodness give me thy holy spirit to open mine eyes, that I may see sin, the
better to know it, the more truly to hate it, and most earnestly to strive
against it, and that effectually both in my self and others.

Again, grant me the same thy holy spirit, to reveal unto me the remedy of
sin, by Christ only, and to work in me faith to embrace the same by Christ,
and thy mercies in him, that I may henceforth be endued with thy holy spirit,
to begin to obey thy good will more and more, and to increase in the same for
ever.

Here call to mind the special sins you have committed heretofore. Remember if
you have occasioned any to sin, to pray for them by name. Remember that Gods
law should be so dear unto us, that the breaking thereof in others, should be
an occasion to make us to lament with tears, etc.

Lead us not into temptation.
BEcause of our continual and great infirmities, because of the great
diligence and subtilties of our enemies: and because thou art wont to punish
sin with sin (which of all punishments is the greatest and most to be
feared) in this petition thou would have thy children to have the same in
remembrance, and for a remedy hereof thou have appoinetd prayer, so that the
only cause why any are overcome and led in^o temptation, is for that they
forg^t what they desire in the p^tition going before this, which should never
be out of their memory, to provoke them to be more thankful to thee, and
more vigilant and heedy hereafter for falling into the like perils. For which
to be avoided thou do most graciousl^ set forth a remedy in commanding us
to pray after pardon for our sins past, and for thy grace to guide us, so
that we be not led into temptation, but might be delivered from evil And
because thou would have all thy children to hang wholly upon thee, to fear
thee only, and only to love thee* thou do not teach them to pray: suffer us
not to be led, but lend us not into temptation, that (I say) the^ might only
fear thee, and certainly know that Satan has no power over so much as a
pigge, but whatsoever thou give unto him and of thy secret, but most just
judgment do appoint him to use, not as he will (for then we are all lost)
but as thou will which can will nothing, but that which is most just as to
give them to the guiding of Satan, which will not be guided be thy grace, as
thou did Saul, etc.

Occasions to evil are in two sorts: Occasions to evil in two sorts.
love by prosperity and suckcesse: another by adversity, and the cross, etc.
The evils eomming of success commonly are unthankfulness, pride, security,
and forgetting of our selves, forgetting of others, forgetfulness of God, of
our mortallity etc. The evils coming of adversity, commonl^ are impatiency,
What tentation^ are to the godly and what they are to the wicked.
murmuring, grudging despairing* con^entning of God, slattering of man
stealing, lying, with many other evils, whereto tentations will entice a man
that is left to himself: whereas to one that is guided with Gods spirit,
temp^ations are but trialls to the glory of God, comfort of the tempted, and
edif^ing of the Church But (as I said) if a man be left alone, temptations
entice even to the devil himself: and therefore thy Children pray to be
delivered from evil, understanding thereby Satan himself, the sower and
supporter of all evil. And this thy children do as well for others as for
themselves. So that I may learn hereby many good things. First, to remember
often our infirmity, and weakness, and the dangerous estate we stand in, in
respect of our flesh, of the world which is full of evil, of Satan which
seeks to fifth us, and as a roaring Lion to destroy us, and of our sins
which deserve all kind of punishments and correction, that I might with thy
children fear thee watch pray, and desire the day of redemption and
deliverance from all evils.

Again, I may learn here that to avoid all dangers and evils, is not in the
power of man, but only thy work. By reason whereof, I should consider thy
great goodness which hitherto have kept me from so many evils, both of soul
and body, yea of name, goods, etc. as thou have done in my infancy, childhood,
youth, middle age, etc.

Thirdly, I may learn here that I should be careful for others, both that
they might be delivered from their evils, and that they might be preserved
from temptation and from being overcome in the same, and therefore thou teach
me not to pray, Deliver me from evil, simply, but D^liuer us from evil.

Last of all, I am taught hereby to see thy goodness toward me which wilt
deliver me from evil, and from being overcome in temptations, for thou
would not have me ask for that which I should not certainly look for at
thy hands. By reason whereof thou would have me to be in a certainty of my
salvation for ever. For else I cannot believe my p^aier to be heard, if that
f^nally I should not be delivered from evil: and therefore thou ioinest here
to a giving of thanks, which with thy Church I should say For thine is the
kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory for ever.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament, and to rejoice. To lament
because of my corruption, infirmity, weakness, oblivion, and carelessness for
thy people, ingratitude etc. because of Satan's power, vigilance and prudency,
which has overcome most grave wise, and holy men whereof some never recovered:
as Cain, Cha^, Achitopel, Saul, Iud^s etc. To rejoice because of thy good, nes,
which teach me this, and show me the remedy, commaundest all thy Church
to pray for me, and will at length deliver me from all evil, and give me
glory. But alas, I am altogether careless and miserable. O be merciful unto
me dear Father, and for Christ's sake forgive me all my sins: grant me thy
holy spirit to reveal to me mine infirmities, weakness, perils, dangers etc
in such sort, that as I may heartily lament my miseries, so I may ask and
obtain thy grace to guide me from all evil for evermore.

Again grant me the same thy holy spirit to reveal to me thy love and
kindness toward me (and that in eternity) in such sort that I may be
thoroughly persuaded of the same become thankful unto thee, and daily expect
and look for the revelation of thy kingdom, power and glory, as one that for
ever shall have the fruition of the same, through thine own goodness and mercy
in Christ, prepared for me before the beginning and foundation of the world was
laid.

Here call to mind our security, Satan's vigilance, our negligence, his
diligence, our infirmity, his aility, our ignorance, his craft and subtlety,
etc.

Again, call to mind, how that he has overthrown for a time many of the
dear Saints of God, to whom we are to be compared in nothing as Adam, (...),
Lot, Judas, Th^mar, M^ses, Aaron, M ri n, Samsan, G^deon, Eli, David, Solomon,
Ezechias, Josias, Peter, Thmas, and innumerable more.

Also call to mind the goodness of God, and of our shepherd Christ, which
has kept us hitherto, keeps us still, and teaches us here to know that he
will keep us for ever: for he would not have us ask for deliverance from
evil, if that he would not we should certainly look for the same. If thou
doubt of final perseverance, thou dishonorest God. Be certain therefore, rest
in hope, be still in his word. See also how he has commanded his whole Church,
and every member thereof, to pray for thee as well as for themselves, in these
and all other things.

Now and then go about to reckon how many and diverse kinds of evils there be,
and thereby as you may know you are delivered from n^ne but by Gods great
goodness: so may you see that the number of evils that you have, are nothing to
be compared to the multitude of evils, wherewith if your Christ were not, the
devil would al to betray you, insect and corrupt you.

But what are all the miseries and evils that can be, to be compared to the
least joy prepared for us in heave. O think of these ioies, and pray that when
the tide of death comes we may hail forth of the haven of this flesh, and
this world joyfully.

In praying this petition, call to mind the evils you have been in, the evils
you are in, and the evils you may fall into, if God should not preseue you,
that you might be stirred up the more to thankfulness, to prayer, and to trust
in God.

For thine is the kingdom, thine is the power, thine is the glory, for ever.
AS in the beginning of this prayer, by these words (Our Father which art in
heaven) thy children are excited and stirred up to a full confidence of
obtaining the petitions following and all things necessary: so in the later end
thou have added for the same purpose these words (For thine is the kingdom,
thine is, etc.) wherein I am taught these many things. First that in prayer I
should have such consideration of thy kingdom, power, glory and eternity, that
my mind should be stricken with an admiration of the same. Secondly, that I
should so consider them, especially in prayer that I should not doubt, but that
thou workest, rulest, and gouernest althings every where, in all persons and
creatures most wisely, justly, and mercifully. Thirdly, that in prayer all my
petitions should tend to the setting forth of thy power, of thy kingdom, and
of thy glory.

Last of all that in prayer I should in no wise doubt of being heard but be
assured that thou which have commanded me to pray, and have promised to hear
me, do most graciously for thy mercies sake, and truths sake hear my
petitions, according to thy good will, through Jesus Christ thy dear son our
Lord and only Savior.

By reason whereof I have great cause to lament and rejoice. To lament, because
I consider not these things in prayer, in such sort as should move me to
admiration, and gratitude: because I consider not thy power and wisdom
generally in all things, because I am so careless for thy kingdom, and because
I am so full of dubitation and doubting of thy goodness. To rejoice I have
great cause, because thou reuealest these things unto me in this sort: because
of thy power, kingdom, and glory which makes to the bearing of my prayers, and
helping of me: because thou will use me as thine instrument to set forth thy
kingdom, power and glory, and because it pleases thee to hear my prayers,
and assuredly wilt save me for ever.

But alas how far am I from these lamentings and reioycing^? By reason whereof
I deserve damnation O be merciful unto me, and forgive me, and of thy
goodness grant me thy holy spirit, to reuea^e to me my blindness, oblivion and
contempt of thy kingdom, power and glory, with the greatness of my doubtings,
that as I may heartily lament them, so have them pardoned and taken from me
through the merits of jesus Christ thy son

Again, give me thy holy spirit to reveal to me in such sort thy kingdom,
power, glory and eternity, tha^ I may always have the some before mine eyes,
be moved with the admiration the^eof, labor effectually to set forth the same:
and finall^, as to have the fruition thereof after this life, so to increase in
an assured, certain, and lively expectation of the same, that I may always
and in all things rejoice in thee through Christ, and give lands, thanks and
praises perpetual, unto thy most holy name; Oh blessed Father, Son and holy
Ghost, three persons, and one God, to whom be all honor and glory, world
without end.

Here think that if the kingdom, power, glory and eternity be Gods, which is
our f^ther, what our dignity is which be his children. If the power be our
Fathers of whom should we be afraid? Let the devil be subject to the Lords
power and kingdom (as he is) how can the subject have power over us which be
sons and heirs in that he has not power over porkets, without the
providence and permissio^ of God? Therefore full well should we pray, Lead us
not into temptation, rather then, let us not be led into temptation, for power
is the Lords, and the Devil has none, but that he has of Gods gift. No, he
were notable to receive power if God did not make him able, although the
execution of it is rather of God^ permission.

Give all thank^s, praise and glory to God our Father through Christ our Lord
and Savior. So be it. JOHN BRADFORD.

Private prayers for the morning and Evening, and for other times of the day.
When you awake out of your sleep pray thus.
MOst merciful God and Father of our Savior Jesus Christ, I most humbly
thank thee for the sweet sleep and comfortable rest which thou have given me
this night past: beseeching thee that like as thou have now awaked my body from
sleep, so thou would awake my soul from the sleep of sin, and
darkness of this world, and that which thou now awaked out of sleep, thou
would after death (whereof this sleep is but an image) restore and raise
aga ne to life everlasting. O gracious God make my body I heartily pray thee,
such a companion, or rather a minister of godliness to my soul this day, and
all the time of this present life, that in the life ^o commit may be partaker
with the same of everlasting happiness, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall show light
unto thee, Ephesians. 5.

Occas^ons to meditate.
Here call to mind the great mirth and blessedness of the everlasting
resurrection. Also remember to muse upon that most clear light, that bright
morning and new clearenes of our bodies after the long darken^sse, which they
have been in. All then shall be full of unspeakable joy and felicity.

When you behold the day light pray.

O Lord God, thou most glorious and true light, from whence this light of the
day and sun does spring and shine unto us: O light which lightenest every man
that comes into this world: O light which know no night nor evening, but
art always a mid day most clear and fair: without whom all is most horrible
darkness, and by whom all things are most clear and bright. O thou wisdom of
the eternal Father of mercies lighten my mind that I may see those things
only which please thee, and may be blinded to all other things. Grant me so
to walk in the ways by the light of thy holy word, that nothing else may be
light and pleasant unto me.

Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, that I sleep not in death, least mine enemies say
I have prevailed against him. Psalm 30.

Occasions to meditate.
Muse a while how much the light and eye of the mind and soul is better then
of the body. Also how much more we ought to care for the soul that it may see
well th^n for the body. Morouer, that beasts have bodily eyes as well as men,
but men only have the eyes of the mind, and that such, as are godly wise.

When you arise pray.
OUR f rst parents cast down themselves from a most excellent high an^
honorable state into shame and misery, and into the deep sea of all wickedness
and mischief: but O Christ, thou p^tting forth thy hand did raise them up
again. Even so we except we be raised up by thee, shall he still for ever. O
good Christ, our most gracious Redeemer, as thou do mercifully raise up now
this my body, even so I beseech thee raise up my mind and heart to the true
knowledge and love of thee that my conversation may be in heaven where thou art.

If thou be ris n with Christ, think upon those things that be above, Co. 3

Occasions to meditate.
Think how foul the fa^l of Adam was by reason of sin, and so of every one
of us from the height of Gods grace. Again, think upon the inestimable benefit
of Christ, by whose help we daily rise again from our fallings.

When you apparel your self, pray.
O Christ cloth me with thine own self, that I may be so far from making
provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof, that I may clean put off
all desi^es, and crucify the king ome of the flesh in me. Be thou unto me a
g^rment to keep me warm and to defend me from the cold of this world If thou
be absent (dear Lord) all things are cold, weak and dead, but if thou be
with me all t^ings are warm, fresh and cherefull etc. Grant me therefore that
as I compass this my body with this garment: so thou would cloth me wholly
(but especially my soul) with thine own self.

Put upon you as the elect of God bowels of mercy, meekness, love peace, etc.
Col 3.

Occasions to meditate.
Call to mind a little how we are incorporate into Christ. Again, how he does
cloth us, govern and nourish us, and under his wings, protection and
providence preserves us.

When you are made ready to begin the day withal pray
O Almighty God and most merciful Father, thou know and have taught us also
something to know that the weakenes^e of man and woman is great, and that with
out thy grace they can neither do nor think any good thing Have mercy upon me
I humbly beseech thee, thy most weak, frail and unworthy child* lighten my
mind that I may with pleasure look upon good things only. Inflame my love with
the heat thereof, that I may carefully covet them, and at the last by thy
gracious conducting may happily attain the^, through Jesus Christ our Lord. I
distrusting altogether mine own weakness, comm^nd and offer my self both soul
and body into thy hands.

Thy loving spirit lead me forth into the land of righteousness.

Cogitations meet to begin the day withal.
Think first that man consists of soul and body, and that the soul is from
heaven heavenly, firm and immortal, but the body is from the earth earthly
frail ^^d mortal.

Again, think that though by reason of sin wherein ye are conceived and
borne, the parts of the soul which do understand and desire, b^ so corrupt
that without special grace to both parts, you can neither know nor love any
good thing in Gods sight, much less then do that is good, yet this
notwithstanding, think that you are regenerate by Christ's resurrection (which
your Baptism requires you to believe) and therefore have both those parts
some thing reformed both to know and to love, and therefore to do also some
good in the sight of God through Christ, for whose sake our poor doings are
accepted for good, the evil and infirmity cleaving thereunto, not being
imputed through faith.

Think that by faith, which is Gods seed (for they which believe are borne of
GOD, and made Go^'s children) giu^n to those that be ordained to eternal life:
think, (I say) that by faith you receive more and more the spirit of
sanctification, through the use of Gods word and Sacraments, and earnest
prayer, to illuminate your mind, understanding, i^dgement, and reason. and to
bow, form, frame and inflame your affections with love and power to do that
which is good, and therefore use you the means aforesaid accordingly.

Think that by this spirit, you are through faith coupled to Christ, as a
liu^ly memb^r, and so to God, and (as it were) made one with him: and by love,
which springs our of this faith, you are made one also with all that be of
God, and so you have fellowshippe with GOD and all good men that ever we^e or
shall be, in all the good that God and all his Saints have, or shall have

Think that as by faith and love through the spirit of GOD, you are now entered
into his Communion (the blessedness whereof no tongue can express) to after this
life, you shall first in soul, and in the last day in body also enjoy for ever
the same society most perfectly, which now is but begun in you.

Think then of your negligence, that do so little care for this your happy
estate.

Think upon your ingratitude to God, for making you, redeeming you, calling
you, and so lovingly adopting you.

Think upon your folly in f^ntasing so much earthly and bodily pleasures.

Think upon your deafnes and blindness which hear not God, no see him he
calling you so d^ligently by his works, word and Sacraments.

Think upon your frowardnes which will not be lead of God and his spirit.

Think upon your forgetfulness and in consideration of your heavenly estate, how
your body is the temple of the holy Ghost, your members are the members of
Christ, the whole world, and all things therein are your own. Therefore lay
unto your soul, O my soul arise, follow God, contemn this world, purpose
well and pursue it, long for the Lords coming, be ready and watch that he come
not upon th^e unawares. And forasmuch as you must live to Gods pleasure, see the
vocation and state of your life whereunto God has called you, and pray to God
for grace knowledge, and ability, to make the most profitable things in hand,
well to begin better to go on, and best of all to end the same to Gods glory,
and to the profit of your brethren, and think that time lost wherein you spe^k
not or do not, or at least think not something to Gods glory, and the commodity
of your brethren.

When you go forth of the doors, pray.
NOw must I walk among the snares of death stretched out of Satan, and of his
mischievous ministers in the world, carrying with me a friend to them both,
and a foe to my self, even this body of sin and sinful flesh, Oh graund
Captain Christ, lead me and guide me I beseech thee, defend me from the
plagues and subtilties, whereof I am in danger Grant that I may take all things
that happen, as I should do, and setting mine eyes upon thee only, I may so
go on forward in thy ways, as by nothing I be hindered, but rather furthered,
so that al my doings may intend to thy glory.

Show me thy ways, (O Lord) and teach me thy paths. Psalm 25.

Occasions to meditate.
Consider how vainly the most part of men are occupied: how many ways they
trouble and cumber themselves, thereby much alienating their minds from the
knowle^ge and cogitation of that which they should most esteem, and so become
a let and an offense to others, As in going abroad, Ioh. 6^ Ioh. 4.
you will see that your apparel be seem^y in the sight of men: so see how
seemly you appear in the sight of God.

When you are going any iourny, pray.
THis o^r life is a pilgrimage. From the Lord we came, and to the Lord we make
our journey: howbeit through dangerous and perilous ways which our cruel
enemies have and do prepare for us, being now more then stark blind by reason
of sin. O Christ which art a most true loads-man and guide; and also most
expert, faithful, and friendly, put thou out thine hand, open mine eyes, make
thy high way known unto me, which thou did first enter into, out of this
corruptible life, and have prepared the same for us to immortality. Thou art
the way, lead us unto the father by thy self that all we may be one with him,
as thou and he together be one.

Show me the way that I should walk in, for I lift up my soul* unto thee.
Psalm. 124.

Or pray thus.
MErciful father, thou art wont to send to thy servants and men of simple
hearts, thine Angels to be their keepers, and (as it were) guides as elder
brothers to watch upon thy weak children: so did thou to young Tobias, to
Jacob, to Abraham's servant, to Joshua, etc. O gracious GOD, though we be much
unlike unto them, so many are our sins, yet for thine own, goodness sake,
send thine holy Angels to pitch their tents about us, to hide us and defend us
from Satan and his slaves, to carry us in their hands, that we come not into
further danger, that thou will deliver us out of, for thine own sake.

His Angels are ministers for them that are heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.

Satan sleeps not, but seeks always to destroy us. 1. Pet. 5.

Occasions to meditate.
Think something how we are strangers from our Country, from our home, from
our original, I mean from God. Again, think upon our madness, that do
linger and loiter so gladly in this our journey and pilgrimage, also how
foolish we are to fantasy things which we cannot carry with us, and to
condemn conscience, which will always be a companion to us, to our joy, if it
be good, but to our shame and sorrow, if it be evil and corrupt. Finally, how
unnatural we are, which so little desire to be at our home, to be with our only
father, master, fellows and friends.

When you are about to receive your meat, p^ay thus.
THis is a wonderful mystery of thy work (O maker and governor of the world)
that thou do sustain the lives of men and beasts with these meats. Surely
this pouer is neither in the bread nor food, but in thy will and word, by which
word al things do live and have their being. Again, how great a thing is it
that thou art able continually to give sustenance to so many creaturs? This is
spoken of by the Prophet in setting forth thy praises: All things look up to
thee, Psalm. 55.
and thou give them meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fil^est
with thy blessing every living thing.

These doubtless are wonderful works of thine almightinesse. I therefore
heartily pray thee (O most liberal Lord and faithful Father) that as thou by
meat, through thy word do minister life to these our bodies; even so by the
same word with thy grace thou would quicken our souls, that both in soul
and body we may please thee, till this our mortal carcass shall put on
immortality, and we shall need no more any further food, but thee only, which
then will be al in all.

Taste and see how good the Lord is. Psalm. 14.

Bless the Lord (O my soul) which seedeth and fills my mouth with good
things. Psalm. 103.

Occasions to meditate.
Think a little how great Gods power is that made us. Also think how great his
wisdom is to preserve us. But most of all, think how many things are given
to our use, how wonderful it is to give us life, but most of all to propagate
and advance to immortality the life of the soul by his only be^ke. Last of
all, think that God by his providence for thy body, would have thee to confirm
thy faith of his providence likewise for thy soul.

In the mean time pray.
O Most liberal distributer of thy gifts which give us all kind of good
things to use, and being pure give pure things, being holy give holy
things: grant to us grace, that we misuse not these the gracious gifts given
to our use and profit. Let us not delight in the things, but let us delight in
thee from whom they come, as necessary for us for a season till we come unto
thee Grant us to be conversant amongst thy gifts, soverly pu^ely, temperatly
and holily, because thou art so. Then shall we not turn that so the poison of
our souls, which thou have given for the medicine of our bodies: but using thy
benefits thankfully, we shall find them profitable both in soul and body.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that the meats and drink set before you, are given you to use, and not
to ab se. Think that they are given to profit, and not to hurt you: Think that
they are not given to you alone, but unto others al o by you. In eating and
drinking, think that you do but feed the worme^. Remember the poor prisoners
the sick, the afflicted, etc. as though you were in their case.

Think upon the food of your soul, Christ's body broken, and blood shed:
desire the meat that lasts for ever; labor for it: Christ's meat was to do
his Fathers will.

After your meat, pray.
BY corporal meats thou do sustain our corporal daily life, ready
otherwise to perish. The which surely is a great work: but yet this is much
greater, more profitable, and more holy, that thy grace (O Jesus Christ) does
preserve us from the death of the soul. For this life we ought much to thank
thee: and because thou do prolong it with thy good gifts, we most heartily
praise thee. Howbeit this life is but the way to eternal life, which we
beseech thee for thy deaths sake that thou will give us* and so shall we not
only give thee (as we may) thanks for a time for temporal things: but also
eternal thanks for eternal things. O grant to us these our desires for thy
mercies sake, Amen.

Occasions to meditate.
Think now that God has given thee this his blessing of food and sustenance,
and thereto time that thou might, repent ^ so seek his glory, and the
commodity of thy brethren, therefore go thereabouts: but first pray for grace
well to begin. Again, consider now thou have been partaker of others men's
labors, as of the husbandmans, the Milners, the Bakers, the Bruers, the
Butchers, the Cooks etc. See therefore that thou be not as a drone be, but
rather such a one as may help the hiue. If God have thus fed thy body which he
loves not, but for thy souls sake: how can it be then, but that he will be
much more ready ^o feed the soul: therefore take a courage to thee, and go to
him for grace accordingly.

Cogitations for about the midday.
As thy body is now compassed on eu^^y side with light, so see that thy mi^d
^ay be also. As God gives th e th^s plentifully this corpo all light, so pray
hi^ that he will give thee the spiritual light. Think that as the sun is now
most clear, so shall our bodies be in the day of judgment. As now the sun is
come to the highest, and therefore will begin to draw downward: so is there
nothing in the world so perfect and glorious, which when it is at the full,
will not decrease and so wear away.

When you come home again, pray.
THere is nothing (O Lord) more like to thy holy nature, than a quiet mind.
Thou have called us out of the troublesome disquietnesse of the world, into
that thy quiet rest and peace, which the world cannot give, being such a peace
as passes men's understanding. Houses are ordained for us, that thereby we might
be defended from the injury of the weather, from cruelty of beasts, from
disquietnes of people and rest from toiles of the world. O gracious father,
grant that through thy great mercy my body may enter into this house from
outward actions, but so that it may become buxome and obedient to the soul,
and make no resistance against the same, that in seule and body I may have a
godly and quietness and peace to praise thy holy name, Amen.

Peace be to this house, and to all that dwell in the same. Matthew. 10.

Occasions to meditate.
Think what a return, and how mer^e a return it will be, to come to our
ete^nall, most quiet, and most happy home: then will all grief and sorrow
cease. Whatsoever here is pleasant and joyful the same is nothing but a very
shadow in comparison of that which is to come.

At the Sun going down pray.
HOw unhappy are they, (O Lord) from whom thy Sun goes down, and gives no
light; I mean thy grace, which is always clear as the mid day? Dark night
unto them is the midday, which depart from thee. In thee is never night, but
always day light most clear. This corporal sin has his courses now up, now
down; but thou dear Lord, if we love thee, art always one. O that this block
and veil of sin were taken away from me that there might be always clear
day in my mind.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that as we are not sorry when the Sun goes down, because we know it
shall rise again: Thi^ is meant of the bloody time of Queen Mary.
even so we should not sorrow for death, where through the soul and body do
part a sunder: for they shall eftsoons return, and come together again in
most glorious wise. So long as the Sun is up, wild beasts keep their dens,
foxes their burrowes, owls their holes, etc. But when the Sun is down, then
come they abroad; so wicked men and hypocrites keep their dens in the time
of the Gospel, but it being taken away, then swarm they out of their holes
like bees, as this day does reach.

When the Candles be light, pray.
MOst thick and dark clouds do cover our minds, except thy light (O Lord)
do drive them away. Thy sun (O most wise worker) is as it were a firebrand
to this world. Thy kingdom whereby light comes both to the soul and body,
is a firebrand to the spiritual world. After day, when the night comes, thou
have given for the remedy of darkness a candle. After sin; for the remedy of
ignorance thou have given thy doctrine, which thy dear son has brought unto
us. O thou that art the author and master of al truth and the true light make
us to see, that the dimnes of our minds may be driven clean away.

Lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, and send us joy and
gladness into our hearts. Psalm. 4.

Thy word is a lantern to my feet, and a light unto my paths. Psalm. 119.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that the knowledge which God gives unto us by the ca^dle light
(whereby we see those things in this night of our bodies which are expedient
for us) should make us to wish much more for this doctrine of God and
spiritual light of our souls, and when we get it, the more to esteem it, and
diligently to embrace it. Again that as all would be horror without candle
light, so there is nothing but mere confusion, where Gods word takes no place.

When you make your self unready, pray.
THis our life and weak knit body by occasion of sin, by little and little
shall be dissolved, and so shall be resto^ed to the earth from whence it was
taken, then will be an end of this vanity, which by our folly we have wrought
to our selves. O most meek father, so do thou unite me (for thou art he that
has knit these our weak members together) that I may perceive my self to be
loosed and dissolved, and so may remember both of whom I was made, and also
whither I must go, lest I be had unprovided unto thy tribunal seat.

Put off the old man with his lusts and concupiscences. Col. 3. Ephesians. 4.

Be content with Joseph, to put off thy prison apparel, that thou may put
on new. Genesis 41.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that as we do willingly put off our garments, because we shall
receive them again when the Night is past: so we should willingly forsake our
bodies, when God by death shall call us, because we shall receive them again
in the resurrection of the lust.

When you enter into your bed, pray:
THe day now ended, men give themselves to rest in the night, and so this life
finished, we shall rest in death: nothing is more like this life then every
day: nothing more like to our grave, then our bed. O Lord our keeper and
defender, grant that I now laying me down to rest, being unable to keep my
self may be preserved from the crafts and assaults of the wicked enemy, and
grant further, that when I have run the race of this life, thou would of thy
mercy call me unto thee, that I may live and watch with thee for evermore And
now gracious God, give me to take my rest in thee, and bring to pass that thy
goodness may be given in sleep before my eyes, that sleeping I be not absent
from thee, but may have my dreams to draw me unto thee, and so both soul and
body may be kept pure and holy for ever.

I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, etc. Psalm. 4.

Occasions to meditate.
Think that as the troublesome day is now past, and night come, and so rest,
quietness, and pleasant sleep, which makes most excellent princes and poor
wretches alike, even so after the tumults, troubles, temptations and tempests
of this life, they that believe in Christ have prepared in them an heaven and
rest most pleasant and ioiful. As you are not afraid to enter into your bed,
and to dispose your self to sleep, so be not afraid to die, but rather
cheerfully prepare your self thereunto.

Think that now you are nearer your end by one days journey, then you were in
the morning.

When you feel sleep to be coming, pray.
O Lord Jesus Christ my watchman and keeper, take me into thy protection,
Grant that my body sleeping, my mind may watch in thee, and be made merry by
some sight of that celestial and heavenly life, wherein thou art the King and
Prince, together with the Father and the holy Ghost, where the Angels and holy
Souls be most happy citizens. Oh purify my soul, keep clean my body, that
in both I may please thee, sleeping and waking for ever Amen.

A general confession of sins, with other prayers for the morning and
evening, to be used in families and public assemblies.
O Most merciful and loving father, whose love is infinite, whose mercy
endures for ever, we sinful creatures, trusting in thine unspeakable goodness
and love toward us, do appear this morning before thy divine majesty, most
humbly confessing our manifold sins and innumerable transg^essions of thy
commandments and fatherly will. Against thee only, against thee (O Lord) have
we sinned, we acknowledge our offenses, we accuse our selves unto thee (O
merciful Lord) and will not hide our unrighteousness. We find in our selves
no thing but ignorance of thy will, disobedience, unstrust, doubtfulnes in thy
goodness, and incredulity, hatred and con^empt of al spiritual things, self
love confidence in our selves and fervent lusting after carnal things of this
world: and this tree of our corrupt nature brings forth continually in us
none other fruits but rotten and unsavory works of the flesh, in thoughts
words and doings unto condemnation.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thy fatherly goodness, even for thy son Jesus
Christ's sake (whom thou have set forth for a purchaser of mercy to us through
faith in his blood) make our hearts clean, take away our stony heart, and give
unto us a true and lively faith, working in us unfeigned repentance and
amendmen: of our sinful life. Have mercy upon us, and forgive us our sins
for thy sons sake: certify our consciences of the remission of the same by
thy holy spirit: by whose operation so mortify in us our old man, the whole
body of sin, that we continually dying unto sin, may walk in a newness of
life, to the glory of thy holy name, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

Another confession of sins.
O Eternal God, most merciful father, we confess and acknowledge here before
thy divine majesty that we are miserable sinners, conceived and borne in sin
and iniquity, so that in us there is no goodness, for the flesh evermore
rebelleth against the Spirit, whereby we continually transgress thy holy
precepts and commandments, and to purchase our selves, through thy just
judgment, death and damnation. Notwithstanding (O heavenly Father for as much
as now we are displeased with our selves for ye sins we have committed against
thee, Gal. 5. Rom 2. Jer. 34. Esa. 20.
and do unfeignedly repent us of the same. we most humbly beseech thee for
Jesus Christ's sake, to show thy mercy upon us, to forgive us all our sins,
and to increase thy holy spirit in us, that we acknowledging from the bottom
of our hearts our own unrighteousness, may from henceforth not only mortify
our sinful lusts and affections, but also bring forth such fruit as may be
agreeable to thy most blesses will, Col. 3. Romans 6. Ephesians. 4.5. 1. Pet. 2.
through Jesus Christ our only Savior, whom thou have already given an
oblation and an offering for our sins* and for whose sake we are ^ertainly
persuaded that thou will deny us nothing that we shall ask in his name
according to thy will. For thy spitit does assure our consciences that thou art
our merciful Father, and so love us thy children, through him, that no thing
is able to remove thy heavenly grace and favor from us. To thee therefore with
the son and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world without end. So be
it.

A P^ayer to be said in the Morning.
O Eternal GOD and heavenly Father, seeing that by thy great mercy we have
quietly passed this night, grant we beseech thee that we may bestow this day
wholly in thy service, so that al our thoghts, words and deeds, may red^und to
the glory of thy name, and good example of our brethren. And as it has pleased
thee to make the sun to shine upon the earth, to give us bodily light, even
so vouchsafe to illuminate our understanding with the brightness of thy
spirit, to direct us in the way of righteousness, so that what thing soever we
shall apply our selves unto, our special care and purpose may be to walk in thy
fear, and to serve and honor thee, looking for all our wealth and prosperity,
to came from thy only blessing, and that we may take nothing in hand which
shall not be agreeable to thy most blessed will.

Furthermore, that we may in such sort travail for our bodies, and for this
present life, that we may have always a further regard: that is, to the
heavenly life which thou have promised to thy children: and in the mane season
that it may please thee to preserve and defend us both in body and soul, to
strengthen us against all the temptations of the devil, and to deliver us from
all perils and dangers that may happen unto us* if we be not defended by thy
godly power.

And forasmuch as to begin well and not to continue is nothing, we beseech
thee to receive us not only this day into thy holy protection, but also for
the time of our whole life, continuing and increasing in us daily thy good
grace and gifts thereof until thou shall bring us to that happy state where we
shall fully and forever be joined unto thy Son Jesus Christ our Savior,
which is the true light of our souls, shining day and night perpetua^ly.

And to the end that we may obtain such grace at thy hand, vouchsafe (most
merciful Father) to forgive and forget all our sins, which we have heretofore
committed against thee, and for thy infinite mercies sake to pardon the same as
thou have promised to those that ask of thee with unfeigned heart, for whom as
for our selves we make our humble petitions unto thee in the name of thy son
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in such sort as he has taught us saying, Ou
Father, etc.

Another Prayer to be said in the Morning.
O Almighty and most gracious God, we heartily thank thee for the sweet sleep
and comfortable rest which thou have given us this night past; and for as much
as thou have commanded by the holy Word that no man should be id^e, but all
occupied in godly and virtuous exercises, every man according to his calling:
we most humbly beseech thee that thine eyes may attend upon us, daily defend
us, cherish, comfort, govern us, and all our counsels, studies and labors in
such wise, that we may spend and bestow this day according to thy most holy
will, setting thee always before our eyes, living in thy fear, working that
may be found acceptable before thy divine majesty, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So be it.

Another Prayer for the Morning.
WE humbly and heartily give thanks unto thee (O heavenly Father) through thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, that to thy innumerable been ^ts hitherto
powered upon our souls, and upon our bodies, thou have kept us this night past
from many evils, both spiritual and corporal, and now of thy mercy do offer
and give us time to repent and amend our lives, so that we might live
henceforth, not as we will, but as thou will: and as our bodies do draw
continually nearer and nearer their end (the grave I mean) so our souls might
aproch to their end that is heaven and not hell, for in one state we stand not
still, but either we are nearer and nearer the happy state of life, or else the
unhappy condition of death eternal.

Wherefore we beseech thee to be merciful unto us good Father, and as of thy
goodness thou give us time to repent and live godly, so of ye same thy goodness
in Christ, we humbly beseech thee to give us thy gracious gift of true, holy,
perfect and perpetual repentance, that we may more and more lament our former
sinful life, trusting unfeignedly in thy rich mercy, through the merits of
Jesus Christ, for the pardon of all our sins, and that we may unfeignedly
purpose, and effectually labor to amend our lives this day; and so long as we
have to live, in all our doings and words, and even in our very thoughts, to the
praise of thy holy name, and good example by all our doings, and words, to all
our brethren.

And forasmuch as thou know our weakness, our ignorance, and great
untowardness, to carry any great cross or affliction: We beseech thee our
sweet Father, so temper and order all things toward us this day and for ever,
that we be never further proved and tempted, than thou will make us able to
bear and so to help us in the same, as may be most to thy glory and our
salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

An Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, Father everlasting, and full of pity, we acknowledge and
confess that we are not worthy to lift up our eyes to heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy divine majesty, with confidence that thou will
hear our prayers and grant our requests, if we consider our own wretched
deseruings. For our consciences do accuse us, and our sins witness against us,
and we know that thou art an upright Judge, which do not justify the sinners
and wicked men, Exo. 20.
but punishest the faults of such as transgress thy commandments. Yet most
merciful Father since it has pleased thee to command us to call upon thee in
all our troubles and adversities, Psalm. 15. Psalm. 28.
promising even then to help us, when we feel our selves as it were
swallowed up of death and desperation, we utterly renounce all worldly
confidence and trust, and fly to thy soueraign goodness, as our only stay and
refuge, beseeching thee not to call to remembrance our manifold sins and
wickedness, He. 9.10.
whereby we continually provoke thy wrath and indignation against us: neither
our neglige^ee, nor our unkindness, which have neither worthily esteemed, nor in
our lives sufficiently expressed the sweet comfort of thy holy Gospel revealed
unto us: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, who by offering up his body in sacrifice once for all, Psa. 107:
has made a sufficient recompense for all our sins.

Have mercy therefore upon us (O Lord) and forgive us our offnces. Psa. 9.10.
Teach us by thy holy spirit that we may rightly weigh them, and earnestly
repent us for the same: and so much the rather (O Lord our God) because that
the reprobate and such as thou have forsaken, Psalm. 8. P^al. 5.
cannot praise thee, nor call upon thy name: but the repenting heart, the
sorrowful mind, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy grace
shall evermore set forth thy praise and glory.

And albeit we be but worms and dust, yet thou art our Creator, and we be the
work of thy hands: yea thou art our father, and we thy children, thou art our
shepherd, Psalm. 22. 1. Cot. 6.
and we thy flock: thou art our redeemer, and we thy people whom thou have
dearly bought: thou art our God, and we are thine inheritance. Jer. 10. Psalm.
6.


Correct us not therefore in thine anger O Lord our God, neither according to
our deserts do thou punish us, but mercifully chastise us with a fatherly
affection; that all the world may know, that at what time soever a sinner does
repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, thou will put away all
his wickedness out of thy remembrance, as thou have promised by thy holy
Prophet.

Finally, forasmuch as it has pleased thee to make the night for man to rest
in, as thou have ordained him the day to travail, grant (O dear father) that
we may so take our bodily rest, that our souls may continually watch for the
time that our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear, for our full deliverance out of
this mortal life, and in the mean season that we be not overcome by any
fantasies, dreams or other temptations, but may fully set our minds upon thee,
love thee, fear thee, and rest in thee, in such sort that our very steep also
may be to the glory of thy holy name.

Furthermore, that our sleep be not excessive or overmuch after the
insaciable desire of the flesh, but only sufficient to content our weak
nature, that we may the better be disposed to live in all godly conversation,
to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of our brethren, through Jesus Christ
our Lord: in whose name we make our humble petitio^s unto thee as he has
taught us.

Our father which art, etc.

Almighty and everlasting God, vouchsafe we beseech thee to grant us perfect
continuance in thy lively faith, augmenting and increasing the same in us
daily, until we grow to the full measure of our perfection in Christ, whereof
we make our confession saying: I believe in God the father, etc.

The Lord bless us and save us, the Lord make his face to shine upon us. Lord
be merciful unto us: the Lord turn his favorable countenance toward us, and
grant us this peace.

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the communion of the
holy Ghost be with us, and remain with us for ever. So be it. 2. Cor. 9.13.

Another Evening prayer.
MOst merciful God and tender Father, which besides thine inestimable mercies
declared and given unto us, in the making of the world for our sakes in the
redeeming of us by the death of thy dear Son Jesus Christ, in the calling of us
to the knowledge of thy blessed word, in keeping of us hitherto in thy holy
Church, and in thy most gracious governing of us, and all things hitherto for
our singular wealth and commodity, have also most fatherly cared for us, and
kept us this day from all dangers both of soul and body, giving us health,
food apparel, and all other things necessary for the comfort and succor of
this poor and miserable life, which many other do want: for these and all
other thy good gifts and gracious benefits, which thou of thine own goodness
only, and fatherly providence have hitherto powered upon us, and do
presently power upon us, and many other we most humbly thank thee and praise
thy holy name, beseeching thee that as al things are now hidden by means of
the darkness which thou have sent over the earth, so thou would vouchsafe
to hide and bury all our sins which this day, or at any time heretofore we
have committed against thy holy commandments: and as now we purpose to lay
our bodies to rest: so grant the guard of thy good Angels to keep the same
this night and for evermore: and whenever our last sleep of death shall come,
grant that it may be in thy good favor, so that our bodies may rest both
temporally and eternally, to thy glory and our joy, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. So be it.

Another Evening Prayer.
O Eternal God, and most merciful father, who this day and all the time of
our life have graciously defended, nourished and preserved our souls and
bodies, and made such fatherly provision for us poor sinners, that of thy
loving kindness we have rich portions, not only in the creatures of heaven
and earth, but also in that plentiful redemption, which thy most dear Son
Jesus Christ has purchased for us, grant unto us (O merciful father) the
assistance of thy grace and holy spirit, that as our bodies shall now take
their natural rest, even so our souls and minds, at the beholding of thy
goodness toward us, may quiet themselves in thee, and conceive such inward
pleasure and heavenly sweetness in thy love, that whatsoever we shall from
henceforth, either think, speak, or do, it may be all to the honor of thy
holy name, through Jesus Christ thy dear son our Lord and only Savior Amen.

Thy mighty hand and our streched arm (O Lord) be still our defense, thy mercy
and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear son, be our salvation, thy
truth and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and
consolation unto the end, and in the end.

A prayer for the remission of sins.
O Almighty and everlasting Lord God, the dear Father of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which have made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is,
which art the only ruler and governor, conseruer and keeper of all things,
together with thy dearly beloved Son Christ Jesus our Lord, and with the
holy Ghost our comforter. O holy righteous and wise: O strong, terrible mighty
and fearful Lord God, governor of the whole world, Judge of al me^: O
exorable, patient, and most gracious Father, whose eyes are upon the ways of
all men, and are so clean that they cannot abide impiety: thou searchest the
hearts, and triest the very thoughts and raines of all men, thou hate sin,
and abhorrest iniquity.

For sins sake thou have grievously punished mankind, thy most dear creature,
as thou have declared by ye penalty of death, laid upon all the children of
Adam: by the casting off Adam and his offspring out of Paradise, by the cursing
of the earth, by the drowning of the world, by ye burning of Sodom and Gomor by
hardening the heart of Pharao, so that no miracle could convert him, by the
drowning of him and his people in the red sea, by the overthrowing of the
Israelites, in the wilderness, so that of six hundred thousand there were but
two that en^red into the land of promise: by rejecting King Saul, by the
punishments upon thy servant David, notwithstanding his hearty repentance, by
grievously afflicting Solomon in himself and his posterity, by the captivity
of the ten tribes, and by the thraldom of the Jews wherein to this present
day they continue a notable spectacle of thy wrath to the world, against and
for sin.

But of all spectacles of thy anger against sin, the greatest and most
notable is the death and bloody passion of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus
Christ. Great was thine anger against sin, when in heaven and earth nothing
could be found which might appease thy wrath, save the bloudshedding of thine
only and most dearly beloved son, in whom was and is all thy delight. Great
was the sore of sin that needed such a salve: mighty was the malady that needed
such a medicine. If in Christ, in whom was no sin, thy wrath was so fierce for
our sins, that he was constrained to cry: My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? How great and importable then is thine anger against us which are
nothing but sinful? They that are thy children, through the contemplation of
thine anger against sin, set forth most evidently in the death of Christ, do
tremble and are afraid, lamenting themselves upon him, and heartily crying for
mercy: whereas ye wicked are altogether careless and contemptuous, nothing
lamenting their iniquities or crying to thee heartily for mercy and pardon.
Amongst whom we are rather to be placed, then amongst thy children, for that we
are so shameless for our sins, and careless of thy wrath* heaping daily
sin upon sin, so that the measure has ouerflowed, and ascended up to
heaven, and brought thy heavy plagues upon us, which are but ernests for
greater to ensue: therefore to us pertains shame, and nothing else is due but
confusion.

What shall we do? what shall we say? who shall give us penitent hearts? who
can open our lips, that our mouths might make acceptable confession unto thee?
Alas, of our selves we cannot think any good, much less wish it, and least
of all do it. As for Angels, or any other creatures, they have nothing but that
which they have received, and they are made to minister unto us: So that where
it passes the power of the master, the minister must needs want. Alas, then
what shall we do? Thou art holy, and we unholy, thou art good, and we nothing
but evil; thou art pure, and we altogether impure; thou art light, and we most
dark darkness: how then can there be any agreement betwixt us? O what now
may we do? Despair. No, for thou art God and therefore good: thou art
merciful, and therefore thou forgiuest sins: with thee is mercy and
propitiation, and therefore thou art worshipped.

When Adam had sinned, thou gave him mercy before he desired it: and will thou deny us mercy which now desire the same? Adam excused his fault, and
accused thee: but we accuse our selves and excuse thee, and shall we be sent
empty away? Noah found favor when thy wrath abou^ned, and shall we seeking
grace, be frustrate? Abraham was pulled out of Idolatry when the world was
drowned therein, and art thou his God only? Israel in captivity in Egypt was
graciously visited and delivered: and dear God, the same good Lord, shall we
always be forgotten?

How often in the wilderness did thou defer, and spare thy plagues at the
request of Moses, when the people themselves made no petition to thee? And
seeing we not only now make our petitio^s unto thee through thy goodness, but
also have a mediator for us, far above Moses, even Jesus Christ, shall we (I
say) dear Lord depart ashamed? So soon as David said, I have sinned, thou
did forthwith answer him, that he should not die: thou had taken away his
sins: and gracious God, even the self same God, shall not we which now with
David gladly confess that we have sinned, shall we (I say) not hear by thy
good spirit that our sins be pardoned? O grant that with Manasses we may
find favor and mercy.

Remember that thou have not spared thine own only dear Son Jesus Christ,
but given him to die for our sins, to rise for our righteousness, to ascend
for our possession taking in heaven, and to appear before thee for us for ever,
a high priest after the order of Melchisedech, that through him we might have
free access to come to thy throne, now rather of grace then of justice.
Remember that thou by him have bidden us ask, and promised that we should
receive saying: Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you. O dear God, and most meek and merciful father, we
heartily beseech thee to be merciful unto us, for this thy Christ's sake, for
his deaths sake, for thy promise, truth, and mercy sake, Have mercy upon us,
pardon and forgive us all our sins, iniquities and trespasses, whatsoever we
have committed against thee in thought, word or deed, ever or at any time
hitherto by any means. Dear father have mercy upon us. Though we be poor,
yet our Christ is rich: though we be sinners, yet he is righteous, though we be
fools, yet he is wise; though we be impure, yet he is pure and holy: for his
sake therefore be merciful unto us.

Call to mind how thou have promised that thou will power out of thy clean
waters, and wash us from our filth, and cleanse us from our evils. Forget not
that thou have promised to take from us our stony hearts, and to give us soft
hearts, new hearts, and to put in the midst of us right spirits. Remember thy
covenant, namely that thou will be our God, and we shall be thy people that
thou will put out of thy memory for ever all our unrighteousness, and have
promised to write in our minds, and hearts, thy law and testimonies.

Remember that thou do straightly charge us to have none other Gods but thee,
saying, that thou art the Lord our God, O then declare the same to us all, we
heartily now beseech thee. Forgive us our sins, forget our iniquities, cleanse
us from our filthiness, wash us from our wickedness, power out thy holy spirit
upon us: Take from us our hard hearts our stony hearts, our impenitent hearts,
our distrusting and doubtful hearts, our carnal, our secure, our idle hearts,
our impure, malicious, arroga^t, envious, wrathful, impatient, covetous,
hypocritical, and epicurall hearts: and in place thereof give us new hearts,
soft hearts faithful hearts, merciful hearts, loving, obedient, chaste pure,
holy, righteous, true, simple, lowly, and patient, hearts, to fear thee, to
love thee, to trust in thee for ever.

Write thy law in our hearts graft it in our minds, we heartily beseech thee.
Give us the spirit of prayer: make us diligent and happy in the works of our
salvation, take into thy custody and governance for ever our souls and bodies,
our lives and all that ever we have. Tempt us never further then thou will make
us able to bear, and whatsoever thou know we have need of in soul and body
(dear God and gracious Father) vouchsafe to give us the same in thy good time,
and alwais as thy children guide us, so that our life may please thee, and our
death praise thee, though Jesus Christ our Lord, for whose sake we heartily
pray thee to grant these things thus asked, and al (other things necessary for
soul and body, not only to us but to all others also, for whom thou would
that we should pray, specially for thy children that be in thraldom, in
exile, in prison, misery, heaviness, poverty, sickness, etc.

Be merciful to the whole realm of England, and grant us all true repentance,
and turn from us the evils that we so wickedly have deserved: pardon our
enemies persecutors, and slanderors, and if it be thy pleasure turn their
hearts. Be merciful unto our parents, brethren and sisters, friends,
kinsfolks, and familiars, neighbors, and such as by any means thou have
coupled and linked to us, by love or otherwise: and unto us poor sinners here
gathered together in thy holy name, grant thy blessing and holy spirit to
sanctify us, and dwell in us as thy dear children, to keep us this day and
for ever from all evil, to thy eternal glory, and our everlasting comfort,
and the profit of thy Church: which mercifully maintain, cherish and comfort,
strengthening them that stand, so that they never fall, lifting up them that be
fallen, and keep us from falling from thy truth, through the merits of thy
dearly beloved son Jesus Christ our only Savior, which lives and reigns
with thee and the holy Ghost, to whom be all praise and honor, both now and
for ever. Amen.

I. B.

A prayer for the true knowledge of the mystery of our redemption in Christ.
O Almighty God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by him also our
Father, the father of all mercy and God of al consolation, have mercy upon us,
and hear our prayers. We most humbly beseech thee for thy dear son Jesus
Christ his sake, for his merits and cruel death, which he suffered, to deliver
us from eternal death and the power of darkness, send into our hearts, the
spirit of truth, to work in us a true lively and steadfast faith that the clear
light and brightness of thy Gospel, the glory of Christ, may shine unto us: and
lighten our minds that we may learn and understand the wonderful and
unspeakable riches of the mystery of our redemption in Christ and by Christ. O
Father of glory, give unto us the spirit of wisdom, and bring us unto the true
knowledge of this thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of thy
self. Open and lighten the eyes of our minds and understanding, that we may
know what the hope is whereunto thou have called us, and how the rich glory of
thine inheritance is upon thy Saints, and the exceeding greatness of thy power
toward us, that by true faith, by understanding and knowledge of thine
eternal wisdom (which is Jesus Christ) we may be indeed, (as we are called)
true Christians, and unfeigned professors of thy holy name, to worship thee in
spirit and truth, and to set forth the glory of thy grace given unto us in
Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

O dear father, write in our hearts love of thy law, hate to al sin,
thankfulness of heart, and continual heat of thy holy spirit for thy Son Jesus
Christ's sake. To whom with thee and thy holy spirit, be all honor majesty,
glory, thanks, rule empire, and dominion for evermore, Amen.

A form of thanksgiving for our redemption, and prayer for the strength and
increase of faith. O Lord increase our faith. Luk 17.
Eternal praise and thanks be given unto thee, dear God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which have blessed us with ali spiritual blessings, Ephe. 4.
in heavenly things by Christ, in that thou have chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world was laid, that we should be without blame before thee
through him, by whom we have redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of our sins: in whom after we heard the word of truth, the
Gospel of our salvation, wherein we believed, Romans 8.
we are sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance, which spirit has and does bear witness unto our spirits that we
are thy children, and therefore cries in our hearts, Abba Father. And thus
most gracious father, when thou have once given the earnest penny of our
salvation unto our hearts, thou do not repent of thy gift and calling:
neither will thou at any time break thy covenant of grace and mercy in Christ
thy sons merits, confirmed in us by that seal and love token For, what
though we be weak in our belief, Romans 3.
shall our unbelief make thy promise of none effect? No, thou will always be
found true, but all men are liars. And yet Lord thou do most graciously
behold and accept, be it never so little a spark of faith. We say therefore
and cry unto thee, Mar. 9
with one that wept and said: I believe, Lord help my unbelief Yea, that
little, be it never so little, is thy mere g^ft also. The which as thou have
begun, so (most merciful Lord) increase y^ same more and more to the peace and
comfort of our conscience, and the glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ Amen.

A thanksgiving to God for his great benefits.
Honor and praise be given to thee (Lord God Almighty) most dear Father of
heaven, for all thy mercies and loving kindness showed unto us in that ^t has
pleased thy gracious goodness, freely and of thine own accord, to elect and
choose us to salvation before the beginning of the world, and even like
continual thanks be given unto thee for creating us after thine own image,
for redeeming us with the precious blood of thy dear son, when we were
utterly lost, for sanctifying us with thy holy spirit, in the revelation and
knowledge of thy sacred word, for helping and succouring us in all our need and
necessity, for saving us from all danger both of body and soul, for comforting
us so fatherly in all our troubles, and afflictions, for sparing us so long, and
giving us so large a time of repentance. These benefits O most merciful
father, like as we do acknowledge that we have received of thy only goodness,
even so we beseech thee for thy dear son Jesus Christ his sake, to grant us
always thy holy spirit, whereby we may continually grow in tha^kfulnes toward
thee, he led in all truth, and com^orted in all adversity.

Strengthen our faith. O Lord, kindle it more and more in feruentnes and love
toward thee and our neighbors for thy sake. Suffer us not (most dear father)
to receive thy word any more in vain: but grant us always ye assistance of
thy grace and holy spirit, that in heart, word, and deed, we may sanctify and
do worship to thy holy name, that we may help to amplify and increase thy
kingdom, and that whatsoever thou sendest, Thy kingdom come: Thy will be
done: Give us this day, etc.
we may heartily well be content with thy good will and pleasure. Suffer us not
to lack the thing (O Father) without the which we cannot serve thee: but bless
thou so all the works of our hands, that we may have sufficient, and not to be
chargeable but rather helpful unto others. Be merciful O Lord, unto our
offenses: Forgive v^, etc.
and seeing our debt is great which thou have forgiven us in Jesus Christ, make
us to love thee and our neighbors so much the more. Be thou (O Father) our
captain and defender in all temptations, Lead us not into temptation.
hold thou us by thy merciful hand, that we thereby may be delivered from al
inconveniences, and end our lives in the sanctifying and honoring of thy name,
But deliver us from eu^ll.
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A aier for true mortification.
O God my creator, preserver, and everlasting defender, where first in my
creation, I was made like unto thine own likeness: the devil (alas) has
since by Adams fall made me ugly, monstrous, and evil favored like to himself.
For what are now Lord, mine earthly members, but as thine Apostle writes,
adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts, evil concupiscence,
Colos. 3.
covetousness (which is the worshipping of Idols) and such other, for the which
thy wrath is wont to come upon the children of unbelief? Nevertheless* Lord,
of thy great mercy and goodness, against this so great a mischief, a much
greater remedy thy fatherly providence has ordained, for thou have sent Jesus
Christ thy dear and only natural son into this world, the vale of miseries,
to loose the works of the devil, and to take away my sins. 1. Joh. 3.


Therefore Satan has now nothing to brag of, for through Christ all that
believe in thee, 1. Joh, 5.
and so become thy children, do overcome the world the flesh and the devil.
And this is the victory which over comes them al even our faith: that faith I
mean which is persuaded, that whosoever believes in Christ* Ioh. 3. Ioh. 5.
shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

That faith which believes the testimony to be true which thou God the Father
do testify of thy son, so making thee no liar: and this is the testimony that
thou have given us eternal life, that faith which believes that thou Father,
who raisedst up Christ from death, shall also quicken our mortal bodies, Romans
8,
through thy holy spirit, dwelling in us. That faith which believes it to be
true which thy Son. Christ affirmed with a double oath, saying, Verily, Joh.
1.
verily, I say unto you, he that believes in me, the works that I do, the
same shall he do, and greater works then these shall he do, Ioh. 15.
because I go to my Father And finally, that faith which believes that now
Christ has been lift upon the cross, he shall draw al things unto him: this
faith (I say) is the victory which overcomes our enemies, the devil, Joh. 12.
the world and our flesh.

Thou therefore dear father which have promised to give whatsoever I shall ask
in thy dear Son Jesus name, 1. Joh. 3^.
for thy great mercy and infallible truths sake, do now in me the thing that he
came for: loose in me the works of the devil, and take away my sins I beseech
thee, make steadfast my faith and confidence in thy promised mercies, and
merciful promises, so that I assuredly believing in thee, may have (as thou
have promised everlasting life, and making thee (dear God) no liar, may
believe, feel and know in my heart and conscience, that the same everlasting
life is thy mere and free gift unto me, yea already of thy great goodness
undoubtedly given me, being now translated from death to life.

Colos. 3.
In thankfulness whereof, Lord cause me now daily to mortify my earthly
members, yea, dear father, since thy spirit, which raised up Christ from death,
dwells within me, do thou (who raisedst Christ from death) quicken my mortal
body, through thy spirit so dwelling within me. I beseech thee, yea Lord Jesus,
according to thy promise (because thou art now gone to thy Father) make me
work the wonderful great work that thou spakest off. Ioh. 6.4.
I mean, make me, being of my self but a lump of sin, and a monster most
ugly, (as the vices whereof the members of my earthly body are above declared
to be compact do prove) make me I say, yet through thy grace, to hate,
abhor, flee and subdue all adultery, whoredom, uncleanness, unnatural lusts,
evil concupiscence, inordinate desires, wantonness, tenderness, delicatenes,
idleness, drunkenness, gluttony, slothfulnes, distrust, despair, ignorance,
weakness, wilfulnes, idolatry, superstition, hypocrisy, heresy, error, sects,
varia^ce strife, wrath, envy, slanders, lying, swearing cursing, vainglory,
pride, covetousness, theft, deceit, flattery, and whatsoever else. (O Lord)
fights or rebelleth against thy holy spirit: and then (O Father) I will boast
and make vant against mine enemy the devil, that I have done greater works
then thy dear Son Jesus did, at what time he spoke these words amongst the
Jews, because albeit he vanquished Satan, yet in as much as he himself was
utterly without sin, the victory seemed the more easy. But I to vanquish
Satan (being my self altogether sinful yea contrary to my most sinful nature)
to subdue sin, the Devil and mine own flesh, it seems a more victory, and
a greater work then the other. For the which nevertheless I will with all
submission acknowledge unto thy divine majesty, that the whole victory Lord
indeed is thine, and thy holy spirit the beginner and finisher both of the will
and the work.

Now therefore (Lord Jesus) strengthen me with thy grace and might that thou
may by me a most sinful wretch, draw all these our earthly members and
horrible vices before rehearsed, under my feet, that I may not only fight
against them, but also subdue them; so that they may all turn to the best for
me, as meet matter whereon I may exercise my faith, power forth my hearty
prayer, and give thee most hearty thanks for victory: whereby I may learn and
have experience that thou have in me drawn all things unto thee, insomuch as
thou thus (Lord) of thy divine power drawest both the devil and the sin that
dwells in me, to set forth thy honor and glory: which thing for thy mercies
sake bring to pass: O God my creator preserver, and everlasting defender.

A meditation for the exercise of true mortification.
HE that will be ready in weighty matters to deny his own will, and to be
obedient to the will of God, the same had need to accustom himself, to deny
his desires in matters of less weight, and to exercise mortification of his
own will in trifles. For, if that our affections by this daily custom be not
(as it were) half slain, surely, surely, when the plunge shall come, we shall
find the more to do. If we cannot watch with Christ one hour (as he said to
Peter) we undoubtedly can much less go to death with him. Wherefore that in
great tentations we may be ready to say with Christ, Not my will but thy will
be done (forasmuch as this commonly comes not to pass, but where the roots
of our lust a by thy grace dear father, are almost rotten and rooted out, by a
daily denial of that they desire) I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake to
help me herein.

First pardon me my cherishing and (as it were) watering of mine affections,
obeying them in their devises and superfluous desires, where through in that
they have taken deep root, and are so lively in me, I secondly do beseech
thee to pull them up by the roots out of my heart, and so henceforth to order
me that I may continually accustom my self to weaken the principal root,
that by the roots and branches they may loose all their power. Grant me (I
beseech thee) that thy grace may daily mortify my concupiscence of pleasure in
things, that is, of wealth, riches, glory, liberty, favor of men, meats,
drinks, apparel, ease, yea and life it self that the horror and impatience of
more grievous things may be weakened, and I made more patient in adversity.

Whereunto I further desire and pray thy goodness dear father, that thou will
add this, namely, that I may for ever become obedient and ready to do thy good
will in all things heartily and willingly to serve thee, and do whatsoever may
please thee. For doubtless although we accustom our selves in ye pleasant
things of this life to mortification and denial of our selves, yet we shall
find enough to do when more bitter and weighty crosses come. For if thy Son
our Savior (ever wont to obey thy good will) prayed so heartily and often, Not
my will, but thy will be done, (whereby he declares himself to be very man)
how can it be but we whose nature is corrupt, not only in nativity, but in the
rest of our whole life also, shall find both our hands full in great and
grievous temptations, wholly to resign our selves unto thee.

Grant therefore dear Father, for thy Christ's sake, to me a most miserable
wretch, thy grace and spirit to be effectual in me, that daily I may accustom
my self to deny my will in more easy and pleasant things of this life, that
when need shall be, I may come unto thee with a resigned will, always
steadfastly expecting thy mercy, and in the mean season continually obeying
thee with readiness and willingness, doing whatsoever may most please thee
through Christ our Lord, who lives with thee, etc.

A meditation of the coming of Christ to judgment, and of the reward both of
the faithful and unfaithful.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the everliving God, by whom al things were
made, are ruled and governed: as of thy love for our redemption thou did
not disdain to be our mediator, and to take upon thee our nature in the womb
of a virgin purely and without sin, by the operation of thy holy spirit, that
both thou might in thine own person wonderfully beutifie and exalt our
nature, and work the same in us also: first abolishing the guiltines of sin, by
remission, then sin it self by death, and last of all, death by raising up
again these our bodies that they may be like to thine own glorious and
immortal body, according to the power, wherewith thou art able to subdue all
things unto thee: as (I say) of thy love for our redemption thou becamest man,
and that most poor and afflicted upon earth by the space of three and thirty
years at the least in most humility, and paiedst the price of our ransom by
thy most bitter death and passion (for the which I most heartily give thanks
unto thee) so of the same thy love toward us, in thy good time thou will come
again in the clouds of heaven, with power, and great glory with flaming fire,
with thousands of Saints, with Angels of thy power, with a mighty cry, shout of
an Archangel, and blast of a trump, and suddenly, as a lightning which shines
from the East, Mat. 24.
etc. when men think least, even as a thief in the night, when men be a
sleep, thou will so come I say, Mat. 15.
thus suddenly in the twinkling of an eye, all men that ever have been, be, or
shall be, with women and children, appearing before thy tribunal seat, to
render an account of all things, which they have thought, spoke, and done
against thy law, openly and before all Angels, Saints and Devils, and so to
receive, the just reward of thy vengeance, if they have not repented and obeyed
the Gospel, and so depart from thee to the Devil, and his angels, and all the
wicked which ever have been, be or shall be* into hell fire, which is
unquenchable, and of pains intolerable, easelesse, endless, hopeles, even
from the face of thy glorious and mighty power.

But if they have repented and believed the Gospel, if they be found watching
with their lamp and oil in their hands, if they be found ready apparelled
with the wedding garment of innocence, if they have not hardened their hearts,
and hourded up the treasure of thy vengeance in the day of wrath to be
revealed, but have used the time of grace, the acceptable time the time of
salvation, that is, the time of this life, in the which thou stretchest out thy
hand, and spreadest thine arms, calling and crying unto us to come unto thee,
which art meek in heart, and lowly, for thou will ease all that labor and are
heavy leaden, if they baue visited the sick and prisoners, comforted the
comfortless, fed the hungry, clothed the naked, lodged the harborlesse: if
they have not laden their hearts with gluttony and surfeiting and carelesnes
of this life: if they have not dug and hid their talent in the ground, doing
no good there with, but have been faithful to occupy thy gifts to thy glory,
and have washed their garments in thy blood by hearty repentance, then shall
thy angels gather them together, not as the wicked which shall be collected as
fagots, and cast into the fire, but as ye good wheat that is gathered into the
barn then shall they be caught up to meet thee in the clouds: then shall their
corrupt body put on incorruption, then shall they be endued with immortality
and glory, then shall they be with thee and go whither thou go: then shall
they hear Come ye blessed of my Father, possess the kingdom prepared for you
from the beginning, etc. Then shall they be set on seats of majesty, judging
the whole world: then shall they reign with thee for ever, then shall god be
al in all with them and to them, then shall they enter and inherit heavenly
Jerusalem, and the glorious restfull land of Canaan, where is always day and
never night, where is no manner of weeping tears, infirmity, hunger, cold,
sickness, envy, malice nor sin: but always joy without sorrow, mirth without
mesure, pleasure without pain, heavenly harmony, most pleasant melody, saying
and singing, Holy, holy holy Lord God of hosts, etc.

Finally the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, what they shall inherit and most surely enjoy,
although here they be tormented, prisoned, solicited of Satan, tempted of the
flesh, and entangled with the world, where through they are enforced to cry,
Thy kingdom come, Come Lord Jesus, etc.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles? Like as the Heart desires the water brooks,
etc. Now let thy servant depart in peace. I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. We mourn in our selves, waiting for the deliverance of our bodies
etc. O gracious Lord when shall I find such mercy with thee, that I may repent,
believe, hope and look for these things with the full fruition of those
heavenly joys which thou have prepared for all them that fear thee, and so
rest with thee for evermore.

A meditation of the life everlasting: the place where it is, and the
incomparable joys thereof.
THat there is an everlasting life, none will deny, but such as will deny God.
For if he be true and just, (which he must needs be, or else he is not God)
then can there not be but an eternal life. That he has both spoken and
promised it, in Mat. 25. 1. Cor 15. Heb. 4.11.13. 1. Pet. 1. it plainly
appears, and elsewhere in very many places: so that to deny an everlasting
life, is to deny God, to deny Christ, and all that ever he did: also to deny all
piety, and religion, to condemn of foolishness all good men, Martyrs,
Confessors, Evangelists, Prophets, Patriarchs. Finally, the denial of eternal
life is nothing else but a denial of the immortality of the soul, and so a
plain making of man nothing better then beasts. If it be so, 1. Co. 15.
let us then eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. Lord preserve us from
this Saduceall and Epicureal impiety, and grant us for thy mercies sake dear
God, that we may be assuredly persuaded, that there is indeed an eternal life
and bliss with thee, for them that put their trust in thee, amongst whom
account me for thy mercies sake.

Again, this eternal life, Where this eternal life is.
and the place appointed for them that be thy servants, all men do grant to be
with thee. Albeit they do not think that because thou art every where,
therefore eternal life is every where. For they by thy word do know, that in
as much as no man can see thee and live, which eternal life and thy blessed
presence is most pleasant and had in fruition, Ioh. 14.
after in another world, whereunto by corporal death they do depart, and are
translated to a place above them, where thou dwell in a light, whereunto no
man can approach. 4. Tim. 6.
Abraham, bosom they read was above, as the place of the wicked was below and
beneath. Helias was caught up into heaven, Joh. 17.
and the dear Son our Savior prayed, that where he is, those also might be
which thou had given him, and might see his glory. Now he, dear father (we
learn by the spirit) was ascended and taken up in his very body into heaven:
whither Stephen looked up and saw thy Christ standing on thy right hand to whom
he prayed, Act 17.
O Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Grant I beseech thee gracious God and Father
that I may have a clean heart, more and more to see thee, and so in spirit to
see and look often upon this place, whither bring me at the length in body
also, I humbly pray thee.

Now what a thing this everlasting life is, no man is able to conceive, much
less able to utter. For The peace of God which is eternal life passes all
understanding. 1. Cor. 6.
The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard neither can man's heart conceive
those things which thou (dear God) have prepared for them that love thee.
Whatsoever therefore can be spoken or imagined of thy kingdom, of the
clearnes, joy and felicity of the same, is nothing in comparison, as we may see
by the Prophets, which (because they could not otherwise) under corporal things
have shadowed the same. So that the confidence of eternal life, what a thing
it is can in no wise be told. Howbeit somewhat we may be brought to some sight
of it by earthly things to think on this sort: What knowledge may be had in
this life of the life eurelasting.
If GOD have given here so many things in a strange place how many are ye great
good things that be at home? If in prison are so many mercies, how many are
they in the palace? If the wicked have so many benefits, what is the store
prepared for thy servants? O Lord if thy children find such comfort in the day
of tears and mourning, what shall they find in the day of ye marriage? If with
beasts men being, have the use of innumerable blessings, O how many are the
blessings which they shall enjoy with thy Angels, and with thy self, O dear
God, when they shall see thee and have the fruition of thee? in whom is fulness
without lothing, of al good and fair things: so that nothing can be more
desired, and that for evermore.

This thy children do not see as they now believe it, I say that even in their
bodies they shall see it for ever, as Job said. They believe that they shall see
thee and their own eyes behold thee, Job. 15.
when these our corporal eyes, our bodies being raised shall do their duties:
such a knowledge of thee they believe to have, as shall not be only
intellectual and by faith as now it is, but even a full sight and fruition,
yea a conjunction, and fellowship with thee. Now they see but as in a glass,
1. Co. 13. Heb. 11.
even in a dark speaking: but then they shall see thee face to face. For faith
though it be the substance of things hoped for, and a certain dark sight of
thee: yet it may not be compared to the reward of faith, that glorious sight
which we shall see in the life to come, when faith and hope shall cease.

Now thy children know that they be thy sons, though they yet appear not what
they shall be. We know (say they) yt when our Christ, God and man shall
appear, then shall we be like unto him, for we shall see him even as he is. O
great prerogative to see Christ, as he is: which is not to be considered, so
much for the manhood, as for the godhead it self, as Paul does also write,
that when all things are subject unto the Son, the^ shall he be subject unto
thee dear Father also, that God may be al in all. And therefore Christ our
savior prayed for us that we might know thee the only true God. Not that our
Christ the son is not with thee, the true, coequall and substantial God, but
that we might know how that after the judgment, such a mystery of his
mediatorshippe shall not be in heaven as is now in earth.

Then thou blessed Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
ghost, shall be all in all, thou shall be the end of our desires, thou shall be
looked upon without end, thou shall be loved without lothing, thou shall be
praised without weariness: although loathsomeness be wont to follow fulness,
yet our fulness, in the contemplation of thy pleasures, shall bring with it no
kind at all of loathsomeness. Society of joys shall be in the beholding of thee.
Pleasures are on thy right hand for ever. We shall be satisfied when we arise
after thine image, I mean in the resurrection.

O dear Father show thy self unto us, and we ask no more. Oh grant us with
thy Saints in everlasting life to praise with perpetual praises thy holy name.
Happy then and happy again were we, if that day were come that we might sing
with the Angels, Elders, and innumerable thousands, a new song, and say, Thou
Christ Jesus which was slain, art worthy to receive power, and riches, and
wisdom, and strength, honor, and glory, and blessing.

In this blessed life al kind of maladies, griefs, sorrows and evils be far
away, and all full of all kind of mirth, joy and pleasure. Oh that we might see
now a little with S. John that holy City new Jerusalem descending from heaven,
prepared of God as a bride trimmed for her husband. O that we might now
something hear the great voice speaking out of the throne: Behold the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and he shall be unto them their God, he will wipe away all
tears from their eyes, and death shall be no more, nor weeping, nor crying,
nor sorrow, for the former things are gone.

I.B.

Another meditation of the blessed state and felicity of this life to come.
THis body is but a prison where in the soul is kept, and that verily not
beautiful nor bright, but most foul and dark, disquiet, frail and filled up
with much vermin, and venomous vipers, (I mean it concerning our affections,)
standing in an air most vnholesom, and prospect most loathsome, if a man
consider the extremities of it by the eyes, nose, mouth, ears hands feet, and
all the other parts. So that no Bocardo, no Litleease, no Dungeon, no Bishops
prison, no Gatehouse, no sink, no pit may be compared in any point to be so
evil a prison for the soul, as the body is for, and of the soul:
wherethrough the children of God have been occasioned to cry and lament, their
long being in it. Oh says David, How long shall I lie in this prison. Oh
wretch that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me out of this body of sin?
Romans 7.
which is an heavy burden to the soul, as the wise man says. And the godly
cry; Luke 2^
Now let thy servant depart in peace. O that I were dissolved, and had put off
this earthly and frail tabernacle, Psalm. 143.
Take me unto thee and bring my soul out of this prison, that it may give
thanks unto thee, O Lord. For so long as we be in this body, we cannot see
the Lord, yea it is an heavy habitation, and depresseth down sore the spirit
from the familiarity which it self should have with God. This world and life
is an exile, a vale of misery, a wilderness, of it self, being void of all
virtues necessary for eternal life, full of enemies, sorrows, sighings,
sobbings, gronings miseries, etc. In danger to hunger, cold heat, thirst, sores
sickness, tentations, trouble, death, and innumerable calamities, being
momentany, short, unstable, and nothing but vain, and therefore is compared to a
warfare, a woman's travail, a shadow, a smoke, a vapor, a word, a storm, a
tempest, in the which Gods people feel great molestations; griefs and
troubles, now of satan himself, now of the world, now of their own flesh, and
that so wonderfully, diversely, dangerously, and contrarily, that they are
enforced to cry, O Lord when shall we come and appear before thee? when shall
this misery end? when shall we be delivered out of this vale of misery, out of
this wilderness, out of these continual afflictions and most perilous seas.

But where thou art (Lord and dear father of mercy) there is not only no
prison, no dolours, nor sorrow, no sighings, no tears, no sickness, no hunger,
no heat, no cold, no pain, no tentations, no displeasure, no malice, no
pride, no uncleanness, no contention, no torments, no horror, no sin, no
filth, no stinch, no bearth, no death, no weeping, no tears, no misery no
mischief, there is (I say) not only no such thing or any evil, not some or
displeasant thing but all liberty, all light, all pleas^ntnesse, all joy,
rejoicing, mirth pleasure, health, wealth riches glory, power, treasure, honor,
triumph, comfort, solace, love, unity, peace, concord, wisdom, virtue,
melody, meekness, felicity, beatitude, and all that ever can be wished or
desired in most security, eternity and perpetuity, that may be thought not
only of man, but of Angels and Archangels yea above all thoughts. The eye has
not seen the like, the ear has not heard, 1. Co^. 2.
nor no heart is able to conceive in any point, any part of the blissful
beatitude, which is with thee most dear Lord and Savior, most gracious God and
comforter.

Where thou art O blessed God the Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Powers,
Dominions, Cherubins, Seraphins, Patriarchs, Prophets Apostles, Martyrs,
Virgins, Confessors, and righteous spirits cease not to sing night and day:
Holy, Apoc. 4.
holy holy, Lord God of hosts, honor majesty, glory, power, empire and
dominion be unto thee, O God the creator, O Lord Jesus the redeemer, O holy
spirit the comforter. Apoc. 5.


In recordation of this, O how thy children rejoice, How contemn they the
pleasures of this world? How little esteem they any corporal grief or shame?
How desire they to be with thee? How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord God of
hosts, say they: My soul has a desire to enter into the Courts of the Lord,
my heart and my soul rejoices in the living God: blessed are they that dwell
in thy house, that they may be always praising thee. For one day in thy Courts
is better then a thousand elsewhere, I had rather be a door keeper in the hou^e
of my God, then to dwell in the tents of ungodliness: Psalm. 24.
for the Lord God is a light and defense. And again Like as the Heart desires
the water brooks, so longs my soul after thee, O God: my soul is a thirst
for God, yea even for the living God. Psalm. 63.
when shall I come to appear before the presence of God? my soul thirsts
for thee: my soul also longs after thee in a barren and dry land where no
water is.

They (thy children I mean, O Lord) desire the day of that their redemption.
Still they cry, Romans 8. Apo. 12. Phil. 3.
Let thy kingdom come. They cry, Come Lord Jesus. They lift up their heads,
looking for thy appearing, O Lord, which wilt make their vile bodies like to
thine own glorious and immortal body. For when thou shall appear, they shall
be like unto thee, thy Angels will gather them together, and they shall meet
thee in the clouds, and be always with thee, Mat. 24.
They shall hear this joyful voice: Come ye blessed of my father possess the
kingdom, prepared for you from the beginning.

Then shall they be like to thy Angels. Then shall they be like unto the Sun
in thy kingdom. Mat. 13. Apo. 7.
Then shall they have crowns of glory, and be induod with white garments of
innocence and righteousness, having palms of victory in their hands. O happy
is he that may but see that immortal and incorruptible inheritance, which they
shall enjoy for evermore. Amen.

I. B.

A meditation of the presence of God.
THere is nothing that makes more to true godliness of life, then the
persuasion of thy presence (dear Father) and that nothing is hid from thee,
but all to thee is open and naked, even our very thoughts, which one day thou will reveal and open either to our praise or punishment, and in this life as
thou did David's faults which he did secretly 2. Reg. 12. or in the life to
come, Math. 25. for nothing is so hid that shall not be revealed. Therefore does
the Prophet say, Woe to them that keep secret their thoughts, to hide their
counsel from the Lord, and do their works in darkness, saying, who sees us.

Grant me therefore dear God, mercy for all my sins, especially my hid and
close sins. Enter not into judgment with me I humbly beseech thee, give me
to believe truly in thy Christ, that I never come into judgment for them, and
that with David, I might so reveal them unto thee, that thou would in thy
great mercy cover them. And grant further, that henceforth I may always think
my self continually conversant before thee, so that if I do well, I need not
to pass of the publishing of it, as hypocrites do: if I think or do any
evil, I may forthwith know that the same shall not always be hid from men.

Grant me that I may always have in mind that day wherein the hid works of
darkness shall be illuminated, and also that sentence of thy son, that nothing
is so secret which shall not be revealed. So in trouble and wrong I shall find
comfort, and other wise be kept through thy grace from evil, which do thou
work I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake.

I. B

A meditation on the providence of God.
God works all in all, maruellously justly and holily.
THis ought to be unto us most certain, that nothing is done without thy
providence, (O Lord) that is, that nothing is done, be it good or bad, sweet
or sour, but by thy knowledge, that is, by thy will, wisdom and ordinance
(for knowledge does comprehend all these in it) as in thy holy word we are
taught in many places, Math. 5.
that even the life of a sparrow is not without thy will nor any liberty or
power upon a porket have all the devils in hell, but by thy appointment and
will, which will we always must believe most assuredly to be al just and good,
Math. 8.
howsoever otherwise it seem unto us, for thou art marvelous and not
comprehensible in the ways, and holy in all thy works.

But hereunto it is necessary also for us to know no less certainly, that
though all things be done by thy providence, God works by means without and
against means.
yet the same providence has many and diverse means to work by: which means
being contemned, thy providence is contemned also. As for example, meat is a
mean to serve thy providence for the preservation of health and life here; so
that he which contemns to eat because thy providence is certain and
infallible, the same contemns thy providence.

Indeed if it were so, that meat could not be had, then should we not tie thy
providence to this mean, but make it free as thou art free, that is that
without meat thou can help and give health and life: for it is not of any
need, that thou use any instrument or mean to serve thy providence. Thy power
and wisdom is infinite, and therefore should we hang on thy providence, even
when all is clean against us. But for our erudition and infirmities sake, it
has pleased thee by mean to work and deal with us here to exercise us in
obedience, and because we cannot else (so great is our corruption) sustain the
naked and bare presence.

Grant me therefore dear father I humbly beseech thee for Christ's sake, that
as I something now know these things, so I may use this knowledge to my comfort,
and commodity in thee, that is, grant that in what state souer I be, I may not
doubt but the same does come to me by thy most just ordinance, yea by thy
merciful ordinance, for as thou art just so art thou merciful, yea thy mercy
is above all thy works.

And by this knowledge grant me that I may humble my self to obey thee, and
look for thy help in time convenient, not only when I have means by which
thou may work and art accustomed so to do: but also when I have no means,
but am destitute thereof, yea when all means be directly and clean against
me, grant, I say, that I may yet still hang upon thee and thy providence not
doubting of a fatherly end in thy good time.

Again, least I should contemn thy providence, or presume upon it by
vncoupling these things which thou have coupled together preserve me from
neglecting thy ordinary and lawful means in all my needs, if so be I may have
them, and with good conscience use the^, although I know thy providence be not
tied to them further then pleases thee, and grant that I may with diligence,
reverence and thankfulness use them and thereto my diligence, wisdom and
industry in all things lawful, to serve thereby thy providence, if it so
please thee: howbeit so that I hang in no part on the means, or on my
diligence, wisdom, and industry, but only on thy providence, which more and
more persuade me to be altogether fatherly and good, how far soever
otherwise it appear, and seem, yea or else is felt of me. By this I being
preserved from negligence on my behalf, and despair or murmuring toward thee,
shall become diligent and patient through thy mere and alone grace, which give
and increase in me, to the praise of thy holy name for ever, through Jesus
Christ our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

I.B.

A meditation of Gods power, beauty, goodness, etc.
BEcause thou Lord would have us to love thee, not only do thou will,
entice, allure, and provoke us, but also do command us so to do, promising
thy self unto such as love thee, and threatening us with damnation if we do
otherwise: whereby we may see both our great corruption and naughtines, and also
thine exceeding great mercy toward us.

First concerning our corruption and naughtiness what a thing is it that
power, riches, authority, beauty, goodness, liberality, truth, justice, (all
which thou art good Lord) cannot move us to love thee? Whatsoever things we
see, fair, good wise, mighty, are but eue^ sparkles of that power, beauty,
goodness, wisdom, which thou art. For to the end thou might declare thy
riches, beauty, power, wisdom, goodness, etc. thou have not only made, but
still do conserve all creatures to be (as David says of the heavens
declarers and setters sorth of thy glory, and as a book to teach us to know
thee.

How fair thou art, the beauty of the Sun, moon, stars, lights, flowers,
rivers, fields, hills, birds, beasts, men, and all creatures, yea the goodly
shape, and form of the whole world does declare.

How mighty thou art, we are taught by the creation of this world even of
naught, by governing of the same, by punishing the wicked mighty Giants
thereof, by overthrowing their devices, by repressing the rages of the Sea
within her bounds by storms, tempests, and fires. These and such like declare
unto us thy invisible almighty and terrible power, whereby thou subduest al
things unto thee

How rich thou art this world thy great and infinite treasurehouse does well
declare. What plenty is there not only of things, but also of every kind of
things? Yea how do thou yearly, and daily multiply these kinds? How many
seeds do thou make of one seed? Yea, what great increase do thou bring it
unto? These cannot but put us in remembrance of the exceeding riches that thou
have. For if to thine enemies which love thee (not (as the most part in this
world be) if to them thou give so plentifully thy riches here, what shall we
think that with thy self thou have laid up for thy friends?

How good thou art, all creatures generally and particularly do teach. What
creature is there in the world which thou have not made for our commodity? I
will not say how that thou might have made us creatures without sense or
reason, if thou had would. But among all things, nothing does so teach us
thy great love toward us, as does the death of thy most dearly beloved son,
who suffered the pains and terrors thereof, John 15.
yea and of hell it self for our sakes. If this thy love had been but a small
love, it would never have lasted so long, and Christ should never have died.

I B.

A meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, that it may be subject
and obedient to the soul.
THis our body which God has made to be the tabernacle and mansion of our
soul for this life, if we consider it accordingly, we could not but use it
otherwise then we do: that is, we would use it for the souls sake, being the
guest thereof, and not for the body it self, and so should it be served in
things to help, but not to hinder the soul. A servant it is, and therefore it
ought to obey and serve the soul, that the soul might serve God, not as the
body will, neither as the soul it self will, but as God will, whose will we
should learn to know and behave our selves thereafter. The which thing to
observe is hard for us now, by reason of sin which has gotten a mansion
house in our body, and dwells in us as does the soul. To the which sin (I
mean) we are altogether of our selves inclined, because we naturally are siners
nd borne in sin: by reason whereof. we are ready, as servants to sin, and to
use our bodies accordingly, making the soul to fit at reward, and pampering up
the servant to our shame.

O therefore (good Lord) that it would please thee to open this gate unto me,
and to give me eyes to consider effectually this my body what it is, namely, a
servant lent for the soul to soiourne in, and serve thee in this life: yet it
is by reason of sin, that has his dwelling there, become now to the soul
nothing else but a prison, and that most strait, vile, stinking, filthy, and
therefore in danger of miseries, too many in all ages, times and plac^s, till
death has turned it to dust whereof it came and whither it shall return, that
the soul may return to thee, from whence it came, until the day of judgment
come, in the which thou will raise up the body, that then it may be partaker
with the soul and the soul with it inseparably of weal or woe, according to
that is done in, and by the same body here now in earth.

Oh that I could consider often and heartily these things, then should I not
pamper up this body to obey it but bridle it, that it might obey the soul:
then should I fly the pain it puts my soul unto by reason of sin and
provocation to all evil, and continually desire the dissolution of it with
Paul, and the deliverance from it as much as ever did prisoner his deliverance
out of prison, for as only by it the devil has a door to tempt, and so to
hurt me, in it I am kept from thy presence, and thou from being so conversant
with me, as else thou would be: by it I am testrained from the sense and
feeling of all the joys and comforts (in manner) which are to be taken as
joys and comforts indeed. If it were dissolved and I out of it, then could
Satan no more hurt me, then would thou speak with me face to face, then
the conflicting time were at an end, then sorrow would cease, and joy would
increase, and I should enter into inestimable rest. Oh that I could consider
this accordingly.

I. B.

Another meditation concerning the sober usage of the body and pleasure of this
life.
THe beginning of all evil in our kind of living, springs out of the
deprauation and corruptnesse of our judgment, because our will always
follows that which reason judges to be followed. Now that which every man
takes to be friendly and agreeing to his nature, the same does he judge
necessarily to be good for him and to be desired. This as meat, drink,
apparel, riches, favor, dignity, rule, knowledge, and such like, because they
are thought good and agreeing either to the body or to the mind, or to both:
for they help either to the conservation or to the pleasure of man, accounted
of every one amongst good things.

Howbeit such is the weakness of our wit on the one part, and the blindness and
too much rage of our lusts on the other part, that we being left to our selves,
cannot but in the desire of things which we judge good and agreeing to our
nature, by the judgment af our senses and reason, we cannot (I say) but
ouerpas the bounds whereby they might be profitable unto us, and so we make
them hurtful unto us, which of themselves are ordained for our health. What is
more necessary then meat and drink, or more agreeing to nature? But yet how
few be there which do not hurt themselves by them? In like manner it goes with
riches, estimation, friends, learning, etc yea, although we be in these most
temperat, yet when there wants thy spirit our regenerator, we are so drowned
in them that we utterly neglect to lift up our minds to the good pleasure of
God, to the end we might imitate and follow God our maker, by yielding our
selves over duly to use his gifts to the common and private vtility of our
neighbors.

But now God only is life and eternity, and cannot but demand of us his handy
work, that we should tender our selves and all we have to the end wherefore we
were made, that is, to resemble for our portion, his goodness, as they which be
nothing else but witnesses, and instruments of his mercy: So that when we wholly
do naturally strive against that kind of life, whereunto he has created us, by
seeking always our selves, what other thing ought to ensue, but that he should
again destroy us, and take away his notable gifts wherewith he therefore endued
us, that by all kind of well doing we should resemble his image? yea what other
thing may ensue, but that he should leave us, and that eternally, that we might
feel, and by experiente prove how bitter a thing it is to leave the Lord, in
whom is all goodness? O that I might therefore find such favor in thy sight
(dear Father) that thou would work in me by thy holy spirit, and true
knowledge to all good things, and hearty love to the same, through Christ Jesus
our Lord and only Savior, Amen.

I. B.

A meditation of death, and the commodities it brings.
What other thing do we daily in this present life, but heap sin upon
sin, and hoord up trespass upon trespass? so that this day is worse always
then yesterday, by increasing as days, so sins, and therefore thy indignation,
good Lord against us: but when we shall be let out of the prison of this body,
and so taken into thy blessed company, then shall we be in most safety of
immortality, and salvation: then shall come unto us no sickness, no need, no
pain, no kind of evil to soul or body, but whatsoever good we can wish, that
shall we have, and whatsoever we loath, shall be far from us. O dear father
that we had faith to behold these things accordingly. O that our hearts were
persuaded thereof, and our affections inflamed with the desire of them.

Then should we live in longing for that which now we most loath. Oh help us,
and grant that we being ignorant of things to come, and of the time of our
death (which to thee is certain) may so love and finish our iourny here, that
we may be ready and then depart, when our departing may make most to thy glory
and our comfort through Christ.

What is this life but a smoke, a vapor, a shadow, a warfare, a bubble of
water, a word, grass, a flower? That thou shall die, it is most certain, but
the time no man can tell when. The longer in this life thou do remain, the
more thou sinnest, which will turn to thy more pain. By cogitation of death,
our minds be often in manner oppressed with darkness, because we do but
remember the night of the body, forgetting the light of the mind, and of the
resurrection.

Here to remember the good things that after this life shall ensue, with our
wavering, in certainty of faith, and so shall the passage of death he more
desired. It is like a sailing over the sea to thy home and Country, it is like
a medicin or purgation to the health of the soul and body: it is the best
Physician; it is like to a woman's travel: for as the child being delivered,
comes into a more larger place then the womb wherein it did lie before, so
thy soul, being delivered out of thy body, comes into a much more large and
fair place, even into heaven.

A meditation upon the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.
OH Lord Jesus Christ the son of the everliving God, by whom all things were
made, and be ruled and governed, thou the lively image of the substance of the
Father, the eternal wisdom of GOD, the brightness of his glory GOD of God,
light of light coequall, coeternall and consubstantial with the father, thou
which of the love thou had to mankind when he was fallen from the
fellowship of God into the society of Satan and all evil, did vouchsafe for
our redemption to become a mediator between God and man, taking to thy Godhead
our nature, as concerning the substance of it and so becamest man, also the
heir of all, and most merciful Messiah which by the power of thy Godhead, and
merits of thy Manhood, have made purgation of our sins, even by thine own
self, whilst thou wast here on earth, being now set on the right hand of thy
father for us, even concerning our nature, in majesty, glory and power,
infinite, I pray and humbly beseech thy mercy to grant me at this present to
rehearse some of thy passions and sufferings for me, the last night that thou
wast here before thy death, that thy good spirit may thereby be effectual to
work in me faith, as well of the pardon of my sins by them as mortification
of mine affecti^us, comfort in my crosses, and patience in afflictions, Amen.

In the midst of thy last Supper with thy dear Apostles, these things could
not but be before thee, namely that they all would leave thee, the most earnest
would forswear thee, and one of the twelve should most traitorously betray
thee, which were no small crosses to thee, Judas was admonished of thee to
beware; but when he took no heed, but wilfully went out to finish his work,
contemning thy admonition and counsel he could not but vex thy most loving
heart.

After supper there was contention amongst thy Disciples who should be greatest
after thee, yet dreaming carnally of thee and thy kingdom, and having this
affection of pride and ambition busy amongst them, notwithstanding thy
diligence in reproving and teaching them.

After thy admonition to them of the cross that should come, thereby to make
them more vigilant, so gross were they, that they thought they could with
their two swords put away all perils, which was no little grief unto thee.
After thy coming to Bethlehem heaviness pressed thee and therefore thou
willedst thy disciples to pray; thou did tell to Peter and his fellows that
thy heart was heavy to death. Thou did will them to pray, being careful
for them also, least they should fall into temptation After this thou wentest a
stones cast from them, and did pray thy self, falling flat and groueling
upon the earth, but alas thou feltest no comfort, and therefore thou came to
thy disciples (which of all others were most sweet and dear unto thee) but lo
thy further discomfort, they pass neither of thy perils, nor of their own,
and therefore sleep apace.

After thou had awaked them, thou go again to pray, but thou foundest no
comfort at all, and therefore did return again for some comfort at thy
detest friends hands. But yet again (alas) they are fast asleep. Whereupon thou
art enforced to go again to thy heavenly father for some spark of comfort in
these thy wonderful crosses and agonies. Now here thou wast so discouraged and
so comfortles, that even streams of blood came running from thine eyes and
ears, and other parts of thy body. But who is able to express the
infiniteness of thy Cross even at thy being in the garden? All which thou
sufferedst for my sake, as well to satisfy thy Fathers wrath for my sins, as
also to sanctify all my sufferings, the more gladly to be sustained for ever.

After thy bloody prayer thou camst and yet again foundest thy disciples a
sleep: and before thou can well awake them, lo Judas comes with a great
band of men to apprehend thee as a thief, and so does leading thee away bound
to the high Bishops house Annas, and so from him to Caiphas. Here now to
augment this thy misery, behold thy disciples fly from thee, false witnesses
be brought against thee, thou art accused and condemned of blasphemy, Peter
even in thy sight forsweareth thee; thou art unjustly stricken for answering
lawfully: thou art blindfolded, stricken and buffered all the whole night in the
Bishop Caiphas house of their servants.

In the morning betimes thou art condemned again of the Priests of blasphemy,
and therefore they bring thee before the secular power to Pilate, by whom thou
art openly arraigned, as other thieves and malefactors were, and when he saw
that thou wast accused of malice, yet he did not dismiss thee, but send thee
to Herod where thou wast shamfully derided in coming and going to him, and
from him all the way, especially after Herod had apparelled thee as a fool.

Before Pilate again therefore thou wast brought and accused falsely: no man did
take thy part, or speak a good word for thee.

Pilate caused thee to be whipped and scourged, and to be handled most
pitifully, to see if any pity might appear with the Prelates, but no man at
all pitied thee.

Barrabas was preferred before thee all the people head and tail, was against
thee and cried, Hang him up: unjustly to death wast thou judged, thou wast
crowned with thorns, they pierced thy brains, thou wast made a mocking stock,
thou wast reviled, beaten, and most miserably handled.

Thou wentest through Jerusalem to the place of execution even to the Mount of
Caluarie, a great Cross to hang thee on, was laid upon thy back to bear and
draw, as long as thou was able.

Thy body was racked to be nailed to the tree, thy hands were boared through,
and thy feet also, nails were put through them to faste^ thee thereon, thou
wast hanged between heaven and earth, as one spued out of heaven, and vomited
out of the earth, unworthy of any place: the hie Priest laughed thee to s^orne
the Elders blasphemed thee, and said, God has noe care of thee, the common
people laughed and cried out upon thee, thirst oppressed thee, but Vinegar only
and gall was given thee to drink, heaven shined not upon thee, the sun gave
thee no light, ye earth was afraid to bear thee, satan tempted thee, and thine
own senses caused thee to cry out. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
O wonderful passions which thou sufferedst. In the^ thou teach me, in them
thou comfortest me, for by them God is my father, my sins are forgiven By the^
I should learn to fear God, to love God, and never to leave him for any
temptations, but with thee to cry, Father into thy hands I commend my spirit.

A prayer to Christ crucified.
AS thou O Lord wast crucified for me, so I beseech thee crucify me with thee,
that I may rise again with thee to everlasting life. Thy flesh was crucified
for me: crucify with thee (O Christ) the kingdom of the flesh, which has
dominion in me, that I may put off the old Adam, and by newness of life may be
transformed into thee the second Adam, sin, infidelity, and the whole tyranny
of Satan being vanquished and overcome.

Bring to pass (O Lord), that by thy cross and painful suffering, thy yoke
may be to me made light, and thy burden easy, that willingly and gladly
following thee, I may come whither thou art gone: that is to thy Father most
blessed and immortal, from whom nothing shall afterward be able to separate us.

God forbid that I should rejoice in any thing, but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Gal
6.

A prayer to Christ ascended, and reigning in glory.
O Good Christ, our first begotten brother and tender hearted Joseph, O
natural Son of that Father to whom we are made Children by adoption through
thee, Oh our head reigning on high in glory, forget us not thy poor members
here on earth, whereunto abasing thy self thou came down and sufferedst for
us most cruel death. Out of this thy throne of majesty and glory thou put
us in assured hope and confidence that we also shall attain to that blessed
place, whither thou art gone before to take possession for us. Oh our strong
tower of defense and succor, what can hurt us now trusting in thee? Most
unhappy are they which are ignorant of thee: most happy are they which always
behold thee: Blessed are they which have known thee here in the days of their
mortality, but more blessed are they which see thee in the heavens, and shall
see thee reigning with thy father in joys incomparable, O Lord the only joy
and comfort of our souls, show us thy loving countenance, embrace us with the
arms of thy mercy: receive us O good Joseph thy younger brethren with the kiss
of comfort, power into our hearts thy holy spirit, pluck us up from the earth
and earthly things: open our eyes, and lift them up unto thee: open thy mouth
and call us unto thee, open our ears that we may hear thee, so that what
soever we do speak, or think, it may be directed unto thee alone, our
redeemer, mediator and advocate.

If ye be risen again with Christ, seek the things which are above, where
Christ sets at the right hand of God set your affection on things that are
above, and not on things which are on earth. Col. 3.

Another.
THou Lord did put away Mary Magdalen from the kissing of thy feet, because
thy flesh was not yet exalted, and she knew not yet the dignity of thy
glorified body, and beautified with the glory of immortality, but was addicted
only to the bodily presence.

She yet sought the living among the dead, neither was it known to her that
thou wast equal with thy father. Wherefore thou would not suffer her so much
as to kiss thy feet, because it was a thing unworthy for thy majesty. O thou
mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah thou conqueror of hell and death, everliving
and immortal, thou art now risen from death for us, thou art now ascended to
thy Father and our Father, and sit at his right hand in glory, suffer us
to come near unto thee that we may kiss thee; yea Lord thou lover of our
souls, Cant. 1.
come then rather unto us, and kiss us with the kiss of thy mouth, that we
may be glad and rejoice in thee, draw us that we may run after the savor of
thy sweet ointments, that we may behold thee in righteousness, Psalm. 17.
and when thy glory shall appear we may be satisfied: for in thy presence there
is fullness of joy, Psalm. 16.
and in thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

A Prayer for true repentance.
MOst gracious God and merciful father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I
have sinned and done wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire
of repentance, whereunto this thy long suffering does draw my hard heart, I
beseech thee for thy great mercies sake in Christ, to work the same repentance
in me; and by thy spirit, power and grace, so to humble mortify and fear my
conscience for my sins to salvation, that in thy good time thou may comfort
and quicken me again, through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son. So be it.

I.B.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Merciful God and dear father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ (in whom
as thou art well pleased, so have thou commanded us to hear him) forasmuch as
he often bids us to ask of thee, and also promises that thou will hear
us and gran^ us that which in his name we shall ask of thee, lo^ gracious
father, we are bold to be^^ of thy mercy through thy son Jesus Christ one
sparkle of true faith and certain persuasion of thy goodness and love toward
us in Christ, where through I being assured of the pardon of all my sins by
the merits of Christ thy son, may be thankful to thee, love thee, and serve
thee, in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life.

I.B.

A prayer for the true sense and feeling of Gods favor and mercy in Christ.
OH Lord God and dear Father, what shall I say, that feel all things to be
(in manner) with me as in the wicked* Blind is my mind, crooked is my will and
perverse concupiscence is in me, as a spring or stinking puddle. O how faint is
faith in me? How little is my love to thee or to thy people? How great is self
love? How hard is my heart? By reason whereof I am moved to doubt of thy
goodness toward me, whether thou art my merciful Father, and whether I be
thy child or no. Indeed worthily might I doubt, if that the having of these
were the cause, and not the fruit rather of thy children. The cause why thou
art my father, is thy mercy, goodness, grace, and truth in Christ Jesus, which
cannot but remain for ever. In respect whereof thou have borne me this good
will, to bring me into thy Church by baptism, and to accept me into the number
of thy children, that I might be holy, faithful, obedient and innocent, and to
call me diverse times by the ministry of thy word into thy kingdom, besides
thy innumerable other benefits, always hitherto powered upon me. All which thou
have done of this thy good will, which thou of thine own mercy barest to me
in Christ, and for Christ, before the world was made. The which thing as thou
requirest straightly that I should believe without doubting; so would thou
that in all my needs I should come unto thee, as unto a Father and make my moan
without mistrust of being heard in thy good time, as most shall make to my
comfort. Lo therefore to thee, dear Father, I come through thy son our
Lord, mediator, and advocate Jesus Christ, who sits on thy right hand making
intercession for me, and pray thee of thy great goodness and mercy in Christ
to be merciful unto me, that I may feel indeed thy sweet mercy as thy child.
The time (Oh dear father) I appoint not, but I pray thee that I may with hope
still expect and look for thy help, I hope that as thou for a little whil have
left me, so thou will come and visit me, and that in thy great mercy, whereof
I have need by reason of my great misery.

Thou art wont for a little season in thine anger to hide thy face from them
whom thou love, but surely (O Redeemer) in eternal mercies thou will show
thy compassions. For when thou leauest us O Lord, thou do not leave us very
long, neither do thou leave us to our own loss, but to our lucre and
advantage, even that thy holy spirit with bigger portion of thy power and
virtue may lighten and cheer us, that the want of feeling of our sorrow, may
be recompensed plentifully with the lively sense of having thee to our eternal
joy, and therefore thou swarest that in thine everlasting mercy thou will have
compassion on us. Of which thing, to the end we might be most assured, thine
oath is to be marked, for thou say: As I have sworn that I will never
bring any more the waters to drown the world: so have I sworn that I will
never more be angry with thee, nor reprove thee. The mountains shall remove,
and the hills shall fall down, but my loving kindness shall not move, and the
bond of my peace shall not fail thee. Thus say thou, the Lord our merciful
redeemer.

Dear Father, therefore I pray thee remember, even for thine own truth and
mercy sake, this promise and everlasting covenant, which in thy good time, I
pray thee to write in my heart, that I may know thee to be the only true God,
and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; that I may love thee with all my heart
for ever, that I may love thy people for thy sake, that I may be wholly in thy
sight through Christ, that I may always not only strive against sin, but also
overcome the same daily more and more, as thy children do, above all things
desiring the sanctification of thy name, the coming of thy kingdom, the doing
of thy will here on earth, as it is in heaven, etc. through Jesus Christ our
redeemer, mediator and advocate, Amen.

I. B.

A prayer against our spiritual enemies, the devil, the world, and the flesh
O Lord God, the devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, the flesh lusts against the spirit, the world persuades unto
vanities yt we may forget thee our Lord God, and so for ever be damned. Thus
are we miserable on every side, beset and besieged of cruel and unrestful
enemies, and like every moment to perish, if we be not defended with thy godly
power against their tyranny: We therefore poor and wretched sinners
despairing of our own strength. which indeed is none, most heartily pray thee
to endue us with strength from above, that we may be able through thy help
with strong faith to resist Satan with fervent prayer to mortify the lusts of
the flesh, with continual meditation of thy holy laws, to avoid the foolish
vanities and transitory pleasures of this wicked world: that through thy grace
we being set at liberty from the power of these our mortal enemies may serve
thee here in true holiness and righteousness, and after be partakers of the
everlasting ioies prepared for thy children, which as they are great and
unspeakable, so are there few that do enjoy them. For strait is the way, and
narrow is the gate that leads thereunto, and few therbe that find it.
Notwithstanding (O GOD) thou have a little flock te whom it is thy pleasure to
give that joyful kingdom: whose names are written in the book of life. Make
us therefore of that number, for Jesus Christ's sake, and place us amongst those
thy sheep which shall stand on thy right hand, to receive that blessed
inheritance, and dwell with thee for evermore.

A prayer for present help in temptation.
Dear father to whom it is more easy to do all things, then for me to
think any one good thing, Lo do thou but speak a word, and thy deadly sick
servant, my soul, shall be made whole. Help (O Lord) for thy great mercy
sake, for thy truths sake, and for thy dear son Jesus Christ's sake, and let
thy strength suffice against my weakness and thy ho y spirit against my
sinful flesh and old man.

Thou art faithful (O Father) who have promised that I shall not be tempted
further then thou will make me able to bea^e. Give now therefore thy grace and
strength unto thy servant, that I may with a strong faith in thy infallible
truth and promised mercy, vanquish and subdue whatsoever rebelleth against thy
most blessed will, preserve and keep holy my soul and body; and let them not
be defiled and made a dungeon of devils and wicked spirits through delectation
in sin. Behold dear Father the posts thereof are sprinkled with the
precious blood of thy dear son, and of thy great mercy they are made the
temple and tabernacle of thy holy spirit. Shall now (alas) the devil, the
world, or the flesh, pluck from thee that thing which presently cries to thee
with assured trust in thy promised help? Nay further, but grant that I may by
thy mighty power turn all their crafts, deceits, and raging assaults unto the
increase of thy fatherly assistance in this my present temptation, and may with
assured hope and trust in thy ready help and comfort, overcome my said enemies
hereafter in like assaults, and praise thy holy name for the victory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

My son if thou will come into the service of the Lord, stand fast in
righteousness and fear, and prepare thy soul to tentation. Eccles. 2.
Remedies against sinful motions and tentations.
First, remember that sin is so heinous a thing, that God by his justice
might worthily damn thee for the same, and is therefore to be abhorred, as a
sweet poison, a flattering death and destruction of the soul, which would cut
thee off from God thy Savior, and make thee a bondslaue to Satan thy deadly
enemy

Avoid therefore even at the first the occasions thereof, and be time squash
out the brains of the children of Babylon against the hard stones, whiles yet
they be young and weak, lest when they be grown elder and stronger, they dash
thee to pieces.

And for a remedy against the same, fly unto God, who commands thee to call
upon him in thy trouble, and promises to deiluer thee, and will not suffer thee
to be further tempted then he will make a way out, whereby thou shall escape,
and doubt not, but he that causes thee to hate the sin which thy nature is to
love, will deliver thee also from the dangers thereof, and make thee to triumph
over Satan to his confusion, to Gods glory, and thy great comfort, which are
causes that our tender loving Father sends tentations, unto us; and he that
is not tempted what is he?

Now after thou have obtained the victory, remember two things; first, to give
most hearty thanks to God for his grace and assistance, whereby thou have
overcome, and be not unthankful in any wise: and then that he who continually
goes about like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour, will not be long,
or far away from thee, but will attempt again the same, or as evil ways,
to overcome thee. Watch therefore and pray.

A prayer for the avoiding of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance for our sins.
OH Lord God strong and mighty great and fearful, which dwell in the
heavens, and workest great wonders, we thy miserable children, here upon earth,
do most humbly beseech thee to be merciful unto us, to pardon our offenses,
and to forgive us all our sins. O Lord enter not into judgment with thy
servants, for if thou do, there shall no flesh be saved in thy sight.

We confess and acknowledge, O Lord, that it is our sins which have moved
thee to wrath, and to show such fearful tokens of thy displeasure toward us
in these our days, first, with fire from heaven, betokening the hot burning
indignation and wrathful displeasure for sin, which abounds at this day:
then, with such horrible and monstrous shapes against nature as were never seen
here in our days, nor in any time before us, which do betoken to us none other
thing, but thy plagues to come upon us, for our degenerate and monstrous life
and conversation. And now desides all this, by great mortality, plagues and
pestilence thou have terribly threatened us, fatherly warned us, and mercifully
called us to repentance. The axe is set to the root of the tree, and if we be
not as rotten members without all sense and feeling, we may perceive our
fearful destruction and desolation to be at hand, (unless we speedily
repent and turn unto thee) because we have been so long taught out of thy
most holy and sacred word, and yet no fruits of repentance or Christian life
will appear.

Woe and alas to these our days, that neither preaching by word most
comfortable, nor preaching by fire most terrible, nor preaching by monsters
most strange and ugly, neither yet by plagues and pestilence most horrible,
will stir up our stony hearts, and awake us from our sins.

We fear (O Lord) that the Turks with all the rest of the unbelieving will
condemn us in the last day: which if they had been so long instructed by the
comfortable preaching of thy word, and sweet promises of thy Gospel, or seen
the wonders which we have seen, no doubt their righteousness would have shined
at this day to our great shame and confusion. Thou have no less warned us (O
Lord) of thy fearful displeasure and heavy plagues, at hand for our great
wickedness, then thou did the Israelits of that horrible destruction which
came upon them, whom thou first in mercy did call to repentance by ye
preaching of thy word: but when no warning would serve, thou didd^st send them
monstrous and fearful signs and tokens, to declare that thy visitation was
not far off. But they like to us at this day, did always interpret those
things after the imaginaion of their own vain hearts, promising to themselves
peace when destruction was over their heads.

Which things when we do call to mind (forasmuch as they are written for our
learning, example and warning) it makes us to tremble and quake for fear of
thy just judgments. For if thou have thus dealt with thine own dear and
chosen children, in token of thy great wrath against sin, what shall we look
for, who do no less deserve thy fearful scourge (for of mercy it is that
thou do thus long forbear us) and live as though there were no God at all to
be revenged upon our sins. It makes us to fear and cry inwardly in our
souls, Apo. 22.
Come Lord Jesus, holy and true in all thy doings, and shorten our days; and
bring this our pilgrimage to an end, suffer us not to heap sin upon sin,
until the day of vengeance, lest we be caught up amongst the number of the
wicked and reprobate, which shall never see thy loving countenance.

It makes us to cry to thee (O Lord) Let thy kingdom come, and end this our
sinful life, wherein we do nothing but provoke thee to wrath.

Correct us not O Lord, in thine indignation, Psalm. 6.
neither chasten us in thine heavy displeasure. And though to us belongs
nothing but shame and confusion, psalm. 89
though our offenses have deserved to be visited with the rod, and our sins
with scourges, yet in mercy Lord and with fatherly correction, chasten us, and
thy loving kindness take not away from us. To thee we fly for succor, ps,
under the wings of thy mercy, shall be our refuge, until thou turn thy
wrathful countenance from us. Eccl. 23.
We know that thy mercy i^ ^boue all thy works, and even as ^at as thy self.
Therefore will w^ say with holy Job, Though thou ill us, Job. 13.
yet will we put our whole ^rust in thee.

Thou came to comfort and pluch out of the dungeon of hell, such wretches as
we are. Thou art the good Samarita^ that came to heal our deadly wounds: thou
art that good Physician that came to cure our mortal infirmities, Luke 15.
thou art the good Shepherd that came to seek us wandering and lost sheep,
and to bring us to thy fold again: E^^^.
and more then that, thou art our brother, flesh of our flesh, Isa. 53.
and bone of our bones: which have tasted of our infirmities, felt our
temptations, and borne the burden of our sins, therefore at thy hands ^e
look for mercy against the day of ^^ngeance. And though thou punish ^^^^er our
hope is, and ever shall be, tha^ ^hy rod shall no farther touch us, ^en shall
make to thy glory, our comm^dity, and the strengthening and increa^ of our faith.

Let this thy preaching sundry ways (O Lord) be sufficient for our warning,
and grant that we may speedliy and from the bottom of our hearts repent,
endeavor to do thy righteous and blessed will revealed in thy word, and frame
our lives according to the same, that we may here live in thy fear all the
days of our life, and after this our sinful course is ended, may dwell with
thee in thy blessed kingdom, through the death and merits of Jesus Christ our
only redeemer. So be it.

Another prayer for the avoiding of Gods deserved wrath hanging over us for our
sins.
When we look back and behold our sinful life past, what a dungeon of
errors, vice and wickedness opens it self unto us? So that there is no man
but he must needs be ashamed of himself when he calls to mind what e has been,
and tremble when he considers the wickedness and sinful course of hi^ life
to come, for who shall undertake that the rest of our life shall be any better
then is past? How can we then sufficiently magnify and praise thy great
mercy, which have deferred thy punishment so long? Beholding therefore this our
dangerous and miserable state, we come unto thee (O thou great and mighty
Judge) in trembling and fear, humbly beseeching thee not to heap upon us thy
deserved vengeance: but let thy tender kindness and love thou barest to Jesus
Christ thy Son our gracious Lord and redeemer, cover our iniquities: for
whose sake (though we deserve al extremity) thou do pardon us.

If thou Lord shall straightly mark our iniquity, O Lord who shall be able to
abide it? Psalm. 103.

A prayer to be said of all such as suffer any kind of cross.
ALmighty God, king of all kings, and governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly, to punish sinners, and
to be merciful^ unto them that truly repent: we confess that thou do justly
punish us, for we have grievously sinned against thee. And we acknowledge that
in punishing us thou do declare thy self to be our most merciful father,
as well because thou do not punish us in any thing as we have deserved, as
also because by punishing us thou do call us and (as it were) draw us to
increase in repentance, in faith, in prayer in contemning of the world, and in
hearty desiring of everlasting life, and thy blessed presence.

Grant us therefore gracious Lord thankfully to acknowledge thy great mercy,
which have thus favorably dealt with us, punishing us not to our confusion, but
to our amendment. And seeing thou have sworn that thou will not the death of a
sinner, but that he turn and live, have mercy upon us, and turn us unto thee
for thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ's sake, whom thou would should be
made a slain sacrifice for our sins, thereby declaring thy great and
unspeakable anger against sin, and thine infinite mercy toward us sinful
wretches.

And forasmuch as the dullness, blindness and corruption of our hearts is such,
that we are not able to arise up unto thee by faithful and hearty prayer,
according to our great necessity, without thy singular grace and assistance,
grant unto us gracious Lord, thy holy and sanctifying spirit to work in us
this good work, with grace to weigh and consider the need and greatness of
that we do desire, and with an assured faith and trust, that thou will grant
us our requests, because thou art good and gracious even to young Ravens calling
upon thee, much more then to us for whom thou have made all things, yea and
have not spared also thine own dear son, because thou have commanded us to
call upon thee, because thy throne whereto we come, is a throne of grace and
mercy, because thou have given us a mediator Christ to bring us unto thee,
being the way by whom we come, being the door by whom we enter, and being our
head on whom we hang and hope, that our poor petitions shall not be in vain,
through him and for his names take.

We beseech thee therefore of thy rich mercy, wherein thou art plentiful to all
them that call upon thee, to forgive us our sins, namely, our unthankfulness,
unbelief, selfeloue, neglect of thy word, security, hypocrisy, contempt of
thy long suffering, omission of prayer, doubting of thy power, presence mercy
and good will toward us, insensibleness of thy grace, impatience, etc. And to
this thy benefit of correcting us, and this gracious gift of repentance, faith,
the spirit of prayer, the contempt of this world, and hearty desiring of
everlasting life. Indue us with thy holy spirit, according to thy covenant of
mercy, as well to assure us of pardon, and that thou do accept us in thy
favor, as thy dear children in Christ and for his sake, as to write thy law
in our hearts, and so to work in us, that we may now begin and go forward in
believing, loving, fearing, obeying, praising, hoping and serving thee, as thou
do require most fatherly and most justly of us, accepting us as perfect in
thy sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer of the afflicted for the profession of Gods Word.
O Gracious God, which seek all means possible how to bring thy children
into the feeling and sure sense of thy mercy, and therefore when prosperity
will not serve, then sendest thou adversity, graciously correcting them here
whom thou will have elsewhere to live with thee for ever: we poor wretches
give humble praises and thanks to thee, that thou have vouchsed us worthy of
thy correction at this present, hereby to work that which we in prosperity
and liberty did neglect. For the which neglecting and many other our grievous
sins, whereof we now accuse our selves before thee (most merciful Lord) thou
might most justly have given us over and destroyed us both in soul and body.
But such is thy goodness toward us in christ, that thou seem to forget all
our offenses, and as though we were far otherwise then we be indeed, thou will
that we should suffer this cross now laid upon us for thy truth and Gospels
sake; and so be thy witnesses with the Prophets Apostles, Martyrs, and
Confessors, yea with thy dearly beloved son Jesus Christ, to whom thou do
now here begin to fashion us like, that in thi^ glory, we may be like to him
also.

O good God what are we on whom thou should show this great mercy? Oh loving
Lord, forgive us our unthankfulness and sins. Oh faithful Father, give us
thine holy spirit now to cry in our hearts. Abba, dear Father; to assure us of
our eternal election in Christ, to reveal more and more thy truth unto us, to
confirm, strengthen, and stablish us in the same, that we may live and die in
it as vessels of thy mercy, to thy glory, and to the commodity of thy Church.
Indue us with the spirit of thy wisdom, that with good conscience, we may
always so answer the enemies in thy cause, as may turn to their conversion or
confusion, and our unspeakable consolation in Christ Jesus: for whose sake we
beseech thee henceforth to keep us, to give us patience, and to will no
otherwise our deliverance or mitigation of our misery then may stand always
with thy good pleasure and merciful will toward us.

Grant this dear Father, not only to us in this place, but also to all others
elsewhere, afflicted for thy names sake, through the death and merits of Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

I.B.

A prayer to God the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost.
O Almighty and everliving God, the eternal Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which of thy unmeasurable goodness have opened thy self unto us, and with a loud
voice have said; of thy son Jesus Christ our Lord, Hear him: O maker and
preserver of all things, with thy coeternall son our Lord Jesus Christ, which
reigns with thee (and was manifested in Jerusalem) and with thy holy spirit
which was poured upon the Apostles. O wise God, merciful Judge, and mighty
Lord, which have said, As truly as I live, I will not the death of a sinner,
but rather that he should convert and amend: which also have said: Call upon me
in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee; have mercy upon up for Jesus
Christ's sake, whom thou would of thy meruellous and incomprehensible
counsel should be made for us a slain sacrifice, He. 6.11.
mediator, reconciler, and peacemaker, to the end that thou might show
thine exceeding great wrath against sin, and thine inestimable mercy toward
mankind. Sanctify and illuminate our hearts and souls with thy holy spirit,
that we may truly believe in thee, call upon thee, be thankful unto thee
and obedient to thy holy will. Defend, govern, and cherish thy Church, as thou
have promised, saying: Esa. 55.
This is my covenant that I have made with them. My spirit which is in thee,
and my word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed for ever. Preserve those kingdoms and commonweals, which give harbor to thy people, and maintain the ministry of thy
holy word and Gospel, that the kingdom of thy son Jesus Christ may increase
and shine throughout all the world.

O Jesus Christ, Son of the everlasting God, A prayer to God the Son.
crucified for us and raised also from the dead, and now reigning at the right
hand of thy father that thou may give gifts unto men, which have said, Come
unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Have
mercy upon us, and pray for us unto thy eternal Father: Joh. 14.
sanctify and govern us with thy holy spirit, help and succor us in all our
necessities, as thou have promised saying: I will not leave you comfortless.

O holy and blessed spirit, together with the father and the son, one true and
everliving God, full of majesty and power, which with thy heavenly inspiration
quicknest the minds of them that before were dead in sin, make ioifull the
hearts of the faithful penitent, bring into the way of truth all such as
have erred and gone astray, comfortest the souls of such as hunger and thirst
after righteousness, and plenteouslie enrichest those with diverse gifts which
ask them in Jesus Christ's name: purify our hearts (we beseech thee) and
inflame them with the fire of thy love: replenish them with thy heavenly
benefits and spiritual blessings, that they may be made mere temples for
thee; lead us into all truth, which aet the only fountain of truth, and
mortify in us whatsoever proceeds not of thee.

Or else pray thus.
O holy spirit, powered into the Apostles, which have promised unto us by the
son of God our Redeemer, to kindle in us a true knowledge and invocation of
God, as it is written, I will power upon you the spirit of grace and
compassion: make to arise in our hearts a true fear of God, and faith and
knowledge of thy mercy, which the eternal father of our Lord Jesus Christ has
promised unto us for his sons sake. Be our comforter in all our counsels and
dangers. Illuminate our understanding, and fill our hearts with new affections
and spiritual motions, and renew us both in soul and body that we may die to
sin, and live to righteousness and so in true obedience may praise the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his son our redeemer, and the^ also our
comforter everlastingly.

A thanksgiving to God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.
WE render thanks unto thee O Almighty and eternal God, with the dear son
our Lord Jesus Christ, and with thy holy spirit, for that of thin exceeding
great goodness, thou have made thy self known unto us by most assured and
euiden^ testimonies, and for that thou have ga^hered and chosen unto thy self
a perpetual Church, and would that thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ should
suffer death, to restore us from death to life, for that thou have given to us
thy Gospel and the holy Ghost, for that thou forgiuest us our sins,
deliuerest us from the power of the devil, and from eternal death, and give
unto us everlasting life: finally, for that thou have visited us with many
great benefits, giving us life, food, doctrine, peace in such places as we have
lived in, and have diminished the pains which we have justly deserved.

We give thanks unto thee (O Lord Jesus Christ, A thanksgiving to the Son.
son of the living God, crucified for us and risen again, because thou have
coupled unto thee our humane nature, and of thy inestimable love did give
thy self to death for us, turning upon thee the great wrath of GOD the Father,
conceived against us, to reconcile us unto him, and ^o purchase us eternal
redemption, because thou have brought us to this grace wherein we stand and
rejoice in hope of the glory of GOD: because thou do preserve, cherish, and
defend send thy Church against the Devil and all thine enemies, because thou
give and renewest often the light of thy Gospel, and maintainest the
ministry of thy word, because thou do forgive us our sins, and give
unto us everlasting life, because thou art our mediator, and make continual
intercession for us, and finally, because thou do succor and preserve us in
all our necessities, dangers and afflictions. A thanksgiving to God the holy
Ghost.


We give thanks also unto thee O holy spirit, the giver of life, which wast
powered upon the Apostles, be cause thou kindlest thy light in our hearts,
because thou rulest, instructest, admonishest, and helpest us, because thou
gouernest and guidest the labors and works of our vocation, and sanctifiest us
to eternal life.

A prayer to God for his help and protection against the obstinate enemies of
the truth.
MOst righteous Judge God of all mercy and comfort, which by thy secret
judgment and wisdom, do suffer the wicked to triumph a increase for a
time, for trial of the faith of thy well-beloved little flock, and the
mortifying of their lusts, now at length to the utter confusion ot thy enemies,
and ioifull deliverance of thy people, look down we beseech thee on thy
dispersed sheep, out of thy holy habitation in heaven, and strengthen our
weakness against their furious rages: abate their pride assuage their malice,
confound their devises, wherewith they lift up themselves against Christ Jesus
thy son our Lord and Savior, to deface his glory, and to set up Antichrist.
We be not able our selves to think a good thought, much less to stand against
their assaults, except thy undeserved grace and mighty arm defend and deliver
us. Perform thy promises made to Jacob, and stop the mouths of the wicked
Edomits. Call them to repentance whom thou have appointed to saluation^ bring
home them that run astray^ lighten the blind and teach the ignorant: forgive
all those that wilfully and obstinatly rebel against thy holy will. Let thy
fearful threatenings pearce our stony hearts, and make us tremble at thy
judgments, make the examples of the^ whom thou have overthrown in their own
devises, as Cain, Cham, Nimrod, Esau, Pharoh, Saul, A^chitophel, Judas and such
other to be a warning for us, that we set not up our selves against thy holy
will. Grantfree passage to thy holy word: that it may work effectually in us
the work of life and blessed hope of our salvation to the eternal praise of
thy majesty through our mediator Christ Jesus, to whom with thee and the holy
Ghost, three persons and one God, be praise and thanksgiving in all
congregations, world without end. So be it.

A prayer for the afflicted and persecuted under the tyranny of Antichrist.
O Merciful Father, who never do forsake such as put their trust in thee:
stretch forth thy mighty arm to the defense of our brethren by the rage of
enemies persecuted and grievously tormented in sundry places, for the true
profession of the holy Gospel: who in their extreme necessities cry for
comfort unto thee, Let not thy long suffering, O Lord be an occasion either to
increase the tyranny of thy enemies, or to discourage thy children, but with
speed O Lord, consider their great miseries and afflictions. Prevent the cruel
devise of Haman: stay the rage of Holofernes, break off the counsel of
Achitophel, Let not the wicked say, Where is now their God. Let thy afflicted
flock feel present aid and relief from thee. O Lord look down upon them
with thy pitiful eye from thy holy habitation, send terror and trembling among
their enemies, make an end of their outrageous tyranny, beat back their
boldness in suppressing the truth, in destroying thy true servants, in
defacing thy glory, and in setting up Antichrist. Let them not thus proudly
advance themselves against thee and thy Christ, but let them understand and
feel that against the they fight. Preserve and defend the vine which thy right
hand has planted, and let all Nations see the glory of thine anointed, Amen.

A prayer to be said before the preaching of Gods word.
ALmighty God and most merciful father, whose word is a lantern ^o our feet,
and a light unto our steps, we most humbly beseech thee to illuminate our
minds, that we may understand the mysteries contained in thy holy law, and
into the self same thing, that we godly understand, we may be virtuously
transformed, so that of no part we offend thy divine Majesty, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Another.
IN this great darkness of our soul O Lord, thou shinest diverse ways unto us
by the light of thy grace, but in nothing so effectually as in the preaching of
thy word. Great is the harvest, (as thou thy self have said) and the workmen
are few. The greatest part of men are ignorant wrapped in miserable blindness,
and few there be that teach thy word truly, as they ought. We beseech thee
therefore to send forth workmen into thy harvest. Send teachers (O Lord) which
are taught of thee, and instructed by the spirit of godly wisdom, and
understanding, which by their preaching will seek, not themselves, but thee;
because they are godly: and can so do, because they are wise and understand.
Give to the preacher of thy word here present, out of the treasures of thy
wisdom, that which he may power upon us to our salvation: and unto us give
thy grace and holy spirit (O Lord) so to hear and to receive thy word, that
the good seed which falls upon us be not choked with thorns, or withered
away with heat or devoured by the fowls of the air, but may grow up in a good
ground, and fructify with great increase.

A prayer to Be said after the preaching of Gods word.
1 Pet. 4. Number. 26, Deuteronomy. 29. Iosu. 7. Mat. 13.
ALmighty God and most merciful Father, we heartily beseech thee that this seed
of thy word now sown amongst us, may take such deep root, that neither the
burning heat of affliction, or persecution cause it to wither, neither the
thorny cares of this life do choke it, but that as seed sown in good ground
it may bring forth thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold, as thy heavenly
wisdom has appointed. And because we have need continually to crave many
things at thy hands, we humbly beseech thee (O heavenly Father) to grant us thy
holy spirit, Luke 17. Romans 8. James. 5. 1 John 5 Romans 12. Wis 6.
to direct our petitions, that they proceed from such a fervent mind, as may be
agreeable to thy most blessed will.

And seeing that our infirmity is such, that we are able to do nothing without
thy help, and that thou art not ignorant with how many and great tentations we
poor wretches are on every side compassed and enclosed, 2 Cor. a9. John 5.
Phil. 2. Psalm. 303 1. Pet. 1. 1. Pet. 5. Luke 17.
let thy strength (O Lord) sustain our weakness, and assist us with thy
grace that we may be safely preserved against all the assaults of Satan, who
goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us. Increase our faith (O
merciful father) that we do not swarns at any time from thy heavenly word.
Augment in us hope and love with a careful keeping of thy commandments, Psalm.
95 Heb 14. 2. Joh. 2.
that no hardness of heart, no hypocrisy, no concupiscence of the eyes, nor
inticements of the world, do draw us away from thy obedience. And seeing the
times are dangerous wherein we live, let thy fatherly providence defend us
against the violence of all our enemies, and specially against the furious rage
of that Romish Idol, enemy to thy Christ.

Furthermore, forasmuch as by thy Apostle we be taught to make our prayers and
supplications for all men; Epl. c. 13. Romans 11. 2. Cor. 4.
we pray not only for our selves here present, but beseech thee also to
reduce al such as be yet ignorant, from the miserable captivity of blindness
and error, to the pure understanding of thy heavenly truth, that we all with
one consent, and unity of mind may worship thee our only God and Savior.

We beseech thee also most (dear Father) for Pastors and Ministers, John 21.
Mat 18. John 9. Mat. 6.
to whom thou have committed the dispensation of thy holy word, and charge of
thy chose^ people, that both in their life and doctrine they may de found
faithful setting only before their eyes thy glory, and that by them all poor
sheep which wander and go astray, may be sought out and brought to thy fold.

Again, that it would please thee to deliver the Church from such idle
shepherds, wolves, and hirelings as seek themselves, their bellies, Pro 21.
John 16.1. Romans 13. John 6.
and not thy glory, and the safeguard of thy flocks.

Moreover, because the hearts of rulers are in thy hands, we make our prayers
unto thee for all princes and magistrates, to whom thou have committed the
administration of justice: especially (O Lord) for the Kings Majesty) that it
would please thee to endue him with thy plentiful grace and principal spirit,
that he may with a pure faith acknowledge Jesus Christ thy only son to be
king of all kings, and governor of all governors even as thou have given all
power unto him both in heaven and earth, and so work in his heart, that he
considering whose minister he is, may heartily seek, and zealously promote thy
true honor and glory carefully traveling to bring thy people committed to his
charge (and yet remaining almost in all parts of his Realms in miserable
blindness and dark ignorance) to the true knowledge of thee, ruling and
guiding them as he is taught and commanded by thy holy word.

Also we beseech thee, to indue al^ such as are in any authority under him,
with thy grace and holy spirit, that they may be found upright and faithful in
their calling, favorers and furtherers of thy holy Gospel, maintainers and
defenders of the true Preachers and ministers thereof, and such as in singlenes
of heart will seek not themselves, but thy glory and the commodity of thy people.

And for that we be all members of the mystical body of Christ Jesus, we
make our requests unto thee (O heavenly father) for all such as are afflicted
with any kind of cross or tribulation, as war, plague, 1. Cor. 2. Romans 12.
Jacob. 5.
famine, sickness, poverty, imprisonment, persecution, banishment, or any
other kind of thy rods whether it be grief of body, or unquietness of
mind that it would please thee to give them patience and constancy, 2. Co. 12.
Heb. 13.
till thou send them full deliverance out of all their troubles.

Finally (O Lord) we most humbly beseech thee: to show thy great mercy upon
our brethren which are persecuted, cast into prison, and daily condemned to
death for the testimony of thy truth, Heb. 13. Romans 8. Psalm. 4. John 1.
and though they be utterly destitute of all man's aid, yet let thy sweet
comfort never depart from them, but so inflam their hearts with thy holy spirit,
that they may boldly and cheerfully a bid such trial as thy godly wisdom
shall appoint: 1. Pet. 1. Acts 2. Mat. 10. Luk 21.
so that at length as well by their death, as by their life, the kingdom of thy
Son Jesus Christ may increase and shine throughout all the world. In whose name
we make our humble petitions unto thee, as he has taught us saiing; Our father
which art, etc.

A Prayer to be said before receiving of the communion.
O Father of mercy and God of all consolation, seeing al creatures do
acknowledge and confess thee to be their governor and Lord, it becomes us,
the workmanship to thine own hands, at al times to reverence a magnify thy
godly majesty: First, for that thou have created us to thine own imagr and
similitude, Genesis 1. Ephesians. 2. Gala. 1. Genesis 3. Acts. 4. Heb. 9. Apoc. 5. John 3.
Heb. 8. Heb 4. 1. Pet. 1. Es^. 45.53. Ma. 3.17. Ier. 31.
but chiefly because thou have delivered us from that everlasting death and
damnation, into which Satan drew mankind by the means of sin, from the
bondage whereof, neither man nor Angeli was able to make us free: but thou (O
Lord) rich in mercy, and infinite in goodness, have provided our redemption to
stand in thine only and well-beloved Son, whom of very love thou did give to
be made man like unto us in all things, Heb. 8. Romans 5. Heb. 2. John. 6. Genesis
3. Romans 5. Ephe. 3.
sin excepted, that in his body he might receive the punishment of our
transgression, by his death to make satisfaction to thy justice, and by his
resurrection to destroy him that was the author of death, and so to bring
again life to the world, from which the whole of spring of Adam was most
justly exiled.

Ephesians. 2. John 6.17. Genesis 6. Romans 3. ^sa. 64. Psalm. 5.12. Romans 7. Mat. 16. 2,
Cor. 2. Luke 11. Mat. 11.
O Lord we acknowledge that no creature was able to comprehend the length and
breadth, the deepnes and height of that thy most excellent love, which moved
thee to show mercy, when none was deserved, to promise and give ^ife, where
death had gotten victory, to receive us into thy grace, when we could do
nothing, but rebel against thy Majesty. The blind dullness of our corrupt
nature will not suffer us sufficiently to weigh these thy most ample benefits.
Yet nevertheless at the commandment of Jesus Christ our Lord, Ma. 16. Luke
11. 1. Co. 11. Joh. 8. Gala. 5. Romans 8. 1 Pe. 1. Ephe. 5. Heb. 4. Romans 3. Ma.
25. Phil. 3. Ephe. 1. Ephe 2. Apo. 13.
we present our selves to this thy table (which he has left to be used in
remembrance of his death until his coming again) to declare and witness
before the world, that by him alone we have received liberty and life: that by
him alone thou do acknowledge us to be thy children and heirs; that by him
alone we have entrance to the throne of thy grace; that by him alone we are
possessed in our spiritual kingdom to eat and drink at his Table, and with
whom we hauour conversation presently in Heaven, and by whom our bodies shall
be raised up again from the dust, and shall be placed with him in that endless
joy, which thou (O Father of mercy) have prepared for thine elect, before the
foundation of the world was laid. And these most inestimable benefts we
acknowledge and confess to have received of thy free mercy and grace, by thine
only beloved son Jesus Christ. For the which therefore we thy congregation,
moved by thy holy spirit, do render to thee all thanks praise, and glory for
ever and ever.

A thanksgiving after the receiving of the holy Communion.
MOst merciful Father, we render unto thee all praise, thanks honor and
glory, for that it has pleased thee of thy great mercies to grant unto us
miserable sinners, so excellent a gift and treasure, as to receive us into the
fellowship and company of thy dear son Jesus Christ our Lord whom thou have
delivered to death for us, and have given him unto us, as a necessary food and
nourishment unto everlasting life. And now we beseech thee also (O heavenly
father) to grant us this request, that thou never suffer us to become so unkind
as to forget so worthy benefits, but (father) imprint and fasten them sure in
our hearts, Luke 15. Gala. 5. 1. Tim. 4. ^^h 5. 2. P t. 5. Mat. 5. 1. Pe. 1*
that we may g^o^^ and increase daily more and more in true faith, which
continually is exercised in all manner of good worke^; and so much the rather (O
Lord) confirm us in these perilous dates and rages of Satan, that we may
constantly, stand and continue in the confession of the same to the advancement
of thy glory, which art God over all things, blessed for ever.

A lamentation of a sinner, afflicted in conscience for his offenses.
IN the midst of the desperate assaults of my soul, the intolerable
heaviness of my mind both heertofore (Lord) cried as shrill in thine ear as
though I had shricked and with lamentations cried out saying; Help, help me
my GOD my creator, my most provident keeper, and everlasting defencer, for
behold I perish.

On this occasion (Lord) when heaviness of mind did heretofore assault me, I
remembered that thou had many times set before mine eyes the wonderful
greatness of thy most tender love toward me, by the great multitude of thy
benefits powered upon me: which benefits every of thy works (as they came
before mine eyes) gave me just occasion to be mindful of.

Would not (thought I) if I had in any manner any grace at al, would not such
love bring now into my heart a wonderful delectation, joy, and comfort in God
for the same. And again, could such delight in Gods sweet mercy and tender
love toward me (if I were not as evil as a cast away that were none of Gods
children) be without loathing of my sin and lust and desire to do Gods holy
will. And these things thought I (fle upon me unthankful wretch) are either
not at all in me, or else indeed so coldly and slenderly, that they being
truly waighed and compared to righteousness are m^re vile then a filthy cloth
starched in corrupt blood.

O (thought I) I am afraid, I have deceived my self: for thy servants at all
times (I trow) feel otherwise then I now do, the fruits of thy spirit, as
love, joy, peace, and such like. But my love (alas) toward thee, what is it? my
joy is not once almost felt of me; for my very soul within me (as David in
his heaviness said) refuses comfort, and fares as though it did utterly
dispare and what peace can I feel then, or certainty of thy favor and love?
Justly I may power out this dolorous lamentation of Sion: The Lord has
forsaken me, Isa 49
and my Lord has forgotten me.

Even in the midst (I say) of these my former desperate assaults, and in mine
intolerable heaviness, I cried to thee, O my God, and from heaven thou hardest
my gronings, and thereupon first preparedst my heart to ask comfort of thee,
and then thou did accept my prayer and gave me plentifully my asking.

Oh my soul, consider well that thou art never able to declare the exceeding
goodness of God in this, that he heard the very desires of thee being
afflicted; who is so ready favorably to grant the requests of the afflicted,
that oftentimes he tarrieth not until they do call, but or ever they call
upon him, favorably hears them as the Psalmist says: The desire of the
aflicted thou hear O Lord: thou preparest their hearts, Psalm. 77,
and thine ears hear them.

Oh Lord my God, marvelous things are these, whether I consider of this
marvelous manner of thy hearing, or else the marvelous nature and property of
thy goodness. Marvelous (no doubt) is that thy hearing, whereby the very
desires of the afflicted are heard: but much more marvelous is this thy
goodness, which tarriest not until the afflicted do desire thy help, but
preparest first their hearts to desire, and then thou give them their desires.

Yea Lord (worthy of all praise) it cannot otherwise be. For how should
thou do otherwise then thy nature and property is. Art not thou very goodness
and mercy it self? How can thou then but pity and help misery?

Art not thou both the creator and also the conseruer of all things?

Insomuch as the Lions whelps roaring after their pray do seek their food at
thy hands, and the Ravens birds lacking meat, Psalm. 147. Esa. 94.
do call upon thee.

If then thy fatherly providence and tender care (O Lord) upon all thy
creatures be so great, that the very beasts and fowls have this experience of
thy goodness in their necessities, that their roarings and cryings have the
strength of earnest calling and desires: how much rather do these sighings,
groanings, and desperate heaviness of men, but chiefly of thy children, cry
and call loud in thine ears though they speak never a word at all.

Should I then now despair of thy fatherly mercy, whiles presently I feel
thee stir up my soul and heart to crave help at thy hand? Should I think
that thou will absent thy self for ever? that thou will be no more entreated?
that thy mercy is clean gone? that thy promise is come utterly to an end, and
that thou will now shut up thy loving kindness in displeasure?

Nay Lord, for all alterations are of thy right hand, and turn always to the
best to them that fear thee. All this is but mine own infirmity, for thou
art ever one, thy promises be infallible, and thy love toward thine,
everlastingly during. I will therefore in this my present tentation and
grievous assault, power out the heaviness of my heart before thee dear
Father. Out of the deep will I cry, and lift up my soul unto thee, Psalm. 1.
from whom I assuredly know my help is coming, I will also for my present
comfort, call to remembrance (O Lord my God) thy tender mercies toward me
already showed the multitude of thy benefits the greatness of the sa^e, the
long continuance of them even from my onception, until this instant: and
sinally, thy continual love and desire to power them upon me.

And moreover, since thy goodness is so great (O Lord) that thou do not
only pity misery, but also call the heavy hearted and afflicted unto thee,
promising that thou will ease their misery: Mat. 11.
for as much as by the motion of thy good spirit, I loath and abhor my sins,
feel the grieuousnesse of them, and thy heavy wrath toward me for the same,
and sinally, what need I have of thy gracious aid and succor: therefore (O
Lord) in thy Son Christ's name, with sure confidence and trust in thine
infallibe promise, in this mine anguish and trouble I come unto thee at thy
merciful calling, and crave comfort at thy hand. For thou have promised, that
when I loath my sins, thou will utterly forget them; when I feel the grievous
but then of them, thy mercy swalloweth them up: when I seek that I want, thou will assuredly grant it me. For since thou mouest my heart to desire help, how
should I mistrust but thou will for thy truths sake, give me my asking?

Yea, where I know not how, or what to desire, as I ought, thy holy spirit
graciously working in me, makes intercession mightly for me with groanings
which cannot be expresses, and therwithal certifieth my spirit, that by
adoption through thy great mercy and goodness I am become thy child and heir.

Why should I not then be of good comfort, and joyful in thee my God? For if
thou be on my side, who can be against me? Since thou did not spare thine
own son, but gave him for me, even when I was thine enemy; how shall thou
not with him, now that by his death I am brought into thy favor, give me all
things with him, and for his sake: Romans 8.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of thine elect? it is thou Lord which
iustifiest me. It is Christ that has died for me; yea, rather that is risen
again for me. Who also is set on thy right hand, and has taken possession,
yea, and perpetually there makes intercession for me, until that joyful day
be come, when I shall have full fruition of the most glorious presence of thy
divine majesty in the kingdom which thou have prepared before the beginning of
the world, ^phe. ^.
but in time (to the gracious goodness thought best made known to me by
giving thy holy spirit into my heart: whereby when I first Lord believed thy
holy word which is thine own power to save all that believe, I was sealed,
Romans 8.
confirmed and stablished in the certainty of that ^hine everlasting kingdom
and inheritance.

For the which inestimable benefit of thy rich grace (Oh Lord my God) I beseech
thee, even for ye love thou barest to Christ Jesus thy son, and the mercy thou
had on him when he cried on the cross: Man* ^7.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me? Help, help, I say, and inflame my
heart with love so plentifully toward thee again, that I may be even
swallowed up in the joyful feeling of the same, in such sort, that I may of
very thankfulness love thee my God alone thee I say my dear God, and nothing
but thee, and for thy sake. O holy spirit whose work this is in me, increase
this work of thy in^uit mercy, and preserve me that I never become unthankful
unto thee therefore, Amen.

A prayer for the sick.
O Most merciful God, which according to the multitude of thy mercies, do
so put away the sins of those which truly repent, that thou remembrest them no
more: open thy eyes of mercy, and look upon this thy sick servant, who most
earnestly desires pardon and forgiveness: renew in him (most loving father)
whatsoever has been decayed by the fraud and malice of the devil, or by his
own carnal will and frailty: Preserve and continue this sick member in the
unity of thy Church. Consider his contrition, accept his tears assuage his
pain, as shall be seen to thee most expedient for him. And forasmuch as he
puts his full trust only in thy mercy, impute not unto ^im his former
sins, but take him unto thy favor through the merits of thy most dearly
beloved son Jesus Christ.

A prayer to be said at the hour of death.
O Lord Jesus Christ which art the only health of all men living, and the ever
lasting life of them that die in thee: I wretched sinner do submit my self
wholly unto thy most blessed will, and being sure that the thing cannot perish
which is committed unto thy mercy, willingly now I leave this frail and
sinful flesh in sure hope that thou will in better wise restore it to me
again at the last day, in the resurrection of the Just. I beseech thee most
merciful Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will by thy grace make strong my soul
against all tentations, and defend me with the buckler of thy mercy against
all the assaults of the devil.

I see and acknowledge that there is in my self no hope of salvation: but all
my confidence, hope and trust is in thy rich mercy and goodness. I have no
merits or good works which I may allege before thee: of strives and evil
works (alas) I see a great heap: but yet through thy mercy I trust to be in
the number of them to whom thou will not impute their sins, but wilt accept
and take me for righteous and just, and to be an inheritour of everlasting
life.

Thou merciful Lord wast borne for my sake: thou did suffer both hunger
and thrst for my sake: thou did teach, pray, and fast for my sake, all thy
holy actions and works thou wroughtest for my sake: thou sufferedst most
grievous pains and torments for my sake: Finally, thou gave thy most
precious body and blood to be shed on the Cross for my sake. Now most
merciful Savior let all those things profit me that thou freely have done
for me, which have given thy self also for me. Let thy blood cleanse and wash
away the spots and foulness of my sins.

Let thy righteousness hide and cover any unrighteousness: let the merits of
thy passion and bloud-shedding be the satisfaction for my sins. Give me Lord
thy grace, that the faith of my salvation in thy blood manner not in me, but may
be ever firm and constant: that the hope of thy mercy and life everlasting
never decay in me: that love wax not cold in me: Finally, that the weakness of
my flesh be not overcome with the fear of death.

Grant me merciful Savior that when death has shut up the eyes of my body,
yet the eyes of my soul may still behold and look upon thee; and when death
has taken away the use of my tongue, yet my heart may cry and say, Lord into
thy hands I commend my soul, Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

A prayer for a woman with Child.
THou art wonderful (O Lord) in all thy works, and whatsoever thy good
pleasure is, that do thou easily bring to pass, neither is there any thing
impossible with thee that thou will have done. And albeit this thy mighty power
shows it self abundantly in all thy works, yet in conceiving, forming and
bringing forth of man, it shines most evidently.

At the beginning (O Father) when thou made man and woman, thou command
them to increase, multiply and replenish the earth. If through the subtell
enticements of Satan they had not transgressed thy commandment by eating the
forbidden fruit, the woman whom thou have appointed to be the instrument and
vessel to conceive, nourish and bring forth man through thy wonderful
workmanship, had without any labor, pain or travel brought forth her fruit.

But that which thy goodness made easy, sin and disobedience has made hard,
painful, dangerous, and without thy special help and succor, impossible to
be brought to pass: so that now all women bring forth their children in great
sorrows pains, and troubles. Notwithstanding that which through their own
imperfection and feebleness they are not able of themselves to pass, thou
through thine unspeakable power make easy in them, and bring unto a
joyful end.

We ^herfore (being fully persuaded of thy favor and g^odnesse, of thy present
help and of thy sweet comfort in all miseries and necessities, knowing also
by the testimonies of the hol^ word: how great and intolerable the pains of
women are that travel of child, if through thy tender mercy they be not
mitigated and eased) most ^umbly pray thee for. Jesus Christ's sake thy son our
Lord, to help and assist this thy servant now in travel and labor that by
the almighty power s^e may safely bring forth that which by thy goodness she
has conceived, and that thy loving kindness may make that easy and
tolerable unto her, which sin has made hard and painful.

Ease (O Lord) the pains which thou most righteously have put upon her and all
women, for the sin and disobedience of our Grandmother Eve, in whom all we
have sinned: be present with her in her trouble, according to thy merciful
promise: Give her strength, and make perfect that which thou have so graciously
begun; Let thy power be showed no less in the safe bringing forth, then in the
wonderful forming and fashioning of that she bears. Make her a glad and
joyful mother that s^ee through thy goodness being safly delivered and restored
to health again may live and praise thy blessed name for ever.

A Psalm to be said in the time of any common plague, sickness, or other cross
and visitation of God.
O Come let us humble our selves and fall down before the Lord with reverence
and fear.

For he is the Lord our God, and we are the people of his pasture and sheep of
his hands.

O come therefore, let us turn again unto our Lord: for he has smi^ten us,
and he shall heal us

Let us repent and turn from our wickedness and our sins shall be forgiven
us.

Let us turn, and the Lord will turn from us his heavy wrath, and will pardon
us, and we shall not perish.

For we acknowledge our faults' and our sins are ever before us.

We have sore provoked thine anger O Lord) thy wrath is waxed ho^e and thy
heavy displeasure is sore kindled against us.

Thou have in thine indignation stricken us with grievous sickness, and by and
by we have fallen as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind

Indeed we acknowledge that our punishments are not worse then our deseruings:
but yet of thy mercy Lord co^re^t us to amendment, and plague us not to our
destruction.

For thy hand is not shortened that thou can not help: neither is thy goodness
abated, that thou will not hear

Esaias 65.
Thou have promised O Lord, that before we cry thou will hear us, and whilst
we yet speak, thou will have mercy upon us.

For none that trust in thee shall be confounded, Tobit 8. Job, 32.
neither any that call upon thee shall be despised.

For thou art the only Lord who woundest and do heal again, Oseas, 6.
who killest and reuinest, bring even to hell, and bring back again.

Our Fathers hoped in thee, and trusted in thee, Sap. 22.
and thou did deliver them.

They called upon thee, and were helped, they put their trust in thee, and were
not confounded.

Psal^ 6.
O Lord rebuke us not in thine indignation: neither chasten us in thy heavy
displeasure.

O remember not the sins and offenses of my youth: but according to thy mercy
think thou upon me, Psa. 25.
O Lord for thy goodness.

Have mercy upon us O Lord, for we are weak: O Lord heal us for our bones are
vexed.

And now in the vexation of our spirits, and the anguish of our souls we
remember thee, and we cry unto thee: hear Lord and have mercy. ^arue. Jonas ^.


For thine own sake, and for thy holy names sake, incline thine ear and
hear, O merciful Lord.

For we do not power out our prayers before thee, ^^a^. 6.
trusting in our own righteousness, but in thy great and manifold mercies.

Wash us thoroughly from our wickedness, and cleanse us from our sins.

Turn thy face from our sins, and put out all our misdeeds.

Make us clean hearts O God, and renew a right spirit within us.

Help us O God of our salvation for the glory of thy name. O deliver us, and
be merciful to our sins for thy names sake.

So we that be thy people and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for
ever, and will always be showing forth thy praise from generation to
generation.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

As it was in the beg^nning, etc.

A Psalm of thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague or any other kind of
sickness, trouble or affliction.
LOrd thou art become gracious to thy land, thou have turned away the
afflictions of thy s^ruants.

Thou have taken away al thy displeasure, and turned thy self from thy
wrathf^l indignation.

For if thou Lord had not helped us it had not failed, but our souls had
been put to silence.

But when we said, our feet have slipped, thy mercy (O Lord) helps us up.

In the multitude of the sorrows that we had in our hearts, thy comforts have
refreshed our souls.

Our souls waited still upon the Lord, our souls hanged upon his help our
hope was alwa^es in him.

In the Lords word will we rejoice: in Gods word did we comfort our selves.

For the Lord said Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will hear thee,
and thou shall praise me.

So when we were poor, needy, sickly, and in heaviness, the Lord cared for us*
he was our helper, and our deliver according to his word.

Ps^. 27.
In our aduersi^y and distress he has lifted up our head, and saved us from
vt^er destruction.

Psa. 33.
He has delivered our souls from death, he has fed us in the time of dearth,
he has saved us from the noisome pestilence.

Therefore will we offer in his holy temple the oblation of thanksgigiuing,
Psa. 37.
with great gladness we will sing and speak praises unto the Lord our Savior.

Psa. 106. Psa. 86.
We will give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures
for ever.

Psa. 103.
The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, plenteous in
goodness and pity.

John 5.7. Psa 108.
His mercy is greater then the heavens, and his gracious goodness reaches unto
the cl^^ds.

Psa. 103.
Like as a father pittieth his own children, even so is the Lord merciful unto
them that fear him. Psalm. 72.


Therefore will we praise thee, and thy mercies O God: unto thee will we sing,
O thou holy one of Israel, P^al. 98.
We will sing a new song unto thee O God: we will praise the Lord with Psalms
and thanksgiving. Psalm. 47.


O sing praises, sing praises unto our God: O sing praises, sing praises unto
our king.

For God is the king of the earth, sing praises with understanding

We will magnify thee, O God our King, Psalm. 145.
we will praise thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will we give thanks unto thee, and praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Our mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord, and let all flesh give thanks to
his holy name for ever and ever. Psalm. 72.


Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever, and blessed be the name of his
majesty, world without end Amen.

Glory be to the father, etc.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

Prayers to be said before and after meals.
AL things depend upon thy providence (O Lord) to receive at thy hands due
sustenance in time convenient. Thou give to them and they gather it, thou
openest thy hand, and they are satisfied with all good things.

O heavenly father which art the fountain and full treasure of all goodness:
We beseech thee to show thy mercy upon us thy children, and sanctify these thy
gifts which we receive of the merciful liberality, granting us grace to use
them soberly and purely according to thy blessed will: so that thereby we may
acknowledge thee to be the author and giver of all good things, and above all
that we may remember continually to seek the spiritual food of thy word, ^.
Tim. 2.
wherewith our souls may be nourished everlastingly, through our Savior
Christ, who is the true bread of life, which came down from heaven, of whom
whosoever eats shall live for ever, Joh ^.
and reign with him in glory, world without end. So be it.

Another prayer before meals.
WHether ye eat or drink faith S. Paul,, or whatsouer ye do else, let all be
done to the praise and glory of God.

Eternal and everlasting God, father ^f our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 10*
who of thy most singular love which thou barest to mankind, have appointed to
his sustenance, not only the fruits of the earth, but also the fo^^ls of the
air, the beasts of the field and fishes of the sea, and have comman^ed thy
benefits to be received as from thy hands with thanksgiving, assuring thy
children by the mouth of thine apostle, that to the clean all things are
clean, as the creatures which be sanctified by thy word and prayer: grant unto
us so moderatly to use these thy gifts present, that our bodies being refreshed
our souls may be more able to proceed in all good works, to the praise of thy
holy name through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Our father which art in heaven, etc Another.
O Eternal God the very God of peace and al consolation: which broughtest
again from death, our Lord Jesus the great shepherd of the sheep^, through
the blood of ^he everlasting covenant make us fruitful in all good works to d^
(...) will, and work in us that which is acceptable in thy sight. Sanctify us
throughout and keep our whole spirit, soul and body faul^ies unto the coming
of thy dear son our Lord Jesus Christ, ^hou art faithful (O father) who have
promised this, who also shall bring it to pass, to thee therefore be given
everlasting praise honor and glory Amen.

A thanksgiving after meals.
LEt al nations magnify the Lord let all people rejoice in praising and
extolling his great mercies: For his fatherly kindness is plentifuly showed
forth upon us, and the truth of his promise endures for ever.

We render thanks unto thee, O Lord God, for thy manifold benefits which we
continually receive at thy bountiful hand not only for that it has pleased
thee to feed us in this present life, giving unto us al things necessary for
the same: but specially because thou have of thy free mercy fashioned us anew
unto an assured hope of a far better life, the which thou have declared unto
us by thy holy Gospel.

Therefore we humbly beseech thee Oh heavenly father, that thou will not suffer
our affections to be so entangled and rooted in these earthly. and corruptible
things, but that we may always have our minds directed to thee on hic,
continually watching for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, what time he
shall appear for our full redemption. To whom with thee and the holy Ghost be
all honor and glory for ever and ever, So be it.

Another thanksgiving after meals.
GLory praise and honor be unto thee most merciful and omnipotent father, who
have fed and daily do feed (of thy most bountiful goodness) all living
creatures we beseech thee, that as thou have nourished these our mortal bodies
with corporal food, so thou would replenish our souls with the perfect
knowledge of thy lively word of thy beloved son Jesus Christ: to whom with
thee and the holy Ghost be praise glory and honor for ever, So be it,

Another.
MOst bountiful and gracious God, which feedest all flesh, and have promised
that asking of thee we shall not lack, if we first seek thy kingdom and the
righteousness thereof, we feeling presently the benefit of this thy gracious
promise in feeding our bodies with this corporal food, do render unto thee
most hearty thanks for the same, beseeching thee likewis to feed our souls with
that heavenly food which perishes not, but abides unto everlasting life, so
that we being nourished by the goodness, both in body and soul, may be apt and
ready to do al good works which thou have prepared for us to walk in, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made
us kings and Priests unto God his Father, be all glory, power, and dominion
for evermore. Amen.

Another.
THe God of glory who has created redeemed, and presently feed us, be blessed
for evermore. Amen.

The God of all power who has called from death the great Pastor of the sheep
our Lord Jesus, comfort and defend the flock which he has redeemed by the
blood of the eternal Testament: increase the number of true Preachers,
repress the rage of obstinate tyrants, lighten the hearts of the ignorant,
relieve the pains of such as be afflicted, but specially of those that suffer
for the testimony of thy truth; and finally, confound Satan by the power of our
Lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

Prayers commonly called Lidleys prayers, with certain godly additions.
Before thou prayest, forgive, if thou have any thing against any man, and come
not to GOD, with a double heart, but lift up pure hands without wrath or
doubting. 1. Tim. 2.
ALmighty and most merciful Father, I thy poor creature and work of thy hands
acknowledge and confess unto thee my manifold sins and offenses, which I
from my youth up unto this day, have committed against thee, in thought word,
and deed, beseeching thee for Jesus Christ thy dear so^s sake, to have mercy
upon me, and to pardon the same according to thy graet mercy, which have
promised, that at what time souer a sinner does repent him of his sin from
the bottom of his heart, thou will put his wickedness out of thy remembrance.

O Lord I confess that I was borne in sin and conceived in wickedness, and am
by nature a child of wrath. For in my flesh dwells no good thing, and of my
self I am not able to think a good thought, much less to do that, thou in
thy law requirest of me saying: Cursed is he that continues not in all things
that are written in the law to do them. Again, thy law is spiritual, but I
am carnal, fold under sin. Therefore (O Lord) I come unto thee for grace
which have said. Ask only shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it
shall be opened unto you) to prevent and draw my will unto all goodness, for none
can come unto thee except he be drawn, and except w be borne from above, we
cannot see the kingdom of God.

Therefore O Lord renew in me a right spirit, that I may receive strength and
ableness to do thy righteo^^ will

Grant that I may ever desire and will that which is most pleasing and
acceptable to thy will.

Thy will be my will, and my will be always to follow thy will

Let there be ever in me one will and one desire with thee, and let me never
desire to will or not to will, but as thou will.

Grant me that above all things I may rest in thee, and fully quiet and pacify
my heart in thee; for thou Lord art the true peace of the heart, and the perfect
rest of the soul.

Thou know Lord what is most profitable and expedient for me: wherefore do
with me in all things as it shall seem best unto thee. For it may not be but
well that thou do which do most justly and blessedly dispose all things
after thy most godly wisdom. Therefore whither it be by prosperity or
adversity, loss or gain, sickness or health, life or death, thy will be done.

Cast out of my heart, all unprofitable cares of worldly things, and suffer me
not to be led with the unstable desires of earthly vanities: but give me grace
that all worldly and carnal affections may be mortified and die in me.

Grant unto me the strength of thy holy spirit, to subdue this body of sin,
with the whole lusts thereof* that it may be obedient both in will, mind, and
members, to do thy holy will.

Assist me with thy grace (O Lord that I may be strengthened in the inward man,
and be armed with thy holy armor, which is the breastplate of righteousness,
the shield of faith, the hope of salvation for an helmet and the sword of thy
spirit, which is thy holy word, that I may stand perfect in all that is thy
will, and be found worthy through Christ to receive the crown of life which
thou have promised to all them that love thee.

Give me grace that I may esteem all things in this world as they be transitory
and soon vanishing away, and my self also with them drawing toward mine end.
For nothing under the sun may long abide, but all is vanity and affliction of
spirit.

Oh Lord God which art sweetness unspeakable, turn into bitterness unto me al
transitory and earthly delights which may draw me from the love of eternal
things: and for all worldly comforts give me the sweet comfort of thy holy
spirit: for thou Lord art my joy, my hope, my crown and my glory.

Blessed are they that for the love of thee, set not by the pleasurs of this
world but crucify the flesh, and the lusts thereof, so that in a clean and
pure conscience they may offer their prayers unto thee, and be accepted to have
company with thee, together with the Angels and heavenly spirits. O everlasting
light send down the beams of thy brightness, and lighten the inward parts of my
heart.

Open my heart that I may behold thy laws, and teach me to walk in thy
commandments.

Behold my weakness (O Lord) and consider my frailenes, best known unto thee.

Feign would I cleave fast to heavenly things, but worldly affections and
temptations pluck me back they daily rebel and suffer not my soul to live
in rest.

Which although they draw me not away to consent, yet nevertheless their
assaults be very grievous unto me.

O what a life may this be called where no trouble nor misery lacks? where
every place is full of snares of mortal enemies?

For one trouble or temptation ouerpassed, another comes by and by the first
conflict yet during, a new battle suddenly arises.

Tedious it is to me to live in such battles, but I perceive such conflicts are
not unprofitable for me whilst I know my self and mine infirmities the
better, and am thereby compelled to seek help at thy hand.

It is good for me (O Lord) that thou have thus exercised and humbled me and
that I may learn to dread thy secret and terrible judgments, which scourgest
every child that thou receiuest, which bring down to the gates of hell, and
bring back again.

I yield thee thanks therefore that thou have not spared my sins, but have
punished me with scourges of love, and have sent afflictions and anguish within
and without.

Of grace and favor it is (O Lord) that thou suffered thy servants to be
troubled and afflicted in this world, because they should not be condemned with
the world.

Thou would that they should here be broken with affliction that they may
after rise in a new light, and be clarified and made glorious in thy kingdom

O holy father, thou have ordained it so to be, and it is done as thou have
appointed.

Wherefore (O Lord) give me thy grace to rest in thee above al things and to
quiet my heart in thee above all creatures, above all glory and honor, above
all dignity and power, above all health and beauty, above all riches and
treasure, above all joy and pleasure, above all fame and praise, above all
mirth and consolation, that man's heart may take and feel besides thee. For
thou Lord art most good, most wise most righ^eous most holy, most just, most
blessed, most high, most mighty, most comfortable, most beautiful, most
loving, most glorious, in whom all treasures of goodness most perfectly rest,

And therefore whatsoever I have besides thee, it is nothing unto me: for my
heart may not rest, nor fully be pacified but only in thee.

Oh Lord Jesus, who shall give me wings of perfect love, that I may flee up
from these worldly miseries and rest with thee?

O Christ, the king of everlasting glory, my soul cries unto thee with
continual gronings, and says, How long tarrieth my Lord God to come to me? Oh
when shall the end come of all these miseries?

When shall I clean be delivered from the bondage of sin?

When shall I (Lord) have my mind only f^xed on thee and we merry in thee with
perfect joy and gladness? When shall that blessed hour come that thou shall
visit me, and make me glad with thy blessed presence, when thou shall be to
me all in all?

When shall I come up to thee, and feel and enjoy those sweet consolations
which with thy blessed saints are always present?

When shall I have peace without trouble, peace without, and peace with in, and
on every side steadfast and sure?

O Lord Jesus when shall I stand and behold thee, and have full sight and
contemplation of thy glory?

When shall I be with thee in thy kingdom, that thou have ordained for thine
elect before the beginning?

O blessed mansion of that heavenly City: O most clear day of eternity whom
the night may never darken.

This is the day always clear, and merry, always sure and never changing.

This day shines clearly to thy saints in heaven. O gracious God with
everlasting brightness; but to us here on earth (so great is the darkness of
sin in us) it shines obscurely, and as it were a far of, we set but a
glimmering thereof.

Would to God this day might shortly appear, and shine unto us, and that these
worldly vanities were at an end.

Thy heavenly citizens know and feel how joyful this day is: but we the
children of Eve, strangers and exiles here on earth, do lament and bewail the
bi^ter tediousness of this present life, short and evil, full of sorrow and
anguish.

Where man is oftentimes defiled with sin, disquieted with troubles, oppressed
with cares, busied with vanities, blinded with errors, oue^charged with
labors, vexed with temptations, overcome with v^ine delights and pleasures of
the world, and miserably wrapped in many kinds of calamities.

Wherefore, O Lord, arise and help me: comfort mine exile, assuage my sorrow,
destroy the power of mine enemies, the kingdom of sin, Satan, the world, and
my wicked flesh, which always make battle against me, and bring these
conflicting days to an end. ^o shall I sing praises unto thee (O God of my
salvation) and magnify thy holy name world without end. Amen.

A confession of sins, and a prayer for the remission thereof.
O Lord God rich in mercy, and of great goodness, who of thy tender love
toward us even when we were thine enemies, did send into the world thine
own dear Son Jesus Christ, to be a slain sacrifice for our sins, so that
whosoever believes in him should not perish but have life everlasting, have
mercy on me according to thy great mercies, and according to the multitude of
thy compassions put away mine iniquities.

For mine iniquities are gone over my head, Psalm 38.
and as a weighty burden they press me down.

Against heaven and against thee have I sinned, O Lord I am not worthy to be
called thy child.

I am a shamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee, Luke 15.
for my sins are ascended up into thy sight.

There is nothing sound in my flesh because of thy displeasure, Psalm. 38.
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

Behold I am sold under sin, and in my flesh there dwelles no good thing.

For the good which I should do I do not, Romans 7.
but the evil which I would not do that I do.

Psalm. 51.
Wash me therefore O Lord, from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sin.
Psalm. 1.
Purify my heart by the sanctifying of thy holy spirit, and by the sprinckling
of the blood of thy dear son from the filth of sin, and an evil conscience,

Make me to hear joy and gladness that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice.

Create in me a new heart O God, and renew a right spirit in me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me.

Psalm. 8
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation and stablish me with thy free spirit.

For thou art good to them that trust in thee, and to the soul that seeks
thee.

All thy ways are mercy and truth to them that seek out thy covenant, and
testimonies.

The fountain of thy goodness is ever full and ouerflowing, thy mercy never
decaieth.

Thou woundest and healest again thou killest and reui^est, bring even down
to hell, and bring back again.

Thou raises up those that are fallen, thou co^fortest the broken hearted Thou
strengthnest the weary standers and crooked knees, and out of the gulf of hell
thou deliuerest the afflicted.

Out of darkness thou bring light, out of death life, and out of damnation
thou bring salvation,

Hear me therefore O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, turn unto me,
according to the multitude of thy tender mercies.

Look upon mine affliction, and my travel and forgive me my sins.

Psalm. 63.
Remember not the offenses of my youth, nor my rebellions against thee

Psalm. 130.
For if thou Lord should mark our iniquities, Lord who should be able to
stand in thy sight.

Job 15.
Seeing thou have found iniquity even in thine Angels, and the heavens are not
clean in thy sight, much more is man abominable and filthy, which drinks
iniquity like water.

Notwithstanding thou have said. O Lord, that as the righteousness of the
righteous man shall not save him whenever he offends so shall not the
wickedness of the wicked man hurt him, whenever he forsakes his wickedness
and turns to thee.

Psalm. 83.
For thou know thine own handy work: thou remembrest what we are, thou
see that we are but weak and feeble flesh.

Look not therefore upon my sins O Lord, but look upon the face of thine
anointed.

For he has borne our iniquities, Isay ^
he has carried our sorrows.

He was wounded for our transgressions: he was broken for our iniquities, the
chastisment of our peace is laid upon him.

He gave his body to be beaten and his cheeks to be stricken, he bare the
sins of many, and prayed for the offenders.

He came to bring glad tidings to the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, Isay
6
to preach liberty to the captives to comfort them that mourn in Sion: and to
give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning. the garment of
gladness for the spirit of heaviness, that they might be called trees of
righteousness, and the planting of the Lord.

For his sake therefore, O Lord be merciful unto me, and say unto my soul,
behold I come to thee, thy health and thy salvation.

A prayer for the true knowledge and understanding of the word of God.
LEt my prayer come before thee O Lord, and give me understanding according to
thy word. Psalm. 119.


Blessed art thou O Lord, teach me thy statutes.

That with my lips I may declare all the judgments of thy mouth.

That I may delight in the way of thy testimonies above all riches.

That I may meditate in thy precepts, and consider thy ways.

That I may take pleasure in thy statutes, and not forget thy word.

Be good unto me thy servant O Lord, ye I may live and keep thy word.

Open mine eyes that I may see the wonders which are in thy law.

I am a stranger upon earth notwithstanding hide not from me thy commandments.

For my heart languisheth with the desire that it has to thy judgments.

Thy testimonies are my delight and my counsell^rs.

I will praise thee with an upright heart when thou have taught me the
judgments of thy righteousness.

Show me thy ways O Lord, and teach me thy paths.

Lead me forth in the truth, and teach me, for thou art my God and my
salvation, in thee do I trust all the day long.

Make me understand the way of thy prece^^s, and I will consider thy wondro^s
works.

The hands have made me and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may
scar^e thy commandments.

That they which fear thee, seeing me may rejoice, because I have trusted in
thy word.

Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and teach me thy
ordinances.

Thou art good and gracious, therefore according to thy goodness, teach me thy
statutes.

O Lord, of whose goodness the earth is full, teach me thy ordinances

O Lord, I beseech thee accept the sacrifice of my lips, and teach me thy
judgments.

The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting, grant me understanding,
and I shall live.

Deal with thy servant according to thy mercies, and teach me thy statutes.

I am thy servant, grant me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.

My lips shall show forth thy praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes.

My tongue shall talk of thy word, Psalm. 36.
for all thy commandments are righteous.

For in thee is a well of living waters, and ever flowing, and in thy light
shall we see light.

A prayer for the leading of a godly life.
I Cry unto thee with my whole heart, hear me O Lord, Psalm. 119.
and guide me, that I may keep thy statutes.

I call upon thee, save me, Psalm. 141.
that I may keep thy testimonies.

Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense, and the lifting up of my
hands as an evening sacrifice.

I have gone astray like a lost sheep, seek thy servant, Psali 11^
for I do not forget thy commandments.

Psalm. 86.
Teach me thy way (O Lord) that I may walk in thy truth: knit my heart unto
thee, that I may fear thy name.

Let thy loving kindness come unto me O Lord, and thy salvation according to thy
promise.

9
Let my heart be upright in thy statutes, that I be not confounded.

O that my ways were so directed tha^ I might keep thy statutes.

Then shall I not be confounded when I have regard unto all thy commandments.

I make my supplication in thy presence with my whole heart, be merciful unto
me according to thy promise.

Guide me (O Lord) that I may consider my wares, and turn my feet into thy
testimonies.

Wherewith shall a man redress his ways? In taking heed thereto according to
thy word.

Teach me (O Lord) the way of thy statutes that I may keep them to the end.

Give me understanding that I may keep thy law, yea that I may keep it with my
whole heart.

Direct me in the path of thy commandments, for therein is my delight.

Turn away mine eyes that I regard not vanity, and quicken me in thy way.

Stablish thy promise to thy servant whereby he may be taught to fear thee.

Direct my steps in thy word and let not iniquity have dominion oue^ me.

Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked
move me.

Gather not my soul with the sinners, nor my life with the blody men.

Let my foot stand in uprightness that I may praise thee, O Lord, in the
congregation.

Let not the word of truth depart out of my mouth, for I trust in thy
judgments.

Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips.

Let not my heart be inclined to evil, to work wicked works, with them that
work iniquity.

Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I do believe thy commandments,

Stay my steps in thy paths, that my feet do not slide.

Stablish me in thy promise, that I may live, and let me not be disappointed
of my hope.

Stay thou me, O Lord, and I shall be safe, and I will delight continually in
thy statutes.

O God create in me a pure heart, and renew a right spirit within me. Psalm. 52.


Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me:

Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.

Let me hear thy loving kindness in the morning, Psalm. 143.
show me the way that I should walk in, for in thee is my trust.

Teach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God: let thy
good spirit lead me into the land of righteousness.

A prayer for deliverance from sin, and to be restored to Gods grace and
favor again.
OH Almighty and everlasting Lord GOD, which have made heaven and earth; and
all things therein contained: O incomprehensible unity: Oh always to be
worshipped most blessed Trinity: I humbly beseech thee and pray thee by the
assumption and crucified humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou would
incline and bow down the great height of thy deity, to the bottomless pit of my
vtility. Drive from me all kind of vice, wickedness, and sin. Create in me a
clean heart, and renew in me a right spirit, for thy holy names sake.

Oh Lord Jesus, I beseech thy goodness for the exceeding great love which drew
thee out of thy Fathers bosom, into the womb of the holy virgin, and for the
assumption of man's statute, wherein it pleased thee to save me and deliver me
from eternal death, that thou would draw me out of my self into thee my
Lord God, and grant that this my love may recover again to me thy grace to
increase and make perfect in me that which is wanting, to raise up in me that
which is fallen, to restore to me that which I have lost, and quicken in me
that which is dead and should live, so that I may become conformable to thee in all my life and conversation, thou dwelling in me and I in thee, my heart being
coupled with thy grace, and settled in thy faith for ever.

Oh my God, loose and set at liberty my spirit from all inferior things,
govern my soul, and work that both in soul and body, I may be wholly and
live to thy glory, world without end, Amen.

I. B.

A prayer necessary to be said at all times.
O Bountiful Lord Jesus, O sweet Savior O Christ the Son of God, have pity
upon me, mercifully hear me, and despise not my prayers. Thou have created me
of nothing, thou, have redeemed me from the bondage of sin, death and hell,
neither with gold nor silver, but with thy most precious body once offered
upon the Cross and thine own blood shed once for all, for a ransom. Therefore
cast me not away, whom thou by thy great wisdom have made. Despise me not
whom thou have redeemed with such a precious treasure, nor let my wickedness
destroy that which thy goodness has builded.

Now while I live, O Jesus, have mercy on me: for if I die out of thy favor, it
will be too late afte^ward to call for thy mercy. While I have time to repent,
look upon me with thy merciful eyes, as thou did vouchsafe to look upon
Peter thy Apostle, that I may bewail my sinful life, and obtain thy favor to
live and die therein I acknowledge that if thou should deal with me
according to thy justice, I have deserved everlasting death.

Therefore I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, trusting to obtain thy
favor, not for my merits, but for thy deserts (O Jesus) who have given thy
self an acceptable sacrifice to thy Father, to appease his wrath, and to bring
all sinners truly repenting and amending their evil life, unto his favor
again.

Accept me (O Lord) among the number of them whom thou have in Christ elected
and chosen to salvation, forgive me my sins, give me grace to lead a godly
and innocent life, grant me thy heavenly wisdom, inspire my heart with
faith, hope and charity: give me grace to be humble in prosperity, patient in
adversity, obedient to my rulers, in all my doings faithful, dealing truly
with all men, to live chastely in wedlock, to abhorte adultery, fornication and
al uncleanness, to do good after my power unto all men, to hurt no man, that thy
name may be glorified in me during this present life, and that I afterward may
attain everlasting life, through thy mercy and the merits of thy death and
passion, Amen.

A Prayer for grace and remission of our sins.
O Lord God merciful Father, I poor wretched sinner come unto thee in the
name of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ my savior beseeching thee for his
sake to be merciful unto me, and to cast al my sins out of thy sight, even
through the merits of his bloody death. Power upon me (O Lord) thy holy spirit
of grace and wisdom, to govern and lead my body and soul in thy holy word
and commandments: show thy mercy upon me, and so lighten the natural blindness
and darkness of my heart through thy grace, that I may daily be renewed by thy
holy spirit. Open my hard heart and gross ears to hear and read thy word, and
heavenly voice, and to believe and follow it in my conversation, and ever to
hold fast that blessed hope of everlasting life. Mortify and kill al vice in
me, that my life may express my faith in thee. Mercifully hear ye humble
supplications of thy servant, and grant me thy peace all my days. Graciously
pardon my infirmities, and defend me in all dangers, both outwardly in my body,
goods and name, and inwardly in my soul, against all evil temptations and
subtle baits of Satan that roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. Grant
(O Lord) that I and every member of thy Church in his vocation and calling, may
truly and godlily serve thee. Graft in my heart the love of thy name: increase
in me true religion: replenish me with all goodness, and of thy great mercy
keep me in the same unto the end. Give unto me the spirit of prayer, true
humility, perfect patience, and continual joy in the holy Ghost. I commend
unto thy protection (O Father) my house and all thou have given me, my whole
family, my wife and children, and aid me that I may well and holily govern,
^orish and bring them up in thy fear and serui^e.

And forasmuch as in this world I must always be at war, not with one sort of
enemies, but with an infinite number, not only with flesh and blood, but with
the devil. which is the prince of darkness: grant me thy grace, that being
armed with thy defense, I may stand in this battle with an invincible co^stancy
against all corruption, which I am encompassed with on all sides, until such
time as I having ended the combat* which, during this life, I must sustain, in
the end I may attain to thy heavenly rest which is prepared for me, through
Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, Amen.

A prayer taken out of the first Psalm.
Almighty and most gracious God, take away from us all evil counsel, and
then our sinne^^: suffer us not to run into an ungodly and wickedlife, and
finally keep out minds far from the contempt of godliness and scorning of
virtue, and in the stead of these evils grant that we may continually be
occupied in thy law and sacred scriptures that we be not carried about like the
wicked, and like dust and fruitless chafe with every blast of affection and
doctrine: but rather that we as trees planted by the water brooks, endued with
the life of the spirit and faith may also bring forth the fruits of good works:
and that what soever we take in hand may prosper, and tend to the praise and
glory of thy name, and furtherance of our salvation, and at the last, when the
wicked shall fall away in thy judgment, we may stand steadfast and be made
perfect, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
ALmighty God, we are sufficiently taught, that grievous calamities and
miserable plagues do therefore daily vex and trouble the church because we have
not ceased to follow the counsel of the ungodly: which being once known we
ought to have eschewed. The way also of the wicked we have not shunned: yea,
we have not ceased to walk their race by continual transgression of thy
commandments, we have also o^ long time contemned all godly correction and
discipline, and whatsoever has been taught us out of thy work has been too
little regarded: yea, without all shame, neglected and scorned*

Wherefore it is no marvel, if w^ in the stead of that happiness and quiet
peace, which we (alas) have to long abused, be now compelled to suffer all
heavy, grievous, and most bitter plagues. But now, O God in humblenes of heart
we flee unto thee confessing our grievous offenses, and we most humbly and
heartily beseech thee, that those evils which we so foolishly and wretchedly
have committed, thou will mercifully forgive us, and frame our minds wholly to
the obedience of thy Law, in such wise that our hearts might be occupied both
day and night in nothing else but in the meditation of thy holy Scriptures. For
so shall we, giving credit to thy words, bring forth seasonable and pleasant
fruit, and shall not be spoiled of the graces of the holy Ghost; yea, our doings
shall never be withour happy success Now we are tossed hither and thither, not
unlike to leaves and chafe, with the wind of adversity and affliction, yet
grant (O most merciful Fathee) that our life perish not with the wicked, but
that the cause of the just may be defended by thy singular providence and
protection: so that in judgment, and in the company of the just we may be able
to stand and not be confounded, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
ALmighty GOD, forasmuch as we have now learned, that a great part of our
felicity, so long as we live here, consists in this, that we refrain from
ungodly counsel and wicked manners, and also avoid the company of those that
despise and deride all good things, and that in the stead of these evils, we
give our selves to the heavenly study of thy holy law, to be occupied and
exercised therein both day and night, whereby we do perceive that we have very
much erred and straied from this way of our salvation, yea we have in these
things most wickedly offended, therefore we beseech thee even for thy mercies
sake, that thou will pardon our offenses, and that henceforth by continual
study and exercise of thy word, thou will vouch safe to make us fruitful plants
that we may not only bring forth wholesome fruits in thy Church whiles we live
here, but also may be able in the other world to stand in judgment before
thee, who best know the way of the just, through Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

A prayer taken out of the second Psalm.
WE perceive (most merciful and almighty God) that not only Antichrist, but
also the power and strength of the whole world conspireth against thee, and
against thy Christ, which think the gospel and the building up again of the
church, to be an intolerable bondage and hard yoke. Wherefore they labor by
all possible means to break asunder the societies and congregations of the
faithful, and cast away al discipline. But forasmuch as thou sit in
heaven, and art not ignorant what the devil or wicked flesh goes about: laugh
thou to scorn their vain counsels, and bring their purposes to naught. Let
them feel thine anger to be kindled against them, and make them astonished at
the storcenesse of thine indignations, so that they may not be able to destroy
the Church over who^ thou have appointed Jesus Christ our only Savior, to be a
governor, that in it he may reign by his word and spirit with invincible
might and power. Wherefore grant unto us although unworthy and shrinking
children, such faith and constancy, that we may find him, and also confess
him to be our only king: and that we may nothing doubt, but that we may be his
nation, people, and heritage, being most assured of this, that he is of such
strength and power, that with his sword more strong then iron, he is able to
destroy whom he will, and break them in pieces like earthen pots.

Therefore, O God, turn the kings and princes of the world unto thee, that
they may be wise and understand, whereby they may unfeignedly acknowledge,
embrace, and kiss his son, lest when his wrath shall once be kindled, they
perish and be destroyed for ever. And when it shall be thy good pleasure make
them blessed for evermore, which commit themselves to thy governance and and
protection, by Christ Jesus our Lord, Amen.

Out of the same Psalm.
MOst mighty and merciful Lord God, though the devil rage, the powers of the
world daily rise up, and the flesh with all her bond slaves conspire against
the kingdom of thine only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord, yet make us to
understand and with constant faith be persuaded that thou deridest and
contemnest all such, whom thou can in thine anger and fierce displeasure,
when thou will suddenly destroy and bring to naught. In this faith, seeing we
are sometimes so weak, that being overcome with sundry kinds of terrors and
dread, we are not so obedient to thy commandments as we ought to be: we
therefore beseech thee for thy great goodness sake to be merciful unto us, and
grant that we may constantly believe thy son our King, and our redeemer, to
have the highest power and dominion with thee in all things. For, seeing thou
have begotten him, thou have also delivered to him all nations to be ruled by
his power as his own inheritance: grant therefore unto us, that yet at length
we may be wise and understand, in such sort as we may serve thee with all due
fear and worship: that in the last day we be not dashed in pieces, as earthen
vessels with the rod of thine indignation, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Amen.

A prayer which M. John Bradford said alittle before his death in Smithfield.
Merciful God and Father, to whom our Savior Christ approached in his fear
and need, by reason of death, and sound comfort: gracious God, and most
bounteous Christ, on whom Stephen called in his extreme need, and received
strength, most benign holy spirit, which in the midst of all crosses and
death, did comfort the Apostle S. Paul with more consolations in Christ, than
he felt sorrows and terrors in the world, have mercy upon me a most
miserable* vile and wretched sinner, which now draw near the gates of death,
deserved both in soul and body eternally, by reason of my manifold, horrible,
old and new transgressions, which to thine eyes, O Lord GOD are open and
known. Oh be merciful unto me and forgive me, for the bitter death and
bloudshedding of thine only Son Jesus Christ. And though thy justice do
require in respect of my sins, that now thou should not hear me,
contemning thy daily callings, yet let thy mercy which is above all thy works
and wherewith the earth is filled, let thy mercy (I say) prevail toward me,
through the merits and mediation of Christ our Savior; for whose sake it
pleases thee to bring me forth now as one of his witnesses, and a record
bearer of thy verity and truth taught by him, to give my life therefore: of
which dignity I do acknowledge (dear God) that there was never any so
unworthy and unmeet, no not the thief that hanged with him on the cross: I
humbly therefore pray thee, that thou would accordingly aid help and assis^
me with thy strength and heavenly grace, that with Christ thy Son I may
find comfort, with Stephen I may see thy presence and gracious power, with
Paul and all other, which for thy name sake have suffered affliction and death.
I may find so present with me thy gracious consolation, that I may by my death
glorify thy holy name, set forth and ratify thy verity, comfort the hearts of
the heavy, confirm thy Church in thy truth, convert some that are to be
converted, and so depart out of this miserable world (where I do nothing but
daily heap sin upon sin) and enter into the fruition of thy blessed mercy,
whereof now give and increase in me a lively taste sense, and feeling, where
through the terror of death, the tormen^s of fire, the pains of sin, the
darts of Satan, and the dolours of hell may never overcome me; but may be
driven away through the working of the most gracious spirit which now
ple^teously endue me withal, that through the same spirit I may offer (as now I
desire and am ready to do) in Christ and by him my self wholly soul and body
to a lively sacrifice, holy and acceptable in thy sight (dear father) whose I
am, and always have been even before the world was made, to whom I commend my
self, faith and name, family and friends, country, and all the whole Church,
yea even my very enemies, according to thy good pleasure: beseeching thee
entirely to give once more to this Realm of England the blessing of thy word
again with godly peace, to the teaching and setting forth of the same: O dear
father now guide me to come unto thee: so purge and purify me by this fire in
Christ's death and passion through the spirit, that I may be a burnt offering
of sweet smell in thy sight, which live and raignest with the son and the
holy Ghost now and evermore, world without end.

The Letany.
O God the father of heaven, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the father of heaven, etc.

O God the son redeemer of the world, have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

O God the son redeemer, etc.

O God the holy ghost proceeding from the father and the son, have mercy upon
us miserable sinners.

O God the holy Ghost, etc.

O holy blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons and one God, have mercy
upon us miserable sinners.

O holy blessed and glorious, etc.

Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, neither
take thou vengeance of our sins: spate us good Lord, spate thy people, whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for
ever.

Spate us good Lord.

From all evil and mischief, from sin, from ^he crafts and assaults of the
devil from thy wrath, and from everlasting damnation.

Good Lord deliver us.

From blindness of heart, from pride, vaineglory and hypocrisy, from envy,
hatred and malice, and al uncharitableness.

Good Lord deliver us.

From fornication and al other deadly sin, and from all the deceits of the
world, the flesh and the devil.

Good Lord deliver us.

From lightning and tempest, from plague, pestilence and famine, from battle
and murder, and from sudden death.

Good Lord deliver us.

From all sedi^i^n and privy conspiracy, from all false doctrine and heresy,
from hardness of heart and contempt of thy word and commandment

Good Lord deliver us.

By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, by thy holy nativity and circumcision,
by thy Baptism, fasting and temptation.

Good Lord deliver us.

By thine agony and bloody sweat, by thy cross and passion, by thy glorious
resurrection and assension, and by the coming of the holy Ghost.

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of our tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of
death, and in the day of judgment.

Good Lord deliver us.

We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God* and that it may please
thee to rule and govern thy holy church universally in the right way.

We beseech thee to hear v^, etc.

That it may please thee to keep and strengthen in the true worshipping of thee
in righteousness and holiness of life, thy servant James our most gracious king
and governor.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to rule his heart in thy faith, fear and love, and
that he may evermore have affiance in thee, and ever seek thy honor and glory.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to be his defender and keeper, giving him the victory
over all his enemies.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to bless and preserve our gracious Queen Anne,
prince Charles, and the rest of the King and Queens royal issue.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to illuminate all bishops, pastors, and ministers of
the church with true knowledge and understanding of thy word, and that both by
their preaching and living, they may set it forth and show it accordingly. We
beseech, etc. That it may please thee to indue the Lords of the counsel, and
all the nobility with grace, wisdom and understanding. We beseech, etc. That
it may please thee to bless and keep the Magistrates, giving them grace to
execute justice, and to maintain truth. We beseech, etc. That it may please
thee to bless and keep all thy people.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give to all nations, unity, peace, and concord.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give us an heart to love and dread thee, and
diligently to live after thy commandments. We beseech thee, etc. That it may
please thee to give all thy people increase of grace, to hear meekely thy
word, and to receive it with pure affection, and to bring forth the fruits of
the spirit.

We beseech thee to hear us, etc.

That it may please thee to bring into the way of truth, all such as have
erred and are deceived.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to strengthen such as do stand, and to comfort and
help the weak hearted, and to raise up them that fall, and finally to beat
down Satan under our feet.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to succor help and comfort all that be in danger,
necessity and tribulation.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water, all
women laboring of childe^, all sick persons and young children, and to show
thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.

We beseech thee to hear, etc.

That it may please thee to defend and provide for the fatherless children and
widows, and all that be desolate and oppressed,

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to have mercy upon all men.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slaunderers,
and to turn their hearts.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give and preserve to our use the kindly fru^ts of
the earth, so as in due time we may enjoy them.

We beseech thee, etc.

That it may please thee to give us true repentance, to forgive us al our
sins, negligences and ignorances, and to indue us with the holy spirit, to
amend our lives according to thy holy word.

We beseech thee, etc.

Son of God, we beseech thee to hear us.

Son of God, we beseech, etc.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Grant us thy peace.

O Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world.

Have mercy upon us.

O Christ hear us.

O Christ hear us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Christ have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Our Father which, etc.

And lead us not, etc.

But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Ve^sicle.
O Lord deal not with us after our sins.

The Answer.
Neither reward us after our iniquities,

Let us pray.
O God meecifull father which despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart,
nor the desires of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist our prayers that we
make before thee in all our troubles and adurrsities whenever they oppress
us, and graciously hear us, that those evils which the craft or subtlety of
the Devil, or man works against us be brought to naught, and by the
providence of thy goodness they may be dispersed, that we thy servants
being hurt by no persecution, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy
Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

O Lord arise, help us and deliver us for thy names sake.

O God we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have declared unto us the
noble works that thou did in their days, and in the old time before them.

O Lord a^ise, help us and deliver us for th^ne honor.

Glory be to the father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end,
Amen.

From our enemies defend us, O Christ.

Graciously look upon our affl^ctions

Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts.

Mercifully forgive the sins of thy people.

Favorably with mercy hear our prayers.

O Son of David have mercy upon us.

Both now and ever vouchsafe to hear us O Christ.

Graciously hear us O Christ, graciously hear us O Lord Christ.

O Lord let thy mercy be showed o^ us, As we do put ou^ trust in thee.

Let us pray.
WE humbly beseech thee (O Father) mercifully to look upon our infirmities,
and for the glory of thy names sake, turn from us all those evils that we
most righ^eously have deserved, and grant that in all our troubles we may put
our whole trust and confidence in thy mercy; and evermore serve thee in holiness
and pureness of living to thy honor and glory, through our only media^or and
aduoca^e Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for the Kings majesty.
O Lord our heavenly father, high and mighty King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the
only ruler of Princes, which do from thy throne behold all the dwellers
upon earth, most heartily we beseech thee with thy favor to behold our most
gracious sovereign Lord King James, and so replenish him with the grace of thy
holy spirit, that he may always incline to thy will, and walk in thy ways,
indue him plentifully with heavenly gifts, grant him in health and wealth long
to live, strengthen him that he may vanquish and overcome all his enemies, and
finally after this life, he may attain everlasting joy and felicity, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer for the Queen and Prince, and other the King and Queens children.
ALmighty God which have promised to be a father of thine elect and of their
seed, we humbly beseech thee to bless our gracious Queen Anne, Prince
Charles, and all the Kings and Queens royal progeny, indue them with thy holy
spirit, enrich them with thy heavenly grace, prosper them with all happiness,
and bring them to thine eutrlasting kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

A prayer for Bishops and Ministers of the Church.
ALmighty and everliving God, which only workest great maruels, send down
upon our Bishops and Pastors, and all congregations committed to their charge,
the healthful spirit of thy grace, and that they may truly please thee, power
upon them the continual dew of thy blessing. Grant this (O Lord) for the
honor of our advocate and mediator Jesus Christ.

For rain.
O GOD heavenly father, which by thy son Jesus Christ have promised to all
them that seek thy kingdom, and the righteousness thereof all things
necessary to their bodily sustenance, send us we beseech thee in this our
necessity, such moderate rain and showers, that we may receive the fruits of
the earth to our comfort, and to thine honor, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

For fair weather.
O Lord God which for the sin of man did once drown all the world except
eight persons, and afterward of thy great mercy did promise never to
destroy it so again; we humbly beseech thee that although we for our
iniquities have worthily deserved this plague of rain and waters, yet thou will
send us such weather whereby we may receive the fruits of the earth in due
season, and learn both by thy punishment to amend our lives, and for thy
clemency to give thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

In the time of dearth and famine.
O Merciful God and heavenly father, whose gift it is that the rain does
fall, the earth is fruitful men and beasts increase: and fishes do multiply,
behold (we beseech thee) the afflictions of thy people, and grant that the
scarsity and dearth, which we do now most justly suffer for our iniquities,
may through thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheapnes and plenty, for the
love of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be praise
for ever Amen.

In the time of war.
ALmighty God King of all kings and governor of all things, whose power no
creature is able to resist, to whom it belongs justly to punish sinners, and
to be merciful to them that truly repent, save and deliver us (we humbly
beseech thee) from the hands of our enemies, abate their pride, assuage their
malice, and confound their devices, that we being armed with thy defense, may
be preserved from all perils, to glorify thee which art the only giver of
all victory, through the merits of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord, So be
it.

In the time of any common plague, or sickness.
O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in the time of King David did slay with
the plague of pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembering thy
mercy, did save the rest: have pity upon us miserable sinners, that now are
visited with great sickness and mortality, that like as thou did then
command thine Angel to cease from punishing, so it may now please thee to
withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

A prayer for the strength and comfort of the holy Ghost.
ALmighty and most merciful God, which give to thy elect people, thine holy
spirit, as a sure pledge of thy heavenly kingdom, we most humbly beseech thee
so to replenish our hearts with the grace of thy holy spirit, that he may bear
witness to our spirits, that we be thy children and heirs of thy kingdom, and
that by thy gracious working of this thy good spirit, we may kill al carnal
lusts, unlawful pleasures, concupiscences and evil affections, contrary to thy
most blessed will, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, So be it.

For sure hope and sure taste of everlasting life.
O Almighty God which have prepared everlasting life for all those that be thy
faithful servants, grant unto us sure hope of this life everlasting, that
whiles we be here in this miserable world, we my have some taste and feeling
of it in our hearts, through the merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
So be it.

For true knowledge of God and his word, and a life agreeable to the same.
GRant unto us (O merciful God, we most heartily beseech thee) knowledge and
true understanding of thy most blessed will and word, that all ignorance being
expelled, we may know what thy will and pleasure is in all things, and how to
do our duty, and truly to walk in our vocation, and that also we may express
in our living those things that we do know, that we be not only knowers of
thy will and word, good Lord, but also may be hearty and faithful workers of
the same, through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ So be it.

A prayer for the strength and increase of faith.
O Almighty and everliving God, which not only give every good and perfect
gift, but also increasest those gifts that thou have given: we most humbly
beseech thee to increase in us the gift of faith, that we may truly believe in
thee, and in thy promises made unto us in Christ Jesus our Lord: that neither by
our negligence, nor infirmity of the flesh, nor by grieuousnes of temptations,
neither by the subtle crafts and assaults of the devil, we be driven from
this faith, in the blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, So be it.

For a godly life.
ALmighty God, give us grace that we may cast away the works of darkness, and
put on us the armor of light now in the time of this mortal life, in which thy
Son Jesus Christ came to visit us in great humility, that in the last day
when he shall come again in his glorious majesty to judge the quick and the
dead, we may rise to the life immortal, through him who lives and reigns
with thee and the holy Ghost, now and for ever. So be it.

A prayer for true perseverance and the assured hope of eternal life.
BLessed God which have caused al holy Scriptures to be written for our
learning, grant that we may in such wise hear the^, read them, mark them,
and inwardly print them in our hearts, that by patience and comfort of thy holy
word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed hope of everlasting life,
which thou have given us in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, So be it.

A prayer for the obtaining of our petitions.
ALmighty God which have given us grace at this time with one accord to make
our common supplications unto thee, and do promise, that when two or three
be gathered together in thy name, thou will grant their requests: fulfill now (O
Lord) the desires and petitions of thy servants as may be must expedient for
them, granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the world to
come life everlasting Amen.

The end of the Lateny.
A GODLY INSTRVCTIon containing the sum of all the Divinity necessary for a
Christian conscience.
Made by M. John Bradford.
A Man that is regenerate and born of God, the which thing that every one of us
be, our Baptism, the Sacrament of regeneration does require under pain of
damnation: and therefore let every one of us with the Virgin Mary say, Be it
unto me O Lord, according to thy Word. according to the Sacrament of Bapti^me,
wherein thou have declared our adoption and let us lament ^he doubting hereof
in us, striving against it, as we shall be made able of the Lord: a man I say
that is regenerate, consists of two men (as a man may say) namely of the old
man, The old man.
and the new man. The old man is like to a mighty Giant, such a one as was
Goliath, for his birth is now perfect: but the new man is like unto a little
child, such a one as was David, for his birth is not yet perfect, The new man.
until the day of the general resurrection.

The old man therefore is more strong, lusty and stirring then is the new man,
because the birth of the new man is but begun now, and the old man is
perfectly borne. And as the old man is more stirring, lusty and stronger then
the new man: Why the old man is stronger then the new. In what respect one man
is.
so is the nature of him clean contrary to the nature of the new man, as being
earthly and corrupt with Satan's seed, the nature of the new man being
heavenly, and blessed with the celestial seed of God. So that one man, in as
much as he is corrupt with the seed of the serpent, is an old man, both an old
man and also a new man
and in as much as he is blessed with the seed of God from above, he is a new
man. And as, in as much as he is an old man, he is a sinner, and an enemy to
God: so in as much as he is regenerate, he is righteous and holy, and a friend
to God, the seed of God, preserving him from sin, so that he cannot sin as
the seed of the serpent, wherewith he is corrupt, even from his conception,
inclines him, yea inforceth him to sin, and nothing else but to sin. So
that the best part in man before regeneration in Gods sight, is not only an
enemy, but enimity it self.

One man therefore which is regenerate may well be called always just and
always sinful: How one man may be called always sinful and always ^ust.
just in respect of Gods seed and his regeneration: sinful, in resp^ct of
Satan's seed and his first birth. Betwixt these two men therefore there is
continual conflicts and war most deadly. The flesh and the old man, by reason
of his birth that is perfect, do often for a time prevail against the new
man, Why the old man often times prevails against the new man.
(being but a chi^d, in comparison) and that in such sort, as not only other,
The old man so mightily prevails sometimes against the new man in the children
of God, that the spirit and seed of God seems to be utterly taken from them:
whereas indeed it is not so, as afterward to their great comfort they find and
feel.
but even the children of God themselves think that they be nothing else but
old, and that the spirit and seed of God is lost, and gone away, where yet
notwithstanding the truth is otherwise, the spirit, and the seed of God, at the
length appearing again, and dispelling away the clouds which cover the Sun
of Gods seed from shining, as the clouds in the air to the corporal Sun,
so that sometimes a man cannot tell by any sense, that there is any sun, the
clouds and winds so hid it from our sight: Even so our felicity or blindness,
and corrupt affections do often shadow the sight of Gods seed in Gods children,
as though they were plain reprobats. Whereof it comes that they praying
according to their sense, but not according to the truth, desire of God to give
them again his spirit, as though they had lost it, and he had taken it away.
Which thing God never does indeed, although he make us think so for a time:
for always he holds his hand under his children in their falls, that they
lie not still as others do which are not regenerat. And this is the difference
betwixt Gods children which are regenerate and elect before all times in
Christ, and the wicked cast aways, that the elect lie not still continually in
their sin, as do the wicked but at the length do return again by reason of
Gods seed, which is in them hid as a spark of fire in the ashes, as we may see
in Peter, Dau^d, ^aul, Mary Magdalen and others. For these (I mean Gods
children) God has made all things in Christ Jesus: to whom he has given this
dignity that they should be his inheritance and spouse. This our inheritour
Christ Jesus, God with God, light of light, coeternall and consubstantiall with
the Father, and with the holy Ghost, to the end that he might become our
husband, (because the husband and the wife must be one body and flesh) has
taken our nature upon him, communicating with it and by it in his own person,
to us all his children his divine majesty (as Peter says) and so is become
flesh of our flesh and bone of our bones substantially: as we are become flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones, spiritually: all that ever we have
pertains to him, yea even our sins, as all that ever he has pertains
unto us even his own glory. So that it Satan should summon us to answer in
our debts and sins, in that the wife is no suable person but the husband, we
may well bid him enter his action against our husband Christ, and he will make
him a sufficient answer.

For this end I mean that we might be coupled and married thus to Christ, The
law Per^aineth to the old man, and the Gospel to the new man.
and so be certain of salvation and at peace with God in our consciences. God
has given his holy word which has two parts (as now the children of God do
consist of two men) the one part of Gods word being proper to the old man, and
the other part of Gods word being proper to the new man. The part properly
pertaining to the old man is the law: the part properly pertaining to the new
man is the Gospel. The law is a doctrine which commands, What the law is.
and forbids, requiring doing and avoiding. Under it therefore are contained
al precepts, threatenings, promises upon conditions, of our doing and avoiding,
etc.

What the gospel is.
The gospel is a doctrine which always offers and gives, requiring faith on
our behalf, not as of worthiness as a cause, but as a certificat unto us, and
therefore under it are contained all the free and sweet promises of God, as I
am the Lotd thy God, etc.

The conscience feared and beaten down with the terror of Gods judgment
against sin, may not look upon the law, but fly to the Gospel for releeefe
and comfort.
In those that be of years of discretion, it requires faith, not as a cause,
but as an instrument, whereby we our selves may be certain of our good husband
Christ, and of of his glory, and therefore when the conscience feels it
self disquieted for fear of Gods judgment against sin, she may in no wise
look upon the doctrine pertaining to the old man, but to the doctrine only
that pertains to the new man in it, not looking for that which it requires,
that is, faith, because we never believe as we should: but only on it which it
offers, and which it gives, that is on Gods grace, and eternal mercy and
peace in Christ Jesus: so shall she be in quiet when she looks for it
altogether out of her self in gods mercy in Christ Jesus, in whose lap if she
lay her head with S. John, John 13. When the conscience is quiet and at peace
with God, the law serves only to keep down the old man.
then is she happy and shall find quietness indeed. When she feels her
self quiet (then in Gods name) let her look on the law, and upon such things
as it requires, th^reby to bridle and keep down the old Adam, to slay the
Goliath, from whom she must needs keep the sweet promises, being the bed
wherein her spouse and she meet and lie together: for as the wife will keep
her bed only for her husband, although in other things she is content to have
fellowship with others, as to speak, sit, eat, drink, go, etc. so our
consciences which are Christ's wives must needs keep the bed yt is Gods sweet
promises all only for our selves, and our husband there to meet together, to
embrace and laugh together, and to be ioifull together. If sin, the law, the
Devil or any thing else would creep into the bed, and lie there, then
c^mplaine to thy husb^nd Christ and forthwith thou shall see him play Phineas
part. Thus my dearly beloved, I have given you in few words a sum of all the
Divinity which a Christian conscience cannot want.

FINIS.
The Table.
AN introduction to prayer. 17 A meditation concerning prayer. 49 A meditation
upon the Lords supper. 68 A private prayer for the morning, evening* and other
times of the day 132 When you awake out of your sleep. eod. When you behold
the day light. 134 When you arise. 135 When you apparel yourselfe. 136
When you are made ready, to begin the day vvithall. 138 Cogitations meet to
begin the day vvithal. 139 When you go forth of the door. 143 When you are
going any journey. 145 When you are about to receive your meat 148 In the
meal time, 150 After your meat, 152 when you come home again. 155 At the
sun going down 156 When the candles be light: 158 When you make your
selves unready. 160 When you go into your bed. 161 When you feel sleep to
be coming. 163 A general confession of sins, wi^h other prayers for the
morning and evening, to be used in families and public assemblies, 165 Another
confession of sins, 167 A prayer to be said in the morning, 169 Another 172
Another 143 An evening prayer. 176 Another, 181 Another, 183 A prayer for
remission of sins. 185 A prayer for the true knowledge of the mystery of
our redemption in Christ 197 A form of thanksgiving for our redemption, and a
prayer for the strength and increase of faith, 200 A thanksgiving to God for
his great benefits. 202 A prayer for true mortification, 205 A meditation of
the exercise of true mortification, 212 A meditation of the coming of Christ
to judgment, and of the revvard both of the faithful and unfaithful. 215 A
meditation of the life everlasting, the place where it, is and the
inco^parablenes thereof, 222 Another meditation of the blessed state and
felicity of the life to come, 231 A meditation of the presence of God, 238 A
meditation of the providence of God, 240 A meditation of Gods power, beauty,
goodness etc. 245 A meditation concerning the sober usage of the body, that it
may be subject and obedient to the soul, 249 Another meditation concerning
the sober usage of the body and pleasures in this life, 252 A meditation of
death and the commodities it brings 256 A meditation upon the passion of our
Savior Jesus Christ, 259 A prayer to Christ crucified, 267 A prayer to Christ
ascended and raining in glory. A 8 A prayer for true repentance, 272 A prayer
for the strength and increase of faith 273 A prayer for the true sense and
feeling of gods favor and mercy in Christ, 274 A prayer against our
spiritual enemies, the devil the world, and the flesh, 280 A prayer for
present help in temptation, 281 Remedies against sinful motions and
tentations, 284 A prayer for the avoiding of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance
for our sins 286 Another 293 A prayer to be said of such as suffer any kind of
cross, 295 A prayer for the afflicted for the profession of gods word, 299 A
prayer to God the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, 302 A thanksgiving to
God the father, the son and the holy Ghost, 367 A prayer to God for his help
and protection against the obstinate enemies of the truth, 301 A prayer for the
afflicted and persecuted under the tyranny of Antichrist. 312 A prayer to be
said before the preaching of Gods word, 314 A prayer to be said after the
preaching ^ Gods word 310 A prayer to be said before the receiving of the
communion, 322 A thanksgiving after the receiving of the communion, 326 A
lamentation of a sinner afflicted in onscie^ce for his offenses 327 A prayer
for the sick 333 A prayer to be said at the hour of death. 339 A prayer for a
woman with child, 343 A Psalm to be said in the time of any common
plague, sickness, or other cross or visitation of God. 346 A Psalm of
thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague or any other kind of sickness,
or afflictions. 350 A prayer, to be said before meat and after, 354 Another
prayer to be said before meat: 355 Another, 356 A thanksgiving after meals.
357 An other ^hankesgiuing after meals. 359 Another, 360 Another, 361
Prayers, commonly called Lydleys Prayers, with certain godly additions.
A Confession of sin. 362 A confession of sins and a prayer for the remission
thereof. 374 A prayer for the true knowledge and understanding of the word of
God. 380 A prayer for the leading of a godly life. 383 A prayer for the
deliverance from sins, and to be restored to Gods grace and favor again. 387
A prayer necessity to be said at all times. 389 A prayer for grace and
remission of sin. 392 Prayers taken out of the first psalm. 395 Prayers taken
out of the second psalm. 400 A prayer which M. John Bradford said a little
before his death in Smithfield. 404 The Letany. 409 For the Kings majesty. 410
For Bishops and ministers of the Church. 431 For rain. 421 For fair vveather.
422 Jn the time of dearth and famine. 423 Jn the time of war 423 In the time
of any common pla^ue of sickness* 424 For strength and comfort of the holy
Ghost. 425. For sure hope and true taste of everlasting life. 426 For the true
knowledge of god and his word and a life agreeable to the same. ibid, For the
strength and increase of faith. 427 For a godly life. 428 For the true
perseverance and assured hope of eternal life. 429 A prayer for the obteining
of our petitions 429 A godly instruction, containing the sum of all the
Divinity necessary for a Christian conscience. 431
FINIS,

