The Church-Sleeper AWAKENED, OR A DISCOURSE On Act. 20.9. being the Substance
of two Sermons Composed and Preached at Cork in Ireland.

By Joseph Eyres Master of Arts, and a Servant of God in the Gospel of his Son.

(...). Mat. 26.40. LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for Joseph Cranford, at the
Sign of the King's Head in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To his much Honored and dearly beloved Friends, the Inhabitants of Cork, both
Magistrates, and People; those especially that are his usual Hearers at
Christ-Church:
JOSEPH EYRES Dedicateth this ensuing discourse, as an expression of his
thankfulness for their owning of him in the worst Times. And wishes increase
of grace here, and fullness of glory hereafter.
Worthy and Christian Friends,
TIme was when men of Anti-Magistratical, and Anti -- Ministerial Principles
were very imposing, and imperious, being as sharp thorns in the tender eyes of
those to whom settlement and order in Church, and State were very dear: yet in
Times of greatest Ataxie, Apostasy, Confusion, the Lord-hath still had a
remnant in this place, that have sighed in secret for all the abominations,
blasphemies, and boisterous oppositions against the Truth that have been in the
midst of us. Some of those melting mourners the Lord has called home, and
taken to himself, and for the briny brook, that they have drunk of in the way,
has given them to drink of the river of his pleasure.

Others have lived to see better days, and are not without some budding hopes
that it shall at length go well with Sion, which they have performed before
their choicest comforts, and their chiefest joy. O how welcome is that hand of
heaven that begins to lift up the poor out of the dust, and to wipe away the
tears from the swollen eyes, and blubbered cheeks of the Daughters of
Jerusalem, giving unto them beauty for ashes, and the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness!

Your condition you looked upon as deplorably sad, whilst without power in
your own hands to reform the abuses, and redress the evils you labored under.
Providence has restored unto you your Charter, with your several Ornaments of
honor, and Badges of authority, and hereby put you into a capacity of being
Reformers, Repairers of breaches, and Executioners of justice; so that if you
will but quit your selves like men, appear against the growing and prevailing
corruptions of the Times, and give a check to the insolency of men's unruly
lusts, you may expect to be carried as on Eagles wings, to be preserved under
the shadow of the mightiest grace, and to have the blessing of peace within
your walls, and plenty within your palaces.

Let not your present outward meanness in the world, and want of an encouraging
Revenue to support your state, retard your motions, discourage you in your
duty, make you loath to intermeddle much in matters of Government, and take you
off from an Heroic and Magnanimous managing of that High Trust that is reposed
in you. Do but lay out your selves wholly for God; be warm and vigorous in the
prosecution of those designs that tend to his glory; execute justice
impartially upon offending ones; that the mouth of iniquity may be stopped, the
most daring transgressors daunted, and constrained to hide themselves through
fear and shame; and you shall find that the Lord will sweetly smile, and shine
upon your Tabernacles, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and compass you about with his loving kindness, as with a shield. 2 Chronicles.
15.20.
The Lord will honor those that honor him. The Lord will be with you, whilst
you are with him. Besides, I charitably hope, and am verily persuaded, did the
State but hear of your renowned zeal, severe reformation, and thorough owning
of the ways of God, their hearts would be much drawn forth to mind your
concernments, and to encourage you in the Lords work, by bestowing upon you
some signal expression of favor and respect; and the rather, because of your
former, never to be forgotten kindness in seasonably opening your gates to
receive and relieve their Army harassed and worn out with wants and weakness.

A few words of wholesome advice I shall entreat you heartily to interpret and
accept. You who are now incorporated into a Civil Society, labor to be
incorporated into Christ, and to be free Denisons of the new Jerusalem that is
above. John 8.36.
If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed. Purge your own Hearts, and
reform your own Families, and hereby give a good example unto others to do the
like. Let your Houses be little Churches, in which God shall be duly
worshipped, and his name daily called upon. Live in subjection to the Laws of
Christ's Kingdom, and call upon others to stoop with their neck to the same
Yoke.

Your incorporation and conjunction calls loudly on you for union and unanimity.
Keep therefore the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. 4.3.
Let your hearts be seasoned with the salt of grace, and be at peace among your
selves. Beware of being divided in your consultations, and transactions. It was
well observed by Nazianzen, That Dissolution is the Daughter of Dissension. As
the conflict of contrary humors causes diseases and destructive distempers in
the body natural: so the clashings and contests of men, who are armed with
contrary principles, and aim at different ends; and in stead of promoting the
good of the Community, make it their business to advance the interest of a
Faction, will prove fatal, and of dangerous consequence to the body politic.

Maintain a cordial, close, and comfortable correspondence with your
Church-Guides, whom you see a clear Providence making your Overseers. Peoples
taking liberty to themselves to disown and desert at pleasure their own
Pastors, and hankering after novel, both Preachers, and Opinions, has turned
the Church into a confused Chaos; discomposed Christ's mystical Body, and
afflicted its members with distortions and dislocations.

Time was, when the breath of a Minister was abhorred, and would hardly be
endured in Cork, and his coming to the City as much dreaded as the Invasion of
an enemy. Blessed be God that your eyes do again behold your Teachers; that the
number of them in this County is increased, and they encouraged with the
refreshing influence of Authority. You cannot be ignorant, how long you were
constrained to wait, and how many difficulties were waded through ere an Order
could be procured for my establishment, and settling among you, by reason of the
undermining suggestions of some whispering Contrasentients.

For the space of six years I have been your unworthy Teacher, and preached the
Gospel unto the Inhabitants of this City; I hope not altogether without
success. Though I must pofess, that I cannot but with grief take notice of the
fewness of those sheaves that are gathered into Christ's barn. How hard are men's
hearts under the continual beating of the hammer! How do they harden their
hearts like the adamant against the clear convictions of the Word! How do men
stand out against Christ, when summoned to come in, and entertain his Message
with perpetual quarrels, and endless contradictions! This is a lamentation, and
shall be for a lamentation.

Let me passionately beseech you in the bowels of Christ Jesus, your Lord, and
mine, to be wise in this your day, and mind the things that do belong unto your
peace.

Let the sounding of the Silver Trumpet of the Gospel awaken you, and cause you
to shake off that unweldy frame of spirit that makes men dull and indisposed to
the duties of Religion.

Let your hearts be upright with God, and be you faithful to the Truth in
giddy and declining Times. Buy the Truth at any rate; Prove. 23.3.
but part with it at no rate whatsoever. It will be your safety and honor to
retain and hold fast the form of wholesome words delivered to you, and to
remain unshaken in your Principles, though stormy winds of temptation and
persecution should arise, and blow upon you with a formidable and affrighting
fury. Though all men should forsake Christ, yet do not you forsake him. There
are many windfals in Christ's Orchard; be you like those few remaining berries
in the top of the uppermost bough, abhorring disunion and defection, and
resolving not to be rent (though with a violent hand) from your Renowned Root.
Mortify thoroughly, and betimes all itching desire after novelty, lest it break
forth into the spreading and crusty scab of Apostasy. Beg wisdom of God,
whereby you may be able to distinguish betwixt the voice of Christ, and the
voice of a stranger. Be not taken with the flaring light of every blazing
Comet, and ignis fatuus, that would slock you into by-ways, and dangerous
paths. Keep your heads and hearts from being flyblown with the unsavory breath
of every rottenhearted Preacher. Take heed of going forth, and dancing after
their delusive pipe, who (the better to deceive, and draw you into the snare)
pretend to rare and rich discoveries; lest you come home with a vertigo in your
heads, and be troubled with the staggers in Religion ever after.

I shall conclude with pressing upon you that serious and savoury advice, which
his Excellency the Lord Deputy, when at Cork in his late Progress, gave to the
Chief of you, with some Justices of Peace of the Country that were then
present. You may remember that you were commanded, and encouraged,

1. To put a stop to the overflowing flood of profaneness, by putting in
execution the several wholesome Laws that are in force against swearing,
drunkenness, uncleanness, and the like enormous practices.

2. To provide for the sanctification of the Sabbath, by making use of that
power that is put into your hands, in punishing and suppressing its too
frequent, and Atheistical violation. Let it not lie as a reproach on Cork,
that Ordinance-despisers, and Sabbathbreakers cannot be so secure from the
stroke and dint of Justice in any place in Ireland as in this.

3. To make use of provided and proscribed means for the conversion of the
Popish Irish within your Jurisdiction. The work is desirable, and of grand
concernment, conducing whereunto among many other are the following expedients.

1. The bringing of the Natives to the Puklick Worship. Compel them to come in,
that Gods house may be full. Bring them within the compass of the net, if ever
you expect they should be caught. Let not their rooted and peevish lothness to
attend upon the Ordinances deter you from doing your duty. They that now
quarrel and contend with you, as being too severe and harsh, will in the day of
visitation glorify God, and call you blessed.

2. The removeing and transplanting of such as (to use his Excellencies own
words) are stiff and sullen in their way; and are not only possessed
themselves with grinning prejudices against the Protestant Religion, but do
likewise make it their design to create and continue the like prejudices in the
rest of their Brethren, who possibly might otherwise be reclaimed, and brought
unto the knowledge of the truth.

Remember the Oath of God with which you are bound to act and rule according to
Law, and be you faithful unto your Trust. Yield Obedience to his Excellencies
Commands in the expressed instances, and buckle in good earnest to the business
of Religion and Reformation, that so we may at length become amountain of
holiness, an habitation of righteousness, in which the Lord will delight to
dwell, which shall be promoted by the prayers and indevours of

From my Study in Cork Sept. 7. 1658. Your Servant in the Lords work, JOSEPH
EYRES.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
A Christian (how plausible soever his pretenses may be) cannot be right at
root, so long as the bare bulk of duty satisfies, without regard had to the
manner of the performance. The iniquity of holiest things, and the sinful
adherencies of the best duties are highly provoking, and sufficiently ponderous
to depress and sink the soul into the lowest hell: so that it nearly concerns
us to enter upon spiritual employments, and engage in holy services with much
caution and circumspection, for fear of a miscarriage. It Is not without cause
that the Spirit advises us to keep our feet when we go to the house of God,
and be more ready to hear than to give the sacrifice of fools. The ear is the
cunduit-pipe thorough which grace comes flowing in to the soul, and therefore
should be kept open, which cannot be done whilst the eye is shut.

My design is to apply the smarting eye salve of the Spirit, that so the
peccant and concerned may be cured of the wonted winking of their eyes.

The Subject in hand seems to be ordinary, and to have little of sublimity in
it. But when I considered that every Pew almost has its Eutychus; and that our
Congregations do generally abound with lukewarm Laodiceans, and are little
better (many of them) than so many Consorts of snoring Sleepers, which make
sweet Music in the Devils ears, whose design doubtless in men's present
snorting is their future howling; I thought it my duty, as a Watchman, to do
something that might awaken. I am willing to stir up and startle those, who
whilst they should be smiting on their thighs, and laying their hands upon
their hearts, are in a yawning posture, and rubbing their eyes, being ing
possessed with a confused stupor; and it is a pretty while ere they can recover
themselves, and understand where they are, and what about. I wish this small
Treatise may prove a mote at least in the eye of the sleepy Hearer, and make it
water, which is the way to be more watchful. Christian Reader, be a diligent
Hearer, and I have my end, who desire to approve my self

Thy faithful Monitor and Soul-Friend, Joseph Eyres.

THE Church-Sleeper Awakened.
ACT. 20.9. And there sat in a window a certain young man, named Eutychus,
being fallen into a deep sleep, and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down
with sleep, and fell down from the third Loft, and was taken up dead.
THE Apostle Paul, after much toilsome travel, and various agitations is now at
Troas, a City in the lesser Asia; where not having long time to tarry, (for he
made it his design (if possible) to be at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost; and
much ground was to be trod, and many places to be passed thorough, and
something for the furtherance of the Gospel, to be dispatched in those places,
ere he could get thither) he is resolved to do as much good as he can in a
little time.

We may not conceive him, idle any day; but surely on the Lords day he was more
then ordinarily diligent and industrious.

The Disciples, or the owners of the way of the Christian Religion, being on
the First Day of the Week met together in order to the hearing of the Word, and
partaking of the Ordinance of the Supper, Paul continued his discourse until
midnight, being hereunto encouraged and urged: 1. By the peoples raised and
unwearied attention. 2. By his own resolution to depart on the morrow, ver. 7.

In these Primitive Times the Lord was wont to accompany the word of his mouth
with the wonderful works of his hand; witness the many Miracles then effected,
whereby the Lord would, 1. Convince Aliens. 2. Confirm Disciples, to whom such
props were of great advantage, because the Doctrine embraced was,

1. Novel, and therefore attended with squint-eyed suspicions. 2. Contrary to
carnal reason, and therefore invaded with puzling Objections. 3. Destructive to
the interests of the flesh, and therefore assaulted with a keen and desperate
opposition, not only from without, but also from within.
A considerable, and seasonable Miracle was this in the Verse succeeding the
Text, of which Paul was the moral cause or instrument: Eutychus the recipient
Subject, who whilst asleep stands in need of a bed; and being now dead, is fit
for nothing but the grave. But the Lord had mercy on him, and did not only
awaken but revive.

This young man was quite tired out with Paul's protracted, and uninterrupted
discourse; which being spun out to an unexpected length, deep sleep seizes on
him, and he falls from such an height, that there remains naught else of the
man, but a breathless trunk.

There is no reason why we should bitterly inveigh against him, under the
notion of a lazy Lozel, and muddy headed Disciple; for he sought not out a
blind nook, and obscure corner, wherein unobservedly to take a nap, and by this
means gratify the flesh; only through the infirmity of the flesh he is
overcome. However, he is not wholly to be excused. The activity of grace must
oppose and make head against the inclinations of nature: and doubtless had he
not been wanting unto himself, he might have been enabled to hold up his head
as well as others: at least, he might have prevented a total overwhelming and
succumbing under this drouzy distemper. The Point that I would hence observe,
is this:

Sleeping in Church Assemblies is a great sin, and of dangerous consequence.

Many are men's miscarriages about the word. Heb. 10.25.
Some forsake the assembling of themselves together, and turn their backs upon
the Ordinances, as if they were not worth the attending on: Ezekiel. 33.21.
Others indeed come as the people comes, and with their lips they show much
love; Esaias 29.13.
They draw nigh unto God with their mouths, and honor him with their lips, so
that the address seems to be accompanied with a flaming affection, and a deep
devotion but their hearts are far from him, going after their covetousness;
there is some base lust or other doted on, and cockered with wantonnest
indulgence, notwithstanding the clear convictions of the word, and their own
professed subjection to it: Others again entertain the word with a slighting
unbelief, Jer. 44.16.
peevish contradictions, and a desperate, declared resolution, not to stoop to
its authority, and yield obedience to its commands. But it is the sleepy
Hearer, whom I have to deal with at this time, and against whom I must spend
some arrows, and discharge some cannons to awaken him. In the prosecution of
the Point in hand, I shall only do these two things. 1. I shall propose
several considerations by way of diswasion from the sin, and provocation to
the contrary practice. 2. I shall propose several directions by way of remedy
and prevention.

The considerations are these that follow.

1. Well weigh with your selves in whose presence you are. First, you are in
the presence of God, who though he be from no place excluded, yet surely he is
in the Assemblies of the Saints especially present. Exodus 20.24. In all places
where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee. In acts
of worship we are said to draw nigh him, Lev 10.2.

There are several things in God which bespeak your attention.

1. His transcendent excellency, and incomprehensible greatness: The presence
of Majesty does awaken meanness, and keeps all the faculties intent upon so
furpassing an Object. If the awe and dread of an infinite, and all-glorious
Being were upon us, it would not only somewhat affect, but even affright, and
cause you to lay aside all deadness and drouziness of spirit. Me thinks the
brightness and splendor of that royal throne before which you present your
selves, and lie prostrate, should awaken you even to astonishment and
consternation, and keep your eyes open beyond all possibility of putting them
together.

2. His Omniscience: Though you sleep, yet God does not so much as slumber;
though your eyes be shut, yet his are not: Though you sneak behind a pillar, or
sink down to the bottom of the Pew, yet you are still in his eye. The Lord is
in his holy Temple, the Lords throne is in heaven: his eyes behold, and his
eyelids try the children of men, Psalm. 11.4. He beholds the frame of your
souls, and takes exact notice of the posture of your bodies. What servant would
dare to sleep, whilsth is Master stands by and looks on? One sleepy Hearer
cannot escape Gods observation in the most condensed and crowded Congregation.

3. His Holiness, whereby he must needs be highly displeased with the undecent
and unbeseeming behavior of those who are engaged in his worship. The sleepy
Hearer is a mote in Gods bright eye, and very offensive to his sight.

4. His Justice, which being awakened by his holiness, is wont to make deep
dints and impressions of revenge upon the objects of his displeasure. Will a
Lamb dare to sleep within the paw and reach of an enraged Lion?

In the next place consider the ends, on the account of which you come into
Gods presence.

1. To speak to him in Prayer. I have heard of some that have talked in their
sleep: I doubt whether these drouzy dreamers we are speaking of, do or can pray
in their sleep. A Prince would look upon it as an unsufferable affront, if a
Subject should be found sleeping in the Presence-Chamher, when he should be
presenting his Petition. Christ's Disciples were sleeping, when they should have
been praying: now Christ bids them watch and pray; He knew full well, that if
they did not watch, neither could they pray, Math. 26.41.

2. To hear him speaking unto you by the Ministry of the Word. Our business is
not only to pour out our complaints and requests into Gods bosom, but
likewise to receive answers and tidings of peace into ours. Now the sleepy
Hearer stops up the passages thorough which the Lord is wont to convey his
grace into the soul. I hope you are not of the opinion, that the Lord now
speaks to his people by dreams, and that therefore there is no need of a waking
attention. Thus you see how the intercourse betwixt God, and sleepy souls is
interrupted and dammed up. Surely that must needs be a very great sin, that
does obstruct duty, and renders the Ordinances of God frustraneous and
ineffectual. Secondly, you are in the presence of the Angels, who are wont to
frequent the solemn and sacred Assemblies of the Saints, (which seems proveable
from 1 Cor. 11.10.) and to take notice of any disorders in sacred Conventions.
You cannot make a wry mouth, laugh, fleere in the Ministers face, take a nap,
be guilty of a lascivious glance, wanton look, or any other immodest behavior,
but it is done, not only in the presence of the God of heaven, but also in the
presence of the Angels of heaven, who are strict observers of you, and have a
watchful eye upon you. Besides, the Angels do with much wonder and delight make
inspection into the profound Mysteries of the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.10.
manifested and made known to and by the Church, 1 Pet. 1.12. if you did so
too, you would not be possessed with such a spirit of slumber as you are.

Thirdly, you are in the presence of the Church. You are now in Gods family,
not your own. You may not take liberty to do that here, which you would make no
scruple of to do at home. Any public Assembly, especially of Saints, and they
engaged in a work of the highest nature, requires an aweful and respective
behavior in such as do attend it. We may not offend any, much less the Church,
1 Cor. 10.32. We may not offend a single Saint, much less a Society of such.

Besides, the Church is an orderly Society; all things in it, should be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.10. Whilst one is singing, another should not
be snoring.

2. Consider, whose work it is that you are about. We are not only in Gods
presence, but are also employed in Gods work. Now we are commanded to be
fervent in spirit, whilst we serve the Lord, Romans 12.11. It becomes not Gods
servants of any, to be of a drouzy disposition; especially, when they should be
diligent and intent upon their Masters business.

Its hard if you cannot watch with Christ one hour. Christ did watch and pray
in the Garden; the Disciples should have done so too, and have kept him
company, Matthew. 26.40.

It was a patheticall expostulation that of Christ, Could you not watch with me
one hour? q. d. If any of your Friends and near Relations were pained in body,
and perplexed in mind, if they lay under the thousandth part of that agony and
anguish of spirit that I lie under, you would have watched with them, and why
then can you not watch with me? Yea, you would have watched all night with them
until the dawning of the day, and is it possible that you can not watch with
me one hour! I could pray for you in a Mountain, and cannot you pray with me
in a Garden! I could spend a great part of the night in prayer for you, and can
you not spend an hour of the night in prayer with me! Me thinks it should not
be such a tiresome task and intolerable.

The service of God does deservedly require the utmost ardour and intenseness
of spirit; the most elevated, enlarged, inflamed affections, that creatures are
capable of.

Whatsoever our hand finds to do, especially in matters spiritual, should be
done with all our might.

3. The work that you are employed about, is of loftiest consequence, and
concernment. Your souls are concerned in it: Life and death are before you. We
should hearken to the word of God, as for our lives, for it is our life, Deuteronomy.
32.46, 47. What a man does for his life, he will do with the utmost vigor and
vivacity.

With what panting and pressing earnestness does an almost famisht and
hunger-bitten beggar cry for bread!

With what awakening, heart-penetrating expressions does a Prisoner at the bar
plead for his life! Not a word passes unobserved by him, he does with much
greediness of attention hearken to the Evidence of VVitnesses, Verdict of the
Jury, Sentence of the Judge; and no wonder, for his life lies at the stake. He
must be either acquitted and live, or else condemned and dye.

You who are here this day, must be tried by that word which you hear; by it
your eternal estates and conditions must be cast. Now, whose ears would not
be tickled with extraordinary delight at the hearing of the promises of life!
and whose ears would not glow and tingle at the denunciations and threatenings
of eternal death! But the mischief on it is, the Church-Sleeper is like the
Smiths dog, whom neither the hammers above him, nor the sparks of fire falling
round about him, can awaken.

4. You are not wont to sleep whilst you are about your own work. You rise up
early, and sit up late, and do with much eagerness and unweariedness prosecute
your own affairs. The Husbandman does not sleep with his Plough in his hand;
neither does the Pilot sleep, whilst he is at the helm, guiding the Ship.

Though you sleep in the Church, yet you do not sleep in the shop, whilst you
have any thing to do, and customers to attend. How contentedly will you refrain
from eating, drinking, sleeping all the day long, nay and a great part of the
night too, provided the merry penny may be coming in thewhiles.

You can sit chatting and discoursing with your Friends many hours, and its
very late many times ere you can part: but when you come into Gods presence to
enjoy fellowship and communion with him, you are nodding presently, and there
you sit like so many liveless logs and senseless statues.

I have heard of feasts that have lasted four or five hours; but hardly of any
Guests that were sleeping whilst others were eating. But when people come to
feast with God, to make a meal upon an Ordinance, they cannot hold open their
eyes for their hearts.

You are not wont to sleep whilst the natural glass is before you; but when
the pure crystal glass of the Law is by the Minister held forth unto you, and
set before you, (as loath belike to behold what manner of persons you are) you
wink with the eye.

5. Wicked men do not sleep whilst they are about the Devils work. If Judas
have a treacherous plot in hand, out of doors he will, though in the night, and
put his black guard in order: a soft downy pillow is no place for his working
contriving head: Being hurried and harassed by the Devil, he cannot by the
darkness and silence of the night be flattered into the least slumber.

The eye that is full of adultery, does not sleep in the Congregation, but is
continually roving about to find out objects for a foul and frothy fancy to
work upon; and being found out, they are gazed on with much greediness and
delight. The Adulterer will be waking, and walking abroad in the dark and black
night, that so he may give his Drab a meeting, Prove. 7.9.

Ahab lies tossing and tumbling upon his bed, and cannot take any rest, until
he be possessed of Naboths Vineyard, 1 King. 21.4. And Amnon is in little
better plight till he have his will on his Sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.2.

How usual a thing is it for the Devils Imps, I mean the roaring Ruffians, and
Bacchanalian Roysters of the times, to spend whole days and nights in
quaffing, carousing, gaming, etc. They have not the least lust to sleep in the
midst of so much mirth, Music, and madness. With what whickering attention do
they hearken to a roguish Fiddler that will sing them a sordid and filthy Song!
Any Music keeps them waking, a midnight Mask, or paltry Poppet-play, how does
it affect, and make men dance an unwearied attendance, who yet are no more
affected with the admirable contrivance, and sublime discoveries of the Gospel,
then so many stocks and stones, save the Music of the Temple!

6. It Is a sin that is mightily promoted by the Devil

He knows of what fatal consequence it is unto his kingdom, for people to
hearken unto the word of life, which is as an hammer to knock off the bolts
from the galled feet of his chained Captives: and therefore he endeavors by all
ways and means imaginable to distract, divert, and take you off from the
present work and business that is before you. He will be sure to sit very heavy
on your eyelids, and close them if possible. The Prince of darkness startles
at the approach of light, and therefore will be sure to draw the curtain, and
shut the window to keep it out. The nodding head leans on the Devils bosom.
The sleepy Hearer is rockt in the Devils cradle, and dandled on the Devils knee.

7. A sleepy eye is a shrewd sign of a sleepy conscience, and a sottish
insensibility of matters spiritual. A fat heart, a deaf ear, and a closed
eye, go hand in hand, Esa. 6.10. A waking conscience is usually attended with a
watchful eye. They who work out their salvation with fear and trembling, will
look about them.

8. You may out-sleep that truth wherein you are nearly concerned, and which if
attended to, might prove successfully isntrumental for your conversion,
consolation.

There is no one truth to be slighted, disregarded; but surely those truths
that reach your particular condition, should be entertained with exactest
observation.

You know not when that plaster will be spread and applied, that is most
suitable to your sore. You know not at what time that medicine will be
administered that is most likely to cure those spiritual maladies and
distempers that you labor under, and therefore it is wisdom to be wary and
watchful.

Possibly there may be some way of wickedness, which you securely walk in; some
necessary duty, which you live in the neglect of; some griezly temptation, with
which you are assaulted: now if you should be sleeping, when these things are
pathetically and powerfully spoken to, you may still live in the practice of
that sin, in the neglect of that duty; and be overwhelmed with that temptation
to your ruin.

9. This may be the last Sermon that ever you may hear; and I am confident,
could you be assured of it, that it would be so, it would mightily startle.

There will be such a thing as the last prayer that ever you shall put up; the
last Chapter that you shall read; the last Sermon that you shall hear: it
behooves you therefore with utmost industry to improve the present opportunity:
Hearken to the voice of God whilst it is called to day; you do not know whether
ever you may hear that voice again behind you, saying unto you, This is the
way, walk in it, shut not your eyes against the light that now shines, for you
do not know whether ever your eyes may again behold a rising sun, and dispersed
beams.

10. The Lord may take you away in your sleep. The instance of this young man
in the Text (one would think) should make you tremble. You that come alive into
the Congregation, may be carried out dead. You that do not attentively hearken
to what the Minister has to say unto you, may be suddenly struck dead in the
place, snatched out of your seats, dragged to Christ's Tribunal, and there
constrained to hearken unto what the great Judge of heaven and earth has to
say unto you, who will speak in such language, and in such a tone, as will make
your souls to shake and shiver. It Is more dreadful to dye whilst asleep in
Gods house, than to dye whilst asleep in your own.

11. There is no sleeping in hell. There will not be the least minutes rest
taken to eternity. The smoke of wicked men's torment ascends up for ever and
ever, and they have no rest day nor night, Rev. 14.11. You that can so
confidently sleep in the Church, shall not be able to sleep in the fiery lake:
The extremity of torment, the continual gnawing of the never dying worm, and
the hideous howlings of Devils, and fellow-damned wights, will keep you waking
in spite of your hearts.

How welcome would a few hours sleep be to those, who are sweating and
sweltring in seaverish flames, and for many nights together have been full of
tossings to and fro until the dawning of the day? But O! how transcendently and
surpassingly welcome would a minutes rest and repose be to those, who for
millions of years have been rosting and roaring in the everlasting flames? But
alas! it cannot be. Who but a fool and a mad man would for a little present
sinful ease and rest, plunge himself into an intolerable, restless state and
condition that knows no end! If this prove not an awakening consideration, I
know not what will.

12. There is no sleeping in heaven. That which is the misery of the damned, is
the happiness of the saved. Rev. 4.8. They rest not day and night, saying,
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. The
Angels do not want sleep; neither shall the Saints when they are translated to
the upper Patadise. Whilst we are in this animal state, nature cannot bear up
under continued watchings, refreshing, and rest. Christ himself did not spend
all his days in acts of immediate worship, he consumed not every night in
prayer and holy meditations: We read as of his eating and drinking, so of his
sleeping. But when these natural Bodies shall be raised spiritual Bodies, the
sublime employment of eternal Hallelujahs will not tire, or cause in us the
least inclination to a drousie despondency. It should be our desire and
endeavor to serve God here, as Saints and Angels serve him in heaven, without
weariness and deadness.

Having thus dispatched the considerations by way of motive, I now come unto
the directions by way of remedy and prevention of this sinful distemper
declared against.

1. Set your selves as in Gods presence. Labor to see him by the eye of Faith,
who is invisible to the eye of sense. Being not aware before whom we are, and
with whom we have to do, we are the more easily overtaken.

If in the Congregation, we were in the presence, and close by the side of
earthly majesty, and were surrounded and observed by Princes and Nobles, I dare
say, there would be such an awe upon us, that we should not dare to sleep, or
be guilty of the least incivillity and undecency of deportment. O then, why
does not the approach and presence of the God of glory, before whom the Devils
tremble, ble, and the Angels veil, not daring to behold with unmasked faces,
work in us far deeper impressions of awefulness, and engage us to the utmost
attention and watchfulness.

The truth of it is, God is not minded, and hence it is that his work is so
slightly slubbered over.

If God were in our eye, our eyes, ears, hearts, would all be open to attend
and entertain him.

2. Bring your Bibles with you; and that not for a vain show, and ostentation,
to be taken notice of for a pious devout respect to sacred Writ; but keep pace
with the Minister, whilst he reads the Word; and turn to those Texts of
Scripture that he quotes. If this laudable course were generally and duly
observed, Truths delivered would better be remembered, and the unhansome
inconvenience of sleeping in Church Assemblies would be prevented.

It Is reported of the Scots, by those who have been present at their
Assemblies, that when the Preacher names a place of Scripture, the people
presently and nimbly turn to it, so that there is heard in the Congregation a
rushing noise or sound, like the fluttering of a mighty flock of birds, that
are hastily rising, and getting upon the wing.

But many may say unto me, Alas Sir! woe and alas! what shall we do? we for our
parts can not read a word: O! how willingly would we make use of the Bible
both in public, and in private, provided we were book-learned as others are!
And cannot you read indeed? the more to blame are those who have had the
charge and care of your education: and the more to blame your selves, this
ignorance of yours being possibly the product of a lazy neglect, and lothness
to take pains.

And here now, because it is seasonable, let me lay a strict charge, and severe
injunction on Parents especially, and Masters of Families, to provide for the
instruction of their children, and servants, that so they may be able to
discern a difference betwixt a Bible, and a Block, not only by the sh^pe and
external figure, but also by the internal and comfortable contents.

3. Be exhorted to write Sermon-Notes, you that can; and you that cannot, learn
to do it. It prevents not only a sleeping eye, but a wandering eye.

It has been my observation of some, that whenever they have omitted taking
notes, they have been as sure to sleep, as if high noon were midnight, and
their Pew a soft bed. Flatter not your selves with a vain conceit, that your
extraordinary, and almost invincible proneness to sleep, by reason of your
natural temper, shall hold you excused, so long as you obstinately refuse to
make use of Bible and Pen, by which this so great a mischief might undoubtedly
be be prevented. I hope you do not count it a disparagement and undervaluing to
you to take notes after the Minister? King Edward the Sixth did not; and to
peruse them, and meditate on them afterward, for the fixing and ingraving of
truth in his mind, and memory.

4. Have you not houses of your own? there you may sleep with less scandal,
and inconvenience to your selves, and others. If there be no no remedy but you
must needs take a nap in the day time (which some can hardly refrain, being
thereto necessitated by a continued custom) it is better you should do it in
private, then in public.

But because men are too prone to gratify the flesh, and indulge the ease of
the outward man, I shall entreat you to be very spare, and temperate, and allow
your selves as little liberty as may be. Far be it from you, that you should be
of the number of those Swine, rather then Saints; those Hogs rather then
Christians, who lie grunting, yawning, stretching in their beds the forenoon of
the Sabbath, and are hardly up and dressed by dinner time: or of the number of
those sordid slow bellies, who are wont to reserve the afternoon of the Lords
day for rest, and a lazy retirement.

5. Principiis obsta, stop the beginnings. When you perceive in your selves an
inclination to nod, and that a soft slumber begins to seize upon you, presently
start up as one astonished at the apprehension of some grand approaching evil;
stand upon your guard, and keep the incroaching enemy at a distance.

6. Feed sparingly, especially on the Lords day. Great Eaters are usually great
Sleepers. From an over full stomach ascend obnubilating fumes, which oppress
the brain, and lock up the passages of the spirits, and thereby dispose to
sleep. Where the heart is overcharged with drunkenness and excess, it produces
sadness, searedness, stupidity, blockishness, inadvertency, forgetfulness,
dullness in duty, and a supine negligence in soul-concernments. They that fast
much, can watch best. Hence sobriety, and watchfulness are joined together. 1
Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant.

7. Let not sorrow too much seize upon you, and prevail over you; it is of a
stupifying, and besotting nature: the Disciples in the Garden found it so. Luke
22.45. Grief contracts the heart, and hinders the egress of spirits to the
several Organs in which they move; yea it exhausts the spirits, and hinders
concoction, so that gross and black vapors invade the brain, which are the
cause of sleep. Gerherd in his Harmony is of the opinion, that Jonah's profound
sleep in the side of the Ship was occasioned by grief, he knowing full well
that for his flying from the presence of the Lord, the tempest was raised, and
the Ship endangered.

8. Take heed of a lolling, and lazy posture of body; it argues irreverence,
and does dispose to drouziness. Standing I would commend as a more watchful
posture, and to be preferred before sitting, especially in Prayer. They that
bow down their heads, and rest them upon their hands, will not long be awake.

9. Let your eye be much upon the Minister. It Is said of Christ's Hearers, Luke
4.20. That their eyes were fastened on him. A good help against distractions.
Trap in loc.
Our hearts are fickle and fugitive, if not hard held to it. The sight of the
eye affects the heart. It Is the Prisoners seeing, as well as hearing of the
Judge, that makes him attentive to astonishment. When the heart is stirred, and
awakened, the eye cannot easily be closed.

10. Engage your neighbor that sits by you, to have a watchful eye upon you,
and to pluck you by the sleeve, if occasion be. Its pity that any should be in
danger of sleeping the sleep of death for want of a faithful friend to rouse up
and awaken.

If your Brothers Ox be fallen into a ditch, you will put to an helping hand,
and pluck it out: and shall your Brother himself lie lolling and snoring in the
Devils lap, and you not so much as jogge him by the elbow, and make him
sensible of his danger?

11. Betake your selves to rest the night before, in good time. Sitting up late
the Saturday nights does wonderfully deadden, and indispose to the duties of
the following day. Sleep in your beds, that you may not sleep in your Pews.
Sleep in the night, that you may not sleep in the day.

Coming home at midnight from dispatching businesses, visiting Friends; or
which is worse, from drinking, gaming, revelling, puts the body and mind out of
order, and is a bad preparative for the approaching Sabbath.

13. Come to the word with expectation. Whenever you attend upon the
Ordinances, look for something, yea, for greater things from the hands of God.
They are vigilant who are in a waiting posture. Beggars are not wont to sleep
before the gates of those from whom they expect an alms. The eyes of servants
look unto the hand of their Masters, and the eyes of a Maiden unto the hand of
her Mistress, when some boon and bounty is expected, Psalm 123.2. If out of a
clear sight, and deep sense of our own unworthiness, weakness, wretchedness, we
came unto God for supply of wants, assistance in service, satisfaction in
doubts, assurance of his love, solace in midst of sorrows, or the like, we
should be more yare, and full of life in managing our addresses than we are.

14. Pray hard unto God, and be very importunate with him:

1. That he would chain up Satan, and rebuke the Tempter, who sneakingly, and
maliciously haunts the Assembles of the Saints, as a sligh observer, and busy
disturber, standing at their right hands ready to resist them.

2. That he would affect your hearts with truths delivered. Stirring affections
are attended with a sharp attention. Men do not look upon themselves as highly
concerned in the commands, promises, menaces of the word, and hence arises
that listless, and sluggish frame that is upon them.

If with Peter's Hearers, we had the keen arrow of conviction sticking fast in
our sides, and making us to blush, and bleed, the floodgates of our eyes would
be open, for swelling streams of penitential tears to come gushing out amain;
and in stead of sleeping and snoring, there would be sighing, sobbing,
lamenting, moan-making, smiting on the thigh, and curious inquiring after a
remedy for this malady. On the other side, if at the hearing of the word the
Spirit should be pleased to come in and breath upon us with a fair and fresh
gale of comfort; if the love of God should be shed abroad in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost; if some bright beam of heavenly light should be darted into the
inner man after a dark, dismal, stormy, tempestuous night of temptation,
desertion, disconsolation, dejection, it would undoubtedly scatter those clouds
of sleep and security that are wont to hang upon our dull and depressed brows.
A warmed heart is a waking heart. Sorrow duls the eye, but joy makes it lively,
and sparkling,

I have read of a gracious woman, Mr. Clarks Mirror. page 508.
who at the Supper-Ordinance, being abundantly refreshed with the joys of the
Spirit, gat home (as she professed) she knew not how; and for the space of a
fortnight these raptures and ravishing joys continued, and filled her mouth
with Songs of praise, so that she could neither sleep, nor eat more then she
forced her self to do out of conscience of duty. It Is impossible we should
sleep with a full cup of consolation in our hands, and at our mouths.

3. That he would bestow upon the Minister a quick and powerful delivery,
which is wont to draw forth attention, and affection. A dull, heavy, unchearful
delivery in the Minister, does little better then invite a drouzy disrespect,
and is attended with a careless and undecent oscitancy in the Hearers.

15. If prone to miscarry in this kind, and to be oppressed with a spiritual
lethargy, you shall do well to humble your selves before God with fasting, and
prayer: possibly this sleepy Devil will not go out, but in the use of such
means, which do not infeeble and render unfit for service, but rather
strengthen, and exhilarate.

FINIS.

