Sixteen QUESTIONS OF SERIOVS AND Necessary Consequence, Propounded unto Mr.
John Cotton of Boston in New England. TOGETHER WITH HIS ANSWERS to each
Question.

Printed according to Order.

LONDON: Printed by E. P. for Edward Blackmore at the sign of the Angel in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Dear and Reverend Sir,
WE do humbly and earnestly desire a short and plain Answer of those
Questions underwritten, and at the hand of you, those things we desire your
speedy Answer unto: and though some of these we know your judgment in, yet
not for our selves only, but for others sakes we put them all in.

Reverend and beloved Brethren,
FOr an Answer unto your (Interrogatories, shall I call them?) or Questions.
Though I might without Sin refer you (as our Savior did the High Priest
when his Doctrine was questioned) to what I have ever taught and spoken openly
to the world, as having in secret said nothing else, John 18.20.21. Yet because
you are much more dear and precious to me, than the High Priest was to him;
and because Love thinks no Evil, and Truth fears not the Light: I have (by
the help of Christ) sent you (according to your Desire) a plain and short
Answer to each particular: wherein if I err, let me see mine Error, and try if
I shut mine Eyes against the Light. If in your judgment I hold forth the
Truth, then bear witness with me to the Truth, for the Honor of the Name of
Christ, and for the Peace and salvation of the Churches in our Lord Jesus, your
Lord and ours.

CERTAIN QUESTIONS Propounded by sundry of the teaching Elders in the Bay, to
Mr. John Cotton Teacher in the Church of Boston.
Quest. 1.

WHat the seal of the Spirit is?

2. Whether every Believer be sealed with it?

3. What ground from the Word of that distinction, a Broad Seal, and the other
seal; and the differences between them?

4. Whether a man may or ought to see any saving work of Christ in himself, and
take comfort from it, before he be sealed by the Spirit?

5. Whether the Testimony or Seal of the Spirit be so clear as witness
immediately by it self, without respect of any Work of Christ in a man; or so
constant, that it being once obtained, a man does never after question his
Estate?

6. Whether a Christian may maintain like constant comfort in his Soul, when
he has fallen into some gross Sin; or neglected some known Duty, as when
he walked most closely with God?

7. Whether a weak Believer may not warrantably apply some Promise to himself,
as given him by God although he does not yet discern his interest in it by the
Broad Seal of the Spirit?

Whether a Christian must of Necessity have his first Assurance from an
absolute and not from a Conditional Promise?

9. What you mean by Christian Sanctification, whether immediate Acting of the
Spirit, or infused Habits; if Habits infused; whether such as are contrary to
corrupt Nature, and all vicious Habits: and if so, whether you must not mean
the Image of God in Adam renewed in us, to be our Sanctification?

10. Whether this Sanctification being discerned by us, be not a true Evidence
of Justification?

11. Whether this Sanctification being discerned may not be, and often is a
Ground of Primitive Comfort, as it is an Evidence of our being in Christ?

12. Whether when my Justification lies prostrate, I may not prove my self in
a state of Grace by my Sanctification?

13. Whether evidencing Justification by Sanctification be a building my
Justification on my Sanctification: or a going on in a Covenant of Works?

14. Whether a Christian be not further active after Regeneration, then before;
if there be a difference, wherein it lies.

15. Whether it be not a safe way to conclude my safe Estate by my Practical
Reasoning.

16. Whether a Christian may not press the Lord for Spiritual Mercies, with
Arguments drawn from the Graces of Christ himself.

Now follow the Answers.
Quest. I.

WHat the Seal of the Spirit is?

Answer.

The Seal of the Spirit is taken by some good Divines to be the Sanctification
of the Spirit, as that which like a Seal:

1. Distinguishes, the faithful: 2. Consents. the faithful: 3. Confirms
the faithful:
Others take it for the Witness of the Spirit it self, as it is distinguished
from our Spirit, Romans 8.16. In which sense it is commonly used by our Brethren
in the Church: Though I my self do generally forbear to call it by that
Name, and do not usually call it, the Witness of the Spirit, least I might
give offense to any, who may conceive the Seal of the Spirit to be more
general.

Quest. II.

Whether every Believer be sealed with it?

Answer.

Every Believer is not sealed with the Seal of the Spirit, if the Seal be
taken for the Witness of the Spirit it self, but in the former sense, all
Believers be sealed with it.

Quest. 3.

What Ground from the Word of that Distinction, a Broad Seal, and the other
Seal, and the differences between them.

Answer.

I know no such Distinction between the Broad Seal and the other Seal: Nor
was that Distinction propounded by any of our Members, but by one of your
selves, who expressing his Conception in that Speech, one of our Members
answered him according to his meaning in his own word, if you call it so, says
he; Nevertheless thus much may truly be said: There is a difference between
the Witness of the Spirit, as it regenerateth and renews our Spirits; and
the Witness of the Spirit as it comfort us with evident Assurance of our
Adoption, Romans 8.16.

Quest. IV.

Whether a man may or ought to see any saving Work of Christ in himself, and
take Comfort from it, before he be sealed by the Spirit?

Answer.

A true Believer may and ought to see (if it be declared to him in the use of
the means) any Work of Christ in himself that accompanies Salvation (as
Cornelius did) before he be sealed with the Witness of the Spirit it self:
yet sull settled Comfort he cannot take, nor rest in, till it be witnessed unto
him by the Spirit: for Comfort without the Word is false Comfort, and neither
Word nor Spirit, do teach us to take any Comfort so much from the Work of
Christ in us, as from the Object of it.

Quest. V.

Whether the testimony or Seal of the Spirit be so clear, as to witness
immediately by it self, without respect of any work of Christ in a Man: or so
constant that it being once obtained, a man does never after question his
Estate?

Answer.

The Testimony of the Spirit is so clear, as that it may witness immediately,
though not without some work of Christ in a man, yet without respect unto the
Work: Nevertheless it is not so constant or permanent (at least not in all
Believers) but that a man after he has received it, may come in time of
Temptation to question his Estate, though not so frequently nor so desperately
as before.

Quest. VI.

Whether a Christian may maintain like constant Comfort in his Soul, when he
has fallen into some gross Sin, or neglected some known Duty, as when he
walked most closely with God.

Answer.

A Christian man cannot find like constant Comfort maintained to his Soul,
after he has fallen into sin, whether of Commission or Omission, as when God
keeps him in a close walking with him: For the Spirit of God in him being
grieved (and grieved it is by any gross sin especially) it will not speak
wented Peace and Comfort to him. If David fall into such gross Sins, as
Adultery and Murder, it cannot be, but the Bones of his Comfort will be broken,
Psalm. 51.8. Nevertheless, the assurance of a man's good Estate, may be
maintained to him, when the frame and Course of his Spirit is grown much
degenerate, Isa. 63.16.

Quest. VII.

Whether a weak Believer may not warrantably apply some Promise to himself as
given by God, although he does not yet discern his Interest in it by the Broad
Seal of the Spirit.

Answer.

A weak Believer may warrantably apply some Promise to himself, and may have
it also given him of God, even whilst he is yet waiting for it, before he can
discern his Interest in the Promise, by the Witness of the Spirit it self:
For the Soul that waits for Christ, may come to see and know (by his renewed
knowledge) that he does wait; and may from thence conclude, that he on whom he
waits, will not absent himself for ever.

Quest. VIII.

Whether a Christian must of necessity have his first assurance from an
absolute, and not from a Conditional Promise?

Answer.

A Christian man's first assurance does arise from the Spirit of God, applying
Gods free grace in an absolute Promise. Or if in a Conditional Promise, it is
not to Works, but to Faith, and to faith* not as as it is a Work, but as it
reveals the free grace of God offered, and applied in Christ Jesus.

Quest. IX.

What you mean by Christian Sanctification, whether immediate acting of the
Spirit, or infused Habits: If habits infused, whether such as are contrary to
corrupt Nature, and all vicious Habits: and if so, whether you must not mean
the Image of God in Adam renewed in us, to be our Sanctification?

Answer.

I mean by Christian Sanctification, the fruit of the Spirit of Christ
dwelling in true Believers, working and acting in us, both infused Habits and
actions of Holiness, contrary to all vicious Habits and actions of corrupt
Nature. And yet I do not mean, that the Image of God in Adam renewed in us
(and no more then so) is our Sanctification: our Sanctification in Christ has
in it this more; Faith in the Righteousness of Christ, and Repentance from
dead Works, (and that which is the Root of all) the indwelling Power of the
Spirit, to act and keep Holiness in us all, which Adam wanted.

Quest. X.

Whether this Sanctification being discerned by us, be not a true Evidence of
Justication?

Answer.

If this Sanctification be evidently discerned, it is a true evidence of
Justification, a Posteriori; as Justification is likewise a true Evidence of
Sanctification, a Priori.

Quest. XI.

Whether sanctification being discerned, may not be, and often is a ground of
Primitive Comfort, as it is an Evidence of our being in Christ?

Answer.

I do not believe that this Sanctification being discerned, is a ground of
Primitive Comfort, though when it is evidently discerned* it be an Evidence of
out being in Christ. I conceive our faith depending on Christ is as soon
discerned, and sooner then our Sanctification by Christ; and yet, neither will
discerning of it yield settled Comfort to the Soul, till the Spirit of God does
witness from Christ, Gods thoughts of Peace toward him.

Quest. XII.

Whether when my Sanctification lies prostrate, I may not prove my self in a
state of Grace by my Sanctification?

Answer.

If my Justification lies prostrate (that is, altogether dark and hidden from
me (I cannot prove my self in a state of Grace by my Sanctification: For
whilst I cannot believe that my Person is accepted in Justification, I cannot
believe that my Works are accepted of God, as any true Sanctification.

Quest. XIII

Whether evidencing Justification by Sanctification, be a building my
Justification on my Sanctification: or a going on in a Covenant of Works.

Answer.

To evidence my Justification by my Sanctification, though it may seem at first
blush a plain and evident Phrase, yet is it indeed ambiguous, or at least
obscure: Give me leave to clear the sense of it, and then give you mine
answer. To evidence my Justification by my Sanctification, is no more at first
hand than to give or hold forth my Sanctification for an evident Argument of my
Instification: Thus far the Phrase is plain. But now when I give it for an
evident Argument, I may give it either for an evident cause or ground of my
Justification, or for an evident Sign or Effect of it. Again, when I give it
for an evident sign of Justification I may either give it alone for an evident
sign (having nothing else to show for my Justification) or I may give it for a
concurrent Sign, together with other Signs and Witnesses, which may make both
my Justification and my Sanctification evident and clear to my self and
others. Having thus cleared the ambiguity and obscurity of the Phrase, I give
you mine Answer distinctly in these several Propositions.

Proposition. 1.

To give my Sanctification for an evident ground, or cause, or matter of my
Iustication, is to build my Justification upon my Sanctification, and to go on
in a Covenant of Works.

Propos. 2.

To give my Sanctification for an evident ground or cause of my Faith, whereby
I am justified, as when I do not, nor dare not depend upon Christ for my
Justification, till I evidently see my Sanctification, this is also to build my
Justification on my Sanctification, and to go on in a Covenant of works. For
Sanctification (or which is all one) good works are not the Cause of justifying
faith, but justifying faith the Cause of them.

Propos. 3.

To give my Sanctification for an evident cause and ground of my faith (not
whereby I am justified, but) whereby I believe my self to be justified (which
they call the Faith of Assurance) this may be a building my Justification on my
Sanctification, or a going on in a Covenant of Works two ways:

1. If the Soul have no Evidence of his Dependence upon Christ for
Righteousness, nor no Evidence of his Effectual Calling unto Christ, and unto
faith in Christ (by the Fathers drawing him to come to him) but only he sees
an evident Change in himself, from a profane and civil course to a
sanctified Conversation; or at least upon that which is worse, to wit, upon
that which seems true Christian Sanctification, which indeed is not but a
legal Reformation. For when a man has bin humbled under the Spirit of Bondage
by the Terrors of the Law yet he may never come to feel his need of Christ, nor
his own insufficiency or unworthiness to receive him,

Though he may obtain 1. Restraining grace to keep him from known Sins. 2.
Constraining (or exciting) Grace to provoke him to Duty (or else his Conscience
sometimes terrified by the Law would fly in his face.


And though in this way he may find Comfort (as the Stony ground did; and
Thorny Soil much more) and so from this great Change he may build up to
himself the faith or Assurance of his Justification, yet in truth, in so doing
he builds upon such a Sanctification which is indeed a sandy Foundation.

2. To give my Sanctification for an evident ground or Cause of faith, whereby
a man believes himself to be justified, may be a building of Justification
upon Sanctification in another Case: to wit when we shall give a man no other
ground or Evidence of his Justification, but only from the Evidence of his
Sanctification: For the Publican did not (as the Pharisee thought himself did)
see any evident fruits of his Sanctification, but was deeply affected with the
sense of his Sins, so that he smote his Breast with the Anguish of sin, and
durst not lift up his eyes to Heaven through Confusion of face for Sin, but
only cried out to God to be merciful unto him in this sinful estate: and yet
by our Saviors own judgment) this man went home justified rather then the
other ( Luke 18.) though he saw no Evidence of his Sanctification, but rather
Evidence of his sinful Corruption. If any of our Brethren doubt hereof, I
would pray them to call to mind what some of them that lived in Essex have
heard our Brother Hooker and Mr. Rogers also teach soundly, and argue out of
the Word; that there be saving graces which are not sanctifying, but are
wrought before Sanctification, which yet may bear Witness to a safe estate
(and I may add to Fellowship with Christ, for there is no safety but in him)
before the Soul can see any Evidence of his Sanctification.

Propos. 4.

A man may give his Sanctification for an evident ground or Cause of his faith
whereby he is justified, and yet sometimes not build his Justification upon his
Sanctification, nor be under a Covenant of Works, but only sometimes go
aside to a Covenant of Works: As in Case, when a man is truly justified, and
sees it not, he does then betake him to his Works for the hastening of his
Assurance. As Abraham when he had long waited for the promised Seed, thought he
was justified by believing the free Promise: yet, for the more speedy
satisfying of his Faith and Hope, he turned aside to go into Hagar, (who was a
Type of the Covenant of Works) for the hastening of his sight and fruition of
the promised Seed: So there be sundry Children of Abraham (even of his elect
Seed) that having been driven out of their Sins by a Spirit of Bondage, and
finding a need of Christ, and their own insufficiency and unworthiness to
receive him: do therefore seek and wait for him (by the mighty Power of God)
in every Ordinance and Duty. Such men are already truly justified (though it
may be as yet they do not know so much) because this their seeking and waiting
for Christ, in the Sense of their own Need and Emptines and unworthiness, is a
true Act of a lively justifying faith. But now if such souls, because God may
tarry long, before they can see and feel Christ given to them, shall therefore
seek Christ in their own Works of Sanctification, and in the Promises and
Blessing given to such Works, and not finding such Works, can find no Peace
nor Assurance: Such Souls, though they do not build their Justification upon
their Sanctification, (for indeed they were truly justified before, while
they depend on CHRIST for Righteousness, according to the free Promise of
Grace, and so are truly under a Covenant of Grace) yet they go aside to a
Covenant of Works (as unto Hagar) to bring forth to the sight of Christ (the
seed of Promise) whom they so long waited for. The failing of such Souls is
this, that they having Christ laid in their Hearts, as the Foundation of their
Justification (though they know not so much.) Upon this golden and precious
Foundation, they build Hey and Stubble, in seeking, and settling, and grounding
their faith of Assurance not upon Christ, nor upon the free Promise of Grace,
nor upon the Witness of the Spirit it self applying the same, but upon the
Holiness of their own Works. In which Case, they are often put to many and
sad Doubts, ever and anon renewed upon them, till the faith and confidence,
which they had built upon their own Works, be at length burnt up with the
Fire of Temptation and the clearer Daylight of Gods Word and Spirit. And then
though their own Works, and their own Building thereupon be burned, yet
their Souls will be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

Propos. 5.

The Soul that has lain under the Terrors of the Law, and comes afterward
to see and feel his need of Christ, and his own strength and worth to receive
him* and does depend upon Christ for Righteousness and Mercy, he may come in
this Estate to see (by his renewed Knowledge) his dependence on Christ, and
withal some fruits of Sanctification that flow therefrom, as Prayer
(sometimes) with unutterable Sighs and Groans, Brokennesse of Spirit,
Mourning for sight of Christ, Longing desire after the sincere Milk of the Word
love of the Ministry that wounded him, etc. And seeing God helping him here,
he may thereby gather, that he that has begun to help him, will go on to
help him still. But yet to give these for certain Evidences of his
Justification, the poor Soul dare not, though another Christian of better
discerning, may justly so apply to him as good Evidences of his justified
estate. But nevertheless he will still seek and wait for further and clearer
Fellowship with Christ, till the Spirit of God himself do witness to him,
the gracious thoughts of God toward him in a free Promise of Grace, before he
can plead his own good works, (whether after Conversion or before) for good
Evidences of his Justification. For (as it has been observed by some of our
godly learned Countrymen) the graces of Gods Spirit in our Souls, are like the
Stars in the Firmament, which shine but with a borrowed Light from the Sun: If
the Sun were hid from them, their Light would be obscure: so is the light of
our graces, if the Spirit of God do hide his light from us.

Propos. 6.

But now if the Spirit of God do show abroad his Light into such a Soul, and
give him a clear sight of his estate in a free Promise of grace in Christ;
such a one evidently discerns both his Justification and his Sanctification;
and the one of them giving good Evidence to the other, the Blood to the Water,
and the Water to the Blood, and the Spirit to both, 1 John 5.6.8. And thus in
evidencing his Justification by his Sanctification, he does not build his
Justification upon his Sanctification, nor hereby go on in a Covenant of
works, nor go aside to it.

Propos. 7.

But though the Soul may gather Knowledge of his estate, from such Evidences
of Sanctification; yet if he shall therefore build his justifying Faith upon
such evidences, he shall again go aside to a Covenant of Works, though his
Person may be under a Covenant of grace; For justifying Faith cannot safely
build or rest upon any ground, save only upon Christ and his Righteousness.

Quest. XIV.

Whether a Christian be not further active after Regeneration, then before; if
there be a difference, wherein it lies?

Answer.

A Christian is more active after Regeneration then before, before Regeneration
we are not active at all in any spiritual Christian Action no nor in Proximam
Potentiam, Passive to receive help from God to do it, but after Regeneration,
Acts Agimus. If we act and go forth in the strength of our own spiritual
Gifes, without looking up to Christ, ye fall as Peter did, Matthew. 26.23.

Quest. XV.

Whether it be not a safe way to conclude my safe estate by any practical
Reasoning?

Answer.

It is not an unsafe, but a lawful way to conclude a man's safe Estate by way
of Practical Reasoning, so it be, the Reason be not carnal but spiritual.
One Proposition being expressed in the Word, or safely deducted thence; the
other being the experimental observation of a good Conscience, enlightened by
the Spirit of God, and looking up to Christ to clear the Conclusion from both.
Nevertheless a good Conscience will not satisfy himself in this way* till it
be established by the Witness of the Spirit; or if it should so satisfy and
rest it self for a Season, God will awaken it in time, to a Sense further need
of Christ.

Quest. XVI.

Whether a Christian may not press the Lord for spiritual Mercies, with
Arguments drawn from the Graces of Christ in himself?

Answer.

A Christian Soul is more usually wont to press the Lord for spiritual
Mercies, by Arguments drawn from his own spiritual Miseries and Infirmities,
then from the Graces of Christ in himself. Nevertheless, the Saints do also
make use of Arguments drawn from the Graces of Christ, when they do discern
the same in themselves* but they are usually such Graces whereby they go out
of themselves, and their own Strength and Worth, (as Faith, Hope, Desire,
Seeking, Waiting, etc.) or such as do express their spiritual Bent and
Inclination, or Affection, which they desire might be quickened and satisfied
with their spiritual proper Object or End, but the force of their Arguments
from those Graces, is fetched, not from the Force, or Fullness, or Power of
them, but from the Weakness and Emptiness of them.

Thus have you (according to your Desire) a plain and short Answer to all your
Demands, except the thirteenth; which being exposed to greatest Agitation and
Exception, I have spoken the more largely and distinctly to it; that so, I
might avoid carefully (as I see it needful) all Suspicion of Ambiguity and
Obscurity.

Now the God of Truth and Peace lead us by his Spirit of Truth into all Truth,
through Him, who is made unto us of God, the Way, the Truth and the Life. AMEN.

FINIS.

