AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF THE RIGHT Honorable SPENCER, EARL OF NORTHAMPTON,
WHO DIED A CONQUEROR At the Battle of Hopton-heath.
BAck, back ye too officious Tears, our Grief
Moves in a Sphere too high to find relief
From your moist Tribute: go, and help to mourn
At some dry Nurses Grave, or thirsty Urne
Of a Court Parasite, who there did lie,
While others fought, to beg their dignity;
Or if you like not these, your aid afford
At the scorned Fall of some great Edgehill Lord,
Who mounted on that Tarrace viewd the Field
With such delight as Gardens use to yield
Set with Brigads of Bones, or else French Box
Cut into Knots, for whose Familiar Pox
His living Carcass had for long time been
Steeped in Populion and Gum Seraphine,
That'mongst the Surgeons a dispute might be
Whether his Morbus were imbalm'd or he.
Bedew what hearse ye please, here is no room
For such light mourners at this Solemn Tomb*
But (ah) where is it? Northampton must not have
(Such is their inhumanity) a Grave;
To him who in his death deserved Heaven,
Five foot of Common earth would not be given.
Foolish and Cruel! in denying one
Ye have bestowed on him a Million,
Each noble English breast is now become
Recorder of his virtues, and his Tomb,
Who shall his name in lasting letters keep
When short lived Marble shall be laid to sleep,
When Brook, and Gell, and Pym, and Strode and Gray,
(That poor one-syllabled race) shall melt away
And dwindle into nothing, He shall fill
Times Brazen Leaves, that who come after will
Forbear great Acts, for fear there should not be
For them and him too, room in history.
But on ye Gallant spirits of the Age
He Will be content to crowd into a page
Rather then have his sacred Masters cause,
For which he dyed, Religion and the Laws
To bleed, for as his life was old and plain,
So in his death he did affect no Train
Or idle Pomp, like Kings who when they die
Often send a plague out to press Company
Of followers to wait on them, that so
They may in state salute the Shades below.
He did desire (so free was he from pride)
But two or three to attend his naked side
Unto his bliss; store of his friends, it is true,
Did strongly Court him for the journey too,
Witness the blood they lost that fatal day,
Witness the noble wounds they bore away.
But all their large endeavors could not move,
His Lordship did the better Courtyer prove:
To leave the Kings Troops full, to him was more,
Then to see old Charon tugg at's Ebon Oar
By the weight of his retinue --
He fell indeed (so nobly did he close
His life,) he fell with multitudes of Foes.
So in fair Beaumont* I have seen an Oak
When mercenary hands by many a stroke
Have made him nod, all tottering as he stood,
Threaten a ruin to the underwood.
But (alas) the Rabble that he slew that day
Was neither for his company nor way.
For as they met on bloody Hopton-plaine
They parted there too, never to meet again:
While his blessed Soul did up to Heaven fly
To wear an Anadem for his Loyalty,
And his most rightly ordered valor, they
Hunted quite counter down the other way,
Cursing that Ordinance made them Rebel,
And sent them to the Lower House of Hell,
Where that dark Close Committee shall not need
To make a post-nate Law for their black deed.
It is confessed he might have been alive,
But that he scorned breath as a Donative,
And that from them; he blushed to have it se'd
They gave him life, who their own had forfeited.
Heroicke Soul! how easy were for me,
To make whole Nature weep an Elegy!
I cannot view a shower, nor yet stood still,
To see a Spring come trickling from a Hill
To court a sportive Mead, but I could call
Them Heaven and Earth's tears at thy Funeral,
Night wears a sable Mantle, and for you
The Morn and Evening drop their pearly dew,
Autumn for grief tears off his tawny Locks,
The Trees weep Gummes, their amber-Grease the Rocks.
Lightning as Tapers at thy hearse I place,
And Thunder style but sorrows deeper Base;
When I the glances of fallen stars espy,
I fancy tears sent from Astraeas eye
To mourn thy loss: this I could do, but fear
Apollo then would pluck me by the ear,
And call me fool, tell me such wanton dresses
Would better fit the curled and amorous Tresses
Of silken Squires, who safe in a warm Town
Do choose to dye upon ignoble Down
Summond by surfets, rather then to feel
The shock of Mars locked up in manly steel,
Who lie at home (like to a boaking Toad)
To blast their Acts who are imployd abroad,
And (like blind veins through which the waters fall)
Make the pure springs taste of their mineral,
Who scarcely can their burial day out live,
And have no worth but what their Heralds give.
I could be angry now, but that I see
With what a gentle scorn he laughs at me
And my distempered zeal; pardon blessed soul,
I cannot my unruly grief control,
Nor think with patience how each family
Almost, but thine, parts stakes with Loyalty
And Treason, so abetting on both hands,
If God or the Devil can do it, to save their lands.
Thou sett'st but all thou had, thy estate, thy life,
Thy goodly offspring, thy heroic Wife,
That virtuous Lady, who like Niobe
Would mourn into a statue, but that she
Beholds thy picture in her noble Son,
Who after thee, being dead, made have to run,
But that Bellona in love with him assayed
To wound his foot, and so his journey stayed.
Greatest of Gamesters, why would thou hazard so?
What all thy Jewels at one desperate throw?
Who shall forbid my vexed Muse to call
Northampton now the Loyal Prodigal,
Who ventured his whole Stock? would others bring
Such aides, we quickly then should have a KING,
And Church, and Laws restored, which now do lie
Wounded by a many headed tyranny.
Becalme your rugged foreheads then, o all
Ye that lament this Lord's too hasty fall;
For though his age be shortne'd, it appears
He as gained in fame, what he has lost in years;
Though the one half of his days he has not told
Who dies with Honor Virtue makes him Old.
FINIS.

