In Trepidus mea Fata sequor

Plouell fecit
depiction of execution by beheading, on scaffold surrounded by soldiers AN
ELEGY UPON The most PIOUS and EMINENT, Doctor JOHN HEWITT.
I.
NAture and Reason both do plainly show,
After an Ebb we must expect a Flow:
Our late Experience makes this Maxim good,
A Flood of Tears succeeds an Ebb of Blood.
HEWITT's departure makes a Tempest rise,
His ebbing Body left us flowing Eyes.
II.
Come then, my Muse, let us labor to distill
Thorough the Limbeck of my mourning Quill
Such hearty Tears, that truly may invite
A Zealot to a perfect appetite
Of Love and Pity; and let those that never
Knew how to weep, now learn to weep for ever.
III.
But stay, my Genius, will these captious Times
Endure the touch of our Elegious Rimes
Without a prejudice? Be therefore wise;
This Age has reaching Ears, and searching Eyes:
If thou offend'st, my Muse, be sure to borrow
The privilege to charge it on thy sorrow.
IV.
Since he is dead, report it thou, my Muse,
Unto the World as Grief, and not as News.
Hark how Religion sighs, the Pulpit groans,
And Tears run trickling down the senseless stones!
That Church which was all Ears, is now turned Eyes,
The Mother weeps, and all her Children cries.
V.
Does Rachel mourn? Oh blame her not, for she
Has lost her Darling in his Infancy!
She looks upon it as a signal Cross,
But knows that he has gained by her loss.
She grieves, and hopes her griefs are understood,
Her Children that sucked Milk, may now suck Blood.
VI.
But hark! there is something whispers in my ear,
A Famine in Religion now grows near,
Her Zeal-parch'd Corn hangs down it is drooping head,
And turns to dirt, which might have proved good Bread.
How sad it is, that Children must not eat:
Religion will find Mouths, but where is the Meat?
VII.
Ah sanguine days! When such tall Cedars fall,
Danger draws near, and threatens Shrubs and all.
The senseless Ax, that nothing understood,
Cut off his Life, and died it self in Blood.
When Troy was burnt, the neighboring Towns did stand
Expecting then their doom was near at hand.
VIII.
'Twas He, whose careful Zeal, and zealous Care
Was always laboring duly to prepare
Religious Viands, that his Flock might be
Not pampered, but well fed with Charity:
But now, Ah now, he is willingly retired
Where he will be blessed, as he was here admired!
IX.
Blessed Soul! Since thy unhappy-happy Fate
Has so soon made thee more than fortunate,
I will surcease my grief, and only shed
Some real drops, only because thou art dead.
It Is Nature, not Religion, makes us weep:
Manners forbids a noise whilst friends do sleep.
X.
No more, my Muse, it is enough we know
He is transplanted from this World below
Unto a glorious Mansion, in whose Quire
There is no fear of Plots, nor thoughts of Fire.
That Court of Justice periods all his strife,
And gives what here he lost; I mean, New Life.
FINIS.

