An Extract OF LETTERS, Wherein is Related, Certain Remarkable PASSAGES From
YORK and HVLL.

AC:

OX



LONDON: Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Benjamin Allen in Pope's Head Ally,
August 9. 1642.

AN EXTRACT, OF LETTERS, FROM YORK and HVLL.
SIR,
MY Love remembered unto you etc. these are to let you understand, we are all
perfect in good health and courage, and plenty, although they thought by
stopping our fresh water, and burning our Mills, and begerting on us about to
have famished us, and did daily think to burn us, and cut all in pieces; yet
they have failed hither toward, and are last Saturday at night ^^ed all to
Beverly. I think they are not above 2000. Cavaliers in all (...) and the
Common Soldiers they have forced, will (...) affect them, ^et we marveile all
is so delayed, for we could not have expected, but that we should have been
in great miseries ere this, but such is Gods mercy unto us. The means that we
have done toward them has been but small, only, the light of our Gunnes
made in the Night reason, was terrible to them: and beside we have received
400. London Soldiers, that kept the Town, although but raw Young Men, yet the
report was something to them in a bad matter, and then we sallying out upon the
news of our aid, for there did 300. of our old Soldiers salley out, to a
Company that lay 3. Miles out of the Town, at a place called Anlaby, and there
made them all run away, killing not above one Man of them, and took 14.
Prisoners, one of them a Drummer that run away from us, that is now going to be
lasht about the Town, with all the Drums, for example, since this, they few
in all places thinking we shall be on the backs on them: yet yestterday being
Sunday, their came a Bark of our Town from Roterdam, and tells us, that there
is 12. great Guns now come to make a Batttery against our Town, for they are
mad for it, and do not let to say, if they had but Hull, they would soon make
the great City of London follow, thus we hear of their boasts daily, but we
have manned out the catches, and all Ships watch his coming; But a cunning
Knave is the pilot, the very same that did Land the other the Providence, he
was sent over to the Queen, and she (they report) gave him, a great reward,
and he will do what he can: they report they are going to York to make the
Randevouse there, but that does not make us secure, we watch daily, and no
Townsmen do offer now to speak any thing; and these in our Town that was the
Governors, opposites, offer Courtesies; and send money to the Soldiers to
encourage them to keep out the Malignant forces, that would not subscribe to
the Parliament Ordinance, which is much sport and joy to all well affected
people in our Town.

God be thanked Yorkshire grows good upon this business, for now they all
be stiffer for the Parliament then ever, and now they see the Parliament to be
friends indeed to the King and Kingdom. The Trained Bands were merely
deluded, for they were brought under a pretense to guard the Kings person, and
indeed they seassed the Siege, for as we hear, there was but threescore left
of one of the Regiments, and indeed if they had not had order, they would all
have gone without order, for they came not to fight against us, nor to starve
us, and the quarrel grew so hot in the Kings Army, that the Soldiers beat the
Officers, and they did cut and flash some of the Popish Captains: Thus the
quarrel in the Kings Army seassed the Siege.

YORK the 5th. of August.
From HULL.
THe King has called all the Country together, both Horse and foot, desires
the foot to lend him their Arms, and it shall excuse their Service, and
desires the Gentlemen that have Horse, to lend money, and that shall excuse
their Service, but indeed I think both Horse and foot are already so weary
of the Service, that they will not stir, and that is perceived by the King,
for we had a very small appearance.

I hope the times will mend presently, if it be true that the Horse and foot is
come out of London, yet some say the King will meet them with a great power. I
pray you pray for us: I have stirred nothing at all, and I hope now it is as
safe in Hull as in any place, other men have sent out all, and wife and
Bearnes, and some are fled themselves, but the most wife and child are you: I
did never fear this so much as the plague, for the cause did persuade me with
courage: my sins are great, therefore I do strive to do what I can for the
cause of God and the Country, to redeem former neglects. Thus having not
further, but the Lord God bless the King, and keep his good heart from all
false Counsels, and incline it to the Parliament, which I hold his best, that
he may enjoy the benefit, and God the glory: So having not further, but to
remember me to you, and all yours, and thank you for your care and love
toward me, I Rest.

Hull, the 5 of August, 1642.
FINIS.

