By the Council of State.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas the Parliament assembled at Westminster the third of November, One
thousand six hundred and forty, is now dissolved, and the Enemies of this
Commonwealth, in this Interval, are likely to take advantage, to carry on their
designs, for disturbance of the Public Peace: And taking notice of the great
Confluence of Papists* and other disaffected persons, at this time, to the
Cities of London, and Westminster, and places adjacent, with Intention,
probably, to put in execution their said designs, whereof, their great boldness
and confidence expressed both here, and in several parts of the Nation, gives
just occasion of suspicion, and more then ordinary apprehension of danger, to
those who are well affected co the Peace of the Nation: For preventing the
dangers that may be occasioned thereby: The Council have thought fit to publish
and declare, and does hereby enjoin, and require all, and every person and
persons, born within this Commonwealth, being a Papist, or Popish Recusant, and
all, and every person and persons, who have, or has at any time born Arms on
behalf of the late King against the Parliament, or since, in pursuance of that
Interest, and every of them (who shall not have leave from the Council of
State, or the Lord General of the Army to the contrary) do before the Twenty
fifth day of this instant March, or, if under restraint, then, within three
days after his or their enlargement, repair unto his, and their place of
dwelling, where he or they* usually heretofore made their common abode, and
shall not at any time after, until the First day of May next ensuing, return to
the Cities of London and Westminster, without like leave or license. Or if such
Papists, or Popish Recusant, or other person aforesaid, have no certain place,
dwelling, or abode, within this Commonwealth, that then all, and every such
Popish Recusant, and other person aforesaid, do, by the time before limited,
remove to the distance of twenty miles at the least from London or Westminster*
and not at any time after return until the said First day of May, without
license as aforesaid, upon pain of being apprehended, and proceeded against as
disturbers of the public peace. And all Justices of peace, Commissioners of
the Militia for the City of London, and the respective Counties and Cities of
this Commonwealth, and all other Officers, Civil and Military, are to
apprehend, or cause to be apprehended all, and every such Papist, and Popish
Recusant, and other person or persons aforesaid, as shall be found at any time
after the said Twenty fifth of March, until the said First day of May, within
the Cities of London and Westminster, or within Twenty miles thereof, contrary
to this Proclamation: And to secure all, and every such person or persons so
offending in the premises, to be proceeded against as aforesaid. And likewise
to seize on, and apprehend all, and every person and persons whatsoever, who
shall raise Tumults, or shall practice, or complot against the public peace
and safety, or make disturbance within this Nation, or hold correspondence with
any the enemies thereof, and them to secure till upon notice to the Council,
further Order shall be therein given. And all Officers of the Ports, and
Commanders of Ships, are required to apprehend and secure all suspicious
persons that shall pass the Ports, either going, or coming from beyond Seas,
without leave of the Council, till the Council, upon notice, take order therein.

Saturday the 17 of March 1659. At the Council of State at Whitehal
ORdered, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published.

Jo. RUSHWORTH,
Clerk of the Council.
Printed by Abel Roper, and Thomas Collins, Printers to the Council of State.


