blazon or coat of arms
By the Committee of Safety of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, etc. A PROCLAMATION Inhibiting all Meetings for the Raising, or
drawing together of Forces, without order of the ^ai^ Committee, or the Lord
Fleetwood.
WHereas it has pleased God in his all-ordering providence, to cast the
present Care of preserving the public Peace and Safety of these Nations upon
this Committee, who, upon a due sense and consideration of their Duty* conceive
themselves obliged both to God and their Country, to use their utmost
Endeavors for preservation thereof, most especially in such a season, wherein
they must needs expect, that partly, through endeavors used by the common
Enemies, and partly through the inadvertency and animosities of some friends,
the continuation of the Peace and Welfare of these Nations will be in apparent
hazard; and their intended provision for the Liberty of the good people of this
Commonwealth, both as men, and as Christians, in a Settlement of a Government
of these Nations, without a King, Single Person, or House of Peers, thereby
interupted and retarded, to the great prejudice and disturbance of the People.

And whereas this Committee have understood, That several Meetings have been
held, wherein matters, tending to the disturbance of the public Peace, and in
favor of the Enemies thereof, have been asserted and promoted, whose
influence, if not prevented, may tend much to the public prejudice.

They do therefore Declare and Order. That no persons whatsoever, upon any
pretense whatsoever, do maintain, or frequent any Meetings within the Cities of
London or Westminster, or late Lines of Communication, or within any other the
Counties, Cities, Towns, and Places of this Commonwealth, thereby to draw
together, or to contrive or endeavor the drawing together of any Forces
whatsoever within this Commonwealth; nor to Countenance, Abet, or Promote any
Assemblies, Meeting or Meetings in order thereunto, without the particular
Order of this Committee, or the Lord Fleetwood, or by Commission or
Instructions from or by either of them, upon penalty of being reputed and
proceeded against, as enemies to, and disturbers of the Peace of this
Commonwealth.

And this Committee do Declare, That if any persons do, from and after the
Seventh day of November, One thousand six hundred fifty nine, Assemble, or Meet
together, to Assert, Promote, Countenance, or Abet, or in Order to the
Promoting, Abetting, or Countenancing the Matters aforesaid, without order as
aforesaid, such persons shall be had, reputed, and taken to be disturbers of
the Peace, and enemies to the Settlement of this Commonwealth.

Given at Whitehall the 5th. day of November, 1659.
ORdered by the Committee of Safety, That this Proclamation be forthwith
Printed and Published.

William Robinson, Clerk of the Committee of Safety.

London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to the Committee of
Safety, 1659.


