THE EARL OF PEMBROKES Farewell to the KING, At his departure from the TREATY
In the Isle of Wight; With His Majesty's REPLY.

ALSO, His SPEECH in the House of LORDS, at his return safe home from the
Treaty.

Taken Verbatim by Michael Oldisworth.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed in the Year. 1648.

THE EARL OF PEMBROKES Farewell to the KING.
May it please your Majesty,
I Am now to take my leave of you; yet I intend not to leave you quite, and not
see you again, and yet by God I may too: Damme this Leaving has been the
undoing of the Kingdom, for had not your Majesty left White Hall, the
Parliament had not left you; nor had the Army seized on you: It Is an old
Proverbs, Leave is light, but this leaving has produced many a heavy business
in this Nation. Your Majesty is now in the hands of Hucksters, Damme and
Hacksters too; Your Majesty had better to have signed to the Propositions of
the Parliament at first, unsight or unseen, without quirks and Queries of
Conscience, then there had been no more to do with you; You might have been
before this time with us in your Parliament House, and then the Army might have
been with the Devil for me; Now they in^^nd to try ye; Indeed you are the
Kingdoms Trustee, and by God, in my judgment, they ought to try ye before
they Trust ye. They have fought against you and your Majesty has fought
against them, and if they had not conquered you, then your Majesty might have
conquered them; Your Valor they have suff^ciently tried a^ready, and your
Patience too, and think you that they will spare your Person; No, they will try
ye, and you shall have the same play as they desire themselves when they beg
to be tried by their Peers, and pray are not those your Peers that have won it
by the sword; and if they have wenne it, by God, J see no reason but they may
we are it too: Jf J fight with another man, and beat him, and disarme him, is
not that man at my mercy, and have not J power to to kill him if J will? Let
Law be what it will; you know might overcomes Right; Damme, J can hardly right
mine own Name, but yet J can ^ight my self if J am abused by one that is
weaker then my self; but if he be stronger then my self, J can as well take an
affront as offer it. For the Treaty, it is now ended, and so it might have been
before it had began, for the good it has brought the Kingdom: Damme, 'twas
never good World since this Treating was invented, Treating and signing, and a
great deal of of stir, to no purpose; a great deal of Pu^pit- prating, but no
practice, a great cry, but a little wool quoth the Devil when he shore his
hoggs; 'Zblood give me the substance, and let the Sign go where it will;
Signing, Damme J think we are are all signed with the Sign of the CROSS, for
nothing prospers that we take in hand; Zblood sure we are be witch'd with a
Shee-Owle, for all the Nations in Christendom whoots at us; Nay the Great Turk
himself (J have clean forgot his Christen Name) hates to have any Commerce with
us we are grown so perfixious and disloyal; Damme, would J were a Turk too,
for they have a thousand times more regal honesty then we that swear and lie
on purpose to deceive and ruin one another; make Covenants and Vows to God, on
purpose to ensare and entrap our Brethren, that so we may make a prey of them;
And now we must have Levelling with a pox to 'em, every man's Estate shall be
alike, No King no Prince Duke, Earl, Barron nor Knight; what the Devil would
they have us be trow ^an any body tell? For my part, J ^m an O^^^m^n and i^
they think J deserve not as much Honor as my Lord Say, Let 'em Say what they
will, call me Spade, Parliament Man, Gaffar; Mouth omnipotent, or what they
will, it is all one to Phillip^ for J have so much understanding, as to know my
Age i^ honorable; and therefore if they deny me my Honor, they cannot deny me
my Age, and that it is makes me honorable: and if they will not suffer the
Lords to sit, nor have an eggetive Voice, then J can hold my tongue in an
affirmative Voice, or sit as a mute in the House of Commons, and speak their
dumb shows for them: For my Religion, I can keep that to my self, and neither
trouble God nor man with it: By God I think it is Religion has set this
Kingdom on a sight flame, for too much Light is a deadly consumer, I know it
by my House; Damee, too much Light burnt it down to the very ground, and so
will these New Lights burn down not only the whole Kingdom, but the whole
World too at the last day, I am sure it makes me twilight to think on it, for I
grow sleepy, and will hasten to an end, on^y I^e give your Majesty a word of
destruction, and conclude: Damme, Content is a Kingdom over, and over, or top^y
turvey; therefore you must be content; beside Patience is a Crown, and if
impatient men uncrown you, your Patience must Crown you again; (that is Patience
perforce) so you exchange but one crown for another and al know, Exchange is no
robbery: S^nk me, I am as impatient an Ass (If I be but thoroughly vexed,) as
any creature living; yet I can have Patience, and suffer too, (to prevent a
mischief) nay, suffer my self to be crossed too, (over the back with a switch) by
a base Scot too, and yet had the Patience to suffer this, rather then raise a
War; a Pox of this Warring for me, and this jarring too; I am sure I am not a
thousand pounds the better for it; though some I could Name, (and not be a
false SPEAKER) that have purchased thousands a year by it; Damme, I hate
fighting, for it was I that swore at your Majesty for fighting against the
Scots, and caused you to withdraw your Forces, and come safe home again, and
Jockey to jogge back into his own Country; And this I did to prevent War;
and by God would do as much again to prevent War, and the ru^ne that
follows it, and would do my business (if need were) in any place, to bring
home a happy, welcome, and long expected Peace.

Your Majesty knows I am an ill Ornitor, therefore as I began, I will make an
end; And leave you to the will of the Army.

Your Majesty's humble servant, P. Pembroke.

His Majesty's Answer to my Lord of Pembrokes SPEECH.
My Lord,
AMidst all my miseries you make me merry; I have no more to say to you, but
that in my fall, you may behold your own, and that suddenly; For my part, I am
rewarded Evil for Good, from them that pretend themselves Saints, and the most
Godly party, but indeed the worst of sinners, and most disobedient of my
subjects, as appears by their former professions and late actions, not only
against me, but against the authority of both my Houses of Parliament; My Lord,
when I demanded 5. Members, upon just evidence of guilt; Was it not adjuded
both by you and them a grand breach of Privilege? And if by me (a King,) so
great a breach, pray what is it in them, that take away 11. at one time, seven
Lords at another time, and now some 40. or 50. more? God forgive them, I do,
and am armed to suffer whatever their malice can allege, or their rage act
against me; I ask, nor expect mercy from them, but look up to One that is able
to deliver me, and mine: Nothing afflicts me more then the Sufferings of my
oppressed People; yet my hope is, That HE that has given me (their King)
strength to bear the heaviest burden of woe, will enable them (my Subjects) to
bear the lighter; But our hope is in God. My Lord, farewell, I expect hourly an
end of all my Troubles, and then begins your own, and then comes theirs that
caused both;

Yours, C. R:

My Lord of Pembroks Speech in the House of Lords, at his return from the
TREATY.
My Lords,
DAmme, I mistake your Titles, I may call you as well Spades, Down-diddles, or
any thing; for down you must, that is flatt; levelled; all fellows now: By God
it is but just with us, if the Army would pull down our Breeches and whip us: we
have sat these 7. years to pull down the King (with a pox) and now we must be
pulled down our selves by a p^cky General (Army I should say.) 'Zblood,
Treating; the Devil shall Treat next for me; Damme, I knew the effect of
Treating before we went: We must go (like so many Hobby-Horses) to the Isle of
Wight to Treat with the King, and then come home again (like so many
Doccer-heads) to Entreat a company of Shack-ragg lousy Soldiers. Damme, our
soldiers are now our Kings, Dukes, Lords, Preachers, nay and Cash-keepers too;
'Zblood we are like to have a through Reformation indeed, for if you are not of
their Judgment, you shall be run through, and through again; a bloody Canish
Religion indeed. I am Chancellor of Oxford; 'Zblood I had better be Master of
the Bare-garden, and Deform Bears in stead of Scholars, when I my self must be
taught and governed by Scullars, Brewers and Tinkers, and a company of
thin-skulls that have no more hare then with, nor no more with then honesty,
and yet more craft then Conscience, more cruelty then coin: I thank God I am
neither Soldier nor Scholar; but an upright Commonwealths-man. It Is confessed,
I have been a Privy Counselor, but Damme, I scorn to be an Evil Counselor;
though I have unjustly given sentence in the Starr-chamber, and Counsellboard;
for evil, I thought none; and could I Act Evell and not think evil? No,
evil be to them that evil think, and J thank God J can justify my innocence
by my Jgnorance; Before J would Evil Counsel Kingdom, Par^iament or Army,
J^^ (...) Barly-Broath in Hell eternally with the Malignant Commons; Damme, J
hate to Traitor my Lord and King the Kingdom, which consists of the Body of
the People, which makes a King, and may as well mar a King, who is but their
Trustee, or Deputy; Damme J acknowledge no other King then my Sovereign Lord
the Common People, who is both Creator of King Parliament, and all other
Officers and Ministers of Justice: Damme, a Plow-boy is as much a King, (if my
Lord the PEOLE p^ease) as King Charles; beside a plowboy is the maker of a
King, and ought not every King to acknowledge his Maker: Jf he claims the
Kingdom by the Norman Conquest; then by God, my Lord Fairfax may lay claim to
it as well as he, for he has conquered it again from him; and if Lord or
Earl be usurped, or derived from the Danes, who as Chronicle-makers say, were
called Lurdanes or Lord-Danes, because they lived Lordly, or idly upon others
labors, as many of our Army do; therefore if Lord be a Title of Reproach, and
not of Honor, we may thank the Army for taking away this Reproach from us;
For my part Sirs (for LORDS I will not call you) they shall not need to take
away my Honor or Titles, for I hold it more honorable to submit my Honor and
Titles to them that knows better how to support them then my self; therefore
for my part, let them take them, I lay them down, and see no reason but you
May do so to; Damme, you ought to submit, when you cannot otherwise help it;
and if you will still remain obstinate, then take what follows; And so the
blessing of Issachar rest continually upon you all.

SIRS J am never tedious in my Impressions, and therefore include my SPEECH,
and desire you seriously to consider of the scope and sirrup of what I have
said,

Your Honors Servant. PEMBROKE and MONTGOMERY.

FINIS.
Vera Copia.




