AN ALPHABET OF Elegiack Groans, UPON The truly lamented Death of that Rare
Exemplar of Youthful Piety, JOHN FORTESCVE, Of the Inner Temple, Esquire.

By E. E.

Chronogram.

DIes MortIs CharIor est nataLe.

(...).

London, Printed for Tho. Heath, in Russel Street near the Piazza's of
Covent Garden. 1656.

AN ALPHABET OF Elegiack Groans.
ELEG. I.
ALas! why sigh I thus? why do mine eyes
Bubble up sorrow at these obsequies?
Such outward symptoms of my grief are small,
My soul weeps inward at his Funeral.
That Anguish lurks in secret, whose dread smart
Wrought into the Bottom, undermines the Heart.
Tears then adieu: only heart-blood can be
Convenient drops for such an Elegy.
I Have lost Half of my Soul! Strange Fates that give
To one thus spirit-wounded power to live!
My OTHER I is dead! Could Atrop sever
Two thus made one, so jointly knit together,
Unless by cutting both? Oh no! his Death
Has wrastled out my Life, though not my Breath.
But what, shall I confine to mine own Breast
This common grief, of which the World s possessed?
A springing Cedar's fallen, so fair, so tall,
That all our Hearts are earthquak'd at his Fall:
Which was so strangely sudden, as his Rise
To such Perfections was; it does surprise
Us with Amazement, that our Faces be
Badg'd with that Mark of Grief, Stupiditie.
'Twould seem to ease our sorrows, could we raise
Our words so high as to complete his Praise.
But this we cannot do, unless we could
Form our rough Brains in so exact a mould,
As that from them might flow in Teary shoures
So many Volumes as He lived hours.
Yet this we must confess; his Parts so rife
Made him far fitter for his death, than life.
Earth scarcely knew them; for, like Stars, they were
Less in her eye, 'cause unto Heaven more near.
He was God's Hidden Treasure; no Man's eye
Viewed all those Riches which in's soul did lie.
God now has taken him to his proper place;
But wresting out the Gem, He th broke the Case:
Yet 'twill be made again by sacred Art
The fit Enclosure of his better Part.
Why then lament we at his Funeral?
Ah! though he fell not, yet he seems to fall:
Just like a Star that is darted through the sky,
Which seems to fall, because it shuns our eye.
But, that our Eyes have lost their dearest sight,
May Tears conveigh them to the shades of Night.
My soul oreflows with grief; so full's my Thought,
That, like a Bubble, it is swollen to naught:
I Am grown so stupid, that by silence I
Can only speak so vast Calamity.
ELEG. II.
BE not my Lines Poetic: let them Faign,
That carry sorrow not in Heart, but Brain.
My waters of Affliction or'eflow
The Banks of Helicon: I cannot show
My solid grief in Verse; no Muses wing
Can bear the weight of my soul-suffering.
Sad groans and sighs are here articulate;
These, only these can signify such Fate:
For, when the Sisters Three so throw their Darts,
They fill each corner of our trembling Hearts
With helpless anguish; that there be no room
To hatch such words as may set forth our Doom.
What then, what shall we do? Grief streitly pent
Swells up the bigger: Pufft Hearts break, or vent.
Shall Fates, like Cutters, which men's Fortunes drain,
Thus stop our mouths, that we should not complain?
Ah! though our Tongues be tied, yet shall our Eyes
Drop down Expression of our Miseries.
ELEG. III.
COme on Eye-flouds apace: it is ease to weep:
Those wounds need washing which are struck so deep;
Least that they putrify: men in distress
Made blind with tears do see their grief the less.
O doleful Tragedies, which mortals find
Shut up within the closet of their mind!
Where Appetite with Will is discontent,
The one would not, the other must lament.
So they distractions raise within our Breast,
And we our selves give to our selves no Rest.
We joy, and mourn, and mourn, and joy again,
Now there is Sunshine, then Tempestuous Rain;
We joy that he is in Heaven, again we mourn
And wish our selves composed in his Urn.
Thus are our Thoughts revolved, as tho there were
No fixed Object which might stay them, here
Now He is gone, who was that Rising Sun
Which did attract each Exhalation
Of our endeared Hearts, like Phaebe, He
Seems to these eyes of Flesh eclipsed to be:
'Cause our inferior sight of Him's bereaven
By interposed Earth 'twixt us and Heaven;
Where now He Is firmly seated, and shall be
A Son of Light to all Eternity.
ELEG. IV.
DEad! oh! and were mine Ears then made to be
A Labyrinth t'inclose mine Agony;
Which through their winding caverns let in pain
Into my soul, never to go out again?
Farewell (if He be dead) farewell our joys
On sordid Earth; farewell those charming toys
The world affords: And it shall henceforth be
Our Life to think upon Mortality.
Blessed Saint that art at rest, now flown above
The reach of Fate, by th'wings of the Heavenly Dove.
Pardon, oh pardon, if our teary eyes
Bemoan not thine, but our own Obsequies,
Who daily die; and (which still makes us grieve)
There Is nothing in us, but our Deaths, does live.
Thy Death is dead, not thou: O may we then
Once die like thee, that we never die again.
ELEG. V.
Emblem of Virtue, from whose Noble eye
Heroic Height mixed with Humility
Shone forth a peerless Paradox; whose soul
Divinely big swells out of that weak scroul
Which it involved: So us our griefs compel,
That since thou went to Heaven, Earth seems our Hell;
And this is our due portion: for it is just
That we should faulter with these Clogs of Dust,
Until Gods love, the true Prometheus Fire,
Our Earthen Hearts shall blessedly inspire,
By whose ascendent virtue we may be
(Like Thee) raised up to Immortality.
ELEG. VI.
FAith is so weak it cannot see
His Joys; or our perplexity:
Oh! we have drunk in so much Gall,
That now we have no Taste at all.
Black Sorrows wrapped up in a Mist,
May whiffle us now where they list,
And (like Hob-goblins) they conspire
To lead our thoughts into the Mire
Of stupid anguish, where we find
Naught else, but that we have lost our Mind.
But ah, what Friendship is in this;
That we do so deplore his bliss?
O tell us not of that: our Tears
Have (like their cause, his Death) no Ears.
ELEG. VII.
GReat in true Goodness! Rich in Mind
As well's in Lands, and Birth! we find
No Epithet fit to set forth
The full Encomium of his worth.
His Youth was Aged with Piety,
Which seemed of such antiquity,
That whosoever knew it, would
Conceit Him in his Nonage Old.
Er'e He could look abroad to see
The Worlds enticing Vanity,
God fixed His Eyes on things above,
Which straight way took his chiefest love:
And so on Earth of Earth bereaven,
He hovered 'twixt it, and Heaven.
Fond Ranters shallow Gallantry
He rightly judged mere slavery
To Tyrant Sin. Streight-living He
Enlarged his Soul to Sanctity.
Each day he thought upon his last,
And now at length in have He past
Out of this World; indeed, as tho
He would not tell us that hee'ld go
So quickly from us, lest our Eyes
Should show His Joys our Miseries,
And so disturb his pious Breast,
Rejoicing at approaching Rest.
He fitly went to Bed so soon,
Whose very morning was High-noon.
ELEG. VIII.
HEre let us stay our mournful looks, and see
Deaths sums cast up in an Epitome:
For All our Lives are lost in Him: we have
(Strange Fate!) our Souls entombed in his Grave;
Nay, it is not so, but thus: our Hearts struck dead
In our (yet walking) Corpse lie Buried.
ELEG. IX.
I-nricht with Poverty of Spirit,
O-n nothing less then His own Merit
H-e set his Thoughts: His Soul so bright
N-ere viewed its own Celestial light.
F-ame He abhorred; whose feeble wings
O-ft whirleth up the lightest things,
R-are Virtues, as were his, do fly
T-oo lofty for the Worlds squint Eye.
E-ach Gem of His rich Mind did even
S-end up its Sparks as high as Heaven:
C-hrist (seeing it Divinely good)
U-nstrips His Soul of Flesh, and Blood:
Those tiresome Rags: even so away was hurld
Elia's Mantle, when he left the World.
ELEG. X.
KNow, know we not that Death is gain
To such as lived like Him? complain
We then for naught? why should our Eye
Set forth so vain Hydrography,
Wherein described we seem to see
Whole Floods of Sorrow, though there be
No reason for it? are we bedight
With Black for Him, on whom The Light
Of men so shines? are we Distressed;
Perplexed, Unquiet at His Rest?
Lets not betear our Eyes, unless it be
For want of the sight of His Felicity.
ELEG XI.
LO, how our Grief rebounds, it rages worse
When we endeavor to restrain its force.
The Flood gates of our Eyes set open, the spout
Of Tears stopped in, will gush the faster out.
Come; since necessity will have it so,
Let what gave th'cause, give end unto our woe;
And let us be plunged in sadness till we find
That we have or'ethrown its resting place our Mind:
Yea so let this distract our Thoughts, that they
Never find contentment in these Vaults of Clay.
ELEG. XII
MIght we not think 'twould come to This, that he
Spent all his time upon Eternity,
As if he came into the world t'obtain
An happy passage to get out again?
Ah, how could we expect His longer stay,
When we perceived him to make have away.
Full fraught with Grace, unto the joyful Port
Of Bliss, unto the King of Kings great Court?
Where He Is in Glory, here in Fame: and thus
His wished Death makes him Amphibious.
ELEG. XIII.
NO more be Fates called Black, since through them He
Has gotten his white cope, and liberty
From all that Dungeon-darkness which we are in
Whiles hudled up within these Clouds of sin.
The Thread of's Life regained he now does see
Stretched through the Ones of all Eternity.
Thus Atrop juggleth still with Pious Men,
And cuts their THREAD to make it whole again.
ELEG. XIV.
O That some Seraphim His praise would sing,
Or lend a Quill plucked from his heavenly wing,
Whereby it might be writ for it does decline
His Commendation that is not Divine.
Young Muses are unskil'd in such grave Theams,
And hardly can acquire the Sovereign streams
O'th Well of Life, for Helicon, as should
Those that would cast their Verse in such a Mould,
That it might form his Praise. That must not be
Verse Rampant which sets forth Humility.
Pens lightly praising Piety mistake,
And, like bad Pensils, blot the work they make.
Great Ornaments not suited well, deface,
And often Encomiums mis-exprest, disgrace.
He that would show His sacred Worth, must be.
A Limner of Incarnate Sanctity,
Which if Men knew both it and Him, would sure
Be thought His fit and only Portraicture.
ELEG. XV.
PUmpt Helicon runs muddy; and that strain
Must needs be jarring, that is wrung out'oth' brain
Distracted with true sorrows, which combined,
Root out all Concord 'oth' afflicted Mind.
Such Lines as should vvear Mourning, may not be
Dressed all-a-mode in the garb of Poetry.
Verse pricked with grief goes lame. There never appears
A Phoebus amongst so many Showers of Tears.
But yet we will write, tho vveakly; some may call
Perhaps our Faults here artificial:
Men stutter most at greatest things: it is fit
At such bright Theams to shut the Eyes of the Wit:
That vvhiles (our passage stopped) vv'are at a stay
We may make known the hardness of the way.
ELEG. XVI.
QUake Ranter-Gallants, and despair to be
Exempt from Deaths untimely stroke, since he
Is fallen so soon, untainted with a Glance
Sparkling from Lust, or vain Intemperance;
Which hasten on your Fate, whose every Eye,
As well as Mouth 's enslav d to Gluttony.
You live so loosly, that your Lives may be
Slipped from you by the rrue Mortality.
Then through His Death cast thoughts upon your own,
And so His Life shall in your lives be shown.
ELEG. XVII.
RAge Tyrant Death: whatever thou can do,
Is but to force Him to overcome thee too,
As well as this vain World: thou strik'st, but He
Repells thy blow, and gains the victory.
He could not put thee to this shameful flight,
Until that thou had first began the Fight.
Thou strip'st him of His robes; it is true, but He
Now wears these Trophies that He won from thee.
ELEG. XVIII.
SOon ripe, soon rotten? false! that Bud which springs
So soon in Grace, shall by the King of Kings
(Pruned by his servant Deaths all-cutting knife)
Ingraffed be into the Tree of Life.
Rotten? Oh no: our soon-ripe Saint puts on
A Life that never shall see Corruption.
'Twas time for Him to leave the world, for even
Here upon Earth His soul was fixed on Heaven.
ELEG. XIX.
TEll us no more of Lands, and Wealth: we see
They are naught else but winged vanity;
They fly from us, or we from them: but they
Who from the Treasure of Gods Word convey
True wealth into their sacred souls, shall be
Alive in death, and rich in Poverty.
Hence 'twas renowned, peerless Saint, that thou
Would scarce look down upon these things below,
But, shutting thine exterior Eye, did find
The sure sight in the eye of thy clear Mind.
ELEG. XX.
Unruly passions! shall we still
Go mourning thus against our will?
We know it is vain to grieve; again
Our knowing this is all in vain.
We Are so entrapt in the Fates dire gin,
That struggling clasps us faster in
Our hearts with sorrow frozen, thaw
At the Sunbeams of Reason's Law:
And so the Knowledge that our Plaints are vain,
Since it cannot help, makes us the more complain.
ELEG. XXI.
WE on this subject cannot be dry,
Whiles Helicon flows in our Eye
Our heart's the pumpe of sorrow: so
It Is full still of successive woe,
That, when it is exhaust by the Pen,
There springs up new, to fill 't again.
Our lighter Thoughts may make us weep;
Some in our souls are sunk So deep,
That they cannot be fetched up by Art,
Unless the Tripod of our Heart
Should be made visible, from whence
Phoebus might spend his Eloquence.
But now, alas, since that we find
No Emblem to set forth our Mind,
How shall we show our griefs, which are
Too weighty to be born in the Air,
Or eke transported by a Quill
To public view? Go too: we will
Add this grief more unto the rest,
That our vast Griefs cannot be expressed.
ELEG. XXII.
YOung Saint Farewell! My work is done,
Although it want perfection:
But, when we speak unfaigned grief
The largest Rhet'rick's to be brief.
He that does thus himself bemoan,
Cannot make an artificial Groan.
His shattered words he will so state
As shaken by the hand of Fate.
Whoever has a soul like me,
Disturbed with an Ecstasy,
Thrown on me by Deaths forked Dart
Shot through the White of my sad heart,
Wherein was seated He, in whom
Now dead I see alive my doom.
I le Groan no more by book, the Smart
Of whipping Fate makes me by heart
To learn such groans as do rebound
Upon our Breasts with Silent Sound;
These chiefly mount to Heavens Ears
Accompanied with unwept Tears,
Which a soul-seeing Eye may find
Congealed within our stupid Mind.
Farewell, Blessed Saint! a Farewel's only true
To them (like thee) that bid the World adieu.
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...):
(...)
(...).
FINIS.

