THE AGREEMENT Of the General Council of Officers of the Armies of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, together with the rest of the Officers and Forces in and
about London; to which the rest of the Officers and Forces of this Commonwealth
by Land and Sea, are desired to give their concurrence.
I. THat the Government of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and
Territories thereunto belonging, be in the way of a free State and
Commonwealth.

II. That they will not have Kingship to be exercised in these Nations, nor any
Single Person to exercise the Office of Chief Magistrate over the same.

III. That there be no House of Lords or Peers.

IV. That the Legislative and Executive power be destinct, and not in the same
hands.

V. That all those persons, and every one of them, who have sat or acted as a
Committee of Safety, and all persons who have acted under them, or any of them,
be Indempnified in their Persons and Estates, for all such things as have been
done by them, or any of them, or by any acting under their Authority, in
pursuance of the Instructions given to them by the Council of Officers.

VI. That there be an Act of Indemnity and perpetual Oblivion, both to
Persons and Estates, for all and every thing and things, acted, done, or
spoken, or ordered, or suffered to be acted or done with respect to raising of
Forces, issuing of money, administration of Justice, and proceedings in Courts
of Law or Equity, or otherwise, since the first day of October, 1659. except
such as have acted, done, or spoken, for or on the behalf of Charles Stuart.

VII. That such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though differing in
judgment from the Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline, publicly held forth,
shall not be restrained from, but shall be equally protected and encouraged in
the Profession of the Faith, and Exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse
not this Liberty to the Civil injury of others, and to the actual disturbance
of the public Peace on their parts. Provided this Liberty be not extended to
Popery or Prelacy, nor to such as, under the Profession of Christ, hold forth
and practice Licentiousness. And that all Acts, Ordinances, Orders, and all
clauses in any Acts, Ordinances, Orders and Customs, to the contrary, be
forthwith repealed, made null and void.

VIII. That the Arrears of Pay to the Armies, Forces, and Navies of this
Commonwealth, now due or incurred to them, or any of them, be with all
convenient speed satisfied and paid.

IX. That the Armies, Forces, and Navies of this Commonwealth, as the same
stood, upon the ninth day of October last, be continued and maintained, under
the same Conduct, as the same stood upon the said ninth day of October, for the
Security, Service, and Peace of this Commonwealth, and not be disbanded, nor
the conduct altered, until the Cause contended for be secured, and the
Government of this Commonwealth, as is before proposed, be effectually settled.

X. That We whose Names are subscribed, do hereby promise and engage, by the
help of God, to stand by and assist each other in the obtaining of the said
things beforementioned.

Thursday 22. of December, 1659.
ORdered by the General Council of Officers, of the Armies of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, that this Agreement be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas Sandford, Secretary.

London, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Army, 1659.


