THE EARL OF ESSEX HIS Loyalty and love TO HIS KING and COUNTRY. With his
five Propositions propounded to his Army, at his late Siege at SHREWSBURY.
Wherein is apparently manifested his faith and love to God and his Country.



London Printed for G. K. oct. 20. 1642.

The Earl of Essex, his loyalty and love to his King and Country, with his
propositions propounded to his Army, at his late siege at SHREWSBURY.
HIS Excellence the Earl of Essex, still endeavoring for the good and welfare
of his King, and a peace and fraternity to and amongst his Subjects, having had
several parties, and more debates concerning our now conditional estate, yet
finding no love from thence but mere opposition, and still thirsting more and
more for the effusion of blood, of the Malignants of this now distressed
Kingdom of England, and still craving from our sovereign Lord the King a fair
reconciliation, (without more effusion) between himself and his Parliament,
and having informarion that the Kings most excellent Matie. intends with all
expedition to seize into his custody, as many and so many of the strongest
holds and forts of this Kingdom, as possibly he may, leaving therein a
sufficient Garrison of men and Arms to oppose the happy and hoped proceedings
of this Parliament, our lives, liberties, estates and privileges are more and
more endangered. His Excellence out of his especial love, and abundant care of
the good of his King, parliament, and Kingdom, caused sufficient aid of men
and Arms, to be dispatched and conveyed to all such Cities, Ports, Forts, and
strong holds as mght prejudice the good effects of this Parliament, and therein
sufficient Garrison, to oppose the Malignants of this agrieved Kingdom, to the
comfort and good of all countries, especially the well affected party of this
Commonwealth.

And therefore in especial wise did admonish and impart these ensuing
particulars, for the better satisfaction of every particular conscience:

1. That the sufferances we have undergone are reduced into two heads: The
first concerning God, the next the Commonwealth.

2. And as it is the first cause concerning God, so it deserves to be the first
fruits of our labor, being the first and immediate honor due to God, and of
great weight and validity, and more inestimate then this vast Universe.
Therefore we ought to serve in Gods cause to draw a blessing on our King and
Kingdoms cause.

3. The Commonwealth has for a A Tyrannical Government, if perfected.
long time groaned under a most heavy burden; and the poor distressed Subject
sadly laments, still hoping to be relieved, he being scarce able to distinguish
between Law and Power: the one of great consequence, and a branch of
tranquillity, Law and Government, yet abused; the other a Power which overruled
that Law and Government cum privilegio.

4. That God having weighed his cause, finding it stuffed and ramm'd with
manifold works of Satan, and more and more endeavoring still to creep in, he
in especial wise took upon him his own just and irreproveable cause, and
raised us as instruments for so good a work. And that being performed, our
King is not only blessed by a rich possession, in enjoying the blessed and
plenteous flowing of the Gospel, but also an eternity hereafter.

Therefore as you are Members of God, and Subjects to our Sovereign Lord the
King, first in Gods name put to your helping hands for Gods cause, your King
and Kingdoms cause, and for a confirmation of that hoped blissful comfort
(the Gospel) which shall bring us and our posterity in the future to eternity,
and for a blessed and comfortable reign to our dear Sovereign, and his
Royal Progeny, the good and comfort of our present condition, the liberty,
privilege, and freedom of a Christian Subject, and for a happy and blessed
union between King and people: and therein we are ever honored, and our
selves worthy to be called Gods children.

Here in is manifested and made known the faith and love of so good a Subject,
both in Gods cause, his King and Kingdoms cause, and it is hoped that no honest
indifferent Subject, that aims at the well and peaceful reign of our
Sovereign, and the peace and welfare of this Commonwealth, can any way repine
or be offended, but rather add to their love and loyalty, from hence a better
portion.

God save the King and Parliament.
FINIS.

