blazon or coat of arms
An Order and Declaration OF THE COUNCIL of STATE, Concerning the Determination
of several Claims now depending before the Commissioners for removing
Obstructions.


WHEREAS by an Act of Parliament bearing date the twelfth of October 1652.
Entitled, An Act for further impowering the Commissioners for removing
Obstructions, to determine Claims, The Commissioners named in one Act of
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for transferring the Powers of the Committees for
Obstructions, or any four of them, were Authorized and Required to hear and
determine all Claims and Causes not then determined, upon Petitions formerly
made to the said Commissioners, or to the late Committee of Parliament for
removing Obstructions in the Sale of any Manors, Lands, Tenements, or
Hereditaments, by any Act or Ordinance of Parliament before that time appointed
to be sold, with and under the Proviso therein mentioned and expressed; And
whereas no time is limited by the said Act for the Determination of such Claims
and Causes as aforesaid, by reason whereof several Persons, who have long
since put in diverse Claims before the said Commissioners and Committee, do
delay the prosecution of them, whereby great Obstructions are made in the sale
of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments: It is hereby Ordered
and Declared, That the time for the hearing and determining of the Claims and
Causes mentioned in the said first recited Act of Parliament, shall be until
the first day of November next coming, and no longer; And that all persons who
shall not get Allowance of their respective Interest, from the said
Commissioners for removing Obstructions, by or before the first day of
November, shall be, and are hereby barred, and concluded, for and in respect of
their said Claims and Interests.

Given at the Council of State at White Hall this 16. day of June 1653.
Thursday June 16. 1653.
At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That this Order and
Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

John Thurloe Secr.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, Henry Hills, and Thomas Brewster, 1653.


