seal of the Commonwealth
Wednesday the first of June, 1653.
AT THE Council OF State AT WHITE HALL.
WHereas diverse of the Inhabitants of this Commonwealth did in the year 1642.
and since issue forth considerable sums of money by way of Adventure for
Lands forfeited in Ireland (upon the late Rebellion) according to sundry Acts
and Ordinances of Parliament granted in that behalf; in pursuance whereof, and
that every Adventurer may receive satisfaction by lot, where his Divident of
Land shall be. It is therefore ordered by the Council of State, That
Methusalah Turner of Cheapside London Linnen-Draper, Robert Hammon of
Broadstreed London Merchant, Henry Brandriffe of Wallbrook London Merchant,
Nathaniel Manton of Iron-monger lane London Merchant, Elias Roberts of
Broadstreet London Merchant, (...) Doctor Hubbard of (...) Doctor of (...)
Francis Blomer of (...) Esquire, Colonel George Gill, and Lieutenant Colonel
Fenton, or any five or more of them be entrusted, and are hereby Authorized to
examine the truth of all men's claims by comparing their Receipts and
Assignments with the Original Books, and shall cause an Entry to be made in a
Book fairly written and kept for that purpose, of all and every such sum and
sums of money (in words and not in figures) as shall be by them allowed; as
also of the names as well of the first Adventurers, as of the person or persons
now claiming the same: And shall likewise cause a transcript of the said
Original Books to be written, and therein make from time to time as they shall
allow of any sum a Memorandum upon the sum so by them allowed and there
entered; that the same is allowed to the end the same may not be again
charged. And the said Committee, or any five or more of them after the claims
are cleared, shall contrive and appoint such a method for the management of all
men's lots as to their utmost skill shall be most free from all offense and just
exception. And to the end all Adventures for Lands in Ireland may have
knowledge, and take notice hereof; It is further Ordered, That in Grocers Hall
London, upon the twentieth day of July next ensuing, being in the year of our
Lord 1653. by eight of the clock in the morning this Lottery shall begin. And
the said Committee, or any five or more of them are further Ordered to admit so
many Adventurers to join in one and the same lot as shall desire it. Provided
no one lot exceed ten thousand pounds, and no more lots for the Province of
Munster then shall amount unto one hundred and ten thousand pounds. For the
Province of Lemster two hundred and five thousand pounds. For the Province of
Ulster forty five thousand pounds, accounting all moneys as doubled brought in
upon the Ordinances of the 14 of July 1643. and the 30 of November, 1647. to
make up the said sums; and in the second alotment for Counties, no one lot to
exceed five thousand pounds; and no more lots for the County of Waterford then
shall amount unto twenty thousand pounds. For the County of Limerick thirty
thousand pounds: For the County of Tipperary threescore thousand pounds: For
the County of Eastmeath fifty and five thousand pounds: For the County of
Westmeath threescore and ten thousand pounds: For the Kings County forty
thousand pounds: For the Queens County forty thousand pounds: For the County
of Antrim fifteen thousand pounds: For the County of Down fifteen thousand
pounds: For the County of Armagh fifteen thousand pounds: And after Alotment is
so made, to ascertain what quantity of Land is due to each of the said
Adventurers, according to the rates for the respective Provinces, mentioned in
the Act of Parliament in that behalf, and the measure allowed by the said
respective Acts and Ordinances, within which such Adventurer comes: But for
avoiding the inconveniences that may arise from observing English and Irish
measure, in the surveying and setting forth of the said lands, and that
nevertheless the Adventurers to whom it does belong, may have the benefit of
Irish measure: It is Ordered, That for such of the Adventurers as have a right
thereunto, the said Committee shall compute and set down how many Acres English
measure such Adventurers proportion in Irish measure does amount unto: And
shall accordingly give unto each of the said Adventurers a Certificate, what
number of Acres (according to English measure) is due unto him, either by force
of the said Act, or in lieu and satisfaction of his proportion of Acres Irish
measure, according to the said former Acts and Ordinances, which Certificate
under the Hands and Seals of any five or more of the aforesaid Committee,
shall be a sufficient Warrant for every Adventurer receiving the same, to make
his claim in Ireland? And the said Committee shall cause an entry to be made in
a Book for that purpose, of all and every Certificate and Certificates which
they shall give to any person or persons, expressing the sum in words and not
in figures, the name of the first Adventurer, and of the person to whom such
Certificate shall be given, together with the proportion of lands due to him,
as the same shall be contained in the said Certificate: and shall cause a
Transcript thereof in a Parchment-Roll to be made and transmitted into the
Chamber of London, there to remain as a public Record. Provided always, the
right of Election for Provinces in the manner of Alotment, be preserved unto
such as have, or shall claim the same upon the Ordinances of the fourteenth of
July, 1643. And the thirtieth of November 1647. And it is further Ordered, That
the said Committee be authorized to receive one penny upon the pound, of and
for every Adventurer, for so much land as he shall be entitled or lay claim
unto, toward the defraying of all incident charges here for carrying on this
service.

Ex: Jo: Thurloe, Secr.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black Spread-Eagle, at the West End
of Paul's. 1653.


