THE LATE PROSPEROVS PROCEEDINGS Of the Protestant Army against the Rebels in
IRELAND.

Being a true and perfect Relation of a great and happy Victory obtained by the
Marquess of Ormond, the Lord Lile, Sir Richard Greenvile and their Forces,
over General Preston and a great body of the Rebels; In which Battle their
whole Amry was totally routed, about forty of their chief Commanders slain,
and at least 2000, common Soldiers, to the great encouragement of the one, and
terror of the other.

As it was sent in a Letter from a Doctor of Physic in Dublin, and received
here, April 11. 1643.

LONDON: April 12. Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Bailey. 1643.

Good news from IRELAND.
Worthy Cozen.
I Know you expect a Relation of what we did in our late proceedings against
the Rebels in these parts; I am now returned from the field, where we have
sufficiently dispersed the Rogues, and where out of a curiosity to see what
people did, I might as well have put a period to my life as any amongst them,
but being as I was an Eye witness of all, I can the more truly inform you
thereof, the particulars of our success in brief was this: First* We commoned
Martin Castle, and they yielded, but marched off without their Arms, It had
good store of Corn but was not very strong, then we marched by Baly-Shannon
and the Rogues appeared and shot at us from a far, but hurt none of us. That
night we marched by Tinmo-Linne, where they by ^^^t defied us, and some
Horsemen being drunk came out in a bravado, but Captain Treswell snapped one
of them, and the rest retired into the Castle, we took this Castle upon the
non-slot, it being manned by very desperate fellows of which some scorned to
ask quarter of Parliament Rogues (as they called us) and those maintained a
steeple by themselves till it was all battered to the ground, and they buried
in the ruins, such as asked quarter were promised. it by the common soldiers
which knocked them on the head as fast as they came down for their clothes,
such as had quarter given by Officers had it observed there were few of those I
think about four, we killed here, two hundred and in the rage of the
soldiers, some women and children were killed I was heartily sorry to see it.
The soldiers come to be so enraged for the death of Lieutenant Oliver, a very
gallant man slain by a stone from the battlements* we lost here ten men and
had many hurt. At this time we took in a Paltry Castle at moon, there they
went without Arms also, then we marched thence having staid before Tinmolin
two days and on the way Captain H^rm^n met us who told us how near Carlo he
had notice of some of the Rogues which were gathered together and marching to
General Preston, they were about four hundred of which he killed two hundred
and took one Captain and twenty prisoners, he lost never a man in the
business.

Thence we marched onward (as General Preston might judge by our course to
Washford) and in the way took a Captain of Horse of the Enemies, one
Mosterson, Captain Pollard took him: but the next morning about two of the
clock, we couzined his expectation and went to Rosse, they never expected us
that way, for we saw them run out of their towns just as we came to the
townesside, and all the way till then we found the towns empty. We took early
in the morning two or three spies; who told us that General Preston quartered
that night behind the next hill which was but two miles off; our forlorn hope
rode up to the Walls of Rosse and were heartily bid welcome by them that kept
the Fort for they took them for some of General Prestons Horse, they might
easily have kept the Port till fresh horse had relieved them, and so have took
the town without loss of time or men, if they had known so much. This
opportunity missed made the Lord Lile and Sir Richard-Greenvile chafe inwardly,
it was so long ere the Foot came up and the Ordnance were planted, that
General Preston from the other side of the water presently filled it with men:
when we had made a breach we could not enter, we had left both our hand
Grenadoes and scaling ladders at home which was a foul fault. We had two
Majors shot, two or three Gentlemen of Companies killed, and 17, or 18. common
men, and above 40. shot. This made us al very melanchollique but the Marquess
of Ormond hearing that General Preston lay very near us, raised the siedge,
and we marched from Rosse to old Rosse that night to look for him, we saw many
of his Horse but they would not stand as soon as we were risen from Rosse, the
men within the town quit the town, and joined with General Preston.

The next day we marched all the morning within sight of one another but could
not come together for a great bogge: but about three of the clock we joined.
The enemy made five thousand shot upon the forlorn hope led on by Captain.
Atkins and at the horse which stood in order behind them and killed not one
man, in this time our Ordnance were drawn up (which by the assistance of some
seamen which were forced to leave their Ships in the River, and gunns also were
so well plied) that they made great slaughter. Then they marched with as much
resolution as men could possible up toward the Ordnance but so many fell by the
way that they began to rout, then the Lord Lile with his Horse encountered their
Horse which advanced also to meet him, and truly he and Sir Richard Greenevile
behaved themselves so, that many of them fell in the Skirmish, a great many of
their prime men were taken Prisoners, they fought gallantly for an hour and
half, their Horse till this instant (having never done any thing remarkable)
fought bravely, their Nobility and chief gentry rode as volunteers in Troops,
and like men they fought, but it pleased God not to prosper their endeavors;
There were killed in this fight Colonel Thomas Butler, Captain Edward Butler
and diverse other of the Butlers, Sir Beverly Britton was slain and Sir Morgan
Cavanah Captain Scarlough Captain of Horse, and (to be short) about Thirty of
their prime men, Cullein the Lieutenant general of the field, Serjant Major
Butler Lieutenant Butler, Captain Fitzgerald and three or four more of their
Captains taken Prisoners they never met such a counter buffe since the
rebellion. We were indifferent well revenged for Rosse, the force of the enemy
is judged and confessed to be about seven thousand the slain in the place
scarce two hundred. I viewed the field from one end to the other, but they were
above sixscore of them Gentlemen, and prime men that scorned to run away, a
great many died, as they marched away as we in our next days march found upon
the wa^ and in Hedges, we lost never an Officer and had but one hurt, that was
Sir Thomas Lucas a Privy Counselor, we lost about 15. men, but many were
wounded. The next day at night, General Preston quartered within half a mile
of us, but he had a great river betwixt us and him, he could not get 2000.
together, the next day had he not cut of the bridge we had been with him
again, as we understood by such as run from him to us, so great a fear had
possessed his Soldiers that he could scarce keep the few he had together. I
had omitted one thing, as Sir James Dilhon was bringing his Forces to join
with General Preston, Major Pigot. (I ween) did as much for him as Captain
Harman had done for those at Tullo, near Carlo: he killed above 200. of them.
That Dilhon is a Puppie, he has ever been beaten by all that have fought with
him most strangely. Now we marched homewards, and in our return did nothing
save taking in two Castles, nor had any hurt done to us save seven or eight
Oxen stole one night, and another night they fell upon the horse quarter, and
killed one Cope a Gentleman, and took two or three horses. You have the total
surely.

I have done with William Robinson, and shall make an end with you to if you
fail me one Posh. If my brother be not able to return me of his own money, he
is in slender condition, and I am (for a trick that I know) in much worse. I
see plainty Ireland will be won if we can get any money to subsist by, it is
pity so brave an Army should be starved. I thank God the best people here
value me beyond my desert far, and I find much civility from all, and I doubt
not Cousin but very shortly I shall be able to requite those courtesies which
you have showed.

Your poor friend and Kinsman E. E. Doctor in Physic.
Aprilis Primo, 1643.
FINIS.

