THE ENGAGEMENT OR DECLARATION Of the Officers and Soldiers of the County
Palatine of LANCASTER.

Together with their LETTER to the Reverend Ministers of the several Hundreds
of that County, desiring them to publish the said DECLARATION in their Parish
Churches.

As also The present State and Condition of that County, certified in a LETTER
to a well affected Citizen in LONDON.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed May 19, 1648.

Sir,
I Have enclosed sent you a Copy of the Declaration of our Soldiers: how far
it is owned you may discern; at the next general meeting it is expected to be
signed by all. We are gathering into a body for our own defense. And if the
news which came last night be true, the Enemy is marched into our County with a
Body of Horse: our Soldiery apprehend themselves in great straights; for if
the Army come down, and they join with them to suppress the Cavaliers, they
fear, and are very jealous that the Army will afterward fall upon them, and
suppress them. I cannot tell, but it is conceived by many well-affected to the
Cause we first engaged in, that if the Parliament do not new model the Army,
and displace such as are generally odious to the Kingdom, there will scarce
ever be an happy peace and settlement in the Nation. For should the
Presbyterian party and the Sectaries join to suppress the common Enemy, it is
(I say) very much to be feared they would afterward clash one with another:
for when those that adhere to the Covenant are put into a posture of defense,
they will never (I am confident) lay down arms to become tame slaves to the
Sectaries, who for all their specious pretenses, and flattering proposals, have
not hitherto really acted any one thing whereby our distractions may be
removed, and Truth and Peace, which is the desire of all good men, may be
perfectly accomplished. We are here wonderful inquisitive after your Affairs
in the City: we say here, that if you act vigorously, and improve all fair
means and opportunities, as every day God begins now to put into your hands,
you will give life to the whole Kingdom. I beseech you in your next acquaint us
what is done in altering your Militia, whether the City have the Tower in their
possession. If you be not more active then some represent you in their Letters,
we fear that you are only doing what will serve to justify your enemies in
destroying of you. But I hope better things, which is the daily prayer of

Your faithful and most affectionate Friend to serve you.

GENTLEMEN,
THe too frequent declensions of many that pretend to Religion from their first
principles, the misunderstanding, and diverse interpretations of our solemn
League and Covenant, as it may suit to private intrests, and the General
Apostasy of the age we live in, together with the grievous aspersions under
which we suffer, has enforced us to present you with this enclosed
Declaration, wherein we know well the weakness of the Language, and the
miscarriages that may be in the style; But we entreat you, to take well the
integrity of our intentionsin Conscience of our duty; And much desire if you
think fit, to publish it in your congregations to the satisfaction of all to
whom it may come, of our fidelity, And we shall remain,

Bolton May 9, 1648 Your very affectionate friends and servants Nich.
Shuttleworth Hugh Bradshaw Vghtred Shuttlewort^ James Chanbrell Richard
Radclyffe John Ashurst Henry Porter George Key W. West J. Butterworth Alex.
Tompson Samuel Birth William Emott William Waller William Gardner Thomas
Westmor George Cranage.


For the Reverend the Ministers in the several Hundreds of the County Palatine
of Lancaster.
The Declaration of the Officers and Soldiers of the County-Palatine of
LANCASTER.
WHereas we lately the Officers and Soldiers of the County Palatine of
Lancaster, having to our best knowledge behaved our selves as becomes loyal
subjects and faithful soldiers and servants of God, King, and Kingdom, are on
the one hand aspersed as Malignants and Enemies to the State, and fit to be
disarmed; and on the other hand, as Rebels, and Enemies to Monarchy, and the
Kings Majesty that now is: We therefore thought it requisite to declare and
express to the Deputy. Lieutenants and Committee of this County, That we own
the Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms in every branch of it, and
will not by any combination, persuasion or terror, be drawn from it. And more
particularly, in reference to the said aspersions, we do further express, That
we stand for the Fundamental Government of the Kingdom by King, Lords, and
Commons, according to the Laws of the Land, and the Declarations of this
present Parliament, before our first engagement: That we love, desire, and
should much rejoice in the Regal and regular Government of His Majesty that
now is. As for Papists, popish persons, malignant abettors of former
Innovations, Usurpations or Oppressions, or any other disaffected persons which
were, are, or shall be in Arms to disturb Religion, Righteousness, and Peace;
we from the bottom of our hearts do detest them, and with our lives and
fortunes will endeavor to oppose them. And we in like manner do declare
against Toleration of Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever is contrary
to sound Doctrine and the power of Godliness, so plainly covenanted and
declared against by the Ministers and others of this and other Counties: Nor
will we, nor (as we verily believe) the Soldiers of the County, be commanded
by any Gentlemen whatsoever of this County, or other Officers, which are justly
aspersed to decline from these honest and just principles, and to favor
Anarchy in Church or State; but will desire, according to the General Petition
of the County, for the putting of all such persons from Places and Offices of
Trust; knowing of our own knowledge, that the Kingdoms Cause has been and yet
is much disadvantaged by the preferment of such persons, and our party weakened,
yea and deserted by many, which would not have deserted it otherwise* Our
humble request therefore is, to the Deputy Lieutenants and Committee of this
County, which desire our engagement in this present Service, That they would
receive in good part this our plain and honest Declaration.

FINIS.

