By the Council of State. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS The Parliament assembled at Westminster the Third of November 1640. is
now Dissolved, and the Care and Preservation of the Public in this Interval,
is in a special manner, committed by Authority of Parliament, to the Council of
State, which Trust they are obliged and resolved in the Strength of God, to
perform with all Faithfulness to the Public Safety. And being taught by the
late dispensations which God has exercised these Nations with, that the
surest, and directest way, to arrive at that great and good End, is to wait
upon Gods Providence and Blessing, in the pursuit of those Methods, which, by
his preceptive Will, appear most regular, and orderly; Which being conformed
unto, may at last, after the many Motions and Revolutions that have befaln
these Nations, Fix the good People thereof upon right Foundations of
Settlement, and true Freedom; And having cause to apprehend, that some persons
(consulting more private Concernments and Interests) may, upon Principles of
dissatisfaction, attempt the putting of Affairs, out of that Hopeful way, into
which, the overruling Wisdom, and Sovereignty of Divine Providence, has at
present reduced them. The Council have therefore thought it necessary, to
charge and require (as they hereby do) all Persons, of what Condition soever
they be, to forbear any meeting or meetings, in order to the contriving, or
carrying on of any Declaration, or Subscription concerning Affairs of State or
Government; But that they do quietly apply themselves to a peaceable Submission
to the present Authority, and to expect, and acquiesce in such management of
public Affairs, as God by the influence of his Wisdom and Conduct, shall guide
them to, until the next Parliament shall be assembled and take further order;
Not doubting but the whole Nation shall in due time receive the Fruit of such
their Submission, and of the Councils circumspection and integrity for securing
their Rights and Welfare. And it is hereby declared, That if any Person or
Persons, after this Caution given, shall do any thing to the contrary hereof,
they shall be looked upon, as Enemies of the Public Peace, and shall be
proceeded against accordingly.

Saturday March 17. 1659. At the Council of State at VVhitehal.
ORdered, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published.

W. JESSOP, Clerk of the Council.

Printed by Abel Roper, and Tho: Collins, Printers to the Council of State.


