(...).

Astrologicall Optics. Wherein are represented the Faces of every Sign, with
the Images of each Degree in the Zodiac: thereby describing,

1. The nature and quality of every person, according to the Degree ascending
in the East at his nativity. 2. The virtue and signification of every Planet
through the 12. Signs. 3. A most excellent Description of the more hidden and
abstruse influence of in his with all other the Planets. 4. A Clear Explanation
of the signification of the Horoscope in any sign of the Zodiac.
Compiled at Venice, by those famous Mathematicians, Johann. Regiomontanus and
Johannes Angelus.

London, Printed for John Allen, and R. Moon, and are to be sold at their
Shops, at the Sunrising, and Seven-Starrs in Paul's Churchyard, in the new
buildings between the two North-doors.

On this Ingenious Translation.
WHat? Learned Angelus in English* Say,
Why deviat'st thou from the Latin way?
That Gallant Road! much beat by learned men,
Fathers, and Counsels; Speak! why turnd'st thou then?
Alas! Since Littleton has left the place
To Anchor there, th'ingenious deem't disgrace.
English is Hebrew grown; Latin poor Scotc'h!
We Pray in English; and in Latin watch.
Come then you Sacred Damsells, learn to Dance
By 'th Albion Music! Italy, and France,
Go shake your Ears! Brave Britain is the place
Of Princely speech; Romes Language is High-base.
But hark my Muse, must we damn Tully so,
And Execrate that Language, whence does flow.
All proper English: No, we will trim her Brow,
With Wreathes of Bays and Laurel; It Is her due.
'Twas not our Authors Aim to strangle her,
But by his English Version, to prefer
Her unto all; and for this end has he
Bestowed his Pains, that aftertimes may see
Old Angelus (A young Tree, bearing fruit)
Has got a work-days (well as Sundays) Suit.
He is so verdant in the English, that
My Poorer praise (Alas!) he needs now
What shall I say? If then Angelus be,
So Excellent in English; what is he.
In Highborn Latin? Surely he is as far,
Above the English, As the morning Star
Beneath the Sun; That serves for higher wits!
And this the ingenious Tire best befits.
Jo. Gadbury Philomath. To the Reader.
TAke here the fruits of some cold Winter-nights which I have painfully
sustained, being desirous that the works of this Ancient Author, (being scarce
to be had in the original) should not dye in obscurity but be revived to see
the light again: Though I have been both discouraged and prejudiced in my
intents to reduce what of art should come into my hands, into the English
tongue; not only by the ignorant and illiterate; (but their reproach I value
not; they doing but their dog-like nature, to bark at that which they know
not,) but also by some time-serving, selfe-ended, selfe-ayming,
selfe-applauding persons; to them I say no more but (...).

Reader, the discourse ensuing was penned above 200. years ago in the Latin
tongue at Venice, by a learned Author Johannes Angelus. It being now almost
gone out of Print; I have endeavored to revive it, and suit it to our English
fashion; here he first represents you with an emblem of Astrology; or an
jmaginary Ison of the ascension of every degree of the Zodiac; thereby-setting
forth a description of the nature and quality of every person, signified by
such an ascendant; which being well considered and weighed with the position of
the Planets, you may the better balance your judgment in the describing of any
person, native querent or quesited, In the next place follows the most copious
judgments on Nativities that ever yet were in the English tongue; with the
applications of the to every Planet: And as I have herein endured much cold,
and pains, in the writing of it; I hope you will reap much profit, in the
studying of it.

I think it needless to say any thing in the praise or vindication of
Astrology; its use and lawfulness being already well known: but only this I
would be glad, if the Vulgar people were not so apt to be frighted at those
Raw-heads and Bloody-bones, wherewith Mothers use to scare their Children from
running abroad: nor to think old women Witches, and such silly people, and
that they make Contracts and Seal bonds to the Devil, ride up and down in the
Air with him; dance abroad like Cats while their Bodies have lain as dead by
their Husbands (as if the Devil could take a soul out of the body and cause it
to return again! Vah) haunt peoples houses, and render them inhabitable.
Indeed these tales use Children to terrify one another with; but they could
never learn it, unless they were taught by some more Childish then
themselves; I wonder that these which have any wit in their heads, or at least
would seem to have, are not ashamed of such idle stories; but the Devil
indeed who is the Father of lies is their tutor, and his doctrine they will
follow; though neither they nor any man or woman in the world yet saw his
Cloven-foot; but he keeps his school in their own bosoms. And therefore St.
Paul teaches them how to make their defense against him. That ever there was
any such thing as Bill or Bond by any one Sealed to him, or any Contract or
Covenant by any witch made with him, is impossible to be true. I could never
yet learn where his Scrivner dwells nor who was witness to any of his Bonds:
if no witness, then certainly they are fools that let him take them in
execution upon his Bonds, and will not plead Nonest factum; and make him prove
his bargain, pertestes the Scripture says he is a Prisoner reserved in
Chains of darkness unto the judgment of the last day; and if so, then how he
can come abroad to drive such bargains, I do not know: but I believe the
brokers are his Factors, for amongst them there are many a simple Wizard,
drawn-in to seal devilish Bonds and Contracts indeed; at 30. pounds per cent;
and is not this the Devils interest? I am sure its no Christians, by their
Law. Some will say, that many have confessed themselves to be Witches: that may
be; many simple people or persons overcome with melancholy have imagined
themselves to be Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Froggs, Cats, Dogs, Fire, Water,
Rivers, nay any thing, and will not be persuaded by reason to believe
otherwise; then judge you what these will confess: Yet all this while I do not
deny, but there are Witches, and too many; wherefore it is Commanded, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live; but what these Witches are, those who have
two or 300 pounds a year to do nothing else but talk to you an hour or two's
discourse, in a week; might bestow the pains to tell you if they would: if
they do not, as soon as I have another opportunity, I will: But one of them
has pusled himself and all the wit he has to pusle Astrologers; and, very
wisely, for want of other Authors quotes those scurilous Ballads and Pamphlets
of Friar Bacon and Doctor Foster; which were idle stories impudently Fathered
on them since their deaths; just like the story of James Hind the great
thief; the pranks which they Printed of him, as done by him, are all in an old
tale-book, Printed above a hundred years ago which I had when I was a
Schoolboy; nay I have heard some persons impudently tell some things to have
been done by Mr. Lilly, which you may verbatim read amongst other stuff in a
story of George, a Green. And I verily believe when ever Mr. Lilly dies; the
Pamphlets of Doctor Foster and Friar Bacon will be new vampt in his name. I
cannot tell how he can think otherwise, having had the experience of so many
impudent lies imputed to him in his life time. But let every one learn to know
himself, and keep the Devil out of his own bosom and he need not fear him
any where else.

Reader here is also annexed a Sygil of to be made when he comes into his
Exaltation; which I have the rather put in, because the elected time is now a
coming: you may make an experiment of it, which happens but once in 30. years;
it was taken out of an Ancient Author: hereafter perhaps you shall see the
rest, in the mean time study the great book of God, and this; and you shall
see them both agree to your good; which that it may, is the desire of him who
is Amicus omnibus, inimicus nullis, nisi sibipsi.

A studio in Art Coelesti. 15. Jan. 1655. R. Turner.

William Lilly student in Astrology unto the Lovers thereof.
THis kind of Astrology now published by Mr. Turner, had its Original from the
Egyptians, and was first made known to us in Europe by the learned Jew Even
Ezra, from whom I conceive Johannes Angelus had those Notes, which he first
published at Venice 1494. and twenty years after reprinted; This learning is
properly termed Monomaeriarum Doctrina, or a part of the Doctrine of the
Spears; and may be of great Concernment unto parents who desire to know those
Magisteries or Professions which would best suit with the natural constitution
of their Children: For this is very true, that if the Nativity be exactly
rectified, and the true Degree of the sign arising, Horoscope or Ascendant,
exactly found out, and then compared with the Decanate or Face of that sign,
so arising; I say then, much of the Inclination of the Child will be found out,
and unto what Magistery he is most propense: and so the Parent may accordingly,
suite his Child with a Trade or Profession, answerable unto his proper Genius
or disposition, by which means the Native is like to prove an absolute Master
in that Profession, he shall be put unto. I am straightened of time, else I would
discover very manifold Uses of this book. The Author has very well translated
it, and delivered the Astrologicall sense of every sentence, judiciously, I
wish both the Translator, Stationer and Book it self; a kind acceptance: the
matter very highly deserving it. Thine,

William Lilly

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line 6. dele like. l. 12. dele in, and for righ read right. l. 15. r.
Laborious. p. 4. l. 18. after standing a. p. 5. l. 14. for retchlesse, r.
restless. p. 8. l. 11. r. of eod, r. and. p. 10.8. r. Covetous. p. 16. l. 22.
r. ascends p. 17. l. 11. r. the. p. 22. l. 16. for Virgo r. Saturn. p. 25. l.
16. r. a role. p. 27. l. 6. r. covetously, p. 33. l. 25. r. a Camel p. 45. l.
11. r. after shoulder, r. it signifies a man without Power. p. 48. l. 14. for
Venus r. Mercury. p. 53. l. 1. for Aries r. Saturn, p. 55. l. 27. r. of Pisces.
p. 59. l. 7. for Crump r. Cramp; l. 13. for Aries r. Mars, l. 20. for Leo r,
Saturn. p. 62. l. 1. for Aries posited, r. Saturn posited, p. 62. l. 9. for
Aries, r. Saturn. p. 63. l. 9. for Aries r. Saturn. l. 11. for. 6. r.
Conjunction. p. 66. l. 18. r. beholds. Pt 72. l. 2. dele valitious. l. 11. r.
rejoices. p. 74. l. 20 r. Herdsman. p. 75. l. 13. r. diaffected. l. ult. for
Taurus r. Venus. p. 77. l. 14. r. Jupiter. p. 82. l. 9. for joined to, r.
beholding. l. 12. r. he, be. p. 85. l. 8. r. Covetous. p. 87. l. 25, r.
Lamenesses. p. 90. l. ult. for, Saturn r. Mars. p. 95. l. 16. for and posited
r. posited and. p. 96. l. 19. fo. the Mars read that Mars. p. 103. l. 17. r.
lascivious. p. 114. l. 23. r. fortune. p. 116. l. 22. r. aspect. p. 122. l. 22.
r. the 6th. p. 122. l. 25. r. Sicences. p. 129. l. 14. r. Opposition. l. 24. r.
Mercury and Mars. p. 131. l. 18. r. opposite. p 134. l. dele they. p. 135 l. 8.
r. infamous, p. 135. l. 12 dele to. p. 141. l. 13. dele. Opposition or. p. 145.
l. 21. for quartile Mars p. 147. l. 1. r. great, l. 16. to r. and p. 152. l.
11. r. Courteous. p. 152. l. 13. r. women p. 152. l. ult. r. cruelly. 153. l.
r. wickedness.

John Angelus, OF Astrology.
CHAP. I. Of the Faces of the Signs, their Signification, and the Forms of
every Degree of the Zodiac; with the Condition and Description of the person
signified by them.
THe first Face of Aries, is of Mars, and it is a Face of Boldness, Fortitude,
Stoutnesse, and Immodesty.

The Second face of Aries is of the Sun, and is a Face of Nobility, Highness,
Rule and great Dominion.

The Third Face of Aries is of Venus, and is a Face of Subtilty in every work,
and of Meekness, of Play, Mirth and Beauty.

In the first Face of Aries, ascends a Valiant man Armed, holding out a
Fauchion in his right Hand.

In the Second Face, ascends a man in a gown like a Clergy man.

The third face ascends like a young woman sitting on a stooll, and playing on
a Lute.

The Forms ascending throughout all the Degrees of Aries.
In the First degree of, there ascends a man holding a Sicle in in his righ
hand, and in his left hand an Engyne of War.

A man then borne, or querent, shall be laboirous, and much exercised in
Warlike affairs.

In the Second degree of, there ascends a man having a Head like a Dog,
stretching out his right hand toward the Skies, and holding a Staff in his
left hand.

It denotes the man borne under that degree, will be a Litigious and
troublesome person and envious as a dog.

The Third degree of arises like a handsome man, stretching forth his right
hand as if he were showing the various things of the world, and applying his
left hand to a girdle bound about him.

It signifies a peaceable quiet person.

In the Fourth degree of, there ascends a man with a curled head of hair,
holding a Hawk in his right hand, and a whip in his left hand.

The person signified by this ascension, is seldom rich; but a spender of his
estate, consuming all he has in his age.

The First degree of Aries ascends like two men, one holding in his hand an
Axe, cleaving wood; the other, holding a Scepter in his righthand.

It signifies a person that will be a provident housekeeper; and a provider
for his family.

In the sixth degree of, there ascends a King Crowned, holding a Globe in his
right hand, and a Scepter in his left.

The native under this Ascension, will exceed all his kindred and acquaintance
in greatness.

The Seventh degree of Aries ascends like a man Armed all over, holding a
dart in his right hand.

It denotes a wary careful person, a preserver of himself.

In the eighth degree of Aries, there ascends a man having his head covered
with a Helmet, and no where else Armed, holding in his right hand a Crosse-bow.

Under this degree are signified quarrelsome contentious persons, and Murderers.

In the Ninth degree of Aries there ascends a man bare-headed, well clothed
over his body with a Gown, holding a sword in his left hand, with the point
downwards.

It signifies talkative persons full of words, and of a wonderful Spirit.

The Tenth degree of Aries arises like a man bare-headed, but clothed over his
body, pearcing a Bear through, with a spear.

It signifies a Forrester or Hunter.

In the Eleventh degree of Aries, there ascends a woman, standing holding a
Distaffe in her right hand.

It signifies Persons loving freind-ship and hospitality.

In the Twelfth degree of Aries there ascends an Eagle, spreading out her
wings over her young-ones, sitting under her.

It denotes ambitious persons, Proud, Covetuous of applause, and aspiring to be
exalted to dignity.

The Thirteenth degree of Aries ascends like a subtle person with his right
hand, holding a Goat by the horns.

The Person borne under him, will be wonderful famous.

The 14. Degree of Aries arises like a Captived man standing upright between
two pillars having his Arms bound with two Chains.

It denotes persons much Subject to Imprisonment.

The 15. Degree of Aries ascends like a man bare-headed, his arms stretched
out, and clothed with an Habergeon: it Signifies thieves, retchlesse, lewd,
and wicked persons.

In the 16. Degree, of Aries arises a man laboring with a dungfork; or
sometimes a man pouring water out of a pitcher.

it denotes a Fisherman or a Labourer.

The 17. Degree arises like a man standing Idle, Clothed in fine silk.

It Represents fine delicate persons.

In the 18. Degree, ascends a woman sitting on a Chair, holding up her right
hand: it denotes a man Loving peace and quietness.

In the 19. Degree of Aries, ascends a man clothed with an Habergeon standing
and showing treasure and money with his hands.

A Thief, Wicked, debauched person, is signified by this Degree.

In the 20. Degree of Aries, ascends a man with a Helmet on his head, and an
Ostrith-Feather in his Hat; Riding upon a Bull, Leading a horse in his
Left Hand.

The man born under this Degree, will be malicious.

The 21. Degree of Aries ascends a dog sitting and turning his face toward a
Lion.

It Signifies a faithful Companion.

In the 22. Degree of Aries, arises a Bear, sitting and holding a great Beam
in his mouth.

The man will be a wicked person that is signified hereby.

In the 23. Degree of Aries, there ascends 6. Serpents, three of them
fighting against the other three.

The man, then born, will have many enemies.

In the 24. Degree there ascends a naked woman, Covering her secrets with her
left hand, and holding up her right hand.

If the native be a woman, she will be desirous of a man; If a man, much given
to women.

In the 25. Degree of Aries, arises a man with Curled locks, Riding upon a
Ram, holding him by the horns.

It Signifies a Citizen covetous to bear rule.

The 26. Degree arises 2. Suns, one shining against the other.

A man bearing rule and keeping his power, is Signified hereby.

The 27. Degree ascends like a great Dragon, lying upon the earth.

A man that will be potent in his old age is Signified by this ascension.

In the 28. degree of Aries ascends a woman standing upright, being well
clothed.

It signifies a pleasant peaceable person.

In the 29. degree arises a Man holding a Saw in his hands.

A laborious person nourishing himself and his Wife by his labor, is signified
hereby.

In the 30. degree of, ascends an Austere Woman, leading a sadled horse in
her right hand.

The native under this degree, will be high-minded, ambitious to bear rule
over others.

CHAP. II. Of Taurus.
THe first face of Taurus, is the face of and it is a face of Plowing, Sowing,
building, peopling-houses, of learning and wisdom in the earth, and of learning
in Geometry.

The 2. is the face of the and it is a face of Power, Nobility, Dignity, and
necessity over people.

The third face is of, and it is face of misery, slavery, madness, necessity
and baseness.

In the first face Taurus, ascends a book, a young man tilling of the ground.

In the Second a tall man girt with a girdle, holding a Key in his right hand.

In the Third a decrepit old man leaning on a Crutch, hanging down one Arm,
and having a wodden leg.

In the First degree of, ascends a man leading a Bull to the slaughter,
holding a Staff in his hand.

It signifies a Hangman.

In the Second degree of arises a woman holding a horse-tayle in her hand.

It denotes an idle person.

In the Third degree ascends an old Woman naked covering her pudenda with her
left hand.

It signifies a Woman desirous of a man in her old age, and to continue young.

In the Fourth, a Woman holding a whip in her right hand.

In denotes a hasty angry person.

In the Fifth degree of, arises a Bull sitting in a Chaldron.

By this ascension are signified men loving hospitality, good housekeepers.

In the sixth degree ascends a man having three heads, and pointing to the
ground with his right hand.

It signifies a prudent wise and illustrious person.

In the Seventh degree, arises a beautiful woman standing naked.

It denores a man of a proud mind.

In the Eighth degree of, ascends a sorrowful Woman sitting upon a footstool.

It fignifies a man of a low humble dejected Spirit.

In the 9. degree of, arises a man holding a whip in his hand feeding Sheep
and Goats in a field.

The man then borne will be a Neat-herd or Shephard.

In the 10 degree of, ascends two men standing, with a Dog playing between
them.

It signifies an idle person, much addicted to venereous acts.

In the 11. degree, arises a Crow standing on the ground.

It demonstrates a covetuous person.

In the 12. degree, arise, two women standing hand in hand.

It imports a benevolent well minded man.

In the 13. degree of, scends two Women with Staves, smiting and striking one
another.

It denotes a troublesome, contentions, wrangling person.

In the 14. degree arises a man holding a Staff in his hand: hereby is
signified an appeaser of quarrels, or one restraining and bridling the
contentious.

In the 15. degree, ascend 7. fowls, flying in the Air.

It Signifies an instable wavering minded man.

In the 16. degree, ascends a man riding on an Ass.

It denotes a Sluggard, a man slow and tedious in all his actions.

In the 17. degreeof, arises a Bull bound by the middle to a tree.

It signifies a man much over-laden with daily labor.

In the 18. degree ascends two Bulls fighting one against another.

It denotes a raging furious man.

In the 19. degree, ascends a Woman pouring water out of one pot into another.

It signifies a smooth tongued person.

In the 20. degree of, ascends two Dogs, a fighting.

It demonstrates an envious person.

In the 21. degree, there arises a Bear looking backwards.

In signifies a wicked, malicious, and wrathful person.

In the 22. degree, ascend three men holding one another by the hands: the
person signified hereby, will be a lover of peace and friend-ship.

In the 23. degree ascends a man falling backwards to the earth.

It signifies, a man unfortunate in all things.

In the 24. degree of, ascends a crooked man holding himself up upon his staff.

It denotes a person weak and feeble in his Actions.

In the 25. degree, a man standing upright, and holding a Staff in his hand.

It signifies a valiant man, strong and powerful in his deeds.

In the 26. degree, a man standing showing his hand.

A peaceable person, or a peacemaker is hereby signified.

In the 27. degree, there arises the similitude of a field of wheat or Corn
standing un-cut.

This ascension denotes a gatherer together, and heaper up of riches.

In the 28. degree, a Woman leading a horse by the bridle.

It denotes a person desirous to rule over others.

In the 29. degree, there ascends a Woman leading an Ass with a Bridle, or
otherwise a Woman leading a he-Goate by the Horns.

Hereby is signified a Woman that rules over her Husband.

In the 30. degree of, there ascends a fair beautiful building.

Hereby is signified a person delighting to do pleasant and delectable deeds.

CHAP. III. Of Gemini.
THe first face of is of, and is a face of writing, of giving and receiving
money, of petition, and wisdom in unprofitable things.

The 2. face is of and is a face of burden, pressure, labor, and getting goods
by labor, and of unhonest actions.

The 3. face is of the Sun, and is a face of oblivion, disdain, of mirth and
jollity, and of hearing unprofitable words.

The first face ascends like a young man girt with a girdle.

The second like a man with an axe cutting wood.

The third, a man with a Hawk in his right hand, and a pipe in his left.

In the 1. degree of, ascends two men sitting on the ground holding one
another by the hands.

It signifies a joyful merry man.

In the 2. degree of, there ascends one man girt with a sword, leading two
other naked men bound.

The person hereby signified, will be a Jailer, or Theefe-taker.

In the 3. degree, arises a man singing and playing on a Lute.

It denotes a man, causing joy to others.

In the 4. degree, ascends a man leading his Wife by the hand.

It signifies, one keeping good hospitality and entertainment for others.

It the 5. Degree a man holding a Crossebow in his left hand, and a girdle in
his right.

It signifies a man preparing for war.

In the 6. a man holding a balance in his right hand.

It signifies a Merchant.

In the 7. two brides, hand in hand.

It denores a person, employed in nuptial affairs.

In the 8. Degree, ascends a Smith Smiteing on Iron, and a woman standing by
Idle.

It Signifies a person shunning labor, and loving Idleness.

In the 9. Degree of ascends a king fitting on a throne, having a Globe in his
right hand and a Scepter in his left.

Signifing a man shall have great power and Authority, that is born under this
degree.

In the 10. Degree, a man ascends lifting up another man from the ground.

It Signifies a person composing differences, freindlily, a among others.

In the 11. an Eagle fluttering with her wings over three of her young ones.

The man will be a South-sayer, or Conjurer that is Signified hereby.

In the 12. Degree, arise two women standing weeping.

It Signifies a Sorrowful person.

In the 13. three Crowns standing together on the ground.

It denotes a Covetous and Envious person.

In the 14. ascends two Foxes devouring Henns.

The man born under this degree, will be a glutton and Covetous.

In the 15. ascends a man having three heads.

It Signifies one of good understanding.

The 16. ascends like a Bridge beside the water.

It Signifies a man laboring without profit.

In the 17. Degree of, ascends a man without hands, and Idle.

It Signifies an unprofitable person.

In the 18. degree, a Fox running Swiftly.

It denotes a Laborious person.

In the 19. Degree ascends a poor man carrying a Staff on his shoulder.

It Signifies the man will be a travailer, a foot-post.

In the 20. Degree, three Snakes lying on the ground

The man born under this degree, will be wise and of good understanding.

In the 21. Degree, ascends a man sitting on Horse Back.

It signifies a Clyent or one retayning to another to have his Defense

In the 22. ascend two Birds Chattering together.

It Signifies a fowler.

In the 23. Degree a decrepit old man leaning on a staff.

It demon Strates a poor miserable Idle person.

In the 24. two women sitting at play together.

It represents one given to mirth.

In the 25. Degree, a man holding a book open in his hand.

It denotes a studious person.

In the 26. of, ascend two Doge fighting.

it represents a quarelsome litigious person.

In the 27. Degree, a woman ascends standing idle and weeping.

An idle vagabond is hereby signified.

In the 28. Degree, ascend two Bulls due greater then other.

A Laborious man is hereby represented.

In the 29. Degree, ascend 3. Dogs, 2. running one way together, and the other
the contrary way.

The man thereby Signified will be a Huntsman to some Noble Man.

In the 30. Degree, ascend 2. men, each of them leading a Hound in a Chain.

It Signifies a Huntsman of a Prince.

CHAP. IV. Of Cancer.
THe first face of is of, and is a face of joy, Subtilty, Humanity, Counesie,
and of such things as induce men to love.

The Second face of is of, and is a face of Jollity, Mirch, of women, of riches
and plenty.

The Third face of is of and is a face of Hunting, pursuing Fugitives; of
getting goods by war, quarrels and contention amongst men.

The First face of appears like a beautiful woman holding a Flower in her
hand.

The Second face, a man and a woman sitting at a table with great heaps of
money before them.

The Third face, a Hunter blowing a Horn with a Dog by his side, and a spear on
his shoulder.

In the first degree of, ascends a man and a woman holding one another by the
hands and rejoicing.

It signifies an Amiable person given to mirth.

In the Second Degree, ascends 2. women standing Idle, like 2. Turrets.

The man signified hereby will be Idle.

In the Third Degree, arises two women Sitting, and tow men standing before
them.

It Signifies a serving man, one wayring upon another pleasure.

In the 4. a maid standing Idle, expecting a man.

It represents a libidinous person full of lustful thoughts.

In the 5. a woman standing expecting a man.

It denotes a Luxurious person.

In the 6. a man holding a Goat in a Brass pot.

It denotes a fool.

In the 7. a man leading a goat with a girdle about his horns.

A Hangman is hereby Signified.

In the 8. Degree of, ascends a house, and a woman standing as it were
absconding her self behind it.

It Signifies a Lazy, slow, and lascivious person.

In the 9. a woman holding a distaff in her right hand.

It imports a laborious person.

In the 10. a man holding a Chest in his right hand.

It Signifies also a laborious person.

In the 11. a ship standing in the water

It represents a fisherman.

In the 12. a man carrying the skin of a Beast on his shoulders.

A Cobbler or Currier, or such handicraft, is hereby signified.

In the 13. a Boy sitting holding a Book open, with a pen in his hand.

It represents a studious person.

In the 14. a Lamb ascends having a Crown of Gold on his head.

It Signifies a Gold Smith.

In the 15. ascends a horse and a mouse lying in her nest under the roof
thereof.

It represents a man desirous to keep home.

In the 16. a bird holding a Serpent under her feet.

It imports a man accounting himself Noble.

In the 17. Degree, a woman standing idle ascends.

It Signifies a sluggish person.

In the 18. Degree of ascends 3. women sitting at play at Tables.

A joyful merry person it represents.

In the 19. Degree, a man having a Spear in his right hand, and a pipe in his
left.

A stage player is hereby Signified.

In the 20. a Dog sitting in a Chariot.

It signifies a slothful person.

In the 21. a Chariot standing empty.

It denotes a person given to vanity.

In the 22. ascends a man standing idle.

it signifies a slothful person.

In the 23. ascends a running water.

An instable unconstant person is Signified under this Degree.

In the 24. ascends 2. Horses, one leaping upon the others back.

It represents a man of aspiring thoughts Coveting dignity and authority over
others.

In the 25. a Horse running in a field.

It Signifies an instable person.

In the 26. Degree, a water Springing out of mountains.

It signifies a moveable unstable man.

In the 27. a Horse bridled.

It signifies a man in bondage and servitude.

In the 28. degree of, ascends two men fitting under a tree, and seeing a Hawke
in the tree.

It denotes an idle person.

In the 29. a man hanging on the Gallows.

It signifies a Thief.

In the 30. degree of, a Ship Sailing on the water.

It denotes a Saylour or Mariner.

CHAP. V. Of Leo.
TThe first face of Leo is of and is a face of cruelty, wickedness, and
violence, of susteyning great labors, boldness, and lust.

The second face is of and is a face of wrangling, quarrelling, ignorance,
necessity; of victory over the miserable and vile, through their ignorance; of
occasion of drawing swords and Wars.

The third face is of Mars, and is a face of love, society, not parting from,
not loosing of ones own, for avoiding quarrels:

The 1. face ascends like a Man riding on a Lion, with a feather in his hat.

The 2. a man holding a sword drawn over his head in one hand, and a buckler
in the other.

the 3. a young man with a Hawk on his fist.

In the 1. degree of Leo, there ascends a man holding a Lions head in his hand.

It signifies a valiant man.

In the 2. degree, ascends a Ship, one side thereof inclining toward the
waters.

The man will be unfortunate in the water, that is signified hereby.

In the 3. degree, a man ascends sitting mourning upon a footstool.

It signifies a sorrowful person.

In the 4. degree, a Fish swimming in the water.

A prudent and a crafty person is hereby signified, affected of great men.

In the 5. a Serpent lying wreathed on the ground.

It signifies an envious man.

In the 6. a man holding a sword drawn in his right hand.

A litigious person desirous to resist others is signified by this degree.

Iu the 7. degree arises a man riding upon a Lion.

A valiant man, strong and wise is by this ascension denoted.

In the 8. a fire flaming.

It imports a labourer with fire.

In the 9 a man well clothed and adorned.

It signifies a proud man.

In the 10. death standing with a Sith in his hands.

It signifies a murderer.

In the 11. degree of ascends a woman standing and showing her naked belly.

It demonstrates an impudent immodest person.

In the 12. A beautiful woman ascends well adorned.

It signifies a chaste modest person.

In the 13. a Bull feeding in pasture.

It signifies a man constant and stable in his deeds.

In the 14. a man standing idle arises.

It signifies a loyterer.

In the 15. degree a Dog or Lion lying couched in the grass.

A valiant man is hereby represented.

In the 16. a bridled Ass.

An illiterate dull person it signifies.

In the 17. ascends a Cammel standing.

The person hereby signified will be valiant and full of Spirit.

In the 18. a Key of a Chamber.

A man of power it imports.

In the 19. a man leading a horse by the bridle,

It signifies a clyent or one pertaining to a noble man.

In the 20. a man holding role of paper in hishand.

A Messenger or Carryer it signifies.

In the 21. a man holding a. Key in his hand.

It signifies a keeper of good hospitality.

In the 22. a man lying as if he were dead.

It signifies a weak feeble person.

In the 23. degree of ascends a man having two heads.

It signifies a man of several minds.

In the 24. a man holding a lock in his' right hand.

It signifies a man meditating wisdom.

In the 25. a man swimming in the water.

It denotes a fisherman.

In the 26. a man working with a dungforke.

It signifies a labourer.

In the 27. a man holding a sicle in his right hand.

A laborious person it represents.

In the 28. three men sporting together.

It represents an idle fellow.

In the 29. a man and woman holding one another by the hands.

An Amiable person is hereby signified.

In the 30. degree of ascends a servant riding on a horse.

The man by this ascension signified will be a servant unto others.

CHAP. VI. Of Virgo.
THe first face of is of the Sun, and is a face of sowing, plowing, of planting
herbs, peopling, gathering together riches and food.

The second face is of, and is a face of gain, of getting substance,
covetuously raking together, and being covetuous, and arising with the strength
of men.

The third face of, is of and is a face of old age, of debility,
slothfullnesse, and of loss of the members through infirmities; of pulling up
trees, and depopulating of places peopled.

In the first face of ascends a man laying money into a Chest.

In the 2. two men one having a purse in his hand.

In the 3. a decrepit old man leaning on a staff.

In the 1. degree of, ascends a woman adorned expecting the sight of a man.

It signifies a lover, either man or woman.

In the 2. degree ascends two women standing idle.

It signifies a vagabond and idle person.

In the 3. a man holding a book of accounts in his hand.

It signifies a Merchant.

In the 4. a man at plow with Oxen.

A labourer in the field is hereby denoted.

In the 5. an Eagle resting.

A Merchant, but one living without labor, is hereby demonstrated.

In the 6. a Woman well clothed standing idle.

An idle fellow it signifies.

In the 7. a simple woman standing idle.

It signifies a sluggish person.

In the 8. a man sitting under a tree.

It denotes a Shepherd.

In the 9. degree of, ascends a woman well clothed, with a red face standing
idle.

The man hereby signified will be angry and luxurious.

In the 10, a man well c^othed standing idle holding an apple in his hand.

It intimates a vagabond or wanderer-about.

In the 11. a white horse bridled running.

The man hereby signified will be swift a fo^^.

In the 12. a man in red clothes, with a black face.

(...) wicked person it represents.

In the 2. degree, ascend two women gathering roses.

A merry jocund man it denotes.

In the 14. an Ox standing in pasture.

The man borne under this degree will be laborious.

In the 15. two merry women standing together.

It signifies a merry person.

In the 16. ascends two Dogs running. together.

The man having this degree ascending, will be a Huntsman.

In the 17. A fair Castle compassed about with a Hedge.

It signifies a man living in safety.

In the 18. degree, arises a tree full of leaves standing in Grass.

It signifies, the man will be a labourer in woods:

In the 19. a man sitting as a servant upon a Horse.

The man will be a reteyner to another.

In the 20. degree of, arises a Bird following a Mole or a Mouse.

It signifies a man contrary to others.

In the 21. a man arises standing and holding Gold in his right hand, and
silver in his left.

A rich man it signifies.

In the 22. a naked woman carrying a Goat and a Lamb on her shoulders.

An impudent immodest person it denotes.

In the 23. A man ascends rowing a boat in the water with an Oar.

It signifies a Mariner.

In the 24. A Bird bound by the neck to a post.

It signifies a man who will be restrained and held to labor.

In the 25. a man casting a stone into a ditch.

It signifies a litigious person.

In the 26. two men discoursing together.

It signifies the man will be well educated.

In the 27. two women standing idle.

An idle person is denoted.

In the 28. degree ascends some on the ground, others flying in the Air.

It signifies the man shall have much Rents.

In the 29. ascends dew or rain falling on the ground.

The person will be religious that is signified by it.

In the 30. degree, ascends a dumb man standing still.

It signifies a fool.

CHAP. VII. Of Libra.
THe first face of Libra is of the, and is a face of Justice right and truth,
of succouring the weak against the strong and the wicked, and of helping the
poor and miserable

The second is of Saturn, and is a face of quietness, plenty, and good life,
quiet and secure.

The third face is of, and is a face of gluttony, of sodomy, of singing, and
mirth and following evil pleasures.

In the first face of, ascends a student having a book open before him.

In the second, an old man in a Gown sitting in a Chair.

In the third, a young man having a cup in his hand.

In the 1. degree of, ascends a man holding in each hand a spear.

The man who has this ascendent will be a Warrior.

In the 2. degree a Clergy man with a pot of incense.

It signifies a religious person.

In the 3. degree a decrepit man crooked in his hands and feet.

It signifies amiserable laborious person.

In the 4. a man at plow with horses.

It Signifies a labourer in the fields.

In the 5. a blackbird, with red bill and feet.

It denotes a fat gross man.

In the 6. a man drawing a plow himself.

It signifies a man taking a great deal of pains without sense or reason.

In the 7. degree of, a man holding a Gold Ring in his right hand.

The person is signified to be a lover.

In the 8. a woman weeping over one that is sick.

It represents a sorrowful man.

In the 9. a man holding a sword over this head in his right hand.

It signifies a litigious person.

In the 10. a blackbird holding his beak to the ground.

The man is signified to be altogether a sloven.

In the 11. degree a man with black hands and face, but white feet.

It denotes an idle, dull; but unstable person

In the 12. a woman standing looking about her.

The man having this ascendant will be a vagabond and idle.

In the 13. degree a man and a woman going two several ways.

The man having this degree rising, will be contentious, and live divided from
others.

In the 14. a great looking glass fixed upon a wall.

It denotes a proud person.

In the 15. two hearts hanging together.

It signifies a wordling.

In the 16. camel running: It signifies the man will be swift and valiant.

In the 17. a bird sweetly singing.

It signifies a person full of mirth.

In the 18. degree of Libra, ascends the similitude of a Village neatly built.

It signifies a man having dominion in the Country.

In the 19. degree a fair Castle on a Mountain.

It denotes a noble man.

In the 20. degree, a fair Altar beautifully Adorned.

It signifies, a religious man.

In the 21. degree, a man riding on an Ass or Horse.

The man will be a Horseman, a groom and servant, who has this degree rising.
In the 22. degree, ascends 2. horses sadled.

It signifies a man coveting much and enjoying little.

In the 23. degree, a physician viewing an Urinal through a glass.

The man will be a physician, who is signified hereby.

In the 24. degree, ascends a man in the upper part, and a horse in the lower
parts beating a Dragon with a Staff.

It signifies a strong man.

In the 25. degree, a Peacock standing in the Grass.

It imports a proud person.

In the 26. degree, ascends a man beating a Lion with a staff.

It signifies, he will be a Conqueror in War.

In the 27. degree a shady tree standing in a garden.

It signifies the man to be a gardener.

In the 28. degree ascends a man laboring with a spade.

A laborious person, it represents,

In the 29. degree, a woman standing idle.

It signifies an idle person.

In the 30. degree of Libra, ascends a Hare running out of a wood.

The man hereby signified will be inconstant and unstable.

CHAP. VIII. Of Scorpio.
THe first face of is of, and is a face of strife, sadness, deceit,
detraction, perdition and treachery.

The second face of, is of the, and is a face of affronts, detections, stirring
up mischiess and quarrels between men and continuing that strife which it
stireth up.

The third face is of, and is a face of War, Drunkenness, and Violence,
Fornication, Wrath and Pride.

In the first face appears two men a fighting and tearing one another by the
hair.

In the second, a man sitting on a stool, and two dogs a fighting by him.

In the third, two women pulling one another by the hair of the head, one
having a staff in her right hand, striking the other on the head.

In the 1. degree of, appears a man holding a spear in his hand.

It signifies a thief and a wicked fellow.

In the 2. ascends a man riding upon an Elephant.

It denotes a strong valiant and stable person.

In the 3. a man standing idle.

It declares the person to be wicked and idle.

In the 4. a man playing on a Harp.

It denotes a jocond merry man.

In the 5. degree, a man ascends, wanting the lower part of his body.

The man will be imperfect in his deeds.

In the 6. degree an Ass or Horse bridled and sadled.

It Signifies a man producing few things to good effect.

In the 7. degree ascends a man sitting and having a purse of money in his
right hand, and in his left hand a golden cup,.

It denotes a rich merchant.

In the 8. a great Cock standing.

The man will be a Scrivener.

In the 9. a man sitting in a Tub.

It denotes one of little wit.

In the 10. degree, ascends a head with a face much wrinkled.

It Signifies a man of strange opinions.

In the 11. degree a man holding a Scorpion by the neck.

It Signifies an envious person.

In the 12. Degree of arises a great Serpent with three Flies biting of her.

It Signifies a wise man, but wicked.

In the 13. Degree. a fair and strong Tower.

The man will be a strong labourer.

In the 14. Degree, a well without water.

It Signifies a man instable without wit.

In the 15. Degree, a fair woman standing idle.

It denotes an idle person.

In the 16. degree a woman giving Alms to a poor man.

It Signifies a merciful man.

In 17. degree, a wolf running in a field.

It denotes a Robber.

In the 18. a house, and woman hiding her self behind the door.

It signifies a sluggish idle person.

In the 19. a dog with great mouth and ears.

It represents a Noble man.

It the 20. a man sitting on a Camel.

It Signifies a valiant man.

In the 21. degree ascends a horse standing freely in a field.

It Signifies the man shall not be subject to the yoke of others.

In the 22. Degree a great flood of water.

An instable person is thereby denoted.

In the 23. Degree, many rivers flowing out of a fountain.

It Signifies an unstable unconstant person.

In the 24. Degrees. of ascends a woman holding a distaff in her right hand.

It denotes a laborious man.

In the 25. a wolf Carrying a foul in his mouth.

It Signifies a thief and a robber.

In the 26. Degrees. a man carrying garments spoiled on his shoulders.

It Signifies a destroyer.

In the 27. arise two men standing speaking together.

It Signifies a Jocound sociable person.

In the 28. degrees. a house or great Church ascends.

It Signifies a man much given to prayer.

In the 29. degrees. a Master sitting with a Book open.

It Signifies a studious man.

In the 30. Degree, ascends a Serpent with a great head.

A prudent person is thereby Signified.

CHAP. IX. Of Sagitary.
THe first face of is of, and is a face of Boldness, freedom, and warfar.

The Second is of the, and is a face of fear, of lamentation, grief, and of a
fearful Spirit over his own body.

The third is of and is a face of willfulness and not being persuaded from it,
of contrarying, yiedling, agility in evil, strife and horrible things.

In the first face ascends a man armed with a polax in his hand.

In the Second, a man sitting, mourning on a stool.

In the third a man with a feather in his hat, holding a staff on the top of
his finger.

In the first Degree of, ascend three men standing without heads.

The man hereby Signified will be religious and just.

In the Second Degree a man ascends shooting an arrow out of a Crosse-Bow.

It Signifies a person always litigious.

In the 3. a man sitting on a Ram, cleathed with flame.

It Signifies a litigious troublesome person.

In the 4. a man carrying a spear on his shoulder.

It Signifies a destroyer.

In the 5. ascends a woman carrying a Cradle on her shoulder.

It denotes a laborious person.

In the 5. an ox with three horns.

It Signifies a man of good understanding.

In the 7. degree a woman standing Idle.

The man hereby Signified will be an Idle person.

In the 8. Degree, two men playing at Dice upon a table.

It Signifies a player.

In the 9. Degree, a great fire of wood burning.

It denotes the man will be a labourer with fire.

In the 10. ascends a portion of gold and silver in the earth.

It Signifies a rich man.

In the 11. Degree, an ape sitting upon a Wolf.

It Signifies a ruler over another man.

In the 12. a man riding upon a goat.

It siignifies A contrarier of others.

In 13. Degree, ascends a man having his hands bound behind him.

It Signifies a conquered vanquished man.

In the 14. a master holding a Book open.

The man hereby Signified will be learned.

In the 15. Degree, a man walking by a horse sadled.

It Signif^es a fearful Coward.

In the 16. Degree, ascend Chariot-wheels without the body.

It Signifies a man void of reason.

In the 17. Degree, a decrepit person leaning on a staff.

It Signifies a man much given to prayer.

In the 18. Degree, a man holding a bird by the tail, and in the other hand a
burning torch.

It Signifies the man will be a fowler.

It the 19. Degree, ascends a house Compassed about with burning faggots.

The man thereby Signified will be laborious and compassed about with fear.

In the 20. Degree, three men walking leading one another by the arms.

It Signifies one merry and sociable.

In the 21. Degree a man standing in the habit of a Doctor.

It denotes a wise man.

In the 22. degree two men piercing one another with their swords.

It Signifies a thief and manslayer.

In the 23. degree a woman cutting another in the Breast with a knife.

It signifies a manslayer.

In the 24. degree, ascends a man running himself through with a sword.

It signifies a man that will be his own enemy.

In the 25. degree. A man vomiting upon the ground.

It signifies a Drunkard, yet a laborlous man.

In the 26. degree. A man playing with a little stasse.

The man will be a stage player, a merry person that is hereby denoted.

In the 27. degree. A man hanging with his hands on a beam.

It denotes a merry fellow.

In the 28. degree. A man riding on a Camel ascends.

Hereby is signified a valiant man.

In the 29. degree, a man tumbling himself out of one bed into another.

A Childish man it signifies,

In the 30. degree. A man holding a horse-shooe in his hand.

It signifies a blacksmith.

CHAP. X. Of Capricorn.
THe first face of, is of, and is a face of wandering of travail, of joy, of
gain and loss, with weakness and vileness.

The 2. face is of, and is face of seeking such things as cannot be known; and
seeking aster such things as cannot be attained to.

The third face is of the, and is a face of covetuousnesse, of governing one
substance, of not sufficing himself, and of suspecting.

In the first face ascends a man travailing on foot.

In the second a man reaching at a bird in the Air.

In the thind, a man sitting at a table telling of money.

In the 1. degree of, ascends two men in like form.

It signifies a jocond amiable person.

In the 2. degree, a man carrying a reed on his shoulder.

In the 3. degree a great Serpent ascends.

Hereby is signified a wise man.

In the 4. degree, two Rakes in a field.

It denotes a Clown.

In the 5. two gates open.

It signifies a man given to hospitality.

In the 6. degree, a man carrying two dogs on his shoulders.

It signifies a litigious person.

In the 7. a man standing between two women.

It denotes a merry person.

In the 8. degree. A hand holding a Bird.

A fowler it represents.

In the 9. a man falling on the ground.

It denotes a feeble person.

In the 10. a man with a Lapwing on each hand.

A Fowler or Hunter, it signifies.

In the 11. degree of, ascends a King Crowned receiving letters from a messenger.

The man hereby signified will be an Ambassador to a Prince.

In the 12. degree, ascends a man running swiftly.

It denotes a swift person.

In the 13. a man carrying a goats skin on his shoulders.

A hangman it represents.

In the 14. degree, a hand holding a Spear.

It imports a litigious troublesome person.

In the 15. a man bending his knees.

It denotes a noble man.

In the 16. degree, a man riding an unbridled horse ascends.

It signifies a man without power.

In the 17. degree, a man with a dogs head arises.

It signifies a man full of strife.

In the 18. degree, ascends a man divided in one half.

It denotes a pusillanimous Childish person.

In the 19. degree, a man having fowr legs standing idle.

It signifies a man playing or resting when he should be at work.

In the 20. degree, an Ape looking on himself in a glass.

It denotes a proud man.

In the 21. degree, a Master holding a book open.

It signifies a learned man.

In the 22. a man digging the ground with a spade.

A labourer it represents.

In the 23. a man leading a woman by the hand.

A lover it denotes.

In the 24. a Cooper working on a Caske,

It signifies an artificer.

In the 25. degree of, ascends a man with a Hawke on his hand.

It signifies a Noble man.

In the 26. degree, a fair Grove of Trees.

The man signified hereby will be a labourer in woods.

In the 27. degree. A man lying on the Grass.

A weak feeble person it denotes.

In the 28. degree, a man carrying earth on his head.

It denotes a rich man.

In the 29. degree, a fairewoman sitting on a stool.

It signifies a man full of mirth.

In the 30. degree of, ascends the tail of a fish.

It signifies a man imperfect in his deeds.

CHAP. XI. Of Aquarius.
THe first, face of, is of, and is a face of an Anxious Spirit greiving after
gain, and never resting, of labor, loss, poverty and vileness.

The second face is of, and is a face of beauty, understanding, humanity,
modesty, good manners, complements and freedom.

The third face is of the, and is a face of detection and affronts.

In the first face ascends a woman sitting spinning on a Rock.

In the second a comely person well clothed sitting on a stool.

In the third a man having an envious look holding his hands on his sides.

In the 1. degree of, ascends a man holding in each hand a bird.

It denotes a Fowler.

In the 2. degree, a man holding both his hands upon his head.

It signifies a sorrowful person.

In the 3. degree. A man holding one hand upon his head.

It signifies a man full of grief.

In the 4. a man riding on his treasure.

A Merchant it denotes.

In the 5. degree, a woman going before, and a man following her.

It denotes a sollicitous person.

In the 6. degree, a man playing with a staste.

It signifies a merry person.

In the 7. A sword drawn, lying on the ground.

A Soldier or warlike person it represents.

In the 8. degree, a man holding a chain in his hand.

It signifies a man not enjoying himself.

In the 9. degree. One man lifting up another from the ground.

It denotes an idle person.

In the 10. degree. a man standing without an head.

It represents a man without power.

In the 11. degree an Armed man without an head.

It signifies a Noble man without power

In the 12. degree of, an armed man smiting down a King.

The man hereby signified will be a ruler over a King. This deserves a Comment.

In the 13. degree, a Troop of horsemen Armed.

I denotes a litigious person, and a Robber.

In the 14. degree. A man holding a boot in his hand.

It represents a sorrowful person.

In the 15. degree, two men riding on an Unicorne.

It denotes a Litigious man.

In the 16. degree of, ascends a man holding fire in his hand.

The man signified hereby will be a labourer with fire.

In the 17. degrees. A woman lying sick a bed.

An infirm and idle person it represents.

In the 18: degree. A great Owl standing still.

It denotes an envious man.

In the 19. degree. A man holding another head in his hand.

It denotes, a man having power and authority.

In the 20. degrees, a decrepit woman leaning on a staff.

A weak feeble person it signifies.

In the 21. degree, a man clothed lying on his back on the ground.

An infirm man it denotes.

In the 22. degree, a man cutting off another hands and feet with a hatchet.

It denotes a wicked doer.

In the 23. degree, two dogs running together.

It signifies a man given to sport.

In the 24. degree, a man weeping holding his hand on his head.

It signifies a man always sorrowful.

In the 25. degree, One carrying a great Spear.

A Thief and wicked person it signifies.

In 26. degree. Water flowing out of a great mountain.

An instable unsettled man, it represents.

In the 27. degree. A house compassed about with a hedge.

It signifies a man safe in his deeds.

In the 28. A man drinking out of a vessel.

It declares a joyful man.

In the 29. degree. A man sitting on horseback, holding a sword drawn in his
hand.

It signifies a Warrior.

In the 30. degree. A King Crowned sitting.

It signifies a man living at peace.

CHAP. XII. Of Pisces.
THe first face of Pisces, is of, and is a face of auxiety, of many thoughts,
of journeys, and removing from place to place, of seeking after substance and
food.

The second face of is of, and is a face of praising ones self, of a high
mind, of seeking after and intermedling with great and high things.

The third face is of, and is a face of fornication and embraces of great
delight with women and loving peace and quietness.

In the first face ascends a man travailing, carrying a burden on his back.

In the second, an ancient man pointing with his hand to the Sky.

In the third, a young man embracing a beautiful woman.

In the 1. degree of, there ascends two men with one head joined together.

It signifies a troublesome and inconstant person.

In the 2. degree. A man sitting on the earth.

It denotes a Clown.

In the 3. a man eating a roll of bread.

The man will be a baker signified hereby.

In the 4. an Unicorne lying on his back.

A man without power it denotes.

In the 5. Two Maids standing together.

A merry person it fignifies.

In the 6. A great bird feeding on the ground.

A covetuous miser it represents.

In the 7. degree of, arises a man holding in each hand a bell.

It denotes a Sexton or keeper of a Church.

In the 8. degree. A man sitting in a tub with a brush in his hand.

It signifies a maker of bathes.

In the 9. degree. A Pilgrim walking.

It denotes a religious man.

In the 10. A man beating in a mortar.

A laborious man is hereby signified.

In the 11. degree. A man walking with a staff on his arm.

It signifies a vagabond.

In the 12. degree. A young man looking behind him.

Hereby is signified a timorous person.

In the 13. degree. A man and woman riding on horseback.

It denotes an idle person.

In the 14. degree. A man cutting wood in a Wood.

The man will be a labourer.

In the 15. degree, a man ascends with a knife drawn.

It denotes a man preparing himself to strife.

It the 16. degree, a man holding a cock in his hand.

A Noble man it signifies.

In the 17. degree, a man drowning himself in the water.

It Signifies a senseless person.

In the 18. degree two horsemen fighting.

It Signifies a troublesome Litigious man.

In the 19. degree, ascends a man piercing himself through with a sword.

The man hereby Signified will be the cause of his own death.

In the 20. degree, a moon shining in the night ascends.

An instable unconstant person is hereby Signified.

In the 21. degree, two men stabbing one another.

It signifies a manslayer.

In the 22. degree a woman having her girments rent.

It denotes an immodest person.

In the 23. degree, a woman swimming in a boat.

It signifies an unconstant person.

In the 24. degree, a man and woman lying in a bed ascend.

A lascivious person it represents.

In the 25. a man casting a stone into a ditch.

A troublesome person is denoted hereby.

In the 26. a woman cutting off a man's head with an axe as he lies asleep.

Hereby is signified a man slayer.

In the 27. a man standing naked pissing.

An immodest person is hereby represented.

In the 28. degree, a man walking by a horse holding in one hand a bird, and in
the other a serpent.

It denotes a man of great understanding

In the 29. a great fish out of the water.

An unstable perion it fignifies.

In the 30. degree, a woman looking in a glass.

It denotes a proud unchaste person.

Here follows the nature and fignication of the Planets, in the signs, and
throughout the 12. houses.

CHAP. XIII. The Signification of Saturn in the Signs.
IF Saturn be found to be Lord of a Geniture, and well placed in the Geniture,
and increasing in strength, and the decreasing; he makes men of a high Spirit;
and raises them to great honors; seldom laughing, keeping anger long, of
good counsel, faithful, and of approved good Judgmens, performing all things
with Judgment, and reason, but not caring for marriage, not affecting wives nor
Children. They are always removed and vacant, to themselves, little eaters,
but great drinkers: for the Corporature of their bodies, they are Slender,
pale, and wan, an ilfavoured countenance, great ears, and thick lips, thick
hard hair, a small heart, a little breast, of nature cold, always some
malignant humor daily offending them, and are very much afflicted with some
inward grief as the colic daily belching and breaking of wind.

For the most part they are malicious, leading a laborious solicitous and
careful life, full of daily griefs and employed about the water or leading
their lives in watery places.

But if be Lord of the Geniture and in his own house, or in his Terms; or in
the house of or in his terms; or in the house of the: and if the nativity be
by day, he makes the native famous and Noble in his life, giving him much
power and felicity.

But if he be in the house of or in the terms of, or in the house of the, he
makes the native, of a sorrowful, laborious, humble, sordid; and inglorious
life, and daily afflicted with sorrow. And these evils shall be stronger, if it
be a nocturnall Geniture; and if the be decreasing in light, then the hair of
his head is very thin, or he will be much deformed by baldness, and such
persons are much subject to be suddenly taken with blindness, or loss of
their sight, through some flux of Rehume; he also signifies plurisies Dropsies,
Gout, Falling Sickness, Crump, Convulsion-fits, especially if the Lord of the
Geniture be afflicted; and ill placed, or impedited by any ill Aspect of the.
But if he be placed with any benevolent Stars beairng rule and strong, he
brings those benefits and preferments before spoken of: and makes a good
Physician. But if Aries be placed with any evil Star, these evils he increases
with much calamity; he commonly causes long life, and sickness through
vicious humors. They commonly live in moist watery places, or in secret hidden
places.

If be in the house or Terms of he makes wicked persons, witches, perjured,
haters of their Brethern and parents.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Signification of Saturn in the 12. houses.
SAturn partilely placed in the horoscope in a nativity by day, he that is born
then shall be greater then any of his brethren, or kindred born before him,
and shall be separated from his parents; and by day in all the fourth Angles he
always produces the first born, or first nourished; or those Brethren which
were born before, do depart out of the place, he gives a haughty proud and
high Spirit. But if be in the horoscope by day, and possess any other Angle of
the Geniture; or be in the Angle of the Ascendant, he Signifies much evil and
brings many Dangers, and loss of estate and expense of ones patrimony, and
more frequently if no benevolent Stars be joined with them; or cast their
powerful Rays unto them.

Saturn in the horoscope in a naivity by night, he that has him so placed
shall be troubled with great labors; and continually oppres thereby; he shall
be exercised in employments about waters, but his conversation shall always be
laborious.

Saturn placed in the 2. place from the Horoscope gives to the native great
sickness, and many overthrowes; he is a destroyer of wife and Children, and a
frequent stirrer up of great troubles, a waster. of the substance both of
Father and Mother, and the native will be slow and dull in all his actions; to
some he gives continual infirmnesse of body.

But if Saturn be thus constituted and in any Angle of the geniture, and behold
the Sun by a, or. or the, increasing with the like Aspect, he causes poverty
and misery, and a body overprest with daily labors.

But if, be in the second in a nativity by day, he gives increase of
substance, but slowly and by degrees, but the native will be of a low Spirit,
and one delighting to live obscure, and secret, and always denying that they
have any thing; and he gives increase of estate to some through employments
about the water.

, posted in the 3. gives a slow sluggish idle body, not regarding to get any
estate; but if he be placed in this house with the, or, he makes the native
foolish, malicious, speaking sacrilegious words against divinity, wasters of
their Patrimony, Thieves; but seldom have good success therein.

If, be thus posited and, joined to him by any Aspect whatsoever; he makes the
native a flase accuser, a sycophant, wicked, malevolent, envious, and
malicious; and always dying an evil death.

Saturn partilely placed in the fourth house that is in Imo-Coeli; if it be by
day, he signifies the native to be a covetuous hoarder up, and keeper of Gold
and Silver; but in this place by night, then the native is a spender of his
Patrimony; brings sudden death to the Father; he also afflicts the body
with great sickness, cold diseases, and infirm old age.

If the, behold him by a, or, or if the, be placed in the same house with him,
he gives barrenness, and causes the native to adopt strangers Children for
his own, or makes him a tutor of little Children, and deformeth the body
through some hidden grief wherewith he always languisheth, he makes the
Mother a widow, and afflicts her with many diseases incident to women, and
continual pains and griefs of the stomach.

Saturn posited in the 5. house by day, makes Kings or Dukes, or raises the
native to great power and authority.

But if, be thus posited and not the, but, in the Horoscope, and, separated
from a 6. of, he gives perpetual felicities, great Power and Magistracy.

But if, be thus posited and not the, but, in the Horoscope, he raises the
native to a lesser office of Magistracy; but signifies a governor of some
City or the like; nevertheless he makes him Lord of a great estate, and one
that susteineth others by his riches.

But if neither, nor, be in the Horoscope, and, be placed in the fifth and
separated from a, of, he gives substance and possessions, but commonly the
native leads a single life, or joins himself to some unworthy match.

But if, be thus placed in a Nocturnall Geniture; he gives some happiness to
the native in the later part of his age, but the continuance thereof is
uncertain and the man slow in all his actions, but if the moon be joined unto
him, and deficient in light, it destroys a man's estate and makes him miserably
spend what before he had gotten.

Saturn placed in the sixth house destroys a man's estate, for he is always ill
posited there, for he gives much sickness, if the, decreasing be joined to
him, or behold him by a, or, he is the author of much unhappiness, he makes
men unhappy, infamous, vagabonds; such as can seldom subsist long in a place.

But if, do behold, thus placed by a, or, or be in the same sign with him, he
gives many hidden and secret griefs of body as ptisicks, dysenteries; and if
they be thus placed and their malignancy not mitigated by the benevolent beams
of some good star, they bring death to the native by some of the
forementioned diseases.

Saturn in the 7. house that is the West Angle partilely posited in a diurnall
Geniture is good, and gives a good estate and old age; signifies the native
to be a covetuous keeper of money, and for diseases he signifies secret
infirmities; the Hemorrhoides, and shrinking of the sinews.

Saturn thus placed in a nativity by night causes Fistulaes, Hemorrhoides, and
such diseases about the fundament, especially if be in any Aspect with him, he
causes Rheumatick bodies, and the native is very subject to impostumes, and
oftentimes the death of their wives happen by some such infirmity.

Saturn in the 8. house by day, gives a good estate in old age, and if he be
thus placed, in the house of, or terms of, he brings profit to the native by
the death of strangers.

But if, be thus placed in a nativity by night, he destroys the estate of the
native; or if the behold him by a; or, he is ill placed here; or if the, be in
the house of, and behold him with the like Aspects; or if the be so placed
with, and behold him with any such Aspect, it brings a violent death to the
native; But if, and, behold, and the, so placed with any good Aspect, it is
fortunate, and gives a prosperous life, but the native is always unconstant
in his love toward women: a good Aspect is a a, or.

Saturn, in the 9. house makes famous men, opinionated Philosophers Priests,
men that have always some imaginary opinions, also according to the quality of
the sign he makes witches, diviners, Mathematitians, interpreters of
Divinity, Prelates, sometimes Diviners and Interpreters of dreams; but most
frequently he signifies, Philosophers; but, thus posited in a nativity by
night, stirs up the wrath of God, and the hatred of the Prince toward the
native especially if the, carry light to him any way whatsoever. but he that is
thus borne, receives more evil from the anger of God then from his Prince, if
be so placed with the Moon and, behold him, but these evils are mitigated if
cast his beams to him from any fortunate place, as if he be in his Terms,
House, or Exaltation, or behlods him by a Aspect.

Saturn, partilely placed in the 10. house, that is, the mid-heaven makes
Emperors Dukes, Presidents Magistrates, if the Sun be in his exaltation, in the
Horoscope.

Also, thus posited in a nativity by day, denotes honest men, of good manners,
wealthy Farmers their dwelling and possessions always adjoining to the Sea,
Rivers or Woods, he gives also great substance and honor, and possessions
from great persons especially, if he be so posited, and in no Aspect with, but
if, be joined to him so placed he abateth the good before spoken of.

But, in the mid-heaven in a Nocturnall Geniture is the author of infelicity, a
destroyer of substance, and hinders marriage and Children, chiefly if he be
found in the place sign or terms of any Malignant star, but if any
benevolent starr as, or, behold him with a good Aspect, they take away his
malignity; giving those things which denies, being so placed by night.

But, by night is always evil in any of the Angles, and signifies much evil
to the geniture, for he kills the wife, destroys the Children and
afflicts the whole course of a man's life with bitter evils.

But if, so posited separate from a conjunction of the, decreasing, he that
has, so placed shall always be afflicted with the burden of poverty, so that
he shall scarce have daily sustenance to maintain his life, especially if the,
be decreasing and joined to him in a feminine sign.

But if, be so placed and separate from the beams of the, increasing, he
gives unstability and unconstancy of life, so that he that has, so placed,
shall scarce have one course of his life like another, but always subject to
mutability; but so placed, if that be joined to him, signifies the native to be
crafty, slye and subtle, and gives long life, especially if he be Lord of the
geniture, or giver of life: but if, on the contrary, the Lord of the geniture
be opposite to the giver of life, it abates 30 years of the natives life, and
signifies greater evils and more powerful as often as he is so posited;
against the Lord of the geniture which the Greeks call Oicodespoten: or if he
be placed against the giver of life, especially if behold him by a, or he
gives the palsy, the native is crooked hunchbackd, ridiculous, deformed
persons, Hermophrodites, and the like; which things are known by the marks
and substance of the corporature of the body.

But if be so, placed and the seperating from him and applying to, in a
nocturnall birth, he signifies fools, Lunaticks, melancholy persons of
languishing bodies, or, so posited in the last quarter of the decreasing, it
signifies the ptisick.

Saturn, posited in the 11. sometimes signifies good, and sometimes increases
evils: he that is then borne, shall live in the same place, and after the same
fashion as his Father has done before him, but about the 30. year of his age
he loses whatsoever he had gotten, and never attayneth to any dignity or
estate till he has surpassed the 30th. year of his age.

Saturn, placed in the 12. houses shows much strife to the native to happen
through words, and dangers, and loss by servants, and causes bondage, and he
gives to him that has him so placed great griefs, and moderate sickness,
especially if be thus placed, and the in any manner joined to him; But if a
benevolent star be placed in any Angle of the geniture, then though be so
placed he that has a benevolent star in any Angle of the geniture it does in
some sort mitigate these evils and malignancy of, making them more mild and
gentle if, be found so posited by day.

But the evil is more strong and vehement, if, be found thus placed in any
nativity by night, but in which of these houses soever is posited in,
diligently inquire out his part, that is, to find out in what part place or
terms of his Duodecathemary he is placed; for by the Duodecathemary and the
terms of the Duodecathemary, you may find out all the power of Saturn.

CHAP. XV. Of the signification of Jupiter in the Signs.
IF, be Lord of a birth, he makes men of high Spirits, coveting greatness,
faith full and always aspiring to great acts, giving more to themselves then
the faculty of their patrimony or power requires; Imperious, Noble, Glorious,
and honest in all their actions, lovers of cleanliness, cheerful and amiable
in all their actions, desiring much meat, lovers and affecters of their
friends, and always delighting in welldoing; a handsome composed body,
beautiful and fair, fair and beautiful eyes and head, the same adorned with
thick hair; of a grave gate. Their life is glorious notable, and full of
felicity, following whatsoever they desire, beautified always with a good and
honest conversation, and protected by the testimony of great men, tender over
their Wives and Children, their Sons always increasing their dignity, and
bringing great honors to their Fathers by their Acts.

He gives some sickness or infirmities to the liver through Wind or
Crudities, and death by dejection or undue carnal copulation.

But when is Lord of a Geniture then look how beholds him and the other
stars: for what has been spoken of one, ought to be an example to guide you
in the rest.

For if, be Lord of ageniture and possess the first Angles of the geniture in
his own house, exaltation or rearmes, or in the house of the, and in a nativity
by day and is adorned with the testimonies of benevolent stars, the full,
carrying her light unto him, and possess not any other Angle of the nativity,
nor (...) them, and the, increasing oppose him not, it signifies full and
complete felicity.

But, if he be in any base humble signs or terms, or in base abject places of
the geniture, and, and the, afflicted by any valitious malevolent Planets, it
deprives him of all power, shows no good signification in the geniture,
neither does the native live a full age, for if malevolent stars do Aspect
him by a, or, according to their strength, they shorten his days.

CHAP. XVI. The signification of Jupiter in the 12. Houses.
Jupiter partily placed in the 1. Angle that is in the Horoscope in those
signs in which he rejoyneth, or in either of his own house Terms or
exaltation, he makes the native noble glorious, chief ruler to Cities,
sometimes signifying the chief governor of great Cities, according to the
measure of his strength in the geniture, by nature he signifies good benevolent
honest cheerful and rich persons especially if he be placed in the Horoscope
by day, and aspected by no malevolent star. For if, be so placed and
malevolent stars behold him with ill Aspects it greatly diminishes the good
signified by Jupiter.

If, be placed in the Horoscope in a nativity by night he signifies the native
to be the first borne, or the death of his brethren that were borne before him,
or seperates him far from them, signifies him to be the governor of some
Country or chief ruler in his Fathers house; to be delicately brought up and
his parents to live in great felicity.

But if, possess this place by night and malevolent stars behold him, he
signifies the native to be a spend thrist and a destroyer of the estate of his
Father and Mother. But always, placed in any Angle of the geniture, either the
native is the first borne or his brethren die that were borne before him, and he
bears chief Rule in his Fathers house, but of he be in the Horoscope whether
it be by night or by day, if the increasing be joined to him by any Aspect
whatsoever, he signifies great Magistrates, Governors of Cities, or men
employed in weighty affairs.

Jupiter, in the 2. house signifies possessions in foreign Countries, and from
strangers, he gives great dominions and possessions to Noble men, if he be so
placed, and joined to him by any good Aspect.

But so placed, if be joined to him and or behold them, it signifies mutability
of estate, changing from good actions to bad; and he that has, so posited, all
the term of his life will be various and subject to mutability, sometimes
abounding with riches, and other times cast down under the burden of poverty.

Jupiter, in the 3. house is neither good nor evil, but equally moderate;
sometimes a helper forward to spend an estate; and sometimes a gatherer together
of riches.

Jupiter, in the 4. house that is in the Imum Coeli, signifies Lawyers, Judges;
men loving Cattle, Hredsmen, Tillers of the ground, according to the nature of
the sign, Ambassadors of Kings or Dukes; or such as to whom is given the
charge of some public government in a Commonwealth; messengers often sent to
and fro, by the command of the King, Prince or Judges: he frequently signifies
the native to be employed in some public actions by the King, etc. Religious
Persons, Pilgrims, fortellers of things to come; reverend Churchmen, etc.

Some, according to the quality of the sign are finders out and discoverers of
hid treasure; but always, being so placed, gives to the native a happy old
age to the time of his death.

But if be so placed, and the in, to him he signifies the Father to be noble
and honorable; but the native will spend his estate in his middle age, and get
it again afterward, he will be slow in Venereous acts, disaeffcted to
Children.

Jupiter, thus placed by night, gives an indifferent estate, and in process of
time happiness.

Jupiter, in the 5. house, signifies great felicity, and the native to be
honored with some public preferment, especially if he be in his houses, or in
his terms, or exaltation, or in the house of the. But if be thus placed, and
behold him with any good Aspect, he signifies Captains, and such as have the
power of life and death, but if without, Mercury and the be joined to him, he
signifies Officers pertaining to Kings; if, alone be joined to him, he gives
perfect happiness; if be joined to him he gives length of years and old age,
and gives Children of both sexes, especially if he be Lord of the geniture, or
Lord of part of the Horoscope, or Lord of that sign wherein the Lord of the
geniture is placed.

But if in a nocturnall geniture he be placed opposite to the giver of life
(for, rejoices not in nocturnall genitures) he diminishes 12. years of the
natives age; but if in a nocturnall geniture,,, or the be opposite to him, they
fill the native with many vices according to the nature and quallty of the
signs: in humane signs they are libidinous excessive lustful and
preposterously effeminate, in 4. footed signs, Hunters, Lovers of Wild-beasts;
frequent haunters of Woods and desert places; and given to much labor: in
earthly signs, herbarists; desirous to know more of the secrets of nature then
is lawful: in watery signs, fishers or such as get their living about Rivers
the Sea or watery places, truly laborious and always living thereby.

But if, be thus posited by night, opposing these stars, and the seperating
from him, he signifies an unconstant life, subject to much unhappiness, but
the same is in some sort mirigated, if the separate from him and apply her
self by a good Aspect to: but if the, depart from him and go to, with any
star, it signifies much misery and unhappiness.

But if, be thus placed and the separate from him, and apply to, by a, it
denotes a violent death to the native according to the nature and quality of
the signs; for if behold the, with and, so departed from, in a nativity by
night, it signifies wranglings, dangers, and strife with inferior people.

Wherefore Iupieer, in this sign by night commonly signifies calamities.

Jupiter, in the 6. house signifies much evil, if he be lord of the sign
wherein the Horoscope is or of the Mid-heaven, or behold the,, or, by a, or if
he behold the, decreasing by a; or the, be decreasing in the same sign: but if
he be not afflicted by any evil star, and receive the light of the,
increasing the evil is thereby mitigated, he signifies here south-sayers,
embroyderers in Gold, Silver-Smithes, but nevertheless, if they gain any
thing by these arts, they quickly spend it.

Jupiter, in the 7. house signifies wealth and long life in a nativity by day,
but in nocturnall genitures, he generally signifies Wives and Children; for the
native shall lose a dear Wife, and see the miserable death of a Son or a
Daughter. But in old age he gives increase of estate, nevertheless but mean,
and so much as he shall not want.

Jupiter, in the 8. house, commonly destroys ones estate, raises up a great
many enemies, stirs up seditions commonly among the people and malicious
acts; he signifies the native to be ignoble, a proud foolish boaster; full of
preposterous animosity, and mad raging folly; especially if there be an evil
star in any Angle of the geniture, but if he have with him, or in, to him or
the increasing behold him with any good Aspect, he signifies procurators or
messengers of Kings; and the native always to die in his youth.

Jupiter, in the 9. house by day signifies Prophets and Foretellers of things
to come, interpreters of the Oracles of God, Priests, Churchmen, and sometimes
he signifies loss or damage; in a nativity by night he signifies, dreamers of
false dreams and the like.

Jupiter, in the 10. House or Mid-heaven, signifies Princes, public officers,
Chief Governors, men always graced with public honors, and desirous of
praise, but luxurious of life; men employed about the affairs of Kings or
great men; to some he gives happiness throughout their whole lives, but
commonly he signifies felicity, if no evil star hinder; but if any
malevolent star hinder him whatsoever estate honor or dignity is got in
Youth, he looses and consumes in Age, unless the 7. house be fortified with
some benevolent star.

Jupiter, in the 10. House by night signifies honest men, and of good manners,
but apt easily to be deceived, and sudden wasters of their estates.

If, be in the 11. house in a nativity by day he gives much happiness, great
riches power and government, if the, and, be joined to him by good Aspect, but
if it be in a nativity by night and the in to him, the good is thereby abated,
but if, be in the 8. contrary to him, though the native have great riches
honor and dignity, he turns it all to misery and unhappiness.

Jupiter, in the 12. House gives good fortune, signifies the native to be
powerful over his enemies and a terror to them; especially if a malevolent
star be in the ascendant or, in the 7. house; but in the 7. undoubtedly
signifies a sudden violent death, and the evils and calamities of the native
will be more prevalent and greater if the, and, behold, by an; but if in a
nocturnall geniture the decreasing oppose him, it signifies great poverty. But
if neither, nor, be in to him and are in good houses, nor the afflict him;
these who have so posited, may thrive, by some art or mystery, as Goldsmiths
or embroyderers of garments with Gold, painters or workers of Silver, but what
art soever it be, it will be sought after and praised, if be so placed and
joined with him.

CHAP. XVII. The signification of Mars in the signs.
IF be Lord of a nativity he signifies, men of proud Spirits, subject to no
reason, immovable, contentious, and audacious, headstrong, fearing no danger,
subject to be deceived, great eaters, valiant, high-minded, ignorant, having
redhaire, eyes bloud-shotten, imperious, always desiring to rule over others,
of a preposterous mind, not careing for Wife, Children nor friends, greedily
coveting other men's goods; he signifies hurt by fire, and Iron, as cuttings or
burnings, falls from high places, or burstings in the lower parts of the body,
he gives a sudden or violent death; if he separate from the full, death by
thieves, or condemned by the Magistrate for some offense, but if his malice be
kindled by the beams of the, it signifies openly destruction by burning. But,
is more strong if he be Lord of a birth by day, and be in any Angle, and the
full in any other Angle afflicted by the beams of, or giving her power to. But
if in a nativity by night he be in the house of, or, or in their terms, or in
his own house or terms, or in the 5.11.10. or first, and behold the
decreasing, or the decreasing give powerto, or joined to him in an Angle by a
he signifies Dukes, Captains, Tyrants, terrible rulers, men of great power,
but if be in the 7th. house in, as before spoken, he denotes the native surely
to dye a violent death: for always, in the 7th. house signifies a violent
death; but the kind thereof, is to be judged according to the nature and
quality of the sign,

CHAP. XVIII. The signification of Mars in the 12. Houses.
MArs, partilely placed in the ascendant by night in a masculine sign, makes
Soldiers; By day, without the beams of, he signifies bountiful men willing
to give more then their estates will bear, something profuse, but their acts
all balanced with reason.

But if by day the ascendant be the house of and a masculine sign, and
therein; and with him, or beholding him with a good Aspect, he signifies
generals and chief Captains of Armies, Lords of life and death, and terrible
to all Cities, or Countries they approach unto, happy valiant and grave,
greatly subject to anger, not greatly affecting Wife nor Children.

Mars, in the ascendant by day signifies crafty audacious furious persons,
vagabonds, instable, never finishing any thing with reason, full of revenge,
spenders of their estate, loosing all the substance of their lives, and Wives,
and Children not reserving any patrimony for them, and dye young: but if be in
his house exaltation or terms, and behold him with a, he mitigates these
evils every way. But I know and have found in many genitures, when has been
in the ascendant, the natives to have been banished, and have been good
Governors in the Common wealth.

Mars in the 2. House is very unfortunate by day if it be in the morning, he
makes the native to wander from his Fathers house and home, and wander up and
down in strange Countries, but if the, increasing be with him or in, or, to him
he signifies slow feeble persons, subject to receive hurt by Iron, Colds, or
fower-footed-beasts, sometimes he makes Seamen, men subject to be Captives or
come in bondage through their own wit, but high-minded in their greatest
necessities.

But if, he joined to him by good Aspect or in his house or terms, he
brings the native out of danger, freeth them from Captivity or imprisonment,
and restores them to liberty. But sometimes they are in want: but, so placed by
night, signifies the native to be a knight or a great ruler, but such as
sometimes shall be subject to dangers, though assisted by the beams of, or.

Mars, in the 3. house signifies the native shall attain to honor with great
labor, covetuous of other men's goods, envying all men, and having a wicked
conscience, but if Jupiter, be in the 11. or 7. he signifies the native may
attain to an estate through great labor in some public Office; if Jupiter
be in with him, he gives great riches and power exceeding others in nobility,
or if he be in the 3. in his own house terms or exaltation, and Jupiter joined
to him, he signifies Magistrates and Governors.

Mars, in the 4th, house by night signifies common Soldiers, such as live in
desert Countries, keepers of wild beasts, sometimes wasters or spoilers of
Countries, according to the quality of the sign, it destroys both life and
estate of the parents, gives widdow-hood, ruin, one Child or none, and he
that has one shall be hindered by him in all his actions; by day he signifies
weak, feeble, lame bodies, subject to receive hurt by Iron, opposed by women,
always ungrateful, but if the, behold him by a, or, or be in with him, these
evils he augmenteth and makes the native mad or lun atick, if the ascendant
be the house of.

Mars, in the 5. house by night in his own house or in the house of Jupiter, or
in his terms or exaltation, or if Jupiter be with him, or behold him in his
own house by a, signifies much honor, a great estate, much honor and love
amongst great men.

But if, and, be thus posited and the apply to, by a fortunate Aspect, it
signifies great honor and power to the native, Captains and Generals of
Armeis, to whom is committed authority over life and death, and great power of
the sword; but if the behold him not, but Venus be with him or behold him by a,
he signifies the native to be rich and happy, pursuing honorable acts; of
proper handsome bodies.

But by day, Mars signifies the native shall spend his estate, and frequently
change his house; and because of misfortunes happening to him, he often dies in
a strange Country, or undergoes some eminent danger.

But if or be joined to him or behold him by a or, they bring great profit to
the native by travail, and recall him soon home to his own Country. But if by
day the increasing be in to him, let him fear great trouble, or danger of
bondage to happen to him: For although he seem to be happy, yet his happiness
is always subject to the power of another; for he signifies Counselors to
great Judges; accusations, seditions, troubles, loss and sudden dangers;
weakness in some part of the body, sometimes madness, burning fevers, which
cause phrensies; he also signifies Jayles, Bondage and imprisonment, unless
Jupiter beholding the in the to, or himself abate these calamities; for Jupiter
brings sudden help, also in this place by day denies Children without the
testimony of Jupiter.

Mars, in the 6th. house signifies much ill, brings hurt to Children, gives
inequality of life, he gives diseases according to the quality of the signs,
in crooked signs he denotes lamenses and crooked deformity; and signifies all
kinds of diseases in this place.

Mars, in the 7th. house is very evil, causes great dangers to the native,
signifies great labors, homicides, wicked persons, guilty, Inventors of
wickedness, Tormentors, Hang-men, Traitors. But if he behold his own house by
an, he gives not a violent death for, never destroys his own house; but
generally, in the 7. by day or night causes a violent death, according to the
nature of the sign; But these evils are more violent in signs contrary to
him for in this Place he gives many griefs and troubles of body, sometimes
sudden death or perpetual imprisonment; in nativities by night he causes
trouble to proceed from all their actions oftentimes causes wounds by fire or
Iron, great secret diseases and infirmities of body, especially if he be lord
of the time, or partake thereof with the full. But if be posited with Mars, or
in the mid-heaven, or it be the power of or if the full apply to or, it denotes
great evil to the native, and many misfortunes; sometimes accusations, sometimes
imprisonment, sometimes loss, great sentences pronounced against him, or he is
cast unto wild-beasts; cast down headlong, destroyed by domestic treachery,
killed by thieves, or perishes by shipwreck, but these are discerned by the
quality of the signs; for in earthly signs he signifies death by wild-beasts,
in solid signs, destruction by some fall headlong, in watery signs drowning,
in humane signs to perish by the sword: but if the be in, to him or with him
or in any Angle of the geniture, he signifies the native to be burned alive,
and afflicts him with lamentable miseries; before the last day of his life, he
shall suffer hurt by fire, iron, violence, torments or homicides,, also
greviously afflicts Wives and Children in the 7th. house.

Mars in the 8th. house, by day, either denies any estate, or causes the
native miserably to spend what he has; if he have the and in he causes
blindness but if he be alone in this place he signifies want penury trouble
sedition and danger, but if the be in the second, and, in no Aspect to Mars and
behold not the ascendant, he gives a violent death, according to the quality
of the sign, in humane signs to be slain by the sword, by Pirates or
thieves, or by his own household, or to be put to death for son crime by the
sentence of the Judge; and to come to some public cruel death, without the
testimony of Jupiter, or in earthly signs to be slain in some desert place
having first undergone great troubles in four-footed signs to be drowned in
some River or Lake, or cast into the Sea by Pirates: in solid signs, death by
a sudden fall; in fiery signs, burning.

By night, he signifies the native to be crafty, and have some good office,
nevertheless violent or sudden death.

But if Jupiter, be joined to him or behold him by any good Aspect, he
mitigates these evils, or if be in the ascendant or the ascendant the house of
Jupiter or, these mitigate and abate his malice.

Mars, in the 9th. house is good, gives a happy and honorable life,
especially if Jupiter be in the ascendant; but by night, if Jupiter be in the
Horoscope, he signifies Magistracy; such as have the power of the sword,
leaders of Armies, but frequently causes some damage in travailes; but if the
9. be the house of or, he signifies learned famous Doctors and Orators; but if
he be in his own house, or in the house of Jupiter, or in his exaltation, and
Jupiter not in the ascen dant, it signifies the native to be a terr or to evil
Spirits, and easily to expel them, and command them to depart out of any one,
that is possessed with them.

Mars, in the 10th. house, by night in his own house or the house of Jupiter in
a masculine sign, or in his exaltation, subjecteth the native to great danger,
and often is easy to be deceived, nevertheless he signifies chief rulers,
Captains, Lords of life and death, Tyrants and terrible Governors in Towns
and Countries, but commonly dying an evil death.

Mars, in the 11th, house, is very fortunate and good, gives increase of
estate, and lore amongst people, gives some dignity or preferment, if the be
with him decreasing, and Jupiter be old him with a good Aspect, or be with him
or joined to him by a, then he signifies Judges or such as have the power of
the sword.

Mars, in the 12th. house by day, gives great troubles and evil, signifies
loss by wicked treacherous servants, much sickness cares and dangers; but by
night, these are all mitigated. We ought always to wish in all genitures
either by day or night that be in some ^ood Aspect, either with or Jupiter, for
they abate his malice; and also it is to be desired that Mars possess no Angle
of any birth, for Mars, in any Angle of a geniture by day does diverse ways
afflict the native, if by day Mars possess one Angle, another, and another, he
signifies a violent death to the natives or to be self murderers.

But if by day be in one Angle, and in another, he wearies the native with
daily evils; either they are killers of their Wives or themselves; if possess
one Angle by day, and another, he signifies fools and void of reason, if by
day possess one Angle, and the another, loss and death by fire, if the,
violent death, and the mother to dye a cruel death; if he be by day in any
Angle without the or of any other star, he signifies great sickness and
debility, likewise by day in any Angle or lord of the house of Children denies
Children: if he be the giver of life by night he gives long life, if in a
diurnall geniture he be the giver of life, he kills the native in his youth,
but if another Plannet be giver of life, and, behold him by an or, he
diminishes 15. years of the natives life, if the interpose between him and he
causes lamenesse or weakness to some part of the body according to the
signification of the sign; if he behold the increasing by a or, it soon kills
the native.

CHAP. XIX. The Suns signification in the signs.
IF the be lord of a geniture and well placed, he signifies faithful persons,
but proud, wise, doing all things with moderation, full of humanity, religious,
honourers and lovers of their parents, he signifies persons of corpulent
bodies, yellow hair: he denotes husbandmen honest persons gaining an estate by
virtuous actions, but disaffected to Wives and Children; of diseases, he
signifies infirmities about the eyes and other parts of the body frequently
happening by fire, and public or violent death in strange places the
increases the time of life if he be well placed and not impedited by the beam
of any malevolent star.

CHAP. XK. The signification of the Sun in the 12. Houses.
THe in the Horoscope hardly gives any brethren, but in a masculine sign or in
his own house or exaltation or joined to the benevolent Aspect of some good
Plannet, shows great nobility; but if he be joined to malevolent stars it
blemisheth the eyesight, but if be in the ascendant by day, he signifies Kings
and great rulers; but if his power be hindered, Counselors. But because we have
said he gives great felicity in the first house, it ought to be explained, for
if be posited with him by day it signifies Kings and Emperors; if Aspect the
or be placed with him it signifies great envy, danger and trouble to the native
to keep his power: but the in the ascendant, and in any other Angle, and in
the 10, and the in any other Angle, it denotes great power and dignity to the
native; but if the Sun and Jupiter be so posited, and in the 10. or 7. and the
with Mars in the 10. or 8, it signifies the native, be he King or Emperor, to
dye a violent death, or to be imprisoned and deposed from his honor according
to the nature of the signs.

But if Saturu be in the 10. he signifies potent persons the in the ascendant,
and; and in the other Angles signifies great men of happy persons, prosperous
and abounding in riches, and always free from the burden of Poverty;
especially if Saturn behold the with a, or. But if the Sun, Jupiter and be thus
and posited behold them with a or, or otherwise be evil placed or joined to
them, he signifies great potent persons having power of life and death, but
Thieves Robbers, Tyrants, greedy after other men's estates, and at last to be
banished or suffer a violent death.

The in the ascendant in a nativity by night signifies the native to be a more
base sordid person, but, if or be with the Sun or behold him by a or it
signifies the native will kill his elder brethren, and destroy all his own
estate and substance and the Sun in any Angle of a geniture debilitateth the
elder brethren; unless the native be the first borne.

The Sun in the 2. house signifies the native to be careful in seeking an
estate; and in all their lives good and affable of condition; but languishing
in their bodies, and of a short life, and crossed with many troubles: but if
and behold the, with any good Aspect as a or or be with him; they bring some
unexpected good to the native, and increase of happiness, raising up men that
are dejected and cast down, to some public office or dignity.

The in the 3. house signifies an evil death to the Father, signifies the
native to be invalid and of no repute, but if and be joined to him by good
Aspect, he signifies grave Counselors, Treasurers, Rulers and Governors of
Cities and the like, but if he be in the 3. in his own house or exaltation, or
in the house or exaltation of or, he signifies devout religious persons, but if
or be with him, or joined to him in other signs, he signifies perjured
perfidious persons, profane irreligious wicked blasphemers.

The Sun in the 4. house Aspected by, or Mars signifies the death of the
Father, destruction of the whole family and estate, nevertheless he signifies
a happy old age, but the native unconstant in his affection toward his Wife
and Children.

Sol, in the 5. house signifies amiable and honorable persons easily attaining
all things they desire, and beloved of all their friends but if he be so placed
with, or she behold him with any good Aspect or, he signifies great honor and
dignity to the native.

But although malevolent stars be with him or in Aspect to him, it does not
much hurt the native, because of the natural goodness of the place, but is
only hurtful to the Children of the native.

The in the sixth house is hurtful to the native and gives great and long
sickness and if be in the ascendant, he afflicts the native, with hurt, or
some wound by Iron; denotes the Father to dye a sudden evil death, and
destroys the natives estate. But if any good star be in the 10. he signifies
riches great possessions, and the native happily to enjoy his Fathers estate.
But although there be no star in the Medium Coeli, if Jupiter and be with the
in the 6. house, they mollifye and mitigate all evil.

Sol in the 7. house is very ill, and gives many infirmities and diseases,
especially if and behold him with any Aspect, or be placed with him; he brings
much sickness and affliction to the native, according to the malignancy of the
afflicting Planner.

But if the be in the 7, and the with him, or in the 10. or ascendant, he
signifies potent and noble persons, men in great authority; chiefly if he be in
his own house or exaltation, or in the house of, and have part of fortune in
any Angle.

The, in the 8. gives sudden death to the Father, if, or be with him or Aspect
him by or, he signifies dotage, falling evil, Phrensies and vicious diseases
according to the nature of the sign.

But if the be in to him and the or do Aspect him by or, he signifies diseases
of the head, Lunatic, Ptisick and Dropsies, according to the nature of the
sign.

Sol. in the 9. house, signifies builders of Churches and religious persons,
lovers of Divine Worship, makers of hymns and Divine Songs, and gaining glory
thereby; and signifies the Father to be of a happy estate, and to lead a happy
life; but nevertheless many changes and mutations of life to happen to the
native.

The in the 10. house, in a diurnall geniture in his own house, or the house
of, or in his exaltation; signifies potent persons, men in great offices, power
and dignity; but if be in the 7. house and the in any other Angle beholding,
let the native be King, Duke, or of what degree soever; he signifies that he
shall suffer imprisonment. But generally the in any Angle with, signifies
learned and devout persons, Orators and studious of various kinds of learning
and curious Arts, the same effects produces, if he be far from the, free from
and and and behold him by any good Aspect.

The in the 11. house signifies noble persons, men of a good happy estate and
condition; living in great credit, and in process of time increase of
felicity, and the greater if or be with him, or behold him by a or Aspect:
neither do malevolent stars impedite or hinder the native, but only are
obstructive to the place of Children.

The in the 12. house frequently signifies ignoble persons servants and
Captives, sudden death to the Father, and destruction of the estate, and great
afflictions and diseases to the body: if good stars be with him nevertheless
he signifies ignoble persons, but if malevolent stars, be with him; he gives
perpetuall-calamities of body and continual bondage and servitude.

CHAP. XXI. The signification of Venus in the signs.
VEnus being Lady of a nativity, signifies loving amiable cheerful persons
luxurious, grateful, honest, near, libidinous; godly, just sincere and
faithful friends of uncorrupted freindship, of a slender handsome body,
pleasant countenance fair eyes, thick hair, a little curling, a beautiful
corporature, great drinkers, but little eaters, covetuous of venereous acts;
often entangled in love; honest and virtuous in all their actions; lovers of
mirth, delighting in music, makers of musical instruments, Painters, if be
placed in the Principal places of the geniture ture, she signifies great fame
and honor to the native, students in sacred learning. the men great affecters
of women, and the women of men, that are thereby signified; she signifies the
native to be fruitful, and to have many Children, and their Children to be
great joy and comfort to them.

But the positure and dignity of this star is diligently to be noted: for in
a nativity by night, if she be in the first 5.10. or 11. or in her own house
exaltation or Terms, or receive power from the decreasing or be beheld by, by
a or the apply to her without the testimony of, she signifies Counselors,
Treasurers, and honorable persons, or if Mars do behold her with a, she also
gives great power and dignity, if be in his own house or in the house of, or
in his terms, or in the terms of Jupiter, or in his exaltation, and Venus;
be free from the beams of the. But if be thus placed with, or in his house,
terms, or exaltation; or in the house of, or in her terms, and in good
houses or places of the geniture, he signifies sundry changes and varieties of
life. But if be ill posited, in the house or terms of by night or by day, she
signifies unchaste lustful persons, afflicted with daily calamities and
mischances, receiving great disgrace by luxurious lust and unlawful love; and
such as bring to themselves public infamy and disgrace by reason of adultery
and unlawful lusts; and for this cause to dye a shameful violent death,
especially if be in the 7. and behold Mars with any ill Aspect.

CHAP. XXII. The signification of Venus in the 12 sign.
VEnus in the ascendant in a nativity signifies Divines, godly men, beloved of
great men, employed in their affairs good Orators according to the nature and
quality of the sign; in humane signs she signifies Priests, Preachers,
foretellers of things of come; she denotes courteous honest men and rich, if
she be not impedited by some malevolent star: if be with her, it signifies
good musicians; in sixed signs, and signs of a small voice she signifies
great students, lovers of their Princes; in earthly or watery signs,
embroyderers or Painters; in four-footed signs, noble Heroic Spirits, lovers
of Cattle, and a nativity by day she signifies infamous libidinous unchaste
persons.

Venus, in the 2. house signifies inventers of Curious arts in a nativity by
night, but often branded with infamy, but by little and little attaining to a
happy condition; grateful, and free in love ^^ in this place by day she gives
many crosses, hinders marriage, and gives sudden death to the wife: but if or
behold her with a or or be with her, she causes barrenness and insufficiency
in Venereous acts; the native never marries but is a great lover of Children.

But this influence is more potent, if by day be in the house of or or in their
terms.

Venus in the 3. house is fortunate if well Aspected by, the native is
religious and marries one belonging to the Church.

Venus posited in the 4. house destroys an estate, and causes Widdow-hood, the
native is always incapable of getting any thing, and if she be joined with,
she signifies Adulterers.

But by night in this place she raises in process of time to credit and
honor and signifies the native to bebeloved of great men, and to live in good
favor and credit, she signifies the first part of youth to want nothing, but
nevertheless the mind to be filled with some vices, acording to the quality
and signification of the signs. For in tropic or double signs she signifies
Widdow-hood and loss about women; in sixed signs, love and an estate by
women, setting aside for in the 4. in this sign with the or in or, to her,
caused barrennes; and such as care not for marriage.

Venus in the 5th. house is fortunate and signifies good honest persons, such
as eafily attain to their desires; if Aspect her, she signifies famous men and
such as attain to great dignity if be placed with her, he augments the
promotion and preferment of the native, but brings Infamy and dilgrace
therewith.

But she signifies the native to be a conqueror in all things, and to receive
rewards of victories; foretellers of things to come, great gainers by wives or
women.

If be posited in the sixth house, whether it be by day or night, she signifies
ignoble Wives, Widows, or weak women, if no star be in the mid-heaven.

if a woman have posited in the sixth house of her nativity, it signifies she
shall have hard difficult labor, and undergo great peril in Childbirth; but
a benevolent star in the 10. causes happiness and good fortune.

Venus posited in the 7th. house, in her own sign by night, gives a happy old
age; but hinders marriage and Children, but brings some disgrace to the native
by reason of venereous acts, and if be with her or joined to her by a or, she
signifies unchaste lascivious libidinous persons and if and be so posited, and
behold them by or, or be posited with it denotes that women that have so
posited to be unchaste and lsacivious; and these vices are the more potent, if
these stars be conjoined with in.

If be in the 8th, house, she hinders marriage, and signifies the Wife to be
barren and deformed, if the native do marry; but if be with her, and malevolent
stars behold them, by or or be with them it signifies destruction of your
native estate; and death by a Gonorthea or Apoplexy.

But Venus in this house by night signifies riches to the native, and great
profit by the death of women, and denotes a sudden death, but without terror or
torment.

Venus in the 9th. house by day signifies the native to be much tempted of the
Devil, to go sordidly without dressing his hair, pretending themselves to be
Prophets, and interpreters of dreams, and the more if Saturn be in any Aspect
with Venus.

In a nativity by night signifies religious persons, devout worshippers of God,
studious of sacred and religious things; and sometimes the natives to be
employed in some office about the Church, or in Kings houses, or about making
Ornaments for women, whereby they increase their estate.

But if behold so posited by a or especially if he be angular, he gives to the
native many enemies; and his Children to suffer cruel death, and that for
adultery or whoredom.

But if be so posited, and or behold her with a or by an, and in to him, or and
with thus placed she gives barrenness, signifies lovers of Children, lustful
persons, and by reason of such vices given to homicide and such Crimes.

Venus in the 10th. house, signifies happy men; famous and of great and happy
fortunes; if be with her, Musicians, scholars, artists; if and be not joined
to her by any Aspect, she signifies Musicians, and Philosophers, but if behold
her with any Aspect, if signifies infamy, and men of no power nor repute, but
such as commit the tuition of their estate to others; if it be a woman that
has, so posited, it signifies her to be unchaste, and expose her self to every
lust, full of whorish actions, and to prostitute her self to whoreing to
maintain her life.

Venus in the 11th. house by night Aspected by, and, causes barrenness; and
hinders marriage: but by degrees increases an estate, by the help of friends;
nevertheless she signifies honest persons, and if she receive the be, she
signifies wealth and power to the native somtiems the chief ruler of a City.

But if by day she be thus placed with the, it signifies power wealth and good
fortune to the native, from his youth to the day of his death, and the rather
if be with them, or Aspect them.

Venus posited in the 12th. house by night signifies dally trouble and grief
to a woman, by reason of lust and unlawful love; if the native be a man she
signifies him to marry his maid, or some common whore, whereby he is without
Children, but in this place by day signifies death to the native, through
women, according to the nature of the signs for this starr has various
instuences which are difficult to be found out; for as a Painter by mixture of
several colors brings them to the true form and color of a perfect body, so
the Aspects of the stars and intermixture, one among another alters and
changes their natures.

For if be thus posited, and joined to her, if signifies men of perverse minds
full of vices, and necessary for no act, especoally if it be in a nativity by
night; but if behold them with any Aspect, he abates this malice, and conferres
much good to the native, increase of his estate and free from vice.

If the be in to, it signifies infanous lustful persons, lovers of Children,
given to incest whoredom and coveting unlawful beds; or if the be with in, or
behold her by a, it always signifies the native to burn with unlawful lust,
if it be a woman, she is mch given to lust, promiscuous love and pleasures.

But in a nativity by night posired in a good sign and well Aspected by, gives
increase of happiness wealth and honor. But by day, if behold her with any
Aspect, it signifies much ill fortune, for rejoices by night if the. or be
joined to her, and gives much happiness and felicity to the native.

But if be in this place with the she signifies injustice, for she is ill
placed here with the; but she rejoices here in the morning behind the, and
signifies good with the good, and increase of happiness.

But if she be Lady of the ascendant and of the geniture, and placed in a good
sign she gives long life, but if the giver of life oppose the Lord of the
ascendant in a nativity, by day, it abates 8. years of the age, and affects
the native with some vices; but such as do not much stain him with infamy.

CHAP. XXIII. The signification of Mercury in the signs.
IF be Lord of the geniture, he signifies witty ingenuous persons, easily
learning all things, modest searchers into the secrets of all arts, covetuous
of learning; if he be in his own house terms or exaltation, or in the house
of Venus, or behold her by a, he makes poets, eloquent Orators; in the house
of the he signifies men of a graceful speech.

But if be in the house or terms of and or behold him with a good Aspect, or
if be in any Angle, or in the third house, he signifies the native to be
addicted to religion, searchers into secret magical arts, Mathematicians,
Astrologers, Religious, faithfully keeping the bond of friendship, just and
honest, doing all things with reason and counsel.

But if Mars behold him by any Aspect or apply to him by a, and if be in the
3th. house in humane signs adorned with the testimony of, or in the first or
10. he signifies advocates, Orators, men of great wit and ingenuity, attaining
their desires by their own power.

But if be in with him in a nocturnall geniture, and placed in the best places
of the geniture, he denotes treachery accusations and stirs up the people with
envy.

But if do so behold, and be in the 7th. house, and he receive the light of the
increasing, it signifies the native to be put to death for some evil deed,
sacrilege, or false money, or the like.

Mercury being lord of the geniture signifies a small handsome body, pale faced
fair beautiful eyes; moderate eaters and drinkers, studious of all kind of
learning; and by reason of their eloquence often employed in some embassy,
loving secret learning; he signifies masters of Grammar or Oratory, Physicians
or Interpreters, careful in all their business, and thereby gaining an
estate, free from lust and luxury, walking strictly from the vulger
conversation; but if he possess any house of sickness or vice, or the
threatening rays of malevolent stars; it signifies vicious humors, if the be
ill placed either lunatic, the Cramp or Lamenesse and death thereby, of by the
water.

CHAP. XXIIII. The signification of Mercury in the 12. Houses.
MErcury in the ascendant in a diurnall geniture in such signs wherein he
rejoces signifies Philosophers, Grammarians and Geometricians, and such as
study celestial sciences, and are apt hereunto, skillfull in saered learning,
good orators, advocates; especially if he be in his own sign.

But if or behold in a nativity by day, it signifies great men, crowned with
religious actions, and oftentimes employed in the affairs of their Prince.

If behold so posited by a or, or with him in the ascendant, he casts down the
native through multiplicity of evils; but if behold with a, he signifies
prosperous actions to the native. Mercury placed in the ascendant by night
signifies Divines; and men easily attaining to whatsoever they seek after, he
also signifies the native to be grave and honest according to the nature of the
sign, sometimes the interpreter to a Prince or chief ruler.

Mercury, in the 2. house in the morning signifies men secretly and obscurely
wicked; without learning; and destitute of any help to maintain a livelihood.

By night or in the evening he signifies worshipful persons, men employed
about other men's estates. But by day the native is always afflicted with
misery and trouble.

Mercury, posited in the 3. house, signifies Priests, Architectors,
Mathematitians, Inventors of new arts, easily applying themselves to learn any
art, if, behold by or, he signifies men of a great wit and understanding, good
Counselors, and if, Aspect him so posited with, he gives great honor and
power to the native.

In the 4. house signifies men of an acute wit, and good learning, and if it be
in the morning, Masters of secret Arts.

But if and possess any other Angle of the geniture, it signifies accusers,
keepers of Jayles, and frequent loss, but in a nocturnall geniture, he
signifies workers of Gold, or diggers in mines of Gold, masters of all secret
arts: Captains and Governors.

Mercury, in the 5. house signifies hiders of Gold and treasure, providently
getting an estate, keepers of other men's treasure and goods; he also in this
house signifies the native to have many Children.

But by night he signifies profuse spenders of their estate, or that they are
entrusted with; and such as seldom keep any money, he sometimes also signifies
Geometritians, and Astrologers.

Sometimes placed in this house, in, with the increasing, afflicts the body with
many diseases and infirmities.

Mercury, in the 6th. house, brings great fortune to the native, and highly
advances him, by reason of his faculty in learning, especially if another
Planet, be in the 10th. house.

By night in this house, he signifies interpreters, fishers, fowlers,
ingravers, if there be any other star in the 10th. house. if he be oriental
in a nocturnall geniture and no other star in the 10th. he signifies
malignant malicious persons, authors of evil Counsels, thieves, liars, having
a greedy covertuous desire, after other men's goods, bearing a bitter hatred to
their friends and neighbors, full of evil actions.

Mercury, in the 7th. house in a diurnall geniture, signifies the native to be
full of vice and wickedness; burning with wicked and unlawful lusts;
signifies wives to be whores, according to the nature of the sign; if he be in
the houses of or he signifies Whores, Bauds, and such as are sordidly wicked,

In the 7th. house by night Mercury signifies rich Wives, and profit by women,
Musicians, Notaries, Schoolmasters.

Mercury, in the 8th. house Occidentall in a nativity by day, signifies
sluggish persons; not willing, nor daring to do any things, fools, malicious,
and good for nothing; but if he be in the house or terms of he makes the
native deaf especially if behold him with any Aspect, but by night in this
place, he signifies the native to have some estate from strangers, and to be
finders of some hidden treasure.

Mercury, posited in the 9th. house not Aspected by any other star signifies
contentious persons, professinng themselves to know much but masters of
nothing, malicious and acting nothing by reason.

But if he be in this place oriental, he signifies Priests, Divines;
South-sayers, Astrologers, Mathematitians, Physicians and such as get their
livings by such arts, and if any benevolent star Aspect him, he gives them
good success and great happiness.

But if malevolent stars behold him or be in or to him, he signifies
irreligious sacrilegious persons, spoilers of Churches vagabonds, exiles.

Mercury, in the 10th. house, gives to the native success in great and
admirable actions, grave, wise, and benevolent, faithful, and employed for
Princes, and great men if behold him by a or, and it be a nativity by day, or
if behold him with the like ctspect, by night.

But if behold by either or, he diverse ways hinders promotion by some kind of
offense, and hereupon cause oftentimes banishment, or some great damage and
loss; and if the be joined to, it causes a violent death.

If behold by or, it signifies the employment of the native to be always in
watery places, either the Sea, or some Pond or River, and also causes diseases
through the abounding of vicious humors.

Mercury, posited in the 11. house signifies ingenious persons, qualified, fit
for all manner of actions, and to be entrusted in great offices, if be in good
Aspect to him.

In the 12th. house also signifies ingenious persons, entrusted in great
affairs; but sometimes they are in danger, whether the event will be prosperous
or not.

But because is good with the good, and bad with the bad, we will explain his
signification with every Planet in a geniture, for by day if he be well placed
with the and, he is very fortunate; if with, unfortunate, and causes much hurt
to the native. But by night he alters his nature, for with and, he is good; but
with the very evil and unfortunate.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Conjunction of Mercury with Sol.
MErcury with the by day in the ascendant, signifies Kings, Dukes, and great
persons. But by night, signifies the Father to be ignoble; they will also be
good Artists, but live private and miserable, according to the nature and
quality of the signs.

Mercury, and the Sol in the 2d, house gives increase of estate; and employment
about Princes.

The and in the 3d. house in, signify interpreters of dreams, Physicians,
Divines, South-sayers, Inchanters, Astrologers, Mathematitians, Fortune Tellers.

In the 4th. house and the in signifies ignoble persons; skillfull and studious
in hidden and unlawful arts, but nevertheless honest and grave: but the sign
is deligently to be considered, which they are posited in, and the Lord of that
sign; for it is dangerous if they be so placed in the house of.

the Sun and in in the 5th. house, signifies noble persons, easily bringing to
perfection, all things they desire; but it is dangerous, they never having
constant felicity; and apt to deceive many.

Mercury, and the, in in the 6th. house, signifies poor, sluggish, but
laborious persons, of ignorant parents dull and slow in all their actions,
unless some other star be in the 10: but if any other star be in the 10th.
house, it is a sign of riches, ingenuity and honor, especially if a
benevolent star be in the 10th. house.

The and in in the 7th, house, by day signifies great power and riches to the
native but nevertheless a violent death.

But by night in this place they are very evil signifying perpetual evil to the
native, and to seek his nourishment by daily labor, and always to be
employed in sordid actions, and of stinking arts and trades.

In the 8th. house and the in, signifies seeble diseased persons, easy to be
deceived; in this place they signify sudden death, and frequently madness.

Mercury, and the in the 9th. house signify exorcists, and such as cure
persons, Possessed with details and evil Spirits, and by such arts gain the
greatest part of their living.

The and in in the 10. house in such signs as they rejoice in or are exahed
in, signify great potent and powerful persons especially if they have the
restimony of.

Mercury, and the in, in the 11th. house, in the latter part of ones age give
increase of estate and felicity.

The and Mercury in Conjunction, in the 12th. house, denotes poor unhappy
persons, servile flaves and such as always dye in a wandering Condition.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Conjunction, of Mercury and Saturn.
MErcury, and in in the ascendant in a diurnall genitute signifies hiders of
money, advocates, men well skilled in the law, scribes, but of languishing
bodies and soon dye.

By night in this place they signify slaves servants and Captives; and of
freemen to be delivered into servitude and bondage to potent men.

If they be in a feminine sign, in a nativity by night; they signify Evnuchs
or barren men; impotent in copulation, sordid, filthy, impudent, immodest
persons.

In the 2d. house and by day signifies herbarists and Physicians, rich and
famous in all their actions, sometimes Orators according to the nature of the
sign.

By night in this place they signify liars fools, madmen, keepers of Churches,
weak in some part of their bodies and full of sundry vices, often subject to
be accused and put in prison having no Children.

Mercury, and in the 3th. house signifies water-bearers, makers of Ornaments
for Funerals keepers of dead bodies or sepulchers, Porters.

Saturn, and in the 4th. house signifies students in secret and unlawful arts,
and get their living thereby; but some that have and in the 4th. are oftentimes
subject to imprisonment.

Saturn and Mercury in in the 5th house cause the natives oftentimes to change
their houses and dwellings, signify keepers of Granaries, of Gemmes, Pearls,
Aromaticks and mettalls, and revealers of holy things.

Saturn, and in in her 6th, and 12. houses signify in both alike, for by day
in either of these places they signify knowledge inmany siences, seeking into
secret arts and mysteries, desirous to know all humane things, they are
malicious and envious; and often afflicted with vicious diseases.

But in either of these houses by night they signify authors of false letters,
malicious, wicked malefactors, always, full of mischeife, but if and be in
either of these houses by day or night, and Aspect them either by or, unless
the evil be avoided, he signifies men to be punished by death for some
Criminal offense.

Mercury, and in in the 7th, house signifies heirs of women, covetuous of
great estates, and lovers of women.

If they be in this house, by night they denote misery to the native, all his
life and involved in many debts, vicious and feeble of body, malignant and
malicious, and subject to imprisonment, for some accusation laid against them.

Mercury, and in the 8th. house in process of time, give increase of life and
substance, and to some, an estate by the death of other men, but they shall be
troubled with some diseases about the belly; by night in this place they
signify poverty and languishing sickness, if the decreasing apply to Saturn,
or the full to Mars.

In the 9th, house, and signify prophets, makers of supersticious Images and
religious ceremonies.

In the 10th. house Mercury, and Saturn signify the native to inherit the
estate of strangers, inventors of great things, writers, actors, or sometimes
the procurators of great men; if a fortunate star Aspect them, they signify
men of a divine wit, Orators, Masters of Oratory or Grammarians, or Masters
thereof.

Mercury, and in in the 11th. house fignifie the same things as they do in the
5th.

In the 12th. house, and have the same signification as in the 6th. house is
expressed.

CHP. XXVII. Of the Conjunction of Mercury and Jupiter.
MErcury, in conjunction with in the 1. house signifies noble men, virtuous
honest and honorable, chief magistrates or Governors of Towns and Cities,
always delighting in Justice and honest actions.

Mercury, and in the 2. house in a nativity by day signifies the native to have
possessions and an estate adopted to him from strangers, and in process of
time great felicity, but in this place by night they signify foolish persons;
of no durable felicity, much subject to be deceived.

Mercury and in the 3. house signify Magitians, but always lovers of
goodness and virtue makers of hymns, religions persons and exciters of others
to religious exercises, keepers of temples, foretellers of things to come, all
which are also signified by these Planets in the 9th. house.

Merury, and in in the 4th. signifies singers and Organists, Curates, Tutors of
Children and such as have the tuition of women, and sometimes to find some
hidden treasures by chance, whereby they attain to great happiness.

In the 5th, house, and by day or night do signify the same thing: in process
of time they raise the native to great power, and make them happy in all their
actions, easily attaining what they desire, the same signification they have in
the 11th. house.

Mercury, and in the 6th. house by night and day have the same signification,
and are very fortunate, fignifying happiness to the native in all his actions,
especially if any other star be in the 10th. house, or if the apply to them,
it denotes great riches to the native, and to flow in money, to be Lords of
much Gold and great possessions.

Mercury, and in the 7th. house by night or day, signifies gain and profit
from women, public offices, men of long life a happy old age of good Counsel
and good manners, always coveting good things, but if it be in a nativity by
night and behold and by a or it diminishes their goodness.

Mercury, and; in in the 8th. house in a diurnall geniture are but moderatly
good; the native subsisting by his own invention, they signify some disgrace
to the native: in his youth, but in the latter part of his age increase of
estate.

If they be in this house by night, either the native gains something himself
to subsist well on, or some great estate is conferred upon him, but they denote
a sickly body.

Mercury, and in the 9th. house have the same signification as in the third.

In the 10th. house and signifies magistrates and men or great power according
to the quality of the native.

In the 11th. house they have the same signification as in the 5th.

Mercury, and in the 12th. house in a nativity by night and oriental,
signifies secretaries to Princes States or great men, Notaries; but often
offending, subject to much unhappiness in their youth, or put to a violent
death, but in a diurnall geniture, they signify the native not to be so much
subject to offenses; and to continue longer in their place or office; if in
this place they be Occidentall, the native is more slow in his actions, they
denote a sinister unhappy fate, much subject to trouble and popular actions.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Conjunction of Mercury and Mars.
MErcury and in in the first house, are very unfortunate, and Signify
unhappiness, to befall the native by unlawful love; and for some evil deed,
to be put to a violent death, if it be a diurnall Geniture. But by night he
Signifies men of great Offices, Captains, and such as shall have good success
in war.

But if by night be so posited and behold them by a or he Signifies much
unhappiness to the native, and in the 2. house, by day Signifies vagabonds,
fugitives, Captives, and a violent death, if the full behold them, but in this
house by night, Signifies men of an evil mind; wicked, malicious, but subject
to be deceived in all their Actions.

Mercury and in the 3d. house, Signifies foretellers of things to come, suchas
are much conversant in Implovment about Churches and in process of time,
happiness.

and in the 4th. house, signify men of a poor unfortunate Condition, enemies
and treacherous to their parents and friends, practisers of unlawful acts,
always by their evil actions involving themselves into trouble; bringing
poverty upon themselves, and subject to great and long sickness, if the behold
them by a or.

But if it be by night, they Signify the native to come to some public
office, as Captains or Magistrates, but to dye a violent death.

Mars and in the 5th. house, Signifies valiant noble men, Conquerers, and
invincible in all their actions, public treasurers; tyrants and terrible to
all their adversaries.

In the sixth house, in a diurnall Geniture, signifies great sickness,
Imprisonment, the native to suffer much by false accusations, and
Circumventions of his Servants and servile persons, or to suffer false
Imprisonment for others men's facts; and to suffer great torments, or a violent
death, especially if the full any way beheld them.

But if and be thus posited by night, they signify the native to be much in
debt, or suffer much by usury; they denote sluggish and dull persons in all
their actions; and to suffer many unjust accusations, by their servants and
envious persons.

Sometimes the natives are cruel to their servants, afflicting them with over
much labor, hunger, and torments.

Mercury and, in the 7th. house, in a diurnall Geniture, Signify the native
will kill his wife or some other woman by reason of some unlawful lust, and by
reason thereof to suffer Imprisonment and death; but generally and so posited
signifies Homicides, Thieves, Pirates, and such like according to the nature of
the signs, always pursuing evil actions and to receive a public sentence of
death; for some wicked fact. If they be thus posited by night they Signify the
native to be involved in trouble by reason of some unlawful acts committed
with women.

Mercury and in the 8th. house, in a diurnall Geniture, signify the native
seldom attaines to what he desires, subject to many dangers, and loss of all
their estates; foolish and wilful persons; often Imprisoned, and dying a
violent death.

By night in this house, he signifies men of evil parts; studious to execute
evil offices, and always living by evil acts: it signifies Thieves, Robbers,
Faith-Breakers, Inventors or Actors of wickedness, Tormentors, Hangmen,
subsisting by such actions, or oftentimes subject to die a violent death.

Mercury and in the 9th. house, Signifies irreligious unjust perjured persons;
of erroneous minds, spoilers of Churches, sacrilegious, especially if they be
far from the Sunbeames, or oppsiote to the Sun, or in his house, or if the
fulls behold them by or.

Mercury and, in the 10th. house sinnifies weak and miserable persons, loving
navigation, and watery places; sometimes slaves to Kings and great Men,
according to the quality of the signs.

But commonly and, in the 10th house, signify the native to be employed in
some public office, but not long to continue in it, by reason of some false
accusation, to be against him, whereby he will lose his place and estate:
unless he be friendly aspected by Jupiter.

Mercury and and in the 11th. house, signify always the native to dye in
fight; lovers of watery places, of weapons, sound Counselors; happy in all
their actions.

Mercury and, in the 12th. house, are very unfortunate, and signifies many
Calamities to the native, for they who have and so posited, are much addicted
to false-hood and wicked acts, much oppressed with debt; subject to suffer
public shame and disgrace, by reason of their perfidious wickedness.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the Conjunction of Mercury and Venus.
MErcury and in the ascendant in a diurnall Geniture, signifies men belonging
to the guards of Princes treasures, or such like Offices: they also signify
Musicians, Dancers, making of Musical Insttuments; public Magistrates,
Orators, Grammarians, Arithmeticians; by night in the ascendant, they represent
men of acute wits, ingenious in all their actions, Priests makers of Images,
and; in time, to attain to great Dignity; Ambassadors of Princes, of a
graceful speech and eloquence.

Mercury and in the 2d. house, in a nativity by day, signify men employed in
noble actions, and long to persevere therein, grate full and courteous in all
their lives, but subject to lustful vices.

If they be oriental in this place, they signify the natives to gain an
estate by their own industry, happy learned men, practicing, learning, and
music, cherefull honest, graceful persons: In a nocturnall Geniture, if they
they be occidentall in this place they foreshew great happiness, and an
increase of estate.

Mercury and, in the 3th. house signify good disputants in Religion, Priests,
Prophets, such as have some great office or authority in the Church,
Ambassadors of Princes.

In the 4th. house and, signify the native to be skillful in occult learning,
Magitians Philosophers, always studying celestial sciences, profitable to all
men.

Mercury and, in the 5th. house, give great riches in process of time. And
great gifts or profit from women or wives, and love amongst great persons.

Mercury and in the 6th. house, signify an estate by learning, especially if
some good star be in the 10th. house, but they seldom marry, but are lustful
and receive some disgrace thereby.

In a nocturnall Geniture, if they be oriental in this house, it signifies the
native to marry some servile servant, widow, or harlot, and always to be
servile and laborious, and employed about the the water, if there be no starr
in the 10th. house.

Mercury and, partilely placed in the 7th. house, signify many hidden and
occult diseases, in the liver, Phrensies, Melancholy, and the like, always
disaffected to Marriage, and in famous all their lives.

But by night in this house, they signify the native to gain much riches, and
an estate by wives and women; to obtain to much honor and dignity in their old
age: if neither or aspect them but especially; for if or behold them by any
aspect, they turn all the good we speak of, to the Contrary.

Mercury and, in the 8th. house, signify in a diurnall Geniture, if they be
occidentall the native to be gelded, always to be employed in laborious
actions, vicious in body and mind, not marrying, for they will be barren and
unfit for generation, and dye either vexed with evil Spirits, of an apoplexy or
Frenzy.

Mercruy and in the 9th. house, fignifies the native to gain his living by some
Employment or office belonging to Churches, Priests, Astrologers,
fortune tellers, Magitians.

In the 10th. house and posited, denotes the native to gain honor from the
people by some public employment, but to receive some disgrace by reason of
some actions of their wives.

But if they be oriental in this place, they signify inventers of Music;
players of public comedies; but unhappy in marriage, for they either marry
Whores, or public infamous wives; or they will be given to many vicious
lustful pleasures.

In the 11th. house and signifies persons, exercised in employments about
women; trusted with the estates of women; and thereby raising their own
fortunes; but afterward are again dejected and cast down by contrary fortunes.

Mercury and in the 12th. house by day, signify lovers laboring with the vice
of lustful love, and are perspicuous and notoriously known to all to abound in
those vices, and thereby tosuffer great loss; and to come to a violent death,
through lustful vices.

But in this place by night, and signify the native to suffer much affliction
by reason of whores or unworthy women, and subject often to be deceived in
their actions, and of their estates.

CHAP. XXX. The signification of the Moon, in the signs.
IF the Moon be Lady of a geniture and well placed, she signifies men stable,
constant, honorable, honest, of a large fair body, eating much meat, caring
for little drink; but the course of their lives unequal and subject to change
and variety, that sometimes their estate does increase daily, and is again
suddenly cast down and diminished; they delight to live or be conversant about
watery places; well affected to their Wives, Children, Fathers and Mothers.

But if any malevolent stars cast their beams to the, they give to the
native some infirmity about the eyes, either disfiguring them with some wound
or hurt thereabouts, or else obscureth the sight with some mist or cloud before
it: it also deformeth the beauty of the body with many scarres or marks, as
leprosy, or some malignant wounds; debilitates the whole body. But these
things the testimony of good stars prevents.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Moon in the 12. houses.
THe in the ascendant in a nocturnall geniture at full, and in those signs
wherein she rejoices, gives great increase of fortune, raises the native
above his brethren, and to great deserts in age.

The in this house by day signifies, Admirals or chief Governors of Ships;
but if by day the be in the first, and or possess any other Angle of the
geniture; if they behold her by or, or be with her, it signifies cruel
Pirates, but if the be so posited with evil Planets and Aspected of no good
Planets, it signifies a short time of life to the native.

The in the 2d. house in a nativity by day signifies men of famous and
perspicuous actions, but luxurious and much given to voluptuous delights, their
employments to be in sundry places, and to live in subjection to others.

If Saturn be in the ascendant and the in this place diminished in light, it
signifies blindness to the native by reason of some sudden hurt or wound in
the eyes; if be in the ascendant it signifies Ruptures, Hemerhoids, and such
like infirmities.

The in the 3d. house signifies the Mother to be ignoble, spotted with some
kind of infamy; but if be posited with her, it signifies the native to gain by
being some public Treasurer: but if and the be so posited and behold them, it
signifies prelates, chief rulers about church Government.

If the be in this place with it signifies the natives to be dealers in
pledges, Aromaticks, wine, or flowers.

If in a nativity by night the be in this house with, it signifies lazy
slothful persons in all their actions, attaining to nothing which they desire,
speaking sacrilegious words against religion.

If in a diurnall geniture the be in this house with and, it signifies
sacrilegious persons, unjust, irreligious, wicked Homicides.

The in the 4th. house in a nativity by day signifies an ignoble Mother, and
her husband to outlive her: but if be in any other Angle of the geniture and
in the west angle, it brings servitude or imprisonment to the mother.

But if by night the be in this place at full, it signifies a Mother rich and
noble, and greatly raises the natives by daily increase of riches.

But if the be in the 4th. house and the in the ascendant, the natives receive
deserts of happiness, some by religion, others by negotiations about women;
but by day they signify ignoble, wandering persons; their whose lives full of
troubles and dangers; employed sometimes in some servile office about the
Church, especially if any evil stars behold the.

The in the 5th. house by night signifies the native to have many Sons and
joy with them or from them, but in a diurnall geniture she gives many
daughters.

In the 6th. house, the increasing in light and well aspected by good Planets,
gives profit to the native by four footed beasts, and health and soundness of
body; but if beheld by the rays of evil lanets, she signifies miserable
humble servile laborious persons.

The in the 7th house, in a nocturnall geniture in those signs wherein she is
exalted or rejoices and increasing in light, well Aspected by or gives a happy
old age, profit by women and a happy marriage, but if she be oppressed by the
malevolent beams of evil Planets, especially in a diurnal geniture and
decrease in light; she hinders marriage, and when she does give a wife, she is
a widow, barren or very much deformed and ilfavoured.

The in the 8th. house, gives an estate by the dead, and denotes sudden death
to the native without pain or torment; but if or do behold her by or, she
often signifies lunaticks.

In the 9th. house, the being placed in a diurnall geniture, signifies the
native to remain sordidly in the Churches, and to pretend to reveal something
to men declared unto them from God; but in a nativity by night she signifies
divine worshippers of God, religious persons, having some office about the
Church, men of various Cogitations, if she be in the house of, Astronomers; if
of, singers; if the house of, Armourers, makers of weapons; if the house of,
devout persons, well skilled in the law; if of, Chemists; if the house of the
profit by fourfooted beasts; if she be in, her own house, the native has
knowledge in all things belonging to the water.

The in the 10th. house, in a nocturnall geniture in a sign wherein she is
exalted or rejoices, and increase in light and be well Aspected by, signifies
great potent persons having in their hands the power of life and death, great
Counselors, Dukes, Magistrates, happy in all their actions.

But if be in any other Angle of the geniture, it signifies much envy and
unhappiness to oppress the native.

In a nativity by day, the in the 10th. house signifies the native to be
subject to be deceived in all his actions; but if the be in the first in his
own house, or exaltation, or in the house of it signifies great potent persons,
happy in their actions.

The in the 11th. house, has the same signification, as in the fifth house is
declared.

The in the 12th. house, in a nocturnall geniture, signifies long life; but if
or, or either of them, be in the ascendant, it signifies power and happiness.

But if or, in a nocturnall geniture, be in the ascendant or one of them, and
the Moen in the 12th, it signifies many evils misfortunes, and sickness, both
to the native and his Mother.

But if there be no Planet in the ascendant, and the in the 12th. house in a
nativity by day, it signifies misery and destruction of the estate,

Or if she be alone in this house by night, she signifies miserable servile
laborious men; their bodies having a filthy savor, subject often to be
deceived, and suffer loss by strange Journeys,

The so placed in the place of fortune and apply to, or be with him, fignifies
great happiness and magistracy.

If with, or apply to, denotes much honesty; if she apply to, ^^gnifies men
happy, potent, ingenious, cordial, by learning raising themselves to dignity
and increase of their estate.

If the be in this place and apply to, it signifies miserable laborious
persons, laboring in fire or about Iron, and getting their living thereby; if
she apply to, it signifies the native to spend both his Fathers, and Mothers
estate, and to die an erist death.

In all genitures the course of the is to be diligently observed, not only on
the very day of the birth, but also we ought diligently to inquire on the 3.
day of the nativity to what star and by what Aspect she is joined, from whom
she separates and to whom she applies, whether she increase or decrease in
light, and what malevolent stars behold her; for the 3d. day gives the same
Judgment in all things as the first: which being diligently observed and
collected together, we can never err in giving judgment of the fates of men by
their nativities.

If the apply or be carried to, and increase in light, it signifies widdow-hood
to the mother, destruction of the estate and much misfortune.

If the increase in light and apply to, or be joined to him, it signifies rich,
faithful, honest, happy persons; if do not behold her by a or; otherwise, it
signifies much misery and unhappiness.

If the increasing apply to, or be joined to him in a nocturnall geniture, it
signifies crafty, violent, dangerous persons, often subject to be deceived: by
day, weak feeble bodies; subject to diseases about the eyes and stomach, and
to dye a violent death.

If the be carried to the or be joined to him, what part of the scheame soever
it be in, it signifies miserable persons, in all things unfortunate; afflicted
daily with sickness.

If the be carried to, and partilely receive the beams of the approaching, and
if the increasing apply her self to the of, if signifies noble Parents, but
the natives to be separated from their affections, and miserably burdened with
want; but they are well known, noble, full of grace and honesty, and in process
of time gain increase of estate.

But if the decreasing, apply so to, she signifies power and happiness in
youth, but to be scandalized with daily reports, unchaste lustful and burning in
lust toward women, especially if behold them with a, and the evils are the
greater if the and be in the house of or, without the testimony of.

If the be joined to, she signifies eloquent orators; especially if be well
placed in his own signs or terms, or behold them with a.

If the separate from, and apply to, it denotes rich wealthy happy persons.

The full seperating from and applying to, signifies much sickness and
infirmities, and the native to dye in his youth.

If the separate from, and apply to the, it is very unfortunate, and signifies
many calamities, madness lunatic, Dropsies, and the like to happen to the
native daily, during his life.

The seperating from and applying to signifies noble happy rich wealthy
persons, but libidinous, and thereby to suffer infamy: if the decrease in
light, it denotes the native, to cover unlawful loves; impure and immodest
lusts, but nevertheless seeking after and gaining an estate and riches.

If the separate from, and apply to and be increasing, she signifies, obscure
close persons, guilty of writing unlawful letters, studying celestial
sciences, liberal arts, good Orators and Physicians.

But if the, decrease in light, she impedites the speech, or hearing; the body
is sickly, subject to the spleen, melancholy, Coughs, Dropsies and daily
griefs of the Cholick.

If the separate from and apply to in a nocturnall geniture, and be increasing,
it denotes magistrates, men in great power, but holding their power in grea
care and danger, and not without sickness.

The seperating from and applying to the, destroys all the patrimony of Father
and Mother, the native to live from his Parents; exiles, fugitives, slaves,
Captives; especially if the be in the house of or.

If the increasing or at full separate from, and apply to, it signifies noble
potent powerful persons, but to live from their own house, soon to want their
parents, but nevertheless it signifies happiness in the latter part of their
age; honest grateful courteous persons; and much happiness to gains by their
wives.

If the separate from and apply to, he signifies Judges, Collectors of money
interpreters of the law, religious persons, in all things happy.

If the separate from and apply to and be increasing or at full, it signifies
the native to be adopted by a stranger; tutors or teachers of Children; to be
employed in moist watery places; Sailors, Pilgrims: but if the be decreasing, it
signifies servitude, misfortune, captivity, continual sickness and misery; a
miserable death; if it be a nocturnall geniture, a violent death.

If the separate from and apply to the, it signifies very great evils,
misfortunes, shortness of life, infelicity, a violent death, and to dye in a
strange Country.

The seperating from and applying to at full or increasing, denotes Adulterous
libidinous lecherous persons, loving and coveting libidinous Venereous acts,
and thereby oftentimes involving themselves into dangers; it signifies
Jewellers, painters, perfumers, commonly dealers in metals; and sometimes
according to the nature of the sign, Vintners, Innkeepers, Victuallers.

If the be decreasing in light, it signifies fortunate happy persons,
sollicitors about women and getting wealth by them; gaining by their wives
estate and credit, but sometimes suffering disgrace by Venereous acts, always
addicted to promiscuous lusts.

The full seperating from, and applying to in a nocturnall geniture, signifies
great persons, in great public authority, but wicked, malicious, always
coveting to do wickedness: if it be in a nativity by day, and the at full, it
signifies them to receive a public sentence of condemnation from the mouth of
a Judge; and therefore to be put to a violent death.

If the separate from and apply to -it denotes sluggish dull persons,
profitable for nothing; if the be at full or increasing, destroyers of their
estate, full of sundry vices.

But if the be decreasing, it denotes hunger, sickness, Lunaticks, falling
sickness, Hemorhoids, and to dye a violent death.

If the separate from, and apply to it signifies powerful rich fortunate
persons: but if she be decreasing in light, it afflicts the native with secret
hidden vices, and frequent sickness.

The in a diurnall geniture seperating from the and applying to signifies
barrennes, hinders marriage, and Children; denotes preposterous loves, filthy
unclean lusts; persons addicted to servile studies, and occupied in servile
actions, subsisting and maintayning themselves by their own endeavors, and in
process of time living happily.

But in a nativity by night it signifies the native to have many wives, to be
grateful, acceptable, well beloved, living in credit and getting a great
estate.

The seperating from the and applying to in a diurnall geniture, sigmfies the
native to be full of danger in all his life and actions; of evil manners,
sacrilegious, denying the Divinity.

In a nocturnall geniture, signifies public Notaries, Scriveners, inventers
of occult and secret writing, or unlawful letters, finders out of secret
things; whereby some gain an estate, if not hindered by or.

The seperating from the in a diurnall geniture, and applying to, destroys an
estate, divides one from his parents and brings him to want and misery, but in
process of time gives an estate and happiness, but by night it signifies
want; destruction of ones estate, much sickness and affliction.

The seperating from the and applying to by day, signifies a great estate, good
fortune, and happiness beyond measure: but in a nocturnall geniture the
natives get their estate by their own industry, are subject to daily travails,
apt to be deceived in their youth, but in age they live in good credit and
gain good estates.

If the apply from the to in a diurnall geniture, it signifies sudden death to
the parents and want to the native, commonly the parents dye a violent death,
the natives are subject to blindness or defects in the sight, lame, feeble
bodies, they dye young, sometimes a violent death; if it be a nocturnall
geniture, it signifies cruel violent persons, their employment to be about
fire, Iron or Metals; subject to continual labor.

The parting from and applying to if she be increasing or at full, signifies
stewards of noble women, thereby gaining preferment; it denotes also Dyers,
Jewellers, Armourers, delighters in Music, but libidinous; subject to daily
lusts, but grateful and amiable in venereous acts, but if the decrease, it
signifies vicious unclean persons, but of various employments as Orators,
makers of images, ingracers, Painters, susteyning the care of others pleasures
and delights.

The eperating from and applying to, at full or increasing in a nocturnall
geniture, gives a wife that is a public common woman or some of his kindred.

If it be a diurnall geniture and the decrease, the native is addicted to
filthy lusts and vicious delights, and through libidinous acts getting great
disgrace and infamy, servile wandering, filthy persons, Bauds and keepers of
Whore-houses; if the native be a woman she will be a common Whore.

If it be in a nocturnall geniture, it denotes barren persons, Eunuchs, He
moprodites; if the separate from and apply to, it signifies Noble men, Chief
Magistrates of Cities; grateful, Courous, lovers of women; if the decrease, it
signifies the natives to gain much by womaen, to live happy from their youth,
attaining to possessions, great gains, or some honorable office in the Church.

The seperating from and applying to, in a diurnall Geniture at full or
increasing, signifies misery, destruction, imptisonment, or a sudden death by
reason of the love of some one.

but if in nocturnall Geniture, the so apply to, it signifies cruel persons in
great power, but subject to daily dangers and mischances.

If the be transferred from to the, it seperates the native from his parents by
some bitter falling out. Whereby he is cruel burdened with want, full of
trouble, but unchaste and miserably afflicted with love: but after youth is
past, in process of time, he increases his estate, and easily attaines his
desires.

If in a diurnall Geniture the increasing, separate from and apply to, it
denotes deasnesse, flammerers, or such as have some impediment in their speech,
interpreters, priers into secret acts, laylors: but if it be a nativity by
night, it signifies watermen, or men employed to labor about the water: but if
malevolent stars afflict them, it denotes imprisonment and ill fortune to the
native.

If the be transferred from to, it signifies great men, Ambassadors,
Treasurers stewards of Noble men, priests, rich, happy persons.

If the be increasing, or at full, or apply from to in a diurnall Geniture; it
signifies irreligious, perjured, fallacious, wicked persons, full of malice,
their wicknesse daily increasing, Thieves, Robbers, Church-Breakers, Homicides,
murderers, and for some wicked act, to suffer a violent death.

If it be in a Nocturnall Geniture and the at full or increasing appyly to, it
signifies Captains Governors, of cities, men in great power, but terrible
tyrants, never standing long in their power, but diverse ways offending, and
therefore to be deposed banished or put to a violent death: if the separate
from, and apply to the Sun, it signifies men dull in their understanding,
impedited in their speech, deaf, poor wandering people, having no Constant
dwelling house: but in process of time, these evils will be qualified, and
after the time of youth is past they gain a lively hood by sundry employments;
if in a Nocturnall Geniture the full separate from and ayply to, it signifies
men employed in public actions, getting Credit and honor in all their
actions, and increase of happiness; it signifies orators, men of fluent
tongues, poets; gaining by women and women's affairs; Makers of painting
Pictures and Colors, Medecines, Iewellers, but living meanly neither abounding
nor in want, intemperate in venereous acts, and thereby getting some disgrace.

But if in a nocturnall geniture the be decreasing and apply to, it signifies
rich and wealthy persons, having the chief government of some Towns or
Cities; especially if the be free from the beams of the and so likewise. But
if this be in the other places of the geniture, it signifies men always of
honest actions and gaining an estate by their own: if in a nativity by day the
decreasing by joined to, and this be in the 10th. house, it signifies religious
persons, builders of Churches, Prelates or men bearing great Offices in the
Church; but in any other places of the geniture, this signifies men of mean
estates; occupied in arts about metals; or Leather-dressers, sellers of
perfumes or sweet spices; polishers of precious Jewels, Colourers of Gemms
and Jewels, ingravers of Images; builders, Choristers, such as have knowledge
in celestial sciences; learned in hidden and secret arts: and by such means,
gaining their livelihood.

The Signification of the 12 Signs or Houses in the four Angles of Heaven.
CHAP. XXXII. The Signification of the Horoscope in Aries.
IF the Horoscope be found in the Medium Caeli in the 7th. house in Libra, and
the fourth in; we come now generally to explain what the Horoscope in, and the
other three Angels signifies.

The Horoscope in for the most part signifies youth, denies any brethren, or
only one lives of many, and he is debilitated by the bitterness of some vice,
whereby his name is hated: he keeps not his Fathers estate in the same state,
it was left him; but sometimes wastes and spends it, and again gathers it
together: to some he will seem free from too much liberality, and displease
others with his free liberality; bestowing benefits upon ungrateful persons
that will never give him thanks; he will be mutable unconstant, and subject to
griefs and pains in the head.

If the Medium Caeli be also partilely in, he will persevere to attain to some
honorable acts, and flatter with a certain humility, he will be placed in some
office, chief in some learned employment, maintayning many, procureing estates
to others; ingenious in many necessary things; penetrating into celestial
secrets if behold that place or be in that house.

The third Angle the 7th. house chalengeth, wherein if be posited, it signifies
the native to be a daily servant in the houses of Kings or Princes, or employed
in public actions, but their lives to be mutable, and of an unequal fortune,
infelicity following happiness, and misfortune prosperity, casting them
suddenly down from the highest degree of dignity to the lowest of humility,
envy always fighting against their happiness; especially if do not behold the
Horoscope by a or be not posited therein, the evils are the stronger.

The next Angle is the 4th. house. wherein if be found, and the Horoscope in,
it signifies famous happy persons; if be in the ascendant, and behold that
place, or be in that place; but some of the natives kindred will be adversaries
to him, either because of himself, or of some necessary thing belonging to
him, he will be sordid and slovenly in his hair; but will always have plenty
of all necessaries, especially if be found in any Angle.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Horoscope in Taurus.
THe Horoscope in Taurus always denotes the native to be defatigated with many
labors, losing whatsoever he gets in his youth; but afterward whatsoever he
lost before, he shall cheerfully regaine, and a plentiful increase of
happiness he shall see his enemies miserably cast down and kept in continual
subjection; if the Medium Caeli be in, he shall always be in favor and
freindship amongst great men, and his whole life shall be conversant in
public actions, and his employment for the most part to be about the water;
sometimes enviously accused, but he shall have increase of riches as well as
loss.

If the 7th. house be the sign, the native will be prudent in the whole
conversation of his life, nourishing others by some Office of his procuring,
burying his first wife; and if the native be a woman, she buryeth her husband
and a son.

If the 4th. house be in Leo, the native gains an estate by his own proper
labor and by diverse kinds of wyles gains a great estate, but always living
happily, but these things are to be judged according to the nature of the
geniture.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the Horoscope in Gemini.
IF the Horoscope be found in it signifies the native to begin his life with
labor; to receive comfort from his parents, bound in freind-ship to wicked
men; Which gives his patrimony.

If the Medium Caeli be in, it signifies the native to live in watery places,
and to possess his estate and patrimony, to gain his livelihood by other men's
endeavors, and either to be potent in two Cities, or to divide his patrimony.

If the West Angle be in, he brings some damage to himself or his kindred
occasioned by him, and his mind to be troubled with many cares by reason of
the various changes of the time, he shall have many enemies, and be beaten out
of his own Country to wander in strange Nations; but afterward shall return
to his own Country, and his estate be restored unto him.

The 4th, house in signifies the first part of the natives age; shall be
wearyed with the continuation of many labors, but in process of time to
attain to many felicities and much happiness; but all these things are to be
considered by the position or the whole geniture, which we have frequently
desired you, diligently to observe.

CHAP. XXXV. The Horoscope in Cancer.
THe Horoscope in Cancer signifies acute ingenious persons, doing al things
with moderation; subject to much anger; but the same is soon mitigated and
qualified; they subsist by public employments or offices, using much flattery.

If the Horoscope be in and therein, it signifies a violent death, or much
sickness, or their own brothers to suffer for their vices.

If be in the 10th. house or Medium Caeli, it signifies the native to lead his
life amongst great men, to have his daily subsistence from other men's estates,
always seeking after and desiring good things; but his estate subject to
mutability, sometimes loosing and as often gaining.

Capricorn in the 7th. house denotes the native shall be troubled with some
daily hidden afflictions, but the same shall be appeased after, much disprofit;
he will be ingenious in his actions and understanding, but susteyning some
secret grief, and his mind afflicted with many forrowes.

Libra, in the 4th. bouse or Imum Caeli, denotes the native shall suffer many
labors; applying to civil women, and conversant in popular employments, he
will wast the substance of his patrimony that is left him; he will be in power,
and necessary to others; well learned and trusted with others secrets;
attaining to a very old age, and have an honorable burial.

If Mercury be in the following sign, he will be preferred before all his
brethren; but if be in the 2d. house, the daughters have most preferment, if
the Lord of the geniture be well placed, and Aspected by benevolent stars.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Horoscope in Leo
IF the Horoscope be found in he that has this ascendant shall be subject to
much labor and many dangers, well known, always ingenious, one having free
power; not expressing his malice in all things, desirous to live and Rule; and
getting the Substance of his estate by his own endeavors; but if be partilely
placed in the ascendant, or the behold him with a or, he denies having any
Children, but if be found so placed, he gives one daughter.

The Medium Caeli in signifies the native to live in some public employment
or in the Church, to Contract marriage with some widow, whore, servile person,
or old woman or one publicly infamous he shall receive his greatest honor
from some potent person; he will be Ignorant, but nevertheless shall have a
prosperous increase of fortune.

Fortune always favors fools.

If be in the 7th. house, it signifies his life shall be subject both to loss
and gain, he will be grateful and approved in some things.

If be in the 4th. house, he will be the Chief in some employments, but if do
behold this place by any aspect, he will sometimes be imprisoned; if be so
posited and oriental, he will be a soldier or Commander of an army; but will
dye in some strange and foreign place, a Sudden or violent death.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Horoscope in Virgo.
THe Horoscope being in, signifies many Cares and troubles to the native, he
will be skillful in telling things to come, much subject to unlawful love,
Coveting the Society of many women; but he shall labor with these vices but
until the Anaphora of his sign be Completed. He will he well learned humane,
friendly, knowing much and seeking into all secret learning, of a good memory:
gaining some office by his learning, and thereby great increase of his estate.

The Medium Caeli in, signifies an estate by public or religious employment;
in his old age, a devote worshipper of God, and having some government of a
City, seeking after hidden things but Ignorant of much learning; just and
upright in the latter part of his age.

If be in the 7th. house the native shall travail in many strange places, and
he known to many men, many will flatter him; he will be grateful, happy,
amiable, acute, full of much Employment, in all his Conversation Noble.

The 4th. house in signifies the native will be happy, receiving an estate from
his friends, many will flatter him, he will rejoice in the happiness of his
Children, but shall grieve for the loss of some of them; he will be apt and
fit for all things, learned and happy.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Signification of the Horoscope in Libra.
LIbra in the ascendant, signifies much sickness many troubles and dangers,
many adversaries; the native will be religious, a worshipper of God; but his
life much subject to mutability, but inconquerable in all things; the later
part of his time will be more glorious, but having few Children, of a right and
sincere Judgment in all things, proceeding from a divine and heavenly mind.

Cancer in the 10th. signifies he will be ocpucied in some famous actions, his
old age will be honorable pentifull, rich and happy, having a good estate, but
few Children. But if, behold this place by any aspect, he will have a happy
offspring.

Aries in the 7th. house, signifies profit to the Native by the water or watery
places; he will be fearful, he will be in danger of his life in some desert
place, subject to dangers and sudden travailes, having some hidden vice; and
happiness in his old age.

The 4th. house in, the natives estate shall be subject to mutability; sometimes
losing and again getting what he lost, but he shall get all his estate by his
own proper industry, and the latter part of his estate shall be very happy.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Horoscope in Scorpio.
THe Horoscope in signifies the native to be acute in youth, angry, subject to
many misfortunes, but afterward happy, and given much to mirth; if behold him
by any Aspect, they will be famous, religious, and magnified by their own
Studies, always high spirited, running into some danger by reason of their
friends or business, and after many infortunes by the loss of Children, they
shall rejoice in an happy Offspring.

Leo in the Mid-heaven, signifies the native shall be wearied with many
labors, and obliged to some great person for honor or maintenance; he will be
valiant, and in process of time flattered by many; and by this means will raise
many others: he will be placed in some authority, and increase his estate left
him by his Father.

Taurus in the west Angle, signifies the native shall be oppressed with many
adversaries, always covetous of venerous acts, and subject to some infamy or
disgrace; he shall get an estate, and lose it again, and afterward regain it
again.

In the fourth House, signifies danger of life by water, and to whomsoever the
native shall be profitable, they will always be ungrateful to him.

CHAP. XL. The Horoscope in Sagittary.
SAgittary in the Ascendant, signifies the native shall have many adversaries;
but an estate conferred upon him which he hoped not for: he will be frequently
in strange Countries, going much by Sea, in public employments, conversant on
the water, or about watery places, having much Learning, Prudent, Ingenious,
and skilful in all Arts.

In the tenth, denotes he shall be preferred to great power, the common people
shall obey him, and many shall subsist by him; but on whomsoever he bestows any
thing, they will always be unthankful unto him.

in the seventh, signifies the native shall have children and nephews in his
old age; he shall easily overcome all troubles and losses, addicted to secret
learning, ingenuous, just and prudent, always overtaking his adversary with
subtle dissimulations, teaching all things, and in process of time, attaining
to happiness.

Pisces in the fourth or Imum Caeli, intimates the native shall gain his
livelihood about the water, or in watery places; he will be of good credit,
known, and noble, disaffected to a wife or marriage, unless behold that place
by some Aspect, then he easily takes a wife, and is well affected to her; but
she is a whorish or adulterous woman.

CHAP. XLI. Of the Horoscope in Capricorn.
THe Horoscope in, signifies the native will be faithful in his freind-ship to
his friends, subtle, and wanting nothing that appertains to the sustenance of
his life, he will travail in strange Countries and relieve strangers, but they
will always be ungrateful to him; he will be amiable, of a little Spirit, a
long life, and wealthy; abounding in lust to women; and contemning and
dispraising them when his lust is satisfied; studious to learn hidden secrets,
either of others lives, or of religion and holy things.

The Mid-heaven in denotes the native to be just, honest, learned, well-spoken,
performing vows to God for deliverance from some danger or necessity: he will
have good success in his actions, but afterward some misfortune; yet he will
gain by the misfortune of others, and have profit by others deaths, and gains
some secret profit by some ancient thing.

Cancer in the 7th. signifies the native to undergo much trouble by his
friends or kindred, and to be subject to many dangers.

Aries in the 4th. house signifies the native will fall into many errors, and
many disprofits; his life subject to change and mutability, sometimes in a high
degree of dignity, and sometimes cast down in adversity; he will have a wife
and his first son or what son soever he has, shall be much debilitated
with sickness.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Horoscope in Aquarius.
A Quary in the ascendant signifies the native shall wast and lose whatsoever
he has gotten, but shall again gather it together; he will cherish and
relieve many, but in what state soever he is placed he will be in many dangers,
despaired, of by men, but delivered by the asistance of God; he will be smitten
by many with the stroke of envy, but he will be in some religious office, and
well known by his good acts to great men.

The Mid-heaven in denotes the native will be valiant, but leading a hard life
and conversation, removing from place to place, if he be ingenious he will have
some servile office; but the event of all his actions will be prosperous, but
about the beginning of his marriage he will suffer many misfortunes by his wife
or Children, and afterward much good fortune is conferred upon him.

Leo in the 7th. house signifies the native and his wife will live at
variance; either he will join himself to some unworthy woman; or burn in
love to many; and many enemies will rise against him with some sudden actions,
and by his own power he will take a wife belonging to another man or espoused
to another or a widow.

Taurus in the 4th. house signifies the native to be great and much conversant
amongst potent persons; to gain honor in all his actions, and much esteemed
for his learning, and to live a very old age; if the Lord of the geniture be
also well posited.

CHAP. XLIII. Of the Horoscope in Pisces.
THe Horoscope in, signifies ingenious prudent persons, faithful friends; but
having many enemies, and easily vindicating himself from them; inclined to
travail, and negotiations in foreign Countries, and in process of time
increase of estate and felicity.

The Medium-Caeli in involvs the native into many troubles and dangers; having
many great variances with potent persons, and subject to ensnare himself for
some other man; losing all his first possession and estate; and again getting
the dominion and possession of another man's estate, by the means of some
faithful friend.

Virgo in the 7th. house denotes the native to be prudent faithful and
helpful to others, having many faithful secrets committed to him; raising many
friends by his helps, but they always prove ungrateful, he will attain to
much riches, and greatness, and have a loving tender affection toward his
wife, but she will sometimes be ungrateful to him, and he will suffer much
misfortune by his Wife and Children.

The fourth house in denotes much sickness and labor to the native, secret
hidden greifes, but afterward good fortune; on a sudden an estate shall be
confered upon him to supply all his wants, and in his old age he shall dye
suddenly in a strange Country; but herein the Lord of the geniture is to be
observed; for some will give another Judgment hereof, but this is the
substantial truth of it.

CHAP. XLIIII.
THe ascendant in the terms of Saturn does signify slow dull sluggish
persons slow of speech; alienated from all goodness, hated in all their
actions, keeping anger long.

If be in the ascendant in his terms, he denies the native to have any
brothers or sisters, or the first borne to dye an evil death, or some evil
fortune to befall them, and the native to have no Children.

If be in the Horoscope in the terms of, it signifies sordid covetuous
persons, always doing servile acts, and letting all their estate be at the
disposing of others.

Mars so posited signifies malicious, wicked, cruel persons giving themselves
over totally to work wickedness; but their mischeife is often discovered and
brought to light.

The so placed denotes men of temperite manners, but always armed with envy,
imperfect, and defective in their Counsels.

Venus thus placed signifies men sordidly lascivious about Venereous acts, and
always covetuous of other men's goods.

Mercury in this place, signifies men sordidly wicked in all their actions,
oftentimes imprisoned, suffering much trouble by reason of their wickedness.

The thus posited and at full or increasing, signifies men vain, both in mind
and body: but if the be decreasing in light, she vitiateth their bodies with
malignant humors; either dropsies, or a deformed pale Color, or madness.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Horoscope in the terms of Jupiter.
THe Horoscope in the terms of signifies wife, virtuous persons; and if be
posited there, magnanimous, but full of cruelty.

Saturn or in those places by night signifies perfidious persons, never keeping
their credit or promise; wise in their own conceits, leading a poor life, full
of sorrow and misery; but in a diurnall geniture, these evils are in some sort
mitigated.

Venus thus placed signifies men apt to perform all good offices; but never
having prosperous success in marriage; they are loving and daily reaping the
fruits of felicity.

Mercury posited here, denotes persons of good manners, free from malice;
simply and plainly understanding and discerning many things.

The thus placed is very fortunate and gives soundness and health of body.

The in this place, signifies the same as the does.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Horoscope in the terms of Mars
THe Horoscope in the terms of always signifies men of an acute quick
Spirit; in this place signifies also acute Spirits, but long keepers of Anger.

Jupiter in the same place also signifies an acute sharp wit, but such as are
desirous always to do good to others.

Mars in the Horoscope in his own terms, signifies in a diurnall Geniture men
addicted to all wickedness, but timorous and subject to unfortunare Changes;
in a nocturnall Geniture, Cruel irreligious persons, destroyers of other men's
goods.

The full thus placed denotes crafty subtle persons, but oftentimes ensnared
in treachery.

Venus in this place signifies lustful adulterate persons.

Mercury in this place signifies homicides, such are given to wicked lascivious
and unlawful lusts, and drunkenness; ingenious, but seldom having any true
Judgment of any thing.

The thus posited, denotes men diverse ways contending with their adversaries;
and their adversaries doing the like by them, they are very laborious,
receiving some wound by fire or iron: but if it be a diurnall geniture, and the
at full, it gives a strong body; if a nocturnall geniture, it denotes a strong
well composed body fit for labor; but covetuous, and always dying a violent
death.

CHAP. XLVII. The Horoscope in the terms of Venus.
THe Horoscope in the terms of Venus signifies lovers of music, benevolent
persons, desirous to be profitable to all men, in a diurnall geniture great
dignity profit and good fortune,

Saturn, thus placed in the terms of Venus, signifies scorners of women,
haters of marriage, if it be a diurnall geniture; but in a nativity by night it
signifies sordid unclean immodest persons, addicted to unnatural lusts; not
loving natural coition; mutable in their Counsels, and haters of all
goodness.

Jupiter in this place signifies, tender delicate but libidinous persons,
luxurious but free from envy and cruelty, merciful in any office, their
employment to be appertayning to the Church.

Mars, in these terms in a diurnal geniture gives sudden troubles, losses many
and seditions among the people, whereby he comes into much danger; but
signifies lovers of music and poetry, engravers, or the like.

In a nocturnal geniture, in the terms of, gives a double marriage, and great
riches thereby; but withal much carfulness.

The thus placed, signifies the native to Prosper daily in his actions, but
dissertion in marriage and disprofit thereby, but it gives gains and love
amongst great men, always favored and commended by them.

Mercury in the terms of, thus posited in the ascendant, signifies
libidinous, wise, and of good manners; desiring to profit others, Grammarians,
Astrologers, Poets, Orators.

The thus placed, signifies Artificers, delighting in neat honest arts;
Ingravers; getting commendations by their work; but in a nocturnall geniture,
she signifies fishermen, or such as get their lively-hoods by such employments;
signifies zealous persons; of a good mind and understanding.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of the Horoscope in the terms of Mercury.
THe Horoscope in the terms of signifies learned men, credited with offices
of trust, Orators, stewards of great men.

If be therein placed, he signifies Astrologers, Mathematians; doing virtuous
offices, and esteemed for their knowledge.

Saturn in the terms of signifies unhappy cruel persons, slow in their words
and actions, great laborers, full of poisonous malice, long keepers of anger,
of an evil report; interpreters of dreams, rash in their Counsels.

Jupiter in this place signifies men skilled in the law, physicians, advocates
for great persons, but lustful and adulterers; but in a nativity by night he
signifies the natives to be scriveners and of a good report and credit unto the
end of their lives.

Mars thus placed in a diurnall geniture signifies wicked malicious persons,
contentious, cruel, rash, not ruled by reason, clamorous, impudent, full of
raging preposterous fury, hangmen, full of all wickedness; but in a nativity
by night, these evils are something qualified.

The thus placed signifies famous Noble men of popular applause and fame,
interceders or advocates in the defense of the people, whereby they are
publicly known, exercising many offices; and if be thus posited with the,
they do all things with sound Counsel and reason, and are of an incorrupt
judgment.

Venus in the terms of, has the same signification as we have declared to
have in the terms of; she signifies great happy persons, easily attaining
their desires in all things, learned merry persons, lovers of music, Poets,
famous for their verses; gaining estates by others mischances.

The in the terms of in a diurnall geniture, makes artificers, such as are
preferred for their artificial works; but in a nocturnal geniture, she denotes
such as have knowledge in all arts, all manner of artists, delighting in all
manner of exercises ingenious, dealing in Merchants and for reign affairs,
knowing all things, and for diverse causes are transferred from one place to
another, and striving to hide and dissemble all grief and infirmities.

FINIS.
Books sold by John Allen at the Rising Sun in St. Paul's Churchyard between the
two North doors in the New Building, etc.
Divinity.
BEzain Novum Testamentum, in folio Doctor Holdsworth works complear, 4o. Mr.
Carylls fifth Vol. Job 4o. -- his seventh Vol. on Job 4o. Mr. Grenhills second
Vol. on Ezekiel, 4o. Mr. Cradocks Gospel-liberty, 4o. Mr. Lockyers works in 4o.
Bishop Andrews Catechisticall doctrine, 12o. Simsons Justification, 8o. Doctor
Ainsworth, Communion of Saints, 8o. -- His Arrow against Idolatry, 8o. Welsh
Testament, 12o. Richardsons Saints desire, 120. Jacob Behme of Election and
predestination, 4o. H. N. His first exhortation to the Family of Love, 8o.
Cotton on the Covenant, 8o.
Books of Art.
Streets Ephemerides, with Keplers way of direction for Nativities. Magia
Adamica; or, the antiquity of Magicks. by Eugenious Philo lothes Lumen de
Lumine; or, a new magical Light. by Eugenious Philo lothes Anthroposopia
Theomagica. by Eugenious Philo lothes Caelestis Legatus; or the Celestial
Ambassador, by John Gadbury, etc: Opus Astrologicum, sold by Richard Moon at
the seven Stars, in Paul's Churchyard.
FINIS.

