blazon or coat of arms
By the COUNCIL of STATE.
THe Council of State taking notice of the Tumultuous and Barbarous actings at
the New-Exchange in the Strand in the County of Middlesex, upon the 21. and 22.
of November last past, The same being accompanied with the drawing of Swords,
discharging of Pistols, and such other high Misdemeanors as are scarce to be
paralleld by the actings of any persons living under the protection of a civil
Government, And which, in the effects thereof, produced not only a very great
and notorious Violation of the public Peace, but also the Murdering of one,
and the Assaulting, Wounding, and Affrighting of many other of the People of
this Nation, pursuing their ordinary Callings and occasions; And for as much as
the said Exchange is a place of public resort and Trade, The Council have
therefore thought it necessary hereby to declare their resentment of those
proceedings, and their just Displeasure against the same. And as they intend
vigorously to prosecute the Offenders, so, to the intent the like evils may be
better prevented in time to come, They do hereby strictly require and charge,
That no Person or Persons, of what quality soever, do presume, at the said
Exchange, or any other like public place, to Occasion, Encourage or Abet, any
tumultuous Meetings, or hazard a breach of the civil Peace, by Drawing there,
or in any other such place, any Sword or other Weapon, Discharging, Presenting
or Bearing any Gun, or Pistol, or Firing of powder in Granados, or in any
otherwise whatsoever. Of which Command, it will be expected that all Persons
whatsoever take notice, and demean themselves accordingly, upon peril of being
reputed, and dealt withal as disturbers of the public Peace, Whereof a very
strict account shall be taken: And all Justices of the Peace, and other public
Ministers, are required carefully to perform their duties in this Behalf; As
also to use their utmost endeavors to prevent and restrain all immodest, and
unhandsome demeanors of such as shall resort to the said Exchange, That so no
just cause of offense may be given to sober minds, nor any thing there acted
dishonorable to Religion, or the Nation.

Saturday 10. December 1653.
At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That this Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

John Thurloe Sec.

London, Printed by Henry Hills Printer to the Council of State.


