A DECLARATION from the GENERAL AND COUNCIL of STATE, To incite all the good
People of these Nations to thankfullness and holy rejoicing in the Lord, for
the late great Victory at Sea, obtained by the Fleet of this Commonwealth
against the Dutch, upon Thursday and Friday being the second and third of June
1653.
IT has been a Custom much exercised to enjoin Days and Duties of Thanksgiving
for Mercies received from the Lord: The suitableness of which practice with
Gospel Times, and that Gospel Spirit, which is only to bear Rule in the
Churches of God (where the Worship is to be in Spirit and Truth, exercised by a
Free and willing People) is besides the intent of this Paper to dispute.

But considering how welcome to the Lords People every occasion of praise,
ministered by the Lord himself, and minded by those that manage the Public
Affairs, is, to such as wait for his Salvation, we have thought fit to commend
this high and Heavenly Exercise and Privilege, to all those, who are faithful
in these Lands, in the words of the Prophet Isaiah.

Isa. 12. 4. In that day ye shall say, Praise the Lord, call upon his name,
declare his doings among the People, make mention that his name is exalted.

Zion; for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of thee.
Truly this is such a Day, if not that Day, it may be the dawning of it.
Isa. 10. A day of woe to unrighteous Judges, to Tyrants, to all the proud of
the Earth.
Isa. 11. The day of him who is the rod, the branch, and the root of Iesse.



This great Success against the Dutch (who, a few days before, were lifted up
with their Success in getting out their ^ets for Trade, and bringing their
Ships laden with Merchandise home in safety, and in their braving it upon our
^^^s, shooting against our Towns and Castles in the absence of our Fleet) was a
most Signal, and every way, a most ^^^nable mercy.

^he Victory was a complete one.

The Enemy flying with great Terror and Astonishment, having received great
loss of Men and Ships, and this in ^^view and hearing of the Subjects of
France, and Spain, and their own Countrymen.

It was without the loss of one Ship on our part.

It was also seasonable, in abasing Pride, Haughtiness and fleshly Confidence,
and in discovering Hypocrisy.

It was an Answer to the Faith and Prayers of Gods People, and to their great
hopes and expectations from the Lord.

It is a Mercy minding us of, and sealing to us, all our former Mercies.

A mercy at such a time as this, to say no more; what Mercies it has in the
Bowels of it, time will declare* who knows?

One of which we desire from our Hearts, and Hope may be, as of Establishment
and Union to all those that fear the Lord amongst us: So of conviction to that
Nation (at least to all those that fear the Lord there) of their Opposition to
the Work of the Lord in the midst of us: And of their Duty to be serviceable to
Christ (with their Brethren) in that which He is doing in the World, preferring
their usefulness therein, before all their Worldly advantage.

We shall conclude our Exhortation with that of David.

Psalm. 107.

Psalm. 118.
Israel now say, that his mercy endures for ever.
Aaron now say, that his Mercy endures for ever.


The General and Council of State have appointed the 23. of this infant June to
meet (if the Lord permit) with the Council of Officers, to praise him.

Saturday, June 12. 1653. At the Council of State at White Hall, Ordered, That
this Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Jo. Thurloe Secr.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, Henry Hills, and Thomas Brewster, 1653.


