An Emblem of the Times: OR, A seasonable Exhortation drawn from the
consideration of Gods gracious dealing with ENGLAND, above all other her
neighbour-Nations.
Legal Punishments
While on this Emblem thou do fix an eye
Know it presents ouryles late misery
War and the pestelence those judgments great
For gospill great abuse much felt of late

Revel. 19. 1. Salvation glory and power to the Lord our God.

2. For true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged those which
corrupted the earth, etc. and he has avenged the blood of his Servants.

6. Alleluia, for the Lord our God reigns.

15. Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword that with it he should smite the
Nations, he shall rule them with a rod of iron, etc.

17. An Angel cried with a loud voice saying to all the fowls that fly in the
midst of heaven, Come and gather your selves together unto the Supper of the
great God.

18. That ye may eat the flesh of Kings and the flesh of Captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, the flesh of horses and those that sit thereon.

Zeph. 2. 8. I have hard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the
children of Ammon, whereby they have reproach't my people, and magnified
themselves.

Verse. 9 Therefore as I live says the Lord surely Moab shall be as Sodom.
etc. therefore they shall be a perpetual desolation, the residue of my people
shall spoil them.

10. This shall they have for their reproach, and for their pride, because they
magnified themselves against the people of the Lord.

Isai. 9. 17. Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in them, nor have mercy on
their fatherless and widows, for every one is an hypocrite, and an evil
doer, and every mouth speaks folly.

Isai. 10. 6. I will send him against an hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and tread them down like mire in the streets.

Isai. 16. 6. We have heard of the pride and haughtiness of Moab and of his
wrath, but his lies shall not be so.

Isai. 19. 11. Surely the Princes of Zoar are fools, the counsels of the
wisest Counselors of Pharaoh are become brutish.

12. Where are they, let thy wise men tell thee now, and let them know what the
Lord has purposed.

Isai. 22. 9. 12. You have seen the breaches of the Cities of David that they
were many.

In that day did the Lord God of* Hosts call to weeping, and mourning, etc.

1 Pett. 4. 17. The time is come that judgment has begun at the house of God,
and if it first begin at us, what shall become of those that obey not the
Gospel?


ENglands admired change, who can ascend?
Or show the ground, why war thus near should end?
A Civil War thus in our sinful Nation,
How far above all humane expectation.
Our sins that caused the same as great as those
That ruined Germany, Ireland do expose:
Whereby such sad and doleful lamentation,
With depth of grief, o're-whelm their Nation.
Oh England! Isreal's God has saved thee,
And kept thee from intended slaverie.
The great oppression and Egpytian yoke
He only has dissolved, and staid that stroke:
Words are unable to express that love,
And tender dealing, whose affections move
To carry on a work, and heal our bleeding I Will,
This work's intended, for such sinners vile,
Then with what thankful hearts, obedient,
Oh now delay no time, with speed repent,
Wars dismal voice of late thus heard to sound
Throughout the Kingdom, let not fall to ground.
Shall great salvation from free love appear?
Shall songs of mourning turn to praise and prayer?
Shall wrath and vengeance turn to tender love?
Shall peace present her treasure from above?
Shall truth and mercy woo a sinful Nation?
Shall Justice stay her stroke, what provocation
The danger of relaps, most desperate,
Oh therefore now return, before too late.
War sheathing of his sword, yet armed both stand,
And stays a while, yet ready at command.
If sin still stay the close, our expectation
Frustrate shall be, without a Reformation.
Our plenty of the Gospells blessed food
Becomes not such sad janglings, it is not good
When children strive where plenty there is store,
Then wantonness, not hunger, is the more.
This nice disliking if no novelty,
Poor pampred England cannot justify,
Oh what a sad condition are we under,
That by division thus are rent asunder.
The head and tongue, which so deceitful are,
Yet most preferred, whilst hearts neglected are.
What shall thy comfort be that know the most,
When filled with pride and sin, then cease to boast:
Go learn to do what yet thou slighted have,
Then shall thou know, The doer shall be blessed.
Obedience, that great Scripture-Character,
Accounted now by some a work of nature;
A faith but to believe, and for dispute,
How greatly valued, and of most repute?
But Scripture-Worthies (still upon Record)
Declare the truth, that now obtain reward:
Noah, Abraham, Moses, what endured they,
With many others, whom we mention may:
In Holy Writ, there is not a Saint there set,
But still obedience and his faith have met:
Then would we war and pestilence should cease,
That England might abound with truth and peace?
Let sinners all forsake their provocation,
Turn from their evil to humiliation:
Then the destroying Angel quite shall turn
And we no longer sadly caused to mourn,
But Hallalujahs for our great salvation,
Shall sound with joy to him that saved the Nation.
London: Printed by R. A. 1647.


