THE CASE OF John Emmerton OF THE MIDDLE TEMPLE, Gent.
THat the said Mr. Emmerton and Mrs. Bridget Hyde, Daughter and Heir of Sir
Thomas Hyde Baronet deceased, by Dame Mary his Wife (who was afterward the
Wife of Sir Robert Vyner, and now also Deceased) were upon the first day of
October 1674. To prove the Marriage 4 Witnesses. To the Lady Vyners consent 6
Witnesses and her Letter. To Mrs. Hydes consent 14 Witnesses. To Sir Thomas
Hydes intention 3 Witn.
Lawfully Married together by one Mr. Brandley a Minister in Holy Orders, by
and with the Free Consent and Direction of the said Lady Vyner, and at the
Earnest desire of the said Mrs. Bridget, and according to the full intentions
of her said Father Sir Thomas Hyde, all which the said Bridget, has since
frequently declared and acknowledged.

That the said Sir Robert Vyner was informed of the said Marriage upon the
third of January 1674. and did then declare he was satisfied with the Reality
of it. Yet he said, To this 3 Witnesses.
for other peoples satisfaction he would have some of the Witnesses that were
present at the Solemnity come up to London and make Oath of it.

That Mr. Edlyn and Mr. Brandly (two of Mr. Emmerton's principal Witnesses did
accordingly come up upon the Eleventh of January 1674. To this 4 Witnesses.
in Barkhamsteed Coach, and nigh the end of Grayes-Inn Lane, the said Coach was
beset by about Ten armed men, among whom was one Christian (then servant to the
Earl of Danby) which said Company violently pulled the said Mr. Brandley out of
the Coach, (pretending a Warrant from Sir Joseph Williamson then Secretary of
State) and Mr. Brandley then desiring a friend might go with him, one of the
said Company Swore, that if any one stirred or offered to follow, he would
Pistol him; To this 1 Witness and Circumstances.
and so they forcibly carried the said Mr. Brandley away, and tempted him with
promises of 1000 l. (pressing 20 l. upon him) and terrifying him with threats
of Ruining and Pistoling him, to force him to deny that he had Married the said
Mr. John Emmerton to the said Mrs. Bridget Hyde.

That Mr. Brandley having never been in London before, and being thus threatened
in a strange place, and fearing lest he should be Killed if he did not comply
with them, did, when he was carried late that night before the King at
White Hall, and there Examined, Prevaricate in his Testimony concerning the
said Marriage, the Earl of Danby, Sir Joseph Williamson and Sir Robert Vyner
being then present: after which Examination Mr. Brandley was Committed to the
Custody of one Copley a Messenger, and by him detained some days.

That Mr. Brandley being troubled in Conscience for what he had been forced to
do, To this 4 Witnesses.
did get leave of the said Messenger to go out, and did then of his own accord
go to Sir Robert Vyner, and confess he had Married the said Mr. Emmerton to the
said Mrs. Hyde, and begged his pardon for so doing, and threw down the 20 l.
(that had been forced upon him) bidding Sir Robert Vyner take it, for he could
not in Conscience keep it.

That after the said practices upon Mr. Brandley, Mr. Emmerton's Wife was taken
from all his Relations, and put into the hands of Strangers; To this 10.
Witnesses.
who kept her so, that Mr. Emmerton could not speak with her since the death of
her Mother the Lady Vyner to this day; and who by threats, promises and
persuasions, and all other undue means, have endeavored to divert her
affections from her said Husband Mr. Emmerton.

That the Lord Chief Justice Hale upon the Examination of the evil practices
aforesaid, The Records and 4 Witnesses.
did think fit to order a Trial at Law at the King's Bench Bar in Easter Term
1675. where the only point in Issue was, Whether Mr. Emmerton was Lawfully
Married to Mrs. Bridget Hyde or not, and the Jury were so well satisfied of the
Strength and Validity of the Proofs and Evidence, that they gave a Verdict for
the Marriage without going from the Bar, with the approbation of the said Court.

Proved by the acts of that Court.
That Mr. Emmerton having Exhibited a Libel in the Archies Court of Canterbury
the second of March 1674. for the Recovering of his said Wife, the Judge of the
said Court did declare (by Color of an obsolete Canon) that his Witnesses that
were at the Marriage were Excommunicated ( ipso facto) for being at a
Clandestine Marriage; and so put Mr. Emmerton to many long Debates, to great
Charges and trouble before they could be Restored and absolved ad testificandum
only: but as for Mr. Emmerton's Father and Mother (after four Terms Debate)
the said Judge did utterly Refuse to absolve or admit them to be Witnesses at
all in the said Cause: against which unjust and unlawful Sentence Mr. Emmerton
Appealed to the Delegates; But they unjustly and Illegaly did Confirm the
aforesaid Sentence, though Mr. Emmerton's Council did pray that his Father and
Mother might be only examined ( de been esse) and to be believed as they should
see Cause, and as they agreed or Contested with other Witnesses when the
Examinations should be published.

That since the said Sentence, the said Mr. Emmerton's Father is Dead, and his
Mother is very Sickly and Ancient, Proved by 4 Witnessess.
so that by the said Sentence he has utterly lost the Testimony of his Father,
and will in all Probability lose the Testimony of his Mother (if he should have
further occasion to use her) who both of them were the most Material Witnesses,
not only to prove the said Marriage, but also the Lady Vyner's desire and
consent to and for the said Marriage.

That the said Judges Delegates did Retain the said Cause before them till the
12th day of July 1680. at which time it was finally heard. Proved by the acts
of Court.
And although Mr. Emmerton lost the Testimony of his Father and Mother, and many
of the most Material Articles of his Allegations were rejected, and all his
Kindred admitted to Testify only Sub omnibus Limitationibus, and the many
other hardships were put upon him; yet he made so Clear a proof of his said
Marriage, that the said Judges Delegates did give a Sentence for the same.

That notwithstanding the Verdict at Law and Judgment, Execution and
Possession thereupon had, yet the Lord High Chancellor of England upon a Bill
filed in that Court by the said Mrs. Briget without overruling Mr. Emmerton's
Plea thereunto (which he does still refuse to hear) did order the Rents of the
Estate in Question in the said Suite, Proved by the Orders of that Court.
to remain in the Tenants hands till a Sentence should be given before the
Delegates: And since the said Sentence, his Lordship has ordered the said
Rents in Arrears to be brought into Court, declaring that he will allow the
said Mrs. Bridget 1000 l. per Anum (which is half the yearly Revenue) during
the Dependence of a Commission of Review which has been granted her after
almost six about 6000 l. so that Mr. Emmerton can have no fruit of his said
Verdict at Law, or said Sentence.

That although she was obliged to plead all new matter upon her Commission of
Review, Proved by the acts of the said Court.
and prove all by the 26th of October 1680. yet she did not Exhibit any
Allegation till the 9th of this Instant November: and although the Allegation
consisted of such matter as ought not to be admitted by Law, yet the Bishops
and Civilians Empowered by the said Commission of Review then present, did admit
it all, and gave her further time to prove (viz.) to the First day of next Term.

So that by these tedious delays (not knowing but this Suit may last some years
longer) and by these vast expenses Mr. Emmerton is put to, having spent about
6000 l. in this Suit, and being debarred from Receiving any Rents and profits
of the premises by the Lord Chancellors order as aforesaid, by such like unjust
and unreasonable doings Mr. Emmerton is like to be utterly undone and Ruined.


