THE EARL of PEMBROKE'S SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF PEERS When the Seven LORDS
were accused of High Treason.

Copia vera

MIC: OLDSWORTH.



Printed in the Year, 1648.

My Lords,
YOu know I seldom make Speeches, yet (my Lords) every thing would live; and
now I must either find a Tongue, or lose my head. I am accused for sitting here
when your Lordships fled to the Army; Alas, my Lords, I am an old man, I must
sit; you may ride or run any whither, but I am an old man. You voted them
Traitors who left the House, and went to York; they told us then they were
forced away by Tumults: do not You say so too? were they Traitors for going,
and am I a Traitor for stayiug? 'sDeath (my Lords) what would ye have me do?
hereafter I Will neither go nor stay. I have served ye seven years, what have ye
given me, unless part of a Thanksgiving-Dinner, for which you made me fast
once a Month? I was fed like a Prince at the KING'S cost, twice every day,
(long before some of you were born,) and this KING continued, nay out-did his
Father in heaping favors upon me: Yet (for your sakes) I renounced my Master
when he had most need of me; Voted against him, swore against him, hired men to
fight against him: I confess, I my self neither struck at him, nor shot at
him; but I prayed for those that did: I gave my Tenants their Leases Fine-free
if they would rise and resist the KING. And yet (my Lords) after all this must
I be a Traitor? Have I not sworn for ye over and over again? You sent me on
your errands, to Oxford, to Uxbridge, to Newcastle, to Holdenby; you hurried me
up and down as if I had been a King: you made me carry a world of Propositions,
I brought them all safe and sound; what you bade me say, I spoke to a syllable;
and had the KING asked me how old I was, without your Commission I should not
have told him, and yet (my Lords) I am an old man. Remember how I stuck to you
against Strafford and Canterbury; some of ye shrunk at Strafford's Trial, that
your Names were like to be poasted with Malignants; and for Canterbury, many of
you would have had him live, my Lord of Northumberland and others would have no
hand in his Blood, but I gave ye the casting voice which sent him packing into
another world; And yet now would ye send me after him? Have I not sat with you
early and late? When the Parliament tumbled, and tossed, and rolled it self, on
this side, and on that side, still I was for the Parliament; though I stayed
here with Presbyterian Lords, yet when you returned I was firm for You: all the
other Lords left you in the House when Sir Thomas's Chaplain gave thanks for
your Return, but I stayed and prayed with you, and am (for ought I know) as
great an Independent as any of ye all. I Rejoiced with ye, Fasted, sung Psalms,
Prayed with you, and (hereafter) will run away with ye. Nay, I had done it now,
but who knew your minds? if ye meant I should follow ye, why did ye not wink
upon me? think ye I could run away by instinct? My Lords, you know I love Dogs,
and (though I say it) I thank God I have as good Dogs as any man in England;
now (my Lords) if a Dog follow me when I do not call him I bid him be gone; if
I call him and he comes not, then I beat him; but if I beat him for not coming
when I never called him, you will think me mad; 'sDeath (my Lords) it is a poor Dog
is not worth the whistling.

But perhaps my fault is not mere staying here, but being active in your
absence, because in my Robes and collar of S-S I brought up Mr Pelham the
Commons new Speaker: why, what if I did? Is not Mr Pelham my own Cosen? would
Your Lordships have me uncivil to my kindred? why might not I entertain the
new Speaker, as well as Sir Robert Harley entreat us to admit him? Mr Pelham is
none of Sir Robert's Cosen, and yet Sir Robert is an old man.

I hear some say, that I was forward to begin a new War, that my hand is to
all the Warrants for Listing Men and Horse, and in order thereunto, I voted His
Majesty should come to London. It Is true (my Lords) I did give my Vote for the
KING'S coming hither; but wherefore was it? 'twas only to come to choose a New
Speaker: what, would ye have Us dumb, and sit here like Ferrets? my Lords, I
love to hear men speak; and all the Lawyers told me, No King, no Speaker; that
either the Commons must name their Speaker and the KING approve him, or the
KING name him and the Commons approve him; No King, no Speaker: And so I was
for the King, that is, for the Speaker.

Then (my Lords) observe the manner of His coming; the KING was to come
according to the Covenant; mark ye that? I was still for my Oaths: let Him
come when He will, if the Covenant fetch Him, He had as good stay away. And yet
men cry shame on the Covenant; those that took it do cast it up again; and
those that refuse it have given a world of Arguments that it is Unreasonable;
which Reasons our Assembly (like a company of Rascals) never yet answered. I
know (my Lords) many of our friends never took this Oath, but they refused it
out of mere Conscience; shall Malignants Consciences be as tender as ours? why,
what do they think our Consciences are made of? But (my Lords) suppose this
Oath be Unreasonable; can we do nothing but we must give Reason for it? this is
as bad as the House of Commons, who when we deny to pass any Ordinance,
presently send to know our Reasons, though themselves give no Reasons for
demanding Ours. And so Malignants would have Reasonable Oaths; only here is the
difference, the House of Commons do use to demand Reasons, and Malignants
desire to be suffered to give Reasons: my Lords, I love not this giving of
Reasons; though I hold the Covenant is Extreme Reasonable; for as some
Malignants take it to save their Estates, so we give it to make them lose their
Estates; both love the Estate, and both hate the Covenant. Thus (my Lords) we
have Reason for this Oath, and Your Lordships have No Reason to make me a
Traitor while I give my Vote according to the Covenant.

As for signing Warrants to raise a New War, I wonder you will speak of it; have
not ye all done it a hundred times? how many Reames of Paper have we subscribed
to raise forces for King and Parliament? it is known I can scarce write a word
besides my Name: cannot a man write his own Name without losing his head? if I
must give Account for what I set my hand to, Lord have mercy upon me: I see now
my Grandfather was a wise man, he could neither write nor read, and happy for
me if I were so too: Come, come my Lords, be plain and tell me, do I look like
one that would raise a New War? I must confess I love a good Army, but if
there be none till I raise it, Soldiers of Fortune may change their Names. No,
(my Lords) 'twas not I, 'twas the Eleven Members would have raised a War; you
see they were guilty by their running away, I neither ran with Them nor with
You, I do not like this running away, I love to stay by it; and whether was for
War, I that stayed in Town, or You that went to an Army? the Devil of Horse
did I list but in my New Coach, nor used any Harness but my Collar of S-S. And
will ye for this clap me in the Tower? you sent me thither six years since for
but handling a Standish, and now you will commit me for writing my Name; what (my
Lords) do ye hate Learning? can ye not end or begin a Parliament without
sending me to the Tower? Do Your Lordships mean to make me a Lord Mayor? If I
needs must go, I pray ye, send me home, to Baynard's Castle or Durham House, (a
damnable fire burnt my house at Wilton just that hour I moved Your Lordships
to drive Malignants out of London.) But why to the Tower? am I company for
Lions? do ye think me a Cattamountaine, fit to be shown through a grate for two
pence? No, my Lords, keep the Tower for Malignants, they can endure it, some of
them have been Prisoners seven years; they can feed upon bare Allegiance,
please themselves with Discourses of Conscience, of Honor, of a Righteous
Cause, and I know not what: But what is this to me? How will those Malignants
look upon me? nay, how shall I look upon Them? I confess some of 'em love my
Son's company, they say he is more a Gentleman, and has wit: 'sDeath (my Lords)
must I now turn Gentleman? I thought I had been a Peer of the Realm, and am I
now a Gentleman? let my Son keep his Wit, his poor Father never got two pence
by his Wit. Alas, (my Lords) what hurt can I do ye? or what good will it do ye
to have my Head? I am but a Ward, my Lord Say has disposed of me these seven
years; I am no Lawyer though the Littletons call me Cosen; I am no Scholar,
though I have been their Chancellor; I am no Statesman, though I was a Privy
Counselor; I know not what ye mean by the Three Estates; last June the Army
demanded a Release for Lilburne, Musgrove, and Overton, I thought They were the
Three Estates: I thank God I have a good Estate of my own, and I have the
Estates of my Lord Baynings Children, and I have my Lord of Carnarvons Estate,
these are my Three Estates. And yet (my Lords) must I to the Tower? Consider we
are but a few Lords left, come, let us love, and be kind to one another; The
Cavaliers quarreled among themselves, beat one another, and lost all: Let Us
be wiser my Lords; for had we fallen into their condition, my Conscience tells
me we had looked most woefully.

I perceive Your Lordships begin to think better of me, and I hear you would
quit me if I were not charged by the Agitators and General Council of the
Army. How? Agitator? 'sDeath what is that? who ever heard that word before? I
understand Classical, Provincial, Congregationall, National; but for
Agitator, it may (for ought I know) be a Knave not worth three Pence: if
Agitators cut Noblemens throats you will find the Devil has been an Agitator. As
for the General Council I hate the Name of it, it is old and naught, and used
to be full of Bishops; those fellows have troubled us ever since the Apostles;
I thought we had made 'em orpo enough, and is their Name come again to torment
me? My Lords, I understand not these General Counsels, those of old (they
say) were Christians, and these are Independents: What a damnable deal of
Generalling is here! General Assembly, General of the Army, General Council
of the Army; we never had quiet hour since we had so many Generals. Well, my
Lords, these are hard times, and we make them worse with hards words, which
neither we nor our Fathers understood. Heretofore Bishops went Jure Divino,
then Elders would be Jure Divino, and now Agitators will be Jure Divino, (Dam
me, I think nothing is Jure Divino but God.) Call ye this a through
Reformation? what betwixt the Assemblers and the Agitators I am reformed to
mere skin and bone. My Lords, if these 'tators must rule the Kingdom, why are
not we our selves Agitators? why may not I make Oldsworth an Agitator? his
abilities and honesty are equal to most of 'em. But (for ought I see)
Agitators will sooner be Earls of Pembroke and Mongomery than we Agitators: for
the Parliament leads the people, the Army leads the Parliament, Sir Thomas
leads the Army, Cromwell leads Sir Thomas, Ireton leads Cromwell, Agitators
will lead Ireton, whither the Devil shall we all lead at last?

My Lords, ye see I have spoke my mind; I hope every week some of your
Lordships will do the like; and the Commons in this (though in nothing else)
will follow the House of Peers.

But I have done, I have done, my Lords: Remember I beseech ye I am an old man,
I have been a Grandfather time out of mind (for I was so when this Parliament
began,) and now must I be food for Agitators? O my Lords, I have used the KING
so ill, and He loved me so well, and I have served you so well, and you use me
so ill, that no man is sorry for me: Therefore my Request is, that you would
not think of sending me to the Tower, till some body pities me.

FINIS.

