THE ENGAGEMENT AND RESOLUTION OF THE Principal Gentlemen of the County of
Salop, for the Raising and Maintayning of Forces at their own Charge, for the
defense of His MAJESTY, their Country, and more particularly the Fortunes,
Persons, and Estates of the Subscribers under-named.
WE whose names are underwritten, do hereby engage our selves each to other,
and promise upon the Faith and Word of a Gentleman, That we will do our
uttermost endeavors, both by our selves and friends, to raise, as well for
defense of our King and Country, as our own particular Safeties, one entire
Regiment of Dragoneers, and with our lives to defend those men's Fortunes and
Families that shall be Contributers herein, to their abilities. And for the
more speedy expedition of the said service, as also for prevention of being
surprised and plundered by our Enemies, we have thought fit to entreat Sir
Vincent Corbett formerly Captain of the Horse for this County, to be our Chief
Commander over the aforesaid Regiment; And likewise we have appointed the day
of our appearance for bringing in of every man's proportion of his Horse or
Money, according to the subscription of his undertaking, to be the Twentieth
day of December, all in Battlefield.

Henry Bromley Esquire, Sheriff: Robert Viscount Killmorrey. Robert Howard,
Richard Leveson Knights of the Bath. Richard Herbert Esquire. Richard Lee
Baronet. Paul Harris Thomas Wolrych. Vincent Corbett.
Knights and Baronets. William Owen. Richard Prince. Robert Eyton. John Weld
Sen. Francis Ottley. Thomas Screven. Thomas Eyton. Thomas Lister.
Knights. John Corbett. Rowland Lacon. Roger Owen. Edward Kinaston. Francis
Herbert. Robert Corbett, of Humfreston. John Bromley. Thomas Corbett. Pelham
Corbett. Roger Kinaston. Carew Stewry. William Fowler. Edward Acton. Walter
Pigot. Thomas Ireland. William Cotton. Edward Cresset. William Barker. Francis
Thorns. Arthur Sandford. Thomas Owen. John Newton. Edward Baudewin Charles
Baldwin. Thomas Edwards. Walter Waring.
Esquires. Ralph Goodwin. Tho. Whitmore. William Blunden. Richard Okeley.
Harbert Iencks. Francis Billingsley. Robert Matthews. Richard Church. Rees
Tannat. Thomas Phillips. John Leighton. Lawrence Bentall. George Ludlow. John
Dawes. Thomas Barkley. Edward Stanley. Henry Powell. Francis Burton. Fulk
Crumpton. John Pay. Pontesbury Owen.
Esquires. Creswell Tailor. Thomas Holland. Andrew Charleton. Edward Owen.
George Holland. Edmund Bullock. John Huxley. John Wilkocks. Thomas Lokier.
Audley Bowdler. Edward Astley. Richard Hosier. John Wibumbury. Francis
Chambers. Francis Smith. Henry Heynes. Francis Morris.
Gentlemen.


These who have subscribed, are those which were at the first and second
meeting. The rest of the Gentry which are far remote, and as well affected, we
humbly desire may be added to this our Association.

JOHN STVDLEY Esquire Major of the Town of Shrewsbury, and the rest of the
Inhabitants within the said Town and Liberties thereof, do, with a full and
general consent, engage themselves to find and furnish one Troop of
Dragoneers consisting of sixty, at the charge of the said Town and Liberties;
as also two hundred foot Soldiers at their charges. Likewise under the command
of Sir Francis Ottley Knight, Captain for the said Town, for the defense of the
Kings Majesty's Royal Person, The known Laws of the Land, The Liberty and
Property of the Subjects, And the Safety of the said Town and Liberties.

May it please Your Majesty,
WE the Clergy of this County, are (with the Noble Gentry) sensible of Your
Majesty's Wrongs, and our Countries Danger; And therefore with them offer up
our Abilities, (with all humility) an hundred Horse, to be under the Command
of Sir Vincent Corbett, according to Your Majesty's Commission: That so Your
Loyal Subjects may here live in Peace, and be serviceable to Your Majesty.


