A Particular Charge OR IMPEACHMENT IN THE NAME OF HIS EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas
Fairfax, And the ARMY under His COMMAND; Against Denzill Hollis Esquire, Sir
Phil: Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller,
Sir John Maynard, Knights, Major General Massy, John Glynne, Esquire,
Recorder of London, Walter Long, Esquire, Col. Edward Harley, and Ant:
Nicholl, Esquire, Members of the Honorable House of Commons.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
War.

Signed, John Rushworth, Secret.

London, Printed in the Year, MDCXLVII.

A PARTICVLAR CHARGE OR IMPEACHMENT In the Name of his Excellency Sir THO:
FAIRFAX, etc.
Whereas on the fifteenth day of June last. the Heads of a Charge were
delivered in the name of the said Army, unto the Commissioners of Parliament,
to be sent up to the Parliament, against the Persons abovenamed. Now in
prosecution and maintenance thereof, and according to the power thereby
preserved; It is in the Name of the said Army more particularly charged against
the said persons as follows:

1. That the said Mr. Denzill Hollis during the late War in prosecution of
the evil designs expressed in the general Heads or Articles formerly
exhibited, contrary to the trust reposed in him, contrary to his oath taken in
June 1643. and contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament, dated in Oct. 1643.
has assisted the King in the late unnatural War, and held correspondency
and intelligence with the Enemy against the Parliament in manner following,
(viz.) He the said Mr. Hollis being one of the special Commissioners for the
Parliament, to present Propositions of both Houses to the King at Oxford, did
privately and contrary to his instructions, at several times make his
addresses unto the Kings party there then in Arms against the Parliament,
namely unto the Earl of Lyndsey, the Earl of Southampton, the Lord Savill,
and others, and did secretly plot and advise them against the Parliament, and
did intimate unto them, or one of them, that the said propositions then sent
unto his Majesty by the Parl. were unreasonable. And the said M. Hollis being
demanded what answer he would advise the King to make to the said
Propopositions, he the said Mr. Hollis did advise, that the King should demand
a Treaty however, and then declare how unreasonable the Propositions were; and
that yet for the peace of the Kingdom, His Majesty would treat upon them, but
withal wished the said Treaty might be in London, whither the King himself
should come upon security. He the said Mr. Hollis adding, that there was
nothing in the world, that the violent party (meaning the well-affected party
to the Parliament against the Enemy) did so much fear, as His Majesty's
coming to London, which would be a certain dissolution of their authority and
power. And the said Mr. Hollis bad those said persons, or one of them, assure
the King, that if His Majesty knew as much as he (the said Mr. Hollis) knew,
His Majesty would take his horse and be at London the next day, or words to
that effect. And it being again demanded, whether (if the King should be
willing to come) it would be accepted of, He the said Mr. Hollis thereto
answered, that certainly it would be much opposed; but yet he the said Mr.
Hollis was confident, that he and his party (meaning some of the Members
abovenamed, and others) should carry it, and wished the King to put it upon
that trial. And the said Mr. Hollis was desired by the said Earl of Lyndsey,
Earl of Southampton, and Lord Savill, or one of them, that he would be pleased
to draw such an Answer in writing to the said Propositions, as he desired the
King should send, and the said Earl of Southampton (who was that night to lie
in the Kings Bedchamber) would persuade the King to condescend unto it, and
thereupon the said Mr. Hollis withdrew, and either the same day, or the next
day following, the said Mr. Hollis accordingly carried in his hand, unto the
said Lords, or one of them, a Paper ready written, which (as he said) was such
an Answer to the said Propositions as he had drawn for the King to send to the
Parliament, which was taken by the said Lords, or one of them, and carried to
the King, to be considered of, and so much thereof as advised the Kings coming
to London was laid by, (the King fearing to adventure himself:) but the rest
of the said Paper the Lord Digby (who writ the Kings Answer to the said
Propositions) made use of in the same words as the said M. Hollis had set
down; And the said Master Hollis to ingratiate himself with the Kings party,
did about the same time revile the well-affected Members of the House of
Commons, declaring unto the said Kings party at Oxford, or some of them, that
those well-affected Members (which to render them the more odious as he
conceived, he named the violent Independent party) had ill intentions and
great averseness to Peace, and that nothing would be more pleasing to them,
then for the King to refuse the Propositions, how unreasonable soever the same
were, and he also then said, that the Commissioners of Scotland were very weary
of that violent party, and that they being desperate to establish their
Presbytery here as in Scotland, made their addresses to him the said M. Hollis
and his party. All which tended to the protracting of the said late War, and
to the hindrance of an happy Peace, and the said M. Hollis did also after that
receive from the Earl of Lyndsey a Letter written in white Ink, concerning
some secret design, and kept it from the knowledge of the House, from February
till about July after, when it was discovered by him that brought it: but the
Letter it self was by the said M. Hollis (after he had read it) burnt. And
the said Earl of Lyndsey moved the King for a Pass for the said M. Hollis to
go to Oxford: but the King refused to grant it, saying, That Hollis did him
better service in the Parliament, then he could do him at Oxford.

2. That the said Mr Hollis and sir Philip Stapleton during the said late War
(when the said Earl of Lyndsey went from the Tower of London to Oxford) sent
several Messages of intelligence to the Earl of Dorset, and Lord Digby,
thereby assuring them, that they, the said Mr Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton,
did better service for the King here in Parliament, then they could do him if
they were at Oxford. And the said Sir Philip Stapleton desired that the said E.
of Dorset, would preserve him and the said Sir Philip and his friends, in the
good opinion of the party at Oxford (which was then the K ngs Garrison) and he
the said Sir Philip would do as much for his Lordship, and his friends here
with the Parliament. And the said Mr Hollis, and Sir Philip Stapleton the more
to ingratiate themselves into the favor of the enemy, did of their own accord
without any direction of the Parliament, draw up other Propositions then those
mentioned in the precedent Articles, which they affirmed were in their
Judgments fit for the King to grant, and for the Parliament to desire, and
being so drawn up, sent them privately to his Majesty, without any authority of
Parliament to warrant the same.

3. That the said Mr Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major General Massy, Mr
Glyn, Mr Long, Colonel Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholls in the Months of
March, April, May, and June last past, and at other times in prosecution of
the evil designs in the several general heads mentioned, have frequently
assembled and met together at the Lady Carliles Lodgings in White Hall, and in
other places with diverse other persons disaffected to the State (without any
authority of Parliament) for holding correspondency with the Queen of England
now in France and her participants, with an intent by such secret and
clandestine treaties amongst themselves to put conditions upon the Parliament,
and to bring in the King upon their own terms, and having a great power upon
the Treasure of the Kingdom, have therewith maintained and encouraged by
Pensions, and otherwise, the Queens Party in France, thereby to beget a second
and more bloody War in this Kingdom, and they, or some, or one of them assured
the Queen 40000. l per annum, if She would assist them in their design, and
that they would do more for the King then the Army would do, and that they
would find out some means to destroy the Army and their friends.

4. That in further pursuance of the same evil designs, they the said Mr.
Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John Clotworthy, Sir
William Waller, and Major General Massy, by the combination aforesaid, within
the space of three months last past without any authority of Parliament,
invited the Scots and other foreign forces to come into this Kingdom in a
Hostile manner, to abet and assist them in the prosecuting and effecting of
their said designs. And the said Mr Hollis very lately sent to the said Queen
of England then and still in France, advising her amongst other things speedily
to send the Prince into Scotland to march into this Kingdom in the head of an
Army. And did send a special Messenger to her for such ends and purposes. And
the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir William Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Mr Glyn, Major general
Massy, Mr Long, Collonell Edward Harley, and Anthony Nicholls, have underhand,
of their own accord without authority of Parliament, listed, or caused, or
procured to be listed diverse Commanders and Soldiers, endeavoring thereby to
leavy, and raise a new War in this Kingdom to protect themselves in their
unjust oppressions and factious designs, and have at several times within the
space of two Months last past invited, encouraged, abetted and counseled
multitudes of Reformado Officers and Soldiers and other rude persons
tumultuously and violently to gather together at Westminster, to affright and
assault the Members of Parliament in their passage to and from the House, to
offer violence to the House it self, locking the door thereof upon them, and
so imprisoning them, and by such violences, outrages and threats to awe and
enforce the Parliament.

5. That the said Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Mr Glyn have been and
are obstructers and prejudgers of several Petitions to the Parliament for
redress of public grievances, and the said Master Hollis, and Sir Philip
Stapleton in the Month of May last past, did abuse and affront diverse
Petitioners, who in a peaceble manner then attended the Committee, whereof
Collonell Lee was Chaireman; not only reviling and reproaching them, but
violently haleing, and boysterously assaulting them, and offered to draw their
swords upon Major Tuleday, and others of the said Petitioners, and without any
authority or power committed Nicholas Tew one of the Petitioners; and soon
afterward by the procurement of the said Mr Hollis and Sir Philip Stapleton,
and upon their misinformation to the House, the said Major Tuleday, and
Nicholas Tewe, were imprisoned, not being permitted to speak for themselves,
and the said Master Glyn about three months since, caused the said Nicholas
Tewe to be imprisoned in Newgate, and to be detained a long time there, for no
other cause, but for having a Petition about him, which was to be presented to
the House.

6. That the said Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, and Major General
Massy have lately in prosecution of the said designs in the said general
heads mentioned; against the known Laws of this Realm, and rules and
Articles of War made by Parliament; by an Arbitrary power, imprisoned some
Members of the Army without any authority, particularly Ensign Nicholas, whose
Pockets they without authority, caused to be searched, and several Papers to
be taken from him, contrary to the liberty of every Subject, and caused him to
be sent a Prisoner from the head Quarters to London, without the authority or
privity of the General, or the chief Officers of the Army commanding in his
absence.

7. That in or about the Month of March last, (there being a Petition intended
from the Officers and Soldiers of the Army to their General (for such things
only as were justly due unto them, and concerning them merely as Soldiers)
The said Sir William Waller, Sir John Clotworthy, and Colonel Edward Harley
a Member of the Army, having gotten into their hands a Copy of the said
Petition) by combination with the other Members above mentioned, with an intent
to abuse the Parliament into prejudices and jealousies against the proceedings
of the Army concerning the said Petition (they well knowing that the said Army
stood in their way, and hinders them from bringing to pass the designs in
the said general Charges expressed) did falsely and maliciously inform the
House, That the said Petition was contrived and promoted to debauch and
disoblige the Army from the Parliament; And that it was managed and carried on
by diverse principal Officers in the Army, that orders were given out for the
reading of it in the head of every Regiment, and whosoever would not subscribe
it, should be put out of the Musters, and cashiered the Army, and by those and
other aggravations did represent it to the House as a design against the
Parliament; further adding that some Regiments which were remote, were sent
for, to join with the rest of the Army for that purpose; by which
mis-informations they the said Members did the same day procure a peremptory
Order to the General, to suppress the said Petition.

8. That some few days after, Colonel Edward Harley by the Combination
aforesaid, and in pursuance of the same designs, did produce to the House a
Letter supposed to be written from within the Quarters of the Army, to him the
said Colonel Harley, by a person not named, whereby it was informed that
Colonel Harleys Lieutenant Colonel had drawn his Regiment to a rendezvous,
and had caused the said Petition to be read at the head of it, and that he
threatened to cashiere and put out of the Musters all that would not subscribe
it, and that the design of the Army therein was to enslave the Parliament and
Kingdom, (if the Parliament proceeded not to some High Resolution) or to that
effect, as by the said Letter (relation thereunto being had) may appear; and
although the substance of the said Letter was most untrue, and no author
thereof appeared, nor could be produced, although a Committee was appointed for
examination thereof, and it was much pressed the author should be discovered;
yet the said Colonel Harley, Sir John Clotworthy, and Sir William Waller did
so avow the reality of the said Letter, and that the contents thereof would be
made good, as that thereby, and by other false suggestions of theirs against
the Army, they procured the House (upon a long debate, which held till about
eight of the clock at night) to order that a Committee of five Members (whereof
the said Master Hollis was one) should prepare a Declaration to be brought in
to the House the next morning signifying the Houses dislike of the proceedings
of the Army upon that Petition as by the said Order dated (...) day of (...)
last, may appear.

Upon which settling of the said business for that night, most of the Members
departed, as conceiving nothing would be done thereupon till the next day, and
that then they might have a free debate concerning the same; But the House
still continuing to sit (upon dispatch of some Letters formerly ordered,) the
said Master Hollis, by the same combination and in further prosecution of the
said evil designs having of himself (without the Committee) prepared a
Declaration against the Petition it self, contrary to the intention and
direction of the said order, and contrary to the rules of Justice and usual
course of Parliament, did the same night about ten of the clock, on purpose to
surprise the House, present the same Declaration to the House (whereby the said
Petitioners were, without being heard) declared Enemies to the State, and
obstructers of the relief of Ireland, if they persisted therein (as by the
same Declaration, relation being thereunto had may appear) and did procure it
to be then passed accordingly, to the great dis-honour of the Parliament and
their proceedings, to the insufferable injury, the just provocations,
discouragement and discontent of the Army, to the trouble and danger of the
whole Kingdom, to the hindering of the relief of Ireland, and other the evil
consequences in the said general Charges expressed.

9. That by the same and the like false informations and suggestions, the said
Colonel Harley (then a Member of the Army) Sir John Clotworthy, Sir William
Waller, and the said other persons did shortly after the said Declaration so
made as aforesaid, procure diverse eminent and faithful Officers of the Army,
namely Lieutenant General Hamond, Colonel Hamond, Colonel Lilburne,
Lieutenant Colonel Pride, and others, to be all sent for from their Charges in
the Army, to appear at the Bar of the House to make answer in relation to
the said Petition, against whom when they came thither, they could Charge or
prove nothing at all, in so much as the House thought fit immediately to
discharge them. And whereas there was a Committee appointed to examine and
consider of the truth or falsehood of them; and the said Members informing, were
appointed to produce their proofs and evidence to the same before the
Committee; though they have since then been often urged, called upon, and
demanded to produce their proofs and evidence thereto (if they had any) and
have been plainly told, that if they did not proceed effectually to do it,
they should be accounted the authors and devisers of the said falsehoods, and
reparation would accordingly be demanded against them; Yet they have not to
this day produced any proofs or evidence to any of the said informations or
suggestions, whereby the Parliament and Army were so much abused as before is
declared: nor could they or any of them be hitherto persuaded to give in to the
said Committee any Charge against the said Officers of the Army, which they
have then or since procured to be sent for as aforesaid, but have held diverse
of them in a long and chargeable attendance upon the House, without any thing
laid to their Charge, until the House was pleased to discharge them.

X. That the said Mr Hollis, Sr Phillip Stapleton, Sr William Lewis, Sr William
Waller, Sr John Clotworthy, Major Genesis Massy, in further pursuance of the
designs mentioned in the general heads charged against them, have been great
Instruments in the obstructing of the Relief of Ireland; and within the space
of two Months last past, did falsely inform the House, that by their
procurement there were fifty Companies of Foot, and ten Troops of Horse of this
Army, engaged for Ireland, upon the terms, and under the conduct then by the
Parliament propounded: and the more to delude the Parliament herein, they, or
some of them by the combination aforesaid, did procure diverse Officers then in
this Army, namely, Colonel Butler, Lievtenant-colonell Jackson, Major Gooday,
and others, to give in their Names, as listing themselves for Ireland (on the
said terms, and conduct propounded) when as those Officers did at the same
time declare themselves unwilling thereunto, and resolved not to go serve in
Ireland on any terms whatsoever; they the said Members underhand assuring
them, that though they make use of their names, yet they should not go for
that service: They have likewise untruly informed the house, and given in the
names of many considerable Officers of the Army, namely, Captain Pennifather
and Captain Burges, of Colonel Butler's Regiment; Capt. Clark, and four or
more Commission-Officers of Sir Hardresse Waller's Regiment, and others, as
having been subscribed for Ireland, who did not so engage or subscribe, nor
give any consent thereto, but did then, and have ever since utterly disavowed
the same.

And about the same time they also reported to the House the name and offer of
Lievt. Col. Farrington, as being then a Lievt. Col. of this Army, and engaging
for himself and his Regiment for Ireland, whereas the said Farrington had been
casheered the Army a year and a half before; by which and other their false
informations and reports of that nature, the Parliament was abused and misled
into a conceit and confidence of a strength out of the Army, then supposed to
be engaged, and ready for Ireland on their own terms, when as in truth the
same was but a mere delusion, and which was so contrived on purpose to occasion
a slighting and neglecting of the Army, as supposing no further use for them.

XI. Whereas part of three Regiments of Foot, viz. Col. Harbert's, Col. Kemp's,
and Col. Gray's, were by order of the House advanced toward the relief of
Ireland, as far as Broomsgrave in the County of Worcester, the said Sr
Phillip Stapleton, Mr Hollis, Sr John Clotworthy, Sr William Lewis, and Major
Genesis Massy, Sr William Waller, and Mr Glyn, by combination aforesaid, did of
their own accord without the knowledge or direction of the House, on the sixth
day of June last, being Sabbith day, without summoning a Committee, command
those Forces back again as far as Redding, with an evil intent to draw Forces
together, to beget a new war in England.

XII. That the said Sr John Clotworthy in prosecution of the designs in the
said general charges expressed, has in the year 1642 1643, 1644. and since,
converted several great sums of Money (which by several Orders of Parliaments
and of the Irish Committee were designed for the relief of Ireland) to his own
particular use, namely, the sum of 280. l. which by order of both Houses dated
the 11. of Febr. 1642. was to be paid for 20. Buts of Sack for Ireland, 700 l.
which the same day was Ordered for 2000. swords, 300 l. which was by Order of
the said Irish Committee dated the 5. of Apr. 1643. was designed for 120. pair
of Pistols; and diverse other sums of Money upon several other Orders, which
he, the said Sr John Clotworthy from time to time received for the use and
relief of Irel. but were not employed to the uses by the said Orders intended
and directed, but to his, the said Sr John Chotworthies own private use as
aforesaid; and that he has within two years last past received several sums
of Money, Arms and other provisions for a Troop of Horse, which he pretended
he had raised in Ireland, when as he had not, nor did raise or furnish any such
Troop as he pretended; and that he, the said Sr John Clotworthy for money and
other rewards, has preferred John Davis and William Summers, and others, to be
entrusted with the Irish affairs, who have kept correspondency with the enemy,
and have defrauded the state of other great sums of Money, and he has been
privy to, and a sharer in such their actions.

XIII. That about Nov. last past, the said Sr Joh. Clotworthy, being by the
Parl. sent a Commissioner with others into Irel. who all had a joint power and
authority to treat with the Earl of Ormond for the space of four days and no
more; he the said Sr Jo. Clotworthy, contrary to the special trust reposed in
him, held secret intelligence with the said E. of Ormond by cipher or
character, without the consent or knowledge of those others in commission with
him, and many weeks after the time so limited was expired, and about the same
time, he the said Sr Jo. Clotworthy held secret intelligence with George L.
Digby, then in Irel. beyond the time prefixed, and without the consent of the
said other Commissioners: and in order thereunto, the said Ormond and Digby
lately employed one Slingsby to come into this Kingdom about a design
concerning the Prince, as he pretends.

XIV. That the said Sr J. Clotworthy, M. Hollis, S. Phil. Stapleton, by
combination with the rest of the Members before named, in further prosecution
of the designs beforementioned, well knowing that the L. Lyle, late President of
Irel. was both faithful and vigilant while he was trusted in the same Kingdom,
and had now this last Spring made provisions ready to march into the field, and
that the L. Baron of Brohil Genesis of the Parls Horse in Munster, and Col. Sr
Arthur Loftus, persons of honor and reputation, and of great fortunes in the
said Kingdom, lately came purposely into this Kingd. to exhibit, and did
exhibit many Articles of high treason against the L. Inchiquin, for betraying
the Parlias Army to the Enemy (as formerly he had done) yet by the great power
and violent interposition of the said Sr J. Clotworthy, M. Hollis, Sr Phil.
Stapleton, by the practice and combinatio^ aforesaid, the said Articles have
been obstructed, and the business not suffered to come to a hearing, and the
said L. Lisle hastily called out of Irel. and the the power and command of the
Parl. forces in that Kingdom committed to the said L. Inchiquin to the loss of
this Summer service, and the expense of much Treasure for new preparations: and
whereas the said L. Lisle being so suddenly called from thence as aforesaid,
did design and depute, S. Hardresse Waller, Knight. Major Genesis of the Forces there
(a man of known integrity and courage both for his service in Eng. and Irel.
and of considerable fortunes there) to take care of the said L. Lisles Forces,
till the pleasure of the Parl. may be further known; but the said L. Inchiquin
upon the receipt of a Letter from the said Sr J. Clotworthy, M. Hollis, Sr Phil.
Stapleton, or one of them (or from some other person by their, or one of their
direction, privity or procurement) did express that he had order or direction
from London, that no man that favored the Independents (under which name the
said Lord of Inchequin has comprehended all men that have showed themselves
opposite to Tyranny and Arbitrary Government) should have any trust or command
there. Nay, although they were of another judgment, yet if they would not
prosecute the Independents, they should not be employed there, or words to that
effect. And under color thereof, the said Hardresse Waller, and all others
that had their Commissions from the said Lord Lisle, while he commanded were
displaced, to the discouragement of those and other faithful persons to the
Parliament, and to the great disservice and hazard of ^

XV. That whereas a Committee of the House of Commons has been lately
appointed by the Parliament to consider of Propositions for the settling and
preservation of Wales, whereof the said Sir William Lewis and Mr Glyn were and
are Members, and to report the same to the House, They the said Sir William
Lewis and Master Glyn with others of the said Committee did on the 13 day of
April now last past, without any authority of Parliament, before any report
made to the Houses, of their own accord, in stead of settling and preserving
Wales, order that all Committees for Sequestrations should forbear all
proceedings of Sequestrations against all or any the Inhabitants of Wales. And
although some few persons were (upon general heads) excepted; yet by virtue of
that illegal Order, all he Commissioners of Peace, Commissioners of Association
(though never so active in pressing men, and raising money for Forces against
the Parliament) all the Commissioners of Array that did or should at any time
come in and submit to the Parliament, or their Commanders in Chief, all that
had born arms against the Parliament, unless they were Governors or other
Officers of War that held some Town, Castle, or Fort against the Parliament;
all disaffected and scandalous Ministers, though in their Sermons they usually
reviled and scandalized the Parliament and their proceedings, calling them
Rebels and Traitors; and not only incensing the People against the Parliament,
but usually taking up Arms, and leading their Parishioners in arms upon any
Alarm against the Parliament; and many other desperate Delinquents have been,
and still are taken off and freed from Sequestration: and the said Order was
sent to every several Committee in Wales, in several Letters from the said
Committee, contrary to several Orders and Ordinances of Parliament, and
contrary to the Rules of justice and equity which should impartially be
administered as well in Wales as in other places of this Kingdom, whereby the ill
affected Gentry and Ministry of that Country are grown so high and insolent,
that honest men dare scarce live amongst them: so as that which was intended by
the Parliament to settle and preserve Wales, is by the practice of the said Sir
William Lewis and Master Glyn perverted to the danger and destruction of it.

XVI. That the said Sir William Lewis and Mr. Glyn have further ingratiated
themselves with the Delinquents of Wales, and prepared, them for their said
designs, in manner following; viz. he the said Sir William Lewis has within
two years last past countenanced and protected many of the most notorious and
dangerous Delinque^ts within the several Countries of South Wales; namely the
L. of Carbery, and others in Carmarthinsh. Mr Crane and others in
Glamorganshire, Mr Morgan late Knight of the shire, Mr John Herbert and others
in Brecknockshire, Mr Gwyn, Mr Lewis, and diverse others in Radnorshire, by
freeing some of them altogether from Compositions, though sequestered, by
laboring diverse Members of the House and of Comittees to be favorable in
compounding with others, and to admit of such to their Compositions as were
incapable thereof. And the said Sr William Lewis has animated and encouraged
some of the said persons to continue their fidelity unto the Kings cause,
promising them, That if they would be friends with the King for him, he and his
would be their friends in the Parliament: in so much as his friends the
Delinquents in those parts have lately looked upon him as a rising man when the
King shall come to London; which has lately been their constant boasting. And
the said Sir William Lewis has within two years last past caused diverse that
has been Commissioners for the King, and had pressed men, and raised moneys to
promote the late War against the Parliament, namely, his Brother Mast. Tho.
Lewis, Mr Gwyn, Mr Charles Walhiffe, Mr Meridith Lewis, Mr Edward Williams, and
many others to be Commissioners of the Peace, and Committee Men for the said
County of Brecknock, insomuch as those that have been most active and faithful
to the Parliament, have been and still are out-voted in those places, and can
do no considerable service for the Parliament: and the rather for that the said
Sir William Lewis has also produced one Edward Williams his own kinsman, and
much disaffected to the Parliament, to be Solicitor of Sequestrations in that
County, who is and has been very remiss and corrupt therein. And the said Sir
William Lewis has by the means aforesaid lately procured Master Edward Lewis
his son, though unfit for that employment, to be chosen and returned Burgess
for Brecknoe; which that he might the better effect, he kept the Writ for
election of the said Burgess above eight months in his own custody before
it was delivered to the Sheriff of the said County. And likewise that the said
Master John Glyn with in two years last past has procured several persons
that have lately been Comissioners of Array, and in Arms against the Parliament
in Northwales, (viz.) (...) and others to be named in the Commission of the
peace for the Counties of Denbigh and Carnarvan, and other Counties there, and
to be put in other great places of Trust and Command there, and amongst others,
Col. Glyn his brother, who was lately a Colonel in the Kings Army, is by the
said Mr John Glyns procurement become Governor of the Town and Castle of
Carnarvan, and Admiral or Vice Admiral of the Irish seas, to the endangering
(...) countries lying upon the coasts toward Ireland, and to the fear ^

XVII. That the said Sir William Lewis, being heretofore (during these
troubles) Governor of Portsmouth, a Garrison for the Parliament, in which time
he received much of the Public Treasure, for which he has not yet given an
Account, did while he was Governor there, frequently hold correspondency and
intelligence with the Kings party, about the delivery up of the said Garrison;
insomuch as although Sir William Waller, and diverse others in that Garrison
were proclaimed Traitors to the King, yet he by the Kings special Command was
spared, the King affirming, That the said Sir William Lewis was his Friend, and
that he was confident he would do h m good service, or to that effect. And
although the then was a Parliament Man, and Governor of Portsmouth, as
aforesaid, and his estate in the said County of Brecknock, being of the value
of above six hundred pound per annum, was three years in the Kings quarters,
yet the same was never sequestered: And since the Parliament has prevailed,
Colonel Herbert Price Esquire having been Governor of Brecknock for the King
against the Parliament, being sequestered, the said Sir William Lewis by his
solicitations to the Committee, procured the personal Estate of the said
Colonel Price, which the Committee of the County had found out, and caused to
be brought to Morgan Awbrayes house in Brecknock, to be restored unto him,
without any satisfaction to the State, and has procured his the said Col.
Prices lands in the said County of Brecknock, being worth about three hundred
pound per annum, to be let to a friend of the said Col. Pr ces, to his wives
use, as fifty pound per annum, contrary to the directions of several
Ordinances of Parliament made in that behalf.

XVIII. That the said Mr John Glyn, or some other person or persons, by his
direction, consent, or privity, or to his use, has (during his being a Member
of the House of Commons) taken rewards of several persons for service done
them in the House, as namely amongst others, diverse Drovers from Wales, who by
his means and procurement had an allowance by Order of the House for three
thousand pound, in satisfaction of losses they had sustained by the Enemy, did
pay unto the wife of the said Mr. Glyn the sum of an hundred pound, as a reward
for his said service.

XIX. That the said Mr John Glyn, as he has been most active to bring into the
Commission of Peace, and into other places of Authority, diverse notorious
Delinquents in North Wales, as aforesaid, so has been as active, as much as in
him lies, to put out and keep out of the Militia and Common Council of London,
and out of the Commission of Peace of Middlesex, many eminent and faithful
men, that have laid out their estates, and adventured their lives for defense
of the Parliament and City, in the time of their greatest necessity; namely,
Alderman Pennington, Col. Tiebborn, Mr. Estwick, Mr. Moyer, and others,
contrary to the Declaration of both Kingdoms, which has assured all lawful
favor and encouragement to those that have been faithful, and shall so
continue to the Parliament: which doings must needs tend to the giving a fresh
occasion and power to the Enemy against the Parliaments best friends, to the
dishonor of the Parliament, and he indangering of the Kingdom.

XX. That the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, have
by their power and countenance, as Members of the House Commons, both jointly
and severally, used means to obstruct the course of Justice, and have
interposed themselves in several Causes, and by word of mouth moved and
persuaded Judges and other Officers, on the behalf of such as they conceive to
be their friends: Amongst others, whereas a great (...) ^ Langham and Captain
Lymery, and Counsel was met for the pleading thereof, the said Sir Philip
Stapleton M. Hollis, and Sir William Lewis, did repair to the Earl of Rutland
about the same; and the said Sir Philip Stapleton told the said Earl, that
they (meaning himself, and the said M. Hollis, William Lewis) were fully
satisfied concerning the justice of Langhams Cause; and therefore as the said
Earl did respect them, the said Sir Philip Stapleton, M. Hollis, and Sir
William Lewis, or expected from them, he the said Earl of Rutland should give
his Vote for Langham, or used words to that effect; which also was seconded by
the said M. Hollis in words, and agreed unto by the said Sir William Lewis, as
appeared by his presence and gesture. And the said Sir William Lewis did
exercise the same power in a Cause of John Gunters, and others.

XXI. That the said M. Anthony Nicholls, although about four years since he
was by the Committee of Privileges voted, that he was not a Member fit to sit
in the House, by reason his election was void, yet he the said M. Nicholls
does not only sit and vote there as a Member, but by his power and threats in
the West-Countries, and by his solicitations and indirect practices, has
brought in or procured to be brought in, about twenty eight Members more out of
Cornwall, on purpose to carry on the designs and practices beforementioned,
and to make a faction in the said House: and not withstanding the self denying
Ordinance, he the said M. Nicholls does still hold a place in the Tower
formerly conferred upon him by the House, and receives the profits thereof to
his own use.

XXII. That the said M. Nicholls, has since his fitting in the House as
aforesaid, taken rewards for service done there; namely, whereas Sir William
Vuedall Knight, for deserting the Parliament and going to York with the King,
was suspended the House, he the said M. Nicholls for the sum of one hundred
pounds, or one hundred fifty pounds, paid unto him or to his use, by the said
Sir William Vuedall or some for him, did by mis-informations to the House
procure the said Sir William Vuedall to be readmitted a Member of the said
House, and the said M. Nicholls while he was a Member of the Committee for
safety, he and others of the said Committee having issued forth a Warrant for
searching Greenwich house, he the said M. Nicholls did underhand acquaint one
of the Queens Officers therewith, and thereby prevented the design of the said
Committee, to the great disservice of the Parliament and Kingdom.

^ affairs, did out of covetousness or unworthiness procure a command of a
troops or Horse under his Excellency the late L. General Earl of Essex, when
ever hi, said Troop came upon any service, he the said M. Long out of fear
treachery unworthily absented himself, and never was seen or known to charge
the enemy in person, though his Tropp of en engaged, namely at the battle at
Edgehill, when he saw there was like to be blows, he the said M. Long left the
field, and never charged before his Troop; and at the battle or fight at
Brainford, though his Troop were there, yet he staid at London till the danger
was past, and fighting done; and when his Troop was sent into the West, he took
no other notice, of it, but to receive his pay, and in the mean while he
repaired into the County of Essex, and procured a Commission to be a Colonel of
Horse, and instead of fighting against the Parliaments enemies, he betook
himself to plunder, and oppress the Parliaments friends, there, and contarie
to Order, and without any Autho^^y or Exigences of War, compelling him thereto,
enforced great sums of money, and many horses, and other provisions from the
Country, namely from M. Tho. Manwood a man well affected, who had the
Generals protection (whose horses were taken from his Plough) and others, to
the great losses and oppression of the people, and to the great dishon ur of
Parliament, whose service he nevertheless neglected, and has not hitherto
given an account of the great sums of money and other things that he so
exacted from the Country as aforesaid.

XXIV. That the said M. Long afterward (upon pretense of some losses sustained
by the enemy, and some great service he had done for the State) did procure of
the H use a great Office in the Chancery, namely to be the Chief Register of
that Court, wherein his skill was little, and whereof he was and still is
altogether incapable; and although for a time upon the self denying Ordinance,
he, was displaced; yet upon the motion, or by the power and means of the said
M Hollis, he has obtained the same Office, to the great prejudice of skilful
Clerks that have bin bred up in the same Court, and to the disservice of the
Commonwealth, and the dishonor of the House.

XXV. That the said M. Long, on purpose to drive on the designs in the said
general Charges expressed, has for the space of two years last past usually
pressed and urged several Members to give their Votes such ways as he
pleased, and to that end and purpose does constantly place himself near the
door of the House, that when any debate is concerning any design wherein his
party is engaged, he the said M. Long has used much tempering and violence to
such of his own party as would go out of the House, and has persuaded them to
continue there for their Votes, and he the said M. Long, in case any such have
gone out of the House, has been very inquisitive where they may be found, that
so he may go for them when the business in debate comes near to be put to
the Vote, and when they come not according to his expectation, does ordinarily
run out of the House himself to call them, and drive them in again, that he
has been commonly c^lled (by those that are without the House, and have taken
notice of his actions) the Parliament-driver, whereby the freedom of the
Members is taken from them, the manner of the Parliaments proceedings much
scandalized, and many times evil and dangerous designs drove on in a faction
by Votes, to the great prejudice of the Commonwealth.

All which matters and things the said Army shall and will be ready (in
convenient time) to make good by proof upon Oath, as this honorable House
shall direct. And for that by reason of the straightness of time, and other
more weighty Affairs of the Army, they could not so fully finish and complish
the said Articles; therefore the said Army do still reserve further liberty to
add other Articles against the said Members, or any of them, at any time before
their Trial, as occasion shall serve.


