The Earl of Carberyes PEDIGREE: WITH Their Titles, and honorable Endowments.

ALSO, A copy of a Letter, with the Charge and Articles, sent from the
Committee of Pembroke, to the Committee for Compositions at Goldsmiths Hall,
against the said Earl, and other grand Delinquents of the County of Carmarthen.

printer's or publisher's device

October: 3 London. Printed in the Year 1646.

The Earl of Carberery his Pedigree.
THe said Earl was created Baron of Emlim at Oxford, and sat there in the
Junto (the better to distinguish him, because he has been by many taken for
the Earl of Cherbery) he is nephew to the late Walter Vaughan, (Plod-all)
brother to Sir Henry (Act-all, now prisoner in the Tower for all) brother to
the late Sir John (Countenance-all) father to the said Carbery, and brother to
honest Richard (Tell-all) who has been grievously persecuted, imprisoned and
plundered by them all, for his affection to the Parliament.

And yet for all these alls, the said Earl is about London, making all the
friends he can to get him off of these alls; it seems they are so sharp, and
prick so sore, that he cannot rest long in one place; yet he keeps his brazen
face, and brags that he has got a pardon for all, and like to be in as great
command as ever he was: which if it should be true (as God forbid it should)
then woe be to poor Carmarthenshire, especially those who exhibited these
Articles to the Committee there; for they are like to pay for all: but I hope
the Parliament will be better advised, and prevent that, by disabling him and
all his compliances for bearing any office or authority in the Country; he
may very well pay a large Composition, for he ha^h extorted large sums of
money of the Country since these Wars began, besides two or 3000. l. of
Shipmoney, and other moneys which he had of the Countries in his hands before.

The copy of a Letter from the Committee of Pembroke, to the Committee for
Compositions at Goldsmiths Hall.
Honorable,
SInce our accesses into this County of Carmarthen, we find here an insolent
tyrannical Gentry, consisting of one intolerable trunk, the branches
dispersing over the face of the Country, and a servile oppressed Commons,
holding their fortunes (yea their lives) at will of their Grand Seigniour. Ease
and liberty they would gladly enjoy, but think it capital to open their
mouths, and profess so much. Authority we have to minister some remedy, and
fidelity, inclination, and spirit enough, to put it in execution. But the brave
designs and joyful success of our Major-Generall requiring his whole power
in the bordering Counties, leaves us unable to encounter with these sons of
Anak, their very countenance proclaiming nothing but Malignancie and
opposition. The happy Issue of our Major Generals endeavors, the total
reducement of Cardigan, Radnor and Brecknock shieres to King and Parliaments
obedience, rounding this Country with our friends trusty and faithful, is
become the security to hold us together without danger of life so long in this
place, though we dare onley receive charges and examine witnesses against
principal Malignants, and not offer to make assay of sequestrations without a
strong power to second us. We send herein the copy of a Charge brought into us
against some few of them which though it be short and much vented in generals,
yet the witnesses and Records testify particulars so horrid as we never
imagined could be practiced by Christians, hence flowed the violent streams of
misery that overwhelmed Pembrokeshiere, and all the Parliaments friends in this
part of Wales, there is nothing but abhorring the National Covenant, and a
general desire of power to revolt.

We humbly offer these intimations to prevent mistakes if any of them sew for
composition, and if the destroyed County of Pembroke should be designed to
receive any recovery for spoils, the chief agents in the ruin might be
descried, and be made proportionably sharers in the repair, we crave pardon
for this our boldness, and devote our selves

Carmarthen 29. Novrm. 1645. Your humble servants Tho: Powell. Sam. Lort. John
Lloyd. Griff. White. T. Rowen. John Lort. Georg. Will. Griffith. John Mathins.


Articles exhibited the 10. day of November 1645. to the right Worshipful the
Committee established for the King and Parliament within the three Associated
Counties of Pembroke, Carmarthen, and Cardigan, for discovery of the malignancy
(against the authority of Parliament) of Rich: Earl of Carbery, Rice Rudd
Baronet, Sir Henry Vaughan, Sir Edward Vaughan, Knights, John Vaughan of
Llanely, Lodowicke Lewis, Henry Middleton, Tho. Philips, Esquires, and Edward
Lloyd Gent.
1. THe said Earl of Carbery was in time of peace a merciless oppressor of
the Commons within the said Counties, made advantage of the beginning of these
present Wars cherished the troubles to make commodity thereof, undertook the
illegal Commission of Array, in opposition to the Parliament, and suppressing
their friends and adherents, usurped the command in chief and sole power of
those Counties to his own hands, introduced additionall forces out of other
parts of the Kingdom to his assistance, made these Counties the constant seat
of war for 3 years past, to the utter undoing of the well-affected Inhabitants,
and damage of the Country of 500000. l. at the least, and all the other
Delinquents in times both of peace and war have been the principal and
constant instruments for acting the said Earls design, diligently subservient
to his ambition, and avarice, his abettors in ruining the Country, and
proportionable sharers in the spoils.

2. The Delinquents and their faction to disinable the Country of opposition to
their purposes, did in the months of October and November, 1642. disarme all
the Trained Bands of the County of Carmarthen, and possessed themselves of all
the Arms there in the common store, with the Trained Bands Arms, amounting in all to 3000. Arms, and raised a Regiment of foot soldiers to serve in them
against the Parliament, and in pretense of the Soldiers present maintenance,
extorted xl. s. a piece at least, of every the Trained Band men, of some more,
when they were stripped of their Arms, amounting to 2000. and above, the like
course they held as far as they could prevail in the other two Counties.

3. For further exhausting the wealth of the Country to convert to their own
private commodity, the Delinquents in January following, pact a Grand Jury of
men, observant of their countenances, and of special relation and dependancy
upon the said Earl and Baronet Rudd, to serve in the quarter Sessions then
holden in Carmarthen shiere, and prepared a presentment and had it engrossed
before hand, to serve their turn for raising money and suppressing the
Parliaments friends, and overawed the Jury to deliver the same to the Court
without oath or any examination or evidence, as the act of the Jurors upon
their oaths that presentment, designed 2600. I. of the Countries money to be
sequestered to the Earl of Carbery.

4. In levying that unjust imposition by the Earl and some others of the
Delinquents warrants upon pretense that Walter Grundy, persons known to affect
the Parliament, and thereby come to be the object of the Delinquents fury,
withstood the payment of about 9. sh. imposed upon Hugh Grundy their father;
the said Thomas Philips, Edward Lloyd, with one hundred other persons in their
company the 25. of June, 1643. being the Lords day in the morning, forced an
entrance into the house, murdered Walter, dangerously wounded Ralph, carried
him prisoner to Carmarthen, indicted, arraigned and condemned him of high
Treason at the great Sessions in August following, the house plundered to the
value of 200. I. and Mary Grundy their sister in house with them imprisoned,
and Thomas Philips by warrant of the Delinquents immediate after the
presentment, and by color thereof seized the real estate of 100. l. value per
annum, and personal estate of 500. l. of Evan Thomas mentioned by the
presentment to be ill-affected to the then government of the Country, and made
strict search for his body to have murdered or proceeded against him as a
Traitor, but that he escaped by flight to the Parliaments forces in
Pembrookeshire.

The said Earl by the advice of the other Delinquents constantly since the
increase of the troubles, procures persons servilly obsequious to his commands,
be they never so inhumane, to authorize Sheriffs and other officers in
Carmarthenshiere, for better establishing and support of his tyranny and
supplement of means to feed the profuseness and luxury of all the
Delinquents, by undoing of some, and exposing of many hundreds of innocent
persons to perish for want of food.

Praying the persons of the Delinquents may be secured to receive their trial
by Parliament, the injuried by them recompensed out of their estates, and the
residue sequestered according to Ordinance of Parliament.

FINIS.

