THE EARL OF CORKES Victory, AND TYRONES OVERTHROW.

Being a warranted Relation of the great Overthrow which the Earl of Cork
gave to the Rebels at four several times, which makes most of the Rebels fly
out of Cities and Towns, and keep themselves in the Woods.

Also the driving away of the Rebels out of the City of Armagh.

With the Copy of a Letter sent from the Earl of Tyrone to Sir John Burlacie
one of the Lord chief Justices in Jreland.

All which news was brought into London upon Monday the 13. of December by
John Hodges one of the Irish Posts.

LONDON, Printed for John Greensmith, 1641.

The Earl of Corkes Victory, AND Tyrones Overthrow.
REbellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and witches by the Law were not to be
suffered to live, by which we may gather, that the Rebels in Ireland are not to
have the hope of mercy shown unto them, but being ceazed upon to be put all to
death, many out rages have they committed, and many Christianicall Protestant
have they put to unspeakeable torments which have been heretofore presented to
the view of the whole world.

It has been the Lord chief Justices request to have aid and assistance from
England and Scotland, which they have been granted, to the terror of their
treacherous enemies.

The Lord Moore has ressisted them very often, and sometimes his forces have
been overthrown, but oftener has he quelled the pride of the Rebels by just
slaughter.

Also of late has the Earl of Cork stood in the defense of our King and
himself, having an Army consisting of ten thousand men,

With which he marched unto the place some sour Miles distant from Dublin,
where the Rebels Troops lay watching for opportuniry to besiege the City.

Many times before had he challenged them to a pictht Battle, but they never
durst.

Wheresore he unawares, with his companies fell upon them, who to resist, the
Rebels tried their best Skill, but after a Skirmish, the Rebels knowing how
slenderly they were armed seemed to retreat back, but the forces of the Earl
of Cork pursued them, and as they seemed to run away, slew, two Hundredth
Forty Six of the Rebels.

But the Rebels had the next day aid and assistance by the treacherous Earl of
Tyrone, and then they seemed to girt round the Army of the Earl of Cork, but
a Collonell under the command of the Earl of Cork, by his policy, broke
their ranks.

And cut off at that present time, above five hundredth, which struck terror in
the hearts of the Rebels, which the Earl of Macqu^ere his company hearing,
came to the rescue of their Companies, but were valiantly repeld by the Earl
of ^orke a certain^ number of t^^^ being slain, which is doubtful.

Then did the Earl of Cork, march with his Companies toward the City of
Cork where he percoived the Companies of the Lord Muskrey, burning up one of
his chief Manner houses.

Then did he march toward them, and slew one hundred and threescore of them,
the Lord himself was not there present amongst them.

Then came news unto him, that Armagh was besieged, which stayed his intended
purpose for to rescue them, whom he found in great perplexity, but they viewing
aid coming to the Protestants, set fire on part of the City, and changed
habits and Arms with them which they before in the City had slain, and so
passed the revenge, which otherwise had been inflicted upon them.

To watch and ward Armagh did the Earl spare three hundred of his men, which
three days after were encountered by the same Rebels but the Protestants gave
them such an overthrow, that they had no cause to boast of Victory, yet are the
Rebels in hope to obtain foreign aid, and at this time do keep themselves
in the Woods.

The Protestants also expect aid from us, and then they do not fear but to
expel those which went about to destroy them and their Religion.

But not withstanding as yet they confess, they owe recompense for safety
first unto God, and then to the good Earl of Cork, who does make their
enemies to tremble.

This Earl of Cork was borne in Cent, and now is one of the wealthiest Peers
in Ireland, and has hither to proved himself a true loyal Subject to King
Charles our lawful King and Governor, may daily more such Corkes arise, that
with swiftness they may pursue the enemies of Religious Protestants.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Earl of Tyrone unto Sir John Burlacie, one
of the Lord chief Justices in Ireland.
Sir John,
Yleld up vour Fort and do not think for to withstand our invincible power,
least that J study revenge, and you all being taken, suffer without quarter,
but if the good will of a deposed Governor may stir you up to Justice,
revolt speedily and assist me, which am at this time in the County of Monahan,
accompanied with Troops of loving and war like Soldiers, make use of my
Counsel, and be eternally happy.

FINIS.

