By the Council of State.
A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas by an Act of the last Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Dissolving the
Parliament begun the Third of November 1640, and for the calling and holding of
a Parliament at Westminster the 25 of April 1660. It is expressly Declared and
Enacted, That all Persons Engaged in the late Rebellion in Ireland, and all who
profess the Popish Religion, and all and every other Person and Persons who
have Advised, or Voluntarily Aided, Abetted, or Assisted in any War against the
Parliament, since the first day of January 1641. and his or their Sons (unless
he or they have since manifested their good affection to the said Parliament)
shall be incapable to be elected to serve as Members in the next Parliament.
And whereas the Council of State is given to understand, That notwithstanding
the good provision that is therein made, and albeit the happiness and
settlement of the Nation is so much concerned in the observance thereof, yet
diverse Persons more respecting private Interests, and Personal Satisfactions,
then Public Safety, do intend and endeavor* to promote the Electio^^ of
Persons not qualified* as by that Act is directed, to the violating of that
Law, and the perverting of those good Ends of Peace and Establishment which are
thereby aimed at; Therefore, according to the Trust reposed in them for the due
Execution of the Laws, and to the intent, those who have not been hitherto
acquainted with the Tenor and purport of that Act, may be the better informed
how far they are thereby obliged, and that they may avoid the penalty unposed
upon the Infringers thereof, The Council have thought fit hereby strictly to
enioyn, and require all Persons any ways concerned in the Election of Members
to serve in Parliament, to take notice of the said Act, and of the
Qualifications thereby prescribed as aforesaid, and not to do, or attempt any
thing to the contrary thereof. To which purpose, the Sheriffs and Chief
Magistrates of the respective Counties, Cities, and Borroughs of this Nation,
are required, at the times and places appointed for Electing their Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses, and before they do actually proceed to such Elections,
to cause this Proclamation to be publicly read, and Proclaimed in their
several Counties, Cities, and Borroughs, that none may have color to pretend
ignorance thereof; In which behalf, the Council shall expect a punctual
Compliance, and call those to a strict Account who shall neglect the same.

Wednesday March 28. 1660. By the Council of State at VVhitehal.
ORdered, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and Published.

W. JESSOP, Clerk of the Council.

Printed by Abel Roper, and Tho: Collins, Printers to the Council of State.


