At the COURT at WHITEHALL, the 28th. of October, 1664.
Present
The Kings most excellent Majesty. His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Lord
Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Ormond. Lord
Chamberlain. Earl of Anglesey. Earl of Lauderdail. Earl of Middleton. Lord
Bishop of London. Lord Ashley. Mr. Vice Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Morice. Mr.
Secretary Bennet. Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy. Sir Edward Nicholas.
IT was this day Ordered (His Majesty present in Council) That His Majesty's
Declaration, For Encouragement of Seamen and Mariners Employed in the present
Service, be forthwith Printed by His Majesty's Printer: And that so many Copies
thereof as shall be Commanded by his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Lord High
Admiral of England, be disposed of as his Royal Highness shall think fit and
direct: And so many also to the Principal Officers and Commissioners of His
Majesty's Navy Royal, by them to be distributed to such persons and places as
in their Judgments shall seem convenient: Some of them also to the Principal
Secretaries of State, and for the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.

Richard Brown.

His Majesty's DECLARATION For Encouragement of SEAMEN and MARINERS Employed
in the Present Service.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.

CUM PRIVILEGIO.

His Majesty's DECLARATION FOR Encouragement of Seamen and Mariners employed
in the present Service.
HIs Majesty with much satisfaction taking notice of the great resolution and
cheerful forwardness of the Seamen and Mariners in the present Service
necessarily undertaken for the Honor and Defense of His Dominions, and the
Commerce and Trade of His Subjects; and resolving to give due reward and
encouragement to their Valor and Faithfulness, has thought fit (by the Advice
of His Council) to Publish and Declare,

That all Captains, Seamen and others, that do or shall serve in any of His
Majesty's Own, or Merchants Ships employed in His Service, shall (for time to
come, in lieu of all Prizes) have and receive from His Majesty for every Ship
or Prize they shall lawfully take, whether Merchantmen, or Men of War, laden
or light, the sum of Ten shillings for every Tun the said Ship shall measure,
according to the ordinary Rule of Shipwrights-Hall; and Six pounds thirteen
shillings and four pence for every Piece of Ordnance, whether Iron or Brass,
the same to be paid by the Collector for Prize-goods, within Ten days after the
payment of the Wages of such Seamen (in case Adjudication be made of the Ship
in the Admiralty-Court) to be shared and divided amongst them proportionably,
according to the respective Places and Offices in the Ship in which they
served, and according to the Custom of the Seas in that case.

And further, That it be lawful for all Captains, Seamen and others, serving
as aforesaid, to take and have to themselves as Pillage, without further or
other account to be given for the same, All such Goods and Merchandise as shall
be found by them or any of them, in any Ship (they shall take in Fight as
Prize) upon or above the Gun-deck of the said Ship, and not otherwise: And for
every Man of War sunk or destroyed by firing or otherwise, to have Ten pounds a
Gun, only to be divided as aforesaid, to be paid by the Commissioners for
Prize-Goods, within Ten days after the payment of the Ship, as aforesaid, upon
Certificate of the matter of Fact stated by the Council of War.

That care shall be taken for defraying the Charges of Sick and Wounded men, as
aforesaid, and for the relief of Widows, Children, and Impotent Parents of such
as shall be slain in the Service at Sea; and for Meddals, or other Rewards to
such Officers and Seamen of the Fleet, as shall be found to have done any
eminent or extraordinary Service.

And that for supplying of necessary provisions for Sick and Wounded men on
Board, there shall be allowed by His Majesty Five pounds for Six Months
Service for every Hundred men.

That upon the discharge of Sick and Wounded men from the Ships in His
Majesty's Service, care shall be taken for the payment of their Tickets and
Conduct-money.

That Directions shall be given to all Mayors, Bailiffs, or other Magistrates
in any Port-Towns, to take care for all necessary accommodations, at the Charge
of His Majesty, for the Relief and Cure of such Sick and Wounded men as shall
be sent on Shore.

That the Moiety of all Hospitals in England, employed for the Cure of Wounded
and Sick people, be reserved during the time of War at Sea, for such as shall
be Wounded in the Service of the Navy, as they shall become void, from and
after the First of November.

Richard Brown, Clerk of the Council.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1664.


