THE E. of Shaftsbury's EXPEDIENT For Settling the NATION.

Discoursed with His MAJESTY in the House of Peers, At OXFORD, Mar. 24th. 1680
/ 1.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be Sold by Langley Curtis, 1681.

THE Earl of Shaftsbury's EXPEDIENT For Settling the NATION. Discoursed with His
MAJESTY In the House of PEERS at Oxford, M^r. the 24th. 1680/1.
THE 24th. of March, the great Patriot, and next under God and Dr. Oats, the
supreme Savior and Defender of the Nation, the Earl of Shaftsbury received, or
pretended that he received a Letter written in an unknown Hand* containing* an
Expedient for the settling and* composing the Differences between the King and
Parliament. With this he made a great noise, and bustling about as fast as his
legs, and man, and stick, could carry him. It was asked the Duke of Monmouth,
by my Lord Chamberlain, (that supposed that his Grace might be privy to this
grand Affair) what the great Concern was: His Grace* (with some show of modesty
and self-denial) made answer, that it was somewhat concerning himself, wherein
that Lord was (as in many other things relating to his Grace) much more forward
than he desired he should be.

The little Lord very busy, and desirous to speak with the King, was told by
the Earl of Feversham, that he heard he had some business of great Importance
to communicate to the King, and that therefore if he pleased, he would conduct
him to His Majesty. The busy Earl told him, he was willing to be conducted by
so honest a man as his Lordship, drolling and thinking himself guilty of a very
shrewd Irony.

Well, he is brought to the King, and there broached. The Letter of Expedients
is produced; and what do you think was this grand Secret of securing our Peace
and Religion, but a Proposal for the settling the Crown on the Duke of
Monmouth? The K. surpised, told the Earl, that he wondered that after so many
Declarations to the contrary, he should press him upon that Subject, that if
either with Conscience, or Justice, or Nature, he could do such a thing, he
would have done it before; it being reasonable, that if he had had ever a Child
of his own Legitimate, he would much rather have him reign, than his Brother,
or any of his Brothers Children: That his Majesty was none of those that grew
more timorous with age, but that rather he grew the more resolute the nearer he
was to his grave.

At that word the Loyal Earl was mightily concerned, and cried out that it
chilled his blood to hear of such an expression; Telling the King how earnest
the whole Nation was for His Preservation: that in Him were Comprised all their
Safeties, Lives, Liberties; and Religion, and their All.

Yes, answered his Majesty, and yet, my Lord, I am the only Arbitrary man in
the Kingdom: But assure your Selves I intend to take a greater care of my Own
Preservation, and in that of my Peoples, than any of You all that pretend to so
much concern for the Security of my Person* And yet as careful as I am of my
Own Preservation: Yet I would much sooner lose this Life, of which you pretend
to be so watchful Preservers, than ever part with any of my Prerogative, or
betray this Place, the Laws, or the Religion, or alter the true Succession of
the Crown, it being repugnant both to Conscience and Law.

For that matter, replied the Earl, let us alone, we will make a Law for it.

But the K. told him, my Lord, if this is your Conscience, it is far from being
mine: For this cannot be done without overthrowing all Religion, and all Law.

And in fine, assure your selves, that as I love my Life so well, as to take
all the care in the world to keep it with Honor, so I don't think it of so
great Value neither, after Fifty, as to be preserved with the forfeiture of my
Honor, Conscience, and the Laws of the Land.

And much more to this purpose did his Majesty say upon this occasion; all so
full of Reason, Equity and Justice, and with so much Resolution and Courage, as
gave the greatest assurance and encouragement to all the Loyal Lords in the
House, and all honest Subjects that could be; but to the Factious, the greatest
Confusion imaginable.

This was done yesterday in the House of Lords.
FINIS.

