AN ABSTRACT Of all SUCH ACTS OF Parliament, Now in FORCE, As Relate to the
Admiralty AND Navy of England.

LONDON: Printed by S. Bridge in Austin Friars. MDCXCVII.

A TABLE TO THIS Abridgment and Abstract.
A.
ADmiral, and their Deputies, not to meddle with things done within the Realm
Page 2. Admiral, Commissioners of Admiralty, to have same Authority Page 46.
Admiral not to Exact Money for License to Trade Page 6, 7. Commissioners of
Admiralty to have Tenth of Prizes to buy Meddals Page 54. Admirals Jurisdiction
saved in Stat. 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. Page 8. Admiral may execute Powers given
to Commissioners of Navy Page 43. Commissioners of Admiralty to have Copy of
Registry Page 67. Action against Admiral, if act against the Statute 13 Rich
II. Page 3. Articles for Government of His Majesty's Navy Page 11. Appeals,
vide Delegates.

B.
Behavior, Commissioners of Navy have power to bind to Good Behavior Page 32.
C.
COurt of King's Bench, or Commission of Oier and Terminer, to have power to
Try Offenses against Stat. 13 Car. II. Page 61. Continuance of that Act Page 62.
Cinque Ports, their Authority, as to Stat. Hen. VIII page 4, 5. As to Registry
of Seamen; And as to Certificates of Registered Seamen inhabiting there Page 74,
89. Chaplain, or Chyrurgion of Ship, not obliged to be Registered Page 74.
Cruisers appointed by Act of Parliament Page 77, 79, 91 Commissioners Civil and
Military, not to determine on Demise of the King Page 77. Certificate under the
Hand of one Justice of Peace for Registered Seamen Page 73. Commissioners of
Registry to Examine Matters upon Oath, as to Seamens Wages, and Quakers on
Solemn Declaration Page 85, 87. Connusance of things belonging to Admiral Page
1. Commision sur Stat. 27 Hen. VIII. for Trials of Treason Page 4, 5. Clergy,
or Sanctuary, not to be allowed to Persons convict on that Statute ibm. Clergy
not to be allowed to Imbezlers of Stores Page 36. Carriages by Water for King's
Use, Page 26, 27. Counterfeiters of Hand of Treasurer, or Commissioners of Navy
Page 41. Commissioners of Prizes, their Duty, Page 52 55, 61 Commissioners of
Navys Power as to Imbezlements Page 33, 38. Certificates to be brought by
Registered Persons, Vide Register.
D.
DIsturbance in Navy Yards, etc. Page 35, 37. Delegates, their Sentence final,
Appeal out of Admiralty Court Page 11. Declaration to be taken by Officers of
Navy Page 80. Deputies of Admiral, vide Jurisdiction.
F.
FElony to Imbezle King's Stores Page 36. Forfeitures on Stat. 2 and 3 Ed. VI.
Page 7. Forfeitures on 22 and 23 Car. II. Page 38. Fines to be imposed by
Commissioners of Navy Page 32. Fees to be taken for Probate of Wills of Seamen
Page 42. Fraud and Abuses in Plantation Trade redrest Page 78.
G.
GIfts or Rewards not to be taken to exempt Carriages from the King's Service
Page 29.
I.
JVrisdiction of things not belonging to Admiralty Page 2. Judgment on
Offenders, on Statute 27 and 28 Hen. VIII. Page 4. Jury from whence to come on
Trials on those Statutes Page 4, 5. Justices of Peace to determine Offenses of
Desertion of Seamen on Statute 18 Hen. VI. Page 10. Encouragement for Seamens
defending Merchants Ships Page 34. And for Seamen on Board the King's Ships
Page 35.
Imprisonment of Imbezlers for want of Distress Page 32, 39. Instructions to be
given to Captains, of the Statute to Prohibit Trade with France Page 60.
Justices of Peace to Examine on Oath, as to the truth of Certificates by them
given Page 83.
L.
LOrds of Manors who claim Wreck Page 2. Licenses to Fish to be without Fee
Page 7. Liberties, Commissioners of Navy to have power, as well within
Liberties, as without Page 33, 42. Licenses for Landmen to serve on Shipboard
Page 73.
M.
MVrder and Mayhem done in great Ships in Main Stream, how to be Tried Page 3.
Manslaughter and Murder on High Seas Page 4. Mariners Deserting Service Page
49. -- Not to be forced to Land-Service Page 10.
Manner of taking Fishermen to be Mariners for King's Service Page 10.
N.
NEcessity, Things taken for Necessity Page 5, 6. Commissioners of Navy power
as to imbezling Stores Page 32, 29. Navy, and Commissioners of Navy, vide
Commissioners and Imbezlers.
O.
OAth, Proceedings to be on Oath about Disturbances of Seamen Page 32. Oaths to
be given by Commissioners of Navy Page 41. And by Commissioners of Admiralty
Page 44.
Offenses not to be twice punished Page 43. Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
by whom, and before whom to be taken Page 44, 93. Oath of Court Martial Page
47. Office and Officers for Registring Seamen Page 65. Oaths to be taken by
Officers of Registry Page 66. Order of time to be observed in provision for
disabled Mariners, their Wives and Children Page 82.
P.
Penalty and Punishment for Exactions contrary to Stat. 2 and 3 E. VI. ca. 6.
Page 7. Penalty on Offenders against Stat. 13 and 14 Car. II. cap. 20. Page 30.
Pressing Ships and Vessels for King's Service Page 28. Persons refusing to
serve with Ships when Pressed, how to be punished Page 28. Proviso in the Stat.
13 Car. II. not give greater power to Lord High Admiral Page 26. Punishment for
disturbance in Navy Yards, etc. Page 31, 32. Power to discharge Fines by
Commissioners of Navy Page 32. Power to make Warrants and search Ships in
daytime for imbezled Goods Page 39. Personating Seamen to receive Wages, their
Punishment Page 40. Powers given by Stat. 22 and 23 Car. II. may be executed by
Ld. High Admiral Page 43. Prohibition of Trade with France Page 47. Prizes to
be brought into Port, without breaking Bulk or Imbezlement Page 48. Perishable
Goods, how to be disposed ibm. Prize Goods condemned, how to be sold Page 49.
Punishment for imbezling Prize Goods Page 51. Prize taken by Man of War, or
Privateer, how to be divided Page 50, 51 Prizes taken by Collusion Page 53.
Provision made for Registered Seamen, their Wives and Children Page 69, 81, 82
Double share of Prizes to Registered Seamen Page 69 Personating Registered
Seamen, or counterfeiting License Page 73. Penalty on refusers to take the
Oaths, Test, or subscribe Association Page 75, 80 Punishment of Lenders and
Borrowers of Registered Seamens Certificates Page 88, 89.
Q.
QValifications of Officers of the Fleet, as to taking the Oath, Test, etc.
Page 80.
R.
REgistry of Seamen, an Act for that purpose Page 63 Rewards to Registered
Seamen Page 68 Registered Seamens Privileges Page 69 Registered Seamen, Aged and
Disabled, how to be provided for ibm. -- Their Widows and Children, etc. Page
70. -- Absenting from Service ibm. -- may be expunged by Admiralty. Page 73.
In what Cases Persons of 50 years of age may be Registered Page 85
S.
SHips exempted from pressing Page 30. Sentence of Death sur Statute 13 Car.
II. not to be inflicted without leave from Lord High Admiral Page 25. Sentence
of Death by Court Marshal ibm. Saving of Admirals Jurisdiction Page 8. Saving
Franchises to private Persons Page 10. Salvage for re-taken Ships Page 59
Seamen allowed Colliers not to be pressed Page 90.
T.
Trials of Heresies, Murders and Felonies on High Sea Page 4, 5. Time to prove
Property of Wreckt Goods Page 1. Trinity-House, None to be Masters of, unless
Registered Page 71. Trinity-House to settle Rates of Pressed Ships Page 28. Trial
of Offenses against Stat. 13 Car. II. by Court of King's Bench, or Commission
of Oyer and Terminer Page 61.
V.
Vouching Seamen to be Landmen Page 73.
W.
WReck not inquirable in Court of Admiralty Page 2. -- The Description thereof,
and what to be done therewith Page 1.
Warrant of Commissioners of Navy, to search for imbezzled Goods Page 39. Wages
of all Seamen to pay 6 d. per Mensem Page 71. Warrant-Officers of Navy need not
take the Sacrament Page 81.
Y.
YEar and Day, Property of Wreckt Goods, in that time to be proved Page 2.
AN ABSTRACT AND Abridgement of such Statutes as are now in Force, and Concern
the Lord High Admiral of England, Commissioners for Executing the Office of
Lord High Admiral, and the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of England; The
Commissioners of the Navy; The Commissioners for Registering Seamen; The Navy
of England, and Sailers and Mariners therein.
Anno 3 Edw. I. cap. iv.
COncerning Wreck Wreck.
at Sea: Where a Man, Dog or Cat, Escape out of the Ship Quick, that Ship or
Barge, etc. or any thing within them, shall not be adjudged Wreck; but the
Goods shall be saved, and kept by the View of the Sheriff, Coroner, or the
King's Bailiff; So that if any Sue for the said Goods, and prove they were his
within a Year and a Day, they shall be restored without delay; And where Wreck
belongs to any other than the King, Lord who Claims Wreck.
he shall have it in like manner.

Anno 13 Rich. II. cap. v.
Admiral.
THat the Admirals and their Deputies should not meddle of any thing done within
the Realm, but only of a thing done upon the Sea, as it has bin used in the
time of the Honorable Prince Edward, Grandfather of Richard the Second.

Anno 15 Rich. II. cap. iii.
Admirals.
IT is declared, That of all manner of Contracts, Pleas and Quarrels, and of all
other things done, rising within the Bodies of Counties, Wrecks.
as well by Land as by Water; and also Wreck of the Sea, The Admirals Court
shall have no manner of Connisance, Power or Jurisdiction, Jurisdiction.
but they to be determined by Laws of the Land, Not before Admiral.
Nevertheless, of the Death of a Man, Murder, Mayhem.
and of Mayhem done in great Ships, being in the main Stream of great Rivers,
only beneath the first Bridge of the same Rivers near the Sea, the Admiral
shall have Connisance, And also, to Arrest Ships Arrest Ships.
in the great Floats for the great Voiages of the King and the Realm, saving
always to the King all manner of Forfeitures, Admiralty Jurisdiction of Floats.
And he shall have also Jurisdiction of the said Floats during the said Voiages
only.

Anno 2 Hen. IV. cap. xi.
THe Statute 13 Richard the Second confirmed, Action contra Admiral.
and Action given against the Admiral, etc. by Party grieved, is Prosecuted
contrary to the Statute.

Anno 27 Hen. VIII. cap. iv.
Pirates, Manslaughter.
I. THe Statute recites the inconveniency of Trying of Pirates, Manslaughters
at the Civil Law, and Enacts, That all such Offenses done in or upon the High
Sea, or in any other River, Haven or Creek, where the Admiral, etc. pretend to
have Jurisdiction, shall be Inquired, Trial of Piracy.
Tried and Determined in such Shires as shall be limited in King's Commission
Commission.
under the Great Seal to Admiral, etc. Directed to Hear and Determine such
Offenses according to Common Course of the Laws of the Land.

II. To enquire by Jury as if Offenses committed at Land, upon Indictment for
such Offense, like Trial, Trial.
etc. as in Case of Offenses committed at Land: And Persons Convict Persons
Convict.
shall have and suffer such Pains of Death, Loss of Lands, etc. as if they had
been Convicted of Felony or Murder done on Land. Judgment.


III. No Clergy or Sanctuary to be allowed. Clergy, Sanctuary.


IV. Proviso, That things taken for Necessity, Things taken for necessity.
Persons so taking shall not be punished, if give Security for Payment.

V. If Commission directed with in Jurisdiction of Cinque Ports, Cinque Ports.
Then to be directed to the Lord Warden, etc.

In Case of such Commission within Cinque Ports, Trial in Cinque Ports.
Trial to be by the Inhabitants of Cinque Ports.

Anno 28 Hen. VIII. cap. xv.
I. REcites where Traitors, Pirates, Traitors.
Pirates, Thieves, Robbers, Murderers and Confederates upon the Sea have
escaped un-punished because of the difficulty of Proceedings before Lord
Admiral according to Course of Civil Law, Directs Trial Directs Trial.
by Commission under Great Seal, Commission to Admiral.
directed to the Lord High Admiral and other, of Treasons, Felonies, Robberies,
Murders and Confederacies committed on Sea, etc. to hear and determine as the
Common Law of Land directs.

II. Commissioners have Authority to Proceed by Inquest to take Indictments by
Oath of Twelve Jurors Inhabitants in County limited in Commission, Inquest by
Jury.
Such Trial to be had, and Judgment Judgment.
on Persons Convict, as if for like Offenses at Land.

III. Proviso to take away Clergy Clergy.
from Persons Convict on that Commission.

Things taken for necessity.
IV. Like Direction for things taken for necessity, and giving Security for
Payment, as in 27 Hen. 8.

V. Like Directions as 27 Hen. 8. for Commissioners of Cinque Ports.

VI. Like Directions for Trial on such Commission by Inhabitants of Cinque
Ports.

Anno 2 and 3 Edward. VI. cap. vi.
AN Act that the Admiral of England, nor any of his Officers, shall not Exact
any Sums of Money for License to Trade to Ireland, etc.

First Recites, That for few years then past, there has bin taken by certain
Officers of the Admiralty of such Merchants as practiced Adventures into
Island, Newfoundland, Ireland, and other Places commodious for Fishing, diverse
great Sums of Money; And whereas great Complaints thereof has been made, To
the end the more Plenty of Fish may be brought into the Realm, and the same may
be had at a more reasonable Price.

It is Enacted, Not to Exact.
That neither the Admiral, nor any Officers nor Ministers of the Admiralty
shall at any time hereafter Exact, etc. by himself or his Servants, etc. of any
such Merchant or Fisherman, any sum or sums of Money, Doles or Thirds of Fish
for any License to pass this Realm to the said Voiages, or any of them, upon
pain of forfeiture Forfeiture.
for the first Offense treble the sum or sums of the Reward so received, for
which Forfeiture the Party grieved, or any other Person to sue for the same,
the King to have one Moiety, Given to Party grieved.
and the Party grieved the other, and no Protection to be allowed for the
second Offense, Second Offense.
the Party offending to forfeit his or or their Offices in the Admiralty,
Punishment.
and to make Fine and Ransom.

Anno 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. cap. v.
AN Act to restrain carrying of Corn, Victuals and Wood over the Seas, It
Recites the Mischief, and gives Forfeiture of Ship and Goods in Case of
Transportation without License; enables Justices of the Peace to hear and
determine Offenses against that Act, and in it is a Proviso, Proviso.
That that Act shall not be prejudicial unto the Lord Admiral, or the King and
Queens Jurisdiction of Admiralty; but that the Lord High Admiral or Deputies
may execute all kind of Jurisdiction belonging to the Sea, Admiral's
Jurisdiction saved.
according as might have bin done before the making of this Statute.

Anno 5 Eliz. cap. v. An Act touching Politic Constitutions of the Navy.
THIS Act only provides an Encouragement for Fishing, and for the
Transportation thereof into England: And also of Corn, and other Native
Commodities, and hinders the Importation of diverse Goods into England, but no
way concerns the Admiralty or Navy, only in these Sections following:

Sect. 27. Where doubt has bin made whether 18 Hen. 6. cap. 19. heretofore made
against Soldiers retained departing without License from their Captain did
extend to Mariners and Gunners; It is Enacted and Declared, That the said
Statute of 18. Hen. 6. 18 Hen. 6. cap. 19. extends to Sailers.
in all Pains and other Forfeitures, did and does extend to every Mariner and
Gunner having taken Press-Wages to serve the Queens Majesty her Heirs and
Successors.

Justices of Peace to determine the Offenses.
Nota: The Punishment by the 18th of Hen. VI. is as Felony, and the Justices of
the Peace have the Power to enquire and determine those Offenses.

Seamen not to be forced to be Soldiers.
Sect. 41. Fishermen and Mariners shall not be Compelled to serve as Soldiers
at Land, except it shall be to serve under any Captain of Ship for Landing to
do some special Exploit, or under any other Person having Authority to
withstand Invasion of Enemies.

Saving of Franchises.
Sect. 42. This Act not to take away the Liberty, Franchises, Fines, Issues,
Wrecks of the Sea, or any other Lawful Inheritance or Freehold of any Person
Natural or Politic, for or touching any Liberty or Jurisdiction Admiral,
Jurisdiction Admiral.
or for Conservation of any Water.

The manner of taking Fishermen to be Mariners for the King.
Sect. 43. That no Fishermen to be taken by Commission to serve Her Majesty as
a Mariner on the Sea, but the Commission be first brought by her Highnesses
Taker to Her Two Justices of Peace next Inhabiting Sea Coasts, etc. where the
said Mariners are to be taken, to the intent the Justice may choose out, and
cause to be returned such sufficient number of able Men as in Commission
contained, to serve Her Majesty.

Proviso, No greater Authority to Admiral.
That this Act shall give no greater Authority to Lord High Admiral, or to the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty than had before the making of this Statute.

Anno 8 Eliz. cap. v.
FOr the avoiding tedious Suits in Civil and Marine Causes, Appeals from
Admiralty.
All and every such Judgment and Sentence as shall be pronounced upon Appeal to
be made in Chancery by Commissioners under half Seal, Sentence of Delegates
final.
shall be final, and no Appeal to be made from the said Sentence.

Anno 13 Car. II. cap. ix.
AN Act for the establishing Articles and Orders for the Regulating and better
Government of His Majesty's Navy, Ships of War, and Forces by Sea.

For Regulating and better Government of His Majesty's Navies, Ships of War,
and Forces by Sea, It is Enacted, That all and every the Articles and Orders in
this Act mentioned, shall be only and respectively put in Execution and obeyed,
etc.

The Public Worship of God.
I. That all Commanders, etc. shall cause the Public Worship of Almighty God,
according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, to be solemnly and duly
performed in their respective Ships, and that Prayers and Preaching by their
respective Chaplains be performed diligently, and the Lord's Day observed
according to Law.

Swearing and Drunkenness.
II. Every Person in His Majesty's Pay, using unlawful and rash Oaths,
Cursings, Execrations, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, or other scandalous Actions in
derogation of God's Honor, and Corruption of Good Manners, shall be punished
by Fine, Imprisonment or otherwise, as Court Marshal shall think fit.

III. If any Officer, Mariner, Soldier, Holding any Foreign Intelligence.
or other Person in the Fleet, shall give, hold or entertain any Intelligence
to or with any King, Prince or State, being Enemy to, or any Person in
Rebellion against His Majesty, etc. without directions or leave from the King's
Majesty, the Lord High Admiral, Vice Admiral, or Commander in Chief of any
Squadron, such Person or Persons so offending, shall be punished with Death.

IV. Letter or Message from any Foreign Prince, etc. Enemy to the King.
If any Letter or Message from any King, Foreign Prince, State or Potentate,
being an Enemy to the King's Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, or on their
behalf be conveyed to any inferior Officer, Mariner or Soldier, or other, in
the Fleet, and the said Officer, etc. do not within two hours, (having
opportunity so to do) acquaint the superior Commander of it; Or if a superior
Officer or Commander or Mariner being acquainted therewith by an inferior
Officer; Or himself in his own Person receiving a Letter, or Message from any
such Enemy or Rebel, and shall not in convenient time reveal the same to the
Admiral, Vice Admiral, or the Commander of the Squadron, Every such Person
shall be punished with Death, or such other punishment as the Court Marshal
shall think fit.

Relieving of an Enemy.
V. No Person or Persons in the Fleet shall relieve an Enemy or Rebel in the
time of War with Money, Victuals, Powder, Shot, Arms, Ammunition, or any other
Supplies whatsoever, directly or indirectly, upon Pain of Death, or such
Punishment as the Court Marshal shall think fit to impose.

Papers, Charter-parties, etc. taken in any Ship as Prize.
VI. All the Papers, Charter-Parties, Bills of Lading, Passports and other
Writings whatsoever, that shall be taken, seized or found aboard any Ship or
Ships which shall be surprised or seized as Prize, shall be duly preserved, and
not torn nor made away, but the very Originals sent up entirely and without
fraud to the Court of Admiralty, or such other Commissioners as shall be
appointed for that purpose, there to be viewed, made use of and proceeded upon
according to Law, upon Pain of Loss of all the Shares of the Takers, and such
other Punishment to be inflicted on the Offender therein as the Quality of the
Offense and Misdemeanour shall be found to deserve, and the Court Marshal shall
impose.

Ptize Goods, or Goods seized for Prize.
VII. None in His Majesty's Pay shall take out of any Prize, or Ship, or Goods
seized, or for Prize any Money, Plate, Goods taking, or Tackle before Judgment
thereof first past in Admiralty Court, but the full and entire account of the
whole without Imbezlement shall be brought in, and Judgment pass entirely upon
the whole without Fraud, upon pain of such punishment as shall be imposed by a
Court Marshal, or Court of Admiralty, Excepting, That it shall be lawful for
all Captains, Seamen and others, serving as aforesaid, to take and to have to
themselves, as Pillage, without further, or other account to be given for the
same, all such Goods and Merchandises (other than Arms, Ammunition, Tackle, May
take other Goods on Gun Deck (except Tackle, etc.) as Pillage.
Furniture or Stores of such Ship) as shall be found by them in any Ship they
shall Fight or Take as Prize, upon or above the Gun-Deck of the said Ship, and
not otherwise.

VIII. None shall imbezle, Imbezling Cables, Anchors, etc.
steal or take away any Cables, Anchors, Sails, or any of the Ships Furniture,
or any Powder, or any Arms or Ammunition of the Ship, upon Pain of Death, or
other Punishment, as the quality of the Offense shall be found by a Court
Martial.

Foreign Ships taken as Prize not making Resistance.
IX. If any Foreign Ship or Vessel shall be taken as a Prize, that shall not
Fight or make Resistance, that in that Case none of the Captains, Masters or
Mariners, being Foreigners, shall be stripped of their Clothes, or in any sort
Pillaged, beaten or evilly entreated, upon Pain that the Person or Persons so
offending shall Forfeit double Damages, but the said Foreign Ships, and all
the Goods so taken, shall be reserved entire to receive Judgment in the
Admiralty Court according to Right and Justice.

The Duty of Captains, etc. upon Signal of Fight.
X. Every Captain or Commander who upon Signal or Order of Fight or View or
Sight of any of the Ships of the Enemy, Pirate or Rebel, or likelihood of
Engagement, shall not put all things in the Ship in fit posture for the Fight,
And shall not in his own Person, and according to his Place hearten and
encourage the Inferior Officers and Common Men to Fight courageously, and not
to behave themselves faintly, shall be Cashiered, And if he or they shall Yield
to the Enemy, Not to Yield, or Cry for Quarter.
he or they so doing, shall suffer the Pains of Death, or such other Punishment
as the Offense shall deserve.

XI. All Officers to observe the Commands of the Admiral, etc.
Every Captain or Commander, or other Officer, Seaman or Soldier, in any Ship,
Frigate or Vessel of War shall duly observe the Commands of the Admiral, or
other his Superior or Commander of any Squadron, as well for the assailing or
setting upon any Fleet, Squadron or Ships of the Enemy, Pirate or Rebel, or
joining Battle with them, or making Defense against them, as all other the
Commands of the Admiral, or other his superior Commander, upon Pain to suffer
Death or other Punishment, as the Quality of his Neglect or Offense shall
deserve.

XII. Every Captain, Officers that in time of Fight, shall not Fight, or
withdraw.
and all other Officers, Mariners and Soldiers of every Ship, Frigate or Vessel
of War that shall in Time of Fight or Engagement withdraw, keep back, or not
come into the Fight, or Engage and do his Utmost to kill, take and damage the
Enemy, Pirate and Rebels, and assist and relieve all and every His Majesty's
Ships, shall for such Offense or Cowardice, or other disaffection, be Tried,
and suffer Pains of Death, or other Punishment, Penalty.
as the circumstance of such Offense shall deserve, and the Court Marshal judge
fit.

Officers and Ships appointed for Convoy, their Duty.
XIII. The Captains, Officers and Seamen of all Ships appointed for Convoy and
Guard of all Merchant Ships, or any other, shall diligently attend on that
Charge without delay, according to their Instructions on that behalf; and
whosoever shall be found faulty therein, and shall not faithfully perform the
same, and defend the Ships and Goods in their Convoy, without either diverting
to other Parts, or Occasions, or refusing or neglecting to Fight in their
Defense if they be set upon or assailed, or running away Cowardly, and
submitting those in their Convoy to Hazard and Peril, or shall Demand and Exact
any Money or other Reward from any Merchant or Master for Convoying any such
Ships or Vessels belonging to His Majesty's Subjects, shall be Condemned to
make Reparation of the Damage to the Merchants, Owners or others, as the Court
of Admiralty shall adjudge, And also be punished criminally, according to the
Quality of their Offenses, be it by Pain of Death, or other Punishment,
according as shall be adjudged fit by Court Marshal.

XIV. Penalty for not chasing an Enemy, or not relieving a Friend.
Whatever Person or Persons in or belonging to the Fleet, either through
Cowardice, Negligence or Disaffection, shall forbear to pursue the Chase of any
Enemy or Rebel, or Pirate, beaten or flying, or shall not relieve or assist a
known Friend in View, to the utmost of his power, shall be punished with Death,
or otherwise, as a Court Marshal shall find fit.

XV. When at any Time, Service commanded, shall not be stopped or discouraged
Service or Action shall be Commanded, no Man shall presume to stop, or put
backward, or discourage the said Service and Action by pretense of Arrears of
Wages, or upon any pretense of Wages whatsoever, upon pain of Death.

XVI. All Sea-Captains, None shall betray their Trust, or yield to the Enemy.
Officers and Seamen that shall betray their Trust, or turn to the Enemy,
Pirate or Rebel, and either run away with the Ship or any Ordinance,
Ammunition, or Provision, to the weakening of the Service, or yield the same to
the Enemy, Pirate or Rebels, shall be punished with Death.

Deserting the Service, or running away, or enticing others so to do.
XVII. All Sea-Captains, Officers or Mariners that shall Desert the Service or
Employment in their Ships; or shall run away, or entice others so to do, shall
be punished with Death.

XVIII. All Persons whatsoever that shall come, or be found in the nature of
Spies Spies.
to bring any seducing Letters or Messages from any Enemy, or Rebel, or shall
attempt or endeavor to Corrupt any Captain, Officer or Mariner, or other of
the Navy or Fleet, to betray his or their Trust, and Yield up any Ship,
Ammunition, Their punishment.
or Men to the Enemy or Rebel shall be punished with Death.

XIX. No Person in or belonging to the Fleet shall Utter any Words of Sedition,
Mutiny, Sedition.
or Mutiny, or endeavor to make any Mutinous Assemblies upon any Pretense
whatsoever, upon pain of Death. Punishment.


Concealers of Traitorous, or Mutinous Practices or Words.
XX. No Person in or belonging to the Fleet shall conceal any Traiterous or
Mutinous Practices, Designs or Words, or any Words spoken by any to the
prejudice of His Majesty or his Government, or any Words Practices or Designs
tending to the hindrance of the Service, but shall forthwith reveal the same to
his superior, That a meet Proceeding may be had thereupon, upon Pain of such
Punishment Punishment.
as a Court Martial shall find to be just.

XXI. Quarrelling or striking a superior Officer.
None shall presume to quarrel with his Superior Officer, upon Pain of severe
Punishment, nor to strike any such upon Pain of Death, or otherwise, as a Court
Martial shall find the nature of the matter to deserve.

XXII. Unwholesomness of Victuals.
If any of the Fleet find cause of Complaint of the unwholesomeness of the
Victuals, or upon other just grounds, he shall quietly make the same known to
his Superior, or Captain, or Commander in chief, as the Occasion shall
require, That such present Remedy may be had as the matter may require, and the
said Superior or Commander is to cause the same to be presently remedied
accordingly; But no Person upon any such or other pretense, shall privately
stir up any disturbance upon Pain of such severe Punishment as a Court Martial
shall think fit to inflict.

Quarrelling or provoking Speeches.
XXIII. None shall quarrel or fight in the Ship, nor use reproachful or
provoking Speeches tending to make any Quarrel or Disturbance upon Pain of
Imprisonment, and such other Punishment Punishment.
as the Offense shall deserve, and the Court Martial shall impose.

Wastful Expenses of Ammunition.
XXIV. That there be no wastful Erpence of any Powder, Shot, Ammunition, or
other Stores in the Fleet, nor any Imbezlement thereof, but that the Stores and
Provisions be carefully preserved, upon such Penalty by Fine, Imprisonment, or
otherwise, upon the Offenders, Abettors, Buyers and Receivers, Buyers and
Receivers.
as shall be by a Court Martial found just in that behalf.

Care of Conducting and Steering Ships
XXV. That care be taken in the Conducting and Steering of Ships that through
wilfulness, negligence or other defaults none of His Majesty's Ships be
stranded or run upon any Rocks or Sands, or split, or hazarded, upon Pain that
such as shall be found guilty be punished by Fine, Punishment.
Imprisonment or otherwise, as the Offense by a Court Martial shall be Judged
to deserve.

XXVI. Burning Ships etc.
All Persons that shall willingly burn or set Fire on any Ship or Magazine, or
Store of Powder, or Ship, Boat, Ketch, Hoys or Vessel, Tackle or Furniture
thereto belonging, not appertaining to an Enemy or Rebel, shall be punished
with Death. Death.


XXVII. Sleeping on Watch.
No Man in or belonging to the Fleet shall sleep upon his Watch, or negligently
perform the Duty imposed on him, or forsake his Station, upon Pain of Death, or
other Punishment Punishment.
as the circumstances of the Case shall require.

XXVIII. All Murders Murders.
and wilful killing of any Person in the Ship shall be punished with Death.

XXIX. All Robbery and Theft Robbery and Theft.
committed by any Person belonging to or in the Fleet, shall be punished with
Death or otherwise, as the Court Martial upon Consideration shall find meet.
Punishment.


XXX. No Provost Marshal Provost Marshal.
belonging to the Fleet shall refuse to receive or keep any Prisoner committed
to his Charge, Prisoners.
nor suffer him to Escape Escape.
being once in his Custody, nor dismiss him without order upon Pain of being
liable to the same Punishment which should have been inflicted on the Party
dismissed, or permitted to Escape, or such other Punishment as the Court
Martial shall think fit. Punishment for Escape.


Captains, etc. apprehending Offenders, etc. to be assisting.
XXXI. All Captains, Officers and Seamen shall do their Endeavors to detect,
apprehend and bring to Punishment all Offenders, and shall assist the Officers
appointed for that purpose therein, upon Pain to be proceeded against and
punished by the Court Martial at discretion. Punishment.


Sodomy and Buggery,
XXXII. If any Person or Persons shall commit the un-natural and detestable Sin
of Buggery and Sodomy with Man or Beast, he shall be punished with Death Death.
without Mercy.

Where Faults and Misdemeanors have no Punishment prescribed.
XXXIII. All other Faults, Misdemeanors and Disorders committed at Sea not
mentioned in this Act, shall be punished according to the Laws and Customs in
such Cases used at Sea.

Lord Admiral grant Commission.
XXXIV. The Lord Admiral to have full power to grant Commissions to inferior
Vice-Admirals or Commanders in Chief of any Squadron of Ships, to call and
assemble Court Martials, Court Marshal to consist of Commanders and Captains.
consisting of Commanders and Captains; and no Court Martial, where the pain of
Death shall be inflicted, shall consist of less than 5 Captains at the least,
the Admirals Lieutenant to be esteemed as a Captain; Five at least where Death,
And in no Case where Sentence of Death shall pass by Virtue of this Act
(Except in Case of Mutiny) there shall be Execution of Sentence of Death
without the leave of the Lord High Admiral if Offense committed within Narrow
Seas, Sentence of Death not to be inflicted without leave of Lord High Admiral.
Or of Commander of Squadron.
but in Case of Offenses committed in any Voyage beyond, whereupon Sentence of
Death, then Execution shall not be done but by order of Commander in Chief of
that Fleet or Squadron wherein Sentence of Death was passed.

XXXV. Judge Advocate to administer an Oath
That the Judge Advocate of any Fleet to have power to Administer an Oath to
any Person or Witness in order to Examination or Trial of the aforesaid
Offenses, and in the absence of a Judge Advocate the Court Marshal shall have
full Power and Authority to appoint any Person to administer an Oath to the
purpose aforesaid. Or Court Marshal to appoint one in absence of Advocate.


Proviso, touching Power of Lord High Admiral, etc.
XXXVI. Proviso, that this Act shall give no larger Power, etc. to the Lord
High Admiral, etc. than they lawfully had before making of this Act, other than
for such of the Offenses mentioned and specified in the several Articles as
hereafter shall be done in the Main Sea, or in Ships etc. being in the Main
Stream of Great Rivers only beneath the Bridges of the same Rivers near the Sea
within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, and Committed by such Persons as
shall be in actual Pay and serve in His Majesty's Fleet and Ships.

Anno 13 and 14 Car. II. cap. xx. An Act for providing of Carriages by Land or
by Water for the Use of His Majesty's Navy and Ordnance.
How Carriages be provided for Navy, and Ordnance
IT is Enacted, That from and after the 24th of June 1662, as often as the
Service of His Majesty's Navy or Ordnance shall require any Carriages by Land,
upon Notice given in Writing by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the Lord
High Admiral, or under the Hands and Seals of Two or more of His Majesty's
Commissioners of the Navy, or under Hand and Seal of the Master of the
Ordnance, or Lieutenant of the Ordnance for providing Carriages for the Navy or
Ordnance, unto Two or more Justices dwelling near the place where the Carriages
shall be required, the Justices may and shall issue their Warrants to the
adjacent Parishes, etc. as they shall think fit within their respective
Jurisdictions and Counties not being above Twelve Miles distant from the place
of Lading for the sending to a certain place at a certain time to be mentioned
in the Warrants, such a number of Carriages with Horses and Oxen sufficient for
the said Service, as by the said Lord High Admiral, Lord High Admiral, etc.
Commissioners of the Navy, or aforesaid Officers of the Ordnance shall be
respectively required under their Hands and Seals, the Owners of the respective
Carriages shall receive for every Load of Timber per Mile, Price for Carriages.
One Shilling for every reputed Mile they shall go Laden, and for other
Provision the Sum of Eight Pence per Mile; That it shall be lawful for the Lord
High Admiral by Warrant under his Hand and Seal, Pressing of Ships and Vessels
for Carriage.
and for the aforesaid Principal Officers and Commissioners under their Hands
and Seals of two or more, as also for the Master of the Ordnance, or for the
Lieutenant of the Ordnance by Warrant under their Hands and Seals of either of
them as often as His Majesty's Service shall require Carriage by Water, to
appoint such person as they shall judge fit to impress and take up such Ships,
Hoys or Vessels as shall be necessary for Accommodation of His Majesty's
Service, the Owners to be Paid by the Tun, as usually by Merchants, And if the
Owners and His Majesty's Officers cannot agree, The Rates to be paid, and how
to be settled.
Then the Rate to be settled by the Brotherhood of Trinity-House.

Persons refusing to be punished, and before whom.
If any Subject refuse or neglect, on reasonable notice, to make Appearance with
sufficient Carriages, or provide and furnish Ships or Lighters, etc. or shall
after they have undertaken such service, neglect or delay the same, then upon
due Proof, Conviction of such neglect and refusal, by the Oath of the Constable
or other Officer, or two other credible Witnesses before the said Justices or
Mayor, or other chief Officer of the City, etc. for the Land Carriages: For the
Water-Carriages by the Oath of the Person appointed by Lord High Admiral, the
Principal Commissioners of the Navy, or Master, or Lieutenant of the Ordnance,
or two Credible Witnesses before the Officers and Commissioners of His
Majesty's Navy, or Master, or Lieutenant of the Ordnance shall for every
refusal forfeit the Sum of 20 s. for the Land Carriage, and for the Water
Carriage Treble the Freight of such Ship, etc. not exceeding 50 l. in the
whole, To be forthwith Levied in default of Payment to His Majesty's Use by
Warrant under the Hand of the aforesaid respective Officers before whom Proof
and Conviction (by distress) rendering the Overplus, if any.

Provided, That no Horses, Continuance in service.
etc. shall be enforced to Travel more days Journey from the Place they receive
their Lading than expressed in Justices Warrant, And that ready payment shall
be made at the Place of Lading, without delay, Present Payment.
according to the aforesaid Rates.

Provided, No Gifts or Reward to be taken to spare any one.
That in Case any Justice, chief Officer, Constable or Person by Lord High
Admiral, Commissioners of the Navy, and Officers of the Ordnance respectively,
shall take any Gift or Reward to spare any Person, or shall injuriously charge
any Person through Envy, etc. who ought not to make such Carriages, No more
Carriages, etc. to be taken than necessary.
or shall Impress more Carriages than necessary, or shall be commanded by his
superior Officer, upon conviction shall forfeit 10 l. to the Party grieved, to
be sued for in His Majesty's Court of Record, No Essoigne or Protection to be
allowed, And in case any Person shall take upon him to Impress any Horses, No
Person to Impress, other than Authorized in this Act.
etc. Ships, Hoys, etc. other than the Persons empowered as aforesaid, upon
Conviction shall suffer Punishment in Stat. 12 Car. II. cap. 24. Penalty 12
Car. II. cap. 24
which ordains Commitment by Justices of Offender, and Treble Costs and
Damages to Party grieved.

Ships exempted.
Ships and Vessels Freighted by Charter-Party, bona Fide, if other Ships in Port
fitting for Service, or any Vessel laden with any Goods outward-bound, shall
not be liable to Impress for any the Services aforesaid.

Continuance of the Act.
This Act to be in Force until the end of next Session of Parliament, Revived
for Seven Years per Statut. Anno 1 Jac. II. and 4 Will. and Mar. Inhabitants of
New Forest of Southampton may be allowed 4 d. for every Mile, for so many Miles
as their Carriages shall go empty to Place of Lading.

Anno 16 Car. II. cap. v. An Act to prevent the disturbances of Seamen and
others: And to preserve the Stores belonging to His Majesty's Navy Royal.
I. REcites diverse Fightings, Recitals of disturbances in the Navy, Yards, etc.
Quarrels, etc. do often happen in His Majesty's Yards, Offices, etc. belonging
to the Navy, and frequent disorders happen in the Office of the Treasury of the
Navy in Pay-Days in London, etc. either by the Turbulency of Seamen, or
Rudeness of Officers when questioned by the Commissioners about the Imbezlement
of Stores, Provisions, etc.

II. It is Enacted, Who may punish Offenders
That the Treasurer, Comptroller, Surveyor, Clerk of the Accounts, and the
Commissioners of the Navy for the time being, or any Two or more of them, have
Power to Examine all such Offenders, or Persons, whom they upon their Inquiry
or Examination, or in view in their Presence shall find hereafter to make, or
have made any Disturbance, Fighting or Quarrelling in the Yards or Offices
aforesaid on Pay-Days, or on other Occasions relating to the Naval Services, as
follows, viz. They or any Two of them may punish any of the said Offenses by
Fine, Punishment.
Imprisonment, or either of them, the Fine not exceeding 20 s. and the
Imprisonment not exceeding one Week, and have power to Commit to next Goal, or
to Messenger attending on them.

Power to discharge Fine, etc.
III. The Commissioners or the greater part then present, have power to
discharge the said Fine or Imprisonment, if they shall think fit, and for non
payment to imprison the Party offending till Paid; To Imprison for non-payment.
Proceedings on Oath.
To be Paid to the use of the Chest at Chatham, the Proceedings to be on Oath.

Binding to good Behavior.
IV. That the Officers or any Two of them (in case of need for greater Example)
may bind to the Good Behavior, with or without Securities, as Occasion shall
be.

V. Imbezling Stores.
Whereas His Majesty's Stores, etc. belonging to the Navy are imbezled or
filched away.

It is Enacted, Commissioners Power as to Imbezling King's Stores.
That the Principal Commissioners or Treasurers, or any Two, or more, by
Warrant under their Hands and Seals, have power in like manner to enquire and
search for the same in all places, as Justices of the Peace may do in Cases of
Felony, and punish the Offenders by such Fine and Imprisonment as aforesaid,
and cause the Goods to be brought in again: If Offense be of such Nature as to
require higher Punishment, Then that they or any Two or more of them may commit
Offender to Goal, or to the Custody of their Messenger till the Offender enter
into Recognizance with Sureties according to the Nature of the Offense, to
appear and answer the same in the Exchequer or other Court where His Majesty
shall question him or them for the same within one Year next.

The Commissioners or any Two of them may put in Execution this Act in all
places where they hold Offices for the King, Power of Commissioners within
Liberties.
as well within the Liberties, as without, This Act to continue from the first
of June 1664 for Two Years, continued per Statut. 19 Car. II. cap. vii.

Anno 16 Car. II. cap. vi. An Act to prevent the Delivering Up of Merchant
Ships, and for the better Encouragement of Captains, etc. to defend their Ships.
Sect. 10. Encouragement for sailers defending Merchant Ships.
IT is Enacted, That when any English Ship shall have been defended by Fight,
and brought to her designed Ports, in which Fight any of the Officers or Seamen
shall be wounded, It shall be lawful for Judge of the Admiralty, etc. at her
return, to call before him the Adventurers or Owners of the Ships and Goods so
defended, and by advice with them to levy and raise such sums as himself shall
think reasonable, not exceeding 2 per Cent. of the prime Cost, and to
distribute the same with the consent of Three of the Owners, to the Captain,
Officers and Sailers of the said Ship, and Widows and Children of Parties
slain, the Act to continue for Three Years, continued per Statut. 22 Car. II.
cap. xi.

Anno 19 Car. II. cap. vii. An Act to prevent Disturbances of Seamen and
others, and to preserve the Stores belonging to His Majesty's Navy Royal.
THE same as the Statut. 16 Car. II. Sect. 6. Encouragement for Mariners, etc.
Ordinary, etc. to take but 12 d. for Probate, Will, etc.
cap. v. and further Enacts, That for better encouragement of Mariners etc.
Serving in His Majesty's Fleet etc. No Ordinary, Register etc. shall take or
receive of the Executor or Administrator, dying in the pay of His Majesty's
Navy above the Sum of 12 d. for the Probate of any Will or granting
Administration or any matter Relating to same, upon Forfeiture of 10 l. to
Party grieved, altered and repealed by Statut. 22. and 23 Car. II. cap. 2.
revived.

This Act to continue Two Years, Sect. 7.
but afterward revived per Statut. 22 and 23 Car II. cap. xxiii.

Anno 22 Car. II. cap. v. An Act for the taking away the benefit of Clergy from
such as steal Cloth from the Rack, and from such as shall Steal or Imbezzle His
Majesty's Ammunition and Stores.
Eliz. It is amongst other things Enacted, 31 Eliz. cap. 4. Imbezlement of
Munition, and Habiliments of War.
That if any Person having the Charge or Custody of any Armor, Ordnance,
Munition, Shot, Powder or Habilments of War belonging to the Queen etc. Or if
any Victuals provided for the Victualing of any Soldiers, Gunners, Mariners or
Pioneers, shall for any Lucre or Gain, or willingly, etc. Imbezle, Purloyn or
convey away any the same Armor, Ordnance, Munition, Shot or Powder Habilment
of War or Victuals, to the Value of 20 s. at one or several times, the Offense
shall be Judged Felony, Felony.
And the Offender to suffer as in Case of Felony.

It is Enacted, That no Person who shall from and after the 25th May 1670,
Imbezlers, etc. hindered from Clergy.
be Indicted for any Offense Committed against the said recited Act or shall
Feloniously steal or imbezle any of His Majesty's Sails Cordage or any other
of His Majesty's Naval Stores to the Value of Twenty Shillings and thereof
shall be Convicted by Jury shall not have benefit of Clergy.

Anno 22 and 23 Car. II. cap. v. An Act to revive an Act to prevent the
disturbance of Seamen and others, and to preserve the Stores belonging to His
Majesty's Navy Royal, with some Alterations and Additions. Recital of the Act
made 19 Car. II. cap. 7.
REcital, Stat. 19 Car. II cap. 7.
That the said Statute is found useful, It Is Enacted, That all the said Act
(excepting the Clause about Administrations and Probates of Wills, etc.) shall
have full force of an Act during the continuance of this Act.

Recites, Persons carrying Naval Goods.
That whereas ill disposed Persons upon pretense of carrying His Majesty's
Naval Goods Provisions etc. from His Majesty's Yards Wharfes etc. to His
Majesty's Ships or such Persons as are employed to re-carry or remove from the
said Ships such Naval Goods Provision etc. to His Majesty's Yards Wharfes etc.
do frequently imbezle steal and carry them away where they cannot be found and
remove themselves to Places unkown before they can be convict thereof by reason
the Witnesses that should prove the Fact are bound forth to Sea, or otherwise
employed.

No Person to imbezle Kings Stores.
That Justice may be more speedily done, It is Enacted, That the Treasurer,
Comptroller, Surveyor, Clerk of the Accounts, and Commissioners of the Navy, or
any one or more of them, where the Value of the Goods so imbezled, taken or
carried away shall be under the Value of Twenty Shillings, shall have power on
the Oath of Two or more Witnesses or Confession of Party offending, to Convict
him, and by Writing under his or their Hands and Seals, Power to Convict, Fine.
to impose such Fine or Fines on Persons offending and Convicted as aforesaid,
as to any one of them shall seem meet (the said Fine or Fines not exceeding
double the Value of the said Naval Goods so imbezled or carried away) the Fine
to be levied by Distress by Warrant of him or them that shall Convict the
Offender, in case of no Goods to Commit the Party offending by Warrant under
his or their Hands before whom Convicted, For want of Distress to imprison.
to Imprison in the next Goal for any time not exceeding Three Months without
Bail or Mainprize.

That the said Treasurer, Power to enter into any Ship in Day time and Search
for Goods.
Comptroller, etc. or any one or more of them, upon Oath of Two or more
Credible Witnesses testifying that His Majesty's Goods, Stores and Naval
Provisions are conveyed into any Ship whatsoever, and mentioning the Name of
any such Ship being at Anchor, and not ready to Sail that Tide within any of
the Roads, Creeks, etc. within His Majesty's Dominions, any Person by their
Warrant, Warrant, the manner of it.
in which Warrant the Quantity or Qualities of such Goods shall be specified,
thereunto authorized in the Day time in Presence of any known Officer of the
Admiralty, In Presence of known Officer of Admiralty.
shall have full power to go on Board any such Ships, etc. being within the
places aforesaid, and in Case of Resistance and Refusal to be made on Demand,
to enter and break open the Hatches and Cabbins or other Places of the Ship,
Break open Hatches, etc.
and Search therein for any such Stores, Ammunition, etc. or any other Naval
Goods belonging to the Navy, which have been imbezled and taken away, And the
same to Seize and carry into His Majesty's Stores, to be applied to the King's
Use, unless the Officers and Commissioners of the Navy, upon hearing the
matter, shall find they were unduly seized, and thereupon restore them to Party
claiming, and reserves liberty to the Party grieved with the Judgment of
Commissioners to take his Remedy for the said Goods so Seized by due Course of
Law. Remedy to Party grieved.


No Person to Personate any Seaman, etc. in the Presence of any Commissioners,
etc. of Navy, in order to receive Money.
Whatsoever Person shall be discovered fraudulently to personate any Seaman,
Soldier, Artificer or Workman aforesaid in the Presence of any of His Majesty's
Commissioners aforesaid, or in Presence of Play Master or Cashier of His Navy,
in order to receive any Money due from His Majesty to the Seaman, Soldier, etc.
aforesaid, the Person offending may be immediately Committed to Prison by any
the Principal Officers and Commissioners until he or they find Bayl to answer
the same at next Assizes or Quarter Sessions, And being thereof Convicted,
shall Forfeit Double the Sum he would by such Fraud have gained, to the
Governor of the Chest at Chatham, Punishment.
for the use of the use of the Poor there, and suffer Imprisonment not
exceeding a Year.

Every Person who shall Counterfeit the Hands of the Treasurer, None to
counterfeit Hands of Treasurer, etc.
Comptroller, Surveyor, Clerk of the Acts, or of the Commissioners of the Navy,
or the Hand or Hands of any other Signing or Vouching Officers of His Majesty's
Navy, Ships or Yards, or of any of them, to any Bill, Ticket, or other Power,
by virtue whereof the Naval Treasure is or may be disposed of, and shall
knowingly produce any such counterfeit Bill, Ticket, or other Paper may be
Committed to Prison by the said Officers or Commissioners until he find Suretys
to appear at next Assizes, Commit to Goal.
or Quarter Sessions for the County where committed, there to be proceeded
against according to Law.

That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Treasurer, Power given to
administer Oaths.
Comptroller, Surveyor, Clerk of the Acts, and the Commissioners of the Navy,
or any one of them, to administer Oaths in any Case relating, to the receiving,
keeping, issuing and accounting for any part of His Majesty's Treasure,
Victuals, Stores or Provisions of the Navy, or for the preservation of due
Order and Discipline therein in all matters cognizable by the said Officers and
Commissioners.

General Liberty given to execute their power.
That the said Treasurer, Comptroller, etc. and Commissioners of the Navy, and
every one of them, may execute all the powers given by this Act on all
Offenders in all places, as well within Liberties as without.

But 5 s. to be taken for Probate, Will, etc.
That no Ordinary, Register or other Officer belonging to Ecclesiastical Court
or Courts of Orphans, or any Jurisdiction whatsoever, shall take of the
Executor or Administrator (being Wife, Child or Children, or next of Kindred of
any Mariner, etc.) Except where Party deceased leave an Estate of 20 l. or
more) dying in the Pay of His Majesty's Navy, Of an Estate not exceeding 20 l.
above the sum of Five Shillings for the whole Charges of the Probate of any
Will, Registring the same, Granting of her Letters of Administration, etc. or
doing any matter relating thereto Every Officer performing his Duty in the said
Probate to have his proportion, Officers not performing Duty.
If any such Officer presume to take more than Five Shillings for the whole
Probate of the Will, or shall wilfully delay the doing the premises, the Person
so offending shall forfeit 10 l. Forfeit 10 l.
to Party grieved to be recovered by Action of Debt in His Majesty's Courts at
Westminster, and there no Essoigne or Protection, etc.

Provided, that no Clause, etc. in Car. II. cap. v.

This Act to extend to Lord High

Provided That all the Powers hereby given to any Officer or Commissioner of
the Navy may be exercised by Lord High Admiral for time being.

Provided That no Offender punished Offense not to be twice punished.


This Act to continue Seven June 1671. Continuance of the Act.
and from thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

Nota: This Act is continued for Seven Years longer, per Statut. 1 Jac. II.
Entitled, An Act for continuance of several Acts of Parliament therein
mentioned, and the same Act of Continuance Enlarged per Statut 4 and 5 Will.
and Mar. from the 13th of Febr. 1692, for the space of Seven Years, and from
thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

Anno 1 Will. and Mar. An Act for the abrogating the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths.
Sect. 10. Workmen and Warrant Officers in the Fleet.
It Is Enacted, That all and every Commission-Officer, and non-Commission or
Warrant Officers that are already employed in Their Majesty's Service by Sea or
Land, shall take the Oaths appointed by this Statute, and also make repeat and
subscribe the Declaration made in the Statute 30 Car. II. before the Lord High
Admiral or Commissioners of the Admiralty, To take Oaths before Admiral.
or such other persons as Their Majesty's shall appoint to administer and
accept the same respectively, And that all and every such Persons as shall
hereafter be put into any Employment either by Sea or Land, Persons hereafter
to be Officers to take Oaths, etc.
shall before the delivery of such Commission or Warrant to such Officer take
the said Oaths, and make, repeat and subscribe before the Lord High Admiral or
Commissioners of the Admiralty, or their Deputies as aforesaid, or such Persons
who shall issue such Warrant or Commission, or such other Person as shall be
authorized to administer the same as aforesaid respectively, who are authorized
to administer and receive tender and accept the same. And all Officers that
shall refuse to take the said Oaths, and make and Subscribe the said
Declaration, Refusal incapable.
shall be incapable of receiving, taking or holding such Office or Employment.

The Form of the Oath.

The Form of the Declaration.

Anno 2 Will. and Mar. An Act concerning the Commissioners of the Admiralty.
Commissioners of Admiralty.
REcites Whereas the Office of Lord High Admiral of England has bin exercised
by diverse Commissioners appointed by Their Majesty's and the late Kings, and
doubt has been whether certain Authorities belonging to the Office of Lord
High Admiral may or ought to have been exercised by such Commissioners. Now for
avoiding all doubts, Be it Declared and Enacted, Commissioners to have such
Powers as Lord High Admiral.
That all and singular Authorities, Jurisdictions and Powers which by any Act
of Parliament or otherwise have been and are lawfully vested in Lord High
Admiral have always appertained to and of Right might have been, and might and
shall be had, used and enjoyed by Commissioners for Executing the Office of the
Admiral.

Not give larger Power than Lord High Admiral
Proviso, That nothing in this Act give any other Power to Commissioners, etc.
than Lord High Admiral lawfully had.

Proviso, Officers of Court Martial to take Oath.
That upon Trials Offenders by Court Marshal by virtue of any Commission by
Lord High Admiral or Commissioners of Admiralty, Every Officer present shall
before proceeding to Trial take an Oath before the Court in these Words
following:

You shall Well and Truly Try and Determine the Matter now before you, Form of
Oath.
between our Sovereign Lord and Lady the King and Queen's Majesty, and the
Prisoners now to be Tried.

Anno 4 and 5 Will. and Mar. An Act for continuing the Acts for Prohibiting all
Trade and Commerce with France, and for the Encouragement of Privateers.
REcites Two former Acts 1 W. and M. And Enacts To continue Three Years from
the end of the Session of Parliament, and to the end of the then next Session
of Parliament.

Sect. II.
Recites It to be necessary to encourage the setting out private Ships of War,
so as under the pretense of taking Prize no Evil-minded Persons should carry on
a Trade with France, It is Enacted, That all Ships and Vessels with their
Ladings, and all Goods and Merchandises that shall be taken and seized as
Prize, Prize to be brought into Port without breaking Bulk into Hands of
Commissioners.
either by Their Majesty's Ships, or by any Privateers or otherwise, shall be
Imported and brought into some of the Ports of this Kingdom, and immediately,
without breaking Bulk, be put into the hands of Commissioners for Prizes, or
their Officers, who together with Two or more persons, as the Officers or
Mariners of the respective Ships shall entrust, as also such persons as the
Commissioners of the Customs shall appoint, are to take care and preserve the
same from Imbezlement until the same be adjudged lawful Prize, To preserve from
imbezlement.
Except where it shall appear to Judge of the Admiralty that the Goods taken
are perishable, If Goods perishable, may be sold.
in which Case the Judge shall take Bayl for such Goods in order to Sale, as
before the making this Act, yet so as to be subject to the Distribution by this
Act directed.

III. Prize Goods after condemnation to be Entered and Landed in Port.
That notwithstanding former Acts, if Goods and Merchandises by them Prohibited
to be Imported into this Kingdom shall be, bona Fide, without Fraud taken as
Prize by any private Ship of War, or by any of His Majesty's Ships, and shall
be adjudged Prize, It shall be lawful for Commissioners of Prizes or their
Agents, so soon as may be after adjudged Prize, to cause the same to be Entered
and Landed, and to be brought into His Majesty's Warehouse of such Port where
such Goods, etc. are Imported, there to remain until Sold, as hereafter
directed.

IV. Prize Goods to be sold by Inch of Candle.
That as soon as may be after the said Goods shall be adjudg'd Prize and Landed
as aforesaid, the same shall be by Commissioners of Prizes, or their Officers,
in the presence of such Persons as shall be entrusted by such Ships of War,
publicly and openly Sold by Inch of Candle (Public Notice being first given
at the Market Cross) Fourteen days, Public Notice of Sale to be given.
or other most Public Place of the said Port, as also upon the Exchange in the
Port of London, of the Quantity and Quality of Goods, etc. to be Sold, and of
the Time and Place of Sale.

Division of the Prize in Case taken by Privateer.
V. Out of the Proceed of such Sale, the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, and
all other Duties and Impositions payable to Their Majesty's for such Goods,
etc. shall be deducted and answered to Their Majesty's, and the Neat Proceed of
the said Sale, after such deductions, in Case such Prize was taken by private
Man of War, How the Cargo to be divided.
shall be divided into Five Parts, of which Four Parts shall be answered and
Paid to the Person interessed in the said Privateer which took the Prize, the
other Fifth Part to His Majesty, And in Case any such Prize taken by Private
Man of War, How the Ship to be disposed of.
the Ship or Vessel so surprised or taken as Prize, and all the Arms and
Ammunition, Tackle, etc. and Furniture thereof, shall be had, enjoyed by the
Person interessed in the Privateer which took the said Ship, And in Case such
Prize was taken by His Majesty's Ships, How distributed in Case Prize taken by
King's Ship.
the said Neat Proceed after Sale as aforesaid, and such Deductions as
aforesaid, to be divided into Three equal Parts, One Third to the Captain,
Mariners and Seamen surprising the said Prize, to be distributed according to
the usual Custom on such Declaration as Their Majesty's shall make in that
behalf, Provided, That one Third Part shall be divided among the Ships Crew,
One Third to the Treasurer of His Majesty's Navy, for the Relief of Sick and
Wounded Seamen, and the Widows and Children and impotent Parents of Persons
then in His Majesty's Service at Sea, the other Third Part to the Use of Their
Majesty's, And in Case the said Prize was taken by any Merchants Ships employed
in King's Service, How distributed if taken by Merchant Ship in King's Service.
Then the Neat Proceed after such Sale as aforesaid, such Deductions, Customs
as aforesaid, shall be divided in Three Parts, One Third to the Captain,
Officers and Seamen Surprising and Taking the same, One Third to the Use of
Their Majesty's, One Third to the Treasurer of the Navy for the Purposes
aforesaid.

VI. Provided, Imbezlement of Prize-Goods.
That if any Captain or other Officers, etc. who shall take such Prize, shall
imbezle, purloyne, conceal or convey away, or put on Shore any part of the
Goods in any place whatsoever, other than His Majesty's Warehouses of the said
Ports, the Party offending shall forfeit and loose the whole Share and Benefit
of the Prize which otherwise he might have had, Punishment and Forfeiture.
and upon Proof thereof upon Oath by one or more Witnesses before the
Commissioners of the Customs in the Port of London (if such Goods were Imbezled
or put on Shore in the said Port) before the Chief Magistrate of the Peace in
presence of the Chief Officer of the Port in any other Port where the said
Goods shall be Imported, Who to determine.
who are to Hear and Determine the same, One Moiety of the said Goods to be to
the Informer, Informer to have half.
and shall be delivered to him by Warrant of the said Commissioners of the
Customs of the Port of London, or of the Chief Magistrate of the Place, Signed
and Sealed in the Presence of the Chief Officer of the Customs in such Port
respectively, and the other Moiety to the King.

Persons interessed may see the Accounts.
VII. Any Person concerned in any Prize may at seasonable times be permitted to
see the Accounts of any Prize that they may be satisfied whether the Shares
have been rightfully distributed. And the Commissioners for Prizes, and their
Officers, are required to show unto such Persons such Accounts for their
Perusal, Fee 1 s. for showing Accounts.
and to take no Fee or Reward for the same more than one Shilling.

VIII. Ships and Goods of French King taken by Privateers by collusion.
In case any Ship laden with Goods of the growth of the Dominion of the French
King shall be taken by any Privateer by consent, or clandestinely, or by
collusion, such Ship, etc. and also the Ship, etc. of the Privateer, shall upon
Proof thereof to be made in the Exchequer, or Admiralty Court, be judged to be
good Prize to Their Majesty's, One Moiety to Their Majesty's, and the other
Moiety to the Discoverer, Punishment.
and the Bond given by the Captain is declared forfeited, And in Case such
Ship, Ships, etc. of French King's Dominions taken by Man of War.
etc. shall be taken by any Man of War, through consent, collusion, etc. such
Commander or Captain shall Forfeit 1000 l. One Moiety to the King, the other
Moiety to the Discoverer, to be recovered by Action of Debt, or Information in
any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, and no Protection, Punishment and
forfeiture.
etc. to be allowed, And such Captain or Officer to forfeit his Employment
under Their Majesty's for Seven Years, and the said Ship and Goods adjudg'd
good Prize to the King.

IX. Proviso, Tenth of Prize taken by Men of War.
In all Cases where Prize shall not be taken by Privateer, One Tenth part
thereof after such Sale and Deduction of His Majesty's Customs, etc. shall be
paid as aforesaid, and before any Division of the Proceed thereof as aforesaid
shall be Paid to the Treasurer of the Navy, Paid to Treasurer of Navy
and kept apart by the said Treasurer, and shall be disposed of by Warrant of
Commissioners of the Admiralty, Commissioners of Admiralty to dispose of for
Medals, etc.
or Lord High Admiral for Medals and other Rewards for Officers, Mariners and
Seamen in the King's Service at Sea, who shall have done extraordinary Service.

Encouragement to Men of War and Privateers to take Ships of Force.
X. For better Encouragement of Officers and Seamen to annoy the Enemy, and to
take and annoy Ships of War and of Force belonging to the Enemy, It Is Enacted,
In case any of the King's Ships of War or Privateer shall take in Fight as
Prize, or shall Sink, Fire, or by any other means destroy any Ship of War or
Privateer belonging to the French King or his Subjects, or in their Service,
they shall have a Reward for such Ship of War taken or destroyed, Ten Pounds
for each piece of Ordnance in any Ship, to be paid by the Commissioners of
Prizes out of His Majesty's share of Prizes.

XI. If Commissioners of Prizes shall not pay or give Bills payable out of the
first Money comes to their hands to the person interessed in such private Man
of War, Penalty on Commissioners of Prize not paying Reward.
for the reward of Ten Pounds a Gun by the space of three days after it ought
to be paid, demand thereof made, free of all Charges and Deductions, the
Commissioners are made incapable of any Office for the future.

XII. That the Shares, The Rewards given by this Act to be in full of all
shares.
Proportions and Rewards given by this Act to the respective Officers and
Seamen shall be in lieu and full satisfaction of all Shares and Prizes taken
this present War, Any thing made in the Act 13 Car. II. cap. 9. or any
Declaration or Order of Their Majesty's to the contrary.

XIII. If any Captain or Officer, Imbezlement of Money, Plate and Goods.
or any other person by his Direction or Commission, or any Seaman or Soldier
serving in the Navy, or in any Privateer, shall imbezle any Money, Plate,
Goods, Tackle or other things upon or above the Gun-Deck, or any other part or
place whatsoever, in any Ship taken Prize, or retaken from the Enemy,
Forfeiture.
the Party offending shall lose the Share, etc. to him allowed by this Act. And
in Case he be an Officer he shall forfeit the sum of 500 l. (whereof one moiety
to the King the other to the Informer to be recovered in any of His Majesty's
Courts of Record at Westminster, In Case an Officer 500 l. Forfeiture.
and therein no Protection etc. to be allowed) for every such Offense, and such
Officer to be incapable of any Office or place under Their Majesty's for Seven
Years, Incapable of an Office for Seven Years.
It being the True intent of this Act that all Goods upon or above the Gun Deck
and elsewhere shall in all places be preserved entire from Imbezlements and
shall not be pillaged in any Case whatsoever.

Ships taken in Streights and Mediterranean.
XIV. Provided, That where any Ship shall be taken as Prize in the
Mediterranean Sea, or within the Streights of Gibralter, It shall be Lawful for
Captains to Carry such Prize into Port of Allicant or Cadiz in Spain or to the
Port of Messina in Sicily, or the Port of Naples and to put the same into the
hands and possession of persons authorized to receive and preserve the same by
His Majesty, there to remain, to be kept without Imbezlement until Condemned or
Cleared by Court of Admiralty of England, such Captors being obliged with all
speed to transmit the Original Papers taken in such Ships or authentic Copies.

XV. Ships taken in West Indies and America.
Where Ship shall be taken as Prize in west Indies or America, the Captors to
carry into any of His Majesty's Ports in any of His Majesty's Plantations, and
put the same in possession of Chief Governor, there to remain and be kept as
aforesaid, until Condemned and Discharged by such persons as shall be lawfully
commissioned in that behalf.

XVI. Prizes taken in East Indies.
In case any Ship or Vessel shall be taken as Prize in the East Indies or any
place beyond the Cape of Good Hope, It shall be lawful to Carry such Ship to
any Port of an English Factory and put the same into possession of the
Governor or Chief Person of such Factory to be preserved as aforesaid until
Condemnation by such Persons as shall be lawfully Commissioned in that behalf.

XVII. Privateers taking Prizes where no French Goods.
Where any Ships shall be taken by any Privateer in which Ship there shall be
no Goods of the Growth of the French Kings Dominions and the same shall appear
upon Landing upon due proof thereof made, That then after Lawful Condemnation
of such Prize and Payment of Customs and other Duties to His Majesty, the
Person interessed in such Privateer shall have the said Ship and Goods etc.
without Deductions for tenths or any other proportion to His Majesty or the
Lord High Admiral. To have the whole without any deduction for Tenths.


Where Privateers take Prizes in Ports
XVIII. For preventing Abuses practiced by Privateers pretending to take as
Prizes Ships or Vessels within His Majesty's Ports, Rivers, etc. It is Enacted,
That where any Ship, etc. shall be taken within any Their Majesty's Ports, The
Prizes to belong to His Majesty.
etc. by any Privateer, such Prize shall belong wholly to His Majesty as
Perquisite of the Admiralty, And the Captors to have such part and proportion
thereof only as Their Majesty's shall think fit.

Ships taken of King's Subjects, retaken.
XIX. Proviso, That if any Ship, etc. taken as Prize or any Goods therein shall
appear and be proved in the Court of Admiralty to be belonging to Their
Majesty's Subjects of Their Three Kingdoms or Territories thereunto belonging
continuing in His Majesty's Obedience, which were before taken as Prize by the
Subjects of the French King, and re-taken by Their Majesty's Ships of War or
other Ship under His Majesty's Obedience and Protection, That then such Ships,
etc. and such Goods therein found to belong to Their Majesty's Subjects, shall
by Decree of the Court of Admiralty be adjudged to be restored to such former
Owners, To be restored to the Owners.
they paying in lieu of Salvage, if taken by any of Their Majesty's Ships an
Eighth Part of the true Value of the Ships, An eighth part instead of Salvage
to be paid.
etc. and Goods respectively to be restored, which Salvage shall be paid to the
Captain, etc. in the said Man of War, to be divided as before directed,
touching the share of Prizes belonging to the Captains, Officers and Seamen
where Prizes are taken by Men of War, And if taken by Privateer or other Ship,
Retaken Ship by Privateer.
etc. having been in the possession of the Enemy 24 Hours, and under 48 a fifth
part; And if above 48, and under 96 a third part thereof; and if above 96 a
Moiety thereof, All which Payments to be made without deductions; And if such
Ship so retaken shall appear to have been (after the Taking by the Enemy) by
them set forth as a Man of War, the former Owners, etc. to whom the same shall
be restored, shall pay the full Moiety of the true Value without any deduction.

Privateer taking Vessel laden with Wool.
XX. In Case during the continuance of this Act any Privateer Vessel laden with
Wool, or whereupon any Wool is laden with intent to Transport the same, be
taken by any Privateer, or Man of War, on due Proof thereof or Trial in the
Exchequer, the Persons interessed in Privateer, shall have to their own use,
one full Moiety of the Vessel and Goods, the other Moiety to the King.

Admiralty to give this Act in their Instructions to Officers of King's Ships
and Privateers.
XXI. To prevent Ignorance of this Act by any Captains, etc. serving in His
Majesty's Ships or Privateers, Lord High Admiral, or Commissioners of the
Admiralty, are required to express all things by this Act directed to be
observed concerning Prizes, and the Shares, Proportions and Reward of and for
the same in the Instructions by them to be given during the continuance of this
Act, to all Captains and Commanders of the King's Ships, or any Privateer by
them authorized during that Time.

XXII. Lastly, a Proviso, Commissioners detaining Money to be paid to
Privateers.
That if Commissioners of Prizes, or Commissioners of Customs shall detain in
their hands the Shares and Proportions belonging to the persons interessed in
Privateers 2 days after the same ought to be paid by this Act, and demand
thereof made, free of all Fees and Charges whatsoever except Warehouse-Room,
and 2 per Cent. for all other Charges, To forfeit double the Sum detained.
The person offending to forfeit double the Sum, to be recovered by Action of
Debt with Cost of Suit, And no Protection, etc.

Anno 5 and 6 Will. and Mar. etc. An Act for the better Discipline of His
Majesty's Navy Royal.
REcites, Preamble. The Court of King's Bench, or Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer may Try all Offenses in the Act 13 Car. II.
For the regulating and better Government of Their Majesty's Navys and Ships of
War, and Forces by Sea.

That all Offenses contrary to an Act made in the Thirteenth Year of King
Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for the Establishing Articles and Orders
for the Regulating and better Government of His Majesty's Navies, Ships of War,
and Forces by Sea, which shall be committed after the 24th of June 1694. may be
Prosecuted and Determined in Their Majesty's Court of King's Bench at
Westminster, or before Justices of Oyer and Terminer, to be Constituted by
Their Majesty's Commission.

Power to the Courts to act.
And the said Courts are empowered to hold Connusance thereof by Information or
Indictment, and to proceed upon, Hear and Determine the same according to the
Course of the Common Law, etc.

Offenses done out of the Realm to be laid in any County in the Realm.
And where any of the Offenses be committed out of the Realm, in such Case the
same may be alleged and laid in any County within this Realm.

Proviso, That no Person Tried by a Court Marshal, to be Tried, etc. Proviso.
Proviso, That no Person who shall be Tried by a Court Marshal for the same
Offense, be Tried by virtue of this Act, etc.

Proviso, That this Act shall continue in force for Three Years, and from
thence to the end of the next Session of Parliament.

Anno 7 and 8 Will. An Act for the Increase and Encouragement of Seamen, etc.
FOrasmuch as the Strength and Safety of His Majesty's Dominions do much depend
on the supplying His Royal Navy with a competent number of able Seamen which
may be ready at all times for that Service. Preamble.


To Invite great Numbers of His Majesty's Subjects to betake themselves to Sea,
It is fit some provision should be made that Seamen who by Age, Wounds, or
other Accidents should become disabled for future Service at Sea, and shall not
be in a condition to maintain themselves comfortably, may not fall under
Hardships and Misery, but may be supported at the Public Charge, And that the
Children of such disabled Seamen, And also the Widows and Children of such
Seamen who shall happen to be Slain or Drowned in Sea Service, may in some
reasonable manner be Provided for and Educated, His Majesty and Her late
Majesty determined That an Hospital should be Erected and Endowed for the
purposes aforesaid, And in order thereto by their Letters Patent gave a Parcel
of Ground in the Manor of East Geeenwich, and Their Palace standing upon Their
said Ground, and several other Buildings and things mentioned in the said
Letters Patents to the intent that they should be converted to the Service of
an Hospital for the Relief of Seamen, their Widows and Children, and
Encouragement of Navigation. And whereas His Majesty in further execution of
his Pious Intention for the Founding of an Hospital at Greenwich for the
purposes aforesaid, has by His Letters Patents dated the 10th of December
1695. Constituted Commissioners, and Granted an Annual Sum payable out of the
Treasury, and given diverse proper Directions and Authorities for carrying on
and perfecting the said Hospital and the Maintenance thereof, and of the
Persons to be placed therein. And to the Intent that such Mariners, Watermen,
Seamen, Fishermen, Lightermen, Bargemen and Keelmen, or Seafaring Men being
natural Born Subjects of this Realm, or any of His Majesty's Dominions, or
being in England, and above the Age of 18 Years, or under the Age of Fifty
Years, Persons under the Age of 50 and above 18.
and being capable of the Sea Service, who shall be willing to Enter and
Register himself for the Service of His Majesty in His Royal Fleet or Navy, may
by himself or any person by him thereunto in Writing Authorized or Employed,
deliver and give in his Christian Name and Surname, with his Age and Place of
his Abode and Habitation, unto such Officers as shall be appointed for the
Registring of Seamen, as is herein after mentioned; And that such and so many
Public Officers for the Registring the Persons for Sea Service as aforesaid,
Offices and Officers for Registring Seamen, etc.
shall be kept at His Majesty's Charge at the Navy-Office in London, and such
of the Principal Officers of the Navy or other Persons shall be appointed
thereto. And the making and keeping such Register shall be performed in such
Forms and Methods as His Majesty or the Commissioners of the Admiralty shall
from time to time prescribe and appoint, So as that in the said Register there
shall be Entered down and Registered in Order and Course of Time as well the
Names, Sir-names, Additions, Ages, Place of Abode, or Habitation of all and
every such Mariner, Seaman, Waterman, Fisherman, Lighterman, Bargeman, Keelman
or Seafaring Man as aforesaid, And also, the true Days and Times of such
Registry or Entry, for which no Fee, Reward or Gratuity whatsoever shall be
demanded or received other than from His Majesty. And if any Person shall
knowingly make or cause to be made in any of the said Offices any False Entries
of any Person's Name, Wilful mis-entry of Seamen.
etc. he shall forfeit the sum of one Hundred Pounds, one Moiety to His
Majesty, and the other to such Person as shall Sue for the same.

The respective Registerers to be appointed, Oaths to be taken by Registerers.
shall before their Entrance thereinto, or intermedling therewith, take an Oath
before the Judge of the Admiralty, or before Two or more of His Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for that County, etc. wherein such Office shall be, for
the true and faithful Execution thereof, That the said Navy Office or such
other Office as shall be appointed by His Majesty shall be called the Head
Office whereto all the other Registerers in the Seaports shall from Time to
Time, without any Fee, save from His Majesty, give Certificates under their
Hands and Seals of the Numbers, Names, Places of Abode and Additions of all
Seamen, Watermen, etc. that shall be Registered within their respective Offices,
And of the true Times when such Entry was first made, which Certificates shall
by the said Register be Filed in Course of Time as they came in, and the Names
of the Seamen, etc. therein mentioned, shall be in order of Time, and without
any undue Preference, Entered and Registered there also, So that in that Office
the Number, Names, Places of Habitation of all Seafaring Men Registered
throughout the Kingdom, and their respective Time of coming in to be Registered
may from time to time appear, a true Copy of which shall once a Year,
Commissioners of Admiralty to have Copies of the Registry.
or oftener if required, be given by the Officers at the Head-Office to the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, who are to give timely directions that such of
them as they shall find most proper for His Majesty's Service may from time to
time in each Year be disposed for the Service of the Fleet in every or any Year
beginning from the First of January, during which the Number of Registered
Seamen then alive, shall not exceed 30000. Every Registered Seaman shall be
allowed from His Majesty, whether he be in actual Service or not, the Yearly
Sum of 40 s over and above such other Pay as he shall be Entitled to by being
in His Majesty's Service, And in every Year during which the Registered Seamen
then alive shall exceed 30000, there shall in like manner be allowed 40 s. a
Year to each of the first 30000 Registered, Reward to Registered Seamen.
And moreover, none but such Registered Persons shall be Preferred to any
Commission or Warrant Offices in the Navy, and every such Registered Seaman
being in His Majesty's Service in a Foreign Voyage, may appoint to his Wife or
any Person any part or proportion of the Pay due, or to be due to him for his
Service, not exceeding 2 Months Pay in every 6 Months, which shall be duly
complied with upon proof of the 6 Months Service by return of Musters according
to the practice of the Navy, and on like proof of such Seaman's Death in the
Service, the Wages remaining due to him shall be paid to his Executors or
Administrators without tarrying for the Ships Return, or her General Pay.

Also, Double share of Prizes to Registered Seamen.
Every Seaman Registered, shall upon taking any Prize at Sea wherein he shall
be Entitled to any Share, have a double part more than any other Seaman of
like Quality in the Ship with himself.

Upon producing a Certificate of his being Registered he shall from time to time
be freed from serving upon any Iuries or Inquests, Registered Seaman's
Privilege and Exemption.
or in the Militia, or in or about the assessing or Collecting of any Public
Taxes or Assessments, or in the Offices of Constable, Tythingman, Bosholders,
Churchwardens or Overseer or Collector of the Poor, or any other Parish Office
whatsoever, Except he shall declare himself willing to serve in the said
Offices, for which Certificate no Fee to be demanded or received.

All Registered Persons by Age, Aged and disabled Seamen to be put into Hospital
on Certificate.
Wounds or other Accidents disabled for further Service at Sea, and not in a
Condition to Maintain themselves Comfortably, shall upon Certificate thereof
from the Captain, Master, Surgeon and Purser, or so many of them as were in the
said Ship for the Time being under his or their Hands unto the Governor of the
said Hospital at Greenwich, be admitted into the said Hospital, and there
provided with fitting and convenient Lodging, Meat, Drink and Clothing and
other Necessaries during their Life.

Widows of Registered Seamen.
Also, The Widows of such Seamen who shall be Slain, Killed or Drowned in the
Service, and the Children of such Seafaring Men so Killed or Drowned, and not
of Ability to Maintain themselves Comfortably, shall be received into the said
Hospital, and there provided for, And the said Children shall be educated at
the Charges of the said Hospital, till they are fit to be put out, or of
ability to maintain themselves.

Proviso, That if Registered Seamen do not serve.
Provided always, That if any Registered Person during time of actual War
withdraw or absent himself from His Majesty's Service in his Navy, and shall
not within 30 days after due Summons or Warning from the Commissioners of the
Admiralty, Commissioners of the Navy, Officers of the Registry, or
Vice-Admirals of the several Counties repair on Board the Ship to which he
belongs, or shall be appointed, not being detained by Sickness or other Bodily
Infirmities to be attested by the Oath of Two Credible Witnesses to be allowed
by the Commissioners of the Admiralty, Navy, Registry or Vice-Admirals, or
shall relinquish the Service of His Majesty without consent in Writing of the
Commissioners of the Admiralty, he shall for ever loose the benefit of this
Act, To loose the benefit of this Act.
and serve His Majesty at Sea 6 Months without any Pay, but for such Offense
only he shall not suffer as a Deserter; Provided, That nothing in this Act
extend to take away the Punishment appointed for Deserters by an Act made the
13th Car. II.

After the Term of 25 Years, Brotherhood of Trinity-House.
from the 25th of March 1696, None shall be capable of being a Brother of
Trinity-House but who have been Registered.

Every Seaman serving His Majesty, Six Pence per Month to be paid out of
Seamens Wages.
or in any Ship or Vessel belonging to any of the Subjects of England, or any
other His Majesty's Dominions, shall allow, and there shall be Paid out of his
Wages Six Pence a Month for the better supporting of the said Hospital, How to
be Levied.
which shall be levied by such Officers, and according to such Rules and
Methods as shall in that behalf be appointed by the Commissioners of the
Admiralty.

Proviso. The Certificate to be brought by Seamen.
Provided always, That every Seaman at the time of his being Registered, shall
bring or cause to be brought a Certificate of his Place of Abode, under the
Hands of Two Justices of the Peace of the County or Place where he lives, and
as often as any such Seaman shall change his Place of Abode, he shall bring or
cause to be brought a new Certificate thereof to the Register under the Penalty
of loosing the benefit of his being Registered as aforesaid.

Registered persons under 18, and above 55, exempted from Service.
Registered Persons under 18, or obove 55 Years of Age shall be exempted from
Service upon Summons as aforesaid, unless they will Voluntarily Enter
themselves to serve.

Registered Persons preferred to Commission not to be entitled to 40 s
Registered Persons preferred to Commission or Warrant Offices, not to be
entitled to the 40 s. per Annum, or other benefits of this Act, or liable to
any of the Penalties or disabilities therein mentioned.

Commissioners of the Admiralty may Discharge any Seaman from the Register,
Admiralty may discharge or expunge Persons Registered.
upon any Cause for which it shall be desired, And may for any Offense dismiss
and expunge any Seaman from the Register, and thereby deprive them from the
Benefits thereof according to their discretion.

Licenses shall at any time be given by Order of His Majesty, Licenses to
Landmen.
or Commissioners of the Admiralty, to any Landmen desirous to apply themselves
to Sea-Service to serve in Merchant Ships 2 Years, which shall Protect them
from being Impressed, Provided they bring to the Register Two Credible Persons,
Inhabitants, or known in the Place where they enter themselves, who shall
assert the knowledge of the said Landmen, and their Profession for Two Years
past.

Any Person vouching one for a Landman that is a Seaman shall forfeit 20 l.
Person vouching Seaman a Landman.


And any Seaman personating or taking another Name, Personating or taking
other's name. Counterfeiting License.
And any Seaman or other Person whatsoever, counterfeiting a License shall
forfeit 20 l. And suffer such Punishment as by Law may be inflicted, and any
Seaman so offending shall be incapable of the benefit of this Act.

Seamen in Cinque Ports.
Seamen Inhabiting in the Cinque Ports to be Registered in such Places, and by
such Persons as the Lord Warden shall appoint, And to enjoy the same Benefits,
and to be liable to the same Penalties in case of absenting from the Service,
or disobeying the Lord Wardens Summons as the Persons Registered elsewhere. The
said Registerer to take their Oaths before the Lord Warden, Governor of Dover,
or his Deputy, or some Mayor of the Cinque Ports.

Registered person shall not be obliged to serve as a Land Soldier.
No Registered Person shall by virtue of any of the powers before mentioned, be
obliged to serve as a Land Soldier, but only as a Seaman in His Majesty's Fleet.

Proviso, Not to hinder person from serving as Chaplain or Surgeon.
Provided always, That nothing in this Act extends to the debarring any Person
from being a Chaplain, Surgeon, or any other Officer, in any Office of the
Navy, not of necessity to be executed by a Seafaring Man.

Anno 7 and 8 Will. III. An Act for the better Security of His Majesty's Royal
Person and Government.
Sect. 6. IIt's Enacted, Officers Civil and Military,
That all and every Person and Persons that shall be admitted, entered and
placed, or taken into any Office or Offices Civil or Military, or receive any
Pay, Salary, Fee or Wages by reason of any Patent or Grant of His Majesty, or
shall have Command or Place of Trust from or under His Majesty, or by His
Authority, or by Authority derived from His Majesty within England, etc. or in
His Majesty's Navy, Officers in Navy,
or in the several Islands of Jersey and Guernsie, or any of His Majesty's
Family or Household shall subscribe the Association mentioned in the same
Section, To subscribe Association.
at the same time they shall make and subscribe the Declaration mentioned in
Statut. 25 Car. II. Entitled An Act for preventing Dangers from Popish
Recusants.

Persons refusing incapable.
Sect. 7. That the Persons refusing to Sign the said Association in the
respective Courts and Places, shall ipso facto, be adjudged incapable and
disabled in Law to enjoy the said Places, or any benefit by them, And the
Places and Offices to be void.

Penalty on Refusers.
Sect. 8. That all Persons that shall neglect or refuse to Sign the said
Association within the Times and at the Places aforesaid, yet after such
refusal, shall execute such Place either by themselves, or his or their Trustee
or Deputy after the Times expired, and being thereof Convict, shall be subject
to the Penalties in the last recited Act mentioned.

Persons at Sea at the making the Act, etc.
Sect. 14. Proviso, That this Act do not extend to any Person in His Majesty's
Service on Board the Fleet, or beyond Seas, or shall go beyond Seas in His
Majesty's Service before the 25th May 1696. So as such Person subscribe the
said Association according to the appointment of this Act, within Three Months
after his return.

Civil and Military Commissions not to determine.
Nota: By this Act it is Enacted, That no Commission either Civil or Military,
shall Cease, Determine, or be Void by reason of the Death or Demise of His
Majesty, or any his Successors, but that every such Commission to remain in
Force for Six Months after, unless superseded by the next and immediate
Successor, according to the Act of Settlement, 1 Will. and Mariae.

Anno 7 and 8 Will. III. An Act for Granting His Majesty an Aid of Four
Shillings in the Pound for Carrying on the War against France.
AT the end of the Act it is Enacted, Cruisers.
That over and above the Ships for the Line of Battle, and for Convoys to
remote Parts, at the least 4 Ships of the Third Rate, 16 of the Fourth Rate; 13
of the Fifth Rate; 10 of the Sixth Rate, shall from time to time be directed to
Cruise at such Stations as Commissioners of the Admiralty shall deem fit.

In case of necessity may be in Line of Battle.
Proviso, In case of necessity this Act not to hinder the Commissioners of the
Admiralty from directing any of the said Ships to be in the Line of Battle.

Admiral to give Certificate to Parliament.
That it may appear how the service for appointing Cruisers in proper Stations
to secure Merchants Ships is performed, Lords of the Admiralty, etc. to give a
Certificate under their Hands to the next Session of Parliament, of the Ships
so set out in pursuance of the directions by this Act expressing the Names and
Rates of the Ships.

Anno 7 and 8 Will. III. An Act for preventing Fraud, and regulating Abuses in
the Plantation Trade.
Naval Stores may be Imported in Foreign built Ships.
AMongst other things it is Enacted, That Masts, Timber, and other Naval Stores
for His Majesty's service for the space of Three Years may be Imported from His
Majesty's Colonies or Plantations, into this Kingdom, Appointed by
Commissioners of Navy.
in such Foreign-built Ships as shall be employed by His Majesty's
Commissioners of Navy.

Anno 7 and 8 Will. III. An Act for the more effectual preventing the
Exportation of Wool, and for the Encouragement of the Importation thereof from
Ireland.
Sect. ult. It Is Enacted, That the Lord High Admiral, etc. shall from time to
time appoint one Ship of the Fifth Rate, Two Ships of the sixth Rate, and Four
Armed Sloops constantly to Cruise from off the North Foreland to the Isle of
Wight, with Orders for Taking and Seizing all Ships, Vessels or Boats which
shall Export any Wool, or carry or bring any Prohibited Goods or suspected
Persons.

Per Stat. 25 Car. II Nota.
All Officers Civil and Military, and all Officers in the Navy are to receive
the Sacrament in some Parish Church within Three Months after being in their
Places, or having Grant thereof. And in Court of Kings Bench, or Chancery at
Westminster, or at a Quarter Sessions for the County, and deliver a Certificate
in Court of their receiving the Sacrament, And are to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. Which see before Settled in 1 Will. and Mar. and make
the Declaration following:

I A. B. do Declare, That I do believe, That there is not in the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper any Transubstantiation in the Element of Bread and Wine, at
or after the Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever. The Penalty for
neglecting to take the Oaths, and make the Declaration, and Subscribe thereto,
is, to be disabled to Sue to be Guardian, Executor or Administrator, or capable
of any Legacy, to bear any Office, and to Forfeit 500 l. to Person that will
Sue for the same.

Sect. 15. This Act extends not to Non-Commission Officers of the Navy, so they
subscribe and make the Declaration beforementioned.

Anno 8 and 9 Will. III. An Act to Enforce the Act for Encouragement of Seamen.
REcites the Clause in the Act 7 and 8 Will. III. whereby it is Enacted, Sect.
1. Recital of the Act for Registring Seamen as to so much as concerns the
relief of disabled and slain Seamen, their Widows and Children.
That for Relief and Benefit of Registered Seamen, etc. who by Age, Wounds or
other Accidents shall be disabled for future Service at Sea, and shall not be
able to maintain themselves comfortably, and the Children of such disabled
Seamen, and the Widows and Children of such of them as shall happen to be
Slain, Killed or Drowned in Sea-Service, so far forth as the Hospital shall be
capable to receive them, and the Revenue thereof to maintain them. Every such
Seaman, etc. Registered and Disabled, shall upon Certificate in manner as
directed by the said Statute be admitted and placed in the said Hospital, and
shall be provided out of the Revenues of the said Hospital, according to the
Rules and Orders to be provided and settled for the said Hospital, convenient
Lodging Meat, Drink, Clothes, and other Necessaries and Conveniences, and the
Widows and Children of such Slain, Registered Seaman to be in like manner
received and provided for.

Persons so received into the Hospital, and relieved, to be in Order of time,
as appearing on the Registry Book of Seamen.
And forasmuch as there may be diverse Persons so Registered and disabled, and
diverse of the Widows and Children of such Registered Seamen may at one and the
same time stand in need, and by the said Act claim the Bounties and Advantages
aforesaid, It is Enacted, For the avoiding all Partiality and Favor, That all
and every such Persons who by the said Act may claim any of the said Bounties,
Provisions or Allowances, shall be received into the said Hospital, and
maintained, upon Certificates to be had in manner as by the recited Act is
provided, in succession one after another, as the Person Registered shall be and
appear in Course and Order of Time to be upon the Registry Book of Seamen, And
the Widows and Children of the Persons longest Registered always to be preferred
and admitted into the said Hospital, and the Benefits thereof to be employed in
manner as aforesaid.

II. Certificate under the Hand of one Justice of Peace sufficient Warrant to
Register Seaman.
For greater ease to all and every Seamen who have liberty to Register
themselves, Every such Seaman from and after the Tenth day of April next
ensuing, bringing or causing to be brought a Certificate in manner as the said
Act directs, of the Place of his Abode, and in case of Removal, a new
Certificate under the Hand of any one or more Justices of the Peace of the
Place and County where he lives in such and the like manner as the said Act
directs, and be also Entitled to all and every the Benefits and Advantages
given in and by the said Act, And to have like Benefit.
as well for himself as his Wife, Widow and Children. The said Justices giving
such Certificate, is required to make strict inquiry into the truth of the
Contents of the Certificate so by them to be given, and to examine the Parties
so desiring the Certificate on Oath, if shall see occasion. Justices to Examine
into truth of Certificate on Oath.
And if on Examination the said Justice shall find any Fraud, such Justices are
required to Certify the same to the Commissioners of the Admiralty, or Lord
High Admiral, And (if find any fraud) to certify.
that such Fraud and Deceit may be prevented.

Masters Mates and their Wives and Children to have Benefits and advantages of
the Act
III. It is Enacted, That if any Person Registered, and who are or shall be
raised to the Degree of Master's Mate in any of His Majesty's Ships of War, and
the Wives and Children of such Master's Mate are declared and enabled to have
and enjoy all and every the Benefits, Advantages and Bounties given to any
other Persons so Registered, or to their Wives and Children.

What persons above Fifty may Register themselves.
IV. It is Enacted. That from and after the Tenth day of April next, all and
every such Seamen who are above the Age of Fifty, and who by the said Act might
Register themselves in manner as aforesaid, in case they were not of such Age,
and who shall appear by the Books of the Navy-Office to have faithfully served
on Board any of His Majesty's Ships for the space of Seven Years past, without
wilful deserting the same, shall upon producing Certificate under the Hand of
one Justice of Peace in manner aforesaid be Registered, and such Person so
Registered, and their Wives and Children, Executors and Administrators, to have
and enjoy the several and respective Privileges in the said Act.

V. Proviso, Persons of 50 not to be Registered until give reason for omitting
Registring before.
That no Person above Fifty shall after the said Tenth of April be permitted to
Register themselves without giving such reasons for the omitting the Registring
themselves as shall be approved by Commissioners of the Admiralty, or any Three
or more of them, or the Lord High Admiral, or the Commissioners of the Navy, or
any Three of them, or such Persons as shall be appointed by the King for
keeping the said Register.

VI. Commissioners of the Registry to examine on Oath Masters of Ships for
discovery of Seamens Wages.
For the better levying and collecting the Duties of Six Pence per Mensem,
given and granted by the said recited Act for the Revenues and support of the
said Hospital, etc. It shall be lawful for Commissioners appointed for
Registering of Seamen or their respective Deputies for time being, for the
better discovery of the Pay and Wages due to the Sailors and Persons who served
on Board any the Merchants and Privateer Ships or Vessels in the said Act
mentioned, to cause all such Masters and Commanders of such Ships not in His
Majesty's Service, to be and appear before them the said Commissioners or the
respective Deputies who are hereby empowered all and every such Masters and
Commanders upon their Oaths to Examine, as to the Number, Rates, Salaries,
Wages and Times of Service of all and every such Person or Persons belonging to
or serving in such Ships or Vessels in the said recited Act, and which by the
said Act are obliged to Pay the said Duty of Six Pence per Mensem out of their
Salaries and Wages as aforesaid, And if such Masters and Commanders, or any of
them, shall refuse when Summoned or Commanded to appear before the said
respective Persons unpower'd to Examine them in manner as aforesaid, Or if they
shall appear and obstinately refuse to give a plain, full and exact Discovery
of the Matters aforesaid upon their Oaths, that then in every such case, all
and every such Offender or Offenders shall for every such Refusal or Neglect
Forfeit the Sum of 10 l. to the use mentioned in the said recited Act, Penalty
of Refusers.
to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster, with full Costs of Suit, Provided,
such Masters be not Quakers, or reputed Quakers.

VII. It is Enacted, Quakers to be examined.
That every Master or Commander of a Ship or Vessel mentioned in the said
recited Act, being a Quaker, may and shall be Examined before the said
Commissioners appointed for Registring Seamen, or Three or more of them or
their Deputys, and the said Commissioners or their Deputies may and shall from
Time to Time take the solemn Affirmation and Declaration of such Quakers
instead of their Oaths, and in such Manner and Form as by an Act made in the
Seventh and Eighth Year of His Majesty's Reign is directed, Entitled An Act
That the Solemn Affirmation and Declaration of the People called Quakers shall
be accepted instead of an Oath in usual Form, And such Quaker refusing to
appear on such Summons, or to Answer and Make such Solemn Affirmation or
Declaration before the said Commissioners or their Deputy or Deputies, shall be
deemed Offenders, and be liable to the same Penalties and Forfeitures mentioned
in this Act, for refusing to appear and be Examined on Oath, and Swear as
aforesaid.

Persons lending Register Certificates.
VIII. Whereas since making the recited Act diverse ill Persons Registered, have
fraudulently lent their Register Certificates to diverse Mariners, Seamen,
Watermen, etc. who were not Registered pursuant to the said Act, with intent to
keep such Persons not Registered from being Impressed in His Majesty's Service,
For preventing such evil Practices, It is Enacted, That whatever Person or
Persons so Registered, as aforesaid, shall after the Tenth of April next,
directly or indirectly lend to, leave with, or dispose of his or their
Certificate, of his or their being Registered, to any Mariner, etc. whereby to
keep or protect such Person from being Impressed into His Majesty's Service, It
shall be lawful for the Lord High Admiral or Commissioners of the Admiralty,
Punishment for offenders.
or any Three or more of them, to cause such Offenders to be struck out of the
said Register, and loose the benefit of the said recited Act, and to be
compelled to serve in His Majesty's Service, for the space of Six Months,
without any Pay, as in case of Registered Man not appearing on Summons to serve
in His Majesty's Service according to the said Act; And that every Person who
shall borrow, Persons borrowing, how to be punished.
take or receive for themselves or other Persons, such Certificates, or make
use of the same for the intents and purposes aforesaid, shall in all respects
suffer the like Pains and Penalties, and to the same Uses as are provided in
and by the said recited Statute against such Persons as vouch falsely Persons to
be Landmen who are afterward proved to be Seamen, or shall be compelled to
serve His Majesty in Sea Service for the space of Six Months, without Pay or
Wages.

IX. Certificate under Mayor, Bailiffs, or Deputies in Cinque Ports, to be as
good as Certificates from Justices.
Whereas in Jurisdiction of Cinque Ports and their Towns and Members in Kent
and Sussex, there are not any Justices of Peace, or Divisions, as in the rest
of the Counties, but only Mayors, Bailiffs and their Deputies, It is Enacted,
That such Certificate as aforesaid, under the Hand and Seal of any Mayor, or
Deputy Mayor, Bailiff or Deputy Bailiff within Jurisdiction of the Cinque
Ports, obtained in manner as aforesaid, shall be sufficient where no Justice of
the Peace shall be residing within Three Miles of such Port or Town.

Anno 5 and 6 Will. and Mar. An Act for Granting to His Majesty certain Duties
on Glass-Wares, Stone and Earthen Bottles, Coals and Culm for carrying on the
War against France.
Sect. 28. Nota: Allowed to Colliers not to be Impressed.
IT is Enacted, That for Encouragement of all such Ships or Vessels as shall be
employed in bringing Coals for supplying the City of London, and other Ports of
this Kingdom, at more reasonable Rates than during this War they have hitherto
been, that from and after the nine and twentieth day of September, there shall
be allowed Yearly from the fifteenth day of April until the first day of
January, free from Impressing, to any Master of any Ship or Vessel employed in
the Coal-Trade, two able Seamen (such as the Master shall nominate) for every
Ship or Vessel of One Hundred Tun, and one for every Fifty Tun. For every Ship
or Vessel of One Hundred Tun and upwards Burden, according to the Measurement
which such a Ship or Vessel shall appear to be of by a Certificate which shall
be produced from the Custom-House of what number of Tuns such a Ship or Vessel
has Paid for, by an Act for Levying a Duty on Tunnage of Shipping, And if any
Captain, Officer offending
Lieutenant, or other Officer shall by any Authority whatsoever presume to
Impress or take any of the Men allowed by this Act, such Captain, Lieutenant or
other Officer shall Forfeit to the Master or Owner of such Ship or Vessel,
Forfeit Ten Pounds, and incapable of Office.
Ten Pounds for every Man he shall so Impress or Take, to be recovered with
Costs of Suit, by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of His
Majesty's Courts of Record, wherein no Essoigne, etc. shall be allowed, and
shall also be made incapable of holding any Place, Office or Employment in any
of His Majesty's Ships of War.

Sect. 32. It is further Enacted, Nine of Forty Three Cruisers to Cruise on
Northern and Western Coasts.
That Nine of the Ships of War, part of the Forty Three which by an Act of that
Session were appointed to Cruise in several Stations to Guard the Coasts and
the Trade of this Kingdom, are appointed to Cruise or Convoy (that is to say)
Six on the Northern Coast, and Six on the Western Coast, in such Stations as
shall be directed by Lord High Admiral, or Commissioners of Admiralty for time
being, For Protecting Coal-Trade.
for the better Protecting and Preserving such Ships as shall be employed in
the Coal Trade.

The Form of the Oath appointed by the Statute Anno 1 Will. and Mar.
I A. B. do sincerely Promise and Swear, That I will be Faithful, and bear true
Allegiance to Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary.

So help me God, etc.

I A. B. do Swear, That I do from my Heart, Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, that Damnable Doctrine and Position, That Princes
Excommunicated or Deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by Their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I Declare, That no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate,
has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or
Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm.

So help me God, etc.

FINIS.

