An Account of TRANSACTIONS Managed by the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT: Concerning the KING THE Privileges of Parliament, the Liberties of
the Subject, Reformation in Religion, Regulating of Courts, and matters of
War and Peace.

WITH A Declaration, and Votes of both houses of Parliament, concerning his
Majesty.

Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield, near the Queens-head
Tavern. 1647. Feb. 12: Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbot.

An Account of Transactions, managed by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled.
THe Kingdom of England has received Miriads of refreshments, by the
blessings of God upon the Parliaments indevours; which are of high value,
however wretched men (like Saul) may throw their Javelins against their
Worthies; and giddy-brain'd Malignants, (like Corah and his company) oppose
them to their own destruction.

But let Digbey and Leg, and all the Malignant crew of Sanballets, practice
their craft, and stir up their Legions, yet God will finish what he has
determined to do by his Worthies, for the glory of his name, to the joy of good
men, and terror of all opposers. The benifits already received by this
Parliament, are many, and great, though the burdens of the Kingdom be not yet
quite removed, and may answer sweetness to every sorrow, under which the people,
at present, groan. As,

I. Concerning the King, (because some tax the Parliament to be hard toward
Him) consider,

1 Six Subsidies were granted to His Majesty, to win his affections to his
people, amounting to 300000 li.

2 A Bill of Pole Money was passed, and collected, amounting to as great a sum
as those Subsidies, for the safety and security of the Kingdom, that is also
300000 li.

3 To constitute a Peace between the King and the Scots, when his Majesty had
engaged against them, without the advice of Parliament, and against the minds
of his people: A debt was contracted to them of 220000 li. Besides

4 The charge of the English Army, which were, in that engagement, his
Majesty's Arms, and all the Commanders under contract with him, at greater
rates than ordinary, which cost the Kingdom above 50000 li. per mensem.

5 Which with the 300000 li. given to the Scots, for brotherly assistance and
the rest of the charges, amounted to 1100000 l.

6 Besides his Majesty had received Marchandine Impositions, at the least
400000 li.

7 The Parliament have often sent to the King, since he went from them, to
desire his Majesty to return to his Parliament, and they would make him, if he
would join with them for settling the peace, and security of the kingdom, a
great and rich Prince.

8 They have had many Treaties with the King, wherein they have only tendered
such things, as tend to the settlement of the kingdom, to be made into
wholesome Laws, and yet his Majesty has refused to pass them.

9 They have still been tender of his Majesty's Honor (in all submissive
manner owning him for their King, notwithstanding the raising of forces against
them, and laid the fault thereof upon his Counselors.

10 Since all his Majesty's Forces have been totally defeated, and subdued, the
Parliament has sent several times to his Majesty, to desire him to pass the
Propositions for both kingdoms, as at Newcastle, and at Holdenboy, and yet he
has, though personally under the power of the Parliament, refused to do it

11 His Majesty has had his own Chaplains, and others whom he has desired
about him, since he was under the power of the Parl. though they have been
disaffected to the Parl.

12 Upon his Majesty's desire to Treat with the Parliament the Houses have
assented, provided that his Majesty would only have passed four Bills, that
were essentially necessary for the peace and security of the kingdom.

Besides many other actions of the Parliament, of great affections, and
tenderness to his Majesty.

II Concerning Parliaments, they have sought the good of the People in them, As
appears, In that

1 The Dissolution of this Parliament is prevented by a Bill, by which it is
provided, That it shall not be dissolved, nor adjourned, without the consent of
both Houses. That so all the grievances of the kingdom may be relieved.

2 The discontinuance of future Parliaments is prevented, by the Bill for them
to be Trienniall. That so corrupt Counselors, Judges and Magistrates may be
removed, and pass under the lash of Justice, by often Reformation: And all the
burdens of the kingdom be eased, by a perpetual spring of Remedies.

3 The House of Commons protected the five Members demanded by the K. with
about 500 soldiers, papists, and others, because his Majesty did not legally
proceed against them.

4 The 12 Bishops were committed to the Tower, for protesting against the
proceedings of the Parl. in their absence, as if they, by their power, could
control that great Court.

5 When his Majesty left the Parliament, and the Lord Digby, Lunsford, and
others had gathered Horse and men to join with him, for raising of a War
against the Parl. The Houses sent Orders to the Sheriffs of the several
Counties in Engl. and Wales, to call to their assistance, the Justices of the
Peace, and Trained Bands, to prevent the War intended by the King, whereby the
destruction of the Parliament was prevented.

6 They have many of them lost a great part of their estats, in defense of the
kingdom: and some have been slain in the Wars, whereas it was in their power
to have complied with the King against the City of London, and the
well-affected people of the Land, to whom they have stuck for defense of their
Rights, which had they betrayed, as others that left the Parliament, to adhere
to his Majesty, by letting the Cause fall, they might themselves have been
advanced to great fortunes.

7 They have even denied their own Callings, and Domestic businesses to serve
the public, to a great prejudice to many of the Members.

8 They have indevoured to satisfy all the Interests in the kingdom, to those
who have not betrayed their Liberties.

9 They have not spared their own Members, that have proved Treacherous to the
kingdom, as may appear by beheading of Sir John Hotham, and the execution of
Justice upon others, and their general Votes against all those, who have
betrayed the trust of the kingdom, reposed in them.

10 They have denied their own Privileges, for good of the People, as appears
by the late Order of the House of Commons, for giving power to all to prosecute
against any of their estates, in an ordinary course of Law, for debts.

11 The house of Commons have chosen a large Committee, who sit daily in the
Star Chamber, to consider of grievances which shall be presented, and draw up
Ordinances to present to the House for remedies against them.

12 They are resolved, in all their debates, to consider all ways for the
settling of a firm and lasting peace, to make the kingdom rich, and happy.
Justice to be executed, and every one to enjoy their just Rights.

III To that complaint of some, against the Sessements of the 60000 li. a month
for pay of the Army, and other smaller Taxes, by Ordinance of Parliament,
Consider on the other side that

1 They have abolished Ship Money, which was, by his Majesty taxed upon the
kingdom, amounting to 20000 li. a Month.

2 They took away the Coat and Conduct money, which was by the King, taxed upon
the kingdom, with other Military Equipage, the value of which, had it continued
here, as in other parts, could not amount to less then 10000 li. a Month.

3 Monopolists are suppressed, and their Pattents, which were granted by his
Majesty under the great Seal of England, made null, which whilst they were in
force, drew a vast sum of moneys from the people. And could not amount to less
then Prejudice by the Soap Pattent 10000 li. a month In all 1400000 li. a
Month. Prejudice by the Wine Pattent, 30000 li. a month In all 1400000 li. a
Month. Prejudice by the Leather Pattent, 40000 li. a month In all 1400000 li.
a Month. Prejudice by the Salt Pattent, 40000 li. a month In all 1400000 li. a
Month. Prejudiced by other Patte. above 200000 li. a month. In all 1400000 li.
a Month.


4 The plundering and insa^iate Cavaliers; and Irish Rebels, who live upon
prey, and hoped to have gotten the City of London, and all honest men's estates,
that adhered to the Parliment, are subdued, and the kingdom rescued from those
great burdens, which through their violence and cruelty, it was forced to
bear; which, together with that which the Parlia- was forced to raise, for
defense of the kingdom against them, could not amount, in all, to less then
400000 li. a month.

5 So soon as other provisions can be made, for pay of the public debts, and
the kingdom be brought into a condition to be settled, without such Assesments,
and Taxes, they will be totally taken off.

6 Before the defeat given at Nazeby, it would have been thought an happy
contract, if it could have been assured, to have purchased a Peace at so easy
a Rate, as the kingdoms Assesments are now.

IV. The Parliament is so far from inslaving the people, or prejudicing the
Subjects Liberties, That

1 It is Declared, by the judgment of both Houses, and also by an Act of
Parliament, That the Arbitrary power, pretended to be in his Majesty of taxing
the Subjects, or charging their Estates (without consent of Parliament, is
against Law.

2 Justice has been done upon the Earl of Strafford, and the Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury, and Charges brought in against others of his Majesty's Council,
who put the King upon this way of trampling upon the peoples Liberties.

3 In all their Declarations and Votes concerning this particular, they have
given assurance to the people of vindicating, and clearing their just Liberties
and Freedoms.

V However some unreasonable Horseleeches, never have enough but still cry out
against Courts, and Magistrates, after so great a Reformation, established by
the Parliament, yet let such blush to remember, That

1 The Parliament have put down the cruel and oppressing Courts of
Star Chamber, the High Commission, the Courts of the President, and Council in
the North: and freed the Subject from all such Tyranny as was practiced daily
by them.

2 The power of the Council Table is provided for, to be so moderated, that
the public Liberty of the people may not be prejudiced thereby, against the
Laws of the Kingdom, and Privileges of the Subject.

3 The Bishops Cannons, and the power of their Convocation Courts are blasted,
and made null, and (themselves being abolished) all their Tyrannical
Judicatures put down, and the Subjects Liberties vindicated from further
slavery under them.

4 The Forests are by a good Law reduced to their right bounds. The
encroachments and oppressions of the Stannary Courts. The extortions of the
Clerk of the Market, and the compulsion of the Subject to receive the order of
King-hood against his will, paying of fines for not receiving it, and the
vexatious proceedings thereupon for levying of those fines (are by beneficial
Laws) reformed, and prevented.

5 The Court of Wards and Liveries is voted down. Which has been the ruin of
many thousands in this Kingdom.

6 An Ordinance is under debate for taking away the Office for Tenths and First
fruits to the great case of the Ministry:

7 All Courts in the Kingdom are either reformed or checked, so that they
cannot oppress the people without being in danger of the lash of the
Parliament.

8 All Committees and other entrusted by the Parl. must be called to an
account, and be made liable to answer to any charge that shall be exhibited
against them for miscariages.

9 If any Member of Parliament have received any bribe, for any business
depending in Parliament upon information thereof, he is to suffer severely.

10 In any public grievance, the Subject may have present remedy by the
Parliament.

VI. And although some (who are as blind as beetles in the ways of God) cry
out, that there is no Religion settled, And that we are now worse then ever we
were; yet they might consider. That.

1. Episcopacy (which, as it was settled in England, was a continual tormentor
of godly Protestants) is abolished.

2. The Popishly by effected Clergy [who were daily bringing into the Church
fresh Innovasions from the Church of Rome, to exterpate the Protestant
Religion, are cast out with their trumpery.

3. Diverse Ministers, who have been scandalous in their lives, And popish in
their Doctrine, have been suspended, and put out of their places. And other
honest godly Arthodox Divines placed in their stead.

4. The Assembly of Divines have sat constantly, since they were called. And in
matters concerning Religion, have often brought in their humble advice to the
Parliament; And in all things tending to the propogation of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, (both they and all other godly Ministers) have had all possible
encouragement and assistance from the Parliament, And the truth of God is
preached with great freedom: so that if people be unsettled in their Judgments,
it is their own faults, to live without knowledge under the means.

5. The chiefest differences amongst us now are ^^t circumstantialls, whereas
before the Parliament sat, Popery trampled upon the very fundamentalls of the
Protestant Religion, especially in the Kings Chapel, and other eminent places
of worship; And although there are Heriticks amongst us, as must be in all
parts of Christendom, yet they are neither considerable, nor publicly
tolerated.

6 The truth of God was never preached more clearly, and gloriously since the
Apostles time, (it is the Judgment of many very eminent Christians) in any
part of the world, then it is now in this Kingdom, And that is the reason that
so many errors are discovered, though simple ignorant people do not know it.

7 The Houses have passed an Ordinance for the several Counties in the Kingdom
to be drawn into Classes, that so there may be a speedy settled
Church Discipline through the Kingdom.

8 An Ordinance is drawing up by a Committee, for the punishing of Heresy and
Blasphemy.

9 All respect (that the word of God will bear) is had to tender Consciences;
for the propogation of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

10 Both Houses have passed an Ordinance for repair of Churches, and paying
Church duties, with penalties imposed on the refusers.

11 The House of Commons fit every Friday upon the settling of the Church, and
have almost finished the Confession of Faith.

12 All possible means are used for the propogation of the Gospel, of the Lord
Jesus Christ.

VII. And though poor distressed Ireland suffer under the Rebels yet the
Parliament have been dilligent to relieve those groaning Protestants, And to
that end.

1. Have often sent them supplies of men and moneys.

2. Called the Scots for brotherly assistance therein, and contracted great
sums for their pay, for so doing.

3. The Spanish Ambassador was sent to for the stay of Dunkirk Ships, and
other prevention made to hinder supply from going to the Rebels.

4. The Parliament, has several times at the beginning of the Wars, sent
supylyes of Clothes and Victuals, to relieve the Protestant Irish, some of
which supplies, of suites of Clothes, stockings, and other provisions, designed
for them, were taken for the Kings forces.

5. They have every year carefully provided Ships, and supplies for a guard for
the Irish Seas; which have much impeaded the Irish Rebels, in their designs.

6. They have entrusted the transactions of affairs in that Kingdom, in the
hands of such honest, and able men, as from time to time, have given a good
account thereof.

7. They have not only passed votes, and appointed others to assist Ireland;
but diverse Members of the Parliament, have themselves disbursed large sums
toward the work.

8. Though the King and his party have had several Treaties, and agreed to
several Cessations, and peace with the Rebels: yet the Parliament would never
adhere to them, in the least measure, to give them any advantage against the
poor Protestants of that Kingdom.

9. Through Gods blessings upon their endeavors, the Rebels, from a great
strength are now brought low.

10. They are now about an Ordinance, for asesment for 20000. l. per mensem, to
be sessed through the Kingdom of England, and themselves to bear an equal
proportion, for the vigorous prosecution of the War against the Irish Rebels.

VIII. And their care has been great, for the safety of the City of London, as
appears in that.

1. They refused to comply with the King, against the City, before the late
Wars.

2. They prevented the design of the Army, that went against the Scots, from
coming against the City.

3. When Lunsford, was Lieutenant of the Tower, A Message was sent to the King,
to remove him, and after him, Sir John Byron, both great enemies to the City of
London, and at a dangerous time, because his Majesty had then left the City,
and the Parliament.

4. And after that, the Houses passed in Ordinance for the safe Guard of the
Tower, and the City of London, under the Command of Maj. Genesis Skippon.

5. At all times the Houses have been ready to give all assistance that might
be, for the safety, and preservation thereof.

6. They have been always tender to maintain the Liberties, and just rights of
the City.

7. They have entrusted no persons in the Kingdom of England, so much as the
Cityzens of London.

8. They have always had a great respect to answer the City to all just, and
lawful desires, that they have put up to the Parliament.

9. Though the King invited them to come to him to Oxford, and that many
Members of both Houses did go and comply with His Majesty against the City of
London; yet they have stayed, and not disserted them.

10. The Houses have (when Commissioners have been chosen to treat with the
King) sent to the City to present their desires, to be sent with the
Propositions from the Houses, and the Kingdom of Scotland; for the vindicating,
and clearing of the Privileges, and just Rights of the City.

IX. And however some have charged the Parliament, and still would blemish
them, as if they delight in War, and would not have Peace, they may blush at
their impudence, and consider that.

1. When His Majesty left them, and went to Windsor, and contracted forces,
they sent several Petitions to him, to pray him to return to his Parliament.
And desired his Majesty if he had any Charge against the five Members, to send
it to the Houses, and they would proceed in a legal Trial, and make
Inquisition if any thing could be proved against them.

2. They have had several Treaties with His Majesty, and made very great
offers to him; but could not be concurred with.

3. Since the Kings forces have been totally suppressed, they have made
several addresses to His Majesty; but could not be answered with His Majesty's
Concurrence to what they have presented for the safe^y, and peace of the
Kingdom.

And for further satisfaction herein, consider these following papers.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, after many addresses to his
Majesty, for the preventing and ending this unnatural war raised by him
against his Parliament and Kingdom; having lately sent four Bills to his
Majesty which did contain only matter of safety and security to the Parliament
and Kingdom, referring the composure of all other differences to a personal
Treaty with his Maj. and having received an absolute Negative; Do hold
themselves obliged to use their uttermost endeavors speedily to settle the
present Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this
Kingdom, in the enjoyment of the Laws and liberties thereof; And in order
thereunto, and that the Houses may receive no delays, nor interruptions, in so
great and necessary a work; they have taken these Resolutions, and passed these
Votes following, viz.

REsolved, etc. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will make no
further addresses or applications to the King.

Resolved, etc. By the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That no
application or address be made to the King by any person whatsoever, without
the leave of both Houses.

Resolved, etc. By the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. That the
person, or persons, that shall make breach of this Order, shall incur the
penalties of High Treason.

Resolved, etc. That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive
no more any Message from the King, and do enjoin, that no person whatsoever, do
presume to receive, or bring any Message from the King, to both or either, the
Houses of Parliament, or to any other person.

H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com. John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.


Die Luna 17. Jan. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords and commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration and these Resolutions be forthwith printed and published; And that
several Knights of Sheires, and Burgesses that serve for the several Towns
and places, do send copies of the same to the several Counties and places.

It is further Ordered, that whatsoever person shall act contrary to this
Declaration and resolutions of Parliament, or shall incite or encourage others
so to do, shall upon due proof thereof be imprisoned, and his Estate
sequestered; and Offenders in the premises after publication here of shall be
within the several Ordinances of Sequestrations.

And all committes and commissioners of Sequestrations are hereby authorized
and required to take notice hereof, and to proceed to Sequestration accordingly.

John Brown Cleric. Parl. Hen Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


FINIS.

