At the Court at WHITEHALL 10 MARCH 1675/6. By the KING'S Most Excellent
Majesty and the Right Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
WHEREAS in pursuance of an Order of the Eighth Instant, The Lords
Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord high Admiral of England, did
this day report to His Majesty in Council, their Approbation of the several
Rules thereunto annexed, prepared by the Committee of this Board for Trade, for
preventing the fraudulent procuring of Passes; pursuant to the Treaties with
Spain and the United Provinces, together with the Form of a Certificate to be
signed by the Officer appointed to survey each Ship for which a Pass shall be
demanded; as also of the Oaths of the Master, and the Bond to be Entered into by
them; which having been Read and Considered at the Board; His Majesty was
pleased to approve thereof; and did Order, That as well, the Right Honorable
the Lord High Treasurer of England, as the Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty; do respectively cause the said Rules to be duly and punctually
observed and put in Execution in all the Ports therein mentioned.

EDWARD WALKER.

May it please your Majesty,
WE have in obedience to Your Majesty's Order in Council, had several
Meetings about frameing of Rules for Passes, in pursuance of the Treaties with
Spain and the United Provinces: And having also consulted the Commissioners of
the Customs therein, We do present Your Majesty with the following Rules, as
necessary and of great importance in this conjuncture for Your Majesty's
Service.

RULES For Granting of Passes, In Pursuance of the Treaties With SPAIN and the
UNITED PROVINCES.
1. THat no Passes be granted but in the Places Following, Viz. LONDON, Dover.
Rye. Chichester. Southampton. Poole. Weymouth. Lime Regis Exon. Dartmouth.
Plymouth. Fowy. Falmouth. Penzance. Barnstaple. Bridgwater. Mine-Head. Bristol
For the Ports of Bristol and Gloucester. Swanzey. Milford. Colchester.
Ipswitch. Yarmouth. Lynn Regis. Boston. Hull. Stockton. Sunderland. Newcastle.
Berwick. Whitehaven. Lancaster. Leverpool. Chester. Beaumaris.


London Passes be granted only by the Lord High Admiral or the Lords
Commissioners for executing the Office of Lord High Admiral, or the
Commissioners of the Customs, and in the Out-Ports by the Chief Magistrate of
the said Out-Ports respectively, with the consent of the Collector, or other
Chief Officer of the Customs upon the place for the time being, deputed by the
Commissioners; which consent is to be declared by the said Officer under his
hand, upon the body of the Certificate, provided for, in the Article following.

London, until she have been viewed, either by the Surveyor of the Act of
Navigation, or his Deputy, or some Officer of the Navy especially appointed
thereto by the Lord High Admiral, or Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, or
by the Surveyors of the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs aforesaid, and a
Certificate to be produced from the said Officers respectively, to the persons
granting the said Passes, expressing the Name, Built, and Burden of the said
Vessel; and answering distinctly to each other of the said several Heads
contained in the Form of the said Certificate hereunto annexed: And that no
Pass be granted in any other of the Ports or Places beforementioned, until
such Ship or Vessel shall have been viewed by the Surveyor of the Act of
Navigation, or his Deputy, or the said Commissioners their Surveyors, in such
Port where there is a Surveyor; and where there is no Surveyor, by such other
Officer of the said Commissioners, as shall be appointed by the Collector, or
Chief Officer of the Customs, and like Certificate made concerning such Ship or
Vessel.



Greenland) in which case one moiety at least of the Mariners to be English.

England, and that their Families are also here, if any they have; Mem. That
the four Fisher Boats lately made free, are to be excepted.
and as to such Masters of Ships as pretend to Denization, that no Pass be
granted unto them, unless it shall appear that their real and constant
residence with their Families has been in England for the space of one year
before the demanding of such Pass.



London, to the Collector Outward; if in the Out-Ports, to the Officer of the
Customs that is to consent to the Pass, of 100 l. penalty, if the Ship appear
to be above 100 Tons, for the return and redelivery of his Pass, within the
time to be limited in his Bond, to the said Officer of the Customs: and of 50
l. penalty if his Ship be under 100 Tons, unless in case of Capture, or loss of
his Ship; which limitation of time to be made according as is directed in the
following Rule, No. 15.

^ returned by ^ is the ship, concerning which this Oath is by him made; and
that the Name by which he calls her, is the true Name, and that he knows of no
other Name that she has or has had, or if she has had, to declare it.

January the First 1673, and not made free, that before the granting thereof
not only the Master but the Proprietors of such ship, or as many of them as
may be had, do also make Oath of their propriety in such ship, and what shares
they respectively have, and when bought, and for what sum of money, and who
are the rest of the Owners, and their places of Abode: And in case a Pass be
demanded for any such ship in any of the Out-Ports, that when such Oath shall
be taken, no Pass to be yet granted, until the said Oath and the Oath of the
Master and the Certificate of the Officer of the Customs that shall have
surveyed such ship, shall have been transmitted by the Officer of the Customs
that ought to consent to such Pass, to the Commissioners of the Customs in
London, and their approbation had thereupon: And if any of the Proprietors of
such Foreign built ship shall appear to be Foreigners, that the Commissioners
of the Customs do not grant any Pass to such ship in London, nor give their
approbation for the granting of any such Pass in the Out-Ports, until full and
clear satisfaction be given to them, that they are truly inhabitants, and not
sojourners come over, only to serve the turn of Foreigners beyond Sea, during
the present Wars abroad: And moreover that, Whether such propriety is claimed
by Foreigners or Natives, due Examination is to be had of the quality, value,
and worth of such persons, and of their probability of having such propriety,
before such Pass or Approbation be granted.

England, Wales, or Town of Berwick.

England, Wales, or Berwick, but in some place within the Port to which she
belongs, which by this Regulation has power to grant Passes; but if it shall so
happen that a ship being in some other Port than the Port to which she belongs,
and which cannot conveniently repair to the same, shall have need of a Pass,
and that the Master shall demand the same from the persons by this Regulation
authorized in such Port or place to grant Passes, that if such ship be an
English built ship, or made free or bought before January the First 1673,
though not made free, if she belong to the Port of London, that upon a
Certificate from the Commissioners of the Customs, testifying that she belongs
to that Port, and whether such ship has had a former Pass or not; (and if she
belong to the Out-Ports, that upon a Certificate from the Chief Magistrate of
the place within the Port to which she belongs; which by this Regulation is
authorized to grant Passes, attested by the Chief Officer of the Customs, there
deputed by the Commissioners, testifying that she belongs to such place, and
whether such Ship has had a former Pass or not:) That a Pass may be thereupon
granted to her by the Commissioners of the Customs, if she be in the Port of
London, and if she be in any Out-Port, Member, or Creek thereof, by the Chief
Magistrate of the place in the Port where she is, that is authorized to grant
Passes. But in case such Ship be a Foreign built Ship, bought after January the
First 1673, and not made free, that the person or persons so authorized, shall
not grant any Pass to such Master, until the Officer of the Customs, who is to
consent to such Pass, shall have sent a Copy of the Oath of such Master, to the
Commissioners of the Customs, who are thereupon to write to the Collector or
other Chief Officer in that Port, to which (or some Member whereof) the said
Ship is pretended to belong; and the said Officer is thereupon to take care
that the pretended proprietors of such Ship, who shall dwell there, be examined
upon Oath concerning their propriety, and the time of their buying such Ship,
and for what sum of money, and that he do return such Examinations to the
Commissioners of the Customs, together with his knowledge or belief concerning
such Ship, being reputed or known to be a Ship belonging to such Port or Member
thereof, and whether she had any former Pass or not; all which the
Commissioners of the Customs shall transmit to the Officer of the Customs in
the Port or place where such Pass is demanded, and the same shall be of like
effect, as if the Ship had been in her proper Port, and demanded her Pass
there. And if in any of the Cases abovementioned in this Article, a Pass shall
be granted to any Ship out of her proper Port, the same to be forthwith
notified by the Officer of the Customs, who consented to the granting thereof,
to the Commissioners of the Customs, and the said Commissioners shall notify
the same to the Chief Officer of the Customs in such place in the Port to which
she belongs, as is authorized to give and register Passes; whereby the same may
be entered in the Registry, for the preventing of granting double Passes.

Passes hereunto annexed, printed upon Parchment with Blanks, be made use of
here in London, and that the like Passes with Blanks, printed upon the same
size of Parchment, be sent to all places in the Out-Ports, authorized to grant
Passes, and that those and none other, be made use of, whereby they may be
distinguished from all former Passes.

Passes (all which are hereunto annexed) be made use of in London, and in all
places in the Out-Ports, which are hereby authorized to grant Passes.

East or West Indies, or to any part in Africa beyond Cape-Verde, or to any
part of the Mediterranean-Sea, their Passes to determine upon their Return and
being unladen in some Port of England or Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed:
And for that end, to be obliged in the Bonds they are to give, upon taking out
of such Passes, That upon their return, and being unladen, the Master of such
Ship shall deliver up their Old Passes: And that Passes for Ships entering for
all other parts, be to continue for one year only, and the Bonds to be filled
up accordingly, with a saving to Capture and Shipwreck, as before directed.

Out-Ports, by whom the Passes beforementioned shall be granted, of every Pass
which shall be by them respectively so granted; as also by the Collector, or
other Chief Officer of the Customs, in each of the said Out-Ports, of every
Pass whereto the consent of the said Collector or Officer shall be given, in
pursuance of the second Article: Which Registers are to be strictly kept, and
to express all the particulars in the Certificate of the Officer that viewed
such Ship, and in the Oath of the Master: And Copies of what shall be so kept
in the Out-Ports, shall be Monthly transmitted from the aforesaid Collector or
Chief Officer there, to the Commissioners of the Customs in the Port of London:
And the said Commissioners are Monthly to send Transcripts, as well of the
Register kept by themselves, as of what shall be teturned to them from the
Out-Ports, to the Lord Admiral, or Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, in
order to the making up of One entire Register and Alphabet, for the ready
informing His Majesty and Their Lordships in all Matters relating thereto, or
wherein His Majesty's Service may require Information from the same.

Scotland and Ireland, Tangier, and other His Majesty's Plantations, the
Islands of Jersey and Guernsey, and the East Indies; and the keeping the like
Register of the same, with Copies thereof to be transmitted to the Secretary of
the Admiralty of England Quarterly, or where that cannot be, as often as
opportunity of Conveyance shall happen for the same.

July last past; touching Passes, be superseded and annulled.

Council Chamger, 6th. of March, 1675/6. All which is most humbly submitted,
Danby. Craven. Bridgwater. Secretary Coventry. Mr. Secretary Williamson. Robert
Southwell.

A True Copy. John Nicholas.

FORM OF THE BOND To be given by Masters of SHIPS, before any PASS be granted
to them.
NOverint universi per praesentes, ^ teneri and firmiter obligari Serenissimo
Domino nostro CAROLO Secund' Regi, in ^ Libris bonae and legalis Monet' Angl'
solvend' eidem Domino Regi Haered' vel Successoribus suis: Ad quam quidem
solucon' been and fideliter faciend', Oblig' ^ Haered', Executor', and
Administrat' ^ firmiter per praesentes. Sigill' ^ Sigillat'. Dat' ^ die ^ Anno
Regni ^ dicti Dom' nostri Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis,
Fidei Defensor', etc. ^ Annoque Dom' 167

THE Condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above-bound ^ has
received a Pass from ^ for the good Ship called the ^ of ^ and whereof he the
said ^ is now Master, bearing date the ^ day of ^ Now if the said ^ shall
deliver, or cause to be delivered up the said Pass to the said ^ ^ unless the
said Ship shall happen to be taken by Pirates, or be cast away and Shipwrackt,
then this Obligation shall be void and of none effect; or else shall remain in
full force and virtue.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of

FORM OF THE Oath of the Master, For a Foreign-built SHIP, made Free.
^ of ^ Mariner, and Master of the ^ of ^ called the ^ of ^ now at Anchor in
the ^ makes Oath in the presence of ^ That the said ^ called the ^ Burden ^
Tuns more or less, mounted with ^ Guns, and Navigated with ^ Men, whereof ^ are
His Majesty's Subjects, and ^ Strangers, bound for ^ and whereof he is
appointed sole Master for the said Voyage, and knows of no other Master, is a
Foreign-built Vessel made free, and does wholly belong to the Inhabitants of ^
in the Dominions of His Majesty of Great Britain; and that the said Vessel is
the same which has been viewed by ^ and for which he has made a Certificate
bearing date the ^ day of ^ And that he knows of no Name the said Vessel has
been, If he knows of any Name, let it be here expressed, as the Master shall
declare.
or is called or known by, other than the Name abovementioned, If she had any,
declaring what is become of it.
or ^ And that he knows of no other Pass the said Vessel has had ^ And that
the said Vessel became English Propriety by day of ^ Dated this ^ day of ^
Sale, or Condemnation in the Court of Admiralty.
^

Jurat, That the Certificate of the Freedom of this Vessel, produced to the
Officer of the Navigation, who surveyed the same, and the Contents abovesaid,
are true to the best of his knowledge.

Coram, etc.

FORM OF THE CERTIFICATE Of the Officer for the Navigation, for a Forreingbuilt
SHIP, made Free.
IN pursuance of His Majesty's Order in Council, Port of
of the Tenth of March, 1675/6. I underwritten do certify, That the ^ of ^ is
a Forreign-built ^ of the Burden of ^ Tuns, and ^ Guns, now lying at Anchor ^
within the Port of ^ bound for ^ whereof ^ is Master, and is Navigated with ^
Men, whereof ^ are His Majesty's Subjects, and ^ Strangers: And appears to be
made free, as by the Certificate of His Majesty's Surveyor for the Act of
Navigation, dated the ^ day of ^ Anno Dom. ^ and produced to me. Dated this ^
day of ^ Anno Dom. If this Certificate be made in any of the Out-Ports, then
this following Certificate is to be upon the Body of it.


I ^ Collector or Chief Officer of His Majesty's Customs in the Port abovesaid,
do hereby declare my Consent, under my Hand, that a Pass be granted for the
abovesaid Ship.

FORM OF THE Oath of the Master, FOR AN ENGLISH-BUILT SHIP.
^ of ^ Mariner, and Master of the ^ called the ^ of ^ now at Anchor ^ in ^
making Oath in the presence of ^ That the said ^ called the ^ of ^ Burden ^
Tons more or less, mounted with ^ Guns, and Navigated with ^ Men, whereof ^ are
His Majesty's Subjects, and ^ Strangers, bound for ^ and whereof he is
appointed the sole Master for the said Voyage (and knows of no other Master) is
an English-built ^ and does belong to the Inhabitants of ^ in the Dominions of
His Majesty of Great Britain; and that the said Ship is the same ^ which has
been surveyed by ^ and for which he has made a Certificate, bearing date the ^
day of ^ Anno Dom. Or if he knows of any other Name she has, or has had,
expressing or declaring the same.
^ And he knows of no Name the said ^ has been or is called by, other than the
Name abovementioned ^ And that he knows of no other Pass the said ^ has had ^
Or if she had any former Pass, declaring what is become of it.


Jurat, That the Contents abovesaid are true to the best of ^ his knowledge.

Coram, etc.

FORM OF THE CERTIFICATE Of the Officer for the Navigation for an English built
SHIP.
IN pursuance of His Majesty's Order in Council of the Tenth of March 1675/6.
Port of
I underwritten ^ do Certify that the ^ of ^ is an English-Built ^ of Burden
^ Tuns, and ^ Guns, now lying at ^ within the Port of ^ bound for ^ And whereof
^ is Master, and is Navigated with ^ Men, whereof ^ are His Majesty's Subjects,
and ^ Strangers. Dated the ^ day of ^ Anno Dom. 167^ If this Certificate be
made in any of the Out-Ports, then this following Certificate is to be upon the
Body of it.


I ^ Collector or Chief Officer of the Customs upon the Place in the Port
abovesaid, do hereby declare my Consent under my Hand that a Pass be granted
for the abovesaid Vessel.

FORM OF THE Oath of the Master Of a Foreign-built SHIP not made Free, whether
bought before or since the First of January, Anno 1673.
^ of ^ Mariner and Master of the ^ called the ^ of ^ now at Anchor in the ^
makes Oath in presence of ^ That the said ^ called the ^ Burden ^ Tuns more
or less, mounted with ^ Guns, and Navigated with ^ Men, whereof ^ are His
Majesty's Subjects, and ^ Strangers, bound for ^ whereof he is appointed sole
Master for the said Voyage (and knows of no other Master) is an Foreign-built ^
not made Free, bought the ^ day of ^ and does wholly belong to the Inhabitants
of ^ in the Dominions of His Majesty of Great Britain; Express the Owners names
and then respective Parts or Shares in her, with their Places of Abode.
and that ^ are Owners of her ^ and that the said Vessel is the same which has
been surveyed by ^ and for which he has made a Certificate bearing date the ^
day of ^ And that he knows of no Name the said Vessel has been or is called or
known by, If she has been called by any other name let it be here expressed,
as the Master shall declare.
other than the Name abovementioned ^ And that he knows of no other Pass the
said Vessel has had, If she had any, declaring what is become of it.
or ^

Jurat, The abovenamed ^ Master of the said Vessel, that the Bill of Sale of
this Vessel produced to the Officer of the Navigation is true, and that the
persons therein mentioned are the present real proprietors of her.

FORM OF THE CERTIFICATE Of the Officer for the Navigation for a Foreign-built
SHIP not made Free, whether bought before or since the first of January, Anno
1673.
IN pursuance of His Majesty's Order in Council of the Tenth of March 1675/6.
Port of
I underwritten ^ do Certify that the said ^ of ^ is a Foreign-built ^ of the
Burden of ^ Tuns, and ^ Guns, now lying at Anchor ^ within the Port of ^ bound
for ^ whereof ^ is Master, and is Navigated with ^ Men, whereof ^ are His
Majesty's Subjects, and ^ Strangers, and appears to be bought, and belong to
the Inhabitants of His Majesty's Dominions, by a Bill of Sale bearing date the
^ day of ^ Anno Dom. ^ produced to me, but not made Free. Dated this ^ day of ^
Anno Dom. 167 If this Certificate be made in any of the Out-Ports, then this
following Certificate is to be upon the Body of it.


I ^ Collector or Chief Officer of His Majesty's Customs in the Port abovesaid,
do hereby declare my Consent under my Hand that a Pass be granted for the
abovesaid Ship.

FORM OF THE Oath of the Proprietors Of a Foreign built SHIP, bought since the
First of January 1673. and not made Free.
I Underwritten ^ of ^ make Oath that I am a Proprietor in the ^ called the ^
of ^ for which a Pass is demanded by ^ Master of her; And that I have ^ part of
her, and that I bought the same upon the ^ day of ^ for the Sum of ^ really and
without fraud paid by me for the same; Let him here Express the Owners
respective Names, Places of Abode, and Shares as near as he can.
and that ^ are Part-Owners thereof. And that none but Inhabitants of His
Majesty's Dominions to the best of my knowledge, have any Part or Share in the
said ^ Dated this ^ day of ^ Anno Dom. 167^

Jurat, That the Contents abovesaid ^ are true.

Coram, etc.

To all unto whom these Presents shall Come.
We the Commissioners of the Customs of his most Serene Majesty of Great
Britain, etc. Within his Kingdom of England, residing in London; do testify
and make known, That ^ of the ^ called the ^ Has in our presence, under solemn
Oath declared, That the said ^ of the Burden of ^ whereof he is at present
Master, does belong to the Inhabitants of ^ in the Dominions of his said
Majesty of Great Britain. And We desiring that the said Master may be assisted
in his Voyage and business, do entreat all persons in general and particular,
who shall meet him; and those of all places where the said Master shall come
with the said ^ and her Merchandise; that they would admit him favorably,
treat him kindly, and receive the said ^ into their Ports, Bays, Havens, Rivers
and Dominions: permitting her quietly to sail, pass, frequent, and negotiate
there, or in any other place, as shall seem good to the said Master; paying
still the Toll and Customs which of right shall be due: Which We will
acknowledge gratefully upon the like occasions. In witness whereof We have
signed these presents, and sealed them with the Seal of the Custom-house
London, the ^

AFter my hearty Commendations: Whereas the several Rules hereunto annexed, for
preventing the fraudulent procuring of Passes, pursuant to the Treaties with
Spain and the United Provinces, together with the Form of a Certificate to be
signed by the Officer appointed to survey each Ship for which a Pass shall be
demanded; as also of the Oaths of the Masters, and the Bond to be entered into
by them, have been approved by His Majesty in Council, and directed to be
observed and put in execution by an Order of the Tenth of March last: In
pursuance of which Order of His Majesty in Council, These are to direct and
require you to observe the said Rules, and Forms of Certificates, Oaths, and
Bonds (which I have herewith transmitted to you) and to govern your selves
thereby; and that you cause the same to be signified to, and duly observed and
executed by all other Officers of His Majesty's Customs therein concerned,
according to the true meaning thereof, and His Majesty's Pleasure in this
behalf: For which, this shall be you Warrant. Newmarket, the Seventh of April,
1676.

To my very Loving Friends, the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs. DANBY.

At the Court at WHITEHALL 22 MARCH 1675/6. By the KING'S Most Excellent
Majesty and the Right Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
WHEREAS the Right Honorable the Lords Committees for Trade did this day make
Report to the Board, That in pursuance of an Order of the Tenth Instant, upon
the Complaint of the Eastland Merchants, and those who Trade unto Hamburgh,
they have perused the Treaties between His Majesty and the Crowns of Sweden and
Denmark: and according to the Methods prescribed by the said Treaties, they
have made the best Provision they could think of, for Ships that are Outward
bound; proposing that they take their Passes in the manner following: Viz.

RULES for the granting of PASSES in pursuance of the Treaty with Sweden.
Pass to be granted in pursuance of this Treaty, in the Port of London, but by
the Commissioners of the Customs; nor in any of the Out-Ports, but by the Chief
Magistrates of such Places as are authorized to grant Passes by virtue of the
Treaties with Spain and the United Provinces, and with the Consent of the Chief
Officer of the Customs in such Place, and under the like Regulation as to the
Place where she is to receive her Pass, as is directed in the Rules for
granting of Passes, in pursuance of the Treaties with Spain and the United
Provinces. Pass to be granted, until it shall appear to the Person granting the
same, that such Ship has had a Pass in some Port of England, in pursuance of
the Treaties with Spain or the United Provinces. the propriety of such Ship,
etc. as is directed in the Form of the Passport hereunto annexed. Pass to be
granted, without expressing therein the Lading of such Ship, as is also
directed in the Form of the Passport hereunto annexed. Pass be granted, until
the Master of such Ship shall enter Bond, in his Majesty's Name, with one
Surety, if the Ship belong to the Port of London, to the Collector Cutwards;
and if she belong to any Out-Port, then to the Officer of the Customs in such
Port, who is to consent to Passes to be given by virtue of the Treaties with
Spain or the United Provinces. The said Bond to be in the penalty of 100 l. if
the said Ship appear to be of the Burden of 100 Tons or upwards, and in the
penalty of 50 l. if under the Burden of 100 Tons, for the return and
re-delivery of such Pass within the space of one Year, to be accounted from the
Date thereof, unless in case of Capture, or the loss of such Ship. And before
the granting of such Pass, the person demanding the same is to produce a
Certificate to the person or persons from whom he demands such Pass, that such
Bond has been entered into by the Master of such Ship, which Certificate is to
be under the Hand of the Officer of the Customs who took the Bond, and sealed
with the Seal of such Custom-house. Pass printed upon Parchment, with Blanks,
hereunto annexed, be made use of in pursuance of this Treaty, in London, and
the Out-Ports, and no other. Pass which shall be granted in pursuance of this
Treaty; which Register is to be kept in the Port of London by the Commissioners
of the Customs, and in the Out-Ports by the Chief Magistrates, and the Officers
of the Customs, that shall consent to such Pass; and to be transmitted from the
Out-Ports to the Commissioners of the Customs in the Port of London, monthly;
and by the Commissioners of the Customs, to the Commissioners for executing the
Office of Lord High Admiral, quarterly, for London and the Out-Ports. And no
Pass to be granted until the Register be carefully examined, whether any such
former Pass has been granted to such Ship: And in that case, that no new Pass
be granted, until the former be delivered up. The like Directions to be given
for Scotland, Ireland, and the rest of His Majesty's Dominions.
FORM OF THE AFFIRMATION.
THese are to Certify, That ^ upon the ^ day of ^ in the year of our Lord ^
Citizens and Inhabitants of ^ and Subjects of His Majesty the King of GREAT
BRITAIN, did personally appear before ^ under the Dominion of His Majesty the
King of GREAT BRITAIN, and did there upon the Faith of that Oath whereby they
are bound to His Majesty the King of GREAT BRITAIN, our most Gracious
Sovereign, and to our ^ declare that the Ship or Vessel called the ^ of ^ Thus,
does belong to ^ of the Dominions of ^ And that the said ^ does properly and of
right appertain thereunto, or to the Subjects of His Majesty the King of GREAT
BRITAIN, but now from the Port of ^ is bound for ^ freighted with the Goods
following: Viz.

And did affirm upon the aforesaid Oath ^ all the said Goods and Merchandise to
belong to the Subjects of the King of GREAT BRITAIN and ^ unto ^ And that ^
upon the aforesaid Oath alleged that the said Goods above-specified, and no
others, were put or to be put on board the said ^ for that Voyage, and that no
part thereof belongs to any other then the persons aforesaid; and that
therein there are no other Goods hidden under any false or counterfeit Name
whatsoever: But that the aforesaid Merchandise were truly and really for the
use of the said Owners and Proprietors and no others, and that the said Master
of the Ship named ^ is a Citizen of ^ aforesaid. Dated the ^ day of ^ Anno
Domini 167 ^

Had a Pass in pursuance of the Treaties with Spain and the United Provinces,
dated the ^ day of ^

Anno 167

Former Pass in pursuance of the Treaty with Sweden.

To all unto whom these Presents shall Come.
^ under the Dominions of his most Serene Majesty of Great Britain, etc. Do
Certify that upon the ^ day of ^ in the Year of our Lord 1676. ^ Citizens and
Inhabitants of ^ and Subjects of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, did
personally appear before ^ in the ^ and did there upon the Faith of that Oath
whereby they are bound to his Majesty the King of Great Britain, Our most
Gracious Sovereign and to our City, declare that the Ship or Vessel called ^ of
^ Tunns does belong to the ^ of the Dominion of England. And that the said Ship
or Vessel does properly and of right appertain thereunto or the Subjects of his
Majesty the King of Great Britain, but now from the Port of ^ is Bound for ^
Freighted with the Goods following, viz. ^

And did affirm upon the aforesaid Oath, that all the said Goods and
Merchandise do belong to the Subjects of the King of Great Britain; And that
they upon the Oath aforesaid alleged that the said Goods above specified and
no others were put, or to be put on board the said Ship or Vessel for that
Voyage; and that no part thereof belongs to any other than the Persons
aforesaid; And that therein there are no other Goods hidden under any false or
Counterfeit name whatsoever, but that the foresaid Merchandise were truly and
really for the use of the said Owners and proprietors and no other, and that
the said Master of the Ship or Vessel named ^ is a Citizen of ^ Wherefore since
upon strict enquiry it is manifest to ^ That the said Ship or Vessel and Goods
are free, and do really and truly belong to the Subjects of his Majesty of
Great Britain, ^ do with all Respect humbly desire all Powers by Land, or Sea,
Kings, Princes, Commonwealths, Free Cities, as also all Generals, Admirals,
General Officers, Governors of Ports, and all others to whom the Guard of any
Port or Sea is committed, who shall happen to meet this Ship under Sail, or into
whose Fleet she shall fall, or in whose Port she shall happen to stay, that in
regard of the Friendship and alliance which is between every of them, or their
Superiors, and his Majesty of Great Britain our most gracious Sovereign, that
they would not only suffer and permit the said Master with the Ship or Vessel
the Persons, Goods and Merchandise belonging thereunto without any Let or
hinderance freely to make his Voyage, but also (if he think convenient to go
any where else from the said Port) that they would do him all Civil Office as a
Subject of his Majesty the King of Great Britain, expecting the like Returns
from his Majesty the King of Sweden, his Officers and Subjects in the like or
other Case. In Witness whereof ^ have Subscribed these presents and Sealed the
same with the Seal of ^ Dated the ^ day of ^

RULES for the granting of PASSES in pursuance of the Treaty with Denmark.
Pass to be granted in pursuance of this Treaty, but what is signed by His
Majesty, and countersigned by a Principal Secretary of State. Pass be granted,
until a Schedule be produced, signed by the Officers of the Customs in the Port
where the Ship took in her Lading, containing all the Goods she has on Board,
be they more or less: and if she have no Lading, then to express the same. And
a Direction to the Officers in the respective Ports where Passes are to be
given by virtue of the Treaties with Spain and the United Provinces; to grant
such Schedules, and to sign and seal them with the Seal of the Custom-house.
Pass be granted, till a Certificate be produced from the Chief Magistrate of
some such Place in each Port, as by the Regulation of the Treaties with Spain
and the United Provinces is authorized to grant Passes in the Form prescribed
by this Treaty. Pass be granted, until it appear by Certificate to the said
Principal Secretary of State, from whom any such Pass shall be demanded, that
the said Ship has had a Pass according to the Form prescribed by the Treaties
with Spain of the United Provinces which Certificate is to be signed by the
Commissioners of the Customs in the Port of London, or their Secretary, in case
such Pass were granted in the Port of London; and in case it were granted in
any of the Out-Ports, that it be signed by the Officer of the Customs who
consented to such Pass. Pass be granted, until the Master of such Ship shall
enter Bond, in His Majesty's Name, with one Surety, if the Ship belong to the
Port of London, to the Collector Outward; and if she belong to any Out-Port,
then to the Officer of the Customs in such Out-Port, who into consent to Passes
to be given by virtue of the Treaties with Spain and the United Provinces. The
said Bond to be in the penalty of 100 l. if the said Ship appear to be of the
Burden of 100 Tons or upwards; and in the penalty of 50 l. if under the
Burden of 100 Tons, for the return and redelivering of such Pass within the
space of one Year, to be accounted from the date thereof, unless in case of
Capture, or the loss of such Ship. And before the granting of such Pass, the
Person demanding the same is to produce a Certificate to the Secretary of State
from whom it is demanded, that such Bond has been entered into by the Master of
such Ship; Which Certificate is to be under the Hand of the Officer of the
Customs who took the Bond, and sealed with the Seal of such Custom-house. Pass
to be granted until the same be carefully examined whether any such former Pass
has been granted to such ship, and in that case, then no new Pass to be
granted, until the former be delivered up; and that a quarterly account thereof
be given by the said Secretary to the Lords Commissioners for Executing the
Office of Lord High Admiral. Scotland about Passes for Scotch Ships; And if the
Passes for Ireland are to be procured by one of the Principal Secretaries of
State in England, yet that they keep a distinct Register for Ireland, as well
as a ^^^nct Register for England, sersey, Guernsey, Alderney, Sark, and the
Islands of Scilly and Man.
All which, etc. Bridgewater, Carlisle, Craven, Fauco^berg, H. Coventry, J.
Williamson.
R. Southwell.

LONDON ss.
TO all that shall see these Presents, or hear them to be read ^ Lord Mayor,
and the Aldermen of the City of LONDON, Do attest and certify: That on the Day
of the Date hereof; before Us personally came and appeared ^ And under the Oath
wherein ^ stand bound to Our Sovereign Lord the King, did declare unto Us: That
the said Ship ^ in the Port of ^ of the Burden of ^ Tunns, or thereabouts,
does belong to the Port of ^ in the Kingdom of ENGLAND: And that the said Ship
does justly belong to ^ Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King: And ^ And
the said Appearer ^ affirmed under the Oath aforesaid, That the aforementioned
Ship ^ does only belong to Subjects of His said Majesty: And ^ carry no Goods
prohibited, which belong to either of the Parties now in War. In testimony
whereof. We have caused this Cortificate to be subscribed by Our Town Clerk,
and Sealed with the Seal of Majoralty of the City of LONDON.

Given at LONDON the ^ day of ^ Anno Domini 167^ And in the ^ Year of the Reign
of Our Sovereign Lord CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God King of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Which Rules having been read and considered at the Board, His Majesty was
pleased to approve thereof, and did order that as well the Right Honorable the
Earl of Danby Lord High Treasurer of England, as the Lords Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, and His Majesty's
Principal Secretaries of State, do respectively cause the said Rules to be duly
and punctually observed and put in execution.

John Nicholas.

THe Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs are hereby directed and required to
govern themselves by these Rules in what is to be done by them touching Passes
to be granted in pursuance of the respective Treaties with Sweden and Denmark,
and to cause the same to be signified to, and to be duly observed and executed
by all other Officers of His Majesty's Customs therein concerned, according to
the Form thereof and His Majesty's pleasure therein declared: for which this
shall be their Warrant.

New Market this seventh day of April 1676. DANBY.

At the Court at WHITEHALL 10 MARCH 1675/6. By the KING'S Most Excellent
Majesty and the Right Honorable the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
WHEREAS in pursuance of an Order of the Eighth Instant, The Lords
Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, did
this day report to His Majesty in Council, their Approbation of the several
Rules here under written, prepared by the Committee of this Board for Trade,
for preventing the fraudulent procuring of Passes, in pursuance of the Treaties
with Algiers, Tunis, and Tripoly, as follows: Viz.

May it please your Majesty,
BEside the General Regulation which We present Your Majesty in relation to
Passes, We have thought fit for Your Majesty's Service, to prepare also some
Rules for the Granting of Passes, in pursuance of the Treaties with Algiers,
Tunis, and Tripoly; and having therein likewise consulted with the
Commissioners of the Customs, and received their concurrence, We presume to lay
them before Your Majesty, as follows:

FIrst, Whereas by the words of the late Proclamation, bearing date the 22th.
of December 1675, Your Majesty did declare that no Pass or Sea-brief
whatsoever, which bore date before the said Proclamation, shall remain in force
any longer than until the First day of May next; but the other Passes in the
Form thereby established, shall upon demand, and without charge be delivered
forth by the Secretary of the Admiralty for the time being to the parties
interessed therein, upon security by them given for delivering up their former
Passes to the Lord High Admiral or the Lords Commissioners for executing the
Office of Lord High Admiral, within six months after their receiving such new
ones; if there shall appear an evident necessity of sending Passes to any other
Ships now in the Streights then English built Ships or Foreign built Ships made
free, the same shall be done with the utmost strictness of Examination touching
the Propriety of such Ships, and in order only to their coming out of the
Streights and return home; and Bond to be given accordingly in your Majesty's
name with one good surety to such person as shall be appointed by the Lords
Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, to
receive the same: In the sum of fifty pounds penalty if such Ship be under the
Burden of 100 Tons, and in the penalty of 100 li. if such Ship be of the
Burden of 100 Tons or more, for the delivering up the said Passes within the
time to be expressed in the Condition of the said Bonds, unless in case of
Shipwreck or Capture.

SEcondly, And for the better preventing the fraudulent procuring such Passes
for the future, that the following Rules and Directions be duly and punctually
observed and put in execution by the Lord High Admiral or Lords Commissioners
for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral.

1. That no Pass be granted in pursuance of those Treaties in any parts of the
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick, but by the Lords
Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral.

2. No such Pass to be granted to any Ships but English-built Ships or Foreign
built Ships made free, until further Order.

3. No Pass to be granted to any Ship that is not in some Port of England,
Wales, or Berwick, or some Member or Creek thereof, at the time of granting
such Passes.

4. No Pass to be granted to any Ship, whereof the Master is not His Majesty's
Natural born Subject, and whereof two thirds of the Mariners are not English.

5. No Passes granted in pursuance of the Treaties with Algiers, Tunis, and
Tripoly, are to continue in force according to His Majesty's late Proclamation
of the 22d. of December last (longer than the space of one year) from the date
of the said Passes, until further Order.

6. In case any Ship demanding such a Pass, shall be within the Port of London
at the time of demanding thereof, that it be not granted until she shall have
been first viewed by the Surveyor of the Act of Navigation or his Deputy, or
the Officer of the Navy especially appointed thereunto by the Lord High Admiral
or Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, and a Certificate produced from one of
them under their hands to the Lord High Admiral or Lords Commissioners, for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral; which Certificate is to be in the
same Form as the Certificates for English built Ships and Foreign built Ships
made free, for which Passes are demanded in pursuance of other Treaties: And in
case any Ship shall be in any of the Out-ports or in any Member or Creek
thereof, at the time of demanding such Pass; that upon notice thereof to the
Commissioners of the Customs from the Secretary of the Admiralty, the said
Commissioners shall thereupon write to the Collector of such Port, that he
cause the said Ship to be reviewed by the Deputy of the Surveyor of the Act of
Navigation, or by their Surveyor, where there is a Surveyor, or by the Officer
appointed by the said Collector for viewing of Ships; and that he return up the
like Certificate to the Commissioners under the hands of the Officer that shall
have surveyed her: which Certificate shall be by the said Commissioners
transmitted to the Lord High Admiral; and no Pass to be granted to such Ship
until this is done.

7 That before the granting of any such Pass the Master of such Ship make such
Oath as is to be taken by Masters of Ships demanding Passes for English built
Ships or Foreign built Ships made free, or in pursuance of any other Treaties.

8. That the Form of such Passes which is hereunto annexed, be printed upon a
certain size of Parchment, and that no other be made use of; that so they may
be distinguished from all other Passes.

9. That a perfect Register be kept by the Lord High Admiral or Lords
Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral, of all Passes
granted by them; and that the said Register be kept distinct from the Register
which shall be kept by them in pursuance of any other Treaties; and that such
Register be strictly kept and do express all the particulars in the Certificate
of the Officer that viewed such Ship, and in the Oath of the Master.

10. That care be taken to give speedy notice into Scotland and Ireland, and to
the Governor of Tangier, etc. That Passes by virtue of these Treaties, are to
be granted only by the Lord High Admiral of England, or Lords Commissioners for
Executing the Office of Lord High Admiral.

All which is humbly summitted Danby. Bridgwater. Craven. Coventry. J.
Williamson. Rob. Southwell.
WHich being Read and Considered at the Board, His Majesty was pleased to
approve thereof, and did order, That the Lords Commissioners for Executing the
Office of Lord High Admiral of England, do cause the said Rules to be duly and
punctually observed and put in Execution. John Nicholas.

FORM of the PASS in pursuance of the TREATIES with ALGIERS, TUNIS, and
TRIFOLY. By the Lords Commissioners for Executing the Office of Lord Hgh
Admiral of England.
SUffer the Ship ^ to pass with her Company, Passengers, Goods, and
Merchandises, without any Let, Hindrance, Seizure, or Molestation; The said
Ship appearing unto Us by good Testimony to belong to the Subjects of Our
Sovereign Lord the King, and to no Foreigner. This Pass to continue in force
for one whole year from the date hereof, and no longer.

Given under Our Hands and the Seal of Our Office of Admiralty at ^ the ^ day
of ^ in the year of Our Lord One thousand six hundred seventy ^ To all Persons
whom these may concern. By Command of the Lords.

Directions to Masters of Ships and others concerned, whither to repair for
Passes, in pursuance of the respective Treaties between His Majesty and his
Allies. Together with the Fees payable at the respective Places where such
Passes are to be granted.
Denmark
PAsses in pursuance of the Treaty with Denmark, for all England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the rest of His Majesty's Dominions, are to be under His Majesty's
Royal Signature, to be procured by the Secretary of State.

Mediterranean.
Asses or Sea-briefs in pursuance of the Treaties with Algiers, Tunis, and
Tripoly, are to be had for all England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the rest of
His Majesty's Dominions, from the Lords Commissioners for Executing the Office
of Lord High Admiral of England, sitting at Derby-House.

Spain.
PAsses in pursuance of the Treaties with Spain and the United Provinces, are
the same word for word.

Those Passes which concern Spain are only to be had from the Commissioners of
the Customs.

Holland.
But those relating to Holland, may be had either from the Lords Commissioners
appointed to execute the Office of Lord High Admiral of England, or from the
Commissioners of the Customs in London; and in both these Cases for the
Out-Ports from the Chief Magistrates in such places in each Out-Port as are
appointed by His Majesty's Order in Council of the Tenth instant to grant the
same; which are,

LONDON,
Dover, Rye, Chichester, Southampton, Poole, Weymouth, Lime Regis, Exon,
Dartmouth, Plymouth, Fowy, Falmouth, Penzance, Barnstaple, Bridgwater,
Minehead, Bristol For the Ports of Bristol and Gloucester, Swanzey, Milford,
Colchester, Ipswich, Yarmouth, Lynn Regis, Boston, Hull, Stockton, Sunderland,
Newcastle, Berwick, Whitehaven, Lancaster, Leverpool, Chester, Beaumaris.
Sweden.
PAsses in pursuance of the Treaty with Sweden, are likewise to be had in
London from the Commissioners of the Customs, and in the Out-Ports from the
Chief Magistrates in such places in each Out-Port as are appointed by the
aforesaid Order to grant Passes.

Fees for Passes, Oaths, Certificates, etc. to be moderated as follows.
For a Pass signed by His Majesty, pursuant to the Treaty with Denmark, xx s.
For a Pass signed by the Commissioners of the Admiralty xxv s.
For a Pass procured at the Custom-House; Viz.
For the Certificate of the Surveyor of the Navigation ij s. vi d. xvii s. vi
d. For the Certificate and Oath of the Master vi d. xvii s. vi d. For the Pass
in Parchment xii s. vi d. xvii s. vi d. For the Bond xii d. xvii s. vi d. For
the Search and Registering xii d. xvii s. vi d. For the Certificate from the
Lord Mayor of London, pursuant to the Treaty with Denmark x s.
For a Pass procured in the Out-Ports, Viz.
For the Certificate of the Surveyor of the Navigation ij s. vi d. x s. For the
Certificate and Oath of the Master vi d. x s. For the Pass in Parchment v s. x
s. For the Bond xii d. x s. For the Search and Registering xii d. x s. For the
Certificate from the Chief Magistrate of any of the Out-Ports, in pursuance of
the Treaty with Denmark, v s.
FINIS.

