blazon or coat of arms incorporating the Commonwealth Flag (1649-1651)AN ACT
and DECLARATION OF THE Parliament of England, Touching a Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Declaration by the Kings Majesty, To His Subjects of the Kingdoms of Scotland,
England and Ireland. Printed at Edinburgh, 1650.
THe Parliament of England having seen and read a Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Declaration by the Kings Majesty, to his Subjects of the Kingdoms of SCOTLAND,
ENGLAND and IRELAND, Printed at Edinburgh, 1650. Do find therein a Design of
Charles Stuart, the Declared King of Scotland, by the instigation of the State
and Kirk of that Kingdom, under a Pretense of Humiliation for his own and his
Fathers Opposition to the Work of Reformation, and Solemn League and Covenant,
to seduce the People of this Nation from their due Obedience to this present
Government; and to invite them, by promoting his pretended Interest here, not
only to embroil this Nation in new Troubles, by a bloody and intestine War;
thereby, as much as in them lies, taking away all Hopes of a settled Peace in
this Commonwealth, but also to make themselves instrumental to inthral
themselves again in Tyranny and Slavery, from which they have been, through the
Blessing and glorious Appearances of God, so happily Redeemed. And however the
Parliament have reason to believe, That no pious or judicious person can
possibly be deluded under such gross Deceits, to contribute such an Assistance
as in that Declaration is called for, and which would most undoubtedly end (if
the Lord prevent not) in the Destruction of the truly godly in both Nations,
and the Betraying of that Cause that has been Engaged in by them:
Nevertheless, they have Resolved, for the better Information and Satisfaction
of the People of this Land, more largely and particularly to Unmask, and
Discover the Hypocrisy and wicked Design lodged under the specious Pretenses
in that Declaration: And in the mean time, Do Enact and Declare, That all and
every person and persons whatsoever, who shall abet or countenance the said
Declaration, by Printing or publishing the same, or by promoting or prosecuting
the Design or Ends therein contained, is, and are hereby Adjudged and Declared
to be guilty of High Treason, and shall be proceeded against as Traitors.

Die Mercurii, 28o Augusti, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act and Declaration be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1650.


