AN EARNEST EXHORTATION TO A TRVE NINIVITISH REPENTANCE. Wherein is briefly
declared: 1. What true Repentance is. 2. How a man should perceive it wrought
in him. 3. Exhortation to a due examination of every ones self. 4. A right
penitential Prayer. 5. The Bars which hinder Christ's working in the soul. 6.
What true and living Faith is.
Also two Questions resolved: 1. From whence WAR does spring. 2. By what
means it ends.
Together with other considerable matter fit for the times.

PER CHRISTVM TESTOR,
ANTI-CHRISTVM ASPERNOR.
LONDON: Printed by T. P. and M. S. and are to be sold by Ben. Allen in Popes
Head Alley. 1643.

TO ALL MEN DEDICATED:
And published by a Lover of TRUTH,

THat they might heartily try and examine themselves in this troublesome and
miserable time; so, that each one might begin to enter into himself, and there
make a narrow search; whether he be in CHRIST and CHRIST in him; or whether he
be united to the World, the Devil, and his own Flesh and Blood. Whether Light
or Darkness have dominion in him and over him, for his servant he is and shall be
whom he obeyes, whether of Sin unto Death, or Righteousness unto Life
everlasting.

REPENT ACCORDING to the Repentance of Niniveh.
O Beloved Man! who so ere thou art, consider seriously in thy heart and mind,
thy present external and internal estate and condition; have thou ever had
any cause to Repent? did thou ever do? or leave undone any thing unadvisedly?
did thou ever repent thereof? seriously examine thy self, and help thy self
thus.

Quest. What is Repentance?

Ans. Repentance is a divine work in Man, whereby GOD makes known to him, that
he has forsaken GOD, and his holy will, in the inward ground of his soul, and
has turned himself from the All-in-all enlightening Light of Grace, CHRIST
JESUS; and through his own mind and fleshly-Will rejected the government of the
Holy Ghost; and yet imagined himself by his accustomed outward worship and
assumed name of Religion, to be a right true Christian, although he evidently
lived in the love of the world, in fleshly lust, and in spiritual and
corporal pride. For which subtlety and all other deceits of the crafty
Serpent, GOD works in Man an hearty sorrow and repentance, for complying with
GODs enemy; So that a man by divine Grace begins openly to acknowledge such
heavy and inward fall, and departure from GOD, and his holy will, bitterly to
lament the same, and in very earnest to hate his accustomed internal Idolatry
committed with the world, flesh and blood, and with the proud and holy-seeming
Devil, and so to forsake, relinquish, and abandon the same: That when he is
tempted either inwardly or outwardly; he then by the living power of CHRIST
within him, resists, fights, subdues, conquers and overcomes, and thus he
lets the new penitential Light appear without selfnesse or arrogancy, and
shine forth to the Glory of the most holy name of God, and the edifying and
amendment of his neighbor, in a right divine Love, according to the example of
CHRIST, without any selfnesse, for by the divine Repentance (which is true
godly sorrow) all selfnesse will at last be totally mortified and swallowed up.

From hence arises another Question.

2. Quest. How may a man know that such Repentance wrought by GOD, is in him?

Answ. By the inward and outward Combat which he has daily and continually
with the enemies of Christ (who is his Head) and overcomes their assaults. Also
when he is outwardly tempted by the world, by its deceitful Riches,
transitory treasures, and by getting of the reputed necessary provision of
silver and gold, whereupon the Heart would rely, if need should be, or else
leave it to his Children: that then in faith he makes void and quenches such
darts of the world and says: Ah thou deceitful world with thy seeming Riches
and vain glory; I thank God through Jesus Christ who has redeemed me from thy
love, and stirred up in me a Love to the heavenly Treasure, which neither
temporally nor eternally will forsake me; Which when I have and keep, I shall
then truly possess that which can and will keep, maintain, and preserve me for
ever.

If the World with its Honor, Reputation, Greatness, or else with Contempt,
Despite and Reproach, begins to exalt it self against holy conformity to the
Cross of CHRIST JESUS, which follows upon this Repentance, when a man will not
conform himself to the world any more, nor join with it, in fleshly sports, and
sinful works; then the penitent soul is ready in Faith and says: Avoid!
away! I know not of any honor, greatness, delight, sport, or pleasure, but
what I have in and by Christ, and the Conformity with his Cross, whereby the
world with all its honor, etc. is crucified to me, and I to the world against
all inward, spiritual, and bodily Temptations and assaults; namely, 1. against
the bodily; as cares for food and maintenance, grief for loss of temporal
things, covetousness, lusts, desires, and briefly in all and with all things
wherewith the old Adam will delight, content, and cherish himself, or be
lusty, wanton, and alive (for all these things are in the eyes of God an
abomination, whatsoever the sons of Babel will prate and fable to the
contrary, it being so that God will have the old Adam killed through Christ,
in his lusts, words and actions, and by no means cherished.) Thus speaks the
repentant Soul, I am buried with Christ after the old nature of the flesh, so
that I neither may nor can, shall nor will, live any longer therein, but in the
New Life which is Jesus my Savior, I will serve God with fear and trembling,
in holiness and righteousness (which is such a delight as remains for ever)
and thus I will be a cross to my fleshly Tabernacle, as it in its Lusts is a
Torment to me, wherefore I bear also a longing desire, for its laying aside,
and to be rid of it.

2. Against the spiritual Temptations, as when the Devil persuades the soul,
that she is a far gloriouser, beautifuller, and better endued Spouse then
others, and that now all is so well with her that there is neither need nor
occasion of Fear; she may also now judge, despise, and condemn those that
speak any thing dissonant from her, or else are not as it were subject to her,
nor will not suffer themselves to be molded in her frame, to brand all those,
with Heresy, anathematize, curse and condemn them: that God would easily
connive and wink at her, she being the Spouse of Christ, although perhaps she
failed now and then, or went beyond the bounds, etc.

Here we must observe that it is impossible for a man to understand and
perceive all the Devils subtilties and crafty stratagems, unless God reveal
them to him, and in Christ defend him from them, so that they may not hurt the
soul.

Against these crafty assaults of the Devil, thus speaks the repentant and
believing Soul, I am Nothing, a poor wretched, miserable and distressed worm,
therefore I have no reason at all to exalt my self, for what my Head and
Husband CHRIST bestows on me, are of mere Grace which ought to work in me
Humility; and acknowledgement of mine unworthiness (that I am not worthy of
them) and in no wise work in me Pride, nor any Propriety or puffing-up.
Therefore avaunt Satan with thy subtlety and deceit, for thou art a Thief and
a Robber of the due honor of my LORD JESUS CHRIST, to whom only is due all
honor and not to me: and for that reason whosoever will honor me, is and
shall be mine enemy.

O beloved Man, in this manner (thy repentant enlightened soul considered) thou
art as yet in an evil Inn or Lodging, where no good days do shine, but
strife upon strife, battle upon battle, storm upon storm, of which state
the Scripture clearly testifies, that no man should be secure, but continually
examining and proving of himself, and encountering with, and courageously
resisting his enemies, lest he be sifted, deceived, foiled and overthrown by
the Devil, stirred up to unprofitable words and works by his flesh and blood,
and ensnared by the Love of the World, for if any of these Images possess thy
soul, then Christ is expelled, and has in thee no form.

Perform, O Man, what actions soever thou will outwardly, yet it is but as the
Scripture terms it untempered mortar.

Let every man after this manner try and search himself now, whether his
hitherto practiced Repentance has been divine and true; namely so, that the
old Adam is thereby truly disturbed, crucified, mortified, and Christ really
conceived, formed, born, grown, and become perfect in his soul; all which, O
Man, thou must in power feel and find in thee, and not know it according to thy
Reason out of the holy Scriptures or mouth preaching, for that is but a
knowledge without feeling, a History without experience, and a word without
power.

3. Therefore in the third place, I earnestly exhort every man in particular,
in the name of God, to examine duly, and to look narrowly to himself in these
times of the righteous and burning wrath of God, whether he be a sincere
Christian, such a one as in the Love of God is powerful and active, or else a
mere verbal or mouth-Christian, a knower, talker, and no doer, as alas, alas,
the general custom of most men is. For, O babbling Babel, thou art according
to thy imaginary Faith, not spiritually rich, though thou know the holy
Scriptures and its natural or rational exposition, and art able to speak
thereof eloquently, and after a Philosophical manner wittily to argue and
dispute. Thou art not thereby spiritually fed nor refreshed, although thou
usest the outward Sacraments after thy accustomed manner.

Truly thou perswadest thy self in vain, as if nothing else were requisite to
accomplish thy Christianity, then an imputation of the merits of Jesus Christ,
and that in thine open transgressions, sinful courses, Adultery, Sorcerie,
and Idolatry: For it is evident that thou in this thy worship or Religion art
very wretched, blind, poor, and wholly bare or naked of the Righteousness
which God approves, yea it is evident to thee, by the Plagues of Gods
righteous wrath, and the consuming punishments which never have missed, but
always have followed upon a false and (before God) frivelous Religion, which
punishments also even for that cause now adays bear full sway.

(For the true Religion has never from the beginning of the world stirred up
Rods of wrath, but works Patience in the fatherly chastisements and outward
persecutions for Christ's holy Names sake, and hearty Thanksgiving for the
Conformity with Christ's Cross; therefore if the world suffered in a good
conscience for the confession of Jesus, then were her case and condition good.)

Therefore, O thou Babell, rise up from thy false foundation, leave thy
spiritual Pride, wherein thou imaginest as if thou were a true, pure, and sin
free unspotted Spouse of Christ, and stoodst in the power of the New birth, and
Regeneration of the holy Spirit, in holiness and righteousness, in an
obedient faithful service, with due fear and trembling, as unalterablie (or of
necessity) becomes the Spouse of Christ, before God the heavenly Fathers
presence. Ah thou sinful stinking and loathsome Whore, lay down and submit thy
self with Nineveh before God in humility of Heart, with acknowledgement of all
thy committed whoredoms and pollutions with the Creatures and thy strange
Lovers, lie down in the sackcloth and ashes of deepest and lowest unworthy,
that God may no further uncover thy shame and ignominy in the Judgment of his
wrath; but out of his grace, may work in thee true Repentance; And then
thereupon shall follow a right and true worship of God, proceeding from the
living Faith, divine Love and Righteousness, a holy Christian-like and
blameless Life. (for these two are so linked together, that that cannot
severally consist) and confequently the inward Peace and outward quietness,
even grace, goodness, mercy, happiness, life and blessing; as upon unbelief,
unrighteousness, voidnesse of Love, feigned Repentance, and outward false
worship of God (whilst the true internal foundation whereout the external
worship ought and must issue, is rejected and forsaken (as John Arnt in his
third Book of true Christianity plainly lays open) and thereby are practiced
the Heathenish, yea worse then Devilish life and conversation, etc. War,
Plague, Famine, and other punishments and afflictions threatened by God, are
sprung up in all places, among that people which call themselves the people of
GOD, and carry themselves also outwardly as if they were such indeed, boasting
themselves highly to be Christians by their imaginary Faith, which they
themselves have learned by their own power; and also by the outward Religion
which flows from the former: and all this in a fiery Zeal or Heat (yet
altogether without the moving or driving Power of GOD to it) in their Churches,
Prayers, Singings, Sermons, Communions, or Almesgivings, etc. and yet are
altogether estranged from the Life of Christ according to the Power and Truth
of it, both inwardly and outwardly, as by comparison will evidently appear to
every one, when he will make it without the flattery and adulation of the old
man, in a right due and Christian-like trial and examination of himself.
Therefore this conceited world might well begin betimes, duly and otherwise
then hitherto has been done, to examine its customarie Religion, its pretended
Christian faith, communion in the Spirit, especially by this burning wrath of
GOD, and yearly increasing terrible Destruction, from their heart, even from
their very heart stirring up themselves to turn to God in the right way and
manner of Nineveh, not imaginary as if those Villages, Cities and Countries in
Germany, and elsewhere, that have perished already in Gods wrath, were more
wicked then those which are yet in a tolerable state and condition in respect
of their outward prosperity. No verily, no, For if the remaining Towns,
Cities, Countries and Dominions do not soon, even very soon (for the time of
Life to Repentance passes and hastes with greatest speed to an end) bring
forth true and upright fruits of Repentance, (for with false and seeming fruits
God will not be baffled off nor appeased) and with Nineveh humble your selves
from your very Heart unfeignedly, and prostrate your selves down before the
highly displeased God, or else you shall perish in a more terrible manner: for
the slowlier, the sharper and severer the Judgment of God will break forth,
which no going to Church, Preaching, or hearing of Sermons shall divert (though
ye should use and practice them daily according to your accustomed manner, as
other Nations in other places have done, and yet for all that are ruined) but
bring upon you the like judgment as other confumed Countries and Regions have
felt, nay draw and hasten upon your selves a far heavier judgment.

Therefore he that yet will be advised and take counsel, let him arise and go
forth out of his own private little and fleshly Babell, and consequently also
out of the great and public Babel, lest he perish in them in body and soul:
For the wrath of the Lamb shall soon show it self in a right Lion-like
property against his mockers and despisers. Therefore let him kiss with true
and hearty penitential tears, him that may be kissed, lest he perish in his
own vain Way, and be thrown from bodily into everlasting Destruction. O thou
blinded Babel, be, I beseech thee, entreated for Gods sake, and for thine own
salvations sake, to relinquish that damnable Imaginarie-Belief, being but an
opinion prated into thee, as if thou suffer as a right and pure Spouse of
Christ, for the true Religion and right fear of God; for were it thou the Spouse
of Christ, and practiced the right and true Fear of God, without all doubt God
would be thy merciful Father, and not thy consuming fire: O how heartily would
Christ thy Head and thy Husband take care for thee, and cover thee in motherly
Love and tenderness under His Wings: Ah how would the Holy Ghost intercede for
thee with unspeakable Groanings, so that the Just Fire of Gods Wrath could not
thus consume thee: yea how heartily would thou rejoice if it should be the will
of God to baptize thee with the Baptism of the Cross, for the confession of
His Son, for as much as thou thereby should be made like unto the Image of
God.

But O Babell, thou art neither inwardly nor outwardly fashioned and framed in
the right form after Christ Jesus thy Lord and God: Ah thou Arch-whore,
wherefore imaginest thou thy self to be a Virgin, since thou art so thoroughly
impregnated and defiled with the Diabolical seed of Sin, that neither in thee
nor about thee, there is no appearance at all of any thing else to be seen or
heard, but sin, sin, sin: O remember, how by thy kingdom of sin thou shall
together with thy Paramour the Devil, (by whose instigation and motion thou
do plead so hard for the cursed kingdom of sin in thee, and not so much as de
firest once, through Christ to become perfectly Righteous and without sin, but
wilt to the utter Contempt of His Holy Merits, use thy Savior as a daily
servant of sin:) be cast into the pit of Hell, with a double hellish torment,
for all thy crying and saying: Lord, Lord, and for all thy Preaching,
Prophesying, Signs and Wonders, etc. and then thou shall rightly and really
perceive and know whether (as Babell says:) Christ cannot choose but love the
wicked and malicious sinners, whom He both threatens and also makes to feel
woe, woe temporally and eternally.

Now he therefore that will escape the place of torment temporally and
eternally, let him in right earnest without any hypocrisy and simulation
direct his Heart to God, pouring it out, and all that is in it, wholly and
fully before him, lamenting and saying for himself and for others with a broken
heart and contrite spirit, bitterly, heartily, and moanfully, thus:

O Thou great God, and terrible LORD of Hosts: Ah we Men have sinned, we have
committed unrighteousness, and have been ungodly, we are wholly revolted from
Christ Jesus our inward Living Fountain, whereby we are totally departed from
thy Commandments and statutes, and are become sinners deserving nothing but
punishment. Ah Lord, our Teachers, Princes and Rulers, and all the people have
so trespassed against thee, that they have forsaken thine inward Law, and
Testimony, transgressed thine outward Covenant, neglected thy Voice, nor would
hear the same in them, but have sought all from without, and are thereby become
so unprofitable, that there is scarce one that does good, yea not one; and yet
we will not learn to be ashamed, that thy beloved Son Christ Jesus is rooted
out of his true inward Church, Temple and Dwelling, nor freely and openly
confess and acknowledge these our great sins, and horrible transgressions
(that thereby thou might be again reconciled to us in and by Christ (the
only Mean of Reconciliation and unition with thee the living God) and turn thy
countenance to us in grace through the Mercie-Seat) which we by the new
extirpation of him out of our souls have more horribly committed, then ever the
Jews did by the outward crucifying of him: Nay we plaster over such our
misdoings with our outward customary worship of God, by which we moreover
wickedly varnish over our heathenish, ungodly, yea altogether Diabolical life
and doings with a manifestly pernicious and damnable doctrine, as though we
could not choose even in and by the New Birth otherwise but be sinners, and to
deserve punishment, whereas by the testimony of the holy Scripture, through the
true and new Regeneration (which is wrought by Christ Jesus in us by the
effusion or imparting of his holy Spirit) we must be purged from sins, freed
from all punishments of wrath to serve God in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our life; and to walk in fear and trembling before his presence,
which is the perfection of the true Christians in Christ Jesus their Head in
this Time of Grace. But whilst that we, as did the Jews, reject the inward
Circumcision and Baptism, and rely on the outward covenant in our open
sinful courses and fleshly doings according to the first birth, therefore thy
just curse, and hideous execration on all sides lights upon us, O righteous
God, in that thou have sent such miseries upon us that are but Name and
Mouth-Christians, and outward Religionists, wherein many are already languished
both in body and soul; yea O righteous God, thou art ready in thy just anger
to send yet greater plagues upon us, for the vials of thy wrath stand prepared
to be effused upon us who are not yet right Christians, but godless revolting
children, who yet still as thou (according to thy righteous judgments)
afflictest, plaguest and punishest us, we add more and more to our
backslidings, that so we may be destroyed from the earth, and our Name be never
any more remembered.

O God heavenly Father, seeing that from thy Grace, Goodness and Mercy all
(things) spring, and all good Gifts have yet their original, and must through
Christ flow into us: therefore mollify we beseech thee, through the power of
thy Spirit our stony Hearts; break them to pieces, by thy true sorrow,
Contrition and Repentance, which thou thy self workest in Men. O, bruise them
so, that they may come to a true knowledge of their sins, and in a sincere
penitencie lay themselves down before thee in a sorrowful and continual
prayer, crying, seeking, knocking, and not leaving off in their repentant
Lamentation. Ah Lord mark: Ah Lord hear: Ah Lord be gracious: Ah Lord mark: Ah
Lord delay not for the honor of thy Name sake: for thou art our Creator, and
we the work of thy hands. O Father, thou know that after thy Name we are
called, wherefore will thou then thus utterly destroy us, that we be no more a
People: Ah righteous God, this have we merited by our sins, that thou in
justice should everlastingly cast us from thy sight, for all our doings in
and with our wonted external Religion or formal God-service (it proceeding
not out of the Living Faith, Spirit and Truth: forasmuch as the inward
powerful office of the holy Spirit is (alas) ascribed to the outward
Ministry, and thereby all is perverted and subverted) they are in thy sight,
O righteous God, a truly polluted and defiled thing, much more odious then Dung
and Filth, wherefore thou (O holy God) throwest in wrath the dung or dirt of
our holy days, and the noise of our Songs and Psalms back into our faces: Ah
that we were not so hard hearted, but that we might perceive that the Curse
instead of the Blessing on all fides pursues us. O Father we turn us to thy
bottomless Mercy, which is greater then all our sins, and cry heartily to it,
that thou would not enter into Judgment with us, nor lay the sin to our
charge, for we can answer nothing else, but this: Ah Father, we have sinned,
and our sins are more then the sand of the Sea, which have (alas) separated us
from one another, and brought woe upon us, because we have cast out of us and
rejected the Throne of Mercy with its Office, and have adhered to Idols and
humane Traditions: O God of all grace and goodness, forgive us, we beseech
thee, our great sins, and be gracious to us. Oh have mercy, upon us, for we are
but dust, ashes and earth, wherefore then should we be thus utterly consumed in
thy wrath without all Mercy.

O most loving Lord Jesus Christ, look upon that great calamity and
destruction with thy Love-replenished Heart, which thy Father in his just
displeasure has determined now to let pass upon whole Mankind, the like
whereof never has been under heaven before, nor shall be the like for ever
hereafter, seeing that the wickedness of the present world also far
exceedingly surpasses all the ungodliness heretofore practiced from the
beginning of the world, therefore the judgment shall light so much the more
heavily, and hidcously upon the hard hearted, and deriding Mockers and
despisers.

O thou only Mediator, intercede thou for us out of mere grace and mercy,
fot without thee there is no means to be found, neither in heaven nor earth,
betwixt thy Father and us poor, miserable and forsaken people. O intercede!
thou only right and true Intercessour, seeing thy heavenly Father does at all
times hear Thee. O thou hearty Friend of Men, let this move thee to
compassion, that men, for whose cause thou becamest man, should wholly be
ruined, and destroyed, and that thine Inheritance which thou have redeemed with
thy rosy red Blood, should become a spoil and prey to thine enemies. Ah we
perceive, mark and find that by reason of the new crucifying of thee, thou will
exercise vengeance upon vengeance through Heaven and Earth, upon men and
beasts: Ah we have really deserved that the pit of darkness should swallow us
up everlastingly as right fuel for that hellish fire, because we have indeed
loved Darkness more then Thee the true Light, when thou would inwardly
aright have enlightened us, and revealed thy kingdom in us, therefore we
deservedly also reap our unfruitful works of darkness, and shall in Hell
smart for it according to thy righteousness and judgment, and have nothing to
say against it. But, O God thou blessed holy Spirit, who have thy chiefest
delight in and among the children of Men, to heal them again, to sanctify
them, and to purge them from sins, O hide not thy self now in this time of
extremity and urgent calamity, because that we have grieved thee, and
expelled thee with our reigning sins. O thou Divine Flame of Love, assist our
cold hearts with unspeakable sighs: Ah mediate: Ah intercede, Ah kindle our
hearts with a true fervent and hearty sorrow and repentance, that we may not
so unawares and suddenly be snatched away without all Mercy: Ah thou true
chastiser, chastise and reform our unnurtered Hearts: Ah thou only Enlightner,
enlighten thou, we beseech thee, our darkened hearts: Ah thou only Sanctifyer,
sanctify our unhallowed hearts. O thou true Cleanser, cleanse now out hearts
that are unclean and altogether defiled by the world, money, fleshly lust, and
spiritual pride.

O thou true Circumciser, circumcise our wholly uncircumcised hearts.

O thou only true Converter, turn to day out of thy mere grace and mercy, and
convert our perverted hearts, for without thy gracious drawing and powerful
operation in us, we are able to do nothing: therefore thou only true worker of
the will and the deed, make thou to day, to day the beginning in ours and all
men's hearts to a true and cordial Ninivitish Conversion. For if thou turnest
us, we are rightly turned and converted from our ways, so that we do truly
repent, and cease to sin, relinquish the world, hate the flesh and blood, and
fight in thy strength against the subtle assaults of the world, the flesh and
the devil, and obtain the victory, and not in a deceitful way make a show of
holiness for a day, as if we therein were become religious men, according to
the customary, natural, seeming, Mouth-Repentance, and notwithstanding all
this, remain inwardly the very former sows and dogs, and in the days to come
show forth plainly the same properties of sows and dogs, and upon a new
pretended Remission, sin afresh again; and think to plaster over again
outwardly such works of the Flesh with a Sacrament, not considering that such
use of it is turned to a double torment in hell for them, for no Remission is
ordained for such Hypocritical Repentance, but Hell and everlasting damnation.

Come, O come thou true Divine Flame of Love, and guide us to the true divine
worship, and pierce to day our souls with the true beams of thy grace, whereby
all accustomed hypocrisy, false holiness, Phatisaicall godliness and the
fair external glistering show, being nothing but a mere Devils cloud may
vanish, for these are and for ever shall be an enmity with thee the
everlasting, true, and living God.

O thou most clear and shining splendor, enlighten thoroughly our hearts, that
the holy seeming Devil, and the deceitful selfnesse and arrogancy may be
truly expelled. O thou sole inward Teacher, and outward True witness of the
Divine Truth, teach all men inwardly aright to know Christ Jesus, and in thy
power to call him Father in truth O thou Director to the true path and only
Way to salvation, which is Christ Jesus the Son of the All-praised God in his
Body, namely, the Church of the Saints; Ah lead us, we beseech thee, in the
right union to him, forasmuch as we are, alas! by the instigation of the spirit
of error so far separated, and so miserably disjoynted from one another, that
out of the scattered multitude, that true and promised One may in right unity
and sincere brotherly love again arise: O thou only Apprehender, lay hold upon
us to day with the hand of thy grace, and bring us again into the essential
heavenly paternall country of Grace, that we may there altogether spend the
remainder of our earthly life with fear and trembling, and serve thee the
eternal God unblameably in holiness and righteousness from our whole heart.

Ah thou only Looser, loose and untie to day poor mankind from the hideous
snares, bonds and chains of the holy-seeming Devil, and all his instruments,
which change themselves into Angels of Light, and thereby violently ruin and
destroy poor Mankind. O thou the true Destroyer, destroy the kingdom of sin in
us wholly, quench the lust rising in the flesh: conquer the world with its
deceitful Treasures, kill and crucify the flesh, refrain and stay all that,
which exalts it self against the inward essential knowledge, and from
thence-springing open confession.

O open the eyes of our soul, that she may lift up her self to the Mountain,
from whence the quickening and for ever refreshing delight, joy and comfort does
spring, and flow, that she always may long after the same. O loose the inward
spiritual ear, that it may truly hear Christ's word and voice, that it may
stand open to all the works, wonders and deeds of God, and always stopped and
close to all vain talk, unprofitable words, and jests, unmeet for Christians to
hear. Untie the tongue, that she may be thy holy pen, and no instrument of the
seducing and (with the old Adam) flattering devil any more.

O untie our hands, that they may in right true and unfeigned love give to the
right and truly poor and needy, of the right blessing of God, and not of that
Mammon, which by covetousness, exaction, extortion, and under the color of
righteousness is hoorded up, which does at this present time tie fast the
hearts and hands of men in all states with such a powerful dominion, that they
are not able truly to lift up themselves to God, being they are full of the
blood of Lazarus.

O thou only Renewer, amend thou and renew in us all in all, that we may even
at this day, while there yet remains time for Repentance (which will quickly
even very quickly be past, run out) that we so may become new living creatures
and children of God, brothers and sisters of Jesus Christ, and a living Church
and dwelling of thine (O God thou holy blessed Spirit) and not any more deceive
our selves with our outward accustomed assembling in the stony Churches (in
which the stony hearts, and so one stone goes to another) as though that were
the Comminalty of the Saints, and but gather our selves in the true and living
fellowship of thee O Spirit of God, in truth and the sincere bond of Divine
Love, and out of one Spirit, soul and heart, truly honor, praise and magnify
thee O only God.

Ah thou holy and for ever blessed Trinity, one only eternal God for ever,
be again merciful unto us, and spare us according to thy righteousness for
the dear Merits sake of Jesus Christ. Ah, out of thy mere grace renew in us the
Covenant of Grace, that we may again become thy people, and thou our God and
gracious Father. O manifest such a Covenant out of grace in all Teachers,
Princes and Rulers, and in the souls of all the people, and show unto them thy
wonderful goodness, O thou Savior of such as hope in thee: O God, let thy
countenance shine again in us, that we may be revived and enlivened in right
living power. O God incline thine ear unto us and heat us, for we are become
very small. O open the eyes of thy mercy upon poor Germany and Ireland, and
behold how lamentably it is destroyed, wasted, overflowne, made desolate, and
even wholly ruinated. O look upon this thou great God how through the
instigation of the three unclean prophetical spirits men afflict, torment,
marter, kill, slay, and devour one another, insomuch that the wild beasts in
their nature and race abhor such inhumain outrages.

O thou Archshepherd of Israel, awake and behold, how thy poor sheep are
scattered, and torn, and they that fear thee are also scattred and rushed away.
Ah God and Lord, let the blood of the poor and innocent sheep and lambs, which
do not know, wherefore they thus are torn by the spiritual and bodily woolves,
move thine angry heart, and once stir thee up to a merciful deliverance. O
let, we beseech thee, the promised help come out of Zion. Ah shorten the days
of the inward and outward desolation. O let, we beseech thee, the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah roar in power against the bloodthirstie and treacherous whom
thou, O righteous God, have in abomination, that they may be inwardly and
outwardly terrified and astonished, and may so with horror perish, according to
thy Judgment. O thou righteous God, crucify the Crucifiers of thy dearly
beloved Son. Ah recompense to them that afflict and torment him, Anguish and
Torment, and give to the Refractary-ones the thunder and lightning, the
brimstone and fire of Hell for their reward. O God stand up in thy power. Ah
Lord lift up thy self, we beseech thee, in thy strength. Wherefore shall the
ungodly exercise their worse then diabolical malitiousnesse and insolence upon
the poor and afflicted any further, and say in their hearts, and confirm and
show it with their deeds, as though there were no God, no deliverer, no more
any Helper of the poor and afflicted. Oh appear thou righteous Judge of the
earth, unsheath thy sword of Vengeance, and let it fully reach the blasphemers
and extortioners, that the abominable scorners may once perceive, that thou art
yet the righteous Judge upon earth, and have not yielded thy judgments to
mortal men to exercise them according to their own revenge, fullness, but have
in thy wrath, by reason of our unbelief, unrighteousness and wickedness,
wherewith we have offended Thee, suffered them to pass over us as a flood of
water to mollify us to Repentance, until thine anger be fulfilled. Therefore,
O God, convert us to day, and turn thy self against the vessels of thy wrath,
repay unto them double, what they have done to the poor and innocent, so will
we for it praise Thee with united hearts everlastingly, that thou in the midst
of thy wrath have yet remembered thy infinite goodness and mercy; and turned
thy self from thy wrath and our well deserved punishments, and have again mercy
upon poor mankind, and raised up a Savior unto them. O heavenly God and
Father, grant this our Prayer unto us for Christ his bitter death and
suffering, to a true Ninivitish Repentance and conversion, that the day of thy
promised Redemption may break in as a Lightning, and that the Jews and Heathen
may be gathered together in and to the Truth, Amen. Allelu-jah. Amen.

The Bars, which the Devil and the darkened Reason do set before the Souls,
that Christ cannot begin to work therein.
Ans. Hereby is Gods omnipotency, Christ's merit, and the Holy Spirits
inhabitation wholly made void, and greater power ascribed to the Devil in our
destruction, then to Christ in our Renovation, contrary to the tenor of the
holy Scripture, Romans 5. 6, 7, 8. 14. 1. Cor. 2. v. 16. Cap. 3. v. 17. 2. Cor.
3. v. 17. 18. Gal. 2. v. 20. Ephesians. 2. v. 5. 6. Epqes. 5. v. 27. etc. Now as
long as this Bar of doubt remains in thee, so long is Christ's kingdom shut
up in thee, and the kingdom of sin manifest, varnish it over outwardly how thou will, it will nothing at all avail.

2 Bar.
Answ. Verily hereby is Christ made a Minister of sin, contrary to the
testimonies of the holy Scripture, Gal. 2. v. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1. v. 30, 31. 2 Timothy 3. 17. Colos. 4. v. 12. Ca. 1. v. 28 Cap. 2. v. 10. and the Righteousness
of God slandered and blasphemed, Deuteronomy. 27. v. 26. Psalm. 5. v. 6. 1 John 3. v.
10. and his Grace wrested or drawn by licentiousness into a most damnable
abuse. Epist. Jud. v. 4. 14. and seq. 2 Pet. 2. v. 14. 1. Joh. 5. v. 2, 3. 1 John 2. v. 6.

3 Bar.
Ans. Hereby is Repentance (which is merely Gods work, and is not within the
comqasse of man's ability) Jer. 31. v. 18. 19. 2 Timothy 2. v. 25, 26. ascribed to
our natural powers, and by that means idolatry committed. And in the like
manner it is also with Prayer, for it is the only work of the holy Spirit,
Zach. 12. v. 10. Romans 8. v. 15. 26. 27. Joh. 14. and 15. Now God hears not
sinners, for they pray without the Spirit, which dwells in no soul that is
subject to sin, Wisd. 1. ver. 3, 4, 5.

4. Bar.
Ans. O happy desperation, which works a spiritual sorrow, 1 Cor. 7. v. 9,
10, 11. kills the old Adam wholly, Romans 6. v. 6. siq. Romans 8. v. 4. 19. Gal.
5. v. 24. makes the world with all its doings to a bitter Cross, Gal. 6. v.
14. Phil. 3. v. 8. 1 John 2. v. 15, 16. Matthew. 10. Luke 14. takes captive the
Reason, 2 Cor. 10. v. 5. makes a man become a child, Joh. 3. v. 3. a beast and
a fool, Psalm. 73. v. 22. yea a mere nothing, Gal. 6. v. 3. for a reasonlesse,
naturelesse, creaturelesse, worldlesse man, and freed from all vanity is fit
for the kingdom of God, and that is then the pure soul, wherein God dwells,
2. Cor. 6. v. 14. seq. Psalm. 18. v. 27. Psalm. 24. verse 4.

5 Bar.
Ob. Such men as these it is impossible to find in the world, therefore is it
foolishness, yea madness to require this of any man. Ans. He that is fleshly
minded must judge fleshly, and calumniate Gods work and truth, for he is an
enemy of the true Regeneration out of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. v. 10, 11. seq.
Romans 8. v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 73. v. 89. Gal. 4. v. 29. There is but a narrow
way to Lise, wherein for even very few and not many walk, Matthew. 7. v. 13. 14.
Luke 13. v. 23.

The sum of Christianity is this: That the old Man with his lusts and
desires must perish, 2 Cor. 4. v. 16. be killed, destroyed and drowned by
Regeneration, 1 Tit. 3. v. 5, 6. Romans 6. v. 6. and all become new, 2. Cor. 5.
v. 17. that Christ may be all in all, Colos. 3. v. 11. fill all in all, Ephe.
1. v. 23. and present every one perfect to the Father, Colos. 1. v. 28. Cap. 2.
v. 6. 10. Colos. 3. v. 34. Colos. 4. v. 12. 2 Timothy 3. v. 17.

THE SUM OF THE TRVE AND LIVING FAITH, and of all the Articles of the Belief.
The true and living Faith (O beloved Man) consists not in the knowledge of
the holy Scripture, which Moses, the Prophets and Apostles have left behind
them, nor in such Articles, which men have according to their reason collected
out of the holy Scripture, which a man can learn by heart, and fasten in his
memory, and then out of his natural power say and confess; this I believe:
for this truly is but the meet imaginary faith, wherewith all the world is at
this day bewitched, deceived and befooled, yea so far, that men go on to
defend this their says wrought by their own power by wrangling, contentions
and disputes, yea even by the sword, with the shedding of the blood of the
poor, and murdering of many innocent souls, which imaginary faith is the very
true inward abomination of desolation, from whence is also sprung the outward
desolation of Countries and people in the righteous wrath of God, which shall
continue, break forth, and make desolate so long as this unbeleef with its
manifest power of unrighteousness and cold LOVE bears sway.

The true Faith, (O dear Man) is a divine work or power of God in man, which
changes and regenerateth him out of God, truly kills the old Adam, and
makes a whole new man from the heart, mind and all his powers, and brings
with it the holy Spirit, wherethrough man becomes without sin, and keeps and
fulfilleth Gods Commandments, which to the believers are not heavy. For the
righteousness of Faith makes a man without sin, fully righteous before God,
so that he fears God, honors him as a Father, and loves him as a Lord,
from his heart, whole soul and all his powers, and his neighbor as himself, as
Luther described the true, but at this day very much unknown, Faith.

Now he that finds such power in truth in himself, and thereby does the will
of God, he is a true member of the household of Faith, a Religionist, a
Christian, an heir and child of God; but he that has not such a Faith, nor
suffers the fruits of love to grow and blossom, in a right godly and not
seeming-holy way or nature, he knows neither of Faith, Religion, nor
Christianity, yea of no God in truth, though he understood all the Scriptures,
all mysteries and Articles of belief, and could thereof talk and dispute
eloquently and rationally, even as an Angel of Light, yet is he in Gods sight
an unbeleever, a miserable and contemnable man, for he has not in him the
living power of the living Faith which always is fruitful in love, therefore
he talks and prateth much of Faith and its righteousness, yet he knows not
what either Faith or Faiths works are; whiles he does not find and feel them
experimentally inwardly in spirit and truth, nor outwardly shows his talking
and knowledge in deeds and works which God and good men may approve.

With such unprofitable Bablers is (alas!) at this day all the world
replenished, namely, with such as with open mouth cry, Lord, Lord; prophecy
and do signs and wonders, but fulfill and accomplish not the will of God in
power, all these are but external plaisterers, external cryers and seekers of
Christ and the Faith, despisers of the inward power of God, or of the living
Word, of Faith, and the whole kingdom of God in men, in whom and by whom is the
fulfilling of the Commandments, and also the true Christian freedom in
holiness and righteousness.

Therefore thou Faith-conceited Man, beseech God, that he would work this
living Faith in thee, and free thee from this damnable and wrath producing
imaginary faith, since that thou by this faith prated into thee have imagined
to thy self a freedom to sin, to transgress Gods Commandments, relying upon
Absolution according to thy accustomed manner, whereby alas! thou art verily
free but not from sin, as Christ's kingdom requires, but from God, and the
fulfilling of his will and the observation of his Commandments in perfect
obedience, and so art become truly a slave of Satan, 1 John 3. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.

Every one therefore that will be a master of Faith, let him behave himself as
a pattern unblameable inwardly, (by the office of the holy Spirit) in doctrine,
and outwardly in life as a follower of Jesus Christ; He that boasts of faith,
let him show the new obedience of faith by a new, righteous, holy and to
Christ-conformable life and conversation in the Love of God and his neighbor:
He that vaunteth of the Articles of Faith, let him show them forth in deed and
truth, for God is served neither with knowledge, babbling nor disputation, nor
yet the Church of the Saints, which overcomes all things with Love in
Patience, and consequently not with words, but with power.

Therefore O beloved Man that say, that thou beleevest in God, or but that
there is a God, make thy faith appear with true fruit in the strict observation
of his commandments, otherwise is thy saying vain, and thou in truth beleevest
on no God, nor that there is a God, for otherwise thou would tremble and
shake at the breach of his Commandments.

Thou that say I believe that Christ is dead for me, show then by thy self
in deed the death of Christ, namely, that thine old Adam is buried with him,
thy lust and desire is crucified with him, and thou risen again with Christ in
a new nature or life of the Spirit, otherwise is thy faith of Christ an
historical knowledge, without all power and property of Faith.

Thou that say, I believe a Church of Saints, which the holy Spirit
enlightneth, sanctifies, and purifieth: examine thy self, whether the holy
Spirit does inwardly enlighten, teach, chastise, admonish, anoint, guide,
govern, lead and direct thee, and thou also have by the power of the holy
Spirit the kingdom of God revealed in thee, so that thou resistest all that
exalts it self against Gods will, his knowledge and confession, through the
office or power of the holy Spirit, and that the tentation from the world,
flesh and blood, and wicked enemy, is a right hellish torment to thee, so then
art thou a true member of the true Church of Christ.

Say thou, O Man, so I am, for I am a baptized Christian; O beloved Man,
show forth the drowning of the old Adam, the mortification of his lusts and
desires, and the renuntiation which thou have made to the Devil, the World,
and the Flesh, in truth, so that they rule no more in thee, nor move thee to
sin, though they entice, stir, and egg thee on to it. Do thou not, or
find thou not this, so then art thou an unbaptized and unchristened man, for
thou live in the old and not in the new birth, therefore art thou a violator
of the Covenant of God.

Say thou, yet I partake of the flesh and blood of Christ: If thou partake
thereof, then show the living-making power of the flesh of Christ, and that the
blood of Christ has cleansed thee from all sins in words and works, so have
thou truly partaken of the flesh and blood of Christ, otherwise go thou to
the Lords Supper to thy double condemnation.

In sum, all the Articles must live sensibly in thee, and outwardly
demonstrate the living power of love, otherwise is thy Christianity mere
hypocrisy, seeming holiness, self chosen godliness and imaginary faith,
which do but further the destruction both of body and soul, as (alas) appears
before our eyes, and yet no man takes it to heart, or will duly examine
himself.

Two Questions very necessary concerning these present and continuing Wars.
viz. 1. From whence War does spring. 2. By what means it ends.
AS the inward exterpation (or rooting out) of Jesus Christ, with his holy and
threefold office in man's soul, (which, when she is obedient unto, and receives
him, he then as the true and only High Priest, perfectly reconciles,
sanctifies, cleanses, and presents her as a new creature to his heavenly Father
in holy attire of Love, and as the only Master and Teacher in her, sent from
the heavenly Father, makes her remember her misery, in penitencie chastises
her, instructs, teaches, guides and preserves her from the spirit of
error: and thus in her powerfully exercises his royal office, as her Head
and LORD, to the utter (ruin and) demolishing of the Devils Sin palace,
bruising the head of the subtle and holy-seeming Serpent, quenching and
suppressing of all that shall exalt it self against his inward kingdom of
grace, as also to the overcoming of all outward enemies through the Spirit of
Prayer, and his iron Rod or Scepter: and thus kills and crucifieth sin,
Death, the Devil, Hell, the Flesh and Blood, and break asunder the whole
kingdom of sin, so that it can no more bring under subjection or into darkness
the soul, which he has redeemed:) is the only cause of unbelief, and from
thence springing unrighteousness, wickedness, malice, hypocrisy, self-chosen
godliness, outward false worship of God, or Sectarie and Schismatical
religion, consisting merely and altogether in outward things, as external
ceremonies, Articles, and Opinions, without any true inward and experimental
fear of God, perfect obedience or keeping of Gods Commandments; and thus
without any true either inward or outward conformity to and with the life and
conversation of Jesus Christ (which properly is called and really is true
Religion, according to which these divided Religionists ought to prove and
examine their Name-Religions now adays): So also is the rejection or neglect
of this (placed by God in men) Foundation stone of all happiness, life,
blessing, peace and holiness, etc. the only cause of all inward and outward
Wars, jarres, miseries, calamities, desolation, destruction, confusion and
fundamental alteration of all the Foundations or Kingdoms of the Earth;
whereby it is come to pass, that men (which ought to be vessels of Jesus
Christ, that is, remain in the Love, grace, goodness and mercy of God, bear
one an other in the bond of Love, and be united each to other in the Spirit of
Peace:) turn and become fierce vessels of wrath, through hatred, envy,
enmity, desire of temporal honor, or perishable goods, raging even with
swords one against another, insomuch that the one falls by the others sword in
wrath and self-willed revengefulnesse, and thus the soul must come to her end
with horror; whereof the holy Scripture thus testifies: Since ye have
rejected him out of you, whom I have sent unto you and in you, viz. Jesus
Christ, the only Prince of Peace; Behold therefore I have slinged and cast you
out of my grace, life and blessing, into wrath, death and curse, and given you
up to do things that are naught and unseemly, full of unrighteousness and
ungodliness, yea I rejoce therein that one falls by the sword of the other, so
that Countries and people are made waste, and the Earth laid desolate. For this
is the effect and operation of the strong delusions wherewith I have threatened
you, when ye should forsake and suffer to be pulled out of you the King of
Truth, by whom I would have ruled you with the staff of meekness, and
directed the Rod or staff of woe against mine Enemies, which (staff) now for
the unbeleef, unrighteousness, and hypocucies sake, must begin at mine Own
House, and continue forwards, since there is no conversion or returning to me
or my living Fountain.

Therefore to day, to day, whilst ye hear my voice, and find the strokes of my
wrath, (which could not hit nor touch you, if my Child Christ Jesus had ruled
in you, and established anew again the inward peace betwixt Me and you; for we
are separated one from another by the kingdom of sin) go out of Babell, put
away the high places which in you have exalted themselves against the kingdom
of my Son, and erected outward Idoll-houses, and committed therein the
abomination of desolation, (according to my Sons prediction) through the motion
and deceit of the holy-seeming devil: that yet the inward temple of your souls
may be opened, and a pure, holy and righteous dwelling (in which I the LORD
your holy and righteous God may go out and in) may be prepared therein for Me,
through Christ Jesus; and so the inward peace be established: and then I will
according to my righteous judgment, give unto you all the Heathen and mine
Enemies, which would not kiss Christ, for a prey and spoil, that you may
according to my righteousness reward them double as they have deserved it of
me and my Son Jesus. He that has ears to hear let him hear: he that will not
hear, he shall feel it temporally and eternally, says the LORD God: For I am
strong enough to judge and avenge my self.

The principal causes why the Devil does make all Visions and Divine
Revelations contemptible and suspected, are these.
1. THat the extirpation of Jesus Christ and his holy Office in the Devils own
members might not be revealed and discovered to the world, which needs must
come to pass, if the Devils disciples or apostles should allow or approve the
works of the holy Spirits Office; of which the holy Scripture witnesses, 1 John 16. v. 13, 14. Amos 3. v. 7. Apoc. 1. v. 1. Joel 2. v. 28, 29. Phil. 3. v.
15. 1 Cor. 2. v. 10. Which works of the holy Spirits office, are no where
abrogated; and therefore a man has the more cause to observe and beware of the
Devils crafty subtlety, for he is a seeming holy Angel, as his Ministers now
adays in doctrine and life do sufficiently show, and therefore he cavilleth
and slandereth the Ministry of the true Angels and Gods works.

2 Secondly, that the Devils kingdom of darkness, which he has gotten in men
may not be discovered, (the which yet every man discerns and perceives by the
works of darkness which bear sway every where, and confesses that all things
are naught with the children of Men; yet notwithstanding none will go out of
this darkened Babel, lest he should loose the worlds friendship, its honor,
profit and love, etc. for it is a hard and troublesome thing for the old Adam,
and goes to his very heart, when he shall be counted a Fool and a Beast (which
he notwithstanding is, by his highest wisdom.) And to this scope all
exhortations do aim, viz. that men should turn again to God and his Son Jesus
Christ by true Repentance: Now to hinder this true Repentance, and to keep men
in security by their own hypocritical repentance, the Devil (thirdly) does
cavil and blaspheme, whatever God causes to be told, denounced, and declared:
For the same course and process is at this day in hand (with the worse) as was
taken with the first world, Sodom, Gomorrha, Jerusalem, and other Cities and
Countries which perished in the wrath of God, which also by the devils motion
and instigation despised all things, and relied upon their outward religion,
and their usual insolent and domineering government; and so by that means had
no regard at all to the Day of the Lord, which the servants of God were fain to
denounce unto them.

O ye spiritual and corporal buyers and sellers, O ye voluptuous eaters and
drinkers; O ye worldly and covetous planters and builders; O ye fleshly and
wanton woers, men and women: O ye stubborn and revolting children altogether,
will ye not at all have regard to the fearful Day of the LORDs wrath, unless
it overwhelme you as a Lightning, and destroy you from the earth; will ye not
learn to mark and observe by other men's harm and ruin the crafty subtlety of
the devil, and the deceit of his apostles, as from whom all calamity and
confusion has taken its original, for they are those that have caused the
poor people to sin, and established hypocrisy by their witchcraft and
idolatry; by which means the wrath of God has begun to burn, and shall not be
quenched until Babel be brought down and destroyed Now he therefore that will
not fall with her from temporal unto eternal death, let him erect and lift up
his head in Faith, observing and marking by all the works and signs of God,
that the Day of Redemption draws nigh, and is even before the door.

A Prayer for the Body of Jesus Christ in this troublesome and distressed time.
O Thou true and only Head of thy (in all the world dispersed) Church; Let to
day the noble Balsam of thy holy Spirit flow down in full power into thy
members, that through the pure and sincere Milk, the children may become young
men, young men through solid meat, perfect men, that we all may attain to the
measure of thy perfect Age, Be it, O Lord Christ Jesus; O let every member to
day be right fruitful in all works of Love which by thee are wrought in him to
the honor of thy Fathers Name. Let thy holy countenance shine in us, that
every member may in all necessities of soul and body be powerfully healed:
Arm every one with a new power of Grace, that he may be strong against all
high things, which exalt themselves against thy holy and inward Knowledge, and
outwardly resist it. Let the Light of the living Faith shine out of every one,
that people may see the works of thy inward Righteousness, enter into
themselves and receive thee into themselves the only Worker of all Good, that
to the dispersed Church some may be daily added and gathered. O thou true and
only Living Power of God, drive away and repel all spiritual and corporal
Wolves that they may not devour not snatch away any of thy Members; make void
all wicked counsel, which is consulted against thy Body, that the raging and
furious ones may perceive that all their consultations against thee are in vain.

O thou Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, work in every man out of
thy Grace the true knowledge of his sins, the total dying and the spiritual
resurrection to a new, holy and righteous life.

O LORD, Jesus, thou that therefore have appeared in all men, that thou
might destroy and raze the kingdom of darkness, and manifest thy kingdom
of Light and Grace in men, apprehend, we beseech thee, vanquish the old,
crafty and deceitful Serpent, bruise its head to the purpose, bind it with
the promised chains of Darkness, that it may cease to seduce people, in its
seeming light of holiness.

O God thou blessed holy Spirit, since that thine is the Office of Judgment
and Vengeance over all them that do evil, rise up in thy Power; arm thy self
with might, and utterly cast down them that revile and blaspheme thy holy
Office: Turn away ungodliness with the Scepter of Iron, since that few or none
from his heart will kiss the Child Jesus: O let thy help break forth out of
Zion: Ah redeem thy poor distressed people: Unite Heathen and Jews, make one
Sheepfold, and let the Everlasting Gospel shine therein, to the glory of thy
holy Name, Amen.

BE IT SO.
FINIS.

