AN ACT Appointing COMMISSIONERS For Sequestrations.

seal of the Commonwealth

Tuesday, August 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS Clerk of the Parliament.



LONDON: Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold
at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.

AN ACT Appointing COMMISSIONERS For Sequestrations.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament and by the Authority thereof, That
Samuel Moyer Esquire, Richard Moor, William Mullins, Arthur Squib and John
Greensmith, or any three or more of them, shall be and hereby are constituted
and appointed Commissioners for Sequestring, Seizing and Managing all and every
the Estate and Estates, Real and Personal, of all or any the Farmer or Farmers
of Excise and New Impost, Customs and Subsidies, Commissioner or Commissioners,
Collector or Collectors of Prize-goods, and of their and every of their
respective Security and Securities, who shall be adjudged and certified unto
them by the Commissioners appointed by one Act of this present Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for bringing in the Arrears of the Revenue due to the
Commonwealth, to be Debtor or Debtors to the State, in any sum or sums of Money
whatsoever, until such sum or sums of Money as shall be so certified, shall be
fully satisfied and paid for the use of the Commonwealth: And the said
Commissioners or any three or more of them shall and may, and hereby are
Authorized, Enabled and Required for the ends and purposes aforesaid, to
observe and put in execution all and every the Powers, Authorities, and
Instructions heretofore given and in force before the twenty third day of
April, One Thousand six hundred fifty three, by virtue of any Act, Ordinance,
or Order of Parliament, to any Committee or Commissioners appointed by
Authority of Parliament, for managing Estates under Sequestration, and in as
large and ample manner as they or any of them should, might, or ought to have
done.

Tuesday, August 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.


