THE EARL OF WARWICKS Surrender of the ORDINANCE AND Authority formerly
granted by both Houses of PARLIAMENT, for his being Lord High Admiral of
ENGLAND, etc.

Presented in the House of Peers 10. April 1645. and communicated from their
Lordships to the House of Commons at a Conference held the same day.

Printed and Published according to Order.

April 14th LONDON, Printed for Richard Best, 1645.

The Earl of VVarwicks surrender of the Ordinance and authoririty formerly
granted to him by both Houses of Parliament, etc.
MY LORDS,
BEing lately in Kent, to speed out the Fleet, that an Easterly wind might not
prevent their seasonable getting forth of the River; And receiving notice of an
Ordinance of Parliament, whereby the Members of both Houses, holding Offices
under their Authority, stand discharged after the end of Forty days, I thought
it my duty, (after my giving in charge to the Captains, then in those parts,
to be faithful in their Trusts) to make my return back, that I might
testify my cheerful Compliance with the Houses Resolution.

While I have had the Honor to serve the Parliament in the great Trust by them
reposed in me, both since my being Lord Admiral, and before, I have
endeavored to perform my Duty, with fidelity, and diligence, being acted
therein by no other design, but a desire to advance Gods glory, and my
Countries Service. And my Endeavou's (though accompanied with those common
Infirmities that are incident to men) have (through the blessing and goodness
of God) not been without some visible advantage to the Public, being made
isntrumental to preserve the Parliaments Interest in the Fleet, when it was
labored with Letters, and Commands under the broad Seal, from his Majesty,
to be turned against them; And some service has accrued to the State by the
releiving of our Friends, and interception of Supplies intended to the Enemy;
Besides those less observable preventions of danger, which without a vigilant
eye, might have infested the Kingdom.

But as I did, in obedience to the Command of both Houses, Receive, and
hitherto Manage that employment, so did my heart, with all possible
readiness, submit to their pleasure, so soon as it was held forth in that
Ordinance. And therefore, in testification of that high and honorable esteem
that I owe, and sincerely bear to their wisdoms, I do with all humility, and
cheerfullnesse, resign and surrender into their hands, the Office of Lord
Admiral where with they were pleased formerly to entrust me, And shall value
it as my highest honor, and contentment, next to my God, to be serviceable to
them, and my Country in any other condition where into his providence shall
cast me. Not counting my Person, nor dearest interests, too precious to be laid
out in maintenance of that great cause of Religion, and Liberty, wherein they
are so justly engaged. And in all their Resolutions, my faithful and ready
Concurrence shall demonstrate to all the world, That my highest ambition is, no
other, then, to contribute my best endeavor for their Service. And that I am
resolved to stand, and fall with them in the upholding of Gods truth, and the
public Liberty; knowing well by many years experience, that the welfare of
this Kingdom, cannot subsist without Gods blessing in the preservation, and
safety of the Parliament, Which I here present, as the real, and can did
expressions of a mind, full of integrity, and humble respect toward them.

And I shall join my Prayers, together with my utmost assistances, that as God
has thus far honored them with doing of great Services to his name, so he
will continue to shine upon their Counsels, until this shaken Kingdom be
established upon a lasting, honorable, and holy foundation.

FINIS.

