The Earl of STRAFFORDS GHOST Complaining.

Of the Cruelties of his Contrymen, in Killing one another. And persuading
all great Men to live honestly, that desire to die Honorably.

Herein also are his bad Practices manifested, and the sad Condition of ENGLAND
and IRELAND, Expressed and Commiserated.

depiction of the Earl of Strafford's ghost I am not come again to amaze the
eye,
But the corrupted soul to terrify;
Let not my shape affright you, but my crimes,
For the security of future times.


LONDON, Printed according to Order, for G. Bishop, August 22. 1644.

The Earl of STRAFFORDS GHOST, Complaining of the cruelty of his Country men
in killing one another.
WHat still at it Country men? Does your thirst increase with your drunkenness?
Will nothing cure your dropsy but a general devastation? Are not your veins
yet dry enough? Is not the earth moist enough with your blood? I little thought
ye had loved me so dearly, that for my sake ye would have all bled to death as
I did; and indeed had I mistrusted any such matter, I would for your sakes have
been honest in spite of Honor, and have lived to give my Sovereign better
counsel. O the guilt that sticks upon my sad soul will never be washed off
with these showers of blood and tears, spare them dear Country men, sheath
not your swords in one another bowels till there be none left to punish, nor
any to perish: pray make not me your example. Alas, I was a mighty
Malefactor, you are innocent; I died because I was guilty, do not you make
your selves guilty by dying. Indeed I was made an Instrument i'my life time to
set these wars o'foot: for which my afflicted Ghost (haunted with horror)
can take no rest, as long as they continue; there is not a man falls, nor a wound
given but I am sensible of it, I smart for it, so closely am I followed by
Divine Justice, for betraying Innocence. Consider O ye Mortals that live
in the same state I died in, what I might have been, and what I am; how bravely
I might have lived, how wretchedly I died, and how justly I am tormented.
Survay the course I ran, and shun it; keep from the Court, it is infectious; be
not bewitched with the vain hope of greatness; purchase not honor with
dishonestie, lest your lives and fames perish together, and your Ghosts
hereafter affright your posterity with dismal apparitions, and the fearful
Relations of these bloody broiles.

And O King, I must not flatter thee now, nor need I; I am out of thy power!
Look upon thy own work, and consider how other Kings lived and died, and
what fame followed 'em that gave their minde^ to Tyranny, to cruelty, to
murder. Have never an honest man about thee to lay these things before thee?
none but villains at thy elbow still, that seek the ruin of thee and all thy
Kingdoms? why where are all thy Bishops now? thou't hear them; they can (if
they please) tell the strange and true Stories of the lives of thy
Predecessors; they have bin forward enough to bring thee on; where is now their
wisdom and learning, their zeal and affection, their power and policy to
bring thee off again? What good have their counsels done thee? Poor Ireland's
desolate, England's desperate, and Scotland's in danger; and can thy Bishops
make thee believe that thy person is in safety, when thy three Kingdoms are a
fire about thy ears? or that the Prince may prosper, when his people perish?
Trust'em no longer King, they f^^tter thee for their own ends, and fear only
their own falls, and that makes 'em endeavor to persuade thee that the Miter
and the Crown are inseparable; They love thee for their own honors not for
thine; for the benefit of Rome, not of England, they desire thou should live
to be subject to them, rather then thy people should live to be subject to
thee, and therefore according to their own law and honesty these inhumane
Massacres and Murders are cried up, and kept up by their care and counsel as
convenient and necessary: Where Is little Land, and great Canterbury all this
while, does the Tower still keep that grace and goodness together? Has the
holy man wrought so many miracles, that they cannot all this while be reckoned
up, and set down in a Chronicle? I have looked long for him, and wonder he
should be so slow to follow me, that was so forward to send me packing. O how
careful he was at our first acquaintance to get me into favor at Court, and
make me acquainted with a Duke of his own condition, that I might be hansomly
handled betwixt 'em, and screwed up into a capacity of furthering Court
designs, and abusing the Commonwealth. He took a great deal of pains to
make me a great Counceller, that he might with the less pains bring me and the
Kingdom to nothing; I must forsooth be conversant with my King and flatter him,
this (he told me) would bring me along by the path of preferment to the honor
I aimed at; so I followed his advice and prosper'd: My carriage and my
counsels were so approved of, that I was held a fit man to be a Governor Away
I went for Ireland, where (my swelling thoughts appearing in my countenance) I
soon purchased (to the satisfaction of my soul) the respect of a Prince. What
was then to be done? Mean actions are not fit for mighty men, I must exceed
my Predecessors, and I must please my Sovereign, all fell out according to
mine own heart, for I could not do the one, but I must needs do the other; so
I presently bent my endeavors to subvert the laws I liked not, and made (for
mine own advantage) what laws I listed. The power of a Prince would no longer
content me, so that I caused many times the best men to be punished by the
hands of the basest, on purpose to have my actions graced with the name of
tyranie. This was the Government I aimed at, and to maintain this, I made bold
(by His Majesty's leave) to compel the people (by force of Arms) to
obedience. Thus their lives and liberties were at my disposure, honor and
wealth came flowing in upon me, and ambition told me I had found out the true
way to be great, and happy. But for all this I was not unmindfull of the work
I was put upon, I stuck close to my maine business, the rise of the Papists must
be the ruin of the Protestant, and whether I have not proved faithful in
that, let the world judge: But O monstrous ingratitude! how am I rewarded? O ye
Irish, English, and Scot'sh Catholic Gentlemen, what affront have I given you?
if your own plots have wrought your own destructions, what is that to me? I
spent my life in your quarrel, and now for my pains I am tossed from one side
to another, and not suffered to rest in my grave; which way have I deserved
this? Wherein have I been disobedient to his Majesty, or cross to any of your
wicked Counsels? What have I done to purchase reproach on your part? nay, what
have I not done to merit your love and favor? Did I not in my life time bring
on the business bravely? Was it not I that armed the Irish Catholics, and
disarmed the Protestants, on purpose to make you happy (if heaven had had a
mind to it?) Was it not I that endeavored to make the English and Scottish
Protestants work themselves into a weak condition, by setting the two Nations
together by the ears, when Arundell, Digby, Cottington, Windebank, and^. had
made way for the Spanish second Armado to second the business? 1639. Was it not
I that laid huge taxes, and imposed great sums upon many Towns and houses in
Ireland, and forced payment by my soldiers in a warlike manner? Did not I with
my Troops compel diverse great Lords and Gentlemen there, to forsake their own
possessions, and yield up their rights i'their livings contrary to Law and
Justice? Did not I am many other unlawful and unconscionable enterprises
enhaunce the rates of al customarie commodities, and make restraint of their
transportation at my pleasure, and all to bring in money to maintain the
(then) intended Rebellion, and the wars like to follow it? Did not I also (for
the same cause) become the only Merchant of Tobacco in Ireland, as his
Majesty did of Gunpowder in England? The engrossing of two such commodities by
a King and his Vice-ray, are worthy the worlds observation. Did I not besides
restore your Frieries and Masse-Houses, and force a new Oath upon the
Protestant to tie him to the observation of all Church Ceremonies in use for
the present, or to be hereafter established by his Majesty's authority? Did
not Canterbury and I (when we perceived we could not cousin the Parliament of
so many Subsidies, as we thought would serve our turns to undo the Kingdom)
cause it to be broke up, and did I not then promise his Majesty to bring down
the sturdy stomachs of His people by my Irish Catholic Army? Did I not
further persuade his Majesty to reviue the levying of Shipmoney, and to punish
many Sheriffs of the Counties, about that and other payments for being
obstinate honest men? And did I not threaten the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of
London at the Councell-Table, for not yielding to a business of the like nature?
Was not I the cause of some of the Aldermen of Londons commitments, for not
discovering the abilities of their neighbou^s. And were not all these things
done for your sakes? Yes, ye know they were, and ye liked 'em well enough,
and me too all the while ye prosper'd. When the Rebellion in Ireland grew
to such a height, that ye supposed no power could hinder your conquest: when
ye were either bloody actors, willing spectators, or joyful hearers of the
Stories of those horrid massacres; and when the men, money, and Arms, sent
over by the Parliament (his Majesty desiring it) against the Rebels, were
again (by your counsels) at his Majesty's command, made use of by the Rebels
against the Protestants, then were my actions of high esteem, and my Name was
famous amongst you. O you Roman Catholic Courtiers, you that are still mighty
men with his Majesty, can you not work your wills in England yet? No new
project? No quaint device to clear the Kingdom of Protestants? Did I begin to
work so handsomely, and can you not go forward; can you not finished? Have not
the lazy Irish done their work at home yet, that they may move with a full
body, and make an end of their Tragedy here, to you^ eternal content! But oh
--! Eternal did I say? Did you with your clamours raise me from my grave, to
have my counsel? Did you in serious sadness? take it then: proceed not in
these dangerous and damnable courses, except ye have no souls, or know no God;
remember the word Eternal! and be confident, that such works as you are now in
hand with, cannot be finished in this world. You Are content for the present to
hear of the cruel slaughter of your innocent Contrymen, and think your
selves safe under the wings of your Sovereign; but the more security, the more
danger: Take heed ye be not cozened of your lives, as I was; remember the word
Eternal, and make preparation for a better world, before y^ leave this, that is
the worse for ye, and grows weary of ye: Be accessory to no more blood, you have
waded deep already, consider my condition, that am hurried (as in a whirlwind)
from one place to another, now I am in York, straight in London, by and by in
Ireland, and in every place suffer variety of afflictions, according to my
crimes: Here I am plagued for my bad Counsels, there for my worse actions; in
one place for my Ambition, in another for my luxury; but every where for being
accessory to this h^llish Plot, of murdering Christians. In York I am much
tormented, in London more, in Ireland most of all; where many times, as in a
Theater, the bloody Tragedies I made way for in my life time, are presented to
my view. The lamentable cries of my own Contrymen inhumanely murdered,
affright me on one side, and the damnable oaths and execrations of the
perfidious Rebels terrify me on the other. The high ways and fields are
strewn with mangled Carcases, some dead, o pitiful, some dying, o miserable,
but many lame and wounded, lie gasping and groaning, exposed to the lingering
rage of cold and hunger, O intolerable! Sometimes I meet with hundreds of men,
women, and children stark naked, running from one death to meet another, as
rather trusting to the fury of frost and snow, then to the mercy of the
insulting Enemy. These are no sooner out of my view, but as many more (betrayed
by promise of quarter) are robbed and stripped in my sight, by a crew of perjured
villains, that show they are incapable of mercy themselves, by denying mercy
to Innocents that beg it. I have bin forced to behold with horror, as I am now
to report with pain, the eruelty exercised upon Ministers by Monsters; some I
have seen cut in pieces, some whipped, some hanged up, cut down, quartered, and
their mouths stopped with their members; others I have seen hanged, and their
flesh pulled from their bones in the sight of their wives, and some tied to
tre^s, whilst the basest of the rabble have ravished their wives and daughters
before their faces, and then hanged up their parents in the sight of their
children.

I have seen men and women set upon burning hot Gridirons, and others tortured
by clapping hot Tongs to their hands and feet to make 'em discover their hidden
Treasure.

Young virgins have been bound and ravished by the Rebels, whereof somo have
had their tongues cut out, that the cruelty might be concealed, and others been
script, and turned naked amongst the common Soldiers.

I have beheld young infants roasted upon spits before their Parents faces,
whilst they have been tied in Chaires, and forced to be woeful spectators of
their childrens inhumane tragedier, and expecters of their own: then the wife
has bin stripped, and forced in the sight of her husband, and at last the husband
^^s'd of the intolerable torment he suffered in (seeing all this) by being
murdered.

I have beheld women with child ripped up after they have been ravished and the
children slung into the fire; some I have seen hanged, and some dragged up and
down the streets by the hair of the head; and I have seen children tossed into
the water with Pitchforkes, the brains of some dashed against the posts, and
others snatched out of their mothers Arms, and burnd before their faces;
amongst these, and thousands, the like barbarous cruelties, and murders, I
have beheld some thrown upon dunghills with their guts half out, that have not
been able with their woeful cries and lamentations to move so much pity in
the merciless murderers, as to put 'em out of their pain.

And what think ye now? are these commendable Actions? are these pleasant
objects? is all this done for the grace of Christianity, or the glory of his
Majesty! Was ever Religion sought, or bought with so much blood, or absolute
Sovereignty with such infinite slaughter! And are ye not satisfied yet? not yet
weary? not yet ashamed* do you suppose that ye have not yet made work enough for
a Chronicle, that your childrens children will be amazed to read? and blush
when they shall find in the Margent, that all this blood was spilt by the
pernicious counsels of their graceles grandfathers! Are the miseries of
Ireland nothing, unless England smart in the same degree? O I am racked and
tortured, poor England suffers in a far higher nature, and is hardly sensible
of it: Alas, in Ireland the Papists only kill the Protestants, the Irish
murder the English, but here the English kill the English, the Protestant
murders the Protestant, there the greatest part of them that are killed, are
women and children, here the best men are picked out, and armed to kill one
another.

This is your device Digby, your craft Cottington, your policy Porter; what
the Irish Rebels, English Papists, and the Bishops cannot do, to promore
Popery, must be done by the Protestant himself; when this plot was first
contrived in the Devils fencing-school, some of ye played your Masterprize there.
But to what end have ye taken all this pains? where are your hopes (for all
this) of working your wills, and advancing their Papal Monarchy? How much the
nearer are you to the good you aim at, by doing all this mischief! O for shame
give over, lay by your wicked resolutions, these courses will neither purchase
happiness here, nor heaven hereafter. Hark how the Rebels rave, as if they
were in hell already, you have undone 'em, their Liberties, Lands and Lives are
all forfeited through your unhappy counsels, this is their clamor. Your own
Country men the Papists are grown sensible now at length of your shameful
proceedings, and curse your plots and practices, do you not hear 'em? And the
King whom you threatened to make Mighty by killing his Subjects, is brought
into such streights by your stratagems, that he dares not do what he ought,
nor find fault with that he likes not, what think ye of this, are ye not in
a fine condition? and how will ye recover? your favorers suspect you, and
your favorites hate you, what will become of you? O wretched men, why do ye
still trouble the world, that would be so glad to be rid of ye! there is nothing
in it but vanity and villainy, and ye know ye must part with it shortly; the
Courts of Kings cannot give perperuall protection to their unhappie
inhabitants. I was great enough, and good enough to be a Courtier, and yet I
fell in the height of my glory. Come away. But let me not forget the
Parliament, that remembers me no question.

Noble Lords and Gentlemen, though it will seem strange to the world that I
should comply now, who have been so averse in my life time, yet I cannot but
acknowledge my thankfulness to you for freeing your Country of the danger my
longer life would have made it liable to. I confess I would feign have lived
still, that you might have perished; but as soon as ye had took off my head,
my mind was altered. If the rest that are sick of the same disease were cured
in the same manner, 't would be happy for England. My abode is very solitary,
and I am inclined to Melancholy, pray send me some company: but in the mean
time that I may with the more ease bear my affliction, go forward still with
courage in your admirable work of preserving two distressed Kingdoms. Trust
men as you know 'em, and relieve not all particular persons according to their
wants, but their merits: for there are many pretend they have been robbed by
the Rebels, that are little better then the Rebels that robbed 'em, they make
suit for maintenance, when they mean mischief; their malice is so great they
cannot hide it. It Is strange we of the other world, should know more then you
do in this: but I cannot stay now to make any further discovery, my hour
limited is expired, hark, I am called, I come, I come.

FINIS.

