A COLLECTION Of such Statutes as do enjoin the observation of LENT, And other
Fish days throughout the year, with the Reasons for enjoining the same.
ANd be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid for the benefit and
Commodity of this Realm, ^he Reasons (...) the keep^^g of Lent (...) pressed in
^^e Stat. 5. El. p. 5.
to grow, as well in maintenance of the Navy, as in spairing and increase of
Flesh victual of this Realm.

IT shall not be Lawful to any person within this Realm to Eat any Flesh
upon any days now usually observed as fish days (upon pain to forfeit twenty
shillings for every time he shall offend, (...) forfeiture him that ea^^^h
Flesh upon (...) days. (...) forfeiture him in ^^ose house it ^^ ^aten.
or else suffer one months close Imprisonment without bail or mainprise 35
Eliz. 7.) And every person within whose house any such offense shall be done:
and being privy and knowing thereof, and not effectually punishing and
disclosing the same unto some public Officer having authority to punish the
same, for every such offense shall forfeit thirteen shillings four pence (35
Eliz. 7.) All which forfeitures for not abstaining from Meats shall be divided
into three equal parts: that is, one part to the use of the Queen, the other
to the Informer, the third to the common use of the Parish where the Offense
shall be committed, and to be levied by the Churchwardens after any Conviction
in that behalf, 5 Eliz. 5.

But this Act concerning eating of Flesh shall not extend to any persons having
special Licenses upon Causes contained in the same, and grounded according to
the Laws of this Realm: ^^ndition upon License, and ^^at shall be ^^^en to
the (...) upon (...) License.
Every of which Licenses shall be void, unless the same contain these
Conditions, viz. Every License made to any person of the degree of a Lord of
the Parliament and his Wise, shall be upon condition, that they shall pay to
the Poor men's box within the Parish where they remain, etc. in the Feast of
the Purification of our Lady, or within six days after, twenty six shillings
eight pence, and to be paid within one month next after the same Feast upon
pain of forfeiture of the same License: A Knight and his Wife shall pay
yearly thirteen shillings four pence. Every person under the said degree shall
pay yearly six shillings eight pence to the said use at the foresaid time, and
upon the foresaid Condition. 5 Eliz. 5.

All persons which by notorious sickness shall be enforced for the recovery of
their health to eat Flesh for the time of their sickness, ^ho may have
^^^^nce, and who ^^y give li^^^ce to eat (...) upon fish ^^^es, and the (...)
shall be Licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese, or by the Parson, Vicar, or
Curate of such Parish where such person is sick, or of one of the next Parish
adjoining (If there be no Curate, etc. in the same Parish, or if he be wilful)
which License shall be signed by the Bishop, Parson, etc. and endure no longer
then the time of sickness: And if the sickness continue above eight days
after the License granted, it shall be Registered in the Church Book with the
knowledge of one of the Churchwardens: And the party licensed shall give to
the Curate four pence for every Entry, and it shall endure no longer but for
his sickness. And if any License by any Parson, Vicar, or Curate be granted to
any person other then such as evidently appear to have need thereof by reason
of their sickness, not only every such License shall be void, but also every
such Parson, Curate or Vicar shall forfeit for every such License otherwise
granted five Marks, 5 Eliz. 5.

Such persons as have upon good Considerations any lawful License to eat
Flesh upon any Fish day, (...) have ^^^^^ce to eat (...) upon fish ^^^es, must
(...) one dish (...) Sea fish.
be bound to have for every one dish of Flesh served to be eaten at their
Table, one usual dish of Seafish fresh or salt to be likewise served at the
same Table, and to be eaten or spent without fraud or covin as the like kind
is, or shall be usually eaten on or spent on Saturdayes (except such persons as
for sickness shall for that time be licensed by the Bishop, Curate, etc. or by
reason of age or other impediment allowed heretofore by the Ecclesiastical
Laws of this Realm) upon the pain aforesaid, 5 Eliz. 5. 1 Jac. 25.

No Butcher or other person, (...) not to be (...) in Leut.
whether he be licenced or not licensed to kill Flesh, shall from henceforth at
any time in the time of Lent, kill or dress to the intent to put to sale any
Ox or Oxen, Beeves, Beevets, Hogs, Calves, Rams, Ewes, or Weathers, except
Oxen or Beeves for victualling of Ships into foreign parts; and except all
Flesh to be killed three days before Easter yearly upon pain to forfeit and
loose the same Oxen, Beeves, etc. so killed and dressed contrary to this
Statute, or the value of them, 1 Jac. 29.

All Justices of the Peace, ^^^icers sear^^^ng for Flesh (...) in Lent.
Mayors, Bailiffs, head Officers and Constables as well of Cities and Towns
Corporats as in every County of this Realm, shall have full authority yearly
in the time of Lent, to enter into all houses of Victuallers and common
Victualling houses within their Jurisdictions where such offenses shall be
suspected to be committed, and finding any such Oxen, Beeves, etc. killed or
dressed, or any part or parcel of the same contrary to this Statute shall take
seize the same as forfeited, and shall give and distribute the same to
Prisoners and other poor folks by their discretion, 1 Jac. 29.

Every Taverner, ^^^tuallers ^^^ssing of (...).
Inne-keeper, keeper of every common Tablinghouse, common Cook, common Tipler,
or Alehouse-keeper offending at any time hereafter in the dressing of any Flesh
victual, contrary to the Statute of Anno 5 Eliz. or contrary to this Statute,
shall not only forfeit all the Flesh so dressed, but also the penalty imposed
by the said Statute of 5 Eliz. for every offense to be committed, the one half
of all which forfeitures (Except such forfeitures as shall be found and taken
by the Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, head Officers and Constables
according to the Tenor of this Act) shall be to the KING, and the other half
to such person or persons as shall sue or inform for the same in any Court of
Record by Action of Debt, Bin, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoyn,
Protection, or Wager of Law shall be allowed, etc. 1 Jac. 29. To continue to
the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

A Clause in an Act 3 Car. ^^^tinuance ^^e former (...).
^. 4. And so much of an Act made the 5th year of the Reign of the late Queen
Eliz. Entitled An Act touching certain Politic Constitutions made for the
maintenance of the Navy, as is not repealed by any latter Statute, nor does
concern the eating of Flesh, or using of fish upon the Wednesday, etc. together
with all and every other additions, explanations, and alterations made
thereunto, or thereof, or of any part thereof by any Statute or Statutes made
sithence the making of the said last mentioned Act, and in force the last day
of the Session of Parli. that was in the 21 year of the Reign of the late
King James, etc. shall continue in force until the end of the next Session of
Parl.

By a Clause in an Act of 17 Car. (...).
1. ca^p. 4. The aforesaid Stat. be made perpetual. See the Abridgment of the
late Statutes. Title, Continuance.

Note that all the time of Lent, and every Vigil (or Holy day Eve) and every
Friday and Saturday (except Christmas Day falls thereon) and the embring days
throughout the whole year were usually observed by the Laws and customs of the
Realm as Fish days, which is proved by the preamble of the Stat. 2 and 3 Ed 6.
cap. 19. whereby also it is Enacted, that in those times such abstinence should
be used: And the Stat. of 5 and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 3. appoints what days shall be
kept holy, the Eves of which are only to be observed for Fish-dayes.

And by the Stat. of 5 Eliz. 5. Every Wednesday in the year (which shall not
happen to fall in Christmas or Easter week) is limited to be observed as a Fish
day, on which day no manner of person shall eat any Flesh otherwise then ought
to be on the common Saturday.


Note that by a Proviso in the Stat. of 5 Eliz. cap. 5. It is Enacted, that
whosoever shall by preaching, teaching, writing, or open speaking notify, that
any eating of Fish, or forbearing of Flesh mentioned in this Stat. is of any
necessity for the saving of the soul of man, or that it is the service of God,
otherwise then as other Politic Laws are, and be, that then such persons
shall be punished as spreaders of false News are, and ought to be.

The Faculty Office for granting Dispensations and Licenses to eat Flesh, (by
Act of Parliament) in any part of England, is at St. Paul's Chain near St.
Paul's Churchyard.

London, Entered and Printed for R. Pawley, and are to be sold at the Rainbow in
Fleetstreet, 1660/1.


