RULES AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE TARE OF Goods and Merchandise Imported into any
Port of ENGLAND.

Revised and Published by the Farmers of His Majesty's Customs. As a Direction
to all Their Officers concerned therein.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. 1667.

Rules and Instructions published by the Farmers of His Majesty's Customs to be
observed by all their Officers in their allowance of Tares upon all Goods and
Merchandises; which are not to be altered or deviated from in any case, within
the Port of London, without the special direction of the said Farmers, or in
their absence without the Advice and Consent of their General Surveyors, and
Surveyor of the Warehouse, or of some two of them at the least, whereof the
Surveyor of the Warehouse to be one; And in the Out Ports not without the
Consent and Advice of the Collector and Surveyor; or where there is no Surveyor
by the Collector himself, giving speedy notice to the Farmers of the reason of
his so doing.

A
Alum in Cask, to be allowed for Tare twelve pound weight per Cent. Almonds in
Cask, to be allowed for Tare fourteen pound weight per Cent. Anniseeds in
Sernes and Bags, containing about three hundred and three quarters, for Tare
eighteen pound weight only. Anniseeds From Smyrna, with Felts containing about
three hundred and half, for tare twenty pound weight only. Without Felts, for
Tare fourteen pound weight only.
Argal in Cask, to be allowed for Tares fourteen pound weight per Cent. Almonds
In Bags, to be allowed for Tare four pound weight per Bag. In Serns and Bags
containing two hundred weight, for Tare eighteen pound weight only.
Ashes vocat. Potashes, to be allowed for Tare ten pound weight per Cent.
B
BAcks for Chimneys of half a hundred weight and downwards to be accounted
small, and upwards above that weight to be accounted great. Berrilia In double
Searns, containing about three hundred weight, for tare twenty eight pound
weight only. In single searns, for tare fourteen pound weight only.
Beaver-Wooll in hogsheads or brizles, for tare seventy five pound weight only.
Beaver-Wooll in crobyes, let them be tared, and allowance for tare be made
accordingly. Benjamin to be tared, and allowance for tare to be made
accordingly. Books in Bails, each Bail containing one hundred weight, eight of
them makes a Maund.
C
CApers, one third part to be allowed for tare, but then no allowance of five
pound weight per Cent. it being included in the one third part for tare.
Castile Soap. In double searns; for tare thirty pound weight only. In single
Searns, for tare sixteen pound weight only.
Castile-Soap. In Chests containing about two hundred and a half, thirty four
pound weight only. Cardamums, the bail, for tare fourteen pound weight only.
Cochaneile in Chests covered with skins, containing about one hundred and half,
for tare fifty pound weight only. And downwards proportionably. Cochaneile in
Barrels, about one hundred and half, Barrel and Bag, tare twenty four pound
weight only. Cloves and Mace, tare them, and allow for tare accordingly. Copper
Fats, for tare eight pound weight per Cent. Copperis in cask, for tare twelve
pound weight per Cent. Cotton-wool, and Goats-wooll, and Hops, for tare four
pound weight per Cent. Cotton-yarn, for tare five pound weight per Cent.
Cotton-yarn from India, per Bail containing about three hundred weight, for
tare forty five pound weight only. Currants In Buts and Carratels, for tare
sixteen pound weight per Cent. In quarter Rowls, for tare twenty pound weight
per Cent. In bags containing about four hundred pound weight, for tare ten
pound weight per Bag.

F
FLax the Last to be accounted to contain seventeen hundred weight. Feathers,
for tare to be allowed four pound weight per Cent. Figs in Barrels, for tare
twelve pound weight per Cent. Fruit in Baskets, for tare three pound weight per
Basket.
G
GAuls from Aleppo and Smyrna. In double bags, for tare seven pound weight
only. In single bags, for tare four pound weight only.
Gum-laque, Seed-laque, and Shellaque, in Bails, for tare seven pound weight
per Bail. In Chests and Churles, tare them, and make allowance for tare
accordingly
H
HArness plates or breasts, each to be accounted for an Iron double. Hemp
vocat. Steel-hemp in Fats, for tare fourteen pound weight per Cent.
I
INdico in Chests covered with skins containing about one hundred and three
quarters weight, be allowed for tare forty eight pound weight only. Indico in
bales covered with skins, containing about one hund. and a half, tare sixteen
pound weight only. Indico in Churles, tare the Churles, and make allowance of
tare accordingly. Iron Wire Fats, for tare six pound weight per Cent.
K
KEttle Fats, for tare eight pound weight per Cent.
L
LOckeram the piece containing but one hundred and four Else, and should
contain, as per book of Rates, one hundred six Else; therefore allowance to be
made, besides the five per Cent. of two Else per Cent. for loss of measure.
Linen of all sorts, take the contents and allow seven per Cent. of Flemish
measure, and of English contents allow but five per Cent. Except Gentish being
contented by the Gentish measure, includes the allowance of five per Cent. and
so no allowance to be made thereupon.
M
MAdder in bales great and small, single and double bags, for tare twenty eight
pound weight only. In Fats for tare ten pound weight per Cent. Mirrhe the
Chest, tare the Chest, and allow for the tare thereof accordingly.
N
NUtmegs in Cask, for tare ten per Cent. subtle.
O
Oils in certain Cask, one in twenty for allowance of five per Cent. and
Leakage, under ten none, above twenty proportionable. Oils in Candy barrels,
for tare twenty nine pound weight only. Oils in uncertain Cask to be weighed,
and to be allowed eighteen pound weight per Cent. out of the gross hundred for
tare. Note that seven pound and half make a gallon, two hundred fifty two
gallons a ton Civil gage.
Olibanum the Hogshead, to be tared and allowance of tare to be made
accordingly.
P
Saltpeter in Cask, for tare twelve pound weight per Cent. Saltpeter the
bale, for tare twelve pound weight only per Cent. Pepper the bags containing
three hundred pound weight and upwards: in single bags for tare four pound
weight only. In double bags of the same weight, for tare seven pound weight
only.
Prunes in Punchins, for tare sixteen pound per Cent. in other Cask fourteen
per Cent. weight.
R
RAisons in Frails from all places containing about three quarters of a
hundred, for tare six pound weight per Frail only. Lippora Raisons the barrel
containing about one hundred weight, tare per barrel fourteen pound weight
only. ^aisons solis in Cask, for tare twelve pound per Cent.
S.
SMalt or Powder-blew in Cask, for tare ten pound weight per Cent. ^ilks in
Bales of Bellonio, Package with Serecloaths containing about two hundred
weight, for tare Twenty eight pound weight only. In bales of Naples, with
Serecloaths, containing about two hundred weight, for tare six pound weight
only. Fangats of Naples containing about one hundred and half, for tare twelve
pound weight only. And so proportionably downwards. Messina bales thron and
raw, for tare ten pound weight only. Raw Silk, long bales of Aleppo, with
Cotton Wool containing about three hundred and a quarter, and so to two hundred
and three quarter, for tare thirty two pound weight only. Ardas silk in Aleppo,
short bald of the same contents, and pac^ed with Cotton Wool* for ta^^ thirty
pound weight only. Fangats of Aleppo, containing two hundred and a quarter,
(...) two hundred and a half, f^^ tare twenty four pound weig^^ only. Fangats
of Aleppo, containing one hundred three quarters, o^ two hundred weight, for
ta^^ twenty pound weight only. Fangats of Aleppo containin^ one hundred and a
quarter, o^^ one hundred and a half, for ta^^ eighteen pound weight only. Raw
Silk of Smyrna or Cypru^ containing three hundred an^ upwards, for tare sixteen
poun^ weight only. Downwards to 200. for ta^^ fourteen pound weight only. From
two hundred weigh^ downwards, for tare twel^ pound weight only. Bal^s of Silk
from Persia, containing about one hundre^ and a quarter for tare twen^^ pound
only. Sinamond in skins covered with bags sixteen pound weight, for Tare per
subtle hundred. Without bags fourteen pound weight for Tare only. Sugar in
bales from India, for Tare thirty six pound weight only. In Chests one fifth
part for Tare.
^n Cask one sixth part for Tare. Sugar Candy, tare them, and make allowance of
Tare accordingly. Sugar of St. Thomas in Cask, one fifth part for Tare. Sugar
in cannisters, one sixth part for Tare. Loaf-sugar, Paper, Thread and Straw, and
Cask, for tare sixteen per Cent. Shumack in bags, containing about three
hundred and a half, for Tare ten pound weight only. Shumack in bags, containing
about seven hundred weight, for tare fourteen pound weight only. Succades the
Chest, containing about one hundred and half, for tare forty pound weight only.
T.
TAllow from Russia in Cask, an^ from Ireland, for Tare twel^ pound weight per
Cent. Thread Sisters nothing. Outnel: is to be told, an^ to pay by the Fl^mish
pound a formerly with si^ per C. allowance Whited brown is to be told, an^ to
pay by the Fl^mish pound a formerly with si^ per C. allowance Briges or black
and brown is to be told, an^ to pay by the Fl^mish pound a formerly with si^
per C. allowance
Tobacco Spanish in barrels, containing about two hundred and a quarter, for
Tare twenty eight pound weight only In half barrels, containin^ about one
hundred and (...) quarter, for Tare eighteen pound weight only. Spanish in
Pottaccos, without Canvis, for Tare fourteen pound weight only. With Canvis,
for Tare sixteen pound weight only With skins, for tare twenty six pound
weight only. Virginia in Hogshead, weighing under five hund. eighty pound tare,
above five hund. ninety pound tare.
Tobacco Barbados in roll per stick, for tare six pound weight only. Tobacco
Bermudaes in Chests and uncertain Cask, tare them and make allowance
accordingly.
W.
WOrm-seeds from Aleppo with Cotten-wool, for tare twenty four pound weight
only. Worm-seeds and Anniseeds bailes with felts from Smyrna, containing about
three hundred and three quarters, for tare twenty four pound weight only.
Castile Spanish felt wool, containing about two hundred and a quarter, for tare
fourteen pound weight only. Estridge or Lambs Wool, for tare to be allowed
four pound weight per Cent. Polish wool, for tare to be allowed four pound
weight per Cent. Spanish Cloth Wool, containing about two hundred weight, for
tare twenty eight pound weight only. Sigovia Spanish felt Wool, containing
about two hundred weight, for tare fifteen pound weight only.
Y.
CAble-yarn in Winch from Russia for tare twenty eight pound weight only. Yarn
in Fats from Eastland, for tare 12 pound weight per Cent. Grogoram and Moehaire
yarn, in bales from Aleppo with Cotton-wool, for tare twenty eight pound weight
And proportionably downwards. Bales of Moehaire-yarn from Smyrna with felts,
containing about four hundred weight, for tare twenty eight pound weight only.
Moehaire-yarn without Felts, about the same contents, eighteen pound weight
only. Fangats of Moehaire-yarn, containing one hundred three quarters or two
hundred, without felts, for tare fourteen pound weight only. Fangats
containing about one hundred and half, without felts for tare twelve pound
weight only.

By Order of the Farmers of his Majesty's Customs. S. Whittell Secret.


