THE Earl of Warwickes GLORIOUS VICTORY Over fifty Ships of the King of
Denmarkes in the Narrow Seas. Report thereof being made to the House of Commons
by a Merchant of London, that came lately from Norway. With an Order from the
House of Commons to the Earl of Warwick, that one and fifty Ships should be
strongly prepared with 500 pieces of Ordnance. Also how many hundred thousand
pounds the Charge of the Navy has amounted unto, raised out of the Bill of
Tonnage and Poundage, and what the King has received out of the same Bill. And
how the Earl of Stamford, the Lord Rutham and Sir Arthur Hasterigg executed
the Militia in Leicestershire. Lastly the total sum of the money sent by the
Parliament to Munster and Dublin in Ireland. I. B. Cler. P.

London, Printed for J. Horton. June 15. 1642.

The Earl of Warwicks great Victory over 50. Ships of the King of Denmarkes in
the Narrow-Seas.
THe King of Denmark understanding by the manifold information of many, that
his Brother the King of great Britain was disunited from the Parliament, and
his indignation being highly incensed, that he was resolved to make War
against his great Council, and Supreme Court, began to assemble his Subjects,
desiring their assistance to aid his Brother in the intended War. And after
great debate, and consultation thereabout, he concluded immediately to prepare
certain Ships for England. The number of those ships which the King of Denmark
had in preparation, were 100, and 50. of them already fitted on Sea, conducting
with them in the said ships many Horses and Hay, as the information thereof was
reported to the house of Commons by a Merchant, that was lately come from
Norway. Whereupon the House of Commons without any further procrastination or
detraction of any longer time Ordered incontinently, that information should be
sent withal expedition to the Earl of Warwick, Lord General for the Sea,
desiring him to be very vigilant and careful at Sea, least any sudden and
unexpected invasion might rush in upon the Kingdom.

Wherefore as soon as the Earl of Warwick had received this particular
intention from the Parliament, he presently set all the ships in readiness,
and began to be very cautious, setting straight watch every night, least
unawares the Denmarks by some policy or Stratagem might invade the Land by
night.

The ninth day of this present month the Denmarkes appeared in the Narrow Seas
superbiously, coming to England with fifty ships laden with great store of
Ammunition, Horse and Hay, but as soon as the Earl of Warwick perceived his
sinester intents, he went against him with one and twenty ships, and most
valiantly with an undanted courage let off thirty pieces of Ordnance against
the Denmark, following very courageously, insomuch that he made them almost
recant, and turn Sail The Demarks on the other side behaved themselves
bravely at the first encounter, and gave the English above threescore and ten
shootes, which had been sufficient to have sunk some of our ships, but that
they were placed so wisely, and craftily, that we had a great advantage of
them, because we had the Wind withal on our side. And the Lord General had
regulated the ships in such an equal way, that at the second discharge they
were compelled to turn Sail and fly, but two of these Ships were taken;
wherein there was found great store of Ammunition, and the rest escaped by
flight.

If we consider how Arminianisme was diffused in the Church, and since the
Parliament how many obstructions and pernicious obstacles have been laid to
interrupt their assiduous proceedings: all which if they be with mature
deliberation seriously considered, we shall with facility and apparent and
perspicuous demonstrations perceive the wonderful mercies of Almighty God
toward us. For which we are bound in duty toward God to magnify his holy and
omnipotent Name, fortheir is nothing more odious and detestable to God then
ungratitude, for it is a wicked instrument, that oftentimes causes God to
divert and turn away his blessings to a Nation. Therefore above all things let
us be sure to embrace gratitude, and offer it as an Oblation and auspitious
Sacrifice to God, glorifying him for all these mercies, and withal so
beseeching in our supplications, that he would preserve and defend the
Parliament from the malignity of all ill-disposed people.

The Parliament have since most discreetly, and judiciously Ordered, That a
great charge of the State of the Kings Ships should be forthwith taken. And
withal by their appointment, the Navy at Sea is made wonderful strong. For
there is one and fifty ships under the Earl of Warwicks Command, with five
hundred pieces of Ordnance, and set out with such Ammunition, and provisions of
Arms, as has not been seen, and known the like for number, and strength sent
out by any Prince in this Kingdom by force.

The Charge whereof has amounted to 300000 pounds which has been raised out
of the Bill for Tonnage and Poundage. And also the King has received 100000
pound out of the benefit of the same Bill since May was twelve Months.

The Earl of Stamford, the Lord Rutham, and Sir Arthur Haslerigg were
appointed by the Parliament to see the Militia put in execution in
Leicestershire.

The House of Commons Ordered also that there should be 10000 pound presently
sent to Munster in Ireland, and 6000 pound to Dublin to pay the Soldiers.

FINIS.

