AN ACT Against the Raising of MONEYS Upon the People, without their consent IN
PARLIAMENT.

seal of the Commonwealth

Tuesday, October. 11. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THO. St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



London, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament. And are to be sold
at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet, over against Dunstans Church, 1659.

AN ACT Against the Raising of MONEYS Upon the People, without their consent IN
PARLIAMENT.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and by the Authority thereof, And it
is hereby Enacted, That all Orders, Ordinances and Acts made by any single
person and his Council, or by both or either of them, or otherwise, or by any
Assembly or Convention, pretending to have Authority of Parliament, from and
after the nineteenth day of April 1653. and before the seventh of May 1659. and
which have not been or shall not be Enacted, Allowed or Confirmed by this
present Parliament, be, and are hereby Declared, Deemed, Taken and Adjudged to
be of no force or effect, from and after the said seventh of May 1659.

And be it further Enacted, That no person or persons shall after the eleventh
of October 1659. Assess, Levy, Collect, Gather or Receive any Custom, Impost,
Excise, Assessment, Contribution, Tax, Tallage, or any sum or sums of Money or
other Imposition whatsoever upon the People of this Commonwealth, without their
consent in Parliament, or as by Law might have been done before the third of
November 1640.

And be it further Enacted and Declared, That every person of^ending contrary
to this Act, shall be, and is hereby Adjudged to be Guilty of High Treason, and
shall Forfeit and Suffer as in Case of High Treason.

Provided, That this Act, or any thing herein contained, shall not be construed
or taken to make Void or Impeach one Act made this Parliament the twelfth of
July 1659. Entitled, An Act of Indemnity and Free Pardon, nor any Article or
Clause therein contained.

Provided also, That nothing in this Act extend to Interrupt the Possession of
any Soldier or Adventurer, or any Purchaser, their Heirs or Assigns, in
Possession of any Lands or Hereditaments in Ireland, or of any Purchaser of any
Lands or Hereditaments within this Commonwealth, unless where this Parliament
has taken, or shall take further or other Order therein.

Tuesday, October. 11. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Tho. St Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.


