A COLLECTION Of certain Statutes in force, With full and ready notes in the
Margent, containing their effect in brief. As also the ORDINANCES for the
better observation of the Lords Day, and the Fast Days. Published For the
better caution of such as are inclinable to Delinquency against the several
effects of those STATUTES and Ordinances. And also For the better Information
of all such Officers and Ministers as are by late special Warrants authorized
and commanded to put the same Statutes and Ordinances in execution.

For the better suppressing 1. Of unlawful Pastimes Pastimes and abuses on the
Lords day. 2. Of profane Swearing and Cursing. 3. Of the loathsome sin of
Drunkenness. 4. Of the several offenses committed by Inne-keepers,
Alehouse-keepers, and unlicensed Ale-house-keepers. 5. Of unlawful Games. And
several other abuses.

Being appointed by the Lord Mayor of the City of London, to be published in
all Congregations within his Jurisdiction.

London printed by Robert White, and are to be sold at his house On
Adling-Hill. MDCXLIV.

THE EPISTLE TO The READER: To whose serious consideration are presented some
Arguments to move all good Christians to consider their Vows made in their late
solemn Covenant, And accordingly to assist in this great work of active
Reformation.
Courteous Reader,
HEre is set out to thy view in this ensuing Treatise, some of the penal
Statutes now in force against the heinous and common offenses of vain swearing,
cursing, profaning of the Lords day, drunkenness and common gaming, etc.
which offenses have from one end of the Kingdom to the other, deeply
dishonored our God, provoked his wrath against us, disgraced the gospel and
Religion professed amongst us, and made the land to mourn and languish under
many heavy judgments, and now at last under that sore Plague of civil war:
the effectual suppressing of which abominations, how happily may it conduce to
repair the honor of God, to appease the wrath of the most high, to adorn and
credit the Gospel of Christ, and to obtain healing for a bleeding,
languishing, dying Nation.

The vows of God are upon us, most strongly obliging us, sincerely to assist
in this work, as appears by our late national Covenant for Reformation, which
we have solemnly sworn. That we shall sincerely, really, and (...)
constantly through the grace of God in our several places and callings,
without respect of persons, endeavor the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever Artic ^
shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness;
least we partake of other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of
their Plagues.

We shall also according to our places and callings Artic. 6.
in this Common Cause of Religion, Liberty, and peace of the Kingdoms, assist
and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant in the
maintaining and pursuing thereof.

Now the forenamed sins are ringleaders in prophannesse, directly opposite both
to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness; and such person or persons as
zealoustie employ themselves by warrant from authority to see that the penal
Statutes, and the Ordinances against such sins be effectually put in execution,
do really proceed as by our Covenant we are strictly engaged, according to our
places and callings.

The crushing of these outrageous and most scandalous offenses in this Kingdom,
will be no small progress in the pious design of Reformation, which has been
begged with so many prayers and tears, yea dearly bought with so much blood.

Gods people may herein learn wisdom of the children of this world in their
generation, for when the Prelatic all and Popish faction had designed the utter
ruin of the true Religion amongst us, both in truth of doctrine, and power of
godliness, and the introducing of Atheism, Popery, and profaneness; their
compendious method, was to stock up the Lords day by the roots, both by
preaching, and publishing licentious Pamphlets against the doctrine, and
morality of the Sabbath, and by sending forth Declarations in the Kings name,
to be read in all Churches and Chapels, directly against the practical
sanctification of the Sabbath: Whereby both all godly Ministers, all public
Ordinances, and therein the whole life of Religion were exposed to contempt; So
that now we are (by Gods great blessing) upon the great work of Reformation,
in removing the rubbish of sin, and advancing pure Ordinances, and the power of
godliness: one most compendious way thereto, is the carrying on of this work
in the suppressing of the aforesaid abuses, and that the Lords day may be
restored to her primative glory.

Much good success has already crowned these endeavors in the City of
London, and places adjacent, especially in putting a stop to drunken courses,
sensual sports, and other prophanations of the Lords day; which inviteth
London to persist, and likewise all the Counties of the Kingdom to set upon the
like work, it being a work, that does so much conduce to the glory of God.
And it is not doubted, but that the Royal City of London will be an exemplary
pattern to all the Cities and Counties of the Kingdom of England, in spewing
out, all these loathsome sins; for which the Lord might justly cause the land
to vomit out her Inhabitants.

The life of all our political Laws, consists in their lively and faithful
execution, the publishing of these Statutes therefore, may be very useful to
all, but chiefly for a rule for those to walk by, that are authorized to put
the same in execution; and also for those that are subject to violate the said
Laws, that so they may take warning and avoid the penalties.

A happy thing it were, and much to be desired, as being a matter much
conducing to the carrying on of this work, that all godly Ministers would
inform the judgments of the people in their preaching, of the greatness of
these offenses; that so the sword of the Magistrate, and the sword of the
Ministry going together, the work may be carried on with the more ease, to the
glory of God, the credit of the Gospel, and the comfort of the Godly. It was
the practice of good King Jehosaphat, 2 Chro. 17. 8, 9. He sent the Priests and
Levites to instruct the people, and in the 10. verse says the holy Ghost, the
fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the lands that were round about
Judah, so that they made no war against Jehosaphat; such glorious effects may
this work produce if it be done with courage for God; God now calls for men to
put too their helping hand in this active work for Reformation.

And let no man think the work too low for him, for the work is Gods, and our
Covenant binds us to it, and there is a curse pronounced against those that do
it not, in the 48. of Jer. and the 10 verse, Cursed be he that does the work
of the Lord negligently: And for our encouragement, it is said in the 2 Chronicles.
15. and the 7. verse, Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak,
for your work shall be rewarded: Therefore let us as the holy Ghost says, in
the 1 Chronicles. 22. and the 16. verse, Arise and be doing, and the Lord will be
with us: Thus I humbly wish that this work may be seriously thought upon, and
faithfully carried on, to the high pleasure of Almighty God, and the profit and
quiet of the Common wealth.

Yours, W. B.

The Titles of the Statutes and Ordinances contained in this Collection, viz.
1. Car. 1. There shall be no Assemblies for unlawful Pastimes on the Lords
day. Page 1. 3. Car. 1. A Restraint of diverse abuses committed on the Lords
Day. page 3. 1. Jac. 22. The duty of Shoomakers. page 5. An Ordinance of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the better observation of the
Lords day. page 5 21. Jac. 20. None shall profanely swear or curse. page 9 1.
Jac. 9. Several penalties of Ale-house-keepers, for their several offenses.
page 10. 4. Jac. 5. The penalty of a Drunkard, and of him that continues
drinking in an Alehouse. page 14. 7. Jac. 10. The penalty for an offense
committed against any of the Branches of the Statute of 1. Jac. 9. or 4. Jac.
5. touching Ale-house-keepers and Drunkards. page 18. 21. Jac. 7. The Statutes
of 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. made perpetual. One witness shall be sufficient
to convince a man of Tippling or Drunkenness. page 18. 1. Car. 4. Forreiners as
well as Inhabitants shall not be permitted to Tipple in Innes, Alehouses, etc.
page 21. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 25. None shall sell Ale or Beer without License,
and they shall be bound by Recognisance. page 22. 3. Car. 3. The forfeiture and
punishment of him that keeps an Alehouse without License. page 25. 4. Jac. 4.
In what case only Ale or Beer may be sold to an Alchouse-keeper having no
License. page 28. 33. Hen. 8. cap. 8. Artillery shall be maintained, and
unlawful Games debarred. page 30. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 9. All
Licenses to keep houses for unlawful Games shall be void. page 35. An
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled: for the better
observation of the Monthly Fast. page 36. Dalton, fol. 363. The Form of an
Oath concerning the Office of a Constable. page 39.
Anno primo CAROLI REGIS. CAP. I. There shall be no Assemblies for unlawful
Pastimes upon the Lord's Day.
FOrasmuch as there is nothing more acceptable to God then the true and sincere
Service and Worship of him, according to his holy will, and that the holy
keeping of the Lord's Day, is a principal part of the true Service of God,
which in very many places of this Realm has been, and now is profaned and
neglected by a disorderly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting
Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, common Plays, and other unlawful
exercises and pastimes upon the Lord's Day: And for that many quarrels,
bloodsheds, and other great inconveniences have grown by the resort and
concourse of people going out of their own Parishes to such disordered and
unlawful exercises and pastimes, neglecting Divine-worship both in their own
Parishes and elsewhere: Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and
the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, That from and after forty days next after the end of
this Session of Parliament, there shall be no meetings, assemblies, or
concourse of No meetings out of their own Parishes on the Lords day for any
sports. No unlawful pastimes to be used by any person within his own Parish.
3. 5. 4. d. for every offense to the poor.
people out of their own Parishes on the Lords day within this Realm of
England, or any the Dominions thereof, for any sports and pastimes whatsoever;
nor any Bear-baiting, Bullbaiting, Enterludes, common Plays, or other
unlawful exercises, and pastimes used by any person or persons within their
own Parishes, and that every person and persons offending in any the premises,
shall forfeit for every offense three shillings four pence, The same to be
employed and converted to the use of the poor of the Parish where such offense
shall be committed: And A Justice of the County, or chief officer of any
Corporate Town upon view, confession, or proof of one witness upon oath, shall
give warrant to the Constables, or Churchwardens of the Parish to levy the
said penalty by distress.
that if any one Justice of the Peace of the County, or the chief Officer or
Officers of any City, Borough, or Town Corporate where such offense shall be
committed, upon his or their view, or consession of the party, or proof of any
one or more witnesses by oath, which the said Justice or chief Officer or
Officers shall by virtue of this Act have authority to minister, shall find
any person offending in the premises, the said Justice or chief Officer or
Officers shall give Warrant under his or their hand and seal to the Constables,
or Churchwardens of the Patish or Parishes where such offense shall be
committed, to levy the said penalty so to be assessed, by way of distress,
and sale of the goods of every such offender, rendering to the said offenders,
the overplus of the money raised of the said goods so to be sold; In default
of distress the offender shall be set in the stocks for three hours. If any be
sued for executing this Law, he may plead the general issue. None to be
impeached, unless questioned within a month after the offense committed.
And in default of such distress, that the party offending be set publicly in
the stocks by the space of three hours; And that if any man be sued or
impeached for the execution of this Law, he shall and may plead the general
Issue, and give the said matter of Justification in evidence. Provided that no
man be impeached by this Act, except he be called in question within one month
next after the said offense committed. Provided also, that the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Realm, or any the Dominions thereof, by virtue of this
Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be abridged, but that the
Ecclesiastical Court may punish the said offenses, as if this Act had not been
made.

Anno tertio CAROLI REGIS CAP. I. A Restraint of diverse abuses committed on the
Lord's Day.
FOrasmuch as the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday, is much broken and
profaned by Carriers, Wagoners, Carters, Wain-men, Butchers and Drovers of
Cattle, to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of Religion; Be it
therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same,
That no Carrier with any Horse or Horses, nor Waggonmen No Carrier with horse,
waggon-man nor Carman, with Wagons or Carts, Wain-men with Wains, nor Drover
with Cattle shall travel on the Lordsday, upon forfeiture of 20. 3. for every
offense. If a Butcher kill or sell any Victual on the Lord's Day, he shall
forfeit 6. s. 8. d. for every offense, to be levied by distress.
with any Wagon or Wagons, nor Car-men with any Cart or Carts, nor Wain-men
with any Wain or Wains, nor Drovers with any Cattle, shall after forty days
next after the end of this present Session of Parliament, by themselves, or any
other, travel upon the said Day, upon pain that every person and persons so
offending shall lose and forfeit twenty shillings for every such offense: Or if
any Butcher by himself, or any other for him, by his privity or consent, shall
after the end of the said forty days, kill, or sell any Victual upon the
said Day; That then every such Butcher shall forfeit and lose for every such
offense, the sum of six shillings and eight pence; The said offenses, and
every of them being done in view of any Justice of the Peace, Major, or other
head Officer of any City or Town Corporate, within their limits respectively,
or being proved upon Oath by two, or more witnesses, or by the confession of
the party offending, before any such Justice, Major, or head Officer, within
their several limits respectively, wherein such offense shall be committed; To
which end every such Justice, Major, or head Officer, shall have power by this
Act, to minister an Oath to such witness or witnesses; All which sums or
penalties, shall or may be levied by any Constable, or Churchwarden, by warrant
from any such Justice or Justices of the Peace, Major, or other head Officer,
as aforesaid, within their several limits, where such offense shall be
committed or done, by distress and sale of the offenders goods, rendering to
the party the overplus; or shall be recovered by any person or persons that
will sue for the same, by Bill, Plaint, or Information, in Or to be recovered
by any that will sue by Bill, Plaint, or Information.

All which forfeitures shall be to the poor.


any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, in any City, or Town Corporate, before
his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, in their general Sessions of the Peace:
All which forfeitures shall be employed to, and for the use of the poor of the
Parishes, where the said offenses shall be committed or done, saving only that
it shall be lawful to, and for any such Justice, Major, or head Officer, out
of the said forfeitures, to reward any such person or persons that shall
inform, or otherwise prosecute any person or persons offending against this
present Act, according to their discretions, so that such reward exceed not the
third part Saving a third part to the Informer that shall sue.

Which suit shall be in the County, City, or Town where the offense shall be
committed, and not elsewhere.

If Suit or Action be brought against any constable or churchwarden for any
distres taken by them, to plead the general issue.

None shall be impeached, if not questioned within six months.


of the forfeiture; Provided that such Bill, Plaint, or Information shall be
commenced, sued and prosecuted in the County, City, or Town Corporate, where
such offense shall be committed and done, and not elsewhere, wherein no
Essoigne, Protection or Wager of Law shall be allowed to the Defendant.
Provided always that it shall be lawful for any Constable or Churchwarden,
that shall have any Suit or Action brought against them for any distress, by
them or any of them to be taken by force of this present Act, to plead the
general Issue, and to give the special matter in evidence: Provided likewise
that no person or persons whatsoever, shall be impeached by this Act, unless
he be thereof questioned within six months after the offense committed.
Provided further, that this Act shall not in any sort abridge or take away the
authority of the Court Ecclesiastical.

Anno primo JACOBI REGIS. CAP. XXII. The duty of Shoomakers.
NO Cordwainer or Shoemaker shall show, to the intent to No Shomaker shall
make, show, or put to sale, any Wares upon the Lord's Day, upon pain of 3. s. 4.
d. for every time, and the value of the ware besales.
put to sale any Shoes, Boots, Buskins, Startups, Slippers or Pantosles upon
the Sunday, upon pain of forfeiture for every pair of Shoes, Boots, Buskins,
Startups, Slippers and Pantosles made, sold, showed, or put to sale, contrary
to the true meaning of this Act, three shillings four pence, and the just and
full value of the same.

An Ordinance of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, for the better
observation of the LORD'S DAY.
FOrasmuch as the Lord's Day, notwithstanding several good Laws heretofore
made, has been not only greatly profaned, but diverse ungodly Books have been
published by the Prelaticall Faction, against the morality of that Day, and to
countenance the profanation of the same, to manifest the indangering of souls,
prejudice of the true Religion, great dishonor of Almighty God, and
provocation of his just wrath and indignation against this Land; The Lords and
Commons for remedy All Laws enacted and in force concerning the observation of
the Lord's Day are to be put in due execution.
thereof, do Order and Ordain, and be it Ordered and Ordained, That all the
Laws enacted, and in force, concerning the observation of the Lord's Day, be
carefully put in execution; and that all and singular person and persons
whatsoever, shall on every Lord's Day, apply themselves to the sanctification of
the same, That all persons apply themselves to the Sanctification of the Lords
day both in public and private. That no person cry or expose to sale any goods
upon forfeiture of the same.
by exercising themselves thereon, in the duties of Piety and true Religion,
publicly and privately: And that no person or persons whatsoever, shall
publicly cry, show forth, or expose to sale, any Wares, Merchandises, Fruit,
Herbs, Goods or Chattels whatsoever, upon the Lord's Day, or any part thereof;
upon pain, that every person so offending shall forfeit the same goods so
cried, showed forth or put to sale: And that no person or persons whatsoever,
shall without reasonable cause for the same, None to travel upon forfeiture of
ten shillings for every offense.

None to work, or carry burdens, upon forfeiture of five shillings for every
offense.


travel, carry burdens, or do any worldly labors, or work whatsover, upon
that day or any part thereof; upon pain, that every one traveling contrary to
the meaning of this Ordinance, shall forfeit for every offense, ten shilling of
lawful money, and that every person carrying any burden, or doing any worldly
labor or work, contrary to the meaning hereof, shall forfeit five shillings of
like money for every such offense.

And be it further ordained, that no person or persons shall No person above
the age of 14. years shall be present at any sport or pastime whatsoever upon
forfeiture of 5. shillings for every offense.
hereafter upon the Lord's Day, use, exercise, keep, maintain, or be present at
any Wrestlings, Shooting, Bowling, Ringing of Bells for pleasure or pastime,
Masque, Wake, otherwise called Feasts, Church-Ale, Dancing, Games, Sport or
Pastime whatsoever; upon pain, that every person so offending, being above the
age of fourteen years, shall lose and forfeit sive shillings for every such
offense.

And be it further ordained, that all and singular person and Those that have
the government of children under the age of 14. years shall forfeit 12. pence
for every of the said offenses.

All May-Poles to be taken down, and no more to be crected.


persons, that have the care, government, tuition or education of any child or
children, under, or within the age of fourteen years shall forfeit and lose
twelve pence for every of the said offenses that shall be committed by any such
child and children.

And because the profanation of the Lord's Day has been heretofore greatly
occasioned by May-Poles (a Heathenish vanity, generally abused to superstition
and wickedness) The Lords and Commons do further Order and Ordain, that all
and singular May-Poles, that are, or shall be erected, shall be taken down, and
removed by the Constables, Borsholders, Tythingmen, petty Constables, and
Churchwardens of the Parishes and places where the same be; and that no
May Pole shall be hereafter set up, erected, or suffered to be within this
Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales.

And it is further Ordained, that if any of the said Officers The Officers for
their neglect to forfeit 5. s. for every week.
shall neglect to do their Office in the premises, within one week after
notice of this Ordinance, every of them for such neglect shall forfeit five
shillings of lawful moneys, and so from week to week, weekly five shillings
more afterward, till the said May Pole shall be taken down and removed.

And that if any Justice of the Peace of the County, or the A Justice of the
peace of the County, Major, or chief Officer of any corporate Town, upon view,
confession, or proof of one, or more witnesses upon oath, shall give warrant to
the Constable or Church*Wardens of the Parish to leavy the said penalties by
distress.
chief Officer or Officers, or any Justice of the Peace, of, or within any
City, Borough, or Town-Corporate, where the said offenses shall be committed
upon his or their view, or confession of the party, or proof of any one, or
more witnesses by oath (which the said Justice, chief Officer or Officers, is
by this Ordinance authorized to minister) shall find any person offending in
the premises, the said Justice, or chief Officer or Officers, shall give
warrant under his or their hand and seal, to the Constables or Churchwardens
of the Parish or Parishes where such offense shall be committed, to seize the
said goods, cried, showed forth, or put to sale as aforesaid; and to leavie the
said other forfeitures or penalties by way of distress, and sale of the goods
of every such Offender, rendering to the said offenders the overplus of the
moneys raised thereby; And in default of such distress, or in case of
insufficiency, or inability of the offender to pay the said forfeitures or
penalties, that the party offending be set publicly in the Stocks by the space
of three hours. And all and singular, the forfeitures or penalties aforesaid,
shall be employed and converted to the use of the poor of the Parish where the
said offenses shall be committed, saving only, that it shall and may be
lawful to, and for any such Justice, Major, or head Officer or Officers, out
of the said forfeitures or penalties, to reward any person or persons that
shall inform of any offense against this Ordinance, according to their
discretions; so as such The Kings Declarations concerning Wakes, and
recreations, and concerning lawful sports to be used; and all other books and
pamphlets against the morality of the 4. Commandment, to be burnt publicly.
reward exceed not the third part of the forfeiture or penalties.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the Kings
Declaration concerning observing of Wakes, and use of exercise and recreation
upon the Lords day; The Book entitled, The Kings Majesty's Declaration to his
Subjects, concerning lawful sports to be used; and all other Books and
Pamphlets that have been, or shall be written, Printed or published against the
morality of the fourth Commandment, or of the Lord's Day, or to countenance the
profanation thereof, be called in, seized and suppressed, and publicly burnt
by the Justices of Peace, or some, or one of them, or by the chief Officer or
Officers aforesaid, in their several limits, or by their warrant or command.
Provided, and be it declared, That nothing in this Ordinance Meat to be dressed
in a moderate way for present necessity.
shall extend to the prohibiting of dressing of meat in private Families, or
the dressing and sale of Victuals in a moderate way in Innes, or
Victualling-houses, for the use of such as otherwise cannot be provided for; or
to the crying and selling of And milk to be sold according to the hours
appointed.
Milk before nine of the clock in the morning, or after four of the clock in
the afternoon, from the tenth of September, till the tenth of March: or before
eight of the clock in the morning, or after five of the clock in the afternoon,
from the tenth of March, till the tenth of September.

And whereas there is great breach of the Sabbath by Rogues, Vagabonds, and
Beggars, it is further Ordained, That the Lord Major of the City of London, and
all Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, All Laws against Rogues and Vagabonds to be put in due
execution, and care to be taken that they repair to some Church or Chapel
every Sabbath Day, there to remain during the time of Divine-worship.
shall from time to time cause all Laws against Rogues, Vagabonds and Beggars
to be put in due execution; and take Order that all Rogues, Vagabonds and
Beggars, do on every Sabbath Day repair to some Church or Chapel, and remain
there soberly and orderly during the time of Divine worship, And that all and
singular person and persons, that shall do any thing in the execution of this
Ordinance, shall be protected and saved harmless by the Power and Authority of
Parliament.

And be it further Ordained* that this Ordinance be printed and published, and
read in all Parish Churches and Chapels, before the Sermon in the morning, on
some Lards-day before the first of May next, on the South side of Trent, before
the first of June next, on the North side of Trent.

Die Sabbathi, 6. April. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be printed and published, and read in all Churches and Chapels, before the
Sermon in the morning, on some Lord's Day before May 1. next, on the South side
of Trent; and before Jun. 1. next on the North side of Trent.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Anno vicesimo primo JACOBI REGIS. CAP. XX. None shall profanely swear or
curse.
FOrasmuch as all profane swearing and cursing is forbidden by the Word of God,
Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that no
person or persons shall from henceforth profanely swear or curse: And that, if
any person or persons shall at any time or times hereafter offend herein,
either in the hearing of any Justice of Peace of the County, or of any Major,
Justice of Peace, Bailiffe, or head Officer of any City, or Town Corporate,
where such offense is, or shall be committed, or shall thereof be convicted by
the oaths of two For every profane oath or curse, the offender shall upon
conviction by two witnesses or confession, forfeit 12. d. to the poor.

The Constables, Chapter wardens, and Overseers for the poor shall by warrant of
the Justice of Peace levy the said forfeitures by distress.

In defect of distres, the offender (if above twelve years of age) shall be set
in the stocks 3. hours.

If under 12, years, and shall not forthwith pay the said 12. d. he shall be
whipped by the Constable, Parent, or Master.


witnesses, or by confession of the party before any Justice of Peace of the
County, or head Officer, or Justice of the Peace in the City or Town Corporate
where such offense is, or shall be committed; To which end, every Justice of
Peace, and every such head Officer shall have power by this Act to minister the
same Oath: That then every such offender shall for every time so offending,
forfeit and pay to the use of the poor of that Parish, where the same offense
is, or shall be committed, the sum of twelve pence. And it shall also be
lawful for the Constable, Churchwardens, and Overseers of the poor of that
Parish, by warrant from such justice of Peace, or head Officer, to levy the
same sum and sums of money, by distress, and sale of the offenders goods,
rendering to the party the overplus. And in defect of such distress, the
offender, if he or she be above the age of 12. years, shall by warrant from
such Justice of the Peace, or head Officer, be set in the Stocks by three whole
hours; but if the offender be under the age of twelve years, and shall not
forthwith pay the sum of twelve pence, Then he or she, by warrant of such
Justice of Peace, or head Officer, shall be whipped by the Constable, or by the
parent or master in his presence.

And be it further enacted, That if any such offender shall If the offender sue
any officer for distraining, whipping, or stocking, the defendant may plead the
general issue.
commence any Suit in Law against any Officer or other, for such distraining,
sale of goods, whipping, or setting in the stocks, the Defendant, or Defendants
may plead the general Issue, and give the special matter in evidence to the
Jury at the trial. And if it be found against the Plaintiff, or that the
Plaintiff be nonsuit, And have good costs
the Defendant or Defendants shall be allowed good Costs, to be taxed by the
Court.

Provided nevertheless, that every offense against this Law, Every offense
shall be complained of, and proved within twenty days.

Thsi Act shall be read in every church upon the Lord's Day, twice every year.


shall be complained of, and proved, as abovesaid, within twenty days after
the offense committed.

And it is also enacted, That this Act shall be read in every Parish Church by
the Minister thereof, upon the Sunday after Evening prayer, twice in the year.

Anno primo JACOBI REGIS. CAP. IX. Several Penalties of Alehouse-keepers, for
their several Offenses.
Whereas the ancient, true and principal use of Innes, Alehouses The true and
principal use of Innes, Alehouses, and other Victualling-houses.
and Victualling-houses, was for the receipt, and lodging of wayfaring people
traveling from place to place, and for such supply of the wants of such people
as are not able by greater quantities to make their provision of Victuals, and
not meant for entertainment and harboring of lewd and idle people to spend and
consume their money and their time in lewd and drunken manner:

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that if after forty days next ensuing after the end of this present
Session of Parliament, any Inne-keeper, Victualler or Ale-house-keeper within
this Realm of England, or the Dominion of Wales, do permit or suffer any person
or persons inhabiting and dwelling in any City, Town Corporate, Market Town,
Village or Hamlet within this Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, where
any such Inn, Alehouse, or Tipling-house, is or shall be to remain and
continue drinking or tippling in the said Inn, Victualling house,
Tipling-house, or Alehouse, other then such as shall be invited by any
Traveller, and shall accompany him during his necessary abode there: and other
then Laboring and Handicrafts-men, in Cities and Towns Corporate, and Market
Towns, upon the usual working days, for one hour at dinner time, to take
their diet in an Alehouse: and other then Laborers and Workmen, which for
the following of their work by the day or by the If an Ale-house-keeper suffer
a dweller of the Town or Village where the Inn, or Alehouse is, to continue
drinking there (but such as shall be invited by a Traveller) he shall for every
offense forfeit 10. s: to the poor.

Such offense being seen by any Major, or Justice, or proved by oath of two
witnesses, to be taken by such Major or Justice.

21. Jac. 7. one witness is to be taken. If he sell less then an Ale-quart of
the best Bear or Ale for a penny, and 2. quarts of the small, he shall forfeit
20. s. to the poor for every offense, proved as above limited.

The said penalties to be leyied by the Constables and Chapter Wardens by distres,


great in any City, Town Corporate, Market Town or Village, shall for the time
of their said continuing in work there, sojourn, lodge, or victual in any
Inn, Alehouse, or other Victuallinghouse, other then for urgent and necessary
occasions, to be allowed by two Justices of Peace, That then every such
Inne-keeper, Victualler, or Ale-house-keeper, shall for every such offense
forfeit and lose the sum of ten shillings of current money of England, to the
use of the poor of the Parish where such offense shall be committed: the same
offense being viewed and seen by any Major, Bailiffe or Justice of Peace within
their several limits, or proved by the oath of two witnesses, to be taken
before any Major, Bailiffe or any other head Officer, or any one or more
Justice or Justices of the Peace, who by virtue of this Act, shall be
authorized to minister the said oath to any person or persons that can or will
justify the same, being within the limits of their said Commission.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Inne-keeper,
Alehouse-keeper or Victualler, shall at any time utter or sell less then one
full Ale quart of the best Beer or Ale for a penny, and of the small two quarts
for one penny, That then every such Inne-keeper, Ale-house-keeper or Victualler,
shall forfeit for every such offense being duly proved in manner above limited,
the sum of twenty shillings of lawful money of England, to the use
abovesaid, All and every the said penalties to be levied by the Constables or
Churchwardens of the Parish or Parishes where the offense or offenses shall be
committed, by way of distress to be taken and detained for the said
forfeitures, and for default of satisfaction within six days next ensuring,
the same then to be presenlty apprised and sold, and the surplusage or
remainder over and above to be delivered to And for want of distress, the
offender to be committed to the common jail, till he pay the penalty.
the party, of whom the distress was taken, and for want of sufficient
distress, the party or parties offending, to be by the Major, Bailiffe, other
head Officer, or Justice or Justices aforesaid, committed to the common Jail,
there to remain until the said penalty or penalties be truly paid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if the Constables
or Churchwardens do neglect their duty in levying, or do not levy the said
several penalties, or in default of distress or distresses, from time to
time, do neglect to certify the same default of distress, by the space of
twenty days then next ensuing, to the Major, Bailiffe, or other head Officer,
or Justice of Peace within whose Jurisdiction the offense is committed: Then
every person and persons so offending, shall forfeit for every such default,
the sum of forty shillings of current If the Constables or churchwardens
neglect to levy, or to certify the default of distress by twenty days, they
shall forfeit for every default 40. s.
money of England, to the use of the poor of the Parish where such offense
shall be committed, to be levied by way of distress of the offenders goods, by
warrant from any one or more Justice or Justices of Peace, Major, Bailiffe, or
other head Officers within the limits of their Jurisdictions respectively,
under his or their hand and seal, to be taken and detained for the said
forfeitures, for the space of six days then next ensuing, Within which time if
payment be not made, the same goods to be presently apprised and fold* and the
surplusage and remainder over and above (if any be) to be delivered to the
party of whom the distress was taken: And for want of such sufficient
distress, the Constables, Churchwarden or Churchwardens so offending, to be by
the Major, Bailiffe, or other head Officer, Justice or Justices of Peace,
committed to the common Jail, there to remain until the said penalty or
penalties be truly paid: for all For all which levies the Constables or
Churchwardens shall be accomptable to their Successors and other the
Parishioners.
which penalties, which so shall be levied by the said Constables or
Churchwardens, they the said Constables and Churchwardens, shall be accomptable
to their successors and other the parishioners, in such sort as they usually
be in other Church reckonings or accounts. And for all forfeitures to be levied
by reason of any neglect of the Constables or Churchwardens, those shall be
accomptable, who by force of any Warrant or Precept do levy the same, or upon
the enlargement of persons committed, do receive the same.

And be it further enacted, That all other Laws and Statutes touching
Inne-keepers, Victuallers, and Ale-house-keepers, shall still remain in their
former force, and be put in due execution.

This Act to continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority of this The punishment of
offenders against this Law in either of the Universities, to be ministered by
the Governors, Magistrates, Justices of the Peace, or other principal
Officers of the same.

And that all penalties and sums of money forfeit and lost by force of this
Act within the said universities, shall be levied by the Officers and Ministers
of the same, as shall he appointed by the Vicechancellors for the time being.

And that the said Governors, Magistrates and principal Officers shall have
the like power and authority to imprison or otherwise, as in this Act is before
appointed.


present Parliament, that the correction and punishment of such as shall offend
against this Act or any part thereof within either of the two Universities of
this Realm, or the Precincts or Liberties of the same, shall be done upon the
offenders, and Justice shall be ministered in this behalf, according to the
intent and true meaning of this Law, by the Governors, Magistrates, Justices
of the Peace or other principal Officers of either of the same Universities,
to whom in other cases the administration of Justice, and correction, and
punishment of offenders by the Laws of this Realm and their several Charters
does belong or appertain, and that no other within their Liberties for any
matter concerning this Law contrary to their several Charters, do intermeddle,
and that all penalties and sums of money to be forfeited or lost by force of
this Act, within either of the Universities, or the Liberties or Precincts of
the same, shall be levied by the Officers or Ministers of either of the said
Universities, to be from time to time in that behalf appointed by the
Vicechancellours thereof for the time being respectively, And that all powers
and authorities either of imprisonment or otherwise, before given or appointed
by this Act, shall by the Governors, Magistrates and principal Officers
abovesaid of either of the Universities, be duly executed and done within
either of the said Universities, and the Liberties and Precincts of the same,
according to the true intent and meaning of this Act. 21. Jac. 7. made
perpetual.

Anno quarto JACOBI REGIS. CAP. V. The Penalty of a Drunkard, and of him that
continues drinking in an Alehouse.
Whereas the loathsome and odious sin of Drunkenness is Drunkenness the root
and foundation of all other abominations.
of late grown into common use within this Realm, being the root and foundation
of many other enormous sins, as Bloodshed, Stabbing, Murder, Swearing,
Fornication, Adultery, and such like, to the great dishonor of God, and of our
Nation, the overthrow of many good Arts and munuall Trades, the disabling of
diverse Workmen, and the general impoverishing of many good Subjects, abusively
wasting the good creatures of God:

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same,
That all and every person or persons, which after forty days next following
the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall be drunk, and of the same
offense of drunkenness shall be lawfully convicted, shall for every such
offense forfeit and lose five shillings of lawful Every one convicted of
drunkenness shall for every offense forfeit 5. s. to the poor.
money of England, to be paid within one week next after his, her, or their
conviction thereof, to the hands of the Churchwardens of that Parish where the
offense shall be committed, who shall be accomptable thereof to the use of the
poor of the Parish. And if the said person or persons so convicted, shall
refuse or neglect to pay the said forfeiture as aforesaid, then the And for
default of payment to be levied of the offenders goods.
same shall be from time to time levied of the goods of every such person or
persons, so refusing or neglecting to pay the same, by Warrant of Precept from
the same Court, Judge, or Justices, before whom the same conviction shall be.
And if the offender or offenders be not able to pay the sum of five
shillings, If not able to pay the said, 5. s. to be committed to the stocks for
every offense six hours.
Then the offender or offenders shall be committed to the Stocks, for every
offense, there to remain by the space of six hours.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any Constable,
or any other inferior Officer of that Parish or place where the offense shall
be committed, to whom that shall be given in charge by the Precept of any
Major, Bailiffe, other head Officer, or Justices of the Peace within their
several Limits, do neglect the due correction of the said offender, or the due
levying of the said penalties, where distress may be had, Then every person so
offending, shall forfeit the sum of ten If the Constable neglect the due
correction, or levying, (where disTres may be had) he shall forfeit 10. s. to
the poor, to be levied by distress by any other person having warrant from any
Justice where the conviction shall be.
shillings of current money of England, to the use of the poor of the same
Parish, or place where the offense shall be committed, to be levied by way of
distress by any other person or persons, having Warrant from any Major,
Bailiffe, or other head Officer, Justices of Peace, or Court, where any such
conviction shall be. And to be paid to the Churchwardens as before limited, who
are also to account for the same to the use aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons within this Realm of England, or the Dominions of Wales, shall remain
or continue drinking or tippling in any Inn, Victualling-house, or Alehouse,
being in the same City, Town, Village, or Hamlet, wherein the said person or
persons (so remaining tiplign or drinking) does dwell and inhabit at the time
of such drinking and tippling, And the same being viewed and seen by any Major,
or other head Officer, Justice or Justices of Peace within their several
Limits, or duly proved in such manner and form as is limited in and by one Act
of Parliament, made in the first Session of this present Parliament, entitled,
An Act to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling in Innes, Alehouses,
and other Victualling-houses, unless it be in such case or cases, as be
tolerated or excepted in the said Act, That then every person or persons so
offending, shall forfeit and lose for every such offense the sum of three
shillings 3. 8. 4. d. for every offense of continuing drinking in an Alehouse
of the town or village where the party (so drinking) does dwell.
and four pence, of current money of England, to the use of the poor of the
Parish where the said offense shall be committed, to be levied by way of
distress, in such manner and form as is before appointed by this Act, for the
levying of the penalty of five shillings for being drunk. And if it happen that
any offender or offenders, against the true intent of this Clause or Branch,
being thereof lawfully convicted, be not able to pay the said forfeiture or
forfeitures, Then it shall and may be lawful for any Major, Bailiffe, or other
head Officer, Justice or Justices of Peace, or Court, where any such conviction
shall be, to punish the said offender or offenders, by setting him, her, or
them in the Stocks for every such offense, by the space of four hours.

For the more due execution of this Statute, and for the better and more due
proceeding against such offenders, all offenses of Drunkenness and of excess
and unmeasurable Drinking, Be it further enacted by the authority of this
present Parliament, That all the offenses in this Act, and in the said former
Act All offenses in this Act shall be presented before the Judges of Assise,
Justices of Peace and before the Major, and head Officer of every City or Town
Corporate.
mentioned, shall be from time to time diligently enquired of, and presented
before the Justices of Assizes in their Circuit, Justices of Peace in their
Quarter or Ordinary Sessions, and before the Majors, Bailiffs, or other head
Officers of every City or Town Corporate, who have power to enquire of
Trespasses, Riots, Routs, Forces, and such like offenses, and in every Court
Leet, and thereupon such due proceeding shall be against the offender or
offenders, for their due conviction in that behalf, as in such like cases, upon
any Indictment or Presentment is used by the Laws of the Realm, or Customs of
the City, Town or place where such Presentment or Indictment shall be enquired
of and found.

And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons being once lawfully convicted of the said offense of Drunkenness,
shall after that be again lawfully convicted of the like offense of
Drunkenness, That then every person or persons so secondly convicted of the
said offense of Drunkenness, shall be bounden with two Sureties to our
Sovereign The offender upon second conviction shall be bound with two sureties
to be of good behavior.
Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, in one Recognisance or
Obligation of ten pounds, with Condition, to be from thenceforth of good
behavior.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all Constables,
Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tythingmen, Alecunners, All Constabl.
Headboroughs, Tithingmen, Ale-cunners, and Sidemen shall present the offenses
against this Statute.
and Sidemen, shall in their several Oaths, incident to their several
Offices, be charged in like sort to present the offenses contrary to this
Statute.

Provided always, That this Act or any thing therein contained* do not in any
wise abridge or restrain the Ecclesiastical No restraint of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction.
power or Jurisdiction, but that all Ordinaries, and other Ecclesiastical
Judges and Officers shall and may proceed to enquire of, censure, and punish
all such offenders, according to the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm, in
such manner and form, as before they lawfully might do, Any thing in this Act
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, That when any of the offenders against the There shall be but
one punishment for one offense.
true intent of this Act, or any Branch or Article thereof, has been once
punished or corrected for his or her offense, by any the ways and means before
limited* That then the said offender shall not be eftsoons punished or
corrected for the same offense by any other ways or means.

Provided always, That this Act, or any thing therein contained, The Liberties
of the Universities shall not be prejudiced.
shall not be prejudicial to either of the two Universities of this Land, But
that the Chancellor, Masters and Scholars, and the Successors of them, and
either of them may as fully use and enjoy all their Jurisdictions, Rights,
Privileges, and Charters, as heretofore they have, or might have done: Any
thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, That no person or persons shall be punished, No punishment if
not questioned within six months*
impeached, or molested for any offense mentioned in this Statute, unless he
shall be for the same offense presented, indicted, or convicted within six
months after such offense committed. This Act to continue until the end of
the first Session of the next Parliament. 21. Jac. 7. made perpetual.

Anno septimo JACOBI REGIS. CAP. X. The Penalty for an Offense committed
against any of the Branches of the Statutes of 1 Jac. 9. or 4. Jac. 5. touching
Alehouse-keepers and Drunkards.
Whereas notwithstanding all former Laws and Provisions already made, the
inordinate and extreme vice of excessive Drinking and Drunkenness does more
and more abound, to the great offense of Almighty God, and the wastfull
destruction of Gods good creatures: Be it enacted by the authority of The
Ale-house-keeper upon conviction for any offense against the Statutes of 1.
Jac. 9. or 4. Jac. 5. shall for 3. years next after such conviction be
disabled to keep any Alehouse. 21. Jac. 7.
this present Parliament, That if any person being an Ale-housekeeper (after
six weeks next ensuing this present Session of Parliament) shall be lawfully
convicted for any offense or offenses committed against any of the Branches of
two former Acts of Parliament, made sithence the beginning of this present
Parliament, the one entitled, An Act to restrain the inordinate haunting and
tippling in Innes, Alehouses, and other Victualling-houses: the other
entitled, An Act against the odious and loathsome sin of Drunkenness, That
then every person or persons so convicted, shall for the space of three years
next ensuing the said conviction, be utterly disabled to keep any such
Alehouse.

Anno vicesimo primo JACOBI REGIS. CAP. VII. The Statutes of 1. Jac. 9. and 4.
Jac. 5. made perpetual. One witness shall be sufficient to convince a man of
Tippling or Drunkenness.
Whereas one Statute entitled, An Act to restrain the inordinate haunting or
tippling in Innes, Alehouses, and other Victualling-houses, made in the first
year of his Highness* happy reign of England, And another Statute, entitled,
An Act to repress the odious and loathsome sin of Drunkenness, made in the
fourth year of his Highness reign of England, were 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5.
With the alterations and additions hereafter expressed, made perpetual.

Where by those Statutes proof of 2. witnesses was required. It is enacted,
That one witness shall be sufficient.

That after the confession of one offender, his oath shall be sufficient proof
against any other offending at the same time.


made to continue to the end of the first Session of the next Parliament, and
by experience have been found good and necessary Laws: Be it therefore enacted,
That the said Statutes, with the alterations and additions hereafter expressed,
shall be put in due execution, and continue for ever: And whereas by the said
Statutes, proof of two witnesses is required, Be it enacted, that proof of one
witness from henceforth shall be allowed and taken for sufficient in that
behalf: And that the voluntary confession (before any such persons, as by the
said Act are authorized to minister the Oath) of any person offending either of
the said Statutes, shall suffice to convince the Person so offending, after
such confession, the oath of the party so offending, shall and may be taken,
and be a sufficient proof against any other offending at the same time.

And be it further enacted, That if any person or persons, wheresoever his, or
their habitation or abiding be, shall at any time hereafter be found upon view,
or his own confession, He that stays tippling in an Inn or Alehouse
(wheresoever he dwells) shall be within the said Statutes, as if he dwelt within
the City or Town where the Inn or Alehouse is.
or proof of one witness, to be tippling in any Inn, Alehouse, or
Victualling-house, such person or persons shall be from henceforth adjudged and
construed to be within the said Statutes, as if he or they had inhabited and
dwelt in the City, Town Corporate, Market Town, Village or Hamlet, where the
said Inn, Alehouse or Victualling-house is, or shall be, where he or they
shall be so found tippling, and shall incur the like penalty, and the same to
be in such sort levied and disposed, as in the said Act is expressed,
concerning such as there inhabit: and And shall incur the like penalties.
the voluntary confession of such person or persons so offending, before such
as by the said statutes are authorized to minister the, Oath, shall suffice to
convince themselves, and after such confession, the Oath of such person or
persons so confessing, shall, and may be taken by such as by the said Act have
authority to minister an Oath, and shall be a sufficient proof against any
other, offending at that time.

And be it further enacted, That any Justice of Peace in any That any Justice
or Head-officer, upon his view, confession of the party, or proof of one
witness upon oath before him, shall have power to convince any person of
drunkenness, whereby such person so convict shall forfeit 5. s. for every such
offense to be levied, or the offender otherwise punished, as in the aforesaid
Statute is appointed.

And for the second offense sha be bound to be of good behavior.

If any Alehouse keeper be convict for any offense against the branches of
either of the said two former Statutes, or against this Statute, he shall be
disabled to keep any Alehouse for three years after.


County, and any Justice of Peace or other head Officer in any City, or Town
Corporate, within their Limits respectively, shall from henceforth have power
and authority, upon his own view, confession of the party, or proof of one
witness upon Oath before him, which he by virtue of this Act shall have power
to administer, to convince any person of the offense of Drunkenness, whereby
such person so convict, shall incur the forfeiture of five shillings, for
every such offense, and the same to be levied, or the offender otherwise
punished, as in the said Statute is appointed. And for the second offense,
shall become bound to the good behavior, as if he had been convicted in open
Sessions, Any thing in the said former Statute, made in the fourth year of his
Majesty's reign, to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, That if any person being an Alehouse-keeper, or
that shall at any time hereafter be an Alehousekeeper, shall at any time
herafter be lawfully convict for any offense, against any the Branches of
either of the said two former Statutes, according to the alterations and
additions therein contained, or against the true meaning of this present
Statute, That every person so convict, shall for the space of three years, next
ensuing the said conviction, be utterly disabled to keep any such Alehouse.

And whereas in the said Statute, made in the fourth year of his said Majesty's
reign, entitled, An Act to repress the odious Constables, Churchwardens, Head
Boroughs, Tithingmen Ale-cunners, and Sidemen, are enlarged, and charged to
present all offenses against the Statute, 1 Jac. 9. and against the alterations
and additions in this Act
and loathsome sin of Drunkenness, Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs,
Tithing-men, Ale-cunners, and Sidemen, are appointed in the Oaths incident to
their Offices, to be likewise charged to present the offenses contrary to the
said Statute, Be it enacted, That the said Oath shall always hereafter be also
enlarged, and extend to present all offenses done, contrary to the statute made
in the first Session of Parliament, held in the first year of his Highness
reign, entitled, An Act to restrain the inordinate haunting and tippling in
Innes and Alehouses, and other Victualling-houses, with the alterations and
additions in this Act contained, made in the said fourth year of his said
Majesty's reign according to the alterations and additions of the same, in this
Act expressed, Stat. 1. Car. 4.

Anno primo CAROLI REGIS. CAP. IV. Forreiners as well as Inhabitants shall not
be permitted to tipple in Innes, Alehouses, etc.
Whereas in the last Parliament it was enacted, That if any person or persons,
wheresoever his or their habitation, or abiding be, should after be found, upon
view or his own confession, or proof of one witness, to be tippling in any
Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house; such person or persons should be
thenceforth adjudged and construed to be within the Statutes of the first and
fourth years of the late Kings Majesty's reign, King James of famous memory:
The one entitled, An Every Alehouse keeper that shall suffer any person or
persons not dwelling in the city or town where the Alehouse is, to tipple in
his Alehouse contrary to the true intent of any the said three Statutes, shall
incur the same penalty as is appointed 1 Jac. 9. for suffering such to tipple
as dwell in the same City or town.
Act to restrain the inordinate haunting of tippling in Innes, Alehouses, and
other Victualling-houses: And the other entitled, An Act to repress the
odious and loathsome sin of Drunkenness, as if he or they had inhabited and
dwelled in the City, Town Corporate, Market Town, Village or Hamlet, where the
Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house was, or should be, where he or they
should be so found tippling, should incur the like penalty, and the same to be
in such sort levied and disposed, as in the said Act is expressed, concerning
such as there inhabit, but no punishment by any, or either of the said Acts, or
by any other Statute, is inflicted upon the Inne-keeper, Ale-house-keeper, or
Victualler, that permits, or suffers such person or persons not there
inhabiting, to tipple in his Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling-house: For remedy
whereof, Be it enacted, That every Inne-keeper, Ale-house-keeper, and other
Victualler, that at any time after the end of this Session of Parliament, shall
permit and suffer any person or persons, not inhabiting in the City, Town
Corporat, Market Town, Village or Hamlet, where such Inn, Alehouse, or
Victualling-house is or shall be, to tipple in the said Inn, Alehouse or
Victualling-house, contrary to the true intent of any, or either of the said
former Statutes, the said Inne-keeper, Alehouse keeper and Victualler so
offending, shall incur the same penalty, and in such manner to be proved,
levied and disposed, as in the former Statute of the first year of his said
late Majesty's reign, is appointed for permitting such to tipple as dwell in
the same City, Town Corporate, Market Town, Village or Hamlet. Taverns and such
as sell wine, and do also keep Inns or victualling, shall be within the said
two former statutes, and this statute.


And be it further enacted, That the keepers of Taverns, and such as do sell
wine in their houses, and do also keep Innes or Vicaualling in their houses,
shall be taken to be within the said two former Statutes, and also within this
Statute.

Anno quinto and sexto EDWARDI sexti. CAP. XXV. None shall sell Ale or Beer
without License, and they shall be bound by Recognisance.
FOrasmuch as intolerable hurts and troubles to the Commonwealth of this Realm,
daily do grow and increase through such abuses and disorders, as are had and
used in common Alehouses, and other houses called tipling-houses: It is
therefore enacted by the King our Sovereign Lord, with the assent of the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that the Justices of Peace within every Shire, City, Borough, Town
Corporate, Franchise, or Liberty within this Realm, or two of them at the
least, (whereof one of them to be of the Quorum) shall have full power and
authority by virtue of this Act, within every Shire, City, Borough, or Town
Corporate, Franchise, and Liberty where they be Justices of Peace, to remove,
discharge, and put away The Justices of Peace may discharge common selling of
Ale and Beer.
common selling of Ale and Beer, in the said common Alehouses, and tippling
houses, in such Town or Towns, and places where they shall think meet and
convenient. And that none after the first day of May next coming, shall be
admitted or suffered to keep any common Alehouse, or tippling house, but such
as shall be thereunto admitted and allowed in the open Sessions of the Peace,
or else by two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum. And that
the said Justices of the Peace, or 2. of them (whereof the one to be of the
Quorum) shall take bond and surety, from time to time, by Recognisance Recog.
with surety by those that do keep Alehouse.
of such as shall be admitted, and allowed hereafter to keep any common
Alehouse, or tipling-house, as well for, and against the using of unlawful
games, as also for the using and maintenance of good order and rule, to be had
and used within the same, as by their discretion shall be thought necessary,
and convenient: for making of every which Recognisance, the party Twelve pence
for making the Recog.
or parties that shall be bound, shall pay but twelve pence.

And the said Justices shall certify the same Recognisance at the next quarter
Sessions of the Peace, to be holden within the same Shire, City, Borough, Town
Corporate, Franchise or Liberty where such Alehouse or tippling house shall be.
The same Recog. there to remain of Record before the Justices of Peace of that
Shire, City, Borough, Town Corporate, Franchise, or Liberty, upon pain of
forfeiture to the King for every such Recog. taken and not certified, the sum
of three pound six shillings eight pence.

And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the Inquiry of
those which have forfeited their recognisance.
Justices of Peace of every Shire, City, Borough, Town Corporate, Franchise,
and Liberty, where such Recognisance shall be taken, shall have power and
authority by this Act, in their quarter Sessions of the Peace, by presentment,
information, or otherwise by their discretion, to inquire of all such persons
as shall be admitted and allowed to keep any Alehouse, or tippling house, and
that be bound by Recognisance as is abovesaid, if they or any of them have done
any Act or Acts, whereby they or any of them have forfeited the same
Recognisance. And the said Justices of every Shire, and places where they be
Justices, shall upon every such presentment, or information, award Process
against every such person so presented, or complained upon before them, to show
why he should not forfeit his Recognisance, and shall have power and authority
by this Act, to hear and to determine the same by all such ways and means, as
by their discretion shall be thought good.

And it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if The punishment
of those which contrary to the commandment of the Justices do keep Alehouse. 3
Car. 3.
any person or persons, other then such as shall be hereafter admitted and
allowed by the said Justices, shall after the said first day of May,
obstinately, and upon his own authority take upon him or them to keep a common
Alehouse, or tippling house, or shall contrary to the commandment of the said
Justices, or two of them, use commonly selling of Ale and Beer: that then the
said Justices of Peace, or two of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) shall
for every such offense, commit every such person or persons so offending to the
common Jail within the said Shire, City, Borough, Town Corporate, Franchise,
or Liberty, there to remain without bail or mainprise, by the space of three
days. And before his or their deliverance, the said Justice shall take
Recognisance of him or them so committed, with two sureties, that he or they
shall not keep any common Alehouse, tippling house, or use commonly selling of
Ale or Beer, as by the discretion of the said Justices shall be seen convenient.

And the said Justices shall make certificate of every such Recognisance, and
offense, at the next quarter Sessions that shall Certificate of the Recog. and
offense at the Quarter Sessions.
be holden within the same Shire, City, Borough, Town Corporate, Franchise or
Liberty, where the same shall be committed or done. Which certificate shall be
a sufficient conviction in the Law, of the same offense. And the said Justices
of Peace upon the said certificate made, shall in open Sessions assesse the
fine for every such offense at twenty shillings.

Provided always, that in any such Towns and places where any Fair or Fairs
shall be kept, that for the time only of the The fine of those which keep
Alehouse without License.
same Fair or Fairs, it shall be lawful for every person and persons, to use
common selling of Ale or Beer in Booths, or other places there, for the relief
of the Kings Subjects that shall repair to the same, in such manner and sort as
has been used and A Proviso for Towns where Fairs be kept.
done in time passed. This Act, or any thing therein contrary, notwithstanding.
1. Jac. 9. 4. Jac. 4. 11. H. 7. 2. 3. Car. 3.

Anno tertio CAROLI REGIS. CAP. III. The forfeiture and punishment of him that
keeps an Alehouse without License.
Whereas by an Act made in the fifth year of the reign of King Eward the sixth
of famous memory entitled, An Act for keepers of Alehouses to be bound by
Recognizance, amongst other things, it is enacted, That if any person or
persons, other then such as should be from thenceforth admitted and allowed by
the Justices mentioned in the said Act, should Every person obstinately keeping
an Alehouse or Tippling-house contrary to the commandment of the Justices to
be committed to prison for the space of three days, there to remain without
Bail or mainprise. 5. and 6. Exd. 6. 25.
after the day in the said Act limited, obstinately, and upon his own
authority, take upon him or them to keep a common Alehouse, or Tippling house,
or should contrary to the commandment of the Justices, or two of them, use
commonly selling of Ale or Beer, That then the said Justices of Peace, or two
of them (whereof one to be of the Quorum) should for every such offense, commit
every such person or persons so offending to the common Jail within the Shire,
City, Borough, Town Corporate, Franchise or Liberty, there to remain without
Bail or Mainprise, by the space of three days: And before his or their
deliverance, the said Justices should take Recognisance of him or them so
committed, with two Sureties that he or they should not keep any common
Alehouse, Tippling house, or use commonly selling of Ale or Beer, as by the
discretion of the said Justices should seem convenient: And the said Justices
should make Certificat of every such Recognizance and Offense, at the next
Quarter Sessions that should be holden within the same Shire, City, Borough,
Town Corporate, Franchise or Liberty, where the same should be committed or
done, which Certificat, should be a sufficient conviction in Law of the same
offense: And the said Justices of Peace, upon the said Certificate made, should
in open Sessions, assesse the Fine for every such offense at twenty shillings,
as by the said Act may appear: Which Law has not wrought such reformation as
was intended, for that the said Fine of twenty shillings is seldom levied, and
for that many of the said offenders, by reason of their poverty, are neither
able to pay the said Fine of twenty shillings, nor yet to bear their own
charges of conveying them to the Jail; and moreover, do leave a great charge
of wife and children upon the Parishes wherein they live: In regard whereof,
the Constables and other Officers are much discouraged in presenting them, and
the offenders become obstinate and incorrigible.

For remedy whereof, Be it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament,
That if any person or persons, after forty Every one that keeps an Alehouse
without License shall for every offense lose 20.s to the poor.
days next ensuing the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall upon
his own authority, not being thereunto lawfully licenced, take upon him, her,
or them, to keep a common Alehouse, or Tipling-house, or use commonly selling
of Ale, Beer, Cider, or Perry, That then every such person or persons shall
for every such offense forfeit and lose the sum of twenty shillings of
current money of England, to the use of the poor of the Parish where such
offense shall be committed; The same offense being viewed and seen by any
Mayor, Bailiffe, or Justice of Peace, or other head Officer, within the
several limits, or confessed by the party so offending, or proved by the oath
of two witnesses, to be taken before any Mayor, Bailiffe, or other head
Officer, or any one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace, who by virtue of
this Act shall be authorized to minister the said Oath to any person or persons
that can or will justify the same, being within the limits of their said
Commission; Upon conviction the penalty is to be levied by the Constables or
Churchwardens for the poor by way of distress upon warrant from the Mavor or
Justice.
The said penalty to be levied by the Constables or Churchwardens of the
Parish or Parishes where the said offense shall be committed; Who shall be
accountable therefore to the use of the poor of the said Parish by way of
distress, to be taken and detained by Warrant or Precept, from the said Mayor,
Bailiffe, Justice or Justices, or other head Officer, by whom the said offense
shall be viewed, or before whom the same shall be confessed, or proved as
aforesaid: And for default of satisfaction, within three days next ensuing,
the said distress to be by the said Constables or Churchwardens apprised and
sold, and the overplus to be delivered to the party or parties offending, and
this to be only for the first offense. And if such offender or Through defect
of distress or not payment of the said 20, shillings within six days after
conviction the offender to be committed to a Constable, or to be apprehended,
and openly whipped for the said offense, as the Justice shall limit or appoint.
offenders shall not have sufficient goods and chattels, whereby the said
twenty shillings may be levied by way of distress as aforesaid, or shall not
pay the said sum of twenty shillings, within six days after such conviction
as aforesaid, That then the said Mayor, Bailiffe, Justice or Justices, or other
head Officer, before whom the said offender shall be convicted as aforesaid,
shall commit all and every the said offender or offenders to some Constable or
Constables, or other inferior Officer or Officers, of the City, Borough, Town,
Parish, or Hamlet, where the offense shall be committed, or the party
apprehended, to be openly whipped for the said offense, as the said Justice or
Justices shall limit or appoint.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any If the Constable
neglect to execute his Warrant or punishment on the offender, he shall be
committed to the Common Jail until he cause the said punishment to be
executed, or pay 40. s. to the use of the poor for his contempt.
Constable or inferior Officer shall neglect to execute the said Precept, or
Warrant, or do refuse, or do not execute by himself, or some other to be by him
appointed, upon the offender the punishment limited by this Statute, that in
that case it shall and may be lawful for the said Mayor, Bailiffe, Justice or
Justices of Peace, or other head Officer, to commit the Constable, or other
inferior Officer so refusing, or not executing the said punishment by himself,
or some other, to the common Jail of the said County, City, or Town Corporate,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, until the said offender or
offenders shall be by the said Constable or Constables, or other inferior
Officer so refusing, or not executing the said punishment, or some by his or
their procurement, punished and whipped, as is above limited and declared, or
until he or they so neglecting or refusing, shall have paid the sum of forty
shillings of lawful Upon the second offense and conviction of an unlicensed
alehouse-keeper, he or she shall be committed to the house of correction, till
by order of the Justices in their general Sessions he or she shall be freed.
money of England unto the use of the poor of the Parish for their said
contempt.

And be it further enacted, that if the said offender or offenders being an
unlicenced Ale-house-keeper, shall offend in any of the Premises the second
time, and be thereof lawfully convicted in manner and form aforesaid, That then
the said Mayor, Bailiffe, Justice or Justices of the Peace, or other head
Officer shall commit him, her or them unto the house of Correction, there to
remain for the space of one month, and be dealt withal as idle, lewd, and
disorderly persons. And if such person or persons shall again offend, and shall
be thereof convicted, as aforesaid, That then the said offender or offenders
for every such offense, shall be committed unto the said house of Correction,
as aforesaid, there to remain until by the order of the Justices in their
general Sessions for the County, City, Borough, or Franchise, he, she, or they
shall be delivered from thence.

Provided always, that such offender or offenders, as shall be No offender
having been once punished either by the former Statute of Ed. 6. or this
Statute shall be punished again.
punished by virtue of this Act, shall not be punished again for the same
offense by the former Act, made in the fifth year of King Edward the sixth
before mentioned. And that such offender or offenders as shall be punished by
virtue of the before mentioned Act, made in the fifth year of King Edward the
sixth, shall not be punished again for the same offense, by virtue of this
present Act, nor any thing therein contained.

Provided always, that in such towns and places, where any That during the
time of Fairs only any person may sell ale or beer.
Fair or Faires shall be kept, that for the time only of the same Fair or
Faires, it shall be lawful for every person or persons to use common selling
of Ale or Beer in Booths or other places there, for the relief of the Kings
Subjects that shall repair unto the same, in such like manner and sort, as has
been used and done in times past, this Act or any thing therein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding. Stat. 11. H. 7. 2. 1. Jac. 9. 4. Jac. 5. 7. Jac.
10. 21. Jac. 7. 1. Car. 4.

Anno quarto JACOBI REGIS. CAP. IV. In what case only Ale or Beer may be sold
to an Alehousekeeper having no License.
FOr the better repressing of Alehouses, whereof the multitudes None shall sell
or deliver Beer or Ale to any person that shall sell it as a common tippler or
Alehouse keeper, not having any license then in force to sell Ale, and Beer,
upon pain of six shillings eight pence for every barrel, so sold or delivered.
and abuses have been and are found intolerable, and still do and are like to
increase, Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same,
That no person or persons, by himself, or by any other ways or means, directly
or indirectly, shall at any time after three months next after the end of this
present Session of Parliament, sell, utter, or deliver, or cause to be sold,
uttered, or delivered any Beer or Ale, to any person or persons, or into the
house or cellar of any person or persons, that then shall sell or utter Beer or
Ale, as a common Tipler, or Ale-house-keeper, the same person not having any
Licenee then in force to sell Ale or Beer, other then for the convenient use
and expense of his, her, or their household only, upon pain to forfeit for every
barrel sold, uttered or delivered contrary to the form and true meaning of
this Act, the sum of six shillings eight pence, and so after that rate for a
greater or lesser quantity.

And be it further enacted by that authority aforesaid, That all offenses to be
done, or committed, contrary to the true meaning All offenses against this Act
shall be heard and determined in the Sessions of the peace for the County, City
or Town where the offense is committed by action of debt, information,
Indictment or presentment.
of this Act, and all penalties aforesaid, shall be enquired of, sued for,
heard and determined in the Sessions of the Peace for the County, City, or
Borough, Town, or Liberty, or in the Court of Record of the City, Borough,
Town, or Liberty, wherein such offense shall be committed, by action of debt,
Information, Indictment, or Presentment, wherein no Essoine, Protection, or
Wager of Law shall be allowed to the Defendant: And the one half of all which
forfeitures shall be to the use of the poor people inhabiting within the City,
Borough, Hundred, Town, or Liberty, where such offense shall be committed from
time to time, and the other half thereof to him or them that will sue for the
same.

And to the end that the said one half of the said forfeitures above limited to
be to the use of the said poor people, may be The moity of all forfeitures
shall be to the poor, and the other half to him that will sue for the same.
truly employed, and bestowed upon them, according to the true meaning of this
Act, be it further enacted, That the Sheriff, Bailiffe, or other Officer, or
person that shall levy or receive any sum or sums of money forfeited and
recovered according to the true meaning of this Act, shall and may by virtue of
this Act, without further warrant, deliver the one half of the same sum and
sums of money, by him or them so levied or received, to some one or more of
the Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of the same Parish where the same
offense shall be committed, to be by them and every of them distributed and
bestowed amongst the said poor people, according to the true meaning of this
Act, who shall likewise have authority by virtue of this Act to distribute and
bestow the same accordingly.

And be it further enacted, That every Sheriff, Bailiffe, and The person that
shall levy and receive the forfeitures by this Act, shall deliver half thereof
to the Churchwardens and overseers for the Poor to be by them distributed to
the Poor. If such person refuse to pay over the said moity, or that the
Churchwardens and Overseers do not within convenient time distribute the same
to the poor, every person so offending shall forfeit the double value thereof.
other officer and person which shall levy or receive any such forfeiture or
forfeitures aforesaid, and shall pay over the moity and one half thereof,
according to the true meaning of this Act, shall be thereof discharged against
the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors.

And be it further enacted, That if any Sheriff, Baylisse, or other Officer or
person shall refuse to pay over the moity and one half of the said money by him
or them levied or received, or that the said Churchwardens and Overseers, to
whom the said money shall be so paid, shall not from time to time within
convenient time truly distribute and bestow the same to and amongst the poor
people, according to the true meaning of this Act, That then every person so
offending shall forfeit double the value thereof, to be recovered and employed
as aforesaid.

Anno tricesimo tertio HENRICI octavi. CAP. IX. Artillery shall be maintained,
and unlawful games debarred.
BE it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no manner None shall keep
a Common house, Alley or place of Bowting, Tennis, dicing table, carding, etc.
Upon pain to sorfeit 40. s. for every day.
of person or persons, of what degree, quality or condition soever he or they
be, from the feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist now next coming, by
himself, factor, deputy, servant or other person, shall for his or their gain,
lucre, or living, keep, have, hold, occupy, exercise or maintain any common
house, alley or place of bowling, coyting, cloyshcayles, half-bowl, tennis,
dicing table, or carding, or any other manner of game prohibit by any estatute
heretofore made, or any unlawful new game now invented or made, or any other
new unlawful game hereafter to be invented, found, had or made, upon pain to
forfeit, and pay for every day, keeping, having or maintaining, or suffering
any such game to be had, kept, executed, played or Every person using the said
houses and plays, and there playing, to forfeit for every time 6. s. 8. d.
maintained within any such house, garden, alley, or other place, contrary to
the form and effect of this estatute, forty shillings.

And also every person, using and haunting any of the said houses and plays,
and there playing, to forfeit for every time If any sue for a Placard, the game
shall be contained therein that he will use in his house, and what persons
shall play thereat.

Every placard granted to the contrary to be void. That the party before he put
such Placard in execution shall be bound with sureties in Chancery, not to use
the said Placard contrary to the form thereof.

That every Justice and headofficer may enter into all houses and places where
such Games shall be suspected to be holden and as well the keepers as players
there to arrest and imprison.

Until the keepers of such house and plays have found sureties to be bound,
no longer to keep or use such house or plays.


so doing, six shillings eight pence.

And if any person hereafter sue for any placard, to have common gaming in his
house, contrary to this estatute, that then it shall be contained in the same
placard, what game shall be used in the same house, and what persons shall play
thereat, and every placard granted to the contrary, to be void: and also that
the party obtaining any such placard before he put the same in execution, shall
be bound with sufficient sureties with him by recognisance in the Chancery in a
certain sum, to be appointed by the discretion of the Lord Chancellor of
England, that he shall not use the said placard contrary to the form thereof.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall be lawful to
all and every the Justices of Peace in every Shire, Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffes, and other head Officers, within every City, Town, and Borough within
this Realm, from time to time, as well within liberties as without, as need and
case shall require, to come, enter, and resort into all and every houses,
places, and allies, where such games shall be suspected to be holden,
exercised, used or occupied, contrary to the form of this estatute, and as well
the keepers of the same, as also the persons there hanting, resorting and
playing, to take, arrest, and imprison, and them so taken and arrested, to keep
in prison unto such time as the keepers and maintainers of the said plays and
games, have found sureties to the Kings use, to be bound by recognisance or
otherwise, no longer to use, keep, or occupy any such house, play, game, alley
or place: and also that the persons there so found be in like case bound by
themselves, or else with And that the persons that are so found, be in like
case bound by themselves or with sureties by discretion of the Justices,
Mayors, or head Officers, no more to play, haunt or exercise at any the said
places or games.

That the Majors and head Officers shall search weekly or once a month where
any such houses or plays shall be susspected to be kept.

And if they do not so search, to forfeit for every months neglect forty
shillings. That no Artificer, Crafts man, husbandman, apprentice, labourer,
journeyman, Mariners, Fishermen, Watermen or any servingman shall play at
Tables, Tennis, dice Cards, Bowls, Clash, Coyting, etc. Out of Christmas, under
pain of 40. s. for every time.

And in Christmas to play in their Masters houses or in their masters presence.

None to play at any time at bowls, out of his garden or orchard, upon 6. s. 8.
d. forfeiture for every time so offending All Justices, Majors, etc. finding or
knowing any such offenders shall commit them to ward, till they be bound from
using such unlawful games.


sureties, by the discretion of the Justices, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, or
other head Officers, no more to play, haunt, or exercise from thenceforth, in,
at, or to any of the said places, or at any of the said games.

Also be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables and other head Officers, within every City,
Borough, or Town, within this Realm, where any such Officers shall fortune to
be, as well within the franchises, as without, shall make due search weekly, or
at the furthest at all times hereafter once every month, in all places where
any such houses, allies, plays, or places shall be suspected to be had, kept,
and maintained. And if the said Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constables, and
other head Officers within their Cities, Boroughs, and Towns, as well within
franchises as without do not make due search at the furthest once every month,
if the case so require, according to the tenor of this act, and do not execute
the same in all things according to the purport and force of the same: that
then every such Mayor, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, Constable, or other head Officer,
to pay and forfeit for every month, not making such search, nor executing the
same xl. s.

Be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no manner of artificer, or
Crafts man of any handy Craft, or occupation, husbandman, apprentice, labourer,
servant at husbandry, journeyman, or servant of artificer, mariners, fishermen,
watermen, or any serving man, shall from the said feast of the Nativity of
Saint John Baptist, play at the tables, tennis, dice, cards, bowls, clash,
coyting, logating, or any other unlawful game, out of Christmas, under the
pain of xx. s. to be forfeit for every time, and in Christmas to play at any of
the said games in their Masters houses, or in their Masters presence. And also
that no manner of person shall at any time play at any bowl or bowls in open
places out of his garden or orchard, under the pain for every time so offending
to forfeit vi. s. viii. d. And that all Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffes,
Sheriffs, and all other head Officers, and every of them, finding or knowing
any manner person or persons, using or exercising any unlawful games contrary
to this present Statute, shall have full power and authority to commit every
such offender to Ward, there to remain without bail or mainprise, until such
time that they so offending, be bounden by obligation to the Kings use, in such
sums of money, as by the discretion of the said Justices, Majors, Bailiffs,
or other head Officers, shall be thought reasonable, that they or any of them
shall not from henceforth use such unlawful games.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all other All suits
upon this Statute shall be within the year after the offense.
statutes made for the restraint of unlawful games, or for the maintenance of
Artillery, as touching the penalties or forfeitures of the same, shall be from
henceforth utterly void. And all informations, plaints, actions, or suits that
shall be taken or sued upon any part of this statute, shall be commenced within
the year after the offense committed and done, or otherwise no advantage or
suit to be taken.

And where any such forfeitures shall happen to be found Where such forfeiture
shall be in any Franchise or Leet, the lord to have one moity thereof, and the
other to him that will sue for the same in any the Kings Courts.
within the Precinct of any Franchise, Leet or Lawday, then the Lord of the
same Franchise, Leet, or Lawday, to have the one moity thereof, and the other
moity thereof to any of the Kings Subjects that will sue for the same, in any
of the Kings Courts, by action, information, bill, or otherwise, in which
action or suit the Defendant shall not be admitted to wage his Law, nor any
protection, nor essoine shall be allowed: And where such forfeiture shall be
found out of the Precinct of any Franchise, Leet, or Lawday, that the moity of
all such forfeitures shall be to the King our Sovereign Lord, and the other
moity thereof to And where such forfeiture shall be out of any Franchise, the
moity shall be to the King, and the other to him that will sue. That all
Majors, Sheriffs, and other head Officers shall once every quarter make
Proclamation of this Act in every Market within their jurisdictions.

That the Justices of Jail delivery, Assizes, and Justices of peace, do cause
the same to be proclaimed in their Circuit and Sessions.


any the Kings Subjects that will sue for the same, by bill, plaint, action,
information, or otherwise, in any of the Kings Courts, in which suit or action
the Defendant shall not be admitted to wage his Law, nor any protection or
essoine shall be allowed.

And to the intent that every person may have knowledge of this Act, and avoid
the danger and penalties of the same, be it enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all Majors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, and all other head Officers, shall four
times in the year, that is to say, every quarter once, make open Proclamation
of this present Act, in every market to be holden within their several
jurisdictions and authorities.

And also that the Justices of Gaole-delivery, Assizes, and Justices of Peace,
do cause the same to be Proclaimed in their several circuits and sessions
before them holden, and that this Statute shall begin to take his effect,
concerning the penalties of the same, from the said Feast of S. John Baptist
now next coming, and to continue and endure for ever.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
person or persons having taken by lease, whether it be by word, writing, or
otherwise, any house, alley, or place wherein any such unlawful game now is,
and at the time of such lease made, was used, that then every such Lessee shall
at the liberty of him or them, to whom such lease is made, their executors,
administrators, or assigns, from the said Feast of the nativity of S. John
Baptist, be utterly void, except it be for breach of covenants or agreements,
or payment of rent due, or to be due at the said Feast, or any time before, so
that then at the same Feast, or within one month next after the same, the said
Lessee give knowledge to such Lessor or Lessors, their heirs and assigns, that
he will no longer occupy the same, and that then it shall be lawful for the
inheritor, lessor or owner thereof, or to his heirs or assigns in the same
house, alley, or place to re-enter.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, Every Master may
license his servant to play at Cards, Dice or Tables with their master or other
gentlemen in his house, or presence.
that it shall be lawful for every Master to license his, or their servants to
play at Cards, Dice, or Tables with their said Master or with any other
Gentleman, repairing to their said Master, openly in his or their house, or in
his or their presence, according to his or their discretion. And that it shall
be lawful to every such servant, for every time so being commanded or licenced
by his said Master, as is aforesaid, to play at Cards, Dice, or Tables with his
said Master or other Gentleman, so to him repairing, any thing in this Act to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, Leases of houses
where unlawful games be used.

The servant by Litense may play with his Master.


that it be lawful to every Nobleman, and other having Manors, Lands,
Tenements, or other yearly profits, for term of life in his own right, or in
his wives right, to the yearly value of a hundred pound, or above, to command,
appoint, or license by his or their discretion, his or their servants, or
family of his or their house or houses, for to play within the precinct of his
or In what cases servants may play at Dice, Cards, tables, Bowls or Tennis.
their houses, gardens, or orchards, at Cards, Dice, Tables, Bowls or Tennis,
as well amongst themselves as other repairing to the same house or houses. And
that they so playing by commandment, appointment or license, as is aforesaid,
shall not incur any danger, or penalty contained in this Act for the same,
this Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Anno secundo and tertio Philippi and Mariae. CAP. IX. All Licenses to keep
houses for unlawful Games shall be void.
MOst humbly beseeches the Queens most excellent Highness your loving and
obedient Subjects, the Commons in this your present Parliament assembled, that
where by reason of diverse sundry licenses heretofore granted to diverse persons,
as well within the City of London, and the Suburbs of the same, as also in
diverse other places within your Highness Realm, for the having, maintaining,
and keeping of houses, gardens and places for bowling, tennice, dicing, white
and black, making and marring, and other unlawful games prohibited by the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, diverse and many unlawful The inconveniences of
permitting houses for unlawful games.
assemblies, conventicles, seditions, and conspiracies, have and been daily
secretly practiced by idle and mis-ruled persons, repairing to such places, of
the which, robberies, and other misdemeanors have ensued, to the breach of your
Highness peace: For remedy whereof, it may please your Highness, that it may
be enacted by your Highness, the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, that from and after the Feast of the birth of our Lord God next
coming, every license, placard, or grant, made toany person or persons, for the
having, maintnance, or keeping of any bowling-allies, dicing-houses, or other
unlawful games, prohibited by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, shall be
from the said Feast utterly void, and of none effect. All licenses to keep such
houses shall be void.
Statute 33. H. 8. 9.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled: For the better
observation of the Monthly Fast.
Whereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, upon the request of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by and with their advice and
consent, considering the lamentable and distressed condition of his good
subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland (that there might be a general humiliation
of all the estates of this Kingdom before Almighty God in Fasting and Prayer)
was graciously pleased to command the keeping of a monthly Fast; and to the
end that all persons might the better take notice thereof (and to leave such
without excuse, as should not duly keep and observe the same) did afterward The
Fast commanded to be kept by the Kings Proclamation of the 8. of January 1641.
by his Proclamation of the 8. of January 1641. appoint that the same should be
generally, publicly, and solemnly holden, and kept, as well by abstinence from
food, as by public prayers, preaching, and hearing of the Word of God, and
other Religious and holy duties, in all Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish
Churches, and Chapels, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales
(without any exception) on the last Wednesday of every month, to continue
during the troubles in the said Kingdom of Ireland: All which his Majesty did
straightly This Fast to continue during the troubles of Ireland on the last
Wednesday of every month.
charge and command, should be reverently and devoutly performed by all his
Subjects as they desire the blessing of Almighty God, and would avoid his heavy
indignation against this land and people; and upon pain of such punishments as
may justly be inslicted upon all such as shall contemn or neglect so religious
a work and duty.

And whereas the Lords and Commons in both houses of Parliament, have received
diverse informations from several parts of this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales,
of the great neglect of the due observation and keeping of the said Fast upon
the days appointed, and of the profanations of the same, by many irreligous,
il-affected, loose, and scandalous persons, as well of the Clergy as others,
who are so far from afflicting their souls and The neglect of the due
observation of the Fast days a cause to provoke the wrath of Almighty God
against us. The ministers of every Parish to give public notice to the people
on the next Lords day before the day of Fast, and to persuade the people to a
solemn and religious observation of the whole day.
loosing the bands of wickedness, as that they provoke the wrath of Almighty
God, and make so pious a means to procure his blessings, the occasion of
greater judgments.

For the prevention whereof for the time to come, the Lords and Commons do
order, declare, ordain, that in all and every the Cathedrals, Collegiate and
Parish Churches, and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, (without any exception) upon every Lords day next, and immediately
before any the days appointed for the said public Fast, the Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Minister, that upon that day shall Officiate, or exercise in any of
the said Cathedralls, Collegiate, Parish Churches, or Chapels, shall give
public notice in every of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches, or
Chapels respectively, of the Fast day next ensuing, immediately after Sermon,
or prayer ended in the forenoon, before the Congregation be dismisled,
earnestly exhorting and persuading all the people to the solemn due keeping
and religious observation of the whole day appointed for the That all manner of
sports, and pastimes travalling, working, and selling of all commodities be
forborne on the said day. And that all Vintners, Ale house keepers, and
victuallers open not their doors nor sell any thing but in cases of extreme
necessity til the public exercises be past and over.
said Fast, and that they would repair to some Church or Chapel, there
diligently and reverently to attend all such holy duties as shall be used in
the observance of the same; that they forbear to use all manner of sports and
pastimes whatsoever, and their ordinary Trades and Callings upon the said day,
as well Carriers, Waggoners, Carters, Waynmen, Drovers, Butchers, Hucksters,
Shopkeepers, Laborers; or any other using any Art, Trade, Mystery or mannuall
occupation whatsoever, and that all Vintners, Taverners, Ale housekeepers, and
keepers of Victualling-houses, do forbear to keep open their doors, Bulks, or
Shops, or to sell or utter (except in cases of extreme necessity) any Wine,
Bear. Ale, or Victual, till the public exercises and religious duties of that
day in the respective Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches and Chapels be
past and over.

And lastly, all and every the Justices of the Peace, Mayors, That the Justices
of the Peace, Majors, Baylists, Constables, and Churchwardens within their
several limits take special notice of all persons both ministers and others
that shall neglect or contemn the same, and return their names and offenses
to some of the Knights Citizens or Burgesses that serve for the County where
such offense is committed.
Bayliffes, Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers inhabiting or
residing within the limits or percincts of any such Cathedral, Collegiate,
Parish Church, or Chapel, are hereby required to take special notice as well
of such Person, Vicar, Curate, or other Minister that ought to officiate at any
of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish Churches or Chapels, upon any
such day appointed for the said Fast, that shall either refuse or neglect to do
the same, or not door cause the same to be done in that religious and solemn
manner as it ought to be, or that shall refuse to give notice of the Fast Day
at the time, and in manneras aforesaid, and forthwith to return their names,
and the names of all such (from time to time) as shall wilfully offend herein,
in contempt of the Laws, his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, unto some
one or more of the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses that serve for the County
where such offense is, or shall be committed, that some speedy course may be
taken for the severe punishing of such as shall offend herein according to the
Laws.

Die Mercurii 24 August. 1642.
It is this day Ordered, that this Ordinance for the better observing of the
Fast be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Whereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament, have made an Ordinance for the
more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are not by
all persons duly observed, even in these times of public Calamity, to the
great dishonor of God, and the contempt of the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

Now that more particular notice may be given unto all such The Constables or
their deputies shall the day before every public fast repair to every house
within their liberty and charge all persons strictly to observe the same.
that shall offend herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon
them, It is Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, that all
Constables (or their Deputies) shall the day before every public Fast, repair
to every house within their several respective Liberties, and charge all
persons, that they strictly observe the Fast, according to the directions in
the said Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of the public Fast, walk And they shall
upon the said days search diligently for all offenses.
through their said Liberties, diligently serching for, and taking notice of all
persons, who, either by following the work of their calling, or sitting in
Taverns, Victualling or Alehouses, or any other ways shall not duly observe
the same, and they And return the names of the offenders to the Committee for
examinations.
are hereby required, to return the names of all such persons as they shall
find so offending, as also such Informations as they shall receive against any
other persons within their Liberties guilty of the least offense, unto the
Committee for Examinations, that so they may be proceeded against for the
contempt of the said Ordinance; And all Constables are to observe these
direrections from time to time, so long as the said public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

The Form of an Oath concerning the Office of a Constable.
YOu shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve our Dalton, fol. 363.
Sovereign Lord the King in the Office of a Constable: you shall see and cause
his Majesty's Peace to be well and duly kept and preserved according to your
power: you shall arrest all such persons, as in your sight and presence shall
ride or go armed offensively, or shall commit or make any Riot, Affray, or
other breach of his Majesty's Peace: you shall do your best endeavor (upon
complaint to you made) to apprehend all Felons, Barrettors, and Riotors, or
persons riotously assembled: and if any such Offender shall make resistance
(with force) you shall levy Huy and Cry, and shall pursue them until they be
taken: you shall do your best endeavor that the Watch in and about your Town
be duly kept for the apprehending of Rogues, Vagabonds, Night-walkers,
Evesdroppers, Scouts, such as go armed, and the like; and that Huy and Cries be
duly raised and pursued according to the Statute of Winchester against
Murderers, Thieves, and other Felons. And that the Statutes made for the
punishment of Rogues and Vagabonds, and such other idle persons, coming within
your Bounds and Limits, be duly put in execution: you shall have a watchful
eye to such persons as shall maintain or keep any common house or place where
any unlawful game is or shall be used; as also to such as shall frequent or
use such places, or shall use or exercise any unlawful games there, or
elsewhere contrary to the Statutes. At your Assizes, Sessions of the Peace, or
Leet, you shall present all and every the offenses done, contrary to the
Statutes made (1. Jacobi, 4. Jacobi, and 21. Jacobi Regis) to restrain the
inordinate hanting or tippling in Innes, Alehouses, and other Victualling
houses, and for repressing of drunkenness: you shall there likewise true
presentment make of all Blood-sheddings, Affrays, Outcries, Rescous, and other
offenses committed or done against the Kings Majesty's Peace, within your
Limits: and you shall have a care for the maintenance of Archerie according to
the Statute: you shall well and duly execute all Precepts and Warrants to you
directed from the Justices of Peace of this County: And you shall well and duly
according to your knowledge, power, and ability, do and execute all other
things belonging to the Office of a Constable, so long as you shall continue in
this Office. So help you God.

FINIS.

