THE Earl of Portlands CHARGE.

Delivered to the Lords House by M. Pym.

ALSO A NEW PLOT DISCOVERED.

Being the Relation of the Earl of Northamptons surprising the Magazine at
Banbury by the forging of a false Letter.

Also the taking of Warwick Castle by the said Earl, and his carrying of the
Magazine to the said Castle.

With certain Propositions propounded by the Earl of Northampton to the Lord
Brook at their meeting, and the Lord Brook his judicious and religious answer
thereunto.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.

August 11. Printed for John Jones 1642.

A NEW PLOT DISCOVERED.
TOGETHER WITH THE CHARGE of the Earl of Portland.
WE are not yet safe, but every day and hour does beget new dangers, and does
strike the fearful and trembling subject with new horror and amazement. The
bleeding heart of this kingdom does daily receive new wounds: and time, which
we hoped would put a final period to all her distractions, does either
continue the old, or else beget new, to the danger of the general subversion of
the whole kingdom. Peace is exlled our habitation^, and we can receive from
abroad no other sounds, but such as bring unto us affrightment, and not
satisfaction or content. Neither can we expect any respit or release from these
unsavourie troubles, until the power and edge of the malignant party be taken
off, whose destructive counsels nnd actions only tend to the disquiet and
trouble both of the Church and Commonwealth. Mifery must needs be the portion
of that kingdom, wherein virtue, goodness and religion are not only not
encouraged, and countenanced, but neglected, scorned, and trampled down.

The laborious and pious cares and counsels of this Parliament have from their
very beginning found slender and undeserved welcome with a great many, and
their aims and endeavors tending only to the reformarion of such abuses as
have disturbed the unity and peace both of Church and Commonwealth, have been
opposed by malice and discontent. The reason of this discontent and opposition
is decided and out of controversy. The Actors know their own guilt, and know
they cannot be secure, but by the abetting and prosecuting these public
troubles.

My Lord Brook some time after his return to London, being appointed
Lieutenant of Warwickshire, and so by consequence had the trust and charge of
the Militia committed to him, in the execution and performance, according to
the appointment of the House of Parliament, by whose power and authority he was
thought worthy of that trust, and had it conferred upon him; in the execution,
I say, of that t^ust he spent his faithful and respective service. His
opposition was much and dangerous: for when he began to put the Ordinance of
Parliament in execution, and to exercise the Militia in the County of Warwick,
the Earl of Northampion and the Lord Dunsmore, who had a Commission from His
Majesty to put the Commission of Array in execution, opposed him, not with
mean and ordinary strength and power, but had so well armed themselves, as
they thought their design and intentions did deserve or desire. For they had
gathered together into one entire body for that present service and execution,
many hundreds of men out of several Shires and Counties, whom not only by
fair and alluring speeches, but also with an extraordinary salary they had
hired and engaged to partake with them, and to assist them in this their
design. They gave them extraordinary wages, which is not commonly exhibited
unto soldiers, for they allowed them two shillings a day, to the intent that
they should assist them in the hindrance of the Lord Brook from the removing
of the Magazine from Banhurie.

The competition of this thing was very long and full of terror, for the Earl
of Northampton was very violent, and offered the Lord Brook to encounter with
him, and to decide the present controversy by single combat, and not to engage
so many men's lives as were on both sides then present in that same quar^ell;
which the Lord B^ooke out of judgment and wisdom did refuse to do, advising
the said E^^^^ to (...) from the prosecution of so bad a (...), which he had
undertaken, which must of necessity tend to the subversion of his Lords^^p and
his p^sterity.

Thi^ modest answer did not allay or qualify the violent spirit of the
incensed Earl, but he (...) offered him to draw out of their sor^^^ (...)
select men of each side, and by them to ^ecide that days difference. But that
(...) of the Earl was also denied by the Lord Brook, who would not hazard
that (...) trust imposed upon him upon such in^^^siderate ^^rmes. Upon such and
the like discours^, the day was spent, and at the close of the day they p^ie^:
B^^ t^is since reported, that (...) has seized up(...) and has carried (...)
were there repo(...) to have pass(...) much blood had (...) God did div^^t it
for the present. It is likewise reported, that since the Lord Brook his coming
up to London, ^^at the Earl of Northampton has sei(...) the castle of
Warwick, and withal (...) ^^ken possession of the Magazine of that Co^^^y.

After Colonel Goring had delivered up the haven-town of Portsmouth into the
kings possession, this unfaithfulness in him not without just grounds, did
move the House of Commons to enter into consideration concerning ^he securing
of the Isle of Wight, and the discharging of the Earl of Portland from the
government of the said Island. Whereupon after much and due consultation and
deliberation, a Charge was drawn up against the said Earl of P^r^land, which
was to this effect,

That his Lordship was conce^ved upon very strong grounds and motives to be
much Popishly ^ffected: and that the reason which did induce them to this
opinion was, because that his wise and the rest of her kindred, and his mother,
and the most of her friends and kindred were of that religion: so that being
induced to thi^ opinion by these grounds, they thought it convenient and very
requisite to place the C^stle of that Island into such hands as might no ways
be suspected, but such as they might confide in: and that they did think it
very fitting that his Lordship should be kept in custody for a time, whereby he
was committed to Sheriff Garret to be kept in safe custody.

This Charge was delivered to the House of Lords by M. Pym against the Earl of
Portland.

That Sir Ralph Hopton, M. Tho. Smith, and Captain John Digby shall be disabled
to sit as members of the House of Commons during this Parliament. That Captain
John Digby, Sir Ralph Hopton, M. Tho. Smith, Sir Ferdinand Gorges, Sir Francis
Dodington, Richard Board, Hercules Whiting, Nicolas Dounton, James Stroud, John
Walker, and John Cooth Parson of Shipton-Mallet be forthwith sent for as
Delinquents.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

