A COLLECTION Of such Statutes as do enjoin the observation of LENT, And other
Fish days throughout the year, with the Reasons for enjoining the same.
ANd be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid for the benefit and
Commodity of this Realm, to The Reasons for the keeping of Lent expressed in
the Stat. 5. El. Cap. 5. The forfeiture of him that eats flesh upon fish
days. The forfeiture of him in whose house it is eaten.
grow, as well in maintenance of the Navy, as in spairing and increase of Flesh
victual of this Realm.

IT shall not be Lawful to any person within this Realm to Eat any Flesh
upon any days now usually observed as Fish days (upon pains to forfeit twenty
shillings for every time he shall offend, or else suffer one months close
Imprisonment without bail or mainprise 35 Eliz. 7.) And every person within
whose house any such offense shall be done: and being privy and knowing
thereof, and not effectually punishing and disclosing the same unto some
public Officer having authority to punish the same, for every such offense
shall forfeit thirteen shillings four pence ( 35 Eliz. 7.) All which
forfeitures for not abstaining from Meats shall be divided into three equal
parts: that is, one part to the use of the Queen, the other to the Informer,
the third to the common use of the Parish where the Offense shall be committed,
and to be levied by the Churchwardens after any Conviction in that behalf, 5
Eliz. 5.

But this Act concerning eating of Flesh shall not extend to any persons having
special Licenses upon Causes contained in the same, and grounded according to
the Laws of this Realm: Every of which Licenses shall be void, unless the
same contain these Conditions, viz. Condition upon License, and what shall be
given to the poor upon each License.
Every License made to any person of the degree of a Lord of the Parliament and
his Wife, shall be upon condition, that they shall pay to the Poor men's box
within the Parish where they remain, etc. in the Feast of the Purification of
our Lady, or within six days after, twenty six shillings eight pence, and to be
paid within one month next after the same Feast upon pain of forfeiture of
the same License: A Knight and his Wife shall pay yearly thirteen shillings
four pence. Every person under the said degree shall pay yearly six shillings
eight pence to the said use at the foresaid time, and upon the foresaid
Condition. 5 Eliz. 5.

All persons which by notorious sickness shall be enforced for the recovery of
their health to eat Flesh for the time of their sickness, shall be Who may
have license, and who may give license to eat flesh upon fish days, and the
fee.
Licensed by the Bishop of the Diocese, or by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of
such Parish where such person is sick, or of one of the next Parish adjoining
(If there be no Curate, etc. in ^ame Parish, or if he be wilfu^l) which License
shall be signed by the Bishop, Parson, etc. and endure no longer then the time
of sickness: And if the sickness continue above eight days after the License
granted, it shall be Registered in the Church Book with the knowledge of one of
the Churchwardens: And the party licensed shall give to the Curate four pence
for every Eatrie, and it shall endure no longer but for his sickness. And if
any License by any Parson, Vicar, or Curate be granted to any person other then
such as evidently appear to have need thereof by reason of their sickness,
not only every such License shall be void, but also every such Parson, Curate
or Vicar shall forfeit for every such License otherwise granted five Marks, 5
Eliz. 5.

Such persons as have upon good Considerations any lawful License to eat
flesh upon any Fish day, be bound to have for every one Such as have license to
eat flesh upon fish days, must have one dish of Seafish.
dish of Flesh served to be eaten at their Table, one usual dish of Seafish
fresh or salt to be likewise served at the same Table, and to be eaten or spent
without fraud or covin as the like kind is, or shall be usually eaten on or
spent on Saturdayes (except such persons as for sickness shall for that time
be licensed by the Bishop, Curate, etc. or by reason of age or other impediment
allowed heretofore by the Ecclesiastical Laws of this Realm) upon the pain
aforesaid, 5 Eliz. 5. 1 Jac. 25.

No Butcher or other person, whether he be licenced or not licensed to kill
Flesh, shall from henceforth at any time in the time of Lent, Flesh not to be
killed in Lent.
kill or dress to the intent to put to sale any Ox or Oxen, Beeves, Beevets,
Hogs, Calves, Rams, Ewes, or Weathers, except Oxen or Beeves for victualling of
Ships into foreign parts; and except all flesh to be killed three days before
Easter yearly upon pain to forfeit and loose the same Oxen, Beeves, etc. so
killed and dressed contrary to this Statute, or the value of them, 1 Jac. 29.

All Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, head Officers and Constables as
well of Cities and Towns Corporate as in every County Officers searching for
flesh killed in Lent.
of this Realm, shall have full authority yearly in the time of Lent, to
enter into all houses of Victuallers and common Victualling houses within their
Jurisdictions where such offenses shall be suspected to be committed, and
st^ding any such Oxen, Beeves, etc. killed or dressed, o^ any part or parcel
of the same contrary to this Statute shall take and seize the same as
forfeited, and shall give and distribute the same t^ Prisoners and other poor
folks by their discretion, 1 Jac. 29.

Every Taverner, Iune-keeper, keeper of every common Tablinghouse, common
Cook, common Tipler, or Alehouse-keeper offendin^ Victuallers dressing of
flesh.
at any time hereafter in the dressing of any Flesh victual, contrary to the
Statute of Anno 5 Eliz. or contrary to this Statute, shall not onel^ forfeit
all the flesh so dressed, but also the penalty imposed by the said Statute of 5
Eliz. for every offense to be committed, the one half of a^ which forfeitures
(Except such forfeitures as shall be found and taken by the Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, head Officers and Co^stables according to the Tenor of this
Act) shall be to the KING, and the other half to such person or persons as
shall sue or inform for t^ same in any Court of Record by Action of Debt,
Bill, Plaint, or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection, or Wager of Law
shall be ^lowed, etc. 1 Jac. 29. To continue to the end of the first Session of
the next Parliament.

A Clause in an Act 3 Car. 1. 4. And so much of an Act made the 5th year of the
Reign of the late Queen Eliz. Entitled An Act touching certa^ Continuance of
the former Statute.
Politic Constitutions made for the maintenance of the Navy, as is not
repealed by any latter Statute, nor does concern the eating of Flesh, using of
fish upon the Wednesday, etc. together with all and every other additions,
explanations, and alterations made thereunto, or there^ or of any part thereof
by any Statute or Statutes made si thence the making of the said last mentioned
Act, and in force the last day of the Se^ on of Parli. that was in the 21 year
of the Reign of the late King James, etc. shall continue in force until the
end of the next Session of Pa^

By a Clause in an Act of 17 Car. 1. cap. 4. The aforesaid Stat. be made
perpetual. See the Abridgment of the late Statutes. Title, Continuan^ Made
perpetual.


Note that all the time of Lent, and every Vigil (or Holy day Eve) and every
Friday and Saturday (except Christmas Day falls thereon) and the embri^ days
throughout the whole year were usually observed by the Laws and customs of the
Realm as Fish-days, which is proved by the preamble of the St^ 2 and 3 Ed 6.
cap. 19. whereby also it is Enacted, that in those times such abstinence should
be used: And the Stat. of 5 and 6 Ed. 6. cap. 3. appoints wh^ days shall be
kept holy, the Eves of which are only to be observed for Fish-dayes.

And by the Stat. of 5 Eliz. 5. Every Wednesday in the year (which shall not
happen to fall in Christmas or Easter week) is limited to be observed as Fish
day, on which day no manner of person shall eat any Flesh otherwise then ought
to be on the common Saturday.

Note that by a Proviso in the Stat. of 5 Eliz. cap. 5. It is Enacted, that
whosoever shall by preaching, teaching, writing, or open speaking n^tifie,
that any eating of Fish, or forbearing of Flesh mentioned in this Stat. is of
any necessity for the saving of the soul of man, or that it is (...) service of
God, otherwise then as other Politic Laws are, and be, that then such persons
shall be punished as spreaders of false News ^ and ought to be.

The Faculty Office for granting Dispensations and Licenses to eat Flesh, (by
Act of Parliament) in any part of England, is at St. Paul's C^eer St. Paul's
Churchyard.

London, Entered and Printed for R. Pawley, and are to be sold at the Rainbow in
Fleetstreet, 1660 / 1.


