THE COPY OF THE Lord Fitz-gerralds LETTER Intercepted: DISCOVERING A Bloody
and most horrible Plot to kill, burn, and spoil all the Protestants, by the
Army of the Rebels in IRELAND.

Which Letter was sent to his Cosen Sir LUKE FITZ GERRALD.

Published for the Kingdom to see the present horrid designs of the Papists
in Ireland.

March 31 LONDON, Printed by Jane Coe. 1647.

The Copy of the Lord FITZ-GERRALDS Letter JNTERCEPTED. Discovering a bloody
and most horrible plot to kill, burn, and spoil the English Protestants, by
the Army of the Rebels in Jreland.
To his worthy Cosen Sir LUKE FITZ-GERRALD, Knight.
NOBLE COZEN,
DIrections are given by the Council and Congregation, for all Acts of
Hostility toward the English: The Orders were given to General Officers in
private, and were dated the sixteenth of December last.

Their directions were to kill, burn, and spoil all that ever they could, all
that did belong to the English quarters, or any that would speak in their
behalf. Directions were sent to Owen Roe the 18. of that Month, to make up
all the Forces that he could, and to march down toward Trim. He cannot
gather his men yet: for there are two Regiments of them in the County of
Tiperary, and in the County of Lymricke: and they are now upon their march
coming to him. He went out of Lease the 29. of that month, with what forces
he had there. Colonel Warren went from Kilkenny upon St Stephens day, and was
commanded with 500. of his men (with all expedition) to march toward
Teighchrohan. Hugh Mac-Phelim was commanded to meet in the County of Kildare,
with all the forces he had. A Council are working at Kilkenny to have no
Assembly; but I think the country will force them to it, if they stand out:
for all the country is now weary of these times; for they are all in a manner
undone by Soldiers. And for all I see, the Officers and Soldiers in General
Prestons Army, are weary of these times; for they get no pay, but what they get
by the spoil of the country. The Nuncio did expect some moneys over: some
Frigots are come, but no moneys. The Nuntio that was here formerly is sent for
to Rome, and I think no money comes till he comes there, nor then neither, as I
understand from some. All our hope now is, from the King of Spain, because he
has agreed with all others, upon such terms as he agreed with the
Hollanders. Such conditions we must have from our King now. That is in every
one of our Clergies mouths already. General Prestons son came out of Spain,
and brought all the news, that the Hollanders and Spain have agreed: He came
over and a great many Commanders, looking for Soldiers to carry over. Preston
has given Col, Napper a Pattent to be Colonel. General Preston is little
regarded now, for all his last Protestation. My Lord of Muskery is in Munster,
and has more men at command, then ever he had in his life: he will be here
within these five or six days: he sent for me to Ballyhohill, that I might
repair to Kilkenny to take Lodgings for him. And all Kilkinny, they are in
that condition, that they do not know which is best for them, to join with
God or the Devil. The greatest Libellers amongst them now, have no other
practice, but setting out books against the Nobility and best of the Kingdom.
We do not find fault with any thing they set out against the Lord Marquess,
or his Party; for we beleve they are naught. Some of us do daily pray that
they may mend, if they be so. We thought within these few days, to make the
sword our Governor; but now the case is altered: We are altogether governed by
Black-coats, and two lame Fellows; one lame in his leg, and the other in his
heart. If God do not mend them quickly, the Devil bless them. Here is one
Butler in the Council, that has made all the rest of the Council drunk. And
not only the Council, but has made all the whole country so drunk, that
they cannot see one another well, now. They are all looking upon the Fort of
Duncannon, for fear General Preston should come near it again: They will not
suffer him to come nearer then Waterford, they do mistrust him every way, by
reason of his Treaty with the enemy at Dublin. We hear that the enemy is hard
by, and that they have taken away a great many of your cattle; I hope you have
relief with you by this time. We do hear that all the Dilsons and some other
Gentlemen in Mead, have joined with the enemy: And that the Marquess of
Clanriccard is their chief Instrument. All the harm we can do them yet, is to
curse them, and to make them traitors in our Libels. God bless you and yours
from the Traitors wheresoever they are. I hope I shall meet with you at
Kilkenny at the Assembly, if there be any. There will be none if the aforesaid
two lame Fellows can put it off: For he that is lame in the leg, is afraid
that his best leg will be made shorter: And he that is lame in his Heart,
is afraid that his heart will break quite, by the pressing multitude of the
peoples voices. God send us quietness, and crush our enemies. I rest,

Ballihohill the third of this instant March, 1646. Your loving friend and
kinsman to command, EDWARD FITZ-GERRALD.
The names of the chief actors in the design carried on by the Irish Rebels,
are, Ioannes Baptista, Archiepiscopus Firmanus. Joan. Clonfert, Ever
Cloghe^ensis Lowthe. Fra. Pat. Plunket, Alex. Mac Donnel, Nich. Plunket, Rob.
Lynch, Pierce Butler.




FINIS.

