DIEV. ET MON. DROIT


JAMES R.

WHereas in the Charters, Patents or Grants made to several Cities, Buroughs
and Towns Corporate, a Power is reserved to Us to Remove, Displace, and
Discharge by Order under Our Signet and Sign Manual, the Mayors, Sheriffs,
Recorders, Town-Clerks, Aldermen, Common Council-Men, Assistants, Officers,
Magistrates, Ministers, Freemen and other Members of the same: We do
accordingly hereby Remove, Displace and Discharge all Mayors, Sheriffs,
Recorders, Town-Clerks, Aldermen, Common Council-Men, Assistants, Officers,
Magistrates, Ministers, Freemen, and other Members of our said respective
Cities, Buroughs, and Towns Corporate, which have or claim such Offices or
Places by Charter, Patent or Grant from the late King Our most Dear Brother of
ever blessed Memory, or from Us since the Year One thousand six hundred seventy
nine, except such Cities and Towns in Our Proclamation named, whose Deeds of
Surrender are Enrolled, or against whom Judgments in Quo Warranto are Entered:
And they, and every of them, are hereby Removed, Displaced and Discharged
accordingly, in Pursuance of the Power reserved to Us as aforesaid: Whereof all
Persons concerned are hereby required to take Notice.

Given at Our Court a Whitehall the 17th Day of October, 1688. In the Fourth
Year of Our Reign. By Hi^ Majesty's Command. Sunderland P.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, ad Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1688.

DIEV ET MON DROIT

At the Court at Whitehall the 17th day of October, 1688.
PRESENT, The King's most Excellent Majesty.
His R. H. Prince Geo. of Denmark, Lord Chancellor, Lord Privy Seal, Dake of
Hamilton, Marquess of Powis, Earl of Huntingdon, Earl of Craven, Earl of
Berkeley, Earl of Moray, Earl of Middleton, Earl of Melfort, Earl of
Castlemain, Viscount Preston, Lord Godolphin, Mr. Chancel. of the Exchequer,
Master of the Rolls, Lord Chief Justice Herbert, Sir Thomas Strickland, Sir
Nicholas Butler, Mr. Petre.
WHereas in the Charters, Patents, or Grants made to several Cities, Buroughs
and Towns Corporate, a Power is reserved to His Majesty by his Order in
Council, to Remove, Displace and Discharge the Mayors, Sheriffs, Recorders,
Town-Clerks, Aldermen, Common Council-Men, Assistants, Officers, Magistrates,
Ministers, Freemen, and other Members of the same. His Majesty is this day in
Council pleased to Order, And it is hereby Ordered accordingly, That all
Mayors, Sheriffs, Recorders, Town-Clerks, Aldermen Common Council-Men,
Assistants, Officers, Magistrates, Ministers, Freemen, and other Members of the
said respective Cities, Buroughs and Towns Corporate, which have or claim such
Offices or Places by Charter, Patent or Grant from the late King of Blessed
Memory, or from His Majesty since the year 1679. Except such Cities and Towns
in His Majesty's Proclamation named, (whose Deeds of Surrender are Enrolled, or
against whom Judgments in Quo Warranto are Entered) be Removed, Displaced, and
Discharged, in pursuance of the Power reserved as aforesaid, And they and every
of them are hereby Removed, Displaced, and Discharged accordingly.

John Nicholas.

London, Printed by Charles Bill, Henry Hills, and Thomas Newcomb, Printers to
the King's Most Excellent Majesty, 1688.


