Thursday the Thirteenth of June, 1650. to be kept as a Day of Solemn Fasting
and Humiliation; and declaring the Reasons and Grounds thereof.
ALthough this Nation has enjoyed many Blessings, and great Deliverances from
the hands of God, yet have the People thereof multiplied their Sins, as God
has multiplied his Blessings upon them, especially the Sins of Unthankfulness
and Vnfruitfulness, under such Gospel means and Mercies, which may most justly
provoke the Lord to multiply his Judgments upon this Nation. The Parliament
taking the same into serious consideration, as also the pernicious Designs of
the Enemies of this Commonwealth, to engage the same in a New and Bloody war;
and being truly sensible of their own inability to prevent or disappoint the
same; and to testify, That their whole dependence is upon the Lord alone, and
upon the Freeness of his Grace in Christ, Do enact and Ordain, and be it
Enacted and Ordained, That Thursday the Thirteenth of June next enfuing, be
observed and kept in all Churches and Chapels in England and Wales, and the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, a solemn Day of Fasting and Humiliation for the
forementioned Sins, and for all other the Transgressions whereof this Nation
is guilty; and for imploring the Favor of God, for a Blessing upon the Counsels
and Endeavors of the Parliament, and upon their Forces by Land and by Sea; and
that our gracious God would be pleased to give the People of this Nation a
heart to serve him in sincerity; and to unite them against all Combinations and
Practices of Foreign or Domestique Enemies to this Cause of God (which the
Parliament has, and shall by his Blessing and Assistance, maintain to the end)
That so at last, through the Goodness and Mercy of God, this Commonwealth may
be Established in all Truth and Peace, to the Glory of God, and Happiness of
this Nation. And the Ministers of the respective Churches and Chapels
aforesaid, are hereby required to give notice hereof on the Lord's Day next
preceding the said Thirteenth of June; at which time also the said Ministers
are required to publish this present Act.

Die Martis, 21 Maii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by Edward Husband and John Field, Printers to the Parliament
of England. 1650.


