Another LETTER FROM His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, of His Majesty's removal from Childersley to New Market, and
the grounds thereof.

Also an Narrative of a Conference at Childersley with His Majesty; His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairefax, Lieutenant General Crumwell, etc. and the
Commissioners for the Parliament about His Majesty's removeall thence to
NEW MARKET,

And what past at this Conference betwixt His Majesty and the General, and
Commissioners for the Parliament, and the sum of their Speeches.

Also the New Rendezvous of the Army upon Tripole Heath near Royston, June 8.
1647.

Published for the General satisfaction of the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Chapman, 1647.

Master Speaker.
IN my last I promised to send you by the next an account of the proceedings
and resolutions of the Army at the late Randezvous: I have sent you the same in
two Papers unanimously agreed upon there, by both Officers and Soldiers: I
find in one of them diverse things which your latter proceedings since the
resolvtion of disbanding may have given satisfaction unto, but the Army having
then no knowledge thereof; it was thus passed and delivered to me, and I cannot
but send it to them; you may see what they then did remain unsatisfied in;
Understanding that His Majesty and your Commissioners were much straightened
and disaccomodated in the House at Childersley; I went thither yesterday to
advise with your Commissioners about the disposal of his Majesty for more
convenience to to himself and them, then that place did afford; the
Commissioners were pleased wholly to refuse giving of any advise or opinion at
all in the business, and therefore the King declaring His Resolution, not to
go back to Holdenby unless he were enforced, yet complaining much of the
inconveniency he suffered, whereby he was and pressing for a remove to
New Market, and your Commissioners not judging it inconvenient for him to be
there: I ordered Colonel Whalley this day to attend His Majesty, and the
Comissioners thither, with trusty and sufficient Guard of two Regiments of
Horse, which accordingly was this day done, and His Majesty with the
Commissioners gone to New Market, but not through Cambridge: This business
taking up the whole time yesterday, and it being necessary His Majesty should
be disposed of before the place of Randezvous could well be resolved on. This
morning at a Council of War it was judged inconvenient, and scarce possible
to draw to a Randezvous to morrow early enough to dispatch any thing; therefore
it is appointed on Thursday morning at nine of the Clock, and in regard of His
Majesty going to New Market, it was thought fit by the Council of war, That
the place of Randezvous might be altered from New Market Heath to Triploe
Heath, five miles from this Town; I shall take care that your Commissioners if
they come to New Market may have notice of this alteration from the former
appointment, I remain

Your most humble Servant, Tho: Fairefax.
Cambridge June 8. 1647.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
A Copy of the Warrant from his Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax to Colonel
Whaley, to attend His Majesty with his own, and the Lieutenant Generals
Regiment of Horse from Childersley to New Market.
THe Kings Majesty being secured by a party of horre of this Army, upon
supposition of a design or secret intention, to convey away His Majesty
without either my consent or knowledge, and brought unto the Lady Cutts her
house at Childersley, that place being not able to afford conveniences for His
Majesty, and Commissioners attending upon him, and His Majesty declaring
himself, That He will not return to Holdenby except he be forct there unto;
and also the Commissioners of Parliament wholly refusing to advise or propose
any way for the present accommodation of His Majesty (though they were
thereunto earnestly desired by me) that might conduce t^ the security of His
person or pursuance of what other instructions they have received from the
Parliament, alleging their Authority to be already determined at return from
Holdenby: And His Majesty having therefore been importunate to go to His House
at New Market, and the Commissioners not Judging it inconvenient for him to
remain there; I have ordered Colonel Whalley shall to morrow attend His
Majesty and the Commissioners thither with a sufficient and trusty Guard for
His security, until the Parliaments pleasure shall be further known: And for
which purpose I have sent to receive their Commands herein.

Colonel Whalley, I desire you to attend His Majesty, and the Commissioners
according to these directions, with the Lieutenant Generals and your own
Regiment of Horse.

Given under my hand at Cambridge the 8. of June, 1647. Tho: Fairefax.

SIR,
YEsterday the General, Lieutenant General, Commissary General Ireton,
Lieut. Genesis Hammond, and diverse other Officers of the army, went to the Lady
Cuts house (according to His Majesty's desire the day before,) when they came
there, they were (according to the usual manner,) received by the King but
with little respect; after some general di course of things, The King went
into the Garden, and the General and his Officers and the Commissioners went
together, and conferred upon the whole carriage of the business; The
Commissioners seemed to be much unsatisfied, whereupon the King coming up
again, the General and the Commissioners came to Him, and Cornet Joyce (who
was the man that managed that action of securing the King) was called before
them all; The King charged them with saying, He had the commission of the whole
Army for what He did, and by consequence had the Generals; He being the
principal part of the Army: The Cornet replied and did avow, He told His
Majesty he had not the Generals commission, when the King did particularly
demand it of him, and that the King asked him by what commission he did come to
secure Him: He answered the King if He pleased to look about he might see his
authority (meaning the Troopers that were ready mounted) whereupon the King
publicly said to the whole company, That it was true indeed He did say so,
and it was likewise true all the Gentlemen that were mounted on horse back did
cry out, ^^^^ng their approbation to what He said, but says the ^g I was
notwithstanding persuaded, that he could not ^are to attempt such a thing, as
to bring me away, but he had the countenance of greater persons; Then M. Crew
and Sir John Cook extremely pressed against Cornet Joyce, That he deserved to
loose his head for what he had done, and that he had injured the Parliament,
the General, the Army, and the Commssioners with the King, and had brought
them away without their consent; whereupon Cornet Joyce replied, That the King
gave his consent to come, and said He would go whether the commissioners would
or no, and that the commissioners also gave their consent to go, and that he
told them, He would not bring them without their consent, and desired them to
go for the better accommodation of His Majesty, I, said the King, and the
Commissioners you told us, That we should go, and then it was in vain for us
not to consent, But says the King now I am come; I had the promise of those
Gentlemen to be conveyed to Newmarket, I take them to be men of their words,
and were I a mere stranger met upon the high way, and stopped from going on, none
in civility but would provide conveniences for Me, here I have none, and
therefore I expect to go to morrow morning to Newmarket, and desire Sir Tho.
Fairfax and his officers to confer together about it: for the commissioners
say, they have no power at all further to dispose of Me, for their power ended
at Holdenby, and was limited to that place though the commissioners be the
same? Whereupon the General and the Officers withdraw, and conferred together,
and afterward returned to his Majesty and told Him, (as they did at the
beginning) he was removed from Holdenby without their private knowledge, or
consent, yet notwithstanding since he was unwilling to go back if the
Commssioners present with Him would condescend: The General would not be
against his going to Newmarket: says the King; This is a flat denial for the
commissioners say they have no power, and therefore you will not show your
power; if you will not do it I will try these Genlemen that brought Me, I
suppose they are tender of their reputation, and will not fail to wait upon
Me to Newmarket: The General promised to go to Cambridge, and return him a
positive answer the last night; There was variety of discourse besides this,
too large to mention: I shall only observe this in general, That the King is
politic and subtle to lay hold upon any thing for his own advantage, either
to comply with the Army, or Commissioners to be against either as He sees it
work for his ends and very high and positive in his expressions and demands.
The last night after his Excellency came back to Cambridge, he sent this
enclosed to Col. Whaley (after some debate with the Officers) by way of Answer
to His Majesty's desires according to promise and engagement. This day
accordingly His Majesty went from Childersley, he intended by the way of
Cambridge, but his Excellency perceiving some inconveniences would happen upon
it: sent to Col. Whalley to guard Him to Newmarket some other way, and so he
went by Trumpington: Here was much preparation for His Majesty by strewing the
streets, cutting down of boughs and preparing for benefiers. The E. of
Nottingham and the other Commissioners lay at Puckridge last night, they sent
to the General to day, to know where to meet Him, the General desired at
Cambridge, by reason the Randezvouz is deferred till to morrow, and then to be
upon Triploe-heath and not at Newmarket heath by reason of the Kings being
there,

Sir, J rest Your humble servant. T. H
Cambridge June 8. 1647.
FINIS.

