WINE AND WOMEN: OR A brief Description of the common courtesy of a
Curtezan. Written solely for the benefit of immodest and intemperate YOUTH.

Cavete autem vobis: Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with Surfeting and Drunkenness, Luke 21. 34 We see that Lot, of
whom Origin says, Ebrietas decipet quem Sodoma non decipet.

Here Is neither Wine, nor yet good Women blamed, Though It may be in a place or
two they are named: Wine should accilerate our Thoughts above, And make us hate
the very thing we love.

LONDON: Printed by John Hammond, 1647.

To the Honorable Robert Walloppe Esquire, one of the Right Honorable
Committee of both Kingdoms, and a worthy Member of the Honorable House of
COMMONS.
SIR,
I Must either without prolixity, or flattery, confess that I have received
from time to time very many singular and large favors from you and truly I was
thinking and premeditating with my self, what I might do to make it manifest
appear. I willingly would make requital, in some measure, if I were able, and
yet this Duty troubled me the less, in regard with noble and Heroic Minds,
still for the most part, where the deed is wanting, the Will compleats the
Work. Yet I must confess it is very meet, that Charities eyes be open as well
as her hands; though she gives away the Branches, not to part with the Root.
Honored Sir, I do ingeniously confess my selfingag'd to you, and for your
Love: you may conceive it strange I should present you with a present that you
do not love; yet Kind Sir, so it is, for I have tendered to you both the excess
of Wine, and a Company of Wanton Women, and how you do affect the one or
respect the other* your Life and Conversation certificats, as far as Phoebus
commonly does lend his Glorious and most Radiant Rays. I would your unworthy
Servant were as free, for I must confess both to Gods glory and my own
ignomie, unless he please to cover it with the Mantle of Christ's mercy, that
the excess of Wine, inordinate affections, chambering and wantonness, has
bin habitual with me; but I hope that it will be sufficient, that I have spent
the time past of my Life, walking in Wantonness, Riot, Surfeting, and
Drunkenness. Honored Sir, I doubt I am too tedious, I am sure I have bin so
in my Transgressions: Yet ere I part, I would entreat your lenity to patronizle
my little small Enchiridion, whilst I by Gods assistance shall endeavor to
improve my interest in the Lord, and my favor in your Love, And Rest

Your assured Servant to command, Ed. Foord.

To the courteous Reader.
READER consider, as a little Clay
In time will fade, and moulder all away,
Even so conceive that truth this reason gives,
In time will fade the sweetest sweet that lives:
And therefore as thou tenderest Gods honor,
Never let a thought that is ill reflect upon her,
But see without delay that thou apply'st,
To fix 'em on thy proper object, Christ:
So shall thy Transmigration happy be
Both to thy Self, and thy Posterity.
Thine in the Lord, Ed. Foord.

Wine and Women.
IT is the affection some men bear to Wine,
That hinders their immergent duties still,
And makes them by degrees for to decline;
From Actions that are good, to those are ill:
And truly I conceive without distaste,
It Is hard to find a Drunkard that is chaste.
Woe to the Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim, for his Glorious Beauty
shall be a fading Flower, which is upon the head of the valley of them that be
fat, and overcome with Wine: for all their tables are full of filthy
vomiting, no place is clean. Isa. 28. 1. 8. And likewise it is the love that
some men bear
To wanton Women, that undo them still;
For let them speculate a face that is fair,
And pray how soon are they induced to ill?
And therefore it is a most apparent sign,
He that loves women, doubtless favors wine.
Did not Solomon the King of Jsrael sin by these things? yet among many Nations
was there no King like him: for he was beloved of his God, and God had made him
King of Jsrael, yet strange women caused him to sin. Nehe. 13. 26. Besides,
it is Wine that makes a man of strength
So imbecil and weak he cannot stand,
But measures his own way by his own length,
For down he is in the turning of a hand:
Let reason be expuls'd, and Wine take place;
A man will reele to ruin a good pace.
Therefore thou shall say unto them, thus says the Lord God of Jsrael Every
bottle shall be filled with wine, and they shall say unto thee, do we not know
that every bottle shall be filled with wine, and all the Inhabitants with
drunkenness, and I will dash them one against another, even the father and the
son together, says the Lord, Jer. 13 12. 13. 14. Besides, it is Women in the
heat of Wine
That cooles man's duty to his bountious God.
And never permits his glim'ring light to shine
He had directions for to spread abroad;
Me thinks a Woman that is sweet and fair,
Should never sell her skin to make a Snare.
And after this he loved a woman by the Rive^ of Sorek, whose name was Delilah,
unto whom came the Princes of the Philistims, and said unto her, entice him and
see wherein his great strength lies, and by what means we may overcome him,
and punish him,and every one of us shall give thee eleven hundred shekels of
silver, Judges 16. 4. 5. When Wine has filled the brain and belly full,
Then man is put immediate to a Nonplus,
And all his sacrifices they prove dull,
Being as sleepy still as Eutichus:
Down street he squats, and down he hangs his head,
And hear's a funeral sermon like one dead.
For thus has the Lord God of Jsrael spoken unto me, Take the cup of wine of
this mine indignation at mine hand, and cause all the Nations to whom I send
thee to drink it, and they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of
the sword that I shall send among them. Jer. 25, 15. 16. It Is wanton Women
make men idolize,
And their bought beauty too much to adore,
The foolish man can say he is not wise,
That wilfully does run his Ship ashore,
I would not have a man that is discreet,
Trample his knowledge underneath his feet.
But King Solomon loved many outlandish women, both the daughter of Pharaoh,
and women of Moab, Ammon Edom, Zidon, and He^h. and he had seven hundred wives
that were Princesses, and three hundred Concubines, and his wives turned away
his heart from God. 1 Kings 11. 1. 3. And it is Wine we manifest'y find,
That makes us wanton in these mournful times,
Having no index of a pensive mind,
But breviate our days with paultry Rimes:
Take heed of being private with a Woman,
But chiefly if her looks proclaim her common.
And the Daughter of the same Herodias came in and danced, and pleaseed Herod,
and them that sat at table together: the King said unto the Maid, ask of me
what thou will, and I will give it thee? So she went forth and said unto her
mother, what shall I ask? And she said, John Baptists Head. Mark 6. 22. 24. It
is your vicious Women often inclines
Men for to ride a hundred mile together,
Only to expiate their Lust and Minds,
That is more lighter then the Peacocks feather:
Two'd puzzell one to understand their meanings,
That they should have the crop, and God the gleanings.
And when Phineas the son of Eliazar, the son of Aaron the Priest saw it, he
rose up from the midst of the congregation, and took a Spear in his hand, and
followed the man of Jsrael into the Tent, and thrust them both through, to wit,
the man of Jsrael and the woman through the belly; so the plague ceased from
the Children of Jsrael. Number. 25. 7. 8. It is conspicuous, evident and true,
That the excess of Wine makes men absurd,
And beckens them for to be careless too,
In those soliloques that please the Lord:
A drunken man does seldom care two strawes,
Either for Maker, or his Makers Laws.
Noah also began to be an Husbandman, and planted a Vineyard, and he drank of
the wine, and was drunken and was uncovered in the midst of his Tent. Genesis 9,
20. 21. Every sin that man commits alone,
Tends doubtless to his only prejudice,
And he it is that solely should bemone*
His slighting of the heavenly Paradise:
But where Zimri and Co^bi joined be,
There Is double sins against the Trinity.
Then he said, what is the pledge that I shall give thee? And she answered thy
signet, and thy cloak, and the staff that is in thine hand: So he gave it
her, and lay by her, and she was with child by him. Genesis 38. 18. It Is Wine
that makes the quintessence of love
Depart from the right object of the same,
And that reciprocal affection move,
That should the essence of our Souls, maintain:
Wine makes men strong, and in that strength so blind,
That we impart part on it to women-kind.
So they made their father drink wine that night also, and the younger arose
and lay with him, but he perceived not when she arose, nor when she lay down.
Genesis 19. 35. 36. It is your Women that 's so coy and nice,
That deck themselves in mantles, caules* and wimples
And never leaves painting of a piece of Vice,
Till they have filled their faces full of pimples:
It would be strange, to see one fair and poor,
That were not envious, proud, nor yet a whore,
The Lord also says, because the daughters of Sion are hauty and walk with
stretched-out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking and minsing as they go,
and making a tinckling with their feet: Therefore shall the Lord make the heads
of the daughters of Sion bald, and the Lord shall discover their secret parts;
in that day shall the Lord take away the Ornament of the slippers, and the
caules, and the round tyres. Jsa. 3. 16. 17. 18. It Is the excess of Wine that
makes men frame
Their actions so promiscuously and rude,
Procuring to themselves a hateful name,
Whilst they continue in their drunken Mood:
For little Children when they do 'em meet,
Point at them with their fingers in the street.
Then David called him, and he did eat and drink before him, and he made him
drunk, and at even he went out to lie on his Couch with the Servants of his
Lord, but went not down to his House. 2 Samuel 11. 13. It Is wanton Women that
resemble most
The laboring surges of the troubled Sea,
For if their humourous humors be but crossed,
Nothing but emulation is their plea;
And be your fortunes either high or low,
Nothing contents 'em but your overthrow.
Now therefore slay all the males among the children, and kill all the women
that have known man by carnal copulation, but all the women children that
have not known carnal copulation, keep alive for your selves. Number. 31. 17.
18. Excess of Wine it is probable and true,
Deprives our great Creator of a Heart,
And makes a man most earnestly pursue
That which in time will aggravate his smart:
Then who would be a drunkard, that is bereaven
And quite excluded from the joys of Heaven?
VVoe unto him that gives his neighbor drink, thou joynest thine heat and
make him drunken also, that thou may see their privities. Hab. 2. 15. The
beauty of a Woman makes a Man
Often forget the Author of the same;
If it be so, as so it is, why than.
Each one will vote this creature much too blame:
Beauty has many one so blindly led,
They have forgot where it was borne or bred.
And shall see among the captives a beautiful woman, and have a desire unto
her and would take her to thy wife: Then thou shall bring her home to thine
house: and she shall shave her head, and pare her nails. Deuteronomy. 21. 11. 12. The
strength of Wine does so intoxicate
The Memory of many now adays,
That they affect to prattle, talk, and prate,
And without license publish forth their praise:
If you let Wine too often charge your brain*
It Is ten to one you charge, where you will be slain.
And his servant Zimri, Captain of half his Charets, conspired against him as
he was in Tirzah, drinking till he was drunken, in the house of Arza. steward
of his house in Tirzah, and Zimri came and smote him in the seven and twentieth
year of Asa K. of Judah, and reigned in his stead. 1 Kings 16. 9. 10. The quick
and rolling eyes of some spruce Dames
Invites a man to kindle Cupids fires,
And afterward to scorch him in the flames,
Which is as much perchance as she desires:
For any love that is tendered to them chaste,
Is made too straight and narrow for their wast.
The tender and dainty woman among you, which never would venture to set the
sole of her foot on the ground for her softness and tenderness, shall be
grieved at her husband that lies in her bosom, and at her son, and at her
daughter. Deuteronomy. 28. 56. Weak ones should never love for to contend
With things that are so powerful and strong,
It Is better for them gently for to bend,
Then to stand out and do themselves more wrong:
The strength of wine has conquered more by far,
Then Alexander ever did by war.
And they went out at noone, but Benhadad did drink till he was drunken in the
Tent, both he and the Kings, for two and thirty Kings helped him, and they slew
every one his enemy, and the Aramites fled, and Jsrael pursued them, but
Benhadad the King of Aram escaped on a horse. 1 Kings 20. 16. 20 Man would not
think, to glance a lustful thought
Upon a Woman were so sad a thing,
Yet the Messiah tells us it is naught,
And that it much distastes our Heavenly King;
Lord of thy mercy never let my eyes
Love to behold so sad a sacrifice.
And when it was even-tide, David arose out of his bed, and walked upon the
roof of the Kings Palace and from the roof he saw a woman washing her self;
and the woman was very beautiful to look upon: Then David sent Messengers,
and took her away, and she came unto him, and he lay with her, and the woman
conceived, therefore she sent and told David, and said I am with child. 2 Samuel
11. 2. 4. 5. It Is Wine that makes the illiterate to indite,
As though he had drank hard at Helicon,
And oftentimes such pleasing strains to write,
That to say truth, it would admire one:
And makes ye to believe, if you want skill,
He came but lately from Parnassus Hill.
He causes grass to grow for the Cattle, and herb for the use of Man, that
he may bring fort^ bread out of the earth: and wine that makes gla^ the heart
of man, and oil to make the face to shine and bread that strengthens man's
heart. Psa. 104* 14. 15. Women they say the weaker Vessels are;
If so, it is a Paradox to me,
That those that never were trained up in war,
So often should obtain the victory:
For your fair women still in every place
Do conquer valiant men with their bare Face.
To bring Queen Vashti before the King with the crown royal, that he might
show the people and the Princes her beauty: for she was fair to look upon.
But Queen Vashti refused to come at the Kings word, which he had given in
charge to the eunuchs: therefore the King was very angry, and his wrath kindled
in him. Ester 1. 11. 12. It Is Wine that makes the dearest friends that are
To be at odds and sometimes disagree,
And usher forth the bitter Caracter
Both of a Coward and an Enemy:
So in conclusion, nothing but their Swords
Must vindicate their fond and foolish words.
Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is raging: and whosoever is deceived
thereby, is not wise. Pro. 20. 1. Sometimes it is the whiteness of a hand
That does contaminate man's heart so foul;
Because he does not mind the great command
God dictats to him, to preserve his Soul:
Me thinks an object that is fair and white,
Should never guide me wrong, but lead me right.
Hear me now therefore, O my Children, and hearken to the words of my mouth.
Let not thine heart incline to her ways: wander thou not in her paths; For she
has caused many to fall down wounded, and the strong men are all slain by her.
Pro. 7. 24. 25. 26. Some men there be, that commonly prefer*
Flagons of Wine before their real good,
And to commix their choysest Wine with myrrh,
Under pretense for to revive their blood:
But why should Wine engage me to forget,
And quite extinguish reason and my wit?
Woe unto them, that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and to them that
continue until night, till the Wine do inflame them: And the harp, and viole,
timbrel, and pipe, and wi^^ are in their Feasts; but they regard not the work
of the Lord, neither consider the work of his hands. Isa. 5. 11. 12. Women
are cunning Creatures, that we must
Grant for a truth, and no exceptions made,
For they have drilled too many to the dust,
That by their night-intreaties have bin swayed:
Nay, puissant Princes have bin subject still
To the commands of women and their will.
A wise woman builds her house: but the foolish destroys it with her own
hands. Pro. 14. 1. It Is Wine that makes the Beggar to forget,
And quite disband all thoughts of poverty,
Yet suddenly deprives him of his wit,
In his approaches to iocundity:
It makes him in a time of sorrow sing,
And to conceive, he is a little King.
My heart breaks within me, because of the Prophets, all my Bones shake: I am
like a drunken man, (and like a man whom Wine has overcome,) for the presence
of the Lord and for his holy words, For the Land is full of Adulterers, and
because of oaths the Land mourns. Ier. 23. 9. 10. The twinkling eyes of
Women do put out*
Those eyes that do behold 'em, which is strange,
And yet this Metaphor is true no doubt,
When men's aspects lasciviously do range:
Inhetently my thoughts are very foul,
Lord regulate my thoughts, and save a Soul.
Ye have heard, that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery: But I say unto you, that whosoever looks after a Woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart. Matthew 5. 27. 28.
A man in Wine is fit for any ill,
That Satan can suggest or tempt him to;
For if he be enraged, he will fight or kill,
Nay, he will do what you will have him do:
And yet the Boys of Bacchus now adays,
What'ere they lose, purchase a world of praise.
And Nabals heart was merry within him, for he was very drunken: wherefore she
told him nothing, neither less nor more, until the morning arose. Then in the
morning, when the Wine was gone out of Nabal, his wife told him those words,
and his heart died within him, and he was like a stone. 1 Samuel 25. 36. 37. It Is
wanton Women, as they see you pass,
Would call you by your name if they knew how,
Saying, surely I have seen you; when alas
It Is but a trick to make your virtue bow:
For when she has you where she would desire,
She Will bring hot water to augment your fire.
A foolish woman she is troublesome: she is ignorant, and knows nothing: She
sits at the door^ of her house one seat in the high places of the City* to
call them that pass by the way, that go right ^^ their way. Pro. 9. 13. 14.
15. It Is the excess of Wine that makes men steal
Into your brothel-houses when it is Night,
Thinking thereby their actions to conceal
From Gods eternal and most Radiant sight:
But sure no curtains can blindfold his Face,
That views the reins, and sees in every place:
I sought in mine heart to give my self to wine, and to lead my heart in
wisdom, and to take hold of folly, till I might see where is that goodness
of the Children of men, which they enjoy under the sun the whole number of
the days of their life. Eccl. 2. 3 It Is wanton Women, that for benefit
Will venture to increase their sinful stores,
And to that purpose impudently sit;
To take men up as they do pass their doors:
But I could wish an Order would come forth,
To punish these according to their worth.
How weak is thine Heart, says the Lord God, seeing thou do all these
things, even the work of a presumptuous whorish woman? Ezekiel. 16. 30. It Is Wine
that makes men commonly surmise
Which way to walk for to fulfill their lust,
And newfound fopperies for to devise,
That are obnoxious, hateful, and unjust:
Each hansome Face is a sufficient tie,
If it be new, to use immodesty.
Thou have showed thy people heavy things: thou have made us to drink the wine
of giddines. Psa. 60. 3 It Is the excess of Wine that makes men rove,
Darting their eyes at each loose Less they meet,
Forsaking childishly their firstborn Love,
For feigned affection picked up in the street;
But sure it is a sign of ignorance,
To slight true Love, for Love that is met by chance.
They shall not drink wine with mirth: strong drink shall be bitter to them
that drink it. There is a crying for wine in the streets: all joy is darkened:
the mirth of the world is gone away. Jsa. 24. 9. 11 It Is wanton Women that do
captivate
And snare too many poor men now adays,
Either by beauty, or a stately gate,
They practice, when they trip so many ways:
Your chiefest cause your Harlots walk by night,
Is 'cause they do not love to walk aright.
Desire not her beauty in thine heart, neither let her take thee with her
eyelids: For because of a whorish woman, man is brought to a Morsel of Bread.
Pro. 6. 25. 26. And no man does deny, but it is Wine
That does encourage Cowards for to fight;
Yet 'may be, take this man another time*
And he will not venture to secure his right:
God unto none denies his fruitful Grapes,
Yet he restraines 'em when they make us Apes.
Whoredom, and wine, and new wine, take away their heart. Hosea 4. 11. It Is
Wine which makes fond men without a cause*
Retard the precepts of Almighty God,
And daily violate Jehovah's Laws
With such ridiculous and absurd applaud;
For now each imbecile and tippling Sot
Conceives Gods Vineyard is an Ace too hot.
The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, behold a glutton and
a drinker of wine, a friend unto Publicans and sinners: but wisdom is
justified of her Children. Matthew 11. 19. Women are very powerful, that can
Make men forsake the Elizeum of their youth,
And so to stupifie a knowing man,
That he forsakes the way of life and truth;
It Is a sad thing, when God does give us means
For to live chaste, that we should cherish queanes
Behold, all that use Proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As
is the mother so is her daughter. Ezekiel. 16. 44. It Is wanton Women that impair
the store
Of men that had large talents not long since,
But now obscenity has made them poor,
As does appear by sad experience:
Is It not a shame that we should God implore,
To lend us means to give unto a whore?
But he that commits adultery with a woman, is void of understanding: he
that does it, destroys his own Soul. Pro. 6. 32. It Is Wine that makes bad
men for to refrain,
And follow that which is apparent ill,
Taking felicity in what is vain,
Maugre all precepts pressed to cross his will:
Surely in Wine there is a kind of charm,
That that which does me good, should do me harm.
And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he received it not.
Mark 15. 23. It Is wanton Women frequently seduces
Men for to live extravagant and rude,
Making them run to riot and profuses,
They have such fine quaint ways for to delude;
For having spent your portion, they cry then,
Faith Sir good morrow, we are for other men.
For wicked Athaliah and her children brake up the house of God: and all the
things that were dedicate for the house of the Lord, did they bestow upon
Baalim. 2 Chronicles. 24 7. It is the love of Wine that makes men keep
Both from his wife and children night and day;
His wife perceiving of it, falls to weep,
And her poor Lambs they fall as fast to play;
Their father proves an Alchymist most fine,
And turns his Childrens bread to draughts of wine.
Keep not company with drunkards, nor with gluttons: For the drunkard and the
glutton shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags. Pro. 23.
20. 21. Immodest Women set themselves to sale,
Wearing their necks and bosoms constant bare,
And 'cause with some or other they will prevail,
They paint their faces crispe and curle their hair,
And for the lucre of some half a Crown,
They Will take you up, before you are hardly down.
Then the Scribes and the Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery,
and set her in the midst: And said unto him, Master, this woman was taken in
adultery, in the very act. John 8. 3. 4. It Is Wine that makes uncivil men
forget;
And keep all companies they meet withal,
And does the boys of Bacchus so respect,
That he forgets who it is that does him call:
First his burned wine, and then his wine that is rawer,
And whosoere call's him, he call's the Drawer.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better then
wine: we will remember thy love more then wine, the righteous do love thee.
Cant. 1. ^. 3. It Is wanton women, as you have understood,
That would suppress all virtuous thoughts within ye,
And at the first will make a show of good,
That at the last they may the better win ye:
Whilst your coin lasts they will show a hansome leg,
But when that is gone, they will show you how to beg.
Such is the way also of an adulterous woman she eats and wipeth her mouth,
and says, I have not committed iniquity. Pro. 30. 20. It Is the excess of
Wine that makes men wast,
And care so little for their precious time,
Still harboring vicious thoughts that are unchaste,
And round invelloped with filth and slime:
A Man is never fit for acts Divine,
That fits himself to quaffe up bowls of wine.
But they have erred because of wine, and are out of the way by strong drink.
Jsa. 28. 7. It Is envious women whose invective tongues
Makes slander still their common receptacle,
And in their bosoms wears another wrongs;
Their minds and dispositions are so sickle:
I had rather by a Sword receive a wrong,
Then to be bitten by a woman's tongue.
Then said his wife unto him, Do thou continue yet in thy uprightnes I
blaspheme God, and dye: But he said unto her, thou speak like a foolish
woman: what? shall we receive good at the hands of God, and not receive evil,
Job 2. 9. 10. It Is Wine makes men so careless and remiss
In many duties that concerns their good,
And quite cast off their deare-bought happiness,
At no less value then their Makers Blood:
And therefore we may very well conclude,
No sin but one out vyes ingratitude.
Yet the chief Butler did not remember Joseph, but forgate him. Genesis 40. 23.
It is the Love of Harlots often makes
A Man to venture both his limbs and life,
And it is for them alone that he forsakes,
And many times rejects his virtuous wife:
Forbiden Fruit a Man may daily meet,
As he does Death, yet neither may be sweet.
And the woman said unto the Serpens, we eats of the fruit of the trees of the
Garden. Genesis 3. 2. It Is Wine that causes redness in the Eyes,
And couches mischief closely in the mind,
Making a Man heroic acts despise,
And weave from good to ill with every wind,
No thought that is permanent can long remain
In a besotted and unstable Brain.
Though I fed them to the full yet they committed Adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in Harlots houses. Jer. 5. 7. It is impetious Women that
devise
Newfangled fashions every day to wear,
And deck their gowns with rich imbroderies*
When poor weak talonts challenges a share:
But doubtless it is no wonder for to see
A haughty woman linked to levity.
For I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the City shall
be taken, and the houses spoiled, and the women defiled, and half of the City
shall go into captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off
from the City. Zech. 14. 2. And it is as true that wine has quite undone
And dissipated many of their wealth,
Because like Mercuries they loved to run
To that which constantly impaires the health:
What can a Man that loves his charge do worse,
Then fill his Cups, and empty still his Purse?
For it is sufficient for us that we have spent the time of our life past, in
the Lusts of the Gentiles, walking in wantonness lusts, drunkenness,
gluttony, drinkings. 1 Peter 4. 3. By women many mighty ones have bin
VVrapt in a sheet of Lead and direful dust,
Because he used celeritie in sin,
And traverst ways unseemly and unjust:
By following Harlots no man can do well;
Because she leads point blank to death and hell.
For of this sort are they that creep into houses, and lead captive simple
women, laden with sins, and led with diverse lusts. 2 Timothy 3. 6. Wine has
another property beside,
It does extenuate our Love to God,
And builds the fabric of our faith so wide,
That nothing which is good can we applaud:
They that do use it very seldom thrives,
But gets a swift exordium for their Lives.
So that when he hears the words of this curse, he bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, although I walk according to the
stubburnnesse of mine own heart, thus adding drunkenness to thirst. Deuteronomy. 29.
19. It Is envious Women, in a troubled State,
That do incense their Husbands to rebel.
Which makes their Children so unfortunate,
And all their Actions for to thrive so well:
By their advice they presently take fire.
At any motion that will mount 'em higher.
There shall be no Whore of the Daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a
VVhore-keeper of the sons of Israel. Deuteronomy. 23. 17. By Wine the prudent'st men
that lives on earth,
One time or other harh bin much deceived,
And given their sensual wombs untimely birth,
Man's great antagonists so quaintly weaved:
Then having faults within, and foes without us,
I presuppose it is time to look about us.
And the drinking was by an order, none might compel: for so the King had
appointed unto all the Officers of his house, that they should do according to
every man's pleasure. Ester 1. 8. By women mighty Monarchs has bin slain,
And left their large and vast commands behind 'em,
And softly stole away to bliss or pain,
For all their friends so closely had inshrin'd 'em;
It Is a sad thing me thinks, we should embrace
And hug our ruin for a hansome Face.
And Abimelech came unto the tower and fought against it, and went hard unto
the door of the tower to set it on fire: But a certain woman cast a piece of a
millstone upon Abimelechs head, and brake his brainpan. Judges 9. 52. 53. It Is
wine that makes the modest now and then
Forget the simpathy they have with good,
And steer their actions like uncivil men,
By secret distillations of the Blood:
A cup or two revives the pensive Heart,
But many more, does aggravate the smart.
Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine
often infirmities* 1 Timothy 5. 23. A Curtezan, of all the Creatures living,
Is very free of what she counts her own,
'Cause for the most part she is still a giving,
Yet hardly gets a thanks from any one:
And that which animates and makes her free,
Is her deboyst and base scurrillity.
And I find more bitter then Death the wom^^ whose heart is as nets and snares,
and her hands as bands: he that is good before God, shall be delivered from
her, but the Sinner shall be taken by her, Eccles. 7. 28. They that sit long at
wine the wine will tame 'em,
Although they imprecate, curse, swear and dam,
And though a little while it does inflame 'em,
At last they 'le be as patient as a Lamb:
It Is not carousing healths that will procure
Man's health in sickness, not for half an hour.
But the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and as a strong man that after his
wine cries out. Psa. 78. 65. Briefly, it is Wine and Women has undone
This Kingdom that is distracted, rent, and torn,
And made the lees of the Lords Wrath to run,
Till Prince and People had just cause to mourn;
And had not Clemency his Scepter swayed,
No doubt ere this we had bin all betrayed.
Wherefore, be you not unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, and
be not drunken with wine, wherein is excess. Ephesians. 5. 17. 18. Then since we
know the cause it is very meet
We do reform and rectify our ways,
For though Jehovah walks with leaden feet,
He does expect we should not stand and gaze:
He that sits idle in the Market place.
Has little mind to work, or little grace.
THE AVTHORS Apology to the worthy Patronizer, and courteous Accepter of his
Summarie and small Poem, Entitled Wine and Women.
It Is Charity to lend a Crutch sometimes
To verses that are lame, and feeble Lines.
And here couches my encouragement.

YOur candid wits cast censures in this mould,
The man would write far better and he could;
And whee realitie they cannot find,
As a sufficien^ Proxy take the mind:
Therefore I hope you will accept my mite,
Although it pove two or three grains too light.
In this confidence rests your assured Servant, Ed. Foord.

FINIS.

