A LETTER FROM The Right Honorable FERDINANDO Lord FAIRFAX, TO HIS EXCELLENCY
ROBERT Earl of ESSEX.

Relating his late prosperous success against the popish Army in the North,
his expelling them from their Works, and forcing them to raise their siege
from before the Town of Hull.

Also certifying, how the Enemy have fled to Beverley, and were forced to leave
diverse pieces of Ordnance, much Powder and Ammunition behind them.

Being upon the same day wherein the Earl of Manchester obtained the victory
near Horn-castle in Lincolnshire.

Printed by his Excellencies special direction.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, in the Old Bailey, October. 18. 1643.

A Letter from the Right Honorable, FERDINANDO Lord Fairfax, To his
Excellency, ROBERT Earl of Essex.
May it please your Excellency,
SInce the last Account, I gave your Excellency a few days since, of our
condition at Hull, on the fifth of this instant Sir John Meldram, that gallant
Gentleman is happily arrived here, with four hundred men from the Earl of
Manchester, and two hundred and fifty men are since come come from Sir William
Constable, but Sir William himself is not yet here. Some little service, I
thank God, we did on Monday morning last, what time the Enemy assaulted one of
our outworkes, but was beaten back with the loss of eleven or twelve men, and
some Officers, without the loss of any of mine. Yesterday, being the eleventh
of this instant, I thought fit to draw forth what strength I could well make,
in a salley, to drive the Enemy from a new Work that in the night he had
encroacht very near us, on the West side of the Town, and it pleased God to
give a blessing to the attempt. My men I divided into two bodies, under the
command of Colonel Lambart, and Colonel Rainborow, Captain of the Lion, who
brought some Seamen for our assistants, and all under the command in chief
for that service of Sir John Meldram, whose valor and discretion with the
other two Colonels throughout the whole action, I cannot mention without high
commendation. About nine of the clock by an assault two several ways, the
service begun; for, the truth is, we could not take that early advantage that I
desired for such an interprise: in a short time we gained one of their works,
and assaulted them in another; and it was not long ere we were unhappily forced
to retreat, and the enemy recovered all again. But through the goodness of
God my men were soon rallyed, their spirits recovered, and they suddenly
reposses of the last work, beat them out of all the rest in that part, and
got possession of one of their great Brass demi Cannon. The Enemy thus fled,
and the ground ours, we drew that great Gunne out of danger of their reprisall:
About two hours after our possession of those works, the enemy had drawn
down a full body of reserves of Horse, and Foot, from all their Quarters,
their numbers we know not, but about 36 Colors some of our men could tell;
with these they opposed our tired men, and that in truth with excellent
resolution, but it pleased God after two hours sharp encounter, or
thereabouts, they left the Field; since that we have drawn into the Town their
great Demi-Cannon, one Demi-Culverin, one Sacre, three Drakes, and one case of
small Pieces, some Arms, and a Carriage of great Bullet, besides some Powder,
which was made use of against them. This last night I find they have drawn of
the rest of their Ordnance from their other Works, and so are like to be at
some farther distance from us, though I am informed, they intend to keep a
Garrison at Beverley, and to raise some Works somewhat more remote from us, to
keep us from being so active as they believe we would be, when they cannot
make us so passive as they would have us. However, my Lord, we heartily and
thankfully acknowledge the powerful and wise hand of our God in all this,
desire he should have the glory of all, and to send his providence still, as
occasion shall be further offered; the event whereof your Excellency shall
assuredly have an account of, with the first opportunity, by

My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble servant. FER. FAIRFAX
Kingston super Hull, ^^ O^t^^. 1643.
October. 17. 1643.
IT is his Excellencies pleasure this Letter be forthwith printed.

John Baldwin, Secretary to his Excellence.


