THE ANSWER OF Ferdinando Lord FAIRFAX TO A DECLARATION OF William EARL of
Newcastle, TOUCHING, A late VVarrant issued by the Lo: Fairfax, dated 2.
February. 1642.

AS ALSO, The Lord Fairfax's willingness to decide the controversy with the
said Earl of NEW CASTLE in a fair Field.

Printed by the appointment of Ferdinando Lord Fairfax: AT LONDON For John
Frank, and are to be sold at his shop next door to the King's Head Tavern in
Fleetctreet. March 3. 1642.

The Answer of Fardinando Lord Fairfax, to a Declaration of William Earl of
NEW CASTLE, etc.
THere is come to my hands a printed Paper, Entitled, a Declaration of the
Earl of Newcastle, wherein he assumes an intention to answer and vindicate
himself from the six aspersions pretended to be cast on him in my Warrant,
dated the second of Feb: 1642. I must confess there wants no flourish of art
nor language in the Declaration to deceive an inconsiderate multitude, though
to any judicious Reader, it will rather show that the Earl of Newcastle is
galled and angry with the Warrant, then able to clear himself of those just
charges laid upon him in it; so that I might well spare the pains of replying
to it, if I had not a desire to undeceive the misguided opinions of that
multitude, of which a great part do either lead or follow his Lordship in the
destructive Counsels that have endangered the ruin of the Religion and
flourishing State of this Kingdom: And therefore though I want a Press to
divulge my conceptions, yet I shall make use of my pen to satisfy all
impartial judgments that every point in the ground of that. Warrant is most
evidently true, wherein I shall observe his Lordships order, and begin with the
defense of the first and second charges. That his Lordship has contrary to the
Laws of the Land, raised a great Army of Papists and other Malignants. I hope
no man is, or ought to be ignorant, that by a special Statute declarative of
the Law it is enacted, that the free subjects of England shall not be pressed
to serve in the wars without their own consent in Parliament, and by judgment
lately passed in Parliament, and executed, it is deemed to be high Treason, to
levy war, or to Counsel the King to levy war within this Kingdom, in such
manner as the Earl of Newcastle has done, and by sundry other Statutes it is
provided, that Recusants shall neither bear arms nor be suffered to have them
in their houses, as inconsistent with the safety and peace of the Kingdom, and
of the Religion therein established, and yet nevertheless the Earl of
Newcastle has contrary to the known law of the Land pressed and constrained
the subjects to serve in this war, and many extremities have been by his order
put upon those that refused: and has raised and armed the Recusants, and with
their Forces leavied a War in the land, and all this pretended to be done under
pretense (if any man have faith enough to believe it) for defense of the
Protestant Religion, and the laws of England.

For the third charge, that with this Army unlawfully raised, he has invaded
this county, it is too true, and so plain, as his Lordship seeks colors and
arguments, rather to justify then deny it, and therefore I shall not need to
say much to justify the truth of the charges, only I shall desire the Reader
to observe this, that where his Lordship says, the Kings Forces cannot make
invasion in his own Dominions, it may be justly suspected, that the Kings Name
and Authority in this particular, are misguided and misapplyed, seeing His
Majesty has often and solemnly promised, not to make this County the seat of a
War, and therefore withdrew his own Forces from thence; and this suspicion
receives more strength by the Earl of Newcastles own frequent confessions, that
he undertook this invasion upon the earnest entreaty of some of the Nobility
and Gentry of this County.

For the fourth charge, the Earl of Newcastle does not deny it, but he
endeavors to extenuate the fact by allegation, that he has killed nor
destroyed none of the religious Protestant Subjects, but such as take up arms
against him and his assistants, which are already confessed by him to be partly
Papists, and all now proved to be unlawfully raised and employed, and whosoever
will consider the attempts of that Army at Tadcaster and Bradford, and their
oppressions at Leedes, York, and other places of the County, where they have
practiced all manner of Tyranny upon men's persons, and carved what they need or
please out of other men's estates without payment, will easily conclude that it
is both more Christianlike, and more lawful and (...) coming a loyal
Englishman, to dye in his own defense, then to suffer both body and soul to be
inflamed by the violence and practice of such enemies. In this fourth Article,
the Earl of Newcastle takes liberty of extravagant expressions to infuse into
the vulgar, two of his opinions: First, that I and those with me take up Arms
without lawful warrant from the King; Secondly, that if I had performed that
agreement, which he alleges I was bound unto in honor and justice, all the
blood spilt in this cause had been saved. Both the charges, as most part of the
Declaration, seem by the cited authority, to have more in them of the Jesuit
than of the Statesman or Lawyer, for the Earl of Newcastle cannot be ignorant,
that I and those assisting me, act nothing which is not warranted, and directed
by the Kings greatest and most infallible Council the Parliament, by whose
advice the King either is, or ought to be ruled, and by whose powerful and
prudent counsels and assistance, this Monarchy has been supported for many
hundred of years, and my prayers are that it may so subsist to the worlds end.
And for the second it is not unknown to all men curious to know the truth,
that though the agreement which the Earl of Newcastle seems to point at, was
not concluded according to the instructions given by me, yet for avoiding of
blood I observed it in all points, until the adverse party had infringed it in
four several material branches, (which by diverse Letters I represented to
them) though never could obtain reparation, and until my own house grew unsafe
for me, the adverse party sending me menacing Letters, and demanding
restitution of prisoners, as if no agreement at all had been made: So that I
cannot conceive how it should be thought that I broke the agreement, unless my
Lord of Newcastle would have me tied to perform all covenants, and allow the
adverse party a Popish dispensation, giving them liberty to violate all, and be
tied by no bonds nor agreements.

And in this place I may properly take opportunity to tell the Reader, that
four or five days before the making of that agreement, Sir John Savile coming
to meet me at Leeds, to view, and order the Trained bands according to the
Ordinance of Parliament, and bringing some few of his Tenants and neighbors
with him to show their arms, they were laid in wait for, and set upon by the
Troops commanded by Sir Thomas Glemham and Sir John Goodricke, and other
forces who slew three of the company, and made Sir John Savile and all the rest
prisoners: And this was the first guiltless blood shed in this County since
the King left these parts, and at whose hands it will be required the world may
judge.

For the first charge excepted against by the Earl of Newcastle, the Goales at
York and Pomfret can witness with me, that I have not wronged his Lordship,
for in them he has imprisoned the Ministers of Knaresborough, Newton,
Beningborough, Edlinton, and sundry other places, and he has banished from
their Cures, Master Carter the Minister of Ayworth, M. Tod of the new Church of
Leeds, M. Nolson of Holebecke, Mr. Haukesworth of Hunslet, M. Headcoat of
Ardsley, and the Ministers of sundry other places, being all of them men of
blameless doctrine and conversation, and allowed by God and man to hold their
Cures, and then what authority the Earl of Newcastle has to imprison or drive
them from it, is to me unknown.

The sixth charge touching plunders done by his men he does not deny, but takes
no notice of the particulars, which indeed are infinite, but he spends much
labor to asperse me with the same crime, of which I am confident the Country
will acquit me, who know full well how I detest such Tyranny, and how careful
I have been to suppress the insolence of the soldiers that way, and to cause
reparation where I found any such acts have been done by the forces really
under my command, and I wish the Earl of Newcastle would do the like, that so
all men's purses that are filled by such unjust gains, might be left as empty as
when they began to practice those detestable courses.

And to conclude, the Declaration quarrels with my warrant, that talks of
driving him out of the Country which truly I think all men that affect
Religion and Peace have great cause to desire.

And therefore without following the rules of A^^^^^^gaule, or the Knight of
the Sun, which the language of (...) Declaration seems to affect in appointing
pitched (...) tells, I should most willingly design both time, and place, to
decide the controversy in a fair field, if the sufferings of the Country could
be determined in one day or if the adversaries could be constrained to observe
(...) appointments. But both these being either impossible, or improbable, All
I can say in answer of the conclusion is, that wheresoever I find an
opportunity to offer or tell to his Lordship, I shall take it for a great
honor that I may do him that service; and I hope all men that have observed
the resolution of my Army, at tadcaster and Leeds, will easily believe me.

FINIS.

