A NARRATIVE OF THE Manner of Celebrating his Majesty's most Glorious and
Joyful Coronation in the City of BATH, April 23. 1661. by the Mayor, Aldermen
and Citizens thereof, and their adjoining Neighbors of the Gentry and
Commonalty;
Sent in a Letter from John Ford, Esquire Mayor, of the City, to William Prynne,
Esquire One of their Elected Citizens for the Approaching Parliament.
Honored Sir,
HAving yesterday solemnized his Majesty's Coronation, here within our City of
Bath, I thought it an obligation upon me to give you a short account thereof,
which you may please to take as follows, viz. Whilst the morning was ushered
in, and welcomed by the Bells, the Drums beat, calling to such as would
demonstrate their good affections to the King, to show themselves in Arms: For
the Celebrating the day, whereupon all men that had arms fit for that
employment, appeared by this time; (that we might the better mixed our joys with
pious contemplations of Prayers and Thanksgiving unto the King of Kings for
returning unto us, and Crowning this our unparalleld earthly King) my self and
the Aldermen in Scarlet, attended on by the rest of our Corporation in their
Gowns, went to Church, the streets being guarded by these forementioned persons
in Arms, on both sides; leaving a passage for us to pass between, and crying
out, God save the King, with great Acclamations of Joy; after us followed,
above four hundred Virgins, most in white wastecoats and green petticoats,
going two and two, each two bearning aloft in their hands, gilded Crowns and
Garlands, made in the form of Crowns, bedecked with all manner of rare and
choicest flowers; These Ushered Mistress Mayoresse to the Church, who was
attended on by the Aldermens wives and Common Council men's wives and diverse
other Gentlewomen of the City; These being past, the Soldiers marched after,
and having laid by their Arms, came into the Church, as generally the whole
City did: so that our Church was never fuller, all persons expressing as much
piety toward God, as Loyalty toward their King. After Mr. Masters our
Minister had given us a most excellent and learned Sermon, Instructing us both
in our duty toward God and toward the King, taking his text out of Mat. 22.
and 21. verse. The Sermon being ended, the Soldiery again made a guard for us,
and we having now the loud music playing before us, and being followed by the
said 400. Virgins, and the Gentlewomen before mentioned, we passed from the
Church to the Conduit in the Marketplace, being also guarded by the way with a
Company of Foot, (from the Parish of Weston a mile from us) led by Capt.
Sheppard of the same Parish, and also by a troop of Horse being Volunteers,
Commanded by your Nephew Mr. George Clark; having passed these and come to the
Conduit, it began to run with Claret, where we drank a health to his Majesty,
which was seconded with loud Acclamations of Loyalty, each person crying out,
God save the King. From thence we passed to the Guild Hall, where having
entertained the Gentlemen of our City, and such Gentlemen as came out of the
Country to us, we with the Souldery marched from thence with the loud music
playing before us, through every street in our City: In the mean time, the
Gentlewomen and their Virgin Attendance were entertained by my Wife at home.
All which being performed with many vollyes of Shot and loud Acclamations of
Joy; the night began to partisipate of our mirth, which we entertained with
Bonefires and flying fireworks, prepared by certain persons, sent for to that
purpose from Bristoll, who excellently well performed their undertakings for
several hours; which being done, the people civilly dispersed, and the whole
days work carried on with great sobriety and temperance, I hope to the great
credit of our City. This day again the Soldiery having part of their
yesterdayes allowance of powder left, and resolving not to rob his Majesty of
that Honor, they ought to do him therewith, met together and spent this day
also, marching about the City, giving several vollies of shot, and great
expressions of Loyalty: And are now concluding the Day with more Bonesires.
Thus do all people give great expressions of their loyalty to the King, for
whose prosperous Reign (according to my bounden duty) I most heartily pray.
And now craving excuse for troubling you with these Relations, I take leave,
and subscribe my self, as I truly am,

Sir, Your faithful Friend and Servant, John Ford.
Ba the 24. April 1661.
London, Printed for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in Little-britain, 1661.


