True news from IRELAND, sent in a Letter to a Friend at the Meare-maide in
CHEAP SIDE.
THe Army that went from hence is safely returned without any resistance, the
Lord of Ormand marched as far as Drogheda, and left with Sir Henry Tuchburne
500. men, and one battering piece, by which they are much strengthened.

These Gentlemen of the Palle submitted themselves to the Earl of Ormond in
his journey, viz.

The Lord of Donsaney, and his son, Sir John Nettorvill, George Talbot
Gentleman, Garrat Ellnooze, of Balazeth Gentleman, Edward Dowdall and his
son, Patrecke Fox, Robart Welsh, George Dallahide, Mihell Burford, Pattrick
Ba^nwell of Killegriwe, John Hollewood, Collenell Baringham, William Weston
Lieutenant, Collenell Read, the said Read and Barnell, and Mack-mogshan, that
was first taken, were racked, and confessed much, Barnwell confessed that he
was employed to bring some Powder from Washfoord and that there is not a Papish
within this Kingdom, worth Twenty Pounds per Annum, but knew of this
rebellion.

Yesterday our men were forth at a Castle six miles from hence toward
Wicklovv, into which place the day before, a Troop of Horse had driven about
three hundred Rebels, and there enclosed them till more aid came to their
assistance, but the forwardness of our men, and the want of Ordnance at the
beginning procured us a great loss. Sir Simond Harcot, dangrrously wounded: In
another Letter, that Sir Simon Harcot is shot in the belly, and is dead, and
Sarjeant Major Bear and his Lieutenant of the Pyaneares are slain together
with seven or eight private Soldiers, but when the Ordnance was planted, and
began to play the Rogues durst not look forth, so that at the last we obtained
the Castle, and killed both man and woman, and children to the number of three
or four hundred.

Sir Henry Tuchburne and the Lord Moore has done great service, they have
placed Garesons at Platten Stamen, Gormonstone, and Buley, and have burnt all
the a joining Towns, so that the Rebels, have no harboring places near the
Town.

Great store of Pilidges comes daily into the Town of Drogheda the best Wheat
is at two shillings six pence a Mesure, a Cow at five shillings, and a Horse
at twelve and and all other provision at a reasonable Rate.

Sir Henry Tichburne, and my Lord Moore has bin forth ever since the
nineteenth of this month, in which time they have not been ^dell, for ^hey have
burnt slain, and took the Town of Atherdee, where they slew about 300.
Rebels. This day there came a Post from them, signifiing they are now at
Dundaleke, and have took the Town, the Rogues run away saving, A. C. which
they slew Sir Phillem O Neale was there but he trusted to his accustomed weapon
and most valerously betook himself to his heels: Our Army there consist of
a hundred and forty foot, and two hundred Horse.

Art Rue-Roe, Master Maghan, Tuslough: Oneall Barth of Athcame Barnwell of
Rath^sket, and Fleming of Angooze with many others are prisoners in Drogheda.

There is a great Army to go forth hence shortly to scower the Country, which
I beseech the Almighty to bless and send them well home.

Your loving Friend, Robert Fletcher.
From DVBLIN Castle the 28. of March. 1642.
London, Printed for I. Bull living in Grubstreet 1642.


