FAIR PLAY In the LOTTERY, OR Mirth for Money.

In several witty passages and conceits of Persons that came to the Lottery.

Represented by way of Droll

By E F. Gent.

Printed by H. Brugis at the Sign of the Sir John Oldcastle in Pye-Corner.

TO THE Right Worshipful and Ingenious, Sir EDWARD FORD Knight, the Author
wishes much health and happiness.
Honored Sir,
THe many favors that I have of late received from you, has very much induced
me for to present my few Observations unto your knowing view. I must confess
they are not worthy Your serious speculation, being but a little Drollery of
some sorts of people at your Lottery: In a word Sir, if you please for once to
Patronize this little piece, if e're a better bud spring up to my hand, the
whole Stock is yours, Root and Branch, in the interim I take leave to remain,

Your affectionate and assured Servant to command EDWARD FORD.

On Lotteries.
LOtteries or Chances, chances here below,
Are too too frequent, yet men desire to know
Something on that account, to signify,
Being mutual here, their mutability:
And thus in order every man does crave
Something, that is changing to his very grave,
That work being done, no doubt he does surmise
Blanks stand for naught, it is faith that gets the prize.
On a Gentlewoman with child, that longed to draw a piece of plate and could
not.
When Ladies long for Plate that is obscure,
And very fairly ventures, yet not sure;
Who knows the Babe within her may confess
And weep in secret for her sad success.
Alas! the little Infant never saw
The Plate she wished, and had a mind to draw,
And yet by consequence this drawn may be,
She longed for something in the Lottery,
Lady I pity you, because your lot
Seemed for to frown which would have smiled being got
That Lotteries cruel for to make him rue
You lost your p^ise and wronged your infant too
Yet Mistress don't dispond it is not known
How soon bad fortune may be overthrown,
For though the lot into the lap is cast
The Basin and Ure may be yours at last.
Of a blind Maid that came to see the Lotteryr.
SHe was pretty merry though of a mean rank
For she did laugh to hear she had a blank,
Her fortune being hard she would not stay,
She came in blind, and so she went away.
It was a blind come off well met says she,
Fortnne's as blind as I, I plainly see.
On a handsome Sempstris that came to the Lottery to put in her White hand into
the Box
What do you grope for Mistress, why entice
With such a tempting hand Fortune the
She Is coy and skittish, will not, cannot stand
And though you stroke her will not come to hand, nice,
Your powerful touch that all flesh can allure
Cannot tempt down a Spoon much less the Ure,
Forbear, you Tarnish all the Plate we show,
It all seems copper to your brighter hue.
The beauteous luster that enchants the eyes
And makes their Purses not our Plate the Prize
Loses its charming look while all admire
And who, that fairer better show enquire.
But Fortune would not sully that fair sight
A blank was drawn and so it was white to white.
Nothing but blanks she drew, in my opinion
'Twas a friend of mine one Mistress B --
Of one that got a Silver Tankerd.
A Gentlewoman, whose fortune did abound
Made her to prize for joy her happy state
And all her wishes for the present crowned
Obtaining such a handsome piece of plate,
Comely she was as most is in the town
Though at a blush she looked a little Brown.
Of one that murmured at his hard misfortune.
BUt one being angry as it did appear
His fortune was not good at that same time
Paper he did protest was very dear
Or else 'twas made of rags was very fine,
And told his neighbor in a murmuring speech
He had not Paper enough, to wipe his breech.
On a Cook that came to the Lottery.
SOon after this coms in a jovial Cook,
And he adventures very free and fair
He lives hard by Py-Corner, or Pasty nook,
As true a Trout as other Trojans are;
He lost his money, but wished me hold my peace
Or else he vowed to fret in his own grease.
On a humourous Gentelman that complained to a Lady what money he had lost.
I vow sweet Lady, Fortune does not advance
My fate at all, but sends me still ill chance,
A bove three pound dear Madam it has cost me
And still the blanks has played the fools and crossed me,
Yet I will not despond, no more then brag
Harry go home, and fetch me the other bagg
And if I lose again and nothing get
Though I learn nothing it shall teach me wit.
On a poor Labourer that got two pieces of plate for two shillings.
AMongst a sort of Sparks a Labourer comes
For to adventure as your gallants do
And he is in hope for to pick up his crumbs
As in conclusion it proved very true,
His Fortune that was good, say what you please
He labored hard and yet got plate with ease
On a Lady that asked if there were ever a stew pot in the Lottery or no.
NO Madam says the Trumpet, yet there is a Lot
Though not for stews, for this same Chamberpot.
On a Tailor that came to the Lotteriy.
BUt then a nimble Tailor he come in
And must have a dozen Lots, I that he must
He was as spruce we thought as he was trim
And ask't if we had faith enough to trust
It Was Answered that would do very well
For sometimes he would not trust a rag in Hell.
Of a merry Gentelman that lost some money at the Lottery.
A pretty Gentelman and his indeared Bride
Came to the Lottery to sport a while
Only another Lady too beside,
Merry they seemed to be for they did smile,
They ventured very fair for Cup or Bowl
Yet still they lost, and that was very foul,
When they had lost what they thought good themselves
The Gentelman did say that he wood send
(First looking merrily upon the shelves)
For the plate he had won, by a Porter or a Frind,
The Porter came not as he did indent
And thereupon the plate was never sent.
On a Bailf that came to the Lottery.
COme on my boy give me as many lotts
As thou can well afford for a merry Crown,
Better spent here, then wasted upon sots,
If Fortune be not dogged, and too much frown
Pox on it, the'r blanks this it is to mind your pelf
I have often pincht others, and now I am pincht, my self.
On a merry Gentleman and his Lady that came to the Lottery.
LAd, some lots, pox on your drilling way
You are no Cheats, what are you then I pray?
I have had twenty now and never a prize
Take em you knave just where the Basin lies
It Is not a penny matter for the Ure
For that lies pretty safe I am very sure
Well done, lets see if there be nothing here
I will not venture a penny more this year.
Hitherto blanks prove they all, so we are sow'st
And may conclude Sweet Lady we are Choust
On a Whore that came to the Lottery.
COme on my boy, give me a lot or two
If I get any thing I Will pay thee well
I get my money light enough it is true,
And that my Neighbors if you ask, can tell;
Well done lad if there be written in it
I Will give 't a fool or have it put in print.
Of one that said the Lottery was a mere Cheat.
THere is a sort of rash and Childish elvs
That calls your Lotteries Cheats and cunning snaps
When it is well known that they do cheat themselves
The bait proceeding still from their own traps
There Is none compelled to venture, is there pray?
Then who can help the thing, that will away.
But grant it be a Cheat, you will grant this too
The world's a Cheat, then pray Sir what are you.
On an old Woman that came to the Lottery with Spectacles.
BUt then an ancient Matron she comes in
In hope to be a gainer with the rest?
But to say truth, she lost and did not win:
Her Fortune being then, none of the best.
Her Spectacles did help her for to light
Her purse, as well as eyes that wanted sight.
On a Pickpocket that came to venture his money at the Lottery
A pickpocket or own they call a foil
Came to the Lottery and ventured half a piece
You must think he did not get it with much toil;
So long as Crowds do stock, or any geese.
They all prove'd blanks which made him say in fine
This Trade is Cunninger by half then mine.
On an honest woman that won a Silver Flagon at the Lottery.
SWeet Mistress Walker, I must needs confess
I cannot choose but much Congratulate
This happy Fortune, and thy good success,
In wininng such a handsome piece of plate,
I wish for thy sake it had been a better thing
Because I am sure thou art one that loves the King.
On a Cooks wife that did dream she won a piece of Plate
IT seems you dreamed, you won a piece of plate
But when you waked found it was no such thing
Then it was your dream made you so fortunate
And to your senses did such solace bring.
Even so men dream here to get joy and blise
But when they wake, they find how true it is.
But Mistress pray suppose that I had dreamed
I had gi'n you a sound, for that same Plate you got
And for my pains you gave me good content
Which love of yours ought not to be forgot.
But putting up my money I did find
It Was but a dream, I saw you not so kind.
On a Player that came to the Lottery.
AN honest Player unto the Lottery came
And in a frolic, ventured a Crown or two
It Is not a half penny matter for his name
Because there was no form in it that I knew
He drank to me and setting down the glass
Said he had acted fare to play the ass.
A few Lines upon the breaking up of Sir Edward Fords Lottery at the Crown in
Smithfield.
FOr whose good hap the Trumpet cheerful sounds
And his success with joy and Triumph Crowns
And as promistuously there is many a blank
Thrown in the box for one prize that is good
Even so of every sort degree and rank
That comes with the world of flesh and blood.
This sad experience we have allwaies had
For one man that is good there is twenty bad
The pretty Child that draws to day his lots
Demonstrates innocently very Clear
And those divided by a sort of sotts
That makes no use of what they see or hear,
O that by faith a Lottery drawn might be.
To do our souls good to eternity
On this consideration we should strive
For to get faith which is a glorious prize
And will no doubt keep our poor souls alive
When other comforts perishes and dies
And in conclusion, Careful to be found
Clothed with the weding garment and so Crowned.
On Jack Adams innocent of Clarkenwell
AHa look yonder Mamy, there is a danty thing
If we had that two'd make us laugh and sing
Hark Mamy the Trumpit boes,
I Would venture a penny or a crooked pin
If I were sure to lose and not to win.
Mamy you must call to this great boy
Hear, he wont let me a see this fine toy
Which me thinks finely shows
Own standing by, upon his words streigh swore
He never saw a fool at a Lottery before;
Another answered, Friend it is not so
There Is none but fools come there for ought I know
On a drunckenman that came to venture his Money at the Lottery
TRumpet I Would have you know that I am willing
To venture my money as free as any man
Give me a lot old boy, and their's a shilling
I Will have the basin and Ure if I can
Yet having got a cup, it was his lot,
To have a blank, yet called for the other Pot.
On a Merry Cobbler living in Smithfeld
BUt then an honest Cobbler my good Friend,
A great mind had to get a piece of plate
He lives in Smithfeld nere to Duck Lane end
So he might have it at an easy rate.
But being greev'd to see some lose in Plush,
One Bird in the hand is still worth two in the Bush.
At length with courage Hector like he came
And did desire a Lot might favor, who
Had put his genius in a noble frame.
Making him merry and his Neighbors too.
His Money then being missing in his purse
For madness the next day, waxt worse and worse
Scorning their laughter, for one small piece,
Next day he comes and calls for more,
And then he lost a pretey handsome fleece
I think in Shillings it was some three or four
Although his daily labor is in Leather
He cannot yet bring both his ends together
E're frantic like, his fortune was so bad
He made a vow, to come there no more
And for a day or two was very sad
Which in a Welshman seemed but very poor.
Yet still says e're the Lottery be past
He Will come and venture and win all at last.
On a poor man that came to the Lottery.
AT length a poor man comes amongst the rest
To venture a Shilling or two in hope to win
Though for my part I did bed him straight
Not for to do so, cause he looked so thin
In brief he lost, yet if you will take my word
He had his Coin again, of Sir Edward Ford.
On a Capt. that got two pieces of Plate for Twenty Shillings
ANd then a Captain he drew for a piece,
Two pieces of plate, both costly ones indeed
One he bestowed I think upon his Niece,
Still loving for to pleasure those that need.
He called for Sack which I guest very fine
He had a Caudle cup, and I a cup of wine.
Likewise a Lady living in this Town,
For one five Shillings two handsome prizes drew
One as I take it was a bonny Crown,
The other a Sugar box, both good and new.
And yet it is like you will say, in jesting sort
She had a Sugar box, but paid sweetly for it.
On a Spark
I like your Gallant Sparks, that now and then
Ventures his money at Lotteries like man,
For if his calculation be but sound
For own poor Shilling he may get a pound,
Had I said twenty pound I had not ly'd
Set but your blanks, and scurvy chance aside:
But he shall sure be poor and come to lack
That loses all and leaves no Coin for Sack.
Of an old Usurer that came to the Lottery
BUt then a greedy Usurer in truth
Came to the sport only in love to see
If he could get him any thing forsooth
That had got so much before by Usuery
He lost one shilling, which made him look full sad
Another to it would have made him mad.
The Emblem of a Lottery.
THis World may very well compared be
By its Contracting and uncertain ways
Very much like unto a Lottery
That is so frequent used now adays
For still the Revolutions of these things
Makes some men sad, whilst others gladly sings
The wicked sort, they do Resemble much
Your blanks, that seems so white unto the eyes
But being opened torn is with a touch
Thrown under foot and there in dirt it lies.
The Trumpet never sounds for any those
Nor thanks returned for any Chose
But then your holy and religious man
He is compared unto your Costly prize
Which though at first it looks so paile and wan
Why yet within, there the Rich Treasure lies.
FINIS

