ARTICLES Of Agreement Concluded and agreed on by His EXCELLENCY Sir Tho,
Fairfax, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament on the one part: And
Colonel THOMAS BLAGGE Governor of Wallingford on the other part: For and
concerning the rendering of the Garrison of WALLINGFORD Castle and Town.

Read in both Houses of Parliament upon Friday 24. July 1646.

Published by Command.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 25 July
1646.

Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed by his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one
part, and Colonel Thomas Blagge Governor of Wallingford on the other part.
For, and concerning the rendering of the Garrison of Wallingford Castle and
Town, (viz.)
1 THat the Castle and Town of Wallingford, with all the Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, Stores and Provisions of War thereunto belonging, shall be
delivered up without wilful spoil or imbezzlement, unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, or such as he shall appoint to receive the same, upon Wednesday
the 29 July 1646. in such manner, and with such exceptions as are contained in
the ensuing Articles.

2 That on the said 29 day of July, the Governor, and all Officers and
Soldiers of the Garrison, with all other persons therein (that will) shall
march out of Wallingford, with their Horses and Arms properly belonging to them
(and proportionable to their present and past Commands or Employments) with
flying Colors, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Match lighted at both ends,
Bullets in their mouths, and every Soldier twelve charges of Powder, Match and
Bullet proportionable, with one Piece of Ordnance with equipage, and with bag
and baggage, to any place within ten miles of Wallingford, which the Governor
shall choose, where, in regard His Majesty has no Garrison open, nor Army
near, all their Horses and Arms, except what are allowed in the ensuing
Articles, are to be delivered up to such as His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
shall appoint; all the Soldiers shall be disbanded, and all such, both
Officers, Soldiers, and others, as shall engage themselves never to bear
Arms against the Parliament, nor to do any thing wilfully to the prejudice of
their affairs, during their abode in the Parliaments Quarters, shall have the
benefit of the ensuing Articles; That is to say,

3 That all such as shall desire to go to their homes or private friends, (who
shall not be prejudiced by receiving them) shall have the Generals Pass and
Protection, for their peaceable repair to, and abode at the several places
they shall desire for to go unto, the Governor, Officers and Gentlemen, to
pass with equipage of Horses and Arms, answerable to their present and past
commands or qualities; and all, both Officers, Soldiers, and others, to pass
with bag and baggage. And the Troopers only with their Swords, and their
bag and baggage.

4 That all such (if there be any) who shall desire to take entertainment for
foreign service, shall have Passes for their Officers (not exceeding four)
with their Horses and two Servants apeece, to go to London to treat with any
Foreign Ambassador or a Gentl. for entertainment, and all of them shall have
liberty and Passes to march, the Officers with equipage with Horses and Arms
properly their own, and answerable to their present or past Commands, the
Common Soldiers with their Swords, and all with Bag and Baggage to the
Quarters near unto Harwich or Southampton, or to any Port between them, to be
transported, where they shall be assisted in the procuring of Vessels and
shipping for their transportation, at the usual rates accustomed for fraught
by the Governor of the next Garrison or Port Town, who shall also take care
or their safety and accommodation with Quarters until shipping be provided and
weather reasonable, they paying for the same after 28 days from the Render.

5. That all the persons now in Wallingford, not being of the Soldiery of the
Garrison, shall have liberty for their persons and goods to stay in the Town
of Wallingford one Month after the rendering, if they desire it, and then to
have the Generals Pass and Protection as others going out at the rendering upon
the like engagement; And that any person whatsoever, who being sick and
wounded, cannot at present remove, shall have liberty to stay till they be
recovered or able to go away, and shall have fit accommodation and subsistence
provided for them during such their stay, and then shall enjoy the benefit of
these Articles,

6. That no person whatsoever comprised in this Capitulation shall be
reproached, reviled, affronted, plundered, or injured in their march,
Rendezvous, or quarters, journies, or places of abode by these Articles
allowed, nor shall be compelled to bear Arms, nor be imprisoned, restrained,
sued, molested, damnified for any matter whatsoever, of public or private
concernment, relating to this present War, the matter or grounds arising before
the rendering of the Garrison, during the space of six Months after the
rendering thereof, nor be compelled to take any Oaths, or engagements then
what is mentioned in the second Article during the time of six Months, and to
have liberty during the said time to travel about their lawful affairs.

7. That all Horses and other Goods now in Wallingford taken as lawful prize
of War, or properly belonging to the Governor, or Officers of the Garrison
before, or during the siege, shall be continued in the possession of the
present possessors, except such as are to be delivered by the return of these
Articles.

8 That such Household Stuff and Goods now in Wallingford as shall appear to
the General, or such as he shall depute for that purpose, to have been
borrowed by any Officer or Gentleman in the Garrison, for their use and
accommodation in the Garrison, shall be restored back to the owners.

9 That if any person or persons shall wilfully violate these Articles in any
part, the guilt thereof shall be imputed to such person or persons only, and
shall not prejudice any other not acting nor consenting in the same.

10 That the Governor and three more such Officers and Gentlemen as he shall
name, shall have Passes from the General for themselves, with two servants a
piece, their Horses, Swords, Pistols, and necessaries to go to the King, to
give him an account of the said Garrison, and to return to their homes or
friends, and that five weeks shall be allowed for this journey, which shall
not be reckoned any of the six months mentioned in the sixth Article, but he and
they shall be allowed six Months after the end of the said five weeks.

11 That no Officer, Soldier, or other person who by the Articles are to march
out of the Castle or Town of Wallingford, or shall march in, shall plunder,
spoil, or injure any inhabitant or other person therein, in their Persons,
Goods, or Estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging to any of
them.

12 That all persons comprised within these Articles shall peaceably and
quietly enjoy all their Goods, Debts, and movables, during the space of six
Months after the rendering, and shall have liberty within the said space (if
they shall resolve to go beyond the se^s) to dispose of their said Goods,
Debts, and movables, and to depart the Kingdom with the same as they shall
think fit and desire, and shall have Passes for their Transportation
accordingly from his Excellency.

13 That all persons comprised within these Articles, shall upon request have a
Certificate under the hand of the General, or such as he shall appoint, that
such persons were in the Castle or Town of Wallingford at the time of the
rendering, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.

14 That the Townes-men, and the Inhabitants of the Town of Wallingford shall
not be troubled, or questioned for any thing said or written by any of them,
nor the Corporation thereof prejudiced for any thing done by any of them by
express Command since it was a Garrison, and that they shall have the benefit
of these Articles that may concern them.

15 That Mr. John Chamberlin of Sherborne shall have the benefit of these
Articles.

Signed Tho. Blagge.

FINIS.

