THE GREAT INTEREST OF STATES and KINGDOMS.

The Second Part.

A Sermon Preached on a Public Thanksgiving, on the 12th. of May, 1646. at
Botolphs Alders-gate: And after (upon the desire of some friends) enlarged at
Paul's Church in Covent Garden, on the Lords Day, May 17th. 1646.

By SIMON FORD, Minister of the Gospel at Puddle-Towne in Dorcet-shire.

PSALM. 105. 15. -- He rebuked Kings for their sakes, Saying -- Do my Prophets
no harm.

LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON, for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Marigold. 1646.

To the truly Noble, and publike-hearted PATRIOT, SIR WILLIAM WALLER, Knight,
A Member of the Honorable House of COMMONS. This Sermon, and the Authors
Prayers.
Honored Sir,
THAT this plain Sermon casts it self, upon your Patronage; the Subject it
handles, justly challenges at my hands. For, (besides that I am a debtor to
your self mainly, under God, for that rank, whatsoever it be (though of the
lowest Form) which I have had in the Schools, and now have in the Society of
the Prophets;) it is an obligation to me, that I see you (among your many
employments of merely public importance) so cordially careful of preserving
unviolated this Interest of Interests, the maine Subject of these Meditations.

Sir, it is to me, and to all those whose glory it is indeed, (though it is now,
in some mouths, grown a name of Scorn) to be old Disciples, that is, tried
Saints, a matter of praise to that good God that principles and prospers you,
to behold the evenness of your spirit carried out in all conditions to the
prosecution of public Interests with the same height of faithfulness and
fervency. To instance only in a few particulars; seeing I know such a
Discourse, (if enlarged as it might be) though it might be very welcome to all
understanding, and well-affected Readers besides; yet, to you it would relish
ill, whose (in some sense) supererogatory piece of worth it is, to be willing
to do well, without being desirous to be told of it. Sir, we remember how in
the Martial part of this Ages employment, (notwithstanding continual
oppositions of the first Magnitude, both at home and abroad, the Lord blessed
your small inconsiderable numbers of the worst furnished, and least pai'd
soldiers of any, with successes, which the judgment of the late years thought
somewhat bordering on miracles; that you were the kingdoms Wall of Brass
(next our God) at Alton, Arundell, and Cheriton field: and (by Gods special,
never-to-be-forgotten, goodness) a principal means of its preservation: that
you cheerfully obeyed the call of the Houses, in a calm resignation of your
Forces and Command, and sat down one of the chief Self-denying Members,
without capitulating for pay, or giving any manner of encouragement to, or so
much as accepting of the desires of the soldiery, easy enough to have been
induced to follow example, and to mutiny for a dispensation of the continuance
of your command, as the stirrings of many quieted by your wisdom, and the wet
eyes of more abundantly drencht by their affection, did largely testify at
your departure. And we hope shall remember to Gods eternal praise, and your
perpetual glory, that now in your merely representative Capacity you keep
steady to your Principles of Conscience and Honor, voting and acting from an
impulsive within your own breast, without those Springs and Wires, and
weights, that only keep many men's motions regular; that in these days great
justles of severally engaged Parties, you retain still the same unbyassed,
Covenant-spirit, and do not promote with a politic compliance, or act with a
tumultuous precipitancy, the designs of Jesuiticall incendiaries, whether of
the line of Rome, or of Munster, who concur in an endeavor of setting a new
fire on three kingdoms, ere the old be fully extinguished, for no other ends
(that I know) but that (like that Monster Nero) they may sing (...), in the
heat, etc. or see more new light in the flames of it.

But above all, that which renders you most precious in the eyes of all that
hate Babel, is; your settled and constant affection to the Prophets of God (now
the scorn of this (as * one well calls it) Christ-glutted, and Mr. Shepherd in
his Sound Believer.
Gospel-glutted Age, and trampled upon on all hands, as the very offscouring
of all things) of which, you daily give such ample testimony, that (I dare
assure you,) you have a large share in Prophets Prayers, and I hope will one
day have ( Mat. 10. 41.
according to the promise) a liberal portion of the Prophets reward.

And now, Sir, for the future, whatsoever discouragements you meet withal in
the same good way, remember him (I pray you) who endured the contradiction of
sinners, and yet grew not weary of his work, but carried it on to perfection
in despite of all the powers of darkness. Go you, and do likewise: Tell the
humorous world, that (although its experienced fickleness gives you little
reason to build much upon its constancy, yet) you will add one wonder more to
its seven, to wit, that you are in this Lunatic age; the same man you were a
year since. And I hope, when England has recovered its wits again, when its
Platonic year comes about, and Errors Circle is run quite through, so that
cast Truths, like super-annuated factions, shall return. and become New-light
again, (which I doubt not but it will be in time) it will then see cause to
acknowledge (to your honor, and theirs (who have with you) obtained grace to
be kept faithful) that those who have stood to their places and Principles in
all this change, have done far better then those fallen Angels among us, who
have left their Stations, and run the ring of apinions, and parties, so long,
to return at last, to the Point from whence they begun their irregular motion.

I have only one word more, and that concerns this homely piece of mine. Sir,
in this Dedication, I hope you will look upon my desire to testify to the world
how far you have obliged me; and the maine motive that put me upon the thoughts
of it; and accordingly accept it. Yet I must acknowledge that I have withal a
plot upon your name, being persuaded, that (for its sake in the front of this
Epistle) many transient Readers may be perhaps stayed and entreated to read
beyond the Title Page, some of whom might else perchance lay it by for a
Pamphlet sick of the extravagancies of this Age, it being owned by so obscure
an Author as is,

SIR, Yours, and the Churches weak, but (to his power) faithful Servant in
the Gospel, S. FORD.

To the Reader.
REader, though this second Part had not the honor to be so public from the
Pulpit, as its elder brother, the first, had; yet the judgment and importunity
of some well affected to me, and the threatenings, and mis-reports of others
disaffected to it and me, have made it no less public from the Press. And
yet (as thou may perceive by my addresses in the Application) it was
sufficiently public in the preaching too; there being as great a number of
the Kingdoms and Cities Worthies present, as any Congregation, that I know, in
London, affords upon the Lords Day. I confess that I am one of the youngest
sons of the Prophets, which I plead for; and therefore I am apt enough to
acknowledge against my self, that I believe, this subject might have been
far better handled by many thousands of my Fathers and brethren: But my plea
must be that of Elihu, Job 32. I waited, but they spoke not, etc. verse 16. and
I could not be guilty of so much unrighteousness, as the detaining of so
necessary a truth, when God had put it in my heart, would have involved me in.

I have made some Alterations in Method, and some Additions in Matter, since I
preached it; in the former I have pleased my self; in the latter, I have
satisfied (I hope) diverse of my hearers, who importuned that touch of
controversy in the Conclusion; in which, I thought it only necessary, to
fling a few pebbles of exceptions at that Goliath of the Anabaptists, and rigid
Separatists, (their Argument for Separation drawn from our (falsely called
Antichristian) Ministry) which, I am confident, any disengaged Reader will
say: have so far entered its Brazen forehead, as to lay it flat; and though it
may struggle for life in some after-cavills, (which I expect from the host of
that Phili^^im) yet it will never strut again with its spear like a Weavers
Beam, and defy the Prophets of God, the Ministry of all the Reformed
Churches, or the hosts of the living God, all the Saints that have been
begotten, fed, and translated to glory under it.

I have not meddled with any other, because they all depend on the success of
this; and this being over-throwne, they will be contented (like some Heathen
Nobles, of whom Travelers report, that they are killed when their King dies,
to do him service in another world) to fall to ground, and be buried with it.

I am (I bless God) prepared to receive the great and furious charges of being
too bitter against, and grieving the Saints. The Father tells me, it is no more
than I must expect. What wonder, says he, if when I seek my Masters lost
sheep, I am now and then scratched by the Briar-bush^s of detracting tongues
Quid mirum, si cum -- do mini mei oves perditas diligenter inquiro, spinosarum
linguarum v^prihus laceror! Aug. cont. Peti. lib. 30.
! And shall still resolve with that other Father, never to hunt for the good of
being esteemed mild, with so great an evil, as the loss of truth (...). Naz.
Orat.
.

I hope, I shall stand the first charge of these, under the shelter of that
Buckler, which the Apostle hands to me in the command, Rebuke them sharply,
etc. Titus 1. 13.

To the last I return this: That they do give a very weak evidence, that they
are Saints, that will be grieved to hear the Ministry, by which they were
called to be Saints, vindicated from the calumnies of ('it is to be feared, but)
pretended ones.

And I must by the way tell them, that thus object; that, I pray God, they have
no more to answer, for grieving Prophets, (a greater sin (I am sure) though
less taken notice of) then I have, for grieving Saints.

But, if Saints will be grieved, when they are lashed, who are called Saints to
the disgrace of Saintship; I am not Master of their passions: and I am sorry so
slight and unconcerning a Matter, will trouble them; and more sorry they should
thereby bring themselves under the suspicion of being guilty of that, which
they cannot endure should be touched. I have no more to Preface at this time,
but that I am,

Thine, as far as becomes a Gospel Prophet, S. FORD.

THE GREAT INTEREST OF STATES and KINGDOMS.
PSALM. 105. 15. -- And do my Prophets no harm.
THIS Psalm seems to be intended for an Eucharisticall commemoration of Gods
mercies to Israel.

These mercies concern

1. Their Rise; (Original mercies) and these in 1. Gods Choice of them. v. 6,
7. The Palm taken asunder.
2. Gods Covenant with the^. v. 8. 9, 10, 11. 3. Gods protecting Providence
over them. v. 12, 13, 14, 15.
2. Their Race; in the consideration whereof they are again led into 1. Egypt
from the 15. to the 33. in which are specified 1. Gods Provision for them from
v. 15. to 24 2. Gods Propagation, and increasing of them. v. 24. 3. Gods
Miraculous working our enlargement to them, from v. 24. to 39. And this mercy
so great, it is repeated again, v. 43.
2. Wilderness from 39. v. to the 43. 3. Caraan. v. 44. 45.

These words are a part of the third branch of the first General, Isreal's
Originall-mercyes. And the piece of Originall-mercy held forth in them, is cut
out by the Historical Narration of a special protection of Abraham, Genesis 12.
and 20. and Isaac, Genesis 26. whither I must refer you.

In the whole verse there is a double charge given by God Parts of the Text.
unto those Kings, in whose power it lay, to injure the traveling Patriarchs.

Touch them not. Harm them not.
The persons concerning whom it is given are described by a double Character
Anointed. Prophets.


Except you may perhaps think the last of both exegeticall to the first, De
more Psaltes posteriori hemistichio explicat prius; tangere enim Christos Dei
non est aliud qua^ in Prophetis malignari. A Lap. in Heb. c. 1. v. 9.
Touch not. i. e. Harm not, touch not unjustly; Mine Anointed, i. e. My
Prophets; in which I shall not contend.

There is a sufficient foundation to bear the building which I mean to raise
upon these words, in that the charge here given concerns the same persons, in
both branches; and so, as Et si nondum unctionis erat usus, Propheta tamen id
reipsa fuisse in Abrahamo, etc. testatur, quod Deus in Ceremoniis legalibus
postea ostendit. Calv. ad locum.
Anointed Prophets, as well as Anointed Saints.

Of the former branch of this Charge, concerning the persons under its
Character, there has been enough spoken in a more solemn Auditory by a M.
Th. Goodwin at a solemn Fast, Feb. 25. before the house of Commons.
reverend Brother (if not too much at this season, by reason of the strange
pleas of the Advocates of Liberti^isme now adays, for a Toleration of all, how
ever erroneous, Schismatic, or Blasphemous, who pretend to Anointing: as if
the very name of Saints were a sufficient Noli me tangere, an universal
Protection to them from all Civil, or Church Censures) to whose pleas in
behalf of Anointed Saints (in case he will except those also out of that
Charter of Liberty, who dissolve the continuity of the Body by groundless
schism, and breaking the Laws that keep it united; as he has those, who by
fundamental Errors, and damnable Heresies, strike at, or hold not the head,) I
can readily give my vote, and approbation.

The former branch limited.
But concerning those of both sorts, who now most engrosse the name of Saints,
as if they had gotten a Patent from the King of Saints to that purpose; let
them know, the Scripture never gives Magistrates a stricter charge concerning
them, then it gives to Angels; and these (though they pitch their tents round
about those that fear God) have no other Orders given them (that I read of)
then, to keep them in all their ways. If they destroy foundations of
Religion, and fight against its most material principles, nay if they straggle
from the Body, when they should march close in it; if when they should fight
united, they will divide themselves into Parties without command; if they shall
leap over the hedge of Order, and ride scouting after their own singular
humors, or plundering their brethren of the faith once delivered to the
Saints; and so endanger, not Deuteronomy. 2. etc. 13. 5. 6. 9. 2 Chro. 15. 12, 13.
only themselves, but the body by their destructive doctrines, examples and
practices; (and of this nature diverse suppositions more might be added) sure,
the Civil Gods may touch them with a penalty, and the Church-Angels with a
Gal. 5. 12. Apoc. 2. 13. 20.
censure. And although the men may not be evil; yet Peter supposes they may
be, and suffer, as evill-doers, as busybodies, 1 Peter 4. 15.

If they break the Laws of God, or man's, (the submission unto which does not
contradict Gods) God, as he is not Author, so he will not be Patron of
Confusion, by exempting them from satisfying the Laws they have broken. And as
Paul says to the Jews concerning Circumcision, Verily thy Circumcision
profits thee, if thou be a keeper of the Law; but if thou be a breaker of the
Law, thy Circumcision is made uncircumcision, Romans 2. 25. So I to them
concerning Saintship. Verily thy Saintship profits thee, if thou be obedient to
just Laws; but if not, now Saintship must not be thy Sanctuary; (as to thy
Privilege) thy Saintship is unsainted; and though (as Joab) thou fly to the
horns of that Altar, thou may (without the Rebuke in the Text to thy
Censurers) be taken from it, and be safely punished.

But I intend only to touch at this Nolite tangere. The work I have cut out
for the subject of my Discourse, and your attention, is the latter branch of
the Charge, which concerns the Patriarchs, as Prophets. And although that
subject be less popular, Explication of the latter clause
and so less toothsome, or plausible, I hope my Text will be my security.

And do my Prophets no harm. Prophetas dicit non solum quia Deus propius se
illis patefecerat, sed quia coelestem Doctrinam fideliter propagarunt, Galv. ad
locum.
[Doe my Prophets no harme] Prophetas dicit, etc. (says reverend Calvin upon
the place) He calls them Prophets, not only for their nearer communion with
God, but for their faithful spreading the knowledge of God, [My] Prophets,
that is, those whom I have Commissioned to speak in my name. And this Ratio
nominis, suting with all alike commissioned to the worlds end, makes the charge
not peculiar to Patriarchall, but common to Pastoral Prophets, to the worlds
end. And so the divine caveat here given to these Kings concerning these
Prophets (as such) has to me the force of an universal caution to all
Magistrates, concerning all Gods Prophets. Do these and all other Prophets of
mine [no harm] that is, no injury. No exemption this, (no not for Prophets)
from the power of the Magistrate, The latter clause limited.
(if so, it would not stand with the (...) Romans 13. 1.) but from unjust
suffering by, or under that power. And sure whereinsoever God will own them
for his Prophets, whatever they do in discharge of their Commission, in that
God will own their wrongs.

I shall in the conclusion which I draw from these words, take The Doctrine
grounded.
my rise from the Brothers ground, who has dispatched the preceding part of the
Text; who lays this supposition for me, that this Rebuke of God to Kings,
holds forth the grand Interest of Kings, and Kingdoms. Now if it be true of
the former branch, the connection tells me it is so of the latter too. Que Deus
conjunxit, etc. What God has joined, I hope no man will divide. Nor shall I:
And therefore whatsoever Interest the Usage of Saints concerns; that the usage
of Prophets concerns it as nearly, I shall first propound, then prove, then
improve in this Proposition.

Whatever be the great and high Interests of Kings, States, and Kingdoms, on
which their safety, or ruin most depends, there is none it concerns them more
to look to, then the dealing well or ill with the Prophets of God.

In the proof of this point, whatever the aforesaid Author Proved,
has gleaned to strengthen his Interest, I might make use of to confirm this.
'Twill be an Argument that may perhaps By comparison with the interest in
reference ^o Saints.
conclude more then the Doctrine affirms, that if the greatest and most
flourishing Kingdoms, have been broken by their ill using, or prospered by
their well-using the Saints of God: If God dealt with them, accordingly as they
did with his Saints: much more may it be verified concerning the usage of
Prophets, where such flourishing Kingdoms have had to do with them. And if
God be so tender of Saints, as Saints; sure, he will be more tender of those
Saints that are Prophets too; seeing they have not only an holiness of Estate,
but an holiness of Office, to endeare them to him: in that God looks not on
them only as his Subjects, but takes care of them likewise as his Ambassadors.
Sure if the King of England will resolve on Peace or War with any Nation,
according as they use any of his ordinary Subjects; he will resolve more
effectually according to the entertainment of his Agents and Ambassadors. So
that whatsoever can be said concerning Saints in this case, concludes with
double strength concerning Prophets.

But I need not be beholden to Comparison for the proof of a 1. From Scripture.
Truth so positively confirmed in the whole Scripture, there being nothing in
which it speaks more fully then it does to this Point. I shall (though not
enough read to fill my Bosom with such Collections, yet) endeavor to fill my
hand; and those I shall make use of, shall be so clear, and convincing that I
hope I shall be able to affirm (without an overvaluing my weak labor in this
kind) that these gleanings of Ephraim are not beneath the vintage of Abiezer
(i. e.) that I have proved as much (at least) for the Interest of Kings and
Kingdoms in reference to Prophets, as has already been for that to Saints.

In the first place, will you have a word for this Interest? 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
and Ier. 20. 11. (compared) will acquaint you therewith. By positive
expressions of Scripture to this effect.
In the former of these, you shall find King Jehoshaphat encouraging, and
directing his people, now ready to join issue with a numerous Army; (and you
will conceive that at such a time, he will mind them of that which most
concerns them) And what is that? why? you have Prophets, that encourage you in
Gods name, to confidence of success, see how you use them, beware you do not
distrust them; Believe his Prophets, and ye shall prosper. In the last of
these, you have Jeremiah the Prophet complaining of hard usage from his
persecutors. They raised lies upon him and watched advantages to defame him,
but what collects he from this? see v. 11. my persecutors shall be ashamed
(therefore i. e. because they use a Prophet of God so) they shall not prosper.
Thus then, the usage of the prophets of God has a great influence upon the
prospering, or not prospering of a people. And sure then, they have no greater
Interest.

Will you have the Testimony of a Prophet concerning a Prophet? Elijab being
now to be mounted to heaven in a fiery chariot, Elisha who saw how he would be
wanted, sends this Testimony concerning him, in a Sigh after him. My father, My
father, the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof. 2. Kings 2. 12. And if
you will have a Kings concerning Elisha himself, you shall see Ioash giving
the same Testimony of him chapter 13. 14.

The Expression implies it to be the high engagement that lies upon States and
Statesmen, to look to the keeping and protecting of their Prophets among
them: There is nothing it more concerns Princes or people to look to, then
their Military provisions; (it is the security of a people) and these are
Prophets. [Take etc.]

Will you have examples? scriptures are thronged with them 2. By Examples.
in all the Historical part. I shall instance first in Scripture Records of
heathen Princes and Kingdoms; then I shall give you a brief Epitome of the
Scriptures ecclesiastical History concerning it, and so conclude the
confirmation by testimonies from the word.

The first Prophet I find taken notice of for his usage among Of Heathen
Kings, Kingdoms, or both.
Heathens is this Abraham. How God rebuked Kings for his sake, the places I
have already quoted will abundantly show. And lest you should say this care was
taken of him only as of a common Saint; God himself, when he declares how much
Abimelech is concerned in his usage, tells him he is a prophet, and shall pray
for him. Genesis 20. 7. As if he should have said, thou do not know whom thou
now have in thy power. Did thou know what a Prophets prayers will do with
me, thou would restore this man his wife; thou would beware how thou
used'st a Prophet. And truly the cause of a King, yea of a Kingdom may be such
sometimes, that the prayers of Prophets may have a great influence on the
turning of it either way. Witness Moses his often standing in the Gap:
witness Gods stopping Ieremiahs mouth, the last and saddest symptom of the
peoples total captivity, Jer. 7. 16. 11. 14. And by the way; I shall conclude
the State of that Prince, and his Kingdom desperate, where I see the Spirit of
prayer bound up in its Prophets; and presage a growing bappinesse toward it,
when I find them enlarged in mediating for it unto God. Sure, that State is
blind to its Interest, that has provoked God, by abusing Prophets, to strike
his Prophets dumb.

But to go on. The next Prophet among Heathens was Moses, and he was sent to
Pharaoh to bring Israel out of Egypt. Now Pharaohs and Aegypts Interest was
double; to use the Prophet well, and set the people free. Pharaoh now crosses
both these Interests; detaines the people, and abuses Moses. Now if we may
balance these Interests, it may seem his usage of the Prophet did most concern
him. For although after many plagues, God were pleased to destroy the first
borne, and overthrow him and his Host in the red Sea, to set his people free;
yet he never writes his displeasure in such bloody characters, till the
wretched King had driven Moses from his sight, and commanded him to see his
face no more, and threatened him death if he did, Exodus 10. 28. compared with
the sequel.

Come we a little lower. Jonah is sent by God with a message of destruction to
Niniveh, and the utmost respite he was to give them was but forty days. One
would have expected such an unwelcome messenger as he, should have rather found
his death from them, then acceptance among them. But the wise King knew (though
an Heathen) what concerned him to do. And to work he goes. He entertaines the
Prophet, and his message so well, that he commands a solemn Humiliation, and
therewithal saves his City, which no other way could have rescued from ruin.
That was the great Interest of that City, and that well looked too, kept out
the destroyers.

[Take one word 200 concerning the New Testament Prophets, and of how great
concernment the usage of them was to those places where they came, let the
great Gospel Prophet himself testify. It concerns them (says he that was
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows) as nearly, as it
concerns them to well entreat God the Father, and my self. For (says he)
Whoever despises you, despises me, and whoever despises me, despises him
that sent me. Sure then the usage of Gods Messengers is as great a point of
State-Interest as any can be, to all, except those that think themselves then
least losers, when they have lost their God.]

I shall give you only one example out of the New Testament upon this Head.
John Baptist sent by God to prepare the way for Christ among the Jews, begins
to grow much in request with Herod, an Heathen Substitute, appointed by the
Romans to govern them. Herod carries himself fairly a while toward John
Baptist, hears him gladly, and does many things. And yet with those many good
things, he had many evil too: Many filthy vices he was guilty of, but the holy
Ghost takes notice of this above all the rest; That he put John in prison. The
Text further tells us how his freeness to the King in meddling with his
Herodias, robbed him not only of his liberty, but his life. And a second reason
why Herod slew him, Josephus says, was for fear of the people, because they
were ready to entertain any new motion from one whose word had so great a sway
with them (...). Ibidem.
. And see how dear it cost him; the same Josephus says, the Jews looked upon
the victory that Aretas gained over him, and his Army, as caused thereby (...).
Lib. Iud. Ant. 18. cap. 7.
. And how God met with him too in his Person, and with that Herodias that wooed
him to so bloody an action, will appear if we consider what the Authors of
the Centuries relate out of both Josephus and Eusebius. That whorish woman (how
proper is the Scripture conjunction of those two qualities! Ezekiel. 16. 30.
) was no less imperious; and out of her desire to command, envying Agrippa
(her own Brother) the honor of being a King, while her incestuous husband
sat a staire lower, tempts him to a journey to Rome, to beg a Crown, and to
compass it more effectually, attends him thither. When he came thither, he
found his plot spoiled by a prepared jealousy against him; and his ambitious
preparations for Royalty, proved the indictment, and a sentence to perpetual
exile, was the judgment past against him by the Emperor. In which (because
she had brought him to it) this Tempter was so kind as to accompany him. And
so (say the Centuriasts) Herod by complying with the motions of an ambitious
Whore, stripped of his goods, Country, glory at once, dyed miserably with her in
Gallia ( Hac ratione arrogantis meretriculae instigationibus obtemperans
Herodes, cum ipsa bonis, gloria ac patria exutus miserrime in Gallia vitam
finiit. Cent. Magd. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 3.
). Thus he that was afraid of John, and killed him out of a jealousy to secure
his Command, thereby provoked God by a jealousy to out him of his Command.

Let us in the next place, 2. Examples of those within the Church.
take a view of the usage of Prophets within the Church. And in this you shall
see how those Princes, or Kingdoms, have thrived, that have offended against
this Interest. I shall (for methods sake) branch this view into particulars; in
which you shall also see, when God thinks his Prophets injured; by his suiting
such dealings of men toward them, with suitable Showing the issue of crossing
this Interest in harming Prophets.
dispensations of justice, upon the heads of those that so deal with them: and
so I shall save the answering of that question, what it is to harm Prophets.

1. How they have 1. Persons refusing only to hear them.
sped that have harmed Prophets only by refusing to hear them; let Zach. 7. 9,
10, 11, 12, etc. be first called in to give Evidence. The Lord had sent to them
(as himself says) in his Spirit, by his Prophets, but they refused to
hearken, and pulled away the shoulder; (it seems 'twas doctrine they were loath
to bear) and stopped their ears. Nay, they resolved against hearing to any
purpose, if they did hear; for they had before (by a wicked resolution of
rejecting what they thought would not tickle them) made their hearts like an
Adamant, that is, Sermon-proofe, and conviction-proofe, lest they should hear
the Law. The Prophets were legal Preachers, and they would hear none of them;
at least armed themselves with pride and prejudice, enough to render their
labors ineffectuall upon them. But what great matter was this? Was it a
business of so great concernment to them to hear, or not to hear, such men
as pleased them no better? Yes, they had better they had heard them, for God
paid them in their own coin. Well (says he) they would not hear my
Prophets, but I think I met with them; I remember there was a time when they
called upon me to hear, and I was grown as deaf as they; They cried, and I
would not hear, verse. 13. I scattered them with a Whirlwind among the Nations
which they knew not, etc. verse. 14. I sent them where they had been as good to
have been among deaf people as there, for they knew them not, and the land was
desolate after them.

One testimony more to this particular. That which is in this Chapter History,
is (Jer. 25. 3, 4.) Prophecy. The Lord says he to this people, has sent unto
you all his Prophets, rising early, and sending them, but ye hearkened not, nor
inclined your ear. And verse. 9. 10, etc. you have part of that doom threatened,
which you had in that of Zachariah, related.

2. Prescribers to Prophets. See to this purpose, Isa. 30. 10. 2. Prescribing
to Prophets.
The Lord makes a sad complaint of that people; they were a rebellious people,
verse. 9. But how does it appear? They say to the Seers, see not; and to the
Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things, speak to us smooth things,
prophecy deceits? Get ye out of the way, turn ye out of the path, etc. It Is
very unlikely they would dare say so in downright terms. No, it may be they
said no more but, pray Isaiah, and the rest of the Prophets do not preach to
us that which crosses us in our way; cannot you be contented to preach
practical truths to us, and not trouble your selves with State-businesses?
what does it concern you, if we go down to Egypt for security and
assistance? But you see how God interprets them, it is says he, a bidding the
Seers not to see, etc.

But what great matter is this? What matter of moment or concernment in giving
the Prophets a preparatory lesson of our own? We hope all this is no harm to
the Prophets, nor danger to us. See whether God think so too, verse. 13, 14.
Indeed? (says God) are you swollen so great with pride, that you must give
Instructions to my Ambassadors? yea, and you shall swell bigger yet, and that
till you break into minutula frustula; such sherds as are useful for nothing,
no not to take fire from the hearth, or water from the Pit.

3. Deriders of Prophets, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. This it seems that 3. Deriding
Prophets.
people were very well versed in. But what is all that! if a people make
themselves merry, and please themselves a little with jesting at Prophets?
Indeed Solomon tells us it is a sport to a fool to do mischief, and there is a
mad man that throws about firebrarnds, Prove. 10. 23. 26. 29.
arrows, and death; and yet cries, Am I not in sport? But these mad men think
not they jeere and sport themselves out of their houses, and estates by this
mirth. Yet they do so. For though they be in jest, God is in earnest with
them. They never left scoffing at Prophets till they had brought wrath (viz.)
in the Captivity, upon themselves without remedy, says the sequel of the
verse. It Is a dear jesting that costs a Kingdom all its mirth for ever after.

4. Permitters, or encouragers of false Prophets. The great Patron 4.
Permitting or encouraging false Prophets.
of false Prophets in scripture, was Ahab. A poor Prophet of the Lord could
not look abroad, but he was charged, and persecuted as a troubler of Israel.
The false Prophets swarmed, no less then 450, Ahabs, 400, Iezebels Chaplains.
1. K. 18. 19. And when the King consults concerning war with Ramoth-Gilead, one
Micaiah could not be heard, because he did not please his Majesty: but the
false prophets were his great Oracles. But how God fitted him, and his Army, 1
Kings. 22. will fully declare. But I will speak more to it anon.

The Prophet Jeremiah much insists upon this particular. Chap. 14. He tells us
of some of them of whom God himself, v. 12. witnesses they spoke lies in his
name; but what becomes of them? by sword, and famine they shall be consumed. v.
13. But what does this concern the Kingdom, or Nation? see. v. 16. And the
people to whom they prophesy, shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem,
because of the famine, and the sword etc. for I will power their wickedness
upon them.

Chap. 23. (almost throughout) God complains of Prophets that sent themselves,
and yet they would ape the true Prophets, and cry the Burden of the Lord etc.
and this was grown Epidemicall, v. 34. Priests, and people, and Prophets
exercise their gifts promiscuously; see how God takes this at their hands, and
the Toleration of it at the States: Not only they, but the City are threatened
ruin for it. v. 39. All ranks of men were out of the order in which God had
placed them; they had turned Gods institutions up and down, and God would
turn them up and down for it. God takes it as an high affront, when they did
themselves, or suffered others, to wrong his Husbandmen so far, as to lay
Common what he himself had enclosed.

5. Threatners of Prophets 2. Chro. 25. 15. Amaziah a wicked 5. Threatening
Prophets.
King had gained a victory over the Edomites, to the loss of his Religion. He
took the enemies captive, and yielded himself Captive to their Idols. God
sends a Prophet to him, and pleads the case with him, shows him how
unreasonable it is to expect safety from those Gods that were now his Prisoners.
And how does he entertain the Prophet? with a check, [Art thou of the Kings
Counsell] and a threat; [Forbeare, why should thou be smitten?] Here was no
harm yet; but a threatening only; and is that so much?

But how does God take it? see in the Prophets reply, and the sequel of the
story. The Prophet seeing him so careless of his great Interest, asks no
farther evidence, or Prognostic of his sudden ruin, and therefore is bold to
tell him, I know that God has purposed [Orig. counselled] to destroy thee,
because thou have not harkned to my counsel. And a little after, the foolish
man stirs the coals that set him and his Kingdom on fire, in provoking
Joash King of Israel, v. 15, 16, 17, 22, 23. etc. He had better to have taken
Counsel from God by his Prophet, then have provoked God to take Counsel
against him.

6. Silencers of Prophets, Amos 7. It was in the days of Jeroboam 6. Silencing
Prophets.
the son of Joash (a wicked King, as you may see 2 Kings 14. 24.) when this
Prophet prophesied. The matter of his Prophecy was the captivity of Israel:
Amaziah, Priest of Bethel takes him up for it, and accuses him highly for
sedition, unto the King, v. 10. 12. And (very likely by the command of the
King) forbids him to preach any more in Bethel. This indeed is an usage
something to the purpose. God says, Speak; Amaziah says, Speak not. And what
says God now to Amaziah? see his doom, v. 17. Thy wife shall be an harlot in
the City, and thy sons, and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, etc. And
what is the Kingdom concerned in it? their share is no less then to be
captives forth of their land. Thou, says Amos, bidst me go forth of the
Court, and prophecy: if I go forth to prophecy, and must not prophecy here,
God shall send more after me: Israel shall go forth too out of their Land. And
not many years after in Pekah's time, (the throne having scarce been warmed by
any King of four, except Menahem) this Prophecy was in part fulfilled, 2 Kings
15. 29. and perfectly in his successor, Hosheas time, chap. 16. 6. 18, etc.
And as for Jeroboam, although the History do not tell us how he dyed, yet the
Prophecy does, in that Amos 7. and his seed were dispossessed of the Throne;
only Zechariah, (because the fourth from Jehu; to whose seed God had promised
a succession for four generations, as it appears Chapt. 10. 30. and 15. 12.)
was permitted to hold the Scepter six months, as appears, verse 8. chap. 15.

Next, that you may see 'twas not only Amaziah's usage of Amos, that brought,
(though it hastened) the peoples Captivity: You shall see this judgment is
threatened for the old skore too. -- Manet alta mente repostum. God forgets not
how they used his Prophets in all ages, even from the days of Egypt: and now
they shall pay for it with a witness, Chapter 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. I raised
up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites, verse 11.
Ye commanded the Prophets, Prophecy not, verse 12. Behold I am pressed with
you, etc. 13. How God feels Prophets wrongs! Therefore the flight shall perish
from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen himself, nor the mighty
deliver himself, verse 14. nor Bow-man, nor rider, verse 15. nor the strong of
heart, verse 16. This likewise was fulfilled in the captivity of the Tribes
before mentioned.

7. Imprisoners of Prophets. And now I must look back once 7. Imprisoning
Prophets.
more upon Ahab. It was not enough for that wicked and wretched King to
encourage and maintain false Prophets to affront Micaiah; to refuse to hear
him out of prejudice: but when good Iehoshaphat had prevailed to have him
advised with, and he had declared the mind of God to him, he suffers a false
Prophet to smite him, and claps him up for his plain dealing, 1 Kings 22. 27.
Now what became of this Ahab? God meets with him at last; Micaiah tells him, if
he came home in peace, God had not spoken by him, verse 28. No! (thinks Ahab) I
will try that once; I will see if I cannot prove this Prophet a liar. He shifts
his habit, changes clothes with Jehoshaphat, and thereby diverts the greatest
force of the battle upon Jehoshaphat, mistaken for the King of Israel. But
Ahab is not safe, though he be secure in his disguise, and Armor upon that. A
certain man must draw a Bow at a venture, and shoot, and the Arrow must light
on none of all the Army but Ahab, and on no other place about Ahab's body, but
directly between the joints of his Armor, verse 34. and the wound must be
mortal too: and thus for imprisoning his Prophet God brought him to execution;
and his Army after a long conflict were feign to retreat, verse 36. Once more.
The Holy Ghost tells us, 2 Chronicles. 36. 16. that the Jews did not only mock,
but misuse the Prophets of God, till they brought upon them a remediless
captivity. Now among all the Prophets usages that hastened this calamity, it is
more then probable, that the imprisoning Jeremiah by the Princes did post it
forward; and God ('it is likely enough) gave up the City to deliver a Prophet:
for when the store of bread was spent in the C^ty, and Jeremiah likely to
starve, (as Jerem. 38. 9.) the City holds not out long after, and Jeremiah is
preserved by the entering Enemy, chap. 39. 11.

8. Lastly, Murderers of Prophets. This was a sin ordinary 8. Murdering
Prophets.
with the Jews; and for this Christ bemoanes them, Matthew. 23. 37. O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto
thee, how often would I have gathered together thy children as an hen, etc.
(that is, I by my Prophets, and by my self would, if thou had known thy
Interest, and taken that Protection by receiving, and obeying us) but thou
(foolish people) art an enemy, and ever have been, to thy Interest in this
great particular; it is that, at which thy hand is unhappily in, to kill
Prophets. And this he makes good in another place, where prophesying of his
own death, he tells his Disciples, that Jerusalem is so fleshed with killing
Prophets, that a Prophet cannot perish out of Jerusalem, Luke 13. 33. But the
cry of blood is loud; and the cry of Prophets blood, of all other, most
clamorous. Christ therefore presageth so certain a ruin to Jerusalem for
killing Gods Messengers, that he pronounces it as past. Verily your house [is]
left unto you desolate. This sin you are so given to, (when by killing me,
and persecuting my Apostles, you shall have filled up the measure of the sins
of your Prophet-murthering Ancestors, and your own) shall bring the Romans to
your houses, and they shall leave Jerusalem a company of desolate Walls in it,
shall make a wilderness (so the (...).
word signifies) of your houses, (i. e.) either of your particular habitations,
or your glorious Temple; of which (as he elsewhere says) There shall not one
stone be left upon another.

How these Jews hastened this destruction to themselves by putting to death
Christ himself, and persecuting his Apostles, the Sermon I have already quoted
makes good abundantly. I shall take no more notice of it here, then to observe,
that (as God prophesying concerning their opposing Christ, Ps. 2. takes notice
mainly of their spite against him as Gods Anointed, so) he was mainly opposed
under his Offices of Unction; as a King, by Herod, as a Prophet, by
Highpriests, Scribes, and Pharisees: who mainly consult to ruin him, because
they saw him so followed, as John 12. 19. (which seems to me to be the ground
of that consultation related again which they took, chap. 11. 47.) upon which
verse 53. they are said to plot his death.

And as for the Apostles, the maine ground of their spleen to them, (which was
murder too in their intentions, and Gods account) was, their teaching in his
Name, as they confess Acts 4. so that Christ and his Apostles had their share
in the Jews malice, and persecution, as Prophets, as well as Saints; and how
this blood of former Prophets, and these did stick upon the skirts of that
Nation, and how God took it, and what became of that bloody people, the
Apostle Paul prophesies, and Eclesiasticall stories relate. The former tells
us not only the thing, but brings this as the cause to put all out of doubt, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16. where speaking of the Jews, he tells us, that they, in
killing the Lord Jesus, murdering their own Prophets, persecuting him, and
his fellow-Apostles, and forbidding them to preach to the Gentiles, filled up
their sins. (It referres to the afore-cited speech of Christ, where he bids
them fill up the measure of their Fathers, viz. those that killed Prophets, by
crucifying him, and thus persecuting his Apostles.) And wrath was come upon
them to the utmost, (...), [to the end] i. e. a final wrath, a wrath that
should sweep the Nation quite away, and make a clean riddance of them. And as
Christ prophesying of that destruction of the Jews by the Romans speaks of it
as past, for greater certainty: so it is remarkable the Apostle does. And
whether these Prophesies were true or no, History tells us abundantly, to which
(for brevities sake) I refer you.

Now to draw all this proof to an head, in one grand Syllogism, thus.

That which being well looked unto, will advance the prosperity, be the
Chariots and Horsemen, keep out the Destroyers of Princes and People; and
which crossed or neglected unseats great ones, makes God consult to destroy
them, brings a sword upon them, puts God upon the expense of extraordinary
Providence, to ruin them, will hinder the prosperity of a people, makes them
despisers of God and Christ, stops Gods ears to them when they pray, scatters
them with a Whirle-winde, breaks them into smallest, and most useless sheards,
brings remediless wrath upon them, sends them out of their land, takes off the
flight from the swift, strength from the strong, deliverance from the mighty,
makes their houses desolate, fills up their sins, and brings wrath upon them
to the utmost; that is the great Interest of Princes and Kingdoms, then which
they have no greater.

But the usage of the Prophets of God well or ill is influentiall upon Kings
and Kingdoms in all these particulars. Ergo, it is as great an Interest as any
unto them.

R. 1. Out of many Reas. which might be brought, I shall bring 2 Proof by
Reasons. 1. From Gods Interest in the Prophets.
only three. 1. The first relates unto God himself, and so is drawn from
Gods Interest in the Prophets. And herein indeed, is the maine Emphasis of the
charge in the Text, Do [my] Prophets no harm. I have already showed you
wherein Gods Interest in Prophets appears to be greater then in single Saints,
I shall here only make use of that truth again as Argumentative to prove the
Interest of which the Doctrine speaks. Let us suppose a mighty Monarch, that
has millions of armed men to command at an hour's warning, to revenge any
injury, or affront done to him; sending Ambassadors to some petty
Principality, his next neighbors, (not only professed enemies to him, but
Rebels against him) and entreating them to lay down Arms, to be ruled by his
Laws, and enjoy the privileges of his Subjects; especially when it lies in
his power to take away, and cut off, not only their Provisions for War; but
their lives also every moment. What now would you conclude to be that poor
handfulls maine Interest? Would it not be, to entertain those Ambassadors
courteously, receive their Message readily? and would they not offend against
their maine Interest, if they should deny those Ambassadors Audience; if they
should prescribe to them what to say; if they should deride them, and suffer
every factious, anarchicall tumultuous spirit to write, and print, and preach
Libells, and invectives against them, if they should allow some of their own,
(that do not understand so much as the language in which that Kings Articles
for Accommodation and Instructions for his Ambassadors are written) to stand up
and tell those Ambassadors, they know their Masters mind better then they,
that they teach the people lies, etc. If they hereupon should threaten,
silence, imprison, put to death these Ambassadors, would they not provoke this
Monarch to pluck them up, root and branch, to leave their houses desolate, and
fill them with wrath and vengeance to the uttermost? I need not apply so plain
a Parable. Look into Matthew. 21. 33, etc. and 22, 23, etc. and (change only the
message of Invitation to the wedding in this, and that for fruit from the
Vineyard in that place into this concerning which I speak a Treaty of Peace)
what Christ intends in them to the Jews, may be properly applied to all
Nations of Gentiles, to the end of the world, and may warn them to beware how
they slight Gods Ambassadors; and look upon Oxen, and Farms, and
Merchandise, private Interests, when God calls upon them for acknowledgements
to his Son; how they think the crushing and taking Gods Messengers out of the
way, will make them the Domini fac-totum, the absolute Masters of Gods
Inheritance.

R. 2. In regard of the Interest those Prophets have in God himself. 2. From
the Prophets Interest in God.
They have his engagement upon his honor, that he will take their wrongs as
his own, that he will interpret despising them to be despising him; that he
will confirm the word of his servants, and perform the counsel of his
Messengers, Isa. 44. 26. that he has solemnly bound himself to bind that in
heaven by his Matthew. 18. 18.
Ratification, which they (take it either for a binding of Doctrine, or of
Censure, seeing these Scepticall days will needs qu^stion the union of both
keys in the same hand) shall bind on earth by their Declaration according to
their Commission from him.

Thence also, what God threatens a people to do by his Prophets, they are said
to do, as Jer. 1. 10. where God sets his Prophet over kingdoms to root out,
and pull down, and d^stroy, and throw down, and build, and plant, i. e. to
pronounce that doom against a people, which he intended to bring upon them.

And the Apostle Paul tells us of a power, which he had not only to throw
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God, (viz.) that of his preaching: But a power, which he had also
in readiness to revenge all 2 Cor. 10. 6.
disobedience. Which power, if it be not a power of Church-censure, derived
from Matthew 8. 18. (as some of the best Interpreters expound it) must needs
be a power of engaging GODS wrath against, and to the ruin of such
disobedient ones. And truly, by the way, the cries of persecuted Prophets are
loud ones; for my part, I should be loath any Nation or State, to which I wish
well, should force Gods Prophets to go to him, and complain of their usage,
and put him to it upon his engagement to right them; and (as the Scripture
says Elijah did) make Intercession against them. Romans 11. 2.


R. 3. The third Reason is drawn from the People themselves, 3. From the
Interests which people and Prophets have respectively each in the other.
and the relation Prophets bear to them. The People are the sheep, the
Prophets are their shepherds, their Pastors: Sure the Flock is as highly
concerned in having, and keeping a faithful Shepherd as in any thing that can
be imagined.

They are their Watchmen. A people have no greater interest in the time of war,
or danger, then to look to their Guards, and encourage their Watchmen.

They are their lights, burning and shining lights. In a dark night, in a
dangerous way, what concerns a Traveller more then to look to his light, to
keep it in, and preserve it clear? They a^e their Salt, and there are
putrefying days, corrupting times: Seducers, Children that are corrupters,
like Flesh-flies, swarm every where in the hot season of Contention, and
endeavor to taint the sweetest natures, most tender hearts, and most precious
Spirits. Sure, it is the Magistrates (the good Housekeepers) special Interest
to get as much of this Salt as may be, to preserve them from tainting; and to
keep this Salt charily when they have it. There are diverse other names of
Relation in Scriptures that import as much, as Fathers, Stewards, Guides, etc.
But I think the Point abundantly proved; To improve it to you in Application
is my next work.

And in this I shall address my self to all those that would pursue Englands
great Interest sincerely, beseeching them that Applied by
they will look to this, one of the greatest branches, and of the Exhortation
to all to look to this Interest. Among so many Interests pursued.
top-boughes of it, the usage of Gods Prophets among them.

Beloved, there are many Interests this day started and pursued with a great
deal of earnestness, and it were well for the Peace and Union of these
Kingdoms, if some of them had been as the untimely birth of a woman that never
sees the Sun; at least that they had never been taken up to those uses to which
the Sons of division now employ them.

By the way, whosoever he was since our mutual Covenant, Some destructive,
because dividing.
first named an English Interest, in opposition to that of our neighbor
Nation, it had been happy for both Nations in my judgment, if the knees had
not prevented him, and the breasts had never given him suck; and truly (for my
part,) I have so much Covenant-zeale yet glowing in my breast, that did I know
him, I should think my self bound to discover, and bring him to condign
punishment, as an Incendiary, Malignant, and evil Instrument, endeavoring to
divide one Kingdom from another, contrary to the solemn League and Covenant.
But among all these Interests, let me exhort you to look to this piece of the
highest Interest of all Kingdoms, and all these Kingdoms, which I have all
this while insisted upon.

Beloved it is a subject that a man would have thought for Need to press this
Interest.
some years since he should never have lived to see need to press. But we are
unexpectedly cast into such times, in which we had need contend earnestly for
every title of the ancient Gospel, and when Truth it self, and Christ suffers
the Dispensers of Christ's truth cannot expect to be exempted. How shall those
men spare the Messengers of Jesus Christ, that exalt themselves against Christ
himself? The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord,
says that Lord and Master, whose servants it is our honor to be. Now seeing
there is a necessity laid upon the Prophets of Christ to plead their own
cause: Brethren, bear with me if I lay out a few sands upon that service, and
sacrifice a few words to the expected c^nsure, prejudice, and misinterpretation
of this Anti-ministeriall generation. Me thinks it is a sad thing Brethren,
that those Messengers of good tidings, and This Interest was not so slighted as
formerly.
Ambassadors of peace, who not many years ago you reverenced as Angels of
God, nay even received as Jesus Christ himself, of whom every one was no less
then a (...) a Diana newly dropped from heaven in your eyes, are now become the
offscowring of all things, Antichristian Priests, and I know not what else the
tongues of Sectaries will create them: That among all those that complain of
persecution, the Ministers of the Gospel only, though they most are, yet are
scarce thought capable of being persecuted: That among so many Pleas for
Toleration of every *It Is now.
thing, the Ministerial calling is only esteemed intolerable: That every
scurrilous Pamphleter dares make bold with our calling, and Persons in Print,
and proclaim to the world (to the disgrace of our Church and Nation) this
news, that in England, in London, the rarest Ministry in the Christian world,
is persecuted without control by the pens of such mercenary Scriblers, Aug.
cant. Cres. Gram. lib. 3. Quid respondere possent non invenientes, solito
crebrius, and audacius* Circumcellionum violentiis turbisque furentibus nos a
praedicanda Catholica veritate suaque fallacia convincenda deterrere coeperunt.
that in diverse places in the Kingdom, a godly Minister (except he can be so
much sheep himself, as to let his flock be worried before his eyes, and say, or
do nothing) can scarce preach without tumults, or come abroad without
threatenings; that we have reason enough to fear such usage from some of those
sticklers for confusion in our times, as the Father complains of in his, viz.
That when they know not how to answer us, they will terrify or knock us out
of our Arguments, when, (which God forbid) their party is so far Master of the
power of the Kingdom as to dare attempt it feared it may be more.
. And for my part, if they come once to that pass, I shall be sorry to take the
liberty of Conscience they will then give me, who now plead most for it
themselves.

And I pray what is the cause of all this The pretenses for it.
? Truly they will tell us, they fear we will grow too high. And why is this
feared? because we would feign have Church Power dispensed, as it was in its
first institution, before there were Christian Magistrates. Because we would
feign keep Examined, and some real grounds discored.
our Fatherly bowels, and not be forced to use our people, as the wicked Monk
did King John, to give them poison in a Sacrament, because we desire to have
the power of Stewards (as we are) in the house of God, to see that none but our
Masters Family diet at our Masters Table. And I fear in this particular, he
that fears a godly Minister would be so high as to shut him out if he had
such a power allowed him, has cause to suspect himself an Alien or a Dog,
not fit for that Table; and I am confident if some of the maine Whisperers of
this jealousy had windows in their breasts, it would be found, their maine
fear is, either that they shall be rejected as too bad, or else be enforced to
become too good. It may be too our maintenance troubles others, who would be
contented to share stakes with us, to bring us lower. But me thinks they might
remember how they sped that said in another case; Let us kill the heir that the
Inheritance may be ours. It may be others think the people will never be
brought to worship the Calves in Dan and Bethel, to relish illiterate, and
mechanicke Preachers; and the lowest of the people will never pass for
Priests, till the Priests (as they call them) be made the lowest of the people.
And it may be another sort would feign bring the Ordinances of the Gospel to
the judgment of their Law-benches, where they would make a shift to set us by
the ears, and make us fee for our Sacraments, as they do for our estates.

I beseech you consider, (especially you in whose hands it is, This Interest
pressed mainly upon Parliament members.
to encourage us, or to persecute us by a law) God calls to you this day, and
this charge is yours, Do my Prophets no harm. I dare not think you will vote us
or enact us into a suffering condion for preaching to you, or praying for you.
But however, I beseech you beware how you come under being interpreted to do
so, by not forbidding them that would crushus, and to their power do Qui non
v^tat pe^care, cumpossit jubet.
. I do not readily remember any but wicked Princes Ahab, Jeroboam, Zedekiah.
Naz. (...).
(that Scripture records) that suffered good Prophets to be abused before their
faces. Let me tell you freely, the people are gone as far in harming Prophets,
as they dare go without you. Some will not hear them, except they may
prescribe to them. The sheep (as the Father observes it, was an absurdity of
his time) feed their Shepherds. Every one that has the gift of Arrogance and
Ignorance enough (contrary to an Ordinance of your own) takes a liberty of
lawless prophesying, and by that practice (to al whose eyes a love of Anarchy
has not blinded) prophesies the ruin of this flourishing Church and State,
except your care timely prevent it. And what scorn is everywhere cast by
Sectaries of all sorts not only upon all the Ministry of this Kingdom in
general, but upon an Assembly, in which there is as much learning, holiness,
and gravity, as ever Europe (I think) could show in a like number of men; and
which sit by your Authority, and therefore in equity ought to have your
protection; you need go no farther for enquiry, then the late wholesome
discovery of the poison of Aspes under the lips of many of them, in the
historical part of Gangrena. Vid: Gangren. 2d part 1 ecit: page, 155. 156.
What threatening speeches have proceeded from some of them, (the true Image of
their bloody thoughts) are they not written in the Records of him to whom
vengeance belongs? The all-seeing God knows, what arrows and swords they
continually speak, against the Prophets of the most High: and we make no
question will one day retort them into their own breasts.

Thus far they go, and farther they would proceed, no question, (or else they
strangely degenerate from their Grandsires of Munster) if you would but sleep a
little, and let them play the Kings a while without control. But God forbid
that they should ever proceed so far as to persuade you to enable, or suffer
them to act what they have in their thoughts, against those without whom,
neither they, nor your selves, had ever had the common enemy at such a lift, as
(God be blessed) you now have. I beseech you pardon me this Character, and
(seeing it is a plausible Argument, which you have more then once bin urged
withal for favor to the rabble of all sorts of Sectaries, to mind you of the
good such and such have done for you and the Kingdom,) give me leave a little
to reflect upon the advantages, which by the means of the Ministry the Lord
has brought to the great work.

I shall say no more, but this. That the people offered themselves so willingly
to your assistance, that they contributed their estates so liberally, that they
have adventured their lives so valiantly, that they have borne the length, and
chances of War so patiently, adhered to you so constantly, that the City has
assisted so cordially, that our Brethren came to our assistance so readily, nay
(let me add) that your own hearts have been kept up so resolutely; the main
means under God, (I dare say) has been the concurrence of the faithful
Prophets of God with you, in this work. Far from my breast be the thought that
they shall ever have cause to say with their Savior: For which of these good
works do you stone us? Nay, I hope that you will one day stop those black
mouths that rail at them, and punish those that despightfully use them.

I beseech you that you will make some exemplary for railing at our Calling;
and therein vindicate an Ordinance of your own; The Ordinance for ordination
after quoted.
see your own Ordinance put in execution, for the securing of our Pulpits from
the surprizall of every insolent mechanic; help us against the evil spirits of
these days, that steal from us (as Austin complains) our newborn children,
ere they can go alone, and for the service of their own belltes, make
merchandise of their souls. Christianos quos maxim Christi nomine seducunt,
jam per ipsius Christi Evange lium natos inveniunt and faciunt illos divitias
suas. Aug. 13. cont. Mani.
Help us against those seeds-men of the evil one that creep into houses, and
sow tares, where it is not in our power (though never so watchful) to prevent
them. Suppress those set private meetings, in which these Jeroboams Priests
vent their Mystery of Inquity: and which they in diverse places of this Kingdom
altogether against the mind, and without the knowledge, and privity of the
Pastors, and at the time of public Ordinances, frequent, and maintain.
Consider I pray you what the Father says in a like case; desiring the
Magistrate to suppress Apollinarius his meetings. He positively affirms that
if they permitted such Schools of Errors, against their judgment, (for what
ever ends of policy) it were in effect to proclaim their tenets orthodox, yea
more orthodox then their own (...) Naz. Orat. 46.
; and either they must know their errors, and permit them, or think them
truths, and not embrace them; either of which I know not how a good Conscience
can brook. It is a matter of great moment (says Nazianzen) to restrain men
from murder, and punish for adultery, but it is more to make laws for the
spreading and preserving Religion, to bless a people with sound doctrine.
Truly (as he goes on) the words of a Minister are not able to do so much, in
contesting for fundamental truths [even for the holy Trinity it self, as he
instances in that place] as the commands of the Magistrate; if he by authority
stop the mouths of those that are sick of such heretical infection, if he
helps those that are persecuted by them, if he restrain the murderers of
souls, and keep poor souls from being murdered Naz. Orat. 31. (...), etc and
infra. (...) Naz Orat. 31.
, his interposing may likely be a means effectual, and powerful to that
purpose. But especially look to it that there may be no cause given from any
carriage of any of you, to make faithful Ministers think, plain truth will
not be as welcome to Westminster now as heretofore, considering that you have
so much cause to thank God, that in this great work you have had so many
plain dealing Preachers about you, who have been isntrumental to keep up
your spirits in the lowest times, and have continually advised you to those
ways which God has blessed with so much success, especially in the point of
the Covenant, in the quarrel whereof you have ever since the day you took it
(for the most part, constantly) prospered; and considering too, that some that
have Printed seditious, and traitorous Libels against you, are yet (as to any
public notice) unpunished, one of them though questioned and in trouble, got
too easily off.

Consider I beseech you, God has now wonderfully prospered you, and your
Cause: Sure, there is no man will be so wicked as to persecute his Ministers in
token of thankfulness to him. If there be, let him consider what God says to
his own people, when they bragged, God had delivered them to do all manner of
abominations, Jer. 7. 10. 12. 14, 15, 16. Neither will any (I hope) be so
unmindfull of his Covenant (however some aequivocate in it grossly) as to
tolerate those who must needs (according to their Heretical and Schismatic
Principles) out of mistaken conscience persecute Ministers (as Christ says
some should his Disciples) and think they therein do God service. What success
God has given an handful of them (among many thousands of otherwise minded)
in the Army, I hope shall be no stronger plea for an Antiministeriall, and
haereticall, then it is for the scandalous and profane party; with which these,
and all Armies (especially among the ordinary soldiers) must needs abound, and
who have had as large hand too in their successes.

I am sure, by the Covenant you may as lawfully suffer both, as either. I know
there are those here in this City, that would Vide Master Buroughs Irenicum.
p. 130.
feign take an Argument from the successes that God has given to his own
cause, in the hands of differently affected persons, to set God in the head of
an heterogeneous body, made up of as differing members, as Nebuchadnezzars
Image was of differing metalls, I mean a party made up of all kinds of
Sectaries. I hope they will consider how the Cavalliers sped, when upon their
successes, they blasphemously vaunted, that God was turned Cavallier; and
thereby be persuaded to beware, how they (as blasphemously) think, he is now
turned Sectary.

Honorable Patriots give me pardon for this digression in point of Method, I
ask none in point of matter. Nor indeed is it so altogether improper here. I
am fully convinced, it concerns you as nearly as the Text concerns you; seeing
you cannot harm Prophets more, then by making the persecution of them legal;
which you must needs do, if you make a Law to tolerate those ways, whose
principles necessarily involve it.

I speak not for idle, ignominious, or scandalous Ministers that are called
Ministers in opprobrium Ministerii, such as drive the bloody trade of damning
souls. Away to the dunghill with such unsavory salt. They may be employed any
where cheaper to the Eo deteriores sunt, quia meliores non sunt, qui meliores
esse debuerunt. Salv.
State that employes them, then in the Pulpit. Let their lot be so much the
heavier, by how much they should have been better then they are, seeing they
are so much the worse, (as Salvian says in another case) because they are no
better, who should have been better. (I could wish they had not too many
Patrons among those, who think the continuing them, will so corrupt our
government, as to make a greater resort to their separated Congregations.) I
think I speak the thoughts of all the godly Ministers in the land, they will
be so far from charging you with harming Prophets for punishing, and putting
out these, that they will think no action of yours will do them more right,
then freeing them from such botches of that honorable calling.

Those I plead for, are the faithful, Orthodox, able, and conscientious
Pastors. Use them well, as you love your selves, and the Kingdom, which I am
confident (if they perish from the Land) will not long survive them.

And now a word to you of the City, and all that fear God, and hear me this
day. The Lord be blessed, you have (for the most considerable part of you) been
the shields and bucklers of the Prophets. And be you so still. My Text has a
charge for you too. I hope you see how the Prophets Interest and yours are
intwisted each within the other. You cannot but know how soon Munsters calamity
followed the persecution of of its Ministers. You know how a community of
prophesying there ushered in a community of estates, and plurality of Wives:
and when their new-come Prophets had altogether expelled, or infected their
standing Preachers; 'twas not long ere they fell to cut the throats, and rifle
the houses of the wicked; that is, all those that had not lost their Religion
and their Wits like themselves. Sleyden tells us that Thomas Muncer the
firebrand of Germany in its first Reformation, began those Combustions by
preaching against Luther, and cutting out a middle way between him and the
Pope, to make Luther as odious on one side, as the Pope on the other side
Sleid. lib. 5. Com. Huc^scil. Alstetum ubi eomnigra vit ille, coepit docere
primum non solum adversas p^n^ificem Romanum, sed ipsum quoque Lutherum;
utri^sque doctrinam esse vi^iosam and impuram, etc.
. And a little after in Munster 'twas voted an Ace beyond him, that of the two
false Prophets the Pope and Luther, Luther was the worst Id lib. 10. Comm.
Lutherum etiam and Pontificem Romanum aiunt esse falsos Prophetas. Lutherum
tamen altero deteriorem.
. And what were the sister opinions unto this; and into what confusion they
quickly reduced the whole City and Country by decrying the Magistrates as
much, the same Historian abundantly relates. Sure, that Generation has
hitherto had like good will to both Civil and Ecclesiastical power. I cannot
but take notice that Mr.* Tombs in his late examination of Master Marshall's
Sermon, (though he deny the necessary dependence of the rest of those Muncerian
and Munsterian miscarriages, upon the opinion of Antipaedobaptisme, in which
point Master Marshall has answered sufficiently, yet) taking occasion to lay
down some reasons upon which it may seem no wonder, it was so accompanied in
those days: among the rest, he alleges their want of a regular Ministry:
and hence I believe I may be bold to argue thus far; that whatever Sects are
enemies to a regular Ministry (as most of the Sectaries in England But it is
no marvel that when men grow into Sects such things happen, ospecially when
the Reformation of an abuse is denied in an orderly Synodicall way. [In which
yet (referring to Munster) Master Tombs to excuse the Anabaptists, without
Authority, crosses the History that Sleyden tells us, l. 10. that before the
Magistrates of Munster expelled them, by a Decree they allowed them a dispute
before them with the Ministers, which as the place would permit was an orderly
Synodicall way; and afterward offered them another, before learned, and able
Moderators, which Rotman refused] and the persons that seek it declaimed
against, accused, and accursed, and persecuted as Schismatics, and Heretics,
and unlearned and factious men, [marke these words; this is the plain state of
most of our Sectaries in England] join with a discontented party for finister
ends, so that the men that hold an opinion have no regular Ministry nor
orderly meetings to debate, or conclude of things among themselves; and to
agree upon a confession of their Doctrine to be by all avouched. Tombs Examine.
page 24. Sect. 5.
are, and most Anabaptists of any) it is no wonder if they bring themselves, and
the places where they are, into such turbulent, and Antimagistraticall
practices. And truly, it is no wonder to me, when I consider that the
Principles of their enmity to Ministry will easily be improved to an overthrow
of Magistracy.

Hear it I beseech you, all you that love order; and believe it Citizens,
(whose Government hitherto has been your Glory) according to these men's
principles, (as far as they are pleased to discover them) you have no greater
security for your sword, or seat of Justice, for your Chains and Scarlet, then
we have for our Coats or our Pulpits. And sure in their usual way of arguing,
from a pretended flaw in our Calling, to a scorn of our Doctrine, a surprizall
of our Office, and a persecution of our Persons; though they do not mention
you in their premises, yet they may in the Conclusion; ('It Is ordinary with
their Sophistry, to bring more in the conclusion then is in the premises) and
it will go hard with them, if when they have begun with the Minister, they do
not end with the Magistrate, and when they have made the Minister good man
Priest, they will bid fair to make my Lord, Mr. Major And how probable this is
see the disputation recorded in Gangraena. 2. Part. p. 17. where the
Anabaptisticall Disputants unlorded the Lord Ma^or, and called him in scorn,
Master Major.
. For let any man tell me in sober sadness, whether by the Warrant, which they
pretend from 1 Pet. 4. 10. they may not as well make themselves Magistrates, as
they conclude themselves Preachers. I know not if a man's sole gifts authorize
him to teach (though not by virtue of any office, yet out of charity; as they
distinguish most absurdly, as if Charity would bear a man out in doing acts of
office, without a Commission) why they may not be as charitable to the Lord
Major and Court of Aldermen, as to us; especially seeing the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal: and sure there is a gift of
Governing, as well as a gift of Prophesying.

And let any man again resolve me whether if [Be not Lords over Gods Heritage]
exclude us from all power in the Church; [Call no man Master upon earth; and,
Dare any of you go to Law before an Infidel, and not before the Saints] do
not shut you out from any in the State as well; especially when they shall vote
you Infidels (as the Anabaptists have most of you already in effect) and your
Government to be after the manner of the nations; as they have us Anticristian,
and our government tyrannical. Add to this, that your government in your
Families hangs in the same string; and why your servants may not take upon them
to be your Masters when they please, that is, when they are persuaded they have
a gift of governing better then you, I know not, if the former Argument be
sound: at least, why not refuse to call you Masters, if the latter be valid.

Consider I beseech you Citizens; you have borrowed from the whole Kingdom the
choysest Jewels they have. I believe you see, they will be called away from you
fast enough, now the Country is open again: if upon their departure, you have
a famine of the word, it will perhaps be a vexation of spirit to you to
remember, if (which God forbid) you should entreat these Joseph's ill while you
have them, whom God has sent before to store you, perhaps against such a time.

Sure it concerns you nearly to take that care for them which the Apostle
Paul charge his Corinthians to take for Timothy, 1 Corinthians. 16. 10. that they
may be among you without fear; that no man despise them. Let them have no
cause to complain of London, as Salvian does of Carthage: The Athenians and
Lycaonians themselves would hear Paul; But in Carthage (says he) such
servants of God cannot be seen in the streets without reproaches. Let not such
usages be esteemed no persecution, because it is not Manslaughter; and
faithful Ministry the less Martyrs, because they are not murdered. Truly,
that things are not come to that height, it is not because the Persecutors are
not bloody enough, but because they are not Potent enough; and this kindness
is not the men's, but the Laws Intra Carthaginem apparere in plateis and
compitis Dei fervos sine contumelia non licuit. Persecutionem hanc suisse non
putant, qui a non and occisi sunt -- sed in Vrbe illa, non tam hominum fueru^t
hac beneficia, sed legum. Salv. Another address to all together, concerning
this Interest.
. My Lords, Commons, Citizens, Brethren, all that hear me this day; do you
think you have any greater Interest then your Religion? I am sure you should
not; I hope you do not. You are bid to contend earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the Saints Jude 5.
. As you love Religion look to the usage of Gods Prophets. Were it not for them
I know not, (things having been carried as they have (that I say no more) by
some of the Civil and Martial power) how many Articles of our Faith had
remained unquestioned by this time. Neither do I know yet, whether in their
private Congregations by some or other, they be not all undetermined. I have
cause to believe most are. But sure, that they yet dare not outface the light,
it is no small fruit of the labors of the orthodox Prophets. Sure had our
Pulpits (through our default) been as open to them, as (by the fault of
others) the Presses have, you had scarce (as far as some could prevail to rob
you of them) had, left you, a God, a Christ, an holy Ghost, a Word of God, a
Sacrament, nay (you had been so far from being allowed to be Christians, that)
you had been denied to be Men, and been unreasonably scoft at for not
renouncing your souls.

Nay these (...), these depths of Satan are not yet sounded to the bottom.
They do not yet tell you when they will leave robbing you. The innumerable
incomprehensible Reserve of New-light is the Gyges ring, by means whereof they
walk in a cloud at noonday, and keep their principles invisible Quotidie
Haeretici immuta^t dogmata sua. Denique si vir Ecclesiasticus de Scripturis
eruditus contenderit contra ees, and Scripturis sanctis coarguerit eos, statim
requirunt quomodo aliud novum dogma reperiant. Non quaerunt quomodo salventur*
sed quomodo superent. Hier. in Ps. 5.
. To day they sit with us and judge with us, if the great drivers of the
design, and leaders of the rabble so guide them: to morrow they sit, and vote
against us, if the wind turn; and (which is worse) are not ashamed to say and
unsay before the same Auditors (...). Naz. Orat. 32.
. etc. Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? Thus they shift tenets
continually lest you should take hold of them; and when you think you have
them at an advantage, they step aside behind some aequivocation or other, and
leave a cloud in your Arms in stead of that you grasped at. Nor is this
liberty taken only in things of small concernment, and of an indifferent nature.
Here is the danger, and the wonder of it. There are as many Faiths abroad as
fancies, so many Faiths as destroy all faith; yea, concerning God himself,
every year, may every month begets a new Creed, the new undermines the old
Periculosum vobis atque etiam mirabile est tot nunc fides existere, quot
voluntates, etc. Sic plurimae coeperunt esse fides, ut nulla sit; imo vero
annuae, menstruaeque de Deo fides de^ernuntur; novis subvertuntur vetera, etc.
Hilar. lib ad Constantium and Constable. Impp. de Arian.
. How (beloved) can you think it safe for Religion now, to part with your
orthodox Prophets, that hold fast the form of sound Doctrine, and have
learning enough to confute these gainsayers; for a rabble of bottomless
opinions, and opinionists: the workings of whose fancies are as restless, and
more unbounded and irregular, then the vast Occan, which has its confines of
motion appointed, and an Huc usque to put a stop to its proud waves?

By this I hope you see how greatly your selves, nay Religion it self, are
Interested in the usage of your Pastors and Gods Prophets.

And now I had done, had I not cause to think some cavilving An Appendix for
the vindication of our Ministry against the common cavil that it is
Antichristian, because we had our Ordination from Prelates.
spirits, would think to receive the charge in the Text, and yet save
themselves harmless by questioning the application, as not belonging to the
Ministers of this Church; whom they will not own as men commissioned by God,
but Emissaries of Antichrist, and therefore unlawfully called.

I could in the first place (but that the objecters and they in other things
agree so well, that in this, there is little hope they will fall out) set them
and the Papists by the ears about it. How says the Jesuit; are our Ministers
true Ministers or no? No (says he) for they have not a calling from the
universal Bishop. And how say you now Master Anabaptist, are our Ministers
true Ministers or no? No (says he) for they are sent by the Pope of Rome, and
so Antichristian. Friends agree among your selves, what to object, and we will
answer you both together; or fall out among your selves, and you will answer
one another. But sure as long as you stand thus opposite in your assertions,
one must lie, and (because the world know's not which) they will cast the lie
at a venture, and truly speak it handsomer, and call it aequivocation or
mental reservation,, and you are both too well versed in it to disowne it.

But I shall speak a few words to the cavil itself, and but a few; For I
remember this is a Sermon, not a Treatise. To clear The objection answered to
the Parliament from their own Ordinance for ordination of Ministers, bearing
date, Oct. 2. 1644.
this particular, the ground of my exhortation to you, (my Lords and Gentlemen)
I shall not need. I will not think you have set forth any thing as the result
of both Houses debates, which you were not fully settled in. Nor will I think
you are so given to change, as to disavow that now, which you have in a
public edict acknowledged. I read your sense of this Question in your
Ordinance for Ordination, where in the Preamble you assert, That no man ought
to take upon him the office of a Minister until he be lawfully called, and
ordained thereunto; that this Ordination, (that is, an outward solemn setting
apart of persons for the office of the Ministry in the Church by preaching
Presbyters) is an Ordinance of Jesus Christ. That those who have been formerly
ordained by Bishops, (seeing that action was performed by them as Presbyters,
with the Assistance of other Presbyters) have an Ordination for substance
valid, and not to be disclaimed by any that have received it.

So that it is the sense of both Houses, that our Ordination (as by Bishops, the
medium by which the Anabaptists prove us Antichristian) is notwithstanding
according to an Ordinance of Jesus Christ for substance, and constitutes us
Ministers of the Church of Christ, and capable of giving a like mission to
others. What therefore concerns you in the application of the charge in my
Text, your own Ordinance fastens on you, and I hope it shall never witness
against you. I persuade my self, seeing you acknowledge us Ministers of Jesus
Christ, and so Gospel Prophets, to you I have not misapplyed.

To you Citizens and fellow Brethren, I shall speak as concisely To the rest.
too as is possible. If you are converted to Christ, and not to opinion, you
must needs come within the reach of the Apostles Argument. If these Ministers
be not Apostles to others, yet they Discovering the undutifuness of the
objectors (most of them) in so ob^ecting. Questioning the consequence of the
argument.
are to you. For most of you are begotten by their Gospel, and I hope no
dutiful son will charge his Father with illegitimation.

To others who thus argue, our Ministry is derived from Antichrist, that is,
in their meaning, from Bishops installed by him, and it is therefore
Antichristian; although the consequence of that Argument be justly obnoxious,
(for it is not being derived from persons having an Antichristian power, that
makes a thing Antichristian, unless it can be proved that the thing so derived
is derived by that Antichristian power; the same persons may act by a double
power, a legal, and an usurped power; now it is not argument enough to prove
this or that act they do is an illegal act, because done by one that usurps
an illegal power, because such a person that has a legal power too, may as
well act by it; and this is in effect the Argument of the Parliament in the
Ordinance before quoted) yet I pass this. And answer:

The Antecedent cannot be proved, and it is only an affirmation, Questioning the
Antecedent upon good grounds.
that our Ministry though consecrated by Bishops, was derived from Antichrist.
And it may be probable enough, and as probable (I am sure) as any thing they
can bring to the contrary; (which is enough to invalidate this Argument) that
(though for some ages past, it were granted, that Bishops invested by Popes,
have been the Ordainers, and the Ministry has had its succession from them)
that there was Christianity in England long before Popery; and the Ministry
then may be said to be derived from beyond Popery; and 'tvvill be questionable
whether even those Popish Bishops did all or any of them originally receive
their Presbytership from Rome, or from that succession; though they received
their Episcopacy from Rome.

Besides, secondly, this Argument will cast as strong jealousies upon the
calling of all the present Ministry of all the Showing what mischiefs this
Argument involves.
Reformed Churches, seeing Popish Ordainers have at one time or another
interrupted the Order of Apostolical succession, and then it will infer,
that at present in all, and in most of 1. As strong a ground of suspension of
all the Ministry in the Christian world at this time.
them for some ages, there has been no Ministry; and so no lawful
Ordinances: and by the same Reason (as far as we know the extent of
Christianity in the World) we may argue in like manner, seeing Antichrist has
had his claw in every corner of it at one time or another as it is more then
probable. And so Christ's Promise to be with Teachers and Baptizers (who must
have a lawful call to make them capable of that promise) to the end of the
World, would at this time, (there being no lawful called Teachers and
Baptizers supposed in the world; by this Argument) be little better then
concluded a falsehood.

Again thirdly, I know not what should stop these men 2. A road-way to
Anabaptisme, Seeking, and that in infinitum.
from Anabaptisme, or Sebaptisme, if they be not infected yet; or Seeking if
they be, that thus object. For I take their supposition, and thus argue; either
the Baptism which they received from this Ministry was valid, or null; if
valid, they destroy their position, that our Ministry is unlawful (for no
act of office (as administering a Sacrament) can be valid from one that is not
a lawful Officer,) and I answer as the Father in a like case, I acknowledge
this Ministry upon the same grounds upon which they own those that are
Baptized by it. And they prove them lawful Ministers by admitting those whom
they have Baptized. A Luciferian is brought in by Hierome, arguing thus. Si
Ariani haeretici sunt, and haeretici Gentiles sunt, and Ariani Gentiles sunt;
Si autem Ariani Gentiles sunt, and constat nullam societatem Ecclesiae esse cum
Arianis, (i. e.) cum Gentilibus; manifestum est vestram Ecclesiam quae ab
Arianis, i. e. Gentilibus Episcopos suscipit, non tam Episcopos suscipere, quam
de Capitolio Sacerdotes, ac per hoc Antichristi magis Sinagoga, quam Christi
Ecclesia debet nuncupari. (I repeat this the more large, because it expresses
to the full all the cavills of these days against our Calling and Churches.)
To which the Father answers. Si Ariani (ut dicis) Gentiles sunt, and Arianorum
conventicula castra sunt Diaboli; quomodo in-castris Diaboli Baptizatum
recipis? and infra. Tu enim Episcopum probas, quia ab eo recipis bptizatum. --
eadem ratione Episcopum ab Arianis recipio qua tu recipis baptizatum. -- Quare
ergo a nobis parietibus separaris, cum in fide, and Arianorum nobiscum
receptione consentias? Heir. adv. Lucif.
. If invalid; then they must be baptized again, if they will keep any
Church Fellowship; and then they must either baptize themselves, (contrary to
the Institution, and all examples of Scripture) or be Baptized by others: and
how shall they be assured of their Calling, or Baptism to whom they address
themselves, seeing even they also must be feign, either to derive it from one
of these Ministers, or those that were Baptized by them; (and so the Argument
touches them here again) or themselves. And he that questions thus far is
to seek indeed, and may, for any thing I know be a Seeker in infinitum.

But I forget that this must not be a Treatise, but a Sermon: only this I
have added to stop the mouths of some that perhaps would have shifted all the
rest off from their backs, if they had missed it.

To return to you (beloved) and end in a few words: I Conclusion.
beseech you do not only not harm your Ministers, but encourage them, and
assist them. You have Covenanted, not only to root out all Error, Heresies,
Schism, Profaneness, etc. but to assist all that do so. Assist your
Ministers, whose maine work it is. They have well led you the way, (you of the
City especially) by representing the evils of Toleration; second them in this.

Petition for renewing the Ordinance for Ordination, that you may have a
greater supply of such Prophets, and succession too.

-- Vt simili frondescat virga metallo. Still seek out and punish irregular
Assemblies, and seditious Preachers and Practisers, and fear not the Bug-Beare
word of Pehsecuting Saints, when they are out of the way of Saints. This do,
And the good hand of the LORD he upon you for good. If this Exhortation be
any way beneficial, I have my end, let God have the Glory; if not, I have done
my Duty; and if Prophets fare ill, after such a warning, by the procuring, or
neglect of any of you, who ever you be that that heard, or read, this Sermon;
I assure my self it will be a record against you.

FINIS.
REader, seeing the Author, by reason of his distance from London, and absence
from the press, thereby occasioned, could not be aforehand with the Printer
in preventing some mistakes, he is forced to set these afterhand intimations
here, or to prevent thine.

Page 1. Branch the Analysis according to the sense, (some particulars being
miscarryed by the reference. p. 6. at [Take, etc.] should be inserted that
which p. 7, 8. is so enclosed []. p. 8. conceive the quotation in the Margin
above the ibidem. p. 17. dele with. l. 11. p. 28. r. usage; it, Ministers. p.
29. undermined. p. 32. l. 1. r. conferred. infr. lawfully called.

REader, thou art presented with Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver; a
Treatise in Vindication of the Ministry, from base aspersions daily cast upon
their Persons, their Calling. It is no great matter to us to be accounted the
filth of the World, the off-scowring of of all things; the Apostles were so,
and Christ our Master; But there is no small danger to thee to account us so:
If it be the great Interest of States to protect the Saints; it is of far
greater concernment to do the Prophets no harm. These things were preached,
now printed, not to shame, but warn thee.

Imprimatur, JA: CRANFORD.
Sempt. 7. 1646.

