FIVE PHILOSOPHICAL QUESTIONS, Most eloquently and substantially Disputed:

VIZ:

I. Whether there be nothing New in the World. II. Which is most to be
esteemed; -- An Inventive Wit, Judgment, or Courage. III. Whether Truth beget
Hatred, and why. IV. Of the COCK; and whether his Crowing does affright the
Lion. V. Why dead Bodies bleed in the presence of their Murderers.
LONDON, Printed for George Badger, and are to be sold at his shop in S.
Dunstans Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1650.

Whether there be nothing new.
THe desire to learn is natural, and no less pleasing to the mind of man,
than his desire of getting: and indeed, it is one kind of getting: and as men
receive more contentment in one new purchase, than in often thinking on all
those which they had made before; so our understanding takes a great deal more
pleasure in feeding upon new nourishment, than in chewing the cud upon that
which it had already: yea, and among those new repasts, if it light upon any
which it never tasted before, it receives it, as our palate is wont to do,
with so much the more pleasure: for nature is more pleased with the change,
than with the continuation of the use of any thing: the reason is, because
seeking the supreme good, and not finding it in any of those things which she
has yet made trial of, she always hopes to find it elsewhere. This
sweetness, is that which allayes the bitterness of learning to children, who
are ravished with the pleasure of learning all those Histories and Pedanticall
conceits, which we can so hardly endure when we are grown to more age. It may
be, it makes old men so melancholic, because you can hardly tell them any
thing that they know not, and therefore men's talk is tedious to them: whereas
ignorant youth admires and takes pleasure in every thing. And we are so
delighted with novelty, that there is no beast so ill-favored, which seems
not pretty when it is young, witness the Asses foale; nor no plant of so
little delight, as that novelty cannot commend it, as we see in the Hop and the
Primrose. But I distinguish Novelty into Physical or Natural, Moral and
Artificial. The first of these is in new productions, whether of substances,
or accidents, as of diseases unknown to the Ancients. The second of new and
unusual actions. The third of Inventions. According to which distinction, we
may state this question, and that in my opinion, must be done thus: There are
no new substantial productions, Nature having displayed all her forces almost
these six thousand years (according to true account, and much more, if we
believe the Egyptians and Chinois) and having run through all imaginable
varieties of species, by the diverse combinations of all her matters; and also
through all mixtures of qualities and other accidents: which makes it
impossible to show any disease that is new and unknown to the foregoing ages.
But for actions it is another case; their number cannot be determined, because
they depend upon the liberty of man, which could be no longer liberty, if our
Will were not free to pass some set number. Much less can Inventions be said
to be determinate and reducible to a certain number, because they depend in
their productions, upon the wit of man, which is infinite in its duration, and
in its conceptions, which cannot be bounded, no not by that Vacuum which some
have imagined on the further side of the Heavens. Of which all our inventions
are proofs sufficient.

The second said, that this exception is unnecessary, there being nothing at
all new in any of those forenamed classes, according to the testimony of him
that was best able to judge, as being the wisest, and who had made the most
experiments; I mean Solomon, who boldly pronounces of his own times, that
there was not then, nor should ever be any new thing. How much more then is it
true in our time, being so many years after him? For, to begin with the formae
substantiales, as they call them, there is not one of that sort new, not only
in its species, but even in its individual qualities, which, indeed, appear
new to our senses, but yet are not so for all that: as the shape of a Marble
Statue was in the stone not only in possibility, but also in act, before the
Graver made it appear to our eyes, by taking away that which was superfluous,
and hindered us from seeing it. And if we believe, that we have so good a
horse that his like was never found, it is not because it is so, but because it
seems so; other horses, as good or better than that, never coming to our
hands. Much less likely is it that new diseases should be produced, as some
have believed, imagining that the Ancients were not curious enough to describe
all those of their times, or their Successors diligent enough to examine their
writings to find them there. As for humane actions, do we see any now-adaies,
that have not been practiced in times past, whether good or bad, valiant or
cowardly, in counsel or in execution? And that which they call Invention i,s
for the most part, nothing but a simple imitation in deeds or words. Thus,
Printing, and Guns, which we believe were invented within these two or three
hundred years, are found to have been in use among the Chinese above twelve
hundred years. So says Terence of speech, Nihil est jam dictum quod non dictum
sit prius. Our very thoughts, though they be innumerable, yet, if they were
registered, would be all found ancient.

The third said, That Nature is so much pleased with diversity, which is
nothing else but a kind of novelty, that she has imprinted a desire of it in
all things here below, and, it may be, in things above also: for they are
pleased in their work, and the supreme and universal Causes produce us these
novelties. Thus the different periods of the heavens make new aspects, and new
influences, not only every year, but also every month, every day, yea, every
moment. The Moon, every quarter, shows a several sort of face; and
particularly, when she sends all her light toward the Sun, she is called New.
The Sun at his rising is new, and so he appears uncessantly to some Country
or other in the world; in each of which he makes new seasons; and amongst the
rest, Spring, because it is the most pleasant time, is commonly called in
France le Renouveau, because it renewes all things: the air decking it self
with a more cheerful light, the trees clothing themselves with leafes, the
earth with greenness, the meadows being enamelled and imbroidered with new
flowers. The young man that feels the down upon his chin, acknowledges his
mossy beard to be new: upon his wedding day he is a new-married man: it is a
pretty new case to his Bride to find her self made a woman: her great belly
and lying-in, are also novelties to her: the little infant then borne, is a new
fruit: his first sucking is new, his teeth at first coming, are new. And so
are all other conditions of Clarkship and Priesthood, and Widowhood, and almost
infinite others. Yea, many things that seem not at all to be new, yet are so;
as a River seems very ancient, and yet it renewes it self every moment* so
that the water that now runs under the Bridge, is not that which was there
yesterday, but still keeps the same name, though it be altogether other indeed.
We our selves are renewed from time to time by our nourishments continual
restoration of our wasted triple substance. Nor can any man doubt but that
there are new Diseases, seeing nothing is written of them in the books of the
Ancients, nor of the remedies to cure them, and that the various mixtures of
the qualities which produce them, may be in a manner innumerable; and that both
sorts of Pox were unknown to the Ancients. But this novelty appears yet
better in men's actions, and diverse events in them, which are therefore
particularly called News. Such are the relations of Battles, Sieges, takings
of Towns, and other accidents of life, so much the more considerable, by how
much they are ordinarily less regarded. It were also too much injustice to go
about to deprive all Inventors of the honor due to them, maintaining that they
have taught us no new thing. Do not the Sectaries and Heresiarchs make new
Religions? Moreover, who will make any question, whether we have not reason to
ask what new things Afric affords nowadayes, it having been so fertile in
Monsters, which are bodies entirely new, as being produced against the laws of
Nature. And when the King calls down money, changes the price of it,
determines its weight, is not this a new ordinance? In short, this is to go
about to pervert not only the signification of words, but also common sense,
in maintaining that there is nothing new: and it had not been amiss if the
Regent, which printed such Paradoxes in a youthful humor, had never been
served with new-laid eggs, nor changed his old clothes, and if he had
complained, answer might have been made, That there is nothing new.

The fourth said, that there are no new substances, and, by consequence, no new
substantial forms, but only accidental ones; seeing Nothing is made of
Nothing, or returns to Nothing; and in all the other Classes of things, there
are no new species, but only new individuals, to which Monsters are to be
referred. Yea, the mysteries of our Salvation were always in intellectu
Divino. Which made our Savior say, that Abraham had seen him. And as for Arts
and Inventions, they flourished in one Estate, whilst they were unknown in
another, where they should appear afterward in their time. And this is the
sense wherein it is true, that, There is nothing new.

FINIS.
Which is most to be esteemed, an Inventive Wit, Judgment, or Courage.
THe life of man is intermingled with so many accidents, that it is not easy
to foresee them; and though our prudence could do that, yet it belongs to the
Inventive faculty to provide for them; without which, the Judgment remains
idle. Even as a Judge cannot give sentence till the Advocates or Proctors have
let him understand the arguments and conclusions of both parties, that he may
know to whether side he ought to incline; which, in us, is the office of the
Wit or Invention to do: Without which also Courage is but a brutish fury,
which inconsiderately throws us headlong into danger, and so loses its name,
and is called foole-hardinesse. It is the good wit that enables us to do and
say things in the instant, when there is need of them, without which they are
unseasonable; like the Trojans Embassage sent to the Roman Emperor to comfort
him for the loss of his son, who died a year before they came; and
therefore he requited their kindness with comforting them for the loss of
Hector, their fellow Citizen, slain by Achilles, in the time of the war
between the Trojans and the Greeks (above 1200 years before.) It is the Wit
that seasons all the discourses and actions of men, who make no other
distinctions of good and evil, of wisdom and folly; but by our speaking, or
doing things fit for every occasion: which is the act of the Wit, and not of
the Judgment or Courage, although in great and heroical actions: all the
virtues are to be found inseparably chained together; witness all those neat
flashes of wit, witty speeches, and replies made upon the sudden, which have
always gotten their authors more honor and favor, than their premeditated
words and actions, to which the Judgment contributes more largely than the
other two. It is the Wit, that by its inventions, drew men from their caves,
and the life of beasts, to give them palaces, food, raiment, conversation, and
in a word, all the commodities of life which we enjoy at this present. For the
better deciding of this question; suppose in one company, three men differently
endued, the one having a good Wit, the second a ripe Judgment, and the third a
great Courage: This last man can bear with nothing; the judicious man will say
nothing which he has not first well pondered, he will rather hold his peace;
and both of them may find much diversion in the inventions of the ingenious
man; who also, if they fall out, will find a means to make them friends
again; whereas the judicious man would use so many circumspections, that their
quarrel would grow old, and be past the estate of accommodation wherein it
was, when he began to seek the means of agreement, whilst the other being
merely courageous, would hear nothing to that purpose: But their ingenious
companion will find a remedy for all these difficulties, and will show them
the way by his own example; none being harder to be reconciled, than those
which are not at all ingenious. In war, the courageous, I grant, will run
headlong into danger more readily: The judicious will delay an enterprise,
oftentimes employing that time in consultation, which should have been spent
in execution: but the Engineir, like Archimedes, will defend a Town all alone,
or will set upon a Fort, and subdue it by the force of his inventions, better
than a thousand men could have done with handy strokes. As we may see in
stratagems, which have more success than open force, so that it is become a
Proverb, Cunning is better than Force. Antigonus having scattered many Bills of
Proscription, wherein he promised a great sum to him that should kill
Eumenes; many of the soldiers of Eumenes began to plot his death, till
Eumenes, as soon as he heard of it, called his men together to thank them for
their fidelity, telling them, that he having been informed that some of his
own soldiers had a design upon his person, thought good to scatter those
Bills under the name of Antigonus, that so he might discover those which had the
traitorous intent; but he thanked them, he found no such villains amongst
them. This strain of Wit stopped the designs of his enemy, and made them
unprofitable. In private business, one puff of wind upon the Sea, one war
happening between two neighboring estates, one change of some customs by land,
have need of more Wit than of Judgment, or Courage, to save you harmless from
shipwreck and loss. In the Courts of Law, their Replies are pieces of Wit:
Yea, Wit is of so great esteem with every one, that all the perfections of the
Soul are comprised in this word. The French when they would express all that
may be said of man (beside the comeliness and graces of his body) say only he
is homme d'esprit. I therefore think, that the Inventive Wit ought to be
preferred before Judgment, which is of no use, but only in such affairs as
afford and require choice, as Courage is only for dangers.

The second said, In vain have men Wit, if they want Judgment to guide it, as
for the most part it comes to pass. So that ordinarily they are accounted
opposites. Also fools want not that sharpness of Wit, which serves for
Invention; nay, rather both it and Courage are sharpened and made more active by
the heat of frenzy. But it is Judgment that they want, the loss of which
makes them be called fools. Which is observeable in the same company which was
but now mentioned: Wherethe Engineire or sharp-witted man, will talk of very
fine things, but he poures them out like a torrent, and without discretion:
whereas the Judicious man shall give better content than either of them, though
he speak fewer things of the business in hand than they do: But the
Courageous man is apt to give distaste, it being usual with such to run beyond
the bounds of that respect which other tempers are ashamed not to use; for
Judgment proceeds from a coldness of temper, opposite to that heat which
causes promptness of Wit, and Courage. In war, the Inventions and Courage
aforesaid, are also ordinarily not only unprofitable, but also hurtful without
Judgment: Which also in traffic, is the thing that directs the Merchant in
his choice of the several designs which he proposes to himself, and of the
means to attain his ends: without which deliberation nothing comes to a good
end, neither in war nor merchandise.

The third said, that the most courageous do always give laws to the rest,
and so cause themselves to be esteemed above them. For in the first place, if
the company aforesaid be of knowing men, before whom you are to speak; Your
invention and disposition (the effects of wit and judgment) will stand you in
no stead, if you have not the Courage to pronounce your Oration, as we see in
the Oration which Cicero had penned for Milo. Nay, it is impossible to invent
well, if you want Spirit, which gives life to all actions, which have the
approbation of all men, whether at the Bar, or elsewhere, so that they call
them Brave actions, and full of Spirit. And if Courage be of esteem in all
actions, then in War it is esteemed above all; and the Laws punishing
cowardlinesse, and not the defects of Wit or Judgment, do plainly show, that
they esteem Courage more than either of the other.

The fourth said, That those which speak in favor of Wit and Courage,
employing their judgment in the choice of the reasons which they produce, do
sufficiently show that judgment is above them, as being the cause that they
are esteemed. For, you know the Philosophers maxim, the cause has a greater
portion of whatsoever it communicates to the effect, than the effect it self
has. Also the Judge is greater than the Advocates; to whom we may compare the
Wit, because it proposes the means, and the Judgment makes choice of them; and
as for Courage, if it be without Judgment, it deserves not the name. Without
Judgment, the inventions of the Wit are nothing but Castles in the air, and
empty fantasies, like a ruined house without chambers, or any other
requisites. Such Wits for want of Judgment, dwell upon nothing, but always
skip from bough to bough, and from conceit to conceit; which for that cause are
not ordinarily so profitable to their inventors, as to the judicious, who
better know how to make use of them. In truth, you shall find most of the
inventions in those which have least practice, their in experience making many
things easy, which practice shows to be impossible, and therefore they never
found entrance in the Fantasy of a Practicioner. Also, there is more courage
found in beasts than in men; and in men we often see that the most courageous
are not the most judicious, but according as the quicksilver fixes in them by
age, so they grow less and less inventive and less resolute to expose
themselves to such perils, as their foolish youth, and want of experience
caused them to undervalue.

And to say the truth, the Judicious man has all the Wit and Courage that he
should have: for he that invents, or proposes things contrary to a sound
Judgment, goes for a fool: but he that has Judgment, cannot want Courage;
for these two cannot stand together, to be judicious and yet not to forsee that
Courage is necessary in dangers, for the avoiding and overcomming of them: So
that he that says a man is Judicious, presupposes Wit and Courage in him: but
not on the contrary; there being many courageous, but neither judicious nor
inventive; and more that have Wit without Judgment.

The fifth said, that all our actions being composed, all the faculties
contribute to them: and they must needs be faulty if they be not seasoned with
Wit, Judgment, and Courage: but if we compare them together, the Wit is the
most delectable, the Judgment most profitable, and the Courage is most
esteemed.

FINIS.
Whether Truth beget Hatred, and why?
TRUTH is an affection or quality of speech, agreeing with our thought or
apprehension: Whence it follows, that to speak the truth, it is sufficient to
speak of things as we think of them, whether we have conceived of them aright
or no. For which reason, they say in Latin, mentiri, est, contra mentem ire.
Yet there are two sorts of Truths; the one single, which is the truth of the
terms, as also there is an untruth of the terms, for there neither is, nor
ever was any such thing as a Chimaera: the other is composed truth, which is an
indicative speech, wherein we affirm or deny something of some other thing;
which manner of speech is only capable of truth or falsehood. For, truth
properly taken, is when not only our discourse agrees with the species which is
in our understanding, but also when this species agrees with the thing spoken
of. So that truth may be called, the measure or agreement of any thing with
the understanding, and of the understanding with the speech concerning that
thing. This truth may be again divided according to the difference of its
objects, into natural, which treats of the nature of every thing; and
civil, which speaks only of the actions and customs of men. These things
being granted, I think that truth of it self begets no hatred; and therefore we
need not seek the cause why it does: but on the contrary, I say with Aristotle,
that we love truth, and that in such a measure, that we like no falsehood but
that which has an appearance of truth; which we call likely or probable:
which makes the romants to be disliked as soon as we discover any
impossibilities in them. And they that would amuse little children with
monstrous tales, must yet so fit them to their little wit, as that they may
believe them, and so think them true; which is easily done, because of their
want of experience. But, forasmuch as the greater part of men is imperfect, so
far as they love to be praised, so far do they hate those that tell them
the truth of their defects, which ordinarily carry blame with them. And because
the same reason that makes every one love his own praise, makes a man also take
pleasure in blaming of others, that he himself may seem more perfect: Hence it
comes, that dispraise being very well liked by all save only him whom it
concerns, who is very sensible of it; it was upon this ground that Terence said
that Truth begets hatred, especially when it is opposed to flattery, and to
complying with the humors of every man; which makes truth appear so much the
more austere: as a Countryman coming next after a Courtier, seems so much
the arranter clown; and all other contraries set near together, make one
another the more discernable.

The second said, that this proverb [Truth begets hatred] is not grounded upon
truth; for, every man not only professes it, but also gives testimony, that he
is pleased with it. It is also the object of our understanding, which never
rests till it has found it, seeking it with no less earnestness than that
wherewith the will seeks after goodness. So that setting truth on the one
side, known to be such, and on the other side untruth, likewise known to be
such; it is as impossible for the understanding not to love the truth, as for
the will not to incline to a known good. This love of truth is so remarkable in
all persons, that not only the Judges, according to their duties and places, do
use all possible diligence to find out the truth of a fact; but also all those
which are not at all interessed in the business, are notwithstanding so much
taken with it, that though their ears be extremely tired with listening to the
one party, yet they have not the power to refuse audience to the other side
that undertakes to discover falsehood in his adversaries tale: and if the
understanding do not conceive the truth, it never remains any more satisfied
than a hungry stomach would be with painted meat. Wherefore, it belongs only
to diseased minds to hate truth, as only to sore eyes to turn from the light.
Wherefore, as men do not determine of colors, tastes, and other objects of the
sense by the judgment of indisposed organs, nor say sugar is bitter, because
the tongue in a fever, being filled with choler, judges so; even so ought we
not to say, after the perverse judgment of the vicious, that truth begets
hatred; and by consequence we are not to seek the cause of a thing which is not
so.

The third said, that whatsoever agrees to our nature, and is found in us all,
cannot be called a disease, but rather the contrary. Now, not only the
understanding and the inner senses, but also all the outer senses of man, taken
in general and in particular, are pleased with falsehood, and love to be
deceived: Whence it comes to pass, that of all the sects of Philosophers,
there was never any sect more esteemed than those which distrusted the
abilities of our mind, and held themselves in a continual suspense or
uncertainty: nor was there ever any more ridiculous than those that were most
confident of their opinions. And because the acknowledging that we cannot know
truth, is a kind of truth of which our understanding is incapable; therefore
did Democritus lodge truth in a pit; and others said she was flown to heaven:
both expressions signifying, that she is out of men's reach. Besides, our
understanding loves its liberty, no less than our will loves it; and as the
will should no longer be free, if it were necessarily carried to some object;
whence proceeded so many differing opinions concerning the chiefest good? even
so our understanding foreseeing that if at once it should know the truth, it
must cease to be free to turn from it; it therefore preferres likelihoods and
probabilities: from whence arises that pleasure which we take in disputes and
problematicall altercations. For which cause also the sect of Pyrrhon is by
most men esteemed above all others. And the greatest part of the Sciences and
Arts have no foundation but upon the errors of our faculties: Logic, upon the
weakness of our understanding in discerning of truth; for the better
disguising of which, and so our greater pleasure, Rhetoric or the Orators Art
was invented, the end of which is not at all to speak the truth, but to
persuade you to what it pleases. Poesy is the art of lying artificially, in
feigning that which neither is, nor was, nor ever shall be; as picture, and
especially perspective, endeavors only to deceive us. Even the most pleasing
Arts, as Cookery, the better they abuse our taste, and our other senses, by
their disguises, the more are they esteemed. Look into civil conversation, it
is nothing but disguisement; and (not to speak of the maxim of King Lewis the
eleventh, to which he restrained all the Latin of his Successor) the greatest
part of the civilities of our Courtiers, and Citizens too, reaches no further.
And therefore we need not wonder much, if the clownes that run contrary to the
ordinary course of all other men, render themselves odious to every one.

The fourth said, that the understanding is pleased with doubts, as the wooers
of Penelope loved to court her mayds, that is to say, because they could not
enjoy the mistress: Nor is there any that being hungry, and having put his
hand to the platter, would like well to look on it, through a pair of
spectacles of many faces, through which there would appear so many dishes, and
in several places, that he could not tell which was the right. Wherefore, it
is certain that we love truth so well, that no untruth can be welcome to us,
unless it be covered with the ornaments of truth; and all those arts of
disguising show what esteem we have of untruth, seeing it must be like truth
that we may like it. It Is true, that none but God being able to discern this
sort of truth, which consists in the agreeing of our thoughts with our words;
and deceit being very frequent in this matter, civility and courtesy teaches
us rather to use words of complement than rude and ill pollisht language; the
rusticalnesse of which is ordinarily excused by clownes with the name of truth,
though truth be no more incompatible with good grace than pills are with
leafe-gold, by which the one is taken in better part, and the other with less
pain to the sick.

The fifth said, that truth being the expression of the species of something,
and we taking pleasure to see a copy well representing its original, it
cannot beget hatred. Things of themselves do not displease us, at least there
are more that please than that displease, and of these a good part is sweetened
by the manner of speaking of them, as we see in jesting; no man hindering us to
speak truth laughing, so that the denomination being not to be taken from the
lesser and the less sound part, truth cannot be said to beget hatred. Also
truth not being able to produce any thing but its like in an univocall
generation, it must be an equivocall one when it begets hatred: the ignorant
vulgar in this (as they do often in other cases) taking that for a cause which
is none. Otherwise the difficulty that we meet withal in seeking of truth,
increases the love of it, and begets not hate of it. Which love is no less
universal than the hate of untruth, as may appear by that story of two Roman
Citizens, one of which was banished by a general consent, after it was known
that he was so given to lying, that he had never been heard speak truth; the
other received great and public honors, because he had never been heard speak
any untruth, no not in jest. And we have nowadayes store of examples of the bad
entertainment which all liars find; which our ancient Gauls well knowing, did
account it the utmost degree of offense, to give one the lie.

FINIS.
Of the Cock, and whether his crowing do affright the Lion.
THe first man said thus; The Germans going to the wars, had reason to take a
Cock with them to serve them for a spur and an example of watchfulness;
whence came a custom to this day used by the Mule-drivers; some of which tie a
Cock upon their foremost carriage; and others that will not trouble themselves
with him, provide only a plume of his feathers. Upon the same ground Phidias
made a statue of Minerva bearing a Cock upon her helmet: unless you will
rather think his reason to be because this Goddess is as well president of
war as of study; both which have need of much vigilance. Though this bird for
other causes may be well enough said to pertain to her; as for his being so
warlike and courageous, as that he will not part with his desire of
vanquishing, though it cost him his life: And this desire he prosecutes with
such fury, that Caelius Aurelian reports, that a man fell mad, having only been
pecked by a Cock in the heat of his fighting. For the passion of choler being a
short madness, is able exceedingly to raise the degree of heat in a temper
already so extremely choleric; that in time the body of a Cock becomes
nitrous; and in this consideration it is prescribed to sick persons to make
them laxative, and it is the better if he were first well beaten, and plucked
alive, and then boiled.

And this courage of the Cock moved Artaxerxes King of Persia, when a soldier
of Caria had slain Prince Cyrus, to grant him leave to bear a little Cock of
gold upon his Javelin, as a singular badge of his great valor. In imitation
whereof, all the soldiers of the same Province fell to wear the like upon the
crests of their helmets; and were thence called Alectryons, that is in Latin,
Galli, a name afterward given to our Nation, and it may be for the like reason.

The Cock is also the Hieroglyphick of victory, because he crows when he has
beaten his adversary; which gave occasion to the Lacedaemonians to sacrifice a
Cock, when they had over come their enemies. He was also dedicated to Mars: and
the Poets feign that he was a young soldier, and placed for a sentinel by
this God of war when he went to lie with Venus, but feared the return of her
husband: but this watchman sleeping till after Sunrising, Mars and she were
taken napping by Vulcan. Mars being very angry, transformed this sleeper into a
Cock, for his negligence: whence, say they, it comes to pass, that well
remembering the cause of his transformation, he now gives warning when the Sun
draws near to our horizon. Which fable is as tolerable as that of the Alcoran,
which attributes the crowing of our Cocks to one that, as he says, stands
upon the first Heaven, and is of so immense a hugeness, that his head touches
the second: which Cock crows so loud, that he awakens all the Cocks upon the
earth, that immediately they fall a provoking one another to do the like; as if
there were one and the same instant of Cock-crowing all over the face of the
whole earth. The Cock was also dedicated to the Sun, to the Moon, and to the
Goddesses Latona, Ceres^ and Proserpina; which was the cause that the novices
or those that were initiated in their mysteries, must not eat of a Cock. He was
also dedicated to Mercury, because vigilance and early rising is necessary for
merchants; and therefore they painted him in the form of a man sitting, having
a crest upon his head, with Eagles feet, and holding a Cock upon his fist. But
particularly he was consecrated to Esculapius, which made Socrates at the point
of death to will his friends to sacrifice a Cock to him, because his hemlock
had wrought well. And Pyrrhus curing men of the Spleen, caused them to offer a
white Cock; whereas Pythagoras forbade his followers to meddle with the life or
nourishing of any of that calour.

The Inhabitants of Calecuth sacrifice a Cock to their deity, whom they
conceive in the shape of a he-goat; and Acosta, out of Lucian, assures us, that
anciently they worshipped a Cock for a God: Which Christianity not suffering,
has put them upon Churches, the spires of steeples, and high buildings,
calling them weather-cocks, because, as fanns, they show the coast whence the
wind comes; unless you rather think they are set up in remembrance of St.
Peter's repentance at the second crowing of a Cock.

The cause of his crowing is commonly attributed to his heat, which makes him
rejoice at the approach of the Sun, as being of his own temper; of which
approach he is sooner sensible than others; because he more easily than any
other creature receives the impressions of the air, as appears by that harsh
voice which he sometimes uses in crowing when he has been newly moistened by
the vapors; and therefore the Contrymen count it an ordinary sign of
rain. And forasmuch as the whole species of birds is more hot, dry, and light
than the species of foure-footed beasts; therefore the Lion, though he be a
solar creature as well as the Cock; yet is so in a lesser degree than he.
Whence it comes to pass, that the Cock has a pre-eminence over the Lion,
which he understands not, till the crowing raise in his imagination some
species which in him produce terror. Unless you will say, that the spirits of
the Cock are communicated to the Lion by means of this voice; for that is a
thing more materiate, and so more capable to act than the spirits which come
out of sore eyes, which nevertheless do infect those that are found if they
look on them; nay, to speak with the Poet, they do bewitch the very lambs.

The second said, we must reckon this error [of a Cock scaring a Lion by
crowing] among diverse other vulgar ones, of which oftentimes the chaires and
pulpits ring, as if they were certain truths, when in the trial they prove
stark false. It may be some tame Lion grown cowardly by the manner of his
breeding, has been seen affrighted by the shrill sound of some Cock crowing
suddenly and near to his ears; which will seem not unlikely to them that in
the beginning of March last past were present at the intended combat in the
Tennis-court at Rochel, between such a Lion and a Bull; at the sight of whom
the Lion was so afraid, that he bolted through the nets, throwing down the
spectators which were there placed in great number, as thinking it a place of
greater security; and running thence, he hid himself, and could by no means
be made re-enter the lists. Or it may be the novelty of this crowing surprised
some Lion that never heard it before, as having always lived far from any
village or country house where poultry are bred; and thereupon, the Lion at
this first motion, startled.

It is also possible, and most likely too, that the startle of choler
(whereinto the Lion falls as soon as any thing displeases him) was mistaken by
some body for a sign of fear, whereas it was a token of his indignation. For
I see no show of reason to imagine in this generous beast a true and universal
fear of so small a matter as the voice of a Cock, seeing that this likeness
of nature which is attributed to them, should rather produce some sympathy than
any aversion; and yet this enmity (if any were, and that as great as between
wolves and sheep) ought no more to scare the Lion than the bleating of a sheep
affrights a wolf. But the wolf devoures the sheep, and assimilates it to his
own substance, rather for the good will that he bears himself than for any
ill will or hatred that he bears toward the sheep. Besides, we ordinarily see
Cocks and Hens in the court-yards of the houses where Lions are kept, which
never make any show of astonishment at their crowing. Nay, I remember I have
seen a young Lion eat a Cock; it is true, he did not crow, any more than those
of Nibas a village near to Thessalonica in Macedon, where the Cocks never
crow. But the Lion would have been content with tearing the cock in pieces, and
not have eaten him if there had been such an antipathy between them as some
imagine. But this error finds entertainment for the moralls sake which they
infer upon it, to show us that the most hardy are not exempt from fear, which
oftentimes arises whence it is least looked for. So that to ask why the crowing
of a Cock scares Lions, is to seek the cause of a thing that is not.

The third said, we must not make so little account of the authority of our
predecessors, as absolutely to deny what they have averred, the proof of which
seems sufficiently tried by the continued experience of so many ages: for to
deny a truth, because we know not the reason of it, is to imitate Alexander,
which cut the Gordian knot, because he could not unty it. It is better, in the
nature of the Cock and his voice, to seek a cause of the fright of the Lion,
who being a creature always in a fever by his excessive choleric distemper, of
which his hair and his violence are tokens; great noise is to him as
intolerable as to those that are sick and feverish, especially those in whom a
choleric humor enflamed stirrs up headache. Besides, there are some kinds of
sound which some persons cannot endure; and yet can give you no reason for it,
but are constrained to fly to specificall properties and antipathies, and such
we may conceive to be between the Cocks-crowing and a Lions ear, shith much
more likelihood than that the Remora stays vessels under full sail; and a
thousand other effects impenetrable by our reason, but assured by our
experience. Lastly, this astonishment that the Cock puts the Lion into with his
crowing, is not very unreasonable. This king of beasts having occasion to
wonder, how out of so small a body should issue a voice so strong, and which is
heard so far off, whereas himself can make such great slaughters with so
little noise. Which amazement of the Lion is so much the greater, if the Cock
be white, because this color helps yet more to dissipate his spirits, which
were already scattered by the first motion of his apprehension.

FINIS.
Why dead Bodies bleed in the presence of their murderers.
GOod Antiquity was so desirous to know the truth, that as often as natural
and ordinary proofs failed them, they had recourse to supernatural and
extraordinary ways. Such among the Jews was the water of jealousy, of which
an Adulteress could not drink without discovering her guiltiness, it making
her burst. Such was the trial of the Sieve, in which the Vestall Nun, not
guilty of unchastity, as she was accused to be, did carry water of Tiber
without spilling any. Such were the oaths upon Saint Anthonies arm, of so
great reverence, that it was believed that whosoever was there perjured would
within a year after be burned with the fire of that Saint: and even in our
times it is commonly reckoned, that none lives above a year after they have
incurred the excommunication of Saint Geneviefve. And because nothing is so
hidden from justice as murder, they use not only torments of the body, but also
the torture of the soul, to which its passions do deliver it over: of which
Fear discovering it self more than the rest, the Judges have forgotten
nothing that may serve to make the suspected person fearful; for besides
their interrogatories, confronting him with witnesses, stern looks, and
bringing before him the instruments of torture, as if they were ready to make
him feel them; they have invented all other means to surprise his resolution,
and break his silence, especially when they have found already some signs and
conjectures. Wherefore they persuade him that a carcass bleeds in the presence
of the murderers, because dead bodies being removed do often bleed, and then
he whose conscience is tainted with the Synteresis of the fact, is troubled in
such sort, that by his mouth or gesture he often bewrayes his own guiltiness,
as not having his first motions in his own power. Now the cause of this
flowing of the blood in the presence of the guilty is this: After death the
blood grows cold and thick, but after a few days it becomes thin again; as
when we open a vein and receive our blood into Porrangers, if we let it stand
in them, we may there see the like; the heat of the corruption supplying the
room of the natural heat, which kept the blood liquid in the living body. So
that if the carcass be removed by the murderer, it is no wonder if it bleed.
And because the murder is hardly discovered by suspicions, till after some
days, about which time also this liquefaction of the blood happens, so that
this accident is often found in the presence of the murderer: hence it comes
to pass, that the one is counted the cause of the other. Although this cause
and this effect be of the nature of those things, which with small reason are
thought to depend one on the other, merely because they fall out at the same
time; and because this persuasion, though it be false, has a real effect in
discovery of truth, therefore the Lawgivers have authorized it, using the same
care for the discovery of truth, that the guilty do to cover and hide it by
their denials and diverse sleights. But we must take heed that we render no such
cause of this issuing of the blood, as may make it depend on the presence of
the murderer, as if it would not have happened without it.

The second said, that it is not credible that the Sovereign Courts which have
practiced this trial, and made good use of it, were so defective in the
knowledge of natural causes, as not to be able to discern the effusion of
blood, which comes by the putrefaction of it in the veins, (for they have a
property to keep it from congelation) from the gushing out of the same blood
observed at the first approach of the guilty, and when he is brought to look on
the body. It is therefore much better to seek the cause than to call in
question the effect, unless we had better reason so to do, than because it
seems too mavelous. Some have referred it to a magnetic or electricall
virtue of the blood, saying, that quarrels seldom happen between persons
unknown, but that the murderer and the slain having had acquaintance
together, their bloods have gotten such society as to draw one another; and so
the living man's blood being the more active, draws the blood out of the other.
But as this attraction has an imperceptible subtilty, so it is not easy to
conceive it possible, if it be not helped by some means that may connect this
effect to its cause. I like better the opinion of Levinus Lemnius, who
presupposes that two enemies, intending one another death, do dart their
spirits one at another; for they are the messengers of the soul, by which she
exercises the sight and all her other outward senses. Now these spirits
seeking the destruction of one another, and being made active by the sting of
choler, do insinuate and work themselves into the opposite bodies, and finding
an open entrance through some wound, they tend thither more notably than to any
other passage, and there they mingle with the blood of the wounded, and he
shortly after dying, they there settle themselves and abide with his spirits,
till the murderer afterward again approaching to the dead body, the spirits,
which were all this while separated from their total, do take this occasion to
rerurn and rejoyne themselves (as all things are desirous to return to their
own beginnings:) But this they cannot do without clearing and separating
themselves from that mass of blood wherein they lay confused; and therefore
they trouble this mass, and so cause an effusion of that blood, which till
then was retained in the veins. Which is helped not a little by that confusion
whereinto we bring the murderer, by laying before him the body by him
murdered: for hereupon his spirits, forsaking their Center and wandering, do
meet with their fellows, as the Lode-stone and Iron meeting one another half
way.

The third man was of the opinion of Campanella, who attributes the cause of
this bleeding to the sense which is in all things, and which continues in dead
bodies; so that having a perception of their murderers, and perceiving them
near them, they suffer two very different motions of trembling and anger,
which shake the body and remove the blood in the veins violently enough to
make it issue at the gaps of their wounds. For the spirits, which during life
had knowledge enough to make them perceive and obey the commands of the soul,
retain it even after death so far, as to be able to discern their friends
and their enemies. And as at the time of our birth all the objects which are
present, do imprint in us their qualities in that universal change which is
made at that moment, as Astrologers speak; [whence comes that important choice
which they prescribe us to make of mid-wives and gossips, that is (if we
consider the matter more nearly) of the persons which are to be about the
child-wife] so when we die and quit our natural qualities to borrow new ones
from the bodies about us, we get a conformity with all those which are near
us, and with the murderer more than with any other.

The fourth said, this opinion could not be true; for then it would follow,
that he which had killed some man by the shot of an Arquebuz, could not be
known by the sign; and that if a man were killed in the arms of his wife,
and amidst his friends which had defended him, such a one would rather bleed in
the presence of his friends than of the murderer, whose spirits are ordinarily
kept in by the guilt of his conscience and the apprehension of punishment;
whereas his friends being animated with anger, do call forth all their spirits
to a necessary defense. Besides, if the murderer, now brought near the
carcass, have also been wounded in this encounter, he should rather bleed
than the dead man, because his blood is more boiling and must have received
many of the spirits which did all leave the slain man at his death, being
evaporated thence upon the bodies which were round about him: For they issue
out of the wounds of a dying man together with his blood, and that so
violently, that they will not permit at the same time a motion contrary to
theirs, and so cannot admit any entrance for the spirits of the murderer;
which if they should enter, would there acquire a Sympathy with the dead body,
in whose blood they would tongeale, and lose the Sympathy that they had with
the body out of which they came. Even as no man retains the spirits of that
creature whose blood or heart he eats, but he thereof forms his own spirits.
Nay, if they did retain this Sympathy, yet could they not know the murderer,
for want of senses, which they never had; because the spirits which are in the
blood, hardly merit that name, being purely natural and destitute of all
perception, and that in our life time, as being common to us with plants, and
specifically differing from animal spirits, as might be shown by the
different actions wherein nature employes them. In the next degree above these
natural ones are the vital spirits, which vanish with the life which they
conserved, so that then the arteries which contained them become empty. And
lastly, those that were sensitive cannot remain in a dead man, because they are
easily dissipated and have need of continual reparation, as we see in
swoonings, the senses sail as soon as the heart cease to furnish them with
matter to uphold the continuity of their generation: Or if they did remain in
the body after death, they could perform no action for want of necessary
disposures in their organs, as we see in those that are blind, dease,
paralytick and others. But because the refutation of the reasons given of this
effect is a thing very easy, and may be done in many other subjects: It is
better to show that this bleeding cannot come from any natural cause, no not
of such as are unknown to us; which is easily done, if we presuppose that all
natural causes are necessary and do act without liberty at all times when
their objects are presented to them: Which falls not out so here, for it has
oftentimes been seen, that murderers, for fear of being accused of murder,
have made more and nearer approaches round about the dead body than any other,
which has been used as a presumption against them, though the body did not
bleed in their presence; and oftentimes nurses overlie their children, which
notwithstanding bleed not after death, though they hold them in their arms, as
a sign of their great affection and innocence. And had this sign been
natural, Solomon, that was very skillful in nature, would have used this
rather than a moral trial, wherein was much less certainty; nor would Moses
have forgotten it. Besides, we see every day the executioners come to take from
the gallows or the wheel, those persons whom the day before they executed with
their own hands, out of whose wounds comes not a drop of blood, although all
the causes of such bleeding do concur in this example, and ought to produce
their effect, unless you think they were hindered by some moral reason, as
the consideration that this execution was by the order of justice. But then
beasts, being incapable of this consideration, and having none of this
wisdom, should bleed in the presence of those butchers which are not very
exact in their trade, with which the Jews do every day upbraid them. And such
as have killed Hares and Partridges, should cause their bodies to bleed when
they come near them. Moreover, they which have been set upon by some assasin,
find it not always easy to know him again when they see him, though they be
in perfect health, and awake: much less can a man that is asleep, or very
near death, by any sign discover the approaching assasin that mortally wounded
him: and yet it is hard to imagine that we have less perception and knowledge
during the remainders of our life, than after our death; and that a wounded man
must die that he may become more sensible. Lastly, it is easy to make it
appear, that it is not in this effect as in other marvels, which have a
natural cause, because though many effects are so hidden from us, that we are
not able to assign their particular causes, yet they may be all proved by some
reasons, if not demonstrative, yet at least probable: even the magneticall
cure, by sympathy and antipathy, which are the only principles of all natural
motions: Which motions are but of two sorts, that is to say, Approach and
Remotion; it being natural to all bodies to join themselves to their like,
and to fly from the objects from which they have some natural averseness. And
indeed, if the blood issued naturally, it would be to join it self with blood
of the same nature, as the blood of the dead man's kindred: for sympathy is
only between bodies joined in amity. Nor can antipathy produce this effect,
for it is not its property to join and bring-neerer-together two bodies which
are enemies; but on the contrary, in the presence of the murderer it should
concentrate all the blood, and cause it to retire to the inner parts. And these
are the grounds which persuade me not only that the causes of this miracle are
not yet found, but also that it is impossible that it should have any that is
natural.

The fifth said, that this bleeding may be caused by the imagination, if,
according to the opinion of Avicenna, it does act even out of its own subject;
the fantasy of the guilty, with the remembrance of the blood spilt by him in
the killing of the dead there lying before his eyes, which stirs all his
powers, may be able to cause this haemorrhagie or issuing of blood. Some
nitrous vapors also of the earth may help this ebullition of the blood in the
carcass, when it is taken up out of the earth; or the water, having insinuated
it self into the veins of a drowned carcass, may make the blood more fluid.
Hereunto also the air may contribute by its heat, which is greater than that
of the earth or water, and is increased by the concourse of the multitudes
which use to run to such spectacles. Also the fermentation which after death
happens to the blood, serves very much to this heat, which makes it boil in
the veins, as syrups in the time of their sermentation boil and fill up the
vessels, which before were not full, till at length they make them run over at
the top: in the same manner, the blood which before did not fill the veins,
yet after it is fermented, does so puff them up, that they can no longer hold
it all; and having withal gotten a tarmesse which corrodes the orifices of the
vessels, it makes its way out some days after death, as we see in the bodies
reserved for anatomies, where the rope having caused the blood to rise to the
brain, where it could not be contained, it runs out at the nose. Also the
sympathy of the spirits once friendly, and afterward become enemies, may help
toward this effect; which should not be thought more strange than many other
like motions; as the pain felt by the Nurse in her breasts, when her
nurse-child cries; the fury which the red color stirs up in the Lion and the
Turky-cock; the falling sickness, whose fits are augmented or advanced in
those that hold in their hand the plant called Virga sanguinea, or a twig of
the Cornill tree; a kind of Jasper stays bleeding by a contrary reason; Lapis
Nephriticus makes the gravel come out of the kidneyes; the Weapon-salve cures
a wound, being applied to the sword which made it, 100. leagues off: and many
other Talismanick effects, of which we do no more see their connection with
their causes, than of this of the spirits of the murderer and the murdered;
which notwithstanding are no less effectual in this occurrence, than the
spirits which come out of a bleare eye, are able to hurt the eye that looks on
it; or the eyes of a Witch to bewitch lambs, and to produce all other
mavelous effects, whereof their histories are full.

The sixth said, It would be hard to persuade most men that there is sense in
all lifelesse bodies, much more, that there remains any after death; because
sense is given to all bodies for no other cause, but to enable them to discern
their objects, to carry them toward their likes, and to make them fly from
subjects worthy of their eschewing. Which cannot be said of dead bodies, for
whom nature has no longer any care or providence. So that she which does
nothing in vain, and gives not to bodies, qualities of which they have no use,
has not taken care to put into, or preserve in carcasses, a passion which
might serve to uphold them in that estate. For that were against the intention
of Nature her self, who strives to ruin such bodies, and to resolve them into
their elements, to the end that thereof she may make new mixts, and so augment
some of her species. But if we grant Campanella, that dead bodies have some
remainder of sense, yet will it not thereupon follow, that they have enough of
it to cause the motions of trembling and anger, to which he attributes this
bleeding; for anger requires too many sorts of reciprocal motions, and too
much mixed to be compatible with the cold which freezeth the spirits of dead
bodies, whatsoever the Historians say to the contrary; for they write, that
anger might be seen in the stern visages of diverse men slain in battle,
which has no likelihood of truth. And forasmuch as plants (which, according to
the opinion of this author) have a greater measure of sense than carcasses
have, witness the attractions and expulsions which they make; yet are not at
all capaple of anger: and having seen some men so stupid, as to be displeased
with nothing in their life time, I cannot believe that they become more
sensible after their death. Such bodies are then past trembling either for
apprehension or memory, both which are fled away with their life, and they are
in an estate of having no further apprehension of their murderers: And if they
would tremble for fear, it were time for them so to do at the approach of the
Anatomists, who without all pity pull them in as many pieces as they can
imagine any way to differ from one another; and besides, fear would not make
the blood to issue, forasmuch as this passion is not caused but by the
concentration of the spirits, and their abandoning of the outer-parts that they
may retire inward.

Another unlikely consequent is, that these spirits separated from the soul
should be more able to discern the murderer than when they were joined to it,
for a living man is not able to know him that hurt him in the night, or as a
high-way-robber with a vizor and silence preventing all discovery of him by his
face or voice. Furthermore, the spirits are of the nature of the Sunbeams,
which give heat and light so long as they are continued from the body of the
Sun to the object on which they fall; but the Sun is no sooner hidden but that
the beams cease to be. Even so, as long as the rete admirabile of the brain
(which is the spring and forge of the animal spirits, which are only capable
of knowledge) does continue an influence of spirits into the nerves, and
through them into the other organs of the sense; so long are they able to
discern and no longer, though they could subsist longer. So that this opinion
cannot stand, no, not with the opinion of the Pagan Philosophers, who teach
that the soul after death quits not the body, but only the operations of the
inward and outward senses: the ceasing of the actions whereof the spirits are
instruments, being sufficient to show that the spirits themselves are ceased.

The seventh said, that this extraordinary motion cannot be referred but to a
light supernaturally sent from God to the Judges, for the discovery of the
blackest crimes, which otherwise would escape unpunished: which is also the
cause why this miracle, though it sometimes happen, yet is not always
observable as the effects of natural causes, which are necessary and thereby
are distinguished from contingents: it being no less impiety to deny that the
divine justice does sometimes send succor to the justice of men, than it is
ignorant rusticity, in all things to content our selves with universal causes,
without seeking the particular ones, which indeed God commonly employes for the
producing of effects; but yet has not so enchained his power to the necessity
of their order, as that hecannot break it when he pleases, even to the giving
unto moystened clay a virtue to restore sight to the eyes of one borne blind.

FINIS.

