AN ACCOUNT OF Several Passages and Letters between his Excellency Benjamin
Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of the Province of New York,
Province of Pennsilvania, Country of New Castle, etc. Commissionated by their
Majesty's under the great Seal of England, to be their Lieut. and Commander in
chief of the Militia, and of all the Forces by Sea and Land within their
Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and places of Strength
within the same.
AND The present Administrators of the Laws in the Collony of CONNECTICVT, in
the Month of October, 1693.
ON the 13th of October, his Excellency departed from New York, toward
Connecticut, in order to the Publication of their Majesty's Letters Patents
for, and taking upon him the Command of the Militia in that Collony.

The 14th day he arrived at Millford Bay, and writ this Letter from on board,
to Governor Treat at Millford:

Millford Bay, October 14. 1693. SIR;
IN Obedience to their Majesty's Commission, directed to me for the Command of
their Militia of the Collony of Connecticut, I am come to publish the same, and
to take that Trust upon me; and in the first place have thought fit to
communicate their Majesty's Royal Pleasure to you, as a Person that has acted
in chief Rank of the Government, and discharged that Trust with a fair
Reputation: I have sent this Gentleman their Majesty's Secretary for the
Province of New York, to acquaint you with what may be further said upon this
occasion, and to desire your directions, how I may best steer my self for the
publishing of their Majesty's Commands, to render them most effectual for the
present Service.

I am, SIR, Your Humble Servant, BEN. FLETCHER.


Hereunto his Excellency received no Answer.

The 15th day his Excellency arrived at New Haven, and his Horses not coming,
on the 17th he wrote this following Letter to the Governor and General Court of
Connecticut, sitting at Hartford.

New Haven, October 17. 1693. Gentlemen;
I Landed at this place somewhat late Sabbath day at night; my Horses and
other conveniences being aboard another Sloop, and not yet come up, has
detained me longer here than I designed or desired: Being informed your General
Court is now sitting, I am willing to communicate their Majesty's Command to
you while you are together, conceiving it will most conduce to their Majesty's
service, and therefore I desire you will not adjourn your selves till I can
come up to Hartford, which shall be without loss of time, so soon as my Horses
arrive, which I hourly expect.

I am, Gentlemen, Your Humble Servant, Ben. Fletcher.


To which Letter his Excellency had this Answer.

To his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Capt. General and Governor in chief of
their Majesty's Province of New York, etc.
Hartford, October 18. 1693. Excellent SIR;
YOur Letter of the 17th Instant, at one of the Clock in the afternoon, about 2
of the Clock this Morning came to our Governors hand, who has acquainted us
with the Receipt of yours, and of the occasion which has detained your
Excellency longer in those parts than you desired or designed; as also, that
your Excellency desires that we would not adjourn our selves till you can come
up to Hartford. In answer to which your Excellency may be pleased by these to
be informed, That our general Court has been together upon their Majesty's
service ever since Thursday last, and are about dispatching the Affairs under
hand, as we may, but shall not break up till Friday next, and shall be ready to
wait upon your Excellency in General Court, to hear or receive from you what
you have to acquaint us with, that may be for their Majesty's Service, and the
public good of their Subjects. Which with Respects and Service to your
Excellency, is all at present from your humble Servants, The Governor and
General Court of their Majesty's Collony of Connecticut.

By their Order, signed by me, John Allyn, Secretary.


The same day his Excellency wrote to them as follows.

To the Governor and General Court of Connecticut, at Hartford.
New Haven, October 19. at 11 clock in morning. Gentlemen;
THis day about 10 a clock I had the favor of yours. Finding the wind continue
Northerly, I can get no news of my Horses, so that I cannot propose (...)
getting up to Hartford to morrow. I therefore desire that you will please to
adjourn to this place, where a very short time will allow me to lay before you
such things as I have to offer for their Majesty's service.

I am, Gentlemen, Your humble Servant, Ben. Fletcher.


And in Answer to that Letter his Excellency had this Return.

Hartford, October 20. 1693. Excellent SIR;
YOurs of the 19th instant we have received, and in answer thereunto we return,
We cannot, under our present Circumstances, adjourn to New Haven, and have
chose rather, (though we have waited several days to attend your Excellency in
General Court) to resolve to continue our general Court by adjournment till
Tuesday next about ten of the clock. Which is all the needful at present from
your humble Servants, The Governor and general Court.

By their Order, signed by me, John Allyn, Secr.


His Excellency departed from New Haven the 22th day in the Evening, and lodged
at Wallingford that night.

The 23d day he arrived at Hartford. The next morning he went to the General
Court then sitting, there published their Majesty's Letters Patents, and left
with them the following Memorial.

A Memorial to the Governor and General Court for the Collony of Connecticut,
sitting at Hartford, October 24. 1693.
BEnjamin Fletcher their Majesty's Capt. General and Governor in chief in and
over their Majesty's Provinces of New York, Pennsilvania, etc. Gives in this
Memorial, to which he desires a Reply, without loss of time, their Majesty's
Service calling for his immediate Repair to the Fronteers, etc.

He says, being come into this Collony with their Majesty's Commission under
their great Seal of England, to act as their Lieutenant and Commander in chief
of the Militia, and of all the Forces by Sea and Land within their Majesty's
Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and places of Strength within the
same. Which Commission he does here produce, and expect a ready Compliance to
it, from all their Majesty's loving Subjects, that he may proceed to the
execution of that Trust.

Ben. Fletcher.


Coll. Bayard and Secretary Clarkson were sent with this following Message.

Gentlemen;
WE are come from the General to acquaint you, that just now he received an
Express, with Letters from Albany, which give him an account of the weakness of
that Garrison, and the growing strength of the Enemy.

We are further to acquaint you, That these delays of yours do very much hinder
the necessary Affairs of their Majesty's here: His Excellency has no directions
nor instructions from the King to make any applications to your selves; he has
not published his Commission until he did it in this Court; nor could he
suppose, neither will it be believed in England that an English Collony should
deny the Rights of their Protestant King.

The Letters from Albany do still intimate, That they are apprehensive that
they will be attacked by the Enemy, and if that Post should be lost for want of
your Compliance to their Majesty's Commission, you may be sensible of what
dangerous consequence the same would be to your selves.

The Jarseys are under the same Circumstances with your selves, in respect of
their Charter, yet have willingly submitted to the Kings pleasure and Right of
the Millitia, who are commanded by his Excellency; (...) the Governor of that
Collony acts there without the least interruption: He calls Assemblies, makes
Laws, raises Money, ordains and keeps Courts, only commands the Militia under
his Excellency, who has not altered one single Officer in that Collony.

Gentlemen, We are to conclude with the last thing his Excelleny gave us in
charge, That the fatal Consequences of your Proceedures, as it appears to his
Excellency, will be repented by you and your Posterity when it is too late: You
are the only People in all the Kings Dominions that will venture to dispute
with our King, who is a Soldier, concerning that inherent Right of the
Militia, settled upon the Crown by several Acts of Parliament, and cannot be
aliened nor demised.

N. Bayard, M. Clarkson.


The 26th day his Excellency received the following Paper from the General
Court.

To his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of
their Majesty's Province of New York, etc.
IN Return to your Excellency's Demands of the Militia, of us their Majesty's
general Court of their Collony of Connecticut, We say, That finding in your
Excellency's Commission no express superseding of the Commission of the Militia
in our Charter, nor no Order to us from their Majesty's to surrender the same;
and being sensible of the great Importance of this matter, and finding it in
several main things which do need a particular Explication and Settlement, as
we shall, God willing, manifest to their Majesty's, cannot but conceive it our
Duty, both with respect to their Majesty's Service, and our own Peace and
Preservation in this time of War, to continue the Militia as formerly, till by
our Agent, now sent for England, we shall receive farther Orders from their
Majesty's.

And in Obedience to their Majesty's gracious Letters, of March the 3d. 1692.
we shall be ready upon all just occasions, to yield Assistance to his
Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire his Majesty's Captain General and
Governor of New York, etc. and to the Commander there in Chief for the time
being for the Defense of the said Province against the common Enemy, according
to our Ability, and in proportion with our Neighboring Collonies and
Provinces, although we have already been out above five Thousand Pounds for the
defending our Neighbors of Albany since the War began, besides the loss of
Lives. And further, this Court does see reason to grant the sum of six hundred
Pounds in Country Pay, out of our Country Rate, toward the Charge of
maintaining the Garrison at Albany, onward of what shall be our Proportion of
that Charge, in Obedience to Their Majesty's Letter of the 3d of March last.

By Order of the Governor and General Court of Connecticut, signed by, John
Allyn, Secr.
Hartford, October 25. 1693.

And about two hours after his Excellency made this Return by Coll. Bayard.

To the Governor and General Court of Connecticut, sitting at Hartford,
October 26. 1693.
Gentlemen;
I Have received your Paper, which is no Answer to my Memorial; for I do not
demand the Militia from you, knowing very well, as you your selves do, That you
have no right to it, it being settled on the Kings and Queens of England and
their Successors, by several Acts of Parliament, and by no Power on Earth can
be demised from the present Possessor of the Crown. But I have, in tender
regard to this English Collony given in my Memorial to you, the preseur
Administrators of the Government here, in expectation of your ready Compliance
to their Majesty's Patent, and your Assistance to me, being a stranger in these
parts, for the more speedy and effectual execution of that lawful Commission,
whith is granted in Grace by their Majesty's, as well for your Security and
Defense, as the Assertion of their own Right, and this has in no part of their
Dominions found a Rub or Contest.

I do therefore in their Majesty's Names demand your Obedience to this
Commission, as you will answer the Consequences that will ensue; and expect a
speedy Reply in one of these two words, Yes, or No.

Ben. Fletcher.
By his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Their Majesty's Lieutenant and Commander
in Chief of the Militia, and of all the Forces by Sea and Land within their
Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and places of Strength
within the same.

M. Clarkson, Secretary.




Coll. Bayard had also in Charge to deliver this Message.

Gentlemen;
I Am further to tell you from his Excellency, the General, That he is resolved
to put their Majesty's Commission in Execution, and immediately issue forth a
Proclamation, showing the method he has taken for the ease and satisfaction of
their Majesty's Subjects in this Collony, leaving the Militia in the same hands
he found it. And I am also directed by his Excellency to make you, Governor
Treat, a tender of a Commission from him, for the Command of all the Militia in
this Collony. And also to acquaint this Court, That his Excellency has neither
Power nor Intention to invade any of their Civil Rights, but that all things
may run in the same Channel, with no alteration, but only your acknowledging
the Power of the Militia an inherent Right in their Majesty's.

And I may assure you from his Excellency, That he will not set a foot out of
this Collony till he sees an Obedience paid to this Commission, by all such as
are Loyal Subjects to their Majesty's, and will distinguish the rest.

By his Excellency's Command, N. BAYARD.


Coll. Bayard returning from the General Court, etc. acquainted his Excellency
That they desired a Copy of their Majesty's Letters Patents, and that they
promised to make a speedy Reply to his Excellency's Answer sent by the
aforesaid Coll. Bayard.

His Excellency ordered Coll. Bayard and Secretary Clarkson immediately to
carry the Original Patent to the General Court, and to leave it with them for
their perusal, and withal to require them to cause it to be entered in the
Public Records of this Collony. Which Message was accordingly performed.
Whereupon Secretary Allyn made answer, That it could not be done whilst the
Court was fitting; but seemed to be willing to do the same after the Court
should be broke up; and then promised to return the Original to his Excellency.

In the Evening, the following Paper was sent to his Excellency from the
General Court.

To his Excellency Collonol Benjamin Fletcher, Esquire Captain General and
Governor in Chief of their Majesty's Province of New York, etc.
Hartford, October. 26. 1693. Excellent SIR;
YOurs of October 26. we have received, wherein your Excellency tells us, That
you have received our Paper, which is no answer to your Memorial, etc. We have
duly considered what we have received from your Excellency, and do return,
That we have in our Answer to your Memorial, fully informed your Excellency of
our Opinion of those things you mentioned to us therein, which you may please
to take as our Answer. Yet further, we say, That we agree with your Excellency,
That the Inherent Right in the Militia belongs to their Majesty's, and that it
is at his dispose, and has been settled upon us under the great Seal of
England, and enjoyed by us the two last Reigns, and ever since our present
Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, (whom God preserve) came
to the Crown; and lately, we received some directions from them, in order to
the Improvement of the same, which we shall attend; and therefore our desire
is, That you would not interrupt us in our enjoyment of the same, till we have
opportunity to understand their Majesty's further Pleasure therein; which we
trust will be no prejudice their Majesty's Interest, and may be a good means to
prevent future Inconveniences.

By Order of the Governor and General Court, signed by me, John Allyn,
Secretary.


And the next day this following Memorial.

A Memorial from the Governor and General Court of Connecticut Collony, To his
Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, the 27th of October, 1693.
Excellent SIR;
WE have, in our former to your Excellency, tendered you Six Hundred Pounds in
Country pay, out of our Rate, toward the charge of maintaining the Garrison at
Albany, onward of what shall be our Proportion of that Charge. We desire your
Excellency's Answer, whether that be acceptable to you. But if you judge it
more for Their Majesty's Service to have Men, we shall raise about fifty Men to
assist in Garrisoning Albany, who we shall raise and send forth with what speed
we may, to continue there till the Spring, to the end of March, or first of
April next. We crave your Excellency's Answer, who are, Your Humble Servants,
The Governor and General Court of Connecticut.

By their Order, signed, John Allyn, Secr.


To which his Excellency made this Answer.

His Excellency's Answer to the Memorial of the Governor and general Court of
Connecticut Collony, the 27 of October, 1693.
Gentlemen;
I Have your Memorial of this day before me, and in answer thereunto I thik fit
to tell you, I am Their Majesty's Lieutenant and Commander in Chief of all the
Military Forces in this Collony. And that by my Commission, published in your
General Court, all other Military Commissions are superseded, and actually
void. When you think fit to acknowledge the Power of this Patent, which has
never found a Dispute by any of their Majesty's Subjects in any part of their
Dominions, I shall then readily proceed to consult with you of such Methods,
for the settling the Militia here, as may be most for the ease of Their
Majesty's Subjects, and the Security and Safety of the Fronteers of Albany, and
this Collony. In the mean time I conceive my self obliged to pursue the
Execution of their Majesty's Letters Patents, to me directed, till I find an
open Violation of their Majesty's Right by Force of Arms.

By Commands of their Majesty's Lieutenant and Commander in Chief of the
Military Forces in this Collony, M. Clarkson, Secretary.


Upon the delivery of the above Memorial, the general Court dispersed, and
returned no Answer.

During his Excellency's stay at Hartford he had twice Conference with
Governor Treat, Secretary Allyn, Mr. Pitkin and Mr. Stanley, who attended his
Excellency at his Lodging. His ^xcellency having heard what they had to say,
answered their several Arguments, in particular to their Allegations, That they
had enjoyed their Militia the two last Reigns, and since their present
Majesty's came to the Crown, said,

Gentlemen, You cannot say you had the Power of the Militia in the late Reign,
Sir Edmund Andros being received and owned your Governor, from whom you
received Commissions, under him you acted, and swore Allegiance to that
Government.

Nor can you truly say, you had the Power of your Militia under their present
Majesty's, Sir William Phipps having a Commission under the great Seal for that
Trust, which is superseded and nulled by express words in this Commission to
me.

And then concluded thus:

You are permitted by your Charter, in case of eminent Danger, to arm and array
the Subjects of this Collony, but I do not find you are empowered to give
Commissions and keep up a standing Militia.

I do therefore require you, Coll. Treat, to give Obedience to this Commission,
and I do tender you the chief Command of all the Militia in this Collony, under
my self.

Then his Excellency published his Proclamation.

A true Copy, Examined and allowed to be Printed, by M. Clarkson, Secretary.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to their Majesty's, King William
and Queen Mary, at the Bi^^^ in New York, 1693.


