THE FOOLS COMPLAINT TO GOTHAM COLLEGE, And Resolution taken up by free
Subjects, in and about the City of London and Westminster, of that Society: in
the behalf of themselves, and the privileges of their Hospital; with their
requests, that

Policy, may be Judges. Curiosity, may be Judges. Solicitude, may be Judges.
Study, the chief Warden, Diligence, the Attorney General, and Fame, the
Beadle of the Court.
The Fool Rids me
woodcut, man riding an ass

London, printed by Ridibundus, in this present year of wits and fancies, 1643.

THE FOOLS COMPLAINT TO GOTHAM COLLEGE.
WE reason, absolute Monarch, and sole Sovereign of the world, not
acknowledging any Superior, in any sort, equal unto you; for the
redressenesse, and reforming of men's manners, against the obstinate and
perverse wilfulness of folly, and all other his wickedness, which has taken
such deep root, and multiplied it self in that abundance, to our notable hurt
and detriment, the prejudice of our Royal Prerogative and the great damage of
all mankind: for to avoid those great inco^veniences, with the corruption of
so dangerous and spreading a (...) nay causes that it may not creep more and
more upon your loving subjects (whose welfare and safety ought to be tendered as
your own (...) that it may not dilate it self any further to their utter
undoing, (...)nall destruction) that you will please to command and ordain,
(...) to publish and proclaim laws to all those that are already (...) shall
be borne hereafter in succeeding ages, by the power of (...)rall consent of
your Council of State, that they be taken and (...) such as shall be by you
established and confirmed, and that they be (...) very exactly, religiously
observed, and fully complied withal, both in a^ and every the point or parcel
herein specified, or contained, as they will answer to it at their peril, and
incur that grievous punishment to those that shall violate and infringe such
laws, as in that case you shall provide.

Moreover, because the first thing that you are in your Princely care to
consider of, that all due fitting and convenient provision be made for the
quick expedition and good execution of Justice, that you will be pleased to
nominate and appoint certain Officers, both of good sufficiency and trust,
such as shall be requisite and needful for this so important a business; and
therefore to depute, nominate, and assign for Judges, good policy, curiosity,
and solicitude, to the end that they, as if it were you your self, and a
representing you in your own proper person, may truly and uprightly
administer Justice, giving them by virtue of your power full and plenall
authority to apprehend, set at liberty, and punish any manner of person, or
persons whatsoever, upon just cause, referring the said Judges to be ordered
and directed by your laws and ordinances, and not to differ from the true
intent and meaning of them, to the damnifying of the subject, and the
dishonouring of your selves. Furthermore, both for the present, and ever
hereafter, to substitute as elder brothers of the fraternity, and chief
wardens of your incorporation, all those that be jealous observers, every one
according to his place and merit, and he that shall be most jealous may be most
honored, that your Attorney General may be diligent, and your Beadle that
shall warn them to the Court famed.

I.

FIrst of all, therefore any person or persons that shall talk to themselves
as they walk in the streets, or at any time when they are alone, or in a house
p^ivate, may be censured for fools three months; within which term of time
if they abstain therefrom, and reform this their foolery, their punishment
then to be taken off; but in case that they shall not amend th^s fault, that
some three terms of the said time, or thereabouts, may be peremptory set down
to be inflicted upon them; within which l^mited time they shall bring a
certificate of their reformation and amendment, upon pain of being held for
approved attained and converted fools, and accordingly to command your
aforesaid elder brothers and ancients of the Company to find them guil^y, and
to see them afterward severely punished, as violaters and breakers of the
laws.

II.

They who shall walk along the streets, casting their cloak under one arm,
and stretching out their fingers, playing with the wall, and making indentures
with their fingers ends, let them be admitted Scholars of your house and
College: Provided always that they have six months of approbation granted
unto them, in which you to command them to be reformed: Otherwise in default
thereof to ordain that the Warden, Sub-Warden, or Deane of the College, and
in their absence the Senior Fellow, put his coat upon him (according to the
custom of the house) his cap and his babble, and other ornaments belonging to
his degree, and ever afterward be held a professed fool.

III.

Whosoever walking through any place paved with brick, or stone, shall pitch
their toes or heels, walking by a direct line, stride or corner of the said
brick or pavement, may be condemned in the same punishment as aforesaid.

IV.

That whosoever shall play at bowls, seeing the bowl run awry, shall wry
their body with it, thinking to make the bowl run the more on that side, and
govern it self as they direct it with these mimicke jestures, if they should
be seen to practice this their error, we must declare them for brothers
already professed. And further, that the like be also understood of those who use
the like Apish action, when they see something fall down from some high place
to the ground, shrinking their shoulders, wiping their mouths, or turning up
the whites of their eyes, that the like censure may pass.

V.

Also concerning those who wearing Vizards, shall under them make strange
faces, and gesticulations, either by frowning or smiling, or biting of the lip,
as if in so doing it did really and truly seem unto them that these changes
of their various countenances did outwardly appear.

VI.

They who cutting out something with a bad pair of sheeres, or a dull edged
knife, or any untuned instrument, shall draw their mouth on some side like a
flounder, lill out their tongue like a calfe, wrinckle up their cheeks,
forehead, and eyes, like a scorched piece of parchment, and such Idiot-like
postures, our will and pleasure is, that they in like manner shall take the
degree of fools.

VII.

Whosoever expecting the return of their servant sent of some errant, shall
stay waiting for him at the door or window of his house, where he may soonest
see him when he comes, thinking that by his staying there he will come the
sooner, to condemn all such to detract and acknowle^ge their error, upon pain
that in case they shall refuse so to do, they be severely proceeded against.

VIII.

They who draw their cards with a great deal of leisure, by a little, and a
little, to discover at this or that other corner, first to view the color,
then after a little pausing, discourse upon it, arguing the case whether it be
such or such a card, to condemn them to the same acknowledgements aforesaid,
but with this condition, that as often as he, or they offending in this manner,
shall see an Ancient of the house, or pass by his chamber door, he shall make
an acknowledgement of his error by putting off his hat.

IX.

Whosoever looking down from some window, or open gallery, shall from thence
spit down, either thereby to take (as with a plumet) the evennesse of the
building, or to see if he can make his spit to light just upon such a stone,
straw, or place, at which he shall aim, strictly to charge and command them
that they retract this their folly, upon pain of being taken and voted for
public professors of the same.

X.

Whosoever traveling, shall still enquire of those they meet, how far it is to
such a place, thinking that by this their asking they will the sooner be there,
to condemn them in the like penalty, enjoining them for penance the badnesse
of the way, the Carrier jading of them, and the cousenning of their Hostesses
reckoning, not inflicting any greater punishment upon them, upon hopes of their
amendment.

XI.

Whosoever making water, shall go streaking the walls with their urine, as if
they were busy about some curious delineations, or framing some antique
figures, or shall piss in the dust, making I know not what, scattering angles
and circles, or some chinke in a wall, or little hole in the ground, to command
that they do so no more, upon pain to be punished by the Judges, and
delivered over to an elder brother, or one of the Ancients of the house.

XII.

That whosoever hears the clock strike, count not the hours, but ask others
what is a clock, be strictly charged to have an especial care of their health,
because it is an evident demonstration of a Choleric kind of humor; and if
they be poor, and not able to be at the charge of physic; that then one of
the Masters of the College cause a warrant to issue forth to bring them in,
giving order that some preparatives be provided for them of wild Cherries, or
sharp summer Oranges, lest otherwise they might run the danger of lofing
their wits, and quickly turn either fools, of madmen.

XIII.

They who, sit at short commons will neglect their victuals to entertain the
table with discourse may be s^nsured for prating fools, because they take more
care to fill other men^ ears then their own bellies: forasmuch as these are
died in the wool and come ready dressed to hand, that you permit them to be
registered among your incurable fools.

XIV.

That whosoever being at a feast has a good stomach, and forbear to fill
their bellies, because they would be reckoned for wonderful little eaters, and
afterward come home to make up their meal at their own bread and cheese;
that you will cause an especial care to be taken for them, as of such who are
in the seventh degree, and almost in their full height to be taken.

XV.

They who (not being necessitated to it) buy the worst sort of victuals in the
market for saving of their purse, and spend the less in their houses, as if (a
Physician, and Apothecary, or a Barber Chyrurgion who all the year visit them
to cure those diseases which are but by such unholesome meat) were not deerer
by much then the best meat in the market, and therefore that you condemn them
to a public disgrace to be professed fools, forbidding them from henceforth to
do the like, upon pain of being committed over to the Curate or Sexton, or
Gravemaker of his or their parish, or to be punished more or less according to
the hurt that shall grow thereby.

XVI.

They who in summer nights sit in a truret to look about them till their
breath ache, be pronounced to be brothers of your fraternity.

XVII.

Those who in winter evenings stand gasing on the skies till their feet ache, be
declared to be brothers also.

XVIII.

That whosoever gaping upon the heavens do from the clouds of the air form
to themselves figures of Serpents, and the shapes of Lions, etc. to declare and
pronounce them to be right fools.

XIX.

That whosoever entertain themselves with the aforesaid baubles, that they may
thereby give place in their own houses, (as some wittalls use to do for their
own interest and private gain) that they may see the sign of Taurus, Aries,
or Capricorn, with us a most soul and dishonest case, condemn them (though
accoumpted of the brotherhood) not to be capable of the privileges thereof,
nor that they be admitted into the Senate house, nor have any wax lights allowed
them on festival days.

XX.

They who having their shoes dusty, will make them clean with their cloakes,
or handkercher, to condemn them for neat fools.

XXI.

That in case any Gentle woman shall wipe off the dust of her velvet shoes,
with her scarce, shall for her great honor be taken for a threepiled fool.

XXII.

They who say to a friend when they meet him by chance; are you alive Sir? is
it possible that there should be any such man upon the face of the earth, when
he sees him stand just before him; that you command that all such may have a
sign or mark of admiration, set upon them, and that during your pleasure they
never go without it.

XXIII.

Whosoever shall salute him whom he has a mean esteem of saying sir I kiss
your hand, and that you conjure this manner of speaking upon punishment to be
forced to kiss the hands of some inferior person whose hands are full of
scabs, and scurfes or leaprosy, full of dirt, with their nails ready to drop
off, looking just like Caviare, enough to turn ones stomach to look upon them,
and condemned them for fools.

XXIV.

That when one enquiring for some body at his house, is answered that he is not
within, shall reply and say is he then gone abroad, that such be condemned as
rebels, and contumelious people.

XXV.

That they who having broken their shins, or stumbled at some block or stone,
shall with a great deal of fleame, and full of choler, kick, or strike the
said stone or block, be condemned in the same penalty.

XXVI.

That they who have run their head against some post etc. in the da^ke
return back again to look upon it at leisure, with a fixed eye, and a
troubled mind; that you command them to cease often going to look upon it, upon
pain of further punishment.

XXVII.

Whosoever having blowed their nose, look into the snot to pry into it, or
upon it, as if some pearls had dropped from them, to condemn them for brothers
of our said foundation, and that so often as they offend in this fault they give
an Alms to the hospital of incurable fools.

The reason of this mulct is grounded upon this, that others shall hereafter do
as much for you, and them.

FINIS.

