FIVE WONDERS SEEN IN ENGLAND.

Two at Barnstable, One at Kirkham, One in Cornwall, One in Little Britain in
London.
In all which places Whereby Gods Judgments are miraculously seen upon some.

SEVERAL Miraculous Accidents have happened to the Amazement of all those that
have been eyewitnesses thereof.

The Second Impression with additions, and Certificate from those who were eye
witnesses thereof.

Published according to ORDER.

LONDON Printed by J. C. 1646.

A Copy of a Paper which came from Exeter, enclosed in a Letter to an Eminent
Officer of that Garrison, a very honest Godly man) now in LONDON.
THat the Sickness being for a long time very tedious in Barnstable, some
honest people met together twice a week, to pray the Lord for the removing of
his hand of Visitation from the Town, some disturbed them, and crying out they
were INDEPENDANTS, Saying they were the cause of the Plague being amongst them,
threatening to turn them out of their Town, this did not disharten the honest
people, bur they continued still in prayer, and diverse of the other people,
went from the house, (where they had abused them, throwing stones and railing
on them) to their own dwellings, and immediately fell ficck of the Plague, and
they, and all their families dyed of the Plague within one week, which causes
most of the people of the Town, to speak well of the honest party, and to
take notice of the hand of GOD on the other, And which is to be observed, not
one family of those railed against had not, Heither has as yet, had any
sickness amongst them, though it has been on each hand next door to them.

Another remarkable thing is, there was a woman in the Town having the
Sickness, and being with Child dyed, but was delivered just as she dyed, none
could be gotten to bury her, until the third day, and when they came in to
bury her, they found the Child lying by it is Mother, and had sucked the blood
of it is Mother, and was then alive.

And all this is justified by the Deputy governor of Barnstable, besides the
confirmation of many more honest people of that Town, So say the Letters from
Exeter, (which is all I can say of it.)

A Copy of a Certificate under the hand of Mr. Edward Fleetwood, Minister of
Kirkham Parish in Lancashire, concerning the Monster brought forth by Mrs
Haughton, a Papist living in that Parish.
AS we must tell no lie, so we should conceal no truth; especially when it
tends to Gods glory: There was a great Papist, and of great parentage, within
the Parish of Kirkham, and his wives mother being of the same Religion, did
usually scoff and mock the Roundheads, and in derision of Mr. Prinne, and
others, cut off the Cats ears, and called it by his name: But behold an
example of the Justice and equity of God in his judgments: As Adonibezec was
repaid in his own kind: Haman hanged upon the same gallows he had prepared for
Mordecai, and Pharaoh and all his Host drowned in the Sea into which he had
thought to have driven the Israelites. And likewise one of the Popish Prelates,
who said, he would not dine before Ridley and Latimer were burnt, was burned
in his own intrails. So (much what alike) it fell out with this man's wife, a
Popish creature, who being great with child, when the time of her delivery
came, she brought forth a monstrous child without an head, ugly and deformed,
the portracture whereof is printed, and my self eywitnesse thereof,

Edward Fleetwood, Pastor. W. Gattaker, Midwife.


THe mother of this Monster has been often heard to curse against Mr. Prinne,
Mr. Burton, and Doctor Bastwick, and the Roundheads. Also to revile the
Parliament, and say that she thought that the King and the Bishops were the
righter part of us; she has been heard to wish, that she and hers might never
live to be Roundheads, nor Separatists, and that she has praid to God, that
she might never live to see any of hers such; and that the P^ritans and
Independents deserve all to be hanged: and many such like expressions would
often fall from her.

Amongst the rest, one speech of hers was most notorious; and has rested in
the memory of some Gentlewomen, and others that heard her when she spoke it;
that being in company with her, they fell to discourse of the present miseries
of the Kingdom by these wars: and some spoke against the Cavaliers and the
Papists in the Kings Army; Whereupon these Mrs Haughton, said little less
against the Roundheads and Independents, and she said the King was in the
right against them; she was replied to, that those called Roundheads were
honest men, and in the right way of walking and living like the people of God,
and suitable to the profession of Christians; and withal wishing, if it
pleased God that she had her eyes opened, and was such a Roundhead. No, says
she, I had rather have no head, nor life: I nor any of mine, I hope, I hope,
will ever be such. Answer was made her, that her children, if she had any,
might (if God so please) have their eyes opened, and see that good which she is
ignorant of. Mrs Haughton made answer again in these words: I pray God that
rather then I shall be a Roundhead, oy bear a Roundhead, I may bring forth a
child without a head. This was a fearful saying, and taken notice of by diverse
of her neighbors that heard her speak it. And this many who know it, do
apprehend, might be a great means to provoke God to show such a testimony of
his displeasure against her, by causing her to bring forth this Monster, whose
picture is in the Title page of this book.

Now for testimony of the truth of this, we shall give it you in order thus:

Her neighbors who heard her speak the aforesaid words, have been with Mr.
Fleetwood the Minister of the Parish of Kirkham, where she was brought to bed
of this Monster, and where it was buried also, and it was told to some of the
the County, what had happened, and that she had spoken those words. And after
that she was with child, and delivered of the Monster, one widow Gattaker the
Midwife, formerly wife to Mr. Gattaker, sometimes Vicar of the said Parish, she
being a godly woman, could not be eased in her mind, until she had dischaaged
her conscince in making it known to Mr. Fleetwood the Minister aforesaid; That
she had brought the said Mrs Haughton to bed of a Monster, which had no head;
declaring her opinion, that she verily believed that it was the hand of God
upon her for those imprecations she wished upon herself, as is before expressed:
The Minister he spoke of it to others, and so did the Midwife also, which made
it to be spread up and down the Countsey so that it came to the ears of some
of the Committee. And for the further satisfaction of the truth thereof,
Colonel More, an honest godly Gentleman, a member of the House of Commons, and
one of the Committee being there, it was desired he should send a Letter to Mr
Fleetwood the Minister of the Parish, to know the certainty of it, whether it
was truth or not: which letter was writ, and by him sent sent accordingly. And
Mr Fleetwood reteiving the said letter, sent for the Midwife about it, and she
still confirmed what she said before; yst for better satisfaction, Mr.
Fleetwood caused the grave to be opened, and the child to be taken up, and laid
to view, and found there a body without an head, as the Midwife had said, only
the child had a face upon the breast of it, Two eyes near unto the place where
the paps where usually are, and a nose upon tne chest, and a mouth a little
above the navell, and two ears, upon each shoulder one.

Tae certificate was showed before diverse of the Committee, and by Colonel
More, a member of the House of Commons, brought up to London, and showed to
diverse of the House; who have commanded it to be printed, so that all the
Kingdom might see the hand of God herein: to the comfort of his people, and
the terror of the wicked that deride and scorn them.

A Gentleman was in the shop of one Mr. Monday a Painter, who then lived in
Little Britain against Botolph Church, he was railing against Mr. Prinne, Mr.
Burton, and Doctor Bastwick; speaking reproachfully of their sufferings, and
the loss of their ears, himself wiping his head with his handcarcher, wiped
blood from his own ears, to the amazement of th^s^ who were then present-

One Mr. Bret a Trumpeter of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes, being in Sir Ralph Hoptons
quarters with a Message from the General, they having had some losses a day or
two before, and considering that they failed of their own expectations, (for
they thought they had been sure to have had Forces from France, Ireland and
Oxford, to have destroyed Sir Thomas Fairfax,) but seeing Sir Thomas prospered
against them, one of the Cavaliers said in Mr. Brets hearing, God dam him, (he
said) what is there such a change already, (quoth he) God almighty was a
Cavalier the last week, but now he is turned Roundhead, and the rest of his
fellow Soldiers made sport at this expression; and within about a week or two
after all their Forces were subdued by Sir Thomas Fairfax.

FINIS.

