CERTAIN INTELLIGENCE FROM YORK Concerning the Meeting of that County, both
for the Militia and Commission of Array, with several passages on both sides,
and their Articles of agreement between both, for the present settling the peace
in that County. Dated at YORK September the last. Together with the taking of
two Ships at Newcastle by the Earl of Warwick.



LONDON, Printed for H. Blunden, 1642.

York the last of September. 1642.
M. Tho. Thecher,
KInd sir, yours I received, and give you many thanks for the news you made me
partaker of this Post. Here enclosed I send you the particulars of your
kuateis, for provision for receiving and shipping I put down nothing, allow
what you please, both to me and your self, for those goods of that nature by
us disposed of. Here we have had a distracted County, the Gentry banding
together in parties one against another, the Communalty on both sides generally
loath to obey one side or other. Pomfrait-Castle, and Knasborough-Castle was
s^ised on by the Lord Generals command, the Earl Cumb. some few of every
Regiment was got together for the Array, the Musqutteers they made Dragoneers
of, the Pikemen was sent home again. The Lord Fairefax kept himself in Leeds
with those Gentry of his party, the communalty of the Town being wholly at his
command, and able to have opposed all the Forces that was raised against him;
Sir John Savill coming to Leeds to the rest of the Gentry on his party, was
betrayed by interception of a Letter, and was there in a Lane by two Troops of
Horse, who bid him yield as a Traitor, which he opposing and resusing whilst
breath was in him to yeed to that name, the Troops discharged upon his Company,
being about thirty Horse, and killed two of his servants, and took him and some
others prisoners to Pomfrait Castle, but upon a treaty betwixt the gentry he
was again delivered within a day or two, and a new treaty propounded which was
met yesterday at Leeds, where both sides have agreed to lay down the Array and
Militia, and to countenance neither, but jointly to defend and preserve the
peace of the County, till a way be agreed on by both King and Parliament for
settling the same in a legal way. The Articles I have sent you, and the copy
of a Letter from Prince Robert to His Majesty, with the relation of the
Gentleman that carried it to the King, concerning a great skirmish between
Prince Robert with eleven Troops, and some Horse of the King and Parliaments
Forces near Worcester, which were wholly routed, as appears by it, the news
concerning it with you being far different; but we hope yours from London is
a true relation, of which I pray write the truth by the first Post, and that
you will continue your intelligence as occasion serves. Thus with my best
wishes for the peace of the Kingdom in general, I commit you to God, and rest,

Yours to command, Philip Ford.
Just now at 9 of the clock at night the Drums are beating up, it is reported
that Sir John Hotham has some forces come out, and are near this City, within
4. hours march. Vale,



It is agreed that the Treaty concluded this present 29. of September, 1642.
being Michaelmas Day.
1. THat all Forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire, or County or
City of York, shall be disbanded, all those under the conduct of Captain
Hotham, now in Doncaster, and all other Forces in any other part of the County
under any other Commanders belonging to the Garrison at Hull shall retire to
Hull with all speed possible, and the said Captain Hotham shall begin to
march from Doncaster toward Hull, upon Saturday night.

2. It is agreed that no hostile, or violent act shall hereafter be done by the
Garrison at Hull, either directly or indirectly by pretense of any aid or
assistance whatsoever, upon the persons of any men within the County of York,
or within the County or City of York, upon their goods, either in the
aforesaid, or in the County of Kingstone upon Hull.

3. It is agreed that the Commission of Array, and the Orders or Ordinance of
Parliament for the Militia be wholly suspended in this County, until such
times as some course be agreed upon for the ordering of the Militia by the King
and Parliament, and this without disputing either the legality, or the
illegallity of either, but as finding neither of them so necessary at this time
as for the settling them on foot to involve this great County in blood.

4. It is agreed that no Command be imposed upon this County, but such as are
legal and presidented in good times.

5. It is agreed that no armed Forces whatsoever shall be suffered to enter
this County in a hostile manner, by virtue of any pretense or command
whatsoever, and they which shall attempt to do it, the whole County shall rise
against them with force as enemies against peace to be suppressed.

6. It is agreed that if any carriages for household, either of the King or
Queens, be to pass this County, that to prevent all other armed Forces under
pretense of such a conduct to come amongst us, we shall take order to see them
quietly conducted by the Sheriff of the County, with such a convoy as he shall
appoint and we like, and with no other, and if it shall happen the Queens
Majesty shall return out of Holland through this County, we shall humbly
beseech Her Majesty to forbear the bringing with Her any multitude of armed
Forces, but to believe that we shall wait upon Her Majesty, with such a
honorable Convoy as shall fit our duty, and Her Honor.

7. It is agreed that if any warlike provision be desired, to be passed this
Country for his Majesty service that we shall humbly petition His Majesty, that
he would be pleased to convoy the same some other way, being it may be an
occasion of interrupting our peace.

8. It is agreed, that none shall be arrested in this County as Delinquents to
either party, but by a legal peaceable and quiet way, that is, by the legal
Officers and their asistants only, and not by armed men and Soldiers, who may
be an occasion to bring fire amongst us.

9. It is agreed that a general amity be made betwixt all the Gentry and
others of this County, of all former unkindnesses, and differences that have
been bread by these unhappy distractions, and that we hereafter will be as one
man to defend one another, according to the Law, against all others, leaving
all offenses to be punished by the Law of the Land, and not by force and
violence.

10. it is agreed that whosoever in this County, shall be made to appear
either to be the auhor, contriver or assister, to the burning of Sir Edward
Rodes his house, or pillaging any other man's house in this County, we shall all
see them (if they be able) to make reparation, and however to be brought to
Justice.

11. It is agreed, that it is intended by disbanding of the Armies, that His
Majesty shall have all liberty for the removing of all such Cannon and
munition, as he has in this County.

12. It is agred, that all the Arms which do belong to any of the trained
Bands of this County, which has been taken from them since the 12. of this
instant September by either party, shall be presently restored, and that
Captain Hotham shall leave behind him when he returns into Hull, all those
brass Pieces belonging to His Majesty, which are now in Doncaster, except such
as he himself brought thither himself from Hull.

13. It is agreed, that no further Forces shall during this difference betwixt
King and Parliament, be either raised in, or paid by this County, for this
war, other then such as are all ready levied, and really raised, and all such
also presently to go out of this County, without rasing any more.

14. It is agreed, that a humble remonstrance, and Declaration of these our
Resolutions we presently send, both to the King and Parliament accompanied with
a humble petition from us all, that according as we all have unanimously agreed
for our particular peace, so they would be pleased so far to commiserate this
distracted Kingdom, to do the same for general peace of the whole.

Signed by the Comitty for the Treaty. Heny Bellases. Sr. William Savill. Sr.
Edvard Osburne. Sr. John Ramsden. John Hopton. Francis Nevill. Sr. Thomas
Fairfax. Sr. Thomas Malmerer. Sr. William Lister. William White. Thoma^
Stockdaile.


From Newcastle. Loving Cousin,
BY the last Post I heard not from you, I trust in God that you and yours are
well; having time I cannot omit writing to you. Our Town begins to be sore
infected with the Plague, it is dispersed in diverse parts thereof, and (as I
hear) increases; the Lord in mercy look upon us, and stay it, if it be his
will, and prevent and keep from us that other judgment of the fword which
hangs over our heads and threatens us so fore.

There came upon Monday last before our Haven two great Ships, the Captains
and other Officers came to this Town for victuals, and other provision for
them, saying they came for the King, the Captains having done their
randisvouze here, returned to their ships, the Beef, Beer, Bread, and other
provisions were to follow, the which was accordingly performed and sent from
hence the next day; but before the said provision was all laid aboard, six of
the ships set out by the Parliament came and surrounded them, and sent to the
Captains to know whether they would yield or not, which they accordingly did
without any shot at all, so that they, sailed from thence together the same day
like loving friends, and most of the Provisions came to this Town again. By
which you may see how things go. It is reported here that there will be eight
or nine thousand men sent from your City to take this town, but I trust that
report is not true.

FINIS.

