FIVE MOST NOBLE SPEECHES Spoken to his Majesty returning out of SCOTLAND INTO
ENGLAND. The first spoken by the Recorder of York. The second by the Major of
Stamford. The third by the Major of Huntington. The fourth by the Lord Major of
London. The fifth by the Recorder of London.
Also the Relation after what manner and where his Majesty Knighted the Lord
Major and the Recorder of London. With the Description of what honorable
Triumph his Majesty did ride into the City of London, being accompanied with
the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of York and the Lady Mary.

LONDON Printed for John Greensmith. 1641.

THE Recorder of Yorkes SPEECH to his Majesty.
Most Royal Sovereign,
WIth a cheerful auspicious eye, behold your well affected and loyal subjects
gather them selves together to express their duty, and love to your most
Sacred Majesty, whose indulgent, and vigilant care has been expressed to this
our City, and populated Kingdom, by the tedious and irksome travels, which
for our sakes you have undertaken. For which we are so far obliged to your
Sacred Majesty, that should each person here present, either man, woman, or
child, live a double Methusalaes age, yet are we not able to recompense that
love, which your Majesty has extended unto us.

Our well tuned Bells at this present time, to congratulate the welcome of so
great a Prince, turn themselves, and do willingly stand, as if time commanded
them so to do.

Dread Sovereign our hearts through a Sea of joyful tears do endeavor to
swim unto your Grace, being more then abundantly joyful of your most sacred
Majesty's return, our most fertile shire, received not so much discontent in
the billiting of vntutord Soldiers, as it does this time joy, at the the safe
return of so good a King.

Our wives conceive with joy, our childrens tongues are untied with alacrity,
and each one does strive to cry welcome home to so indulgent a Sovereign, our
fields do seem triumphing in their gay diapry to welcome home your Sacred
Majesty, the woods do seem to contemn a falling autumn or a nipping winter
and assume unto thmselves their Spring Liveries and all to welcome home your
most Sacred Majesty.

Which is the total eye of this our Land, which without your Royal Presence
seemed dejected and cast down, but now like as the Spring after a chill and
frozen winter, is welcome being accompanied with the comfortable and glorious
funne-beames to each sensitive and visible creature, even so your Sacred
Majesty being the mortal Sun, from whom we Brittanes receive our safest
warmth, does tha^ each frozen heart, and makes it free from the least of
chillnesse, and cheerful is to welcome home our most Royal and lawful King,

O may your Majestyes Reign heareafter be more happy and peaceable: that Sion
may flourish with the truth, so shall your Majesty's Piety be eternally
cronicled, in the mean while here is not a heart so far from allegiance to
his sovereign King but that will say

Long live King Charles. Amen Amen,
The Major of STAMFORDS SPEECH to his Majesty.
MAy it please your most ^acred Majesty whose piety is so much admired
throughout the Caristian world to give liberty unto your abject Lieutenant in
his own Language to express the love of this well affected Town.

Each would have bin glad to have entertained the place of a Speaker, their
hearts unto your Sacred Majesty are so Loyally bent, whose wishes have hitherto
been nothing more but for the safe return of your most Sacred Majesty, which
to behold each man from his disturbed breast does grief exile, being happy
only in their Sovereigns return.

Their daily Votes are these that all ill effected Traitors may be destroyed,
your Majesty may be eternally blessed, your Spouse and Offspring perpetually
flourish.

The Major of HUNTINGTON'S Speech to his Majesty.
Dread Sovereign,
Whose absence only did cause our present grief for the foot to be without a
head how is it able to subsist, no more can a disturbed kingdom without it is
King.

Religion has been daily abused, and Traitors have and do daily strive to
enterprise our fatal woe but now we are so much animated in your Sacred
Majesty's presence, that although Romes Hens should daily hatch of its
Preposterous Eggs, crocodilicall chickens, yet under the shield of Faith by
you our most Royal Sove^aigne defended, and by the King of Heavens as I stand,
and your most medicable council would we not be fearful to withstand them.

Your Sacred Majesty's presence is our sole delight and sufficient pro^ection
against all our enemies, in thy de^ence O King shall God arise, and his and thy
enemies and shall be destroyed, for you are Religions Guardian, which we wanting
were feareful^ of pernicious er^ours.

May it please your Majesty to give me Lycense to tell how dangerous times are
brother is timorous and fearful to trust the other, Sects and Sch^smes do
daily increase, but your Royal Majesty being returned our confidence is this,
that truth shall take place, and the Religion which was embraced in the time of
Q. Elizabeth and your most wise and Royal Father of blessed Memory King James
shall be constantly adored, which being granted Loyal and well affected
Subjects will be perpetually your humble slaves, presenting unto the God of
Heaven their servent votes and prayers, that he wou^d, be pleased to bless
your Sacred Majesty, that you may enjoy the happ^nesse of this world and
Eternal bhsse in this world to come.

Now follows the Relation of the Entertaiament of his Majesty from Kingsland
to London being met there by the Lord Major, the Recorder and the rest of the
Aldermen accompanied with the chief of the Twelve Companies.
THere was at the end of Kingsland at the first field toward London a Tent
pitched where the Lord with the Lord Major and the Aldermen did attend his
Majesty's coming, who having stayed about an house his Majesty came by.

Then the Lords, the Lord Major, the Recorder, and the rest of the Aldermen
went to the Kings Coach, and having saluted his Majesty with a welcome home,
the Major delivered up his Sword to his Majesty.

After which both he and the Recorder did make a SPEECH to this effect.

The Lord Major and the Recorders Speech.
Most Renowned Sovereign.
After the dangers and troubles of the times, your Majesty's humble subjects
are vnexpresseably joyful at your happy and safe return from Scotland.

The manner of his Maiestyes knighting the Lord Mayor and and the Recorder of
this City of London.
After their sallutations were inded it pleased his Majesty, to draw his Sword
and immediately in the field in the presence there asembied created them both
knights.

After which his Majesty mounted his steed, provided there ready for him with a
stately ^^dle imbroydered with gold and silver.

Then the Prince also mounted his steed, clothed with an extraordinary rich
cloth hanging down almost to the ground very sumptuously.

The Queen also and the Duke of York and the Princes and and some other
Lad^es were also carried out of the coach in which they came, into a rich coach
that there was in read^nesse for them his Majesty honored the lord Mayor so
far after wards as for that day to bear the sword before him, for which he
gave his Majesty thanks.

The Relation of the great Triumph.

First of all did ride the officers and Sergeants of the City arayd in decent
cloaks of scarlet color trimmed with gold lace.

Next followed the 24 Companyes each Company with a trumpeter before them
likewise a horseman which bore a Pendant with the arms of the Company in it.

After them the twelve Companyes having every man a lackey running by his side
clothed with cassocks trimb'd with ribins of colors of the Companies, thus
they marched in order having rich clothes and gold chains about their necks.

In this manner came the Aldermen

First the Trumpeters, then the Atorneys of the City with two maces, after
them the Judges of the city in black gowns, then followed the Aldermen in
their scarlet gowns then the kings Trumpeters, after them the gentlemen
pentioners, next the Heralds, and after them the Lords, in great pomp, then
followed the state, first four maces then the Lord Major with the Lord high
Martial on the one hand of him, and the Lord high chamberlain on the other
hand.

Then did his Majesty in the next place his Groom leading his horse, and all
the people crying God save king Charles,

In the next place rod the Marquisse, and after him the Queen and the Duke of
York, and the Lady Mary and after the Guard, and after them many thousands of
people both on horse and foot.

Thus they rod in Triumph to Guild Hall where his Majesty dined, and afterward
was conducted to his Palace at Westminster.

FINIS.

