THE ARTICLES OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN The Lord General, and the Kentish-men, at
the delivering up of the City of CANTERBURY: A LETTER from YORK; and the
storming of Pembroke by Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell, and the success thereof.



London, Printed by B. A. Anno Dom. 1648.

A LETTER From YORK Concerning the proceedings of Sir Marmaduke Langdale.
SIR
WE have all great cause to bless God for the great success of the army in
the South, and hope to see the like in the North, where I fear the seat of the
War will be most, that which was long a hatching is now brought forth, and
indeed our affairs here, are in a very sad and dubious scale, the enemy very
active strong and running, you have I question not, heard of the taking of
Pomfract Castle being betrayed by a Sergeant and a Captain (that formerly
served the Enemy) who were upon the guard, the Governor Mr. Cottrell having
left the keys with them at that time (which he never did before) till he took
a little rest about six or seven a clock in the morning after his watching the
whole night himself as he used to do, he is a man which all men Judge
faithful, he refused to take quarter, and was shot in the thigh and cut in the
Arm but is living and like to recover, Lieutenant Col Morris, who onct served
the Enemy delivered up Liverpool' and since served the Parliament was the main
actour and now Hetursely Castle was lately attempted to be taken in the like
but the fidelity of the Soldiers they applied themselves to whom was offered
100. li. in hand and 500. li. more upon bond and to be knighted prevented it
for he discovered parties and apprehended them prisoners and now they are in
the Dungeon at Helmsley Castle Langdale is in Westmerland and we hear is
unwilling to fight, if he can prevent it, but our forces are now in a body and
are upon the edge of Westmerlard, about Bones watching an opportunity to engage
though fewer in number, it is thought he will wheel about for Pomfract if he can
possible and miss sighting: Pomfract is blockt up with about. 800 horse and
foot which all the men can be spared for the present the enemy there increase
and are as we hear 250. horse and 400. foot so that, that party cannot lay
close siege, I remain.

Your assured friend,
York 9. Junij 1648 Since the writing hereof news is come that Col. Lambert was
drawn near to Langdale and endeavored to engage them to fight but Langdale
would not stand retre^^ing wish his fertes toward Cumberland and Colonel
Lambert is in pursuit of him.



Articles of agreement made the nineth day of June 1648. between his Excellency
the Lord Fairfax and the Kentish forces in Canterbury. signed by Cammissions on
botth sides.
IMprimis. It is concluded and agreed that the forces under the command of
Commissary General Ireton should enter into the City and County of Canterbury
the next morning about nine of the clock being the tenth day of of this instant
June.

2. That all those in the City should forth with lay down their Arms, and that
all the Arms, and Ammunition in the said City of Canterbury should be brought
into Christ Church, and there delivered up to such Officers as the Commissary
General should appoint to receive the same.

3. That all other weapons and furniture of War within the said City and
subberbs thereof should be brought in and delivered up as aforesaid.

4. That no soldier shall plunder or take away the goods of any of the
Inhabitants of the said City and county, and that all those that had taken up
arms in that City should go home to their own dwellings, and conform
themselves to al Ordinances of Parliament and submit to such sine or sines as
the houses of Parliament shall appoint, except such persons which have formerly
served the Parliament, who are to give security not to take up arms against the
Parliament or act any thing prejudicial thereunto for the future, and in case
such security be not given as aforesaid, then they are to depart the Kingdom.

5. That some means should be used, that the sines, or other punishments
imposed on the persons which made the late insurrictions in the County, may be
with moderation and reasonable terms given, and that the Lord General be
desired to present their case and condition to the Parliament.

6. That all persons whatsoever shall engage themselves, never to bear arms
against the Parliament or their forces.

Commissary. G. Ireton

Signed on the L. Generals party by James Whaley Judge Advocate.

Signed on the Kentish party by R. Wilkinson and James. Kent

In the Church of Canterbury were delivered to Officers appointed by Commissary
General Ireton to receive the same 3000 Arms and 3 hundred horse, there were
also good store of Arms taken at Dover and some Papers found setting forth the
resolution of that party against the Castle of Dover, and the means they
intended to use for obtaining the same, all which papers are sent up to the
Parliament a Mortar piece is going to send Grenades into the revolted castles
of Sandon Warborough, and Deal, hereafter Capt Kem, may come to know the
diffrence between being in a castle or sailing in a ship, the L. Generals
Engineere has made some breach, in the walls of Canterbury to prevent the
adverse party of taking advantage by the strength thereof as they have formerly
to raise combustions in the city.

Commissions are granting for rajsing three Regiments for the Peace and safety
of this County; there came to Rochester on Monday last about 200 from London
desiring entertainment. there be 32 prisoners sent to Leeds Castle whose lot it
fell on to die, the rest of the prisoners are put a shipboard for security, till
such time as further order can be taken therein which will suddenly be do^e,
for the Lord general has left it to the Deputy Lieutenants of this County to
dispose of such of the common Souldion, of this Country as they shall see cause
and another cour^e will be taken with the officers, it is reported that
Lieutenant General Cromwell and Col: Horton stormed Pembroke town in Wales and
are repulsed, others say part of the town is taken the certainty of all to
which, I leave to the next letters.

Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.

FINIS.

