SEVERAL QUERIES concerning the CHVRCH of JESUS CHRIST upon Earth, briefly
explained and Resolved.

Wherein is showed and proved, 1. That there is a Church of Jesus Christ upon
earth. 2. What this Church is? 3. How a People become a Visible Church? 4. That
the Churches in England were at first rightly Constituted? 5. What manner of
Government Jesus Christ has ordained in and for his Church? 6. What manner of
Persons those ought to be, that may be continued in, or admitted into the
Church? 7. What is the duty of Church members toward Jesus Christ their head,
and one another.


By John Flower M. A. Preacher at Staunton in the County of Nottingham.

London, Printed by T. Mabb for Edward Thomas and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Adam and Eve in Little-brittain near the Church, 1658.

TO THE Right Honorable, EDWARD Lord, WHALEY, Lieutenant General of the
Army: under his Highness OLIVER Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging.
Right Honorable,
THis which was at first conceived for the use and direction of my own
Congregation; I have at the desire of some private Friends, suffered to be
brought forth to a more public view; and I have also made bold to tender it to
your Honor, which though I confess unworthy either of your judgment or
acceptance; yet the countenance and many respects which I have received from
you, have heightened me to this presumption; hoping you will please to pardon
that confidence in me, which your own favors and encouragements have begotten.
I hope I have not in this offended against the truth; I am sure I have not
willingly, nor wittingly, if I have through ignorance, or mistake, I shall
willingly be rectified, and be glad to see my errors: Therefore in such ca^e
-- Let the righteous smite me, Ps. 141.5.
and it shall be a kindness, let him reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil
which shall not break my head.

In ^y pre^enting this small piece to your honor, my ambition is only to make
an honorable and thankful mention of your name: your deserts h ve merited a
better monument than I am able to elect for them.

Your Noble and civil deportment toward all in the Counties, more especially
under your Command; chiefly your countenancing and encouraging of the pious and
painful Ministers of the Gospel, has justly gained you a good report of all
men, and of the truth it self; which honor that you may always have, by still
co tinuing steadfast, and unmovable, and always abounding in the work the Lord,
is the prayer of

Your Honors most obliged in all duty and service, JOHN FLOWER.

TO My much esteemed friends and neighbors the Inhabitants of the Town and
Parish of Staunton, in the County of Nottingham:
BY the providence of the most high, Isa 7. Acts 17.26.
that has appointed the tit es that are coming, and shall come, an
^^etermined the bounds of each one ha^itation, I am seated among you in this
place, Ps. 16.6.
and I hope I shall have no other cause but that I may say with the Psalmist,
the lines are fallen unto me in a good place:

I account not that so much a good place where there are good fields good
corn, good pasture -- But I account that a good place, where there is a good
people, a people swift to hear, willing to be reformed ready to submit to the
Scepter, and dominion of the Lord Jesus, and not crying ou^ like those
Rebellious Jews -- Lu 7.19.14
we will not have this man reign over us. I account such a place a good place,
for it is not the fatness of the soil, but the fear of the Lord that makes
rich:

I bless God I have received no discouragment since I came amongst you; I have
not found you stubborn or perverse, froward, or refractory, or resisters of
the word of truth, which has been delivered to you, but I have found you
rather humble and meek, and willing to embrace the Gospel, which as it is your
praise, so it is also my happiness and joy;

For what is it that makes the life of a Minister of the Gospel comfortable? I
tell you (if he be a man that truly fears God, and is faithful to his master)
it is not the greatness of his Living, the fullness of his barnes -- But it is
the obedience of his people to gospel-precepts, their growing in grace, their
adding to faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
2. Pet. 1.5.
and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to godliness
brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity; their willingness to
be reformed, their readiness to receive the truth with love, their not being
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ:

O! The blessing of God upon his labors in Spiritualizing his people, this
refreshes him, when he sees dead people quickened, enemies to Christ
reconciled, children of wrath become children of grace, those that were afar
off, now made nigh, strangers from the covenant now interested in the promise,
there is no greater joy to a sincere minister of the Gospel than this.

This was St. 3 Ioh. 1.4.
John's greatest comfort -- I have no greater joy than to hear that my children
walk in the truth.

O what a rejoicing is this! when a Minister can say of his people, as St. Paul
could of his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6.11
-- But ye are washed but ye are sanctified -- and to the Romans to whom he
preached -- Ye were the Servants of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart the
form of doctrine which was delivered unto you: To. 6.17.


But ah! what woe is it to a faithful minister, that when he has spent
himself, and his pains for many years, yet is forced to complain with the
Prophet -- Lord who has believed our report? Isa. 53.1.
They were servants of sin, and they are so still, they have not obeyed from
the heart the form of doctrine delivered to them:

They were thieves, covetuous, whoremongers, drunkards, Revilers, Scorners and
they are so still, -- they are not washed, they are not sanctified -- an^ this
is an heartbreaking to a sincere Minister of Jesus Christ, and many such there
are that with the Prophet, Ier. 13.17.
mourn in secret for this thing.

I must confess. I have what respects I can desire from you in relation to
things temporal, and my endeavors shall be to gratify you with things that
are spiritual, which are of the greatest concernment in the world.

Our main business in this world should be, to labor to make your calling and
election sure -- To be diligent that at the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ
to judgment we may be found without spot and blameless: men indeed make other
business then this, But alas! That so little regarded saying of our Lord
Jesus Christ will be proved true one day -- What will it profit a man to win
the world and lose his soul?

While providence shall continue me among you in this place, my endeavor shall
be (by Gods assistance) to set you in heaven-way, to be plain, and faithful
to you in things of soul concernment;

To tell you that you are altogether such as ye ought to be, all real
christians, a visible Church, such as have a right to the sacrament, an
interest in the promises -- I dare not sow such pillows under your arms if I
should, well might you suspect me of daubing, I mean, with untempred mortar.

But I shall endeavor to show you out of the Scriptures, who are Christians
indeed, not only by a change of name, but by a change of nature also; who are a
true visible Church of Jesus Christ: what manner of persons they are and ought
to be, to whom Seals and Promises are given, and if you be, or become such,
then may I tell you without deceiving you, that you are Christians indeed, a
Church indeed, have a right to the Seals and promises of the Gospel indeed.

If a Parish or People be altogether profane, atheistical, dead in sins and
trespasses, without any favor or taste of spiritual things -- To tell such a
people that they are good Christians, a visible Church, have a right to the
Sacrament -- is no other then to cheat them of the truth, harden them in their
sins, and lead them blindfold to destruction: A formal and general Preacher
that words, and phrases out his own wisdom, tickling the ears without touching
the hearts or awaking the consciences of his hearers, he may have the praise
and applause of men, but not the praise and peace of God; give me the latter,
let who will take the former.

It will be worth all his pains and sufferings, if a Minister drawing men to
his latter end, and ready to give up an account of his stewardship, can appeal
unto God and his Congregation, as once Samuel (ready to die) did unto the
people in another case, 1 Samuel 12. -- Whose Ox or whose Ass have I taken? whom
have I defrauded? So when a Minister, -- what soul have I beguiled? What soul
have I defrauded? What soul have I hardened in sin by covering, and not
discovering the truth, and danger of its estate to it? What people have I
deceived by telling them, they were Christians, when they were not? a Church,
when they were not, had a right to the Kingdom of heaven, and the seals
thereof when they had not? to be able to say thus, will be worth something one
day; O that all that take upon them the Ministry of the Gospel would consider
this. If plain dealing have outward disturbance, yet it has inward peace.

But indeed an ingenious people, whose reason and understanding is not quite
lost, or infatuated, will in time make good that saying of the wise man's; Pro.
28.23. That he that rebukes a man afterward shall find more favor, than he
that flattereth with his tongue.

My endeavor therefore shall be to cause you to know your miserable estate by
nature, and the remedy thereof by grace; To cause you to look into that great
mystery, the infinite love of God in Jesus Christ, in that great work of your
dedemption through him, that ye may know the Lord Jesus and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto
his death: That when I am called to give an account of my Stewardship amongst
you, I may do it with joy, and not with grief: Ministers of all men had need
to look about them, for they must give account for more souls than their own;
and if any be lost through their default, Ezekiel. 3.18
that blood will be required at their bands:

I would not at the day of judgment be found in the condition of a negligent,
idle, Pastor, that has fleeced, and not fed his flock, for ten thousand
worlds: Not in his condition, 1 Cor. 2.4
that daubs with untemperd mortar, that speaks smooth things, that preaches
not in the demonstration of the spirit, and of power, but with the enticing
words of man's wisdom.

For fearful will be the end of such a man when Jesus Christ and he shall
reckon together; for so many sheep, lost through the earelesness of the
shepherd.

It was the saying of one, That of all men that should be saved Ministers
should be the fewest: Indeed they have the greatest charge, and are subject to
the sorest temptations, and it is to be feared that many Ministers, either for
fear or love, or some other worldly respect may offend too much against their
commission, which bids them cry aloud and spare not, Isa. 58.1.
lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their sins, and the house of
Israel their transgressions; and so hazard themselves too near the pickes of
Gods eternal vengeance and displeasure; which thing of all other I most fear;
and therefore through grace shall labor to avoid; which I cannot do, unless I
look strictly unto you over whom I set an Overseer; therefore blame me not if I
be plain and earnest with you to press you forward toward the mark of the
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; Phil. 3: 14.
If I should be negligent herein, your blood would be upon my head; The Lord
pardon my neglects past.

I had rather disturb my own peace (if it must be so) and trouble the water to
stir you out of the lees of carnal security, than to have you curse me, and
accuse me before God at the day of judgment, for the deceiver and betrayer of
your souls.

I bless God I can say (through the grace given me) that my destre is (so
far as I know my own heart) not to seek yours but you; I had rather see you
thrive in spirituals than my self in temporals; and my greatest encouragement
among you will be, to see you walking in and obedient unto the truth.

If you will give up your names to Jesus Christ, if you will obey the Gospel,
and not run with the wicked of the world into the same excess of riot, you must
look for many oppositions, affronts, scorns, reproaches -- but pass thorough
all these with patience, looking unto the End, Jesus, the Author and Finisher
of your Faith; who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despising the shame, Heb. 12.1.
and is now set down at the right hand of God; and there if you run with
patience the race that is set before you, shall you sit down also; -- For which
things sake I shall always bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, to
be strengthened with might, Ephesians. 3.14.
by his Spirit in the inward man: That Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge. That ye might be filled with
all the fullness of God.

Feb. 2. 1657. J. FLOWER.

Several Questions concerning the Church of Jesus Christ upon earth.
Concerning the Church of our Lord Jesus Christ upon earth, I find these
Questions moved amongst others:
First,WHether there be any such thing as a Church of Jesus Christ upon earth?
Secondly, What is the Church of Jesus Christ? Thirdly, How do a people become a
true visible Church of Jesus Christ at first? Fourthly, Whether the Churches of
England were at first rightly constituted? Fifthly, What Government has Jesus
Christ Ordained in and for his Church? Sixthly, What manner of persons those
ought to be, that are in the judgment of Charity to be looked upon as visible
Members of the Church? Seaventhly, What are the duties of Church Members
toward Jesus Christ, and one another?
Several Queries concerning the Church of Christ.
Section I. Containing an Answer to the first Question.
IF there were not those that denied the Scriptures to be the word of God, and
Jesus Christ the Son of God, it might then be admired that any should question,

Whether there be a Church of Jesus Christ a upon earth? For to deny this is to
deny an Article of the Christian Creed, to accuse the holy Scriptures of folly
and impertinences, to defame our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

If there be no such thing as a Church of his upon earth, what meant our Lord
Jesus Christ when he said -- Mat. 16.8
Upon this Rock will I build my Church? What meant St. Paul, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor.
1.1.
when he directed his Epistle to the Church of God which is at Corinth? Rev. 2.
Why does the Spirit write to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, of the Church
in Smyrna?

Those therefore that deny a Church of Jesus Christ upon earth are not of so
much worth as either to be named, or disputed withal, but they are to be
rejected by all sober and judicious Christians, as those that have together
with their Faith made shiprack of their Reason also.

Section. II. Containing an answer to the second Question, What is the Church
of Jesus Christ?
The word which in English is rendered a Church, is in the Original (...),
which word is used in the Gospel to signify a Church of Jesus Christ: And this
word (...), or Church does signify A company Called out; from (...), which
signifies to call out from among others.

And again this word (...), which we Translate a Church is sometimes used to
signify any assembly called together upon any occasion; Act. 19.33.
For the Assembly was confused; the word then translated assembly is in the
Original (...), so the same word is rendered an assembly, Act. 19.39, 41.

But this word Ecclesia, or Church, we in our speech do use, to signify a
sacred assembly or meeting, or combination of Gods people.

Our English word Church signifies an assembly of Gods people, or those that
desire to fear the Lord; For it is very probable that our word Church, com's
from the German word Kirch, which is derived from the Greek word (...), which
signifies the flock or people of God.

We use the word Church also by a Metonymie, for the place, or house where the
Church or the people of God meet, 1 Cor. 11.18
Calling that a Church.

But to speak properly, the Church of Jesus Christ is his people built of
living and not of dead and senseless stones; 1 Pet. 2.5.
and this Church of Jesus Christ is a company of people Joh. 15.19. Rev. 18 4.
called out of the world, serving Jesus Christ as their Lord and King, 1 These.
4 7. Romans 6.17. Act. 2.42.
Living under, and submitting unto all his holy ordinances.

A true visible Church of Jesus Christ is not a profane, wicked assembly, an
assembly of Notorious Drunkards, Whoremongers Swearers, and the like; But an
holy assembly, called out from among these; 1 Cor. 6.11
Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are Sanctified.

Not an assembly of such as only serve their own bellies, lusts, passions sin,
satan, the times, but an assembly of such as turn from these Idols to serve the
living and true God.

Not an assembly refractory, and disobedient to Gospel Ordinances mockers and
scoffers of holy things and duties, But such as do submit themselves to the
Laws, commands ordinances of Jesus Christ as their duty, and but Romans 12.1.
Reasonable service.

Section. III. Containing an answer to the third question? How do a people
become a true visible church of Jesus Christ at first?
A People become a true visible Church of Jesus Christ by entering into an holy
covenant with the Lord, to take him for their God and King, to be ruled and
directed by his word, and to submit unto all his holy ordinances.

Thus we find in the Scripture when God did constitute Abraham's Family a
church, I mean receive them into a church estate, it was by entering them into
such a Genesis 17.
covenant as before, of which circumcision was a seal.

That which they covenanted with God was, Genesis 17.1
To walk before him and be perfect; and God covenanted with them to verse 7.
be their God, and the God of their feed, and so they came into a
church estate. This was the way of the Apostles in their constitution of
Churches; Those people whom the Apostles did receive into a church estate, it
was by engaging them to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and to submit to his holy
ordinances.

This is plain if we read the 2. of the Acts v. 41. There were three thousand
received into a church estate, which before neither were a church, nor of the
church of Jesus Christ; And how came these to be a church? why v. 41. v. 41.
they gladly received the word preached to them; according to that word v. 38.
v. 38:
they did evidence their repentance for Sin past, (which includes an engagement
to serve God for the future) and upon this they were baptized, and became a
church, v. 41.

So when the Apostles received particular persons into the Church which before
were not of it, these did covenant for to take the Lord for their God, to own,
and serve him, and so they became added unto the church. Acts 19. many became
added unto the Church, But we read that they were such as believed, such as
confessed their sins, such as showed their deeds, such as burned their profane
books, -- Thus they covenanting to serve the Lord were received into the church.

Thus it is clear that a company of people do become a church by entering into
an holy Covenant with the Lord their God to own him, and serve him:

Therefore the church is called the Cant 4.8, 9 10.
Spouse of Jesus Christ, by which name the church could not properly be called,
had she not entered into an holy conjugall covenant with Jesus Christ to be
loyal and faithful to him, for this is essential to the relation of a Spouse
or wife that she enter covenant with her husband to be loyal and faithful to
him.

And as the church is rightly called the Spouse of Jesus Christ by virtue of
this her covenant, so is the Lord also called the husband of his church or
Spouse, for he does covenant with her, Levit 26.12 Genesis 11, 1.
that he will be her God, her shield, her exceeding great reward, that he will
never fail her nor forsake her, --.

The sum of the answer then to this third Question is this,

That a company of people become a church or under the relation of the wife and
Spouse of Jesus Christ, by entering into an holy covenant with him to take him
for their Lord and God, and to submit unto all his holy Ordinances without such
a covenant their could be no such relation betwixt Jesus Christ and the Church
as there is, for all relations of that nature are founded upon Covenant.

Section. IV. Containing the answer to the fourth question: Whether the
churches of England were at first rightly constituted?
IF the people of England were constituted a Church, or gathered into a
church way, in that way and after that manner that the Apostles did constitute
a church, or Churches, or gather a people into a Church Way at first, then the
people of England were at first rightly constituted a Church, or gathered into
a Church Way:

But the people of England were at first constituted a Church, or gathered into
a Church Way in that way and after that manner that the Apostles did constitute
a Church, or Churches, or gather a people into a Church Way, Therefore the
people of England were at first rightly constituted a church or gathered into a
Church Way.

The major proposition is undeniable; the minor I thus prove:

If the people of England were constituted a Church, or gathered into a
Church Way, upon their receiving of the word, forsaking of heathenish
superstitions and idolatry, and embracing the faith of Jesus Christ, and
engaging to serve him:

Then they were constituted a Church, or gathered into a church way, Acts 2.
chap. 19.
in that way and after that manner, that the Apostles did constitute a Church
or Churches, or gather a people into a Church way,

But the people of England were constituted a Church, or gathered into a
Church Way upon their receiving of the word, forsaking of heathenish
superstitions and Idolatry, and embracing the faith of Jesus Christ, and
engaging to serve him,

Therefore they were constituted a Church or gathered into a Church Way, in
that way, and after that manner that the Apostles did constitute a Church, or
Churches, or gather a people into a Church way.

The sequel of the major proposition is undeniable; The minor proposition is
proved by all the histories relating to those times, which declare that the
Infidel, Pagan people of England, by the preaching of salvation through Jesus
Christ were converted unto the faith, forsaking heathenish superstition and
Idolatry: And indeed our own sense and reason must needs induce us to be
persuaded of this; for if this were not a truth, how then came they our
progenitors by the name and religion of Christians; which we their successors
do retain to this day, being derived from them to us.

The name of Christian, by which they were called, the exercise of Christian
religion, which they practiced upon the preaching of the Gospel does abundantly
prove that relinquishing Paganism and Idolatrous worship; They did embrace the
faith of Jesus Christ.

And that they did also at that time covenant to take and own Jesus Christ as
their Lord and only savior by serving him and submitting to his holy
ordinances, the very act of their Baptism is sufficient to inform and
convince all intelligent and considerate persons; For what Infidel, or Infidels
(I mean such as were so brought up, and so lived for many years) were ever
baptized before they had given evidence of their faith in Christ, repentance,
and resolution to own Christ as their Lord and King for the time to come.

That the Apostles baptized none that were brought up in Paganism and
Infidelity without such evidence, and engagement as before, is very clear in
the Scriptures, yea, so evident, that it is past doubt or question: Shall we
then think or dare to say that those who took upon them to be Ministers of
Jesus Christ in those days, when England was an Infidel and Pagan Nation, and
were sent hither to preach the Gospel to this Nation, then in such estate as
before, I say shall we dare to judge or think, or speak that these baptized the
people then of this Nation without evidences of faith and repentance, and
engagements to own and serve Jesus Christ as their Lord, and God, I am sure if
they did ever or could but read the Scriptures, they could not be ignorant whom
they ought to baptize, and upon what evidence, and far be it from me to judge
or think that they would be wittingly and knowingly so injurious to the truth,
the Sacrament of Baptism, and practice of the Apostles, as to baptize the then
people of this Nation without some manifestations of their faith and
repentance, and resolutions to own and serve Jesus Christ for the time to come,
as their Lord and Savior:

I can hardly believe that any man will censure the first converters, and
Baptisers of our nation, either to be men ignorant of, or malicious against the
truth, one of which they must needs judge them to be, if they say they baptized
without such evidences of faith and repentance as before.

But if these first converters did by the preaching of Jesus Christ to the
Pagans of England turn them from their Idols to embrace the said faith, and
upon the said evidences of faith, repentance and resolutions to cleave to Jesus
Christ as their only redeemer, did admit them to be baptized, then they did
rightly constitute them a Church, or gather them into a Church Way according to
the manner and practice of the Apostles recorded in the Scriptures, which that
they thus did, is both a probable and charitable judgment, That they did not,
is a rash and unchristian like censure:

Ob. But the Church of England had its constitution from Rome, therefore it was
never rightly, constituted, neither is a true Church;

Sol. To this I answer, that the antecedent is not altogether true, possibly it
may be, grant it in relation to a part, not in relation to the whole.

For ought I know, or any one can disprove, there might be a Church of Christ
in England nere as soon as there was one in Rome.

The Scriptures do indeed declare that there was a Church in Rome in the
Apostles times, and therefore we may believe it; The Scriptures do not deny
that there was a Church of Christ in England in those days, the Chronicles and
Histories, relating to those times affirm it, and therefore I see not why it
should be contradicted.

It Is true those Histories say not that the whole Nation of England did embrace
the Faith of Christ when it was first preached unto them (as is conceived
either by some of the Apostles, or Apostolical then, as Philip, or Simon
Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea) but part of the Nation did, and were then
gathered into a Church Way;

For about six hundred years after this, when Augustine was sent from Rome, by
Gregory, the then Bishop of Rome, to endeavor the conversion of the whole
Nation, he found both a Ministry and Churches of Jesus Christ settled in the
Land:

For at his first coming, he (as the History relates) assembled together the
Bishops and Doctors of Britain to discourse and reason with them; and to
request their assistance for the conversion of the Pagan English, So that we
may say, and that truly, that Christianity was in England propagated, but not
at first planted by Rome.

But grant this that Augustine was the first that planted the Christian faith
in England, and that there were neither Ministry nor Church, before ordained,
and gathered by him, and his assistants, what is this to the now unchurching of
the Church in England, or the wrong constitution of it at the time.

Obj. The ministry and churches of England were ordained and constituted by
Augustine and his assistants who were sent from Rome.

Therefore the Ministry and Churches of England had no right constitution and
Ordination.

Sol. I deny the consequence; and if any man will go about to prove it, it will
be necessary that he prove and make appear that the Ministry, and Church of
Rome were at that time a false and Antichirstan Ministry and Church:

But I think it is a clear case that the Church of Rome was then (though a
corrupt) yet a true Church, and so continued for many years after that time.

Yea, it is the opinion of some Godly, learned, and judicious, (from whom I see
no Reason to dissent) that the Church of Rome did not quite fall off from
Christ, or turn utterly Antichristian until the Council of Trent, at which
time the said Church of Rome did by a public Council disowne and destroy the
very fundamentalls of Christian religion, which she never did before that time;
at which time these absurd and antichristian and unchurching errors were
decreed and published as the faith of the Church of Rome, and all were accursed
and excommumicated that assented not unto these abominations, 1. Popes
supremacy. 2. Dividing the bread and wine in the Sacrament, allowing the people
no wine. 3. Justification by works. 4. Worshipping of images. 5. That the
people ought not to read the Scripturess. 6. That Traditions ought to be
believed as Scripture.


Now these abominations, which make desolate (I mean unchurch) the Church of
Rome, were not set up by public decree and consent in the said Church until
the said Council of Trent:

It Is true the Mystery of iniquity did work before, and these abominations as
before were creeping into that church, but they were corrected and exploded by
several Counsels.

The Councels of Calcedon, Afric, Constantinople, Milevi, Basil, decreed
against the Popes Supremacy; the Council of Basil decreed communicating in both
kinds.

The divine worshipping of Images was forbid by the second Nicene Council; the
Council of Nice decreed that no Christian should be without a Bible: To believe
Traditions to be equal with the Scriptures, to hold justification by works was
never decreed by any Council, nor held out as the Faith of that Church before
the Council of Trent.

So that I may say, though the Mystery of iniquity was many hundreds of years a
working, yet the disease came not to its full height and state, so as to
destroy the body until that time, I mean the Council of Trent.

So that the Church of Rome not having declared a public disowning of the
Faith and Gospelfundamentalls until the Council of Trent, I see no reason as
yet, why she may not be called a true Church until that time; I say a true
Church, though a Church very corrupt; As a man may be called a true man, though
never so sick, and weak, and diseased, until by the extremity and height of the
mallady he becomes dead; so a Church, may truly be called a Church, though very
sick, diseased and corrupt, until by making shipwreck of the Faith, and erring
in fundamentalls, it expires.

Thus it is clear that grant it were so (as it was not) that the Ministry and
Church of England, as to the whole, were ordained and constituted by Augustine
and other assistants from Rome, yet this concludes nothing at all against the
right ordination and constitution of the Ministry and Churches of England,
because the Church of Rome was at that time (though very corrupt) yet a true
Church.

Ob. But it is objected the churches of England were not rightly constituted,
because the people became Christians not by the ministry of the word, but by
the commands and edicts of their Kings who after they were converted, commanded
all their subjects and people to embrace the said faith and religion.

Sol. To this I answer that the matter of this objection is wholly false and
Scandalous;

It is wholly false that the Pagan people of England became Christians after
the conversion of their Kings, by penal Laws and edicts of their said
Sovereigns.

After Augustine had converted Ethelberg King of Kent to the Christian faith,
let any one, if he can show any such act or edict, put forth by him to enjoyne
all his subjects to embrace the said religion upon any penalty or forfeiture;
If there were any such thing, it would surely be upon record.

But we read the contrary of him, we read of this King Ethelberg that after he
was converted, Innumerable others daily came in, Mr. Fox Acts Monuments 1. vol.
page. 1656.
and were adjoined to the Church of Christ, whom the King did specially
embrace, but compelling none, for so be had learned, that the faith and service
of Christ ought to be voluntary and not coact.

And so I read of the other Kings that then reigned in this Land; that after
they were converted to the Faith of Jesus Christ, they encouraged Ministers to
go into their Countries, and preach to their Subjects; and by this means became
the Pagan people of England to be Christians, and a Church, by the preaching of
the Gospel to them, and not by compulsatory Laws of their Kings: And they that
do gainsay this, it will be easy to prove that they are either ignorant or
perverse.

Mr. Cotton late of New England, a man of great learning and reverence, though
he fully assented not to ye way of the Churches of England, and therefore
separated from them, yet he never found fault with their constitution at first,
for as to this he declares himself thus:

The efficient instruments of their first plantation (meaning the Churches of
England) which were neither Apostles, or Apostolical men, whether Phillip, or
Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes, as any of our Country men may read in
Mr. Fox 's Book of Acts and Monuments, out of Gildas, Tertullian, Origin, Beda,
Nicephorus, which being so, we cannot but conceive the Churches in England were
rightly gathered and planted according to the rule of the Gospel: And all the
corruptions found in them since have sprung from Popish Apostasy in succeeding
Ages, and for want of thorough and perfect purging out of that Leaven in the
late times of Reformation, in the days of our Fathers: Cottons way Churches
New England.
So that all the work now is, not to make them Churches which were none before,
but to reduce and restore them to their Primitive Institution: Thus Mr. Cotton.
And it being granted that the Churches in England were rightly constituted and
gathered at first, it will easily be proved that there has continued a true
Church in this Land unto this day, though very corrupt and impure, especially
when subject to the Papal yoke: Yet in those saddest times of corruption and
persecution, God had his Church and Ministry in England, who witnessed to the
Truth, and appeared for a Reformation of such corruptions and abuses in the
Church, though many of these by the power of a prevaling faction in suffered
for such zeal and love to the Church the Truth.

I say, the Church in England under the greatest Corruption, was never without
some Witnesses, some Names, which suppose they were but a few, in comparison of
the greater part that corrupted themselves, and were made drunk with the wine
of fornication spoken of, Rev. 14.8. Yet will not God disown that to be a
Church when these (though but few) names be found.

God owned them to be a Church in Rev. 3.1
verse 4.
Sardis, and yet tells them they had but a few names which had not defiled
their garments. And though the Church in England might be reproved of
corruption in Doctrine, yet this did not unChurch her, no more than it did the
Church of Pergamus, which God owned to be a Church, though they held the
Doctrine of Baalam. Rev. 2.14.


Though the Church in England might be justly reproved of corruption in
manners, and discipline, yet this did not un-Church her, no more than it did
the Corinthians, whom St. Paul calls a Church of God; though in the same
Epistle he reproves them both for their corruption in manners and discipline.
1 Cor. 11.21


Though in the Church of England by the power of a prevalent factious party,
cha 3.1, 2, 3 chap. 5.
many of the precious Saints of God were put to death, yet this does no more
un-Church her than the same sin did the people of the Jews, whom God al along
owned as his Church, though a prevalent, wicked, factious party among them
killed the Mat. 23.37.
Prophets, and stoned the Messengers of the Lord that were sent unto them.

The Church in England since its first Institution unto this day, cannot be
justly charged to have made shipwreck of the faith of Jesus Christ, by
disowning, or erring in any thing fundamental to that Faith, or necessary to
the esse or being of a Church: Therefore the Church in England continues to be
a Church of God still.

As for her many and grievous corruptions both in Doctrine, discipline and
manners, they are sadly to be bewailed, and diligently to be reformed: These
blemish and disbeautify a Church, and justly provoke God against it: These are
inconsistent as to the well being, but not to the being of a Church.

And though the Church in England did join with and own the Church of Rome,
whilst the said Church held the fundamentals of Christian Religion, and was
sound in matters of Faith; yet when the said Church of Rome did begin to
faulter there, to deny fundamental verities, and make shipwreck of the faith,
which she has done since the Council of Trent, at that very time did the
Church in England refuse her the right hand of fellowship, disown, and separate
from her, and so continues unto this day.

After this manner also did the reformed Churches in Germany, Suevia, Denmark,
France -- separate themselves from that faction of Rome, and likewise so
continue at this day.

They that deny the Ministry and Churches in England to be a true Ministry and
true Churches, must of necessity also assert, defend and affirm these (to me)
most horrid and desperate Conclusions.

First,

The Reason is, because the Church in England and these Reformed Churches reach
out the right hand of fellowship to each other, have the same Baptism, the same
Ordinances, the same Ordination, the same Discipline as to the substance of it:
Therefore if the one be false and Antichristian, the other cannot be a true and
Christian Church, or Churches.

Secondly, Luther, Calvin, and all those famous Lights, and happy Reformers of
the Churches beyond the Seas, were false and Antichristian Ministers.

Thirdly, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Tailor, and many more, who labored much
the Reformation of the Church in England from Romish superstition, and were
famous instruments, as to that work, and afterward sealed unto the truth with
their blood, and are now Triumphing in heaven, that all these were limbs of
Antichrist, and no Ministers of Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, England nor beyond the Seas, where then has it been?

Now if Satan did so prevail against the Church, as utterly to raze the very
foundation of it, how will this consist with that word of our Saviors? Mat.
16.18
Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. If there has ever ceased to be a true Ministry upon earth, how
will this again consist with that promise of our Lords, Mat. 28.2.
Lo I will be with you unto the end of the world?

Fifthly, England; but that all have continued dead in sins and trespasses,
Children of wrath, without Christ, aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world: This was the condition of the Ephesians whilst they were no Church,
Ephesians. 2.
nor had a Gospel-Ministery amongst them: And this has been for many hundreds
of years, and still is the sad condition of England, if without a Church and
true Ministers of Jesus. I cannot see how that ture conversion should be
wrought by a false and Antichrichristian Ministry, Jer. 23.32.
I sent them not nor commanded them, there fore they shall not profit this
people at all says the Lord. Therefore by what Ministry a people profit, and
are converted from sin and Satan, to serve the Lord and fear him, from living
profanely, ungodly, rudely, to live soberly, and righteously, and godly in the
world, it is a sure sign that Ministry is from God, owned, and sent by him:

Therefore seeing by denying the Church and Ministry in England to be a true
Church and Ministry, such abhorred conclusions as before must also be
asserted, it seems to me not only to be an error, but a furor, a phrensy in
some men, to run themselves upon such dreadful Rocks as these.

Sect. V. Containing an Answer to the first Question.
What Government has our Lord Jesus Christ ordained in, and for his Church?
TO this I Answer, That a Government and discipline in the Church is to be
observed by divine right; for God is the God of order and not of confusion;
without this, the Church would rather seem a Babel than a Bethel, and therefore
we must of necessity conclude a Church Government 1 Cor. 12.28
by Divine right.

But although the thing it self be granted, yet the manner how, or way, is much
disputed by godly and learned men.

Now as the Scriptures do clearly hold out that there ought to be a
Church Government, so they do also instruct us in the way, and not altogether
leave us in the dark in a thing of so great concernment as this:

Therefore let us search the Scriptures, they are sufficient to inform us as
to this case; or else how can the Scriptures be truly said to be P^^^ Tim. 3.^15
perfect, if they fall short and cannot inform in a case of so high
concernment as this? How can they be said to be sufficient to make a man 2 Timothy
3.17
wise, if they leave him ignorant in this so weighty a matter?

How can they be said to be sufficient to make the man of God 1 Timothy 5.17
perfect and thoroughly to furnish him unto all good works, if they inform him
not as to the managing of church government, which is a great, and a good work,
and whosoever manage it well, in St. Paul's esteem, are worthy of double honor.

Therefore let us hear the Scriptures speak, as to the way of
Church Government.

To a Government be it either Civil or Sacred are necessary these three things.

1. Ordinances. Ordinances to be submitted unto. 2. Officers. Officers to rule,
and see to submissions unto and observance of Gods Ordinances. 3. Penalties.
Penalties to be inflicted on offenders.
These are all necessary to Church Government: Prayer, Singing of Psalms, the
Sacraments are Church-Ordinances


1. There must be church Ordinances to be submitted unto and observed; and the
Scripture tells us that these are,

First, Prayer, so 1 Timothy 2.1.

Secondly, Singing of Psalms, Psalm. 9.11. Mat. 26.30. Acts 16.25.

Thirdly, Ministry of the word, Romans 10.15. Mark. 16.15. Ephesians. 4.12.

Fourthly, The Sacraments of Baptism, Mat. 28.18.

The Lords Supper, Mat. 26.26. Luke 22.19.

Thus for Church-Ordinances the Scripture declares clearly what they are that
we ought to submit to and observe:

2. There must be Church Officers too, or else no Government;

Now as to Church Officers, the Scriptures do usually call some by the name of
Elders, and do seem to make two Sorts of them.

First, Elders that did both teach and rule,

Secondly, Elders that ruled but taught not:

Teaching Elders or Pastors and Teachers of the Church, the Scriptures declare
that these are to be in the Church as Officers, Rulers, Overseers, for in the
4. of the Ephe. 8, 9, 10, 11. We there read that besides other extraordinary
Officers which were but pro tempore in the Church, So Acts 20.17, 28. 1 Cor:
12.28
Pastors and Teachers are to be in the Church to the end.

And as the Scripture tells us there ought to be Pastors and Teachers in the
Church as Church Officers, so it tells also first how these should be ordained
to their Office. Secondly, How they should be qualified for their Office.

First, How ordained to the Office, that is by Acts 13.3 1 Timothy 4.14
Prayer and Imposition of the hands of the Presbytery.

Secondly, How they should be qualified for the Office.

First, They should be men of gifts and parts, 2 Timothy 3 2 1 Timothy 3.1, 2
apt to Teach.

Secondly, Men of Holy lives and conversations, 2 Timothy 3 2 1 Timothy 3.1, 2
not Scandalous.

A Second sort of Church. Officers, which the Scripture calls Elders also, seem
to be such as were not (as we use to say) in Ecclesiastical Orders; but some
of the Church, gravest and wisest of the Church, who were chosen to help and
assist the Teaching Elders, in the Rule and Government of the Church: That
there were such Church Officers as these in the Apostles times, these Texts of
Scripture seems to hold forth, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well --
especially who labor in the Word and Doctrine.

This place seems to speak of two distinct sorts of Elders, the one Ruling
only, the other both Ruling, and Teaching also, and here the Apostle bids
honor both sorts, but especially those Elders that Taught the Church as well
as Ruled it.

The word especially seems there to make this distinction of Elders, for this
word (...) especially, is commonly used by St. Paul to distinguish persons or
things, in the same place spoken of, so Gal. 6.10. Do good unto all, especially
to those that be of the household of Faith; here the word especially signifies
that there were some of the household of Faith, some not, we must do good unto
all, but especially to those of that household: So, 1 Timothy 5.17. The Elders that
Rule well account worthy of double honor, especially those that labor in the
Word and Doctrine; here the word especially seems to signify that some of those
Elders did labor in the Word and Doctrine, some did not, both were to be
honored, if they ruled well, but especially those Elders that both Ruled well,
and labored in the Word and Doctrine also: So in Romans 2.6, 7, 8. -- Or
Ministry, let us wait on our Ministering, or he that Teaches on teaching, or
he that Exhorts on exhortation, he that Rules with diligence; here seems
to be an Officer that was not to wait upon teaching, but only upon ruling: And
we seem to retain these Elders or Officers still in the Church in England,
under the name of Churchwardens, the name signifies as much as
Church-Guardians, or Church-Rulers.

Another sort of Church Officers that we find mentioned in Scripture are
called by the name of Deacons, 1 Timothy 3.8.
their office to gather the Churches contribution, and to administer to the
poor members; of this Officer the Church will have always need, Mat. 26.11.
The poor ye have always with you:

These Officers we have in the Churches in England, under the Name of
Overseeres of the poor,

Thus the Scripture does inform us what Officers are to be in the Church, for
the rule and better ordering of it.

3. There must be Church penalties; without a penalty to be inflicted upon
obstinate Offenders, neither Ordinances nor Officers (in any kind of
Government) will be regarded.

Therefore, for the carrying on of discipline, and Government in his Church,
and that a better respect may be had to his Ordinances, and Officers, our Lord
Jesus Christ has Ordained a penalty to be inflicted upon all obstinate
offenders in this case; And this penalty is excommunication, or a casting out
of the Church any obstinate Offiender, as a rotten and dead branch, no more
worthy now to be accounted a member of the Church.

This is a delivering up of such an Offender unto Satan for the destruction of
the flesh: ^ Cor. 5.5.


The power of excommunication our Lord Jesus delivered to the Mat: 18. Joh.
20.23.
Church.

And how the Church should proceed against an offender as to the case of
excommunication, we have a Rule Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. Tit. 3.10. Thus is the
Scripture sufficiently clear, and informing, as to the way of
Church Government; And that yet there is so much of difference and contention
about this, it is to be feared that the causes are rather carnal than
conscientious, arising as the Apostle says from our Lusts, and not from any
insufficiency or Darkness in the Scriptures as to this case.

Sect. VI. Containing an Answer to the sixth Question.
What manner of persons those ought to be that are in the judgment of charity
to be looked upon as visible members of the Church?
TO this I Answer, Sol.
first negatively, that no man as he is in his natural condition, without a
change from that, ought to be admitted as a member of the visible Church of
Jesus Christ:

Res. For man in his natural condition is dead in Trespasses and Sins, a child
of wrath, at enmity with God and to every good work reprobate; and therefore as
such he is not, neither is to be accounted a member of the Church visible of
Jesus Christ.

For indeed whilst he is such, he is a visible member of the Synagogue of Satan.

Secondly, I answer affirmitively, that members of the Church of Jesus Christ
ought (according to the Scriptures) in some manner and measure to be prepared,
and fitted for that building.

The Church of God is compared unto a building, now when a house is to be
built, the stones and timber are fitted and prepared by hewing and squaring
before they are laid into the building; Timber as it is rough in the tree, and
stone as it is in the Quarrie or Rock is not fit to build an house withal, but
these must be hew'n and saw'n and plained and polish't, and squared, and thus
they become fit materials to build with all;

Man, as he is in his Natural condition is like timber in the tree in the
rough, like a stone in the Rock unhew'n, unsquar'd, undrest, and the fitting
and preparing such for Gods house as Materials to build withal is compared to
a plaining and hewing of wood, Hos 6.5. I have hew'n them by my Prophet. So
that there must be a Spiritual hewing and squaring, and polishing men out of
their rough and rocky condition before they be fit materials to build God an
house withal.

What man is there that builds an house of trees never hew'n nor sawn, nor
squard; of stones undrest, unpolisht; never such a thing was heard of: But
suppose we such a thing as this, would it not be a most misshapen monstrous
piece of building; would not every one that passes by shake his head at it?
And shall we build God an house, Was the Church in the Apostls time so built.
a Church of such like materials as these? of men and women in their natural
condition, of Drunkards, Whoremongers, Profane persons, Scoffers, Ignorant,
and the like to these, persons in their rough and rocky condition, without any
hewing, squaring, polishing, or fitting of them for such a structure? Surely
such a Church as these are a monstrous building, a Congregation of evil *
doers, Ps 26.5:
a confused Assembly, a building that Jesus Christ is no Corner stone of, nor
will ever own as hi^?

The visible Church of Jesus Christ is so far from being a Congregation of
evil doers, of profane and dissolute persons, that indeed of right there
ought to be none such in the Church, but as they are found and known, they
ought to be weeded out by the sentence of * excommunication. 1 Cor. 5.
What workman in the building of an house lays one row of hewn and pollisht
stones, and another row of rough, unsquared, and unhewed stones? would not this
be a ridiculous piece of building? Shall we then in Gods building (for such is
his Church) lay the stones after such a sort? Here a row of such as tremble at
an oath, here a row of others that profane the holy name of God as often as
they mention it, and swear as commonly as they speak: here a row of such as
pray in their families, and teach their children and servants the ways and
fear of the Lord, here a row (...) others that never call upon God in their
families all their lives, but by their example teach their children and
servants to be Atheists, despisers of Gods Ordinances, and to live without God
in the world, here a row of abstemious and sober persons, that are afraid to
abuse the mercies and creatures of God, to riot and excess, here a row of
others that wholly give themselves to gluttony and drunkenness, whose Tables
are, as the Prophet complains, Isa. 28.8. Full of vomit and filthiness, so
that there is no place clean: Here a row of such as keep Gods Sabbaths and
reverence his Ordinances, here a row of others that are Ordinance despisers,
contemners and mockers of holy things, and duties, Sabbath breakers, and
murmurers that God should have this (though but one day in seven) to himself;
of whom it may be too probably judged, that as well as privately to sport, and
play, and drink, and the like -- They would also Hauk and Hunt, and Plough, and
Cart upon those days; had they not more fear to the Laws of men than regard
to the Law of God: Here a row of such as have been Sanctified and cleansed with
the washing of water by the Word, here a row of others that are filthy still,
that mock and scoff at Sanctification, professing all ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and living unrighteously, unholily in the world:

Will Jesus Christ say unto a Church built after this manner, Cant. 8.9. Thou
art beautiful as Terza, comely as Jerusalem, chap. 6. ver. 4. Thou have
ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, how much better is thy love than wine,
and the smell of thine ointments than all spices? Will not a workman one day
have cause to be ashamed of such a building? Nay, shall he not be sorely
reproved for it, if he have not endeavored a reformation?

Those persons, the Apostles received into the Church, as members of it, were
not profane and lewd persons, scandalous, of evil report, scoffers at
Sanctification, despisers of Gods Ordinances and holy duties; Acts 2 47.4^.49.
But they were such as gladly received the Word, as were pricked in their
hearts at the sense of their sins, such as continued in prayer and the exercise
of other holy and Christian duties: They were such as burnt their curious
(because profane) Books; Acts 19.18, 19.
Such as confessed their sins, and showed their deeds.

Thus I Conclude in the first place, that those, which are received into the
Church, or continued in the same as members thereof ought to be such as at
least wise in outward appearance abstain from evil, as have a mark of
Sanctification and holiness upon them.

Secondly, Church Members ought to be such as have some competent measure of
knowledge, I conceive they ought to be so instructed that they may be able in
some measure to give an account of their hope, and those fundamental truths
that are necessary to be known for the praise and glory of Gods Grace, and
their own Salvation; the Apostle would have all Christians be able to give a 1
Pet 3.15
reason of their hope.

Thirdly, They that are received into, or continued in the Church as its
members, ought to be such as are sound in the faith, as hold fast the form Tit.
2.2.
of sound words, that they make not a rent or Schism in the Church, therefore
an Heretic says the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.13
after the first and second admonition reject.

Sect. VII. Containing an answer to the Seventh Question.
Quest. What are the duties of Church Members toward Jesus Christ and one
another?
Sol. THe Church of Jesus Christ is called his body; We are the body Mystical,
Christ is our Head, we are his Members: Now the duty and office of the Members
of this body Mystical both toward their Head, and one another; may be more
clearly seen into, if we consider the office of the Members in the Body
Natural, from whence the Church, which is called the body of Jesus Christ,
takes this sigurative denomination:

First, The Members of the body Natural have a very special care of the Head,
as of their principal and chief part, without which they cannot subsist:
therefore the Members will endanger themselves to secure their head: If a blow
be made at the head, the hand or arm will interpose it self, and receive the
blow or wound upon it self, rather than it should fall upon the head: So the
Members of the Church of Jesus Christ, ought to have a most special care of
him their head: Is Jesus Christ their head made at? Do any go about to wound
him, by striking at his Person, Natures, Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
Justification by his blood? O now it is time for all the Members to look about
them, to interpose betwixt their head and those that strike at him, to
vindicate his honor, excellency, person, nature, and the like, as before,
against all his Enemies and Assailants that would wound him in any of these.
Though you may be in never so much danger of worldly loss or damage by making
such a defense, yet care not where this blow lights, so it be warded off your
head.

It was a noble resolution of a French Martyr: After many persuasions of
worldly friends to recant his profession, he considering how dishonorable this
would be to Jesus Christ, how his head would be wounded and grieved by such a
revolt, puts off all that persuaded him to so shameful an action, with this
notable saying; Vivat Christus, pereat Servus, Let Christ live, let his Servant
perish.

Every member of Jesus Christ ought to be so minded, ready upon occasion at all
times to say, let me, that am a poor and unworthy member of so honorable and
excellent a head, let me be cut off, let me suffer in my name, estate,
relations, let me be imprisoned, wounded, bleed So my Lord Jesus Christ, my
head be not grieved, o he live and be glorified by my bonds, imprisonments,
scars, bleedings, reproaches, rebukes, let all these and a thousand more befall
me.

Secondly, The members of the body natural are guided and governed, and move
by the direction of the head and follow it; so the members of the body of Jesus
Christ, the Church, they ought to observe the guidance, motion and steps of
their head to follow his example, and tread in his paths, to be heavenly in
their discourse, holy in their conversations, as he has given them an example:
every member of this body ought to walk the way of the 1 John 2.6.
head.

Now as to the carriage and duty of Church members toward one another.

First, The members of the body natural they are united, and at peace among
themselves; one arm does not strike another, one foot does not spurn the
other; the eye does not say to the hand I have no need of thee and so of the
rest.

So the members of the body mystical, the Church, there ought to be a sweet
harmony betwixt all and every member; Envy, Malice, Hatred, spurning at, and
reviling one another -- these things ought not to be heard of in the Church of
Jesus Christ, because they are all members of his body.

Secondly the members of the body natural, if some be weak or wounded, all the
rest have a special care of the weak or wounded member; the whole arm will
bind up the broken one, the strong leg will ease that that's lame and feeble.

This mutual respect there ought to be among the members of the body of Christ
the Church; the whole ought to bind up the broken, the strong ought to bear
the infirmities of the weak, that they may not fail, nor be discouraged, nor
faint in the way and service of Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, The members of the body natural are ready to save and support one
another, in case of any apparent danger; as if one leg trip, or stumble, the
other will have to relieve and support it; so the members of the Church of
Jesus Christ, they ought to be watchful one over another, to be ready to save
and support one another in case of apparent danger, as if one member do stumble
or is ready to fall into errors of opinion or practice, the other should be
ready to catch at such a falling member, to relieve, and strengthen, and
support, to hold him up that he may recover, and not utterly fall into such
temptations.

Fourthly, The Members of the body Natural, are ready to supply according to
their power, to each particular member what it stands in need of: So the
Members of the body of Christ, the Church, these ought to be ready to the
utmost of their ability to supply and relieve the wants of other
Fellow Members, whose necessities crave it: As we are men we are commanded to
do good to all, this is humanity, as we are Members of the Church of Christ we
are enjoined especially to succor and relieve those that are of the same
household; This is Christianity.

In the Church of Jesus Christ, we should not every one look only at his own
proper interest, but also at the welfare one of another. If an Heathen could
say (and very truly that) Non solum nobis nati sumus, We are not only born for
our selves, but for one another also; I may surely then very confidently say,
that Non solum nobis renati sumus, that we are not borne again for our selves,
but for one another also, for the comfort and help and mutual edification of
all our fellow Members in Christ Jesus.

Lastly, The Members of the body natural do all sympathise with one another, if
a finger do but ache, all the Members condole it: So in the Church of Jesus
Christ all the Members should condole and sympathise with one aching or
afflicted Member; Christians, Members of the same body, should all sympathise
and have a share together both in one another crosses and comforts, Romans
15.16. Rejoice with those that rejoice, and weap with those that weep, be of
the same mind one toward another. The Lord Jesus Christ our head sympathises
with all and every of his poor members, Isa. 63.9. In all their afflictions he
is afflicted.

Sect. VIII.
FRom what has been said in relation to the Solution of the Fourth Question,
it appears that the first constitution, or planting, or gathering of the
Churches in England was right and orderly, according to the Scripture-rule, and
way of the Apostles, in that case; from whence I conclude with that Reverend
Divine Mr. Cotton, (as before) that the great work of the Ministers of Jesus
Christ in England now, is not to constitute and gather Churches anew, as if
there had never been any before: But rather to labor to reform and purge and
purify those Churches which were at first founded and built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and the Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Corner stone: I say to reform and purify those from that dross and tin,
those many corruptions which time and neglect of discipline has contracted.

Therefore I shall declare what I conceive as to the way that every particular
Church ought to take in this case; That is what is now to be done by every
particular Church in this land that desires to be a true reformed and refined
Church of Jesus Christ.

It must needs by all be granted, that we have, even all the particular
Churches and Congregations in this Land, Romans 3.13.
I say that we have all sinned and come short of the glory of God, that our
unfruitfulnesse under Ordinances, our neglect of discipline, our not
sanctifying the Sabbath, our careless and unchristianlike conversations might
justly have provoked God to have sent us a bill of divorce, to have sent his
Messengers to us with a Loammi and a Loruhamah, plead with your mother, plead,
for she is not my wife, Hos. 2.12.
neither am I her Husbend.

Therefore, seeing we stand charged before God with so many high and heinous
provocations, it is surely high time for every particular congregation in
England, that is called by the name of a Church, and desires truly to be such,
to meet God in the way with a peace offering in their hands, that the just
indignation of the Lord may be turned away from them, that they fall not by
their iniquities, and become as dung upon the earth.

We read of the * prodigal son after a long time of disobedience to his
Father, Luke ^1.17
that when he came to himself, he bethought him of this way to be reconciled
to his Father again, I will go, says he, unto my Father, and will say unto
him, Father I have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy
to be called thy son; Thus he humbling himself, and confessing his fault, his
father welcomes him gladly: This my son was dead and is alive, was lost and is
found.

Here is a pattern, not only for one prodigal son or daughter, but for a
prodigal assembly, or Congregation also to be reconciled to God their Father.

Let a particular Church or congregation of people, that by their turning of
grace into wontonness and abuse of spiritual mercies, have given God just
occasion to disown them: I say, when these come to themselves, to have a sight
and sense of their own state, and of the danger thereof, that is of their not
being reconciled to God, and cleaving more close to him, let them gathering
themselves together;

First, Humble themselves before God, freely confessing their many
provocations, the want of love, of zeal, of holy walking according to the
Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, their breach of Covenant with God,
which they made in Baptism, let them say, Father we have sinned against heaven
and before thee, and are not worthy the name of thy Church, or to be called thy
people; let them confess the sins of their forefathers, the generations before
them, let them humble themselves for these, and their own imitation of them;
Thus did the Church of the Jews in the days of Nehemiah, and Ezra, being
sensible of their Backslidings and Spiritual Fornications, and the danger they
were in by reason of these; They assembled themselves, they confessed their sins,
and the sins of their fathers, confessing God to be just in all that he brought
upon them, Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, Neh. c. 93 3
Ezekiel. 10.9.
for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.

Secondly, Let every particular Church or Congregation renew their Covenant
with God, even that Covenant they made with him in Baptism, to forsake the
world, the flesh, the Devil, professing their sorrow and repentance for the
breach of it, and solemnly engaging to observe it better for the time to come,
in keeping a more strict watch over themselves, and one another, in forsaking
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living more soberly, more godly, more
righteously in this present world, as becomes Christians and the professed
Members of the Church of Jesus Christ: Thus did also the Church of the Jews;
you heard before that in relation to their better reformation and turning to
God, they assembled themselves together, and humbled themselves before the
Lord, confessing their sins and the sins of their fathers, and to this they
added a solemn renewing of their * Covenant, Nehe. 9 38. 9 2.
or a new engaging to God to walk more orderly before him for the time to come.

Thirdly, Let them separate themselves from Achans; I mean, let every
particular Congregation of Gods people put out from amongst them all the openly
scandalous, ungodly, and profane, for these are botches and boiles of a
Church, the dead and withered branches, which ought to be cut off by the
sentence of excommunication, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. Rev. 18.4. Nehem. 9.38.

Sect IX.
HAving spoken as to the way of refining and reforming a Church, I shall now
use a word of Exhortation, in general to all the Congregations of this Land,
called by the name of Churches, especially to my own Congregation, to stir up,
and encourage you to so great, so good, so necessary, so acceptable a work to
God as this.

It is true, that by being a true reformed, refined Church of Jesus Christ, you
become engaged into many Duties, as you have heard * before: But for your
encouragement, consider also you become invested into many privileges, a few
of which I shall (by Gods help) give you an account of.

First, If you be truly Members of the Church of Jesus Christ, Privilege of a
true Church
then you stand to him in the relation of a Spouse, a Wife, -- then your Maker
is your Husband. -- I have espoused you to one Husband says the Apostle,
meaning Jesus Christ. The Church is called Cant. 4.8. the Love, the Spouse of
Jesus Christ.

Now by being the Spouse of Jesus Christ, by being married unto him by Grace,
and so forsaking all our Beloveds for his sake, as the world, sin with all the
lusts and pleasures of it; as a wife forsakes all Beloveds, as Father, Mother,
-- to follow her Husband; I say in so doing you become in vested into and
interested in all the privileges that belong to a Spouse or wife by the
marriage of her husband.

First, First privilege.
a Spouse or Wife has interest in all the relations, Friends, kindred of her
Husband, his friends are her friends, his kindred her kindred, his servants are
her servants, his possessions her possessions; then if you be espoused to Jesus
Christ, if he be your husband, if this mystical knot be ried betwixt him and
you, then all his is yours, all Christ's is yours, his kindred your kindred, his
father your father, his God your God, My Father and your Father, my God and
your God, Joh. 20.17. Now you need not stand afar off with the fearful
Publican, but come in boldly and say, my God my Father: Then his friends are
your friends, even all the Saints and members of Jesus Christ upon earth,
whether Paul's or Apollos, or Cephases, all are yours, all pray for you, all
rejoice over you, all his friends will be your friends. Then his servants
become your servants, his attendants become your attendants; his servants and
attendants are the glorious Angels, Mat. 4.11. and these think it no debasement
to wait upon the Spouse of their master: are they not called the Saints,
Angels, Mat. 18.10. Their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which
is in Heaven. Then his possession become your possession; Heaven, Gods right
hand, glory; fullness of joy, pleasure for evermore -- all these you have a
right unto by the right of your husband Jesus Christ.

Secondly, A second privilege.
It Is a great privilege not to need to fear in the most dangerous of times and
seasons; this is your privilege, if members of the Church of Christ, you need
never fear or be discouraged, be the times never so evil or dangerous; when
the times look lowering, threaten war, famine, pestilence -- and then what fear
and shaking is there among worldly men, men uninterested in Christ, whose help,
and hope is only in this life, how do they then run to and fro, ever at their
wits end, Their hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those
things that are coming on the earth. as our Lord Jesus speaks Luke 27.25, 26.
Thus shall it be now in these last times.

But if you be true members of the Church of Jesus Christ, you need not fear
nor be dismayed at any troubles or changes that hang over the world; though
there be signs in the sun, in the moon, in the stars, though there be in the
earth distress of nations with perplexity, though the sea and the waves roar,
yea though the earth be moved, and the hills leap one against another, Yet our
Lord Jesus says unto his Church and every member of it, Luke 12.33. Fear not
little flock, for it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom; Though your
father shake the kingdoms of the world, yet your kingdom shall remain
unshaken.

Therefore, David Heb. 12.28. The Lord is my salvation, whom shall I fear? the
Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid Ps. 27.1. though an
host should incamp against me, my heart shall not fear, though war arise
against me, in this will I be confident.

And again it is the language of the Church professing her confidence in God,
Ps. 46.2. We will not fear though the earth be removed, and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea, though the waters thereof
roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swellings thereof.
And again the Psalmist speaking of a member of Jesus Christ says, Ps. 112.7.
He shall not he afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord.
This is the privilege of a Saint, he needs fear no news, he needs not be
afraid of any tidings, though they tell him the earth removes, and the
mountains shake, yet he speaks not, for his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord.

Thirdly, A third privilege of a Saint.
If ye be true members of the Church of Jesus Christ youneed not fear the curse
of the law, you need not fear hell, death, judgment which is so terrible and
dreadful to the wicked: O what would not a wicked man give when he lies upon
his Deathbed, and ready to give up the ghost, terrified with approaching death
and judgment, I say what would not he give to be certain of his freedom from
condemnation, that he might die the death of the righteous, look death in the
facewith boldness, and comfort surely he would give a world, if he had it for
this privilege, which some have upon their deathbeds confessed.

All the true members of Jesus Christ (though they may want worldly comforts,
and privileges) yet they have this privilege (which is worth a world fo all
other) they need not fear death, or judgment, their peace is made, there is no
Condemnation, Romans 1.8. to them therefore they cry; O death where is thy sting,
O grave where is thy victory, 1 Cor. 4.44.

They look upon death with comfort, and upon the grave without fear, knowing
that their Redeemer lives, and that at the last day their bodies shall rise
again to live for ever with the Lord.

Fourthly, A fourth privilege.
If ye be true members of the Church of Jesus Christ, you need not, neither
shall ye fear the greatest shaking that ever shall be, I mean the shaking both
of heaven and earth, when Christ our Lord shall come to judgment, yet once
more, and I shake not the earth but the heaven also, Heb. 12.26.

O when this last and great shaking shall be (which to be near at hand all
these lesser shakings do portend) when the earth shall burn as stubble under
his feet, and the Elements melt with fervent heat, When there shall be a great
earthquake, and the Sun become black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon become
as blood, and the stars fall from heaven, and the heavens depart as a scrole
when it is rouled together, and every mountain and Island removed out of its
place, Rev. 6.12. 2 Pet. 3.10.

What would not then a wicked profane person, that has always before mocked
at the Saints of Jesus Christ, now give to be as one of them? O how will he
curse himself that ever he was such a mad man to slight preaching, and coming
into Church-society, and not to have considered that he must come to judgment!
how at this great and fearful day of the Lord, which shall be so terrible to
all the wicked of the world, Rev. 6.15. That the tribes of the earth shall
mourn, and the Kings of the great men, and the rich men, Rev. 6.15.
and the captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman and every freeman
shall hide themselves in dens and in the rocks of the mountains, and shall say
to the mountains and rocks fall on us and hide us from the face of him that
sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great day of his
wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand.

I say in this so terrible day of the Lord, 2 These. 1.8.10.
shall our Lord Jesus Christ hide all his Saints under the hollow of his arm
gather them under the covert of his wings, deliver them from the wrath that is
to come upon all the wicked and ungodly of the world.

Though this shall be a day of gloominess and thick darkness over all the land
of Egypt, yet the sun shall shine on Israel; Luke 21.28. When the ungodly shall
at this day hang down, the Saints shall lift up their heads, because their
redemption is at hand.

Fifthly, If a Saint of Jesus Christ, A fifth privilege.
what ever befalls thee, shall befall thee for thy good, whether smiles or
frowns, crosses or comforts, riches or poverty, sickness or health, all these
shall be advantage to thee -- Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for
good to them that love God. Thus highly priviledg'd are all the members and
Saints of Jesus Christ, therefore I conclude, Happy are the people whose God is
the Lord.

And now let me speak familiarly to you, are not all these as before high
privileges? are they not worth the traveling for? O consider they are brought
home unto you, they are offered you at your doors, and how can ye escape if ye
neglect so great salvation? Such high privileges profer'd you, on such
honorable and easy conditions? therefore slack not, come into the Church of
Jesus Christ, flock like Doves to these windows, and all these privileges
shall be yours. Now will any man for the pleasure of sin which is but for a
season, for the love of drunkenness, of uncleanness or the like -- out
himself of the Church? cause the members of Jesus Christ to reject him as an
Atheist, an Infidel? I tell this person what ere he be, that he will sadly rue
this one day, he will curse that fatal love to sin, those sensual delights and
pleasures that now cost him his salvation, he will then be ready for very grief,
and madness at himself, to put out those eyes that have looked upon a woman to
lust after her, to bite that tongue that has so often cur'st and sworn and
blasphemed the holy name of the Lord, scoft at holiness; and mocked at the
assemblings of his Saints; to cut that throat that has so often poured down
wine and strong drink till he has been inflamed by it, and heightened to the
acting of any impiety with a strangely brutish confidence: Thus I say he that
now refuses these great privileges profferd to him, and for the love of sin
shuts himself out of the Church of Christ, a day will come when he shall wish,
O that I had not sat in the chair of the scorner! O that I had joined my self
unto the Congregation of the godly, then shall sorrow and sighing take hold on
him, when he shall see those that have lived soberly and righteously and godly
in their generations owned by Jesus Christ, with a come ye blessed, and led by
him by the hand to sit down with Ahraham, Isack and Jacob, in the kingdom of
God, and he himself cast out.

Think of this betime, all ye that as yet forget God, and Hos. 14.2. take with
you words and turn unto the Lord, Hos. 14.2.
say unto him take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. But if ye will
not obey God, nor hearken to the voice of his Ministers that beseech you in
Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, be ye sure of this, that a day will come
when Jesus Christ shall appear 2 These. 1.9.
in flaming fire to take vengance on you, because ye have not obeyed the
Gospel, yea, and shall say, Bring hither those mine enemies that would not that
I should reign over them, Luke 19.27.
and slay them before me.

Sect. X.
AS there are many privileges that the Saints are interested in, so there are
many and sad penalties which shall be inflicted upon all those that do contemn
the gospel, and separate themselves from the Church and Communion of Saints
here upon earth.

First, 1. Penalty.
These shall be separate from the presence of the Lord, they shall never see
God; -- Mat. 25.41
depart from me ye workers of iniquity: Heb. 12.14.
-- without holiness no man shall see God.

Secondly, Heb. 10.29.
-- Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be thought worthy, who
has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has done despite to
the Spirit of grace? It shall be more tolerable at the day of Judgment for
Sodoxie and Commorrah, than for those that contemn the Gospel.

Thirdly, Mat. 10.15
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of the power. 2 These. 1.9. Mat. 25.41
-- Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

Fourthly, These shall be turned into 4. Ps. 9, 17. Mat. 25.30.
hell, a place of horror and darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth: And now let me ask you, what do you think of all these sad judgments and
penalties? are ye not afraid of them? are you not afraid to be separate from
the presenc^ (...) he Lord? are ye not afraid to b^ punished with an
everlasting punishment? are ye not afraid to be turned into hell, a den of smoke
and darkness; Ah! what heart of stone will not break at the consideration of
these things? Who can dwell with devouring fire? Isa. 33.14.
who can dwell with everlasting burnings? Jam. 2.19.


The Devils tremble at the thought of these, will men be worse than Devils?

Sect. XI.
THerefore Beloved, seeing we shall partake of such great privileges, if we
reform and turn to God, yea, seeing there is much more in store for us than
is as yet discoverable, for -- eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
it entered into the thought of man what God has prepared for them that love and
fear him. Seeing we shall escape such condemnation, and judgment thorough grace
in so reforming our selves as before, Heb. 12.1.
O let us then lay aside every weight, and the sin that does so easily beset
us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us. Josh. 24.15.
Let us of this Congregation imitate Joshua, let us choose with him, let us say
unto all the people, and congregations round about us, choose you whom ye will
serve, choose ye whether ye will reform or not reform your ways, choose you
whether you will own us or disown us, applaud us or hiss at us, countenance us
or contemn us, join with us or separate from us, strengthen us, or labor to
make our hands feeble, say we do well, or say we do ill, Speak friendly to us
or scoff at us, yet we are resolved, what we will do, that we will leave
Ashterch and Basaam. That we will say, what have we to do with Idols? And
reform and repent and engage our selves afresh to serve the Lord.

Which that we may do, let us put in practice the rules before laid down;

First, Assembling our selves together, let us solemnly and sorrowfully
confess and bewail our own sins, and the sins of our forefathers before God,
(...) 9.6.
let us say our God, we blush and are ashamed to lift up our faces unto thee,
for our iniquities are increased over our heads and our trespass is grown up
unto the very heavens: And having thus humbled our selves before God let us,

Secondly, Renew our covenant with God, our Covenant made so long since in
baptism, which all of us have broken, and backslided from: let us say, truth
Lord, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us; the devil, the world,
the lusts of the flesh have ruled over us; thou, O Lord, may justly charge us
to have forgotten thee, and to have dealt falsely with thee in thy covenant, and
therefore because of all this we make a sure Covenant with thee for the time to
come, that we will have no other Lord besides thee, that we will walk in a
more professed subjection to all thy holy ordinances, more carefully watching
over our selves and one another, that being cleansed from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.
we may perfect holiness in thy fear. And having thus renewed our covenant, and
engaged our selves unto the Lord to be his, let us endeavor,

Thirdly to purge out from amongst us every thing that defiles and is unclean,
for a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump; one Achan may distress a whole
Israel, one incestuous person, such as was in the Church at Corintb, one
adulterer, drunkard or the like in a Church, if countenanced and tolerated by
the same, and not reproved and dealt withal according to the rule of the
Gospel, may bring wrath and a judgment upon a whole congregation, for by reason
of such a tolleration, and neglect of Gospel-discipline, the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper may be profaned and abused, as it was in the Church of Corinth,
for which cause the Lord punished them with sickness and death for -- For this
Cause (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.30
namely for the profanation of the Lord's Supper many are sick and weak among
you, and many sleep.

Therefore it much concerns every particular Church to purge out the old
leaven, that they may be a new lump, and not to keep that feast with the old
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice, and wickedness, lest the Lord
stretch out his hand against them.

Section XII.
BUt methinks I hear some say,

To these I Answer:

First, If the way be strait, and strict, it is the more like to be Heaven way,
Mat. 7.14.
for -- strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leads to everlasting
life. If the way proposed were large and broad, you might well suspect it the
way to hell and death, Mat. 7.13.
for wide is that gate and broad is that way.

Secondly, Rejoice, O young men in your youth, Eccl. 9.11.
and let your hearts be merry -- Let the harp and the violl, and the tabret,
and the pipe, and wine be in your feasts. -- But for all this know you shall
come to judgment.

Thirdly, strait that Christ Jesus has said is easy, that the burden is heavy
that he has said is light: Cursed is he that discourageth the People of the
Lord, Mat. 11.30
and brings an evil report upon the land of Canaan; let their carcases rot in
the wilderness, and let them not see the salvation of the Lord.

Fourthly, his commandments are not grievous. These restrain not so, 1 John 5.3.
but that we have liberty sufficient, liberty to eat, to drink, to meet friends
with friends, and to rejoice together; yea, if we be such as are received into
favor with God, and justified by Jesus Christ, there is then cause enough for
us to rejoice and be cheerful; the Scriptures then give and encourage us to
this freedom -- Eccles. 9.1.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for
the Lord now accepts thy works. Thus may it be said to any one, that is truly
a member of Jesus Christ: The service of the Lord is not slavery but freedom.
But here is the madness and misery of men, they account nothing liberty, but
what is licencious; they account it not liberty to eat and to drink, unless they
may eat to gluttony, and drink to drunkenness; no liberty to be merry, unless
they may be profane, curse and swear.

But alas is this the liberty and freedom you so contend for? Indeed this is
hellish bondage, hellish slavery; Is this liberty to be overcome with wine and
strong drink? to have thy legs so bound thou can not go, thy tongue so tied
thou can not speak? Thy eyes so enflamed thou can not see? Thy reason and
understanding so captivated and lost, that it is hard to distinguish whether man
or beast? Is this liberty, that thou can not be merry, but thou must mock
God, scoff at holiness, reproach the Saints? O cursed liberty if this be it!
This is worse than that Egyptian bondage that made the Jews so sigh and cry
under it; and it would make thee also groan under it, were thou but in the
least sensible of thy own condition.

It Is the Lord Jesus Christ that by your coming in unto him would set you at
liberty, make you Freemen; It Is he that proclaims liberty to the captive, the
opening of the prison, Isa. 61.2.
to them which are bound --. Jesus Christ would have you Freemen, at liberty;
to be so much Lords over your selves and the creatures, as to eat and drink and
not to surfeit, or be drunken, as to be merry and yet not in sin; The Devil
keeps men in slavery, in slavery to their lusts, in slavery to their passions,
in slavery to their meat, drink, apparel; Oh! It is not liberty you contend
for, but bondage; not freedom but slavery; and you will see and understand
this, if ever your eyes be opened; for they are now blinded --. 2 Cor. 44.
In whom the God of this world has blinded the eyes of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them. I say if ever your eyes be opened, you will cry out
against your selves for being such willing slaves to Satan, when you might long
ago have been the Lords freemen, Then may I say unto you as St. Paul to the
enlightened Romans, What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? Romans 6.21.
And now to conclude all, I say, that, Blessed are all they that so hear the
good word of the Lord as to practice it. Blessed are they that hearing that
there is a Church of Jesus Christ upon earth, how constituted, and what it is,
do labor and desire to add and join themselves unto it, and become true
members of it. Blessed are they that hearing what government our Lord Jesus
Christ has ordained in and for his Church, think not his yoke uneasy, nor his
burden heavy; but cheerfully and willingly submit to all his holy, just, good
and reasonable Commandments. Blessed are they that hearing what manner of
Person those ought to be that are to be received into, or continued in the
Church of Jesus Christ as visible members thereof, do labor to purge and
purify themselves from all uncleanness, both of flesh and spirit, that they
may be thought worthy of admittance into such membership. Blessed are all they
that hearing the duty of the members of Jesus Christ toward him their head,
and one another as members, do set about and practice the same. Blessed are
they that hearing the necessity of a reformation, the acceptablenesse of it to
God; the profit and privileges that follow it, if practiced, The judgments and
penalties that are unavoidable, if this be slighted, do suddenly and seriously
set about this work; 1, By a full and free confession, and a sad and sorrowful
lamentation of their sins before God: 2, By a renewing of their Covenant with
God, entering into a new and sure engagement to serve him: 3, By endeavoring
to purge out from among them those obstinate and unruly persons that profane
holy things, and bring a contempt upon Gods Ordinances: If we that belong to
this Congregation be not rebellious and refractory, but obedient and willing to
set about this work; I dare affirm it, that when we assemble our selves
together, the presence of our Lord Jesus shall be with us, the blessing of the
most high shall be upon us; Then shall he crown our years with goodness, and his
paths drop fatness upon us; then instead of having that doleful message --
Hos. 2.2.
Ye are not my Wife, neither am I your Husband; we shall hear this joyful
sound from heaven, saying, Ammi, Ruhamah, ye are my people, ye have obtained
mercy,

Soli Dei gloria.

