A LETTER Sent from the RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lord Fairfax, To the Committee of
both Kingdoms: CONCERNING The great Victory, lately obtained (By Gods Blessing)
At SELBY in YORKSHIRE.

Wherein is more exactly set forth the manner of performing that gallant
service, then has been published in former Relations.

Together with a LIST of the Commanders that were there taken prisoners.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter, with the List, and the
Order for Thanksgiving on Tuesday next, be printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed for Edw. Husbands, April 19. 1644.

My LORDS:
ACcording to the Orders sent to me and my son from your Lordships, we have
now joined our Forces together; and though the Enemy held all the passes from
the Eastriding to the West, and by that means intercepted diverse of our
Letters, and thereby became acquainted with our appointments, and so
endeavored to prevent them; which forced me to decline Selby, and make a
passage over the River, ten miles below it in Marshland, where my Men and
Carriages being passed with some difficulty, on Sunday and Monday last, I
instantly marched with the whole Army consisting of Two thousand Horse and
Dragoons, and Two thousand Foot or thereabouts, to Ferry-bridge, and so to
Selby, where Colonel John Belasyse (commanding in chief in Yorkshire) then lay
with an Army of Fifteen hundred Horse, and Eighteen hundred Foot, as themselves
confess, though Reports made it much more numerous.

Upon Wednesday, our Forlorn-Hope of Horse beat in a partee of the Enemies
Horse, and followed them into the Town, taking diverse of them prisoners, and
the day being far spent, I quartered the Army within a mile of Selby that
night, and drew them out again early the next morning, and then with the Foot
in three divisions, one led up by my self, a second by Sir John Meldrum, and a
third by Lieutenant Colonel Needham, fell upon the Town, to storm it in three
places altogether, where the Enemy received us with much courage, and made
strong resistance for two hours or thereabouts; but in conclusion, my own Foot
Regiment forced a passage by the River side, and my son with his Regiment of
Horse rushed into the Town, where he was incountred by Colonel Belasyse, and
the Enemies Horse; but they being beaten back, and Master Belasyse himself
wounded, and taken prisoner, and our Foot entered on all sides the Town, the
Enemy was wholly routed, and as many as could saved themselves by flight, some
toward Cawood, some toward Pontefract, and the rest toward York, over the
River by a Bridge of Boats laid by themselves; We pursued them every way, and
took in the Town and chase, the Prisoners, Ordnance, Arms, Ammunitions, and
Colors mentioned in the List enclosed.

Of my own Men, I lost in the fight diverse gallant Commanders and Soldiers,
and very many sore wounded; And indeed, all my Army, both Commanders and common
Soldiers, behaved themselves with as much courage as ever I observed in Men.

All which we must acknowledge to God alone, who both infuseth courage, and
gives Victory where he pleases: I shall now, I hope, be able to raise more
Forces in the country, and improve this Victory that God has bestowed on us,
to the best advantage. This being all for the present, until further occasion,
I rest

Your Lordships Most affectionate and humble Servant, Fer: Fairfax.
Selby, 12 April, 1644.
A List of the Officers taken Prisoners, the 11. of April, 1644.
Colonel John Belasyse. Colonel Sir John Ramsden. Sir Thomas Str^ckland.
Lieut. Colonel T^ndall. Lieut. Colonel Forbes. Major Heskit.
Commanders of Horse. Major Wentworth. Major Sadlington. Major Rogers. Captain
Horsfeild. Captain Beversham. Captain Washington. Captain Grimston. Captain
Cholmley.

Captains of Foot. Captain Scudamore. Captain Williamson. Captain Morrit.
Captain Turner. Captain Skeld^n. Captain Brigs. Captain Waterhouse. Captain
Kirk. Captain Hardcastle. Captain Lister. Captain Nevill. Captain Conyers.
Captain Lieut. Salvin. Captain Lieut. Conyers.

Lieutenants of Horse. Lieutenant Rickaby. Lieutenant Bishop. Lieutenant
Keighley. Lieutenant Gra^.

Lieutenants of Foot. Lieutenant Wright. Lieutenant Grin. Lieutenant Ridmayne.
Lieutenant V^ncent. Lieutenant Pearson. Lieutenant Fit^^ames. Lieutenant Moore.
Lieutenant Waynman. Lieutenant Ev^n^. Lieutenant No^ton. Lieutenant Duffe^ld.
Lieutenant Turner. Lieutenant Croc. Lieutenant Fowler. Lieutenant Geeres.
Lieutenant Carter. Lieutenant Jackson. Lieutenant Sk^pwith. Lieutenant Duckit.
Lieutenant Harper. Cornet Dickers. Cornet Spuryer. Cornet Smith. Cornet
Brabiner. Cornet Hutton. Cornet Thompson. Ensign Hewith. Ensign Cowling
Ensign Middleton. Ensign Leyton. Ensign Ram^^ Ensign Todd. Ensign Jack^^
Ensign Conyers. Ensign North. Ensign Leighton. Ensign Hapletine.
Quartermaster Wadmouth. Quartermaster Jackson. Quartermaster Dunkin.
Quartermaster Hall. Quartermaster Thomlinson. Quartermaster Spencer.
Quartermaster Walton. Quartermaster Burton. Quartermaster Slater.

Elias Walker, Master of the Magazine. Richard Ludlow Provost Marshall; And
diverse Sergeants, Trumpets, Corporalls, Drums, and other Officers.

Diverse slain, and lies strewed in the way to York for four miles together;
others that fled to Pontefract, were pursued as far as Ferry-Bridge.

Four Brass pieces of Ordnance.

Seven Barrels of Powder. Sixteen Bundles of Match.

Two thousand Arms or above.

Many Horse and Foot Colors taken, but as yet sixteen or seventeen come in.
And Sixteen hundred common Soldiers. Above Five hundred Horse. The Pinnace
taken at Gainsbrough; All their Bag and Baggage, and many Ships and Boats upon
the River.

Die Mercurii, 17 April, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Ministers in the several Churches and Chapels within the Line of
Communication, and Parishes within the Bills of Mortallity, do give notice to
their Parishioners, of the great Success it has pleased God to give the
Parliaments Forces in Yorkshire and Pembrokeshire; And to acquaint them that
the Houses have appointed, and set a part Tuesday next, for a
Publique-Thanksgiving, to be given to Almighty GOD for his great Blessings and
Successes.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl D. Com.

FINIS.

