NAPS UPON PARNASSUS.

A sleepy Muse nipt and pincht, though not awakened Such Voluntary and Jovial
Copies of Verses, as were lately received from some of the WITS of the
Universities, in a Frolic, dedicated to Gondibert's Mistress by Captain Jones
and others.

Whereunto is added for Demonstration of the Authors prosaick Excellency's, his
Epistle to one of the Universities, with the Answer; together with two
Satirical Characters of his Own, of a Temporizer, and an Antiquary, with
Marginal Notes by a Friend to the Reader.

Vide Jones his Legend, Drink Sack and Gunpowder, and so fall to it.

(...), Hom. Iliad. a.

Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus.

London, Printed by express Order from the WITS, for N. Brook, at the Angel in
Cornhill, 1658.

An Advertisement to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THough I willingly confess, that a Title Page without the Authors Name
prefixed in Capital Letters, shows like a Man in the Pillory without a Paper
(to specify his Crime) on his Forehead: nevertheless, thou art desired not to
take is amiss, that these present Poems are defective in that particular; for
there are diverse, and sundry motives, which induced this imperfection. As (1.)
their Modesty; which commands them to stand Bare-headed (that is, without the
Authors Name) in respect, and reverence to every Reader; although they cannot
be uncovered (as I question not you will quickly find.) (2.) The Authors
Ingenuity prompted Him to this Stratagem of concealing his Name, to the end,
that one and the same gross Obscurity. should equally triumph over his Name, as
Poems: And now Reader, if neither of these two Reasons will satisfy thee, know
in the third place, that I indeed do not know, neither can learn his Name. I
found these Poems in a dark, blind Alehouse, where the Author had with a cup
too much, obnubulated his Muse, and so forgot, and left them behind. To speak
truly, being unwilling to rob the world of so much Ingenuity, (I say) like the
desperate St. George, redeemed these Ethiopian Virgin-Poems, out of the Jaws of
that fell Dragon, (the furious gaping Oven) which, (even when I had first
bestridden the^ threshold) yawn'd for them. Much ado I had to recover Them out
of the good Woman's hands, who left the bottoms of her Pies (that baking) in
very great jeopardy, for want of them: yet at last I did get them, as many as
you see there are of them. I am apt to believe there were more once, but the
injury of Fate has obliterated the rest. As many as could be found, have thou
here (Reader) carefully collected, by the sedulity and expenses of

Thy loving Friend Adoniram Banstittle. alias Tinderbox.
Dated May 30. 1658. from the Apollo in Fleetstreet.
Naps upon Parnassus.
Upon the Infernal Shades of the Authors Poems: or, The hooded Hawk.
ROom, room now for a lusty Poet,
That writes as high as any I knew yet,
What Is Homer but a spewing Dog,
Who writes a fight 'twixt Mouse and Frog?
Of stout Achilles, and of Hector,
Which of them should be the Victor?
And yet forsooth This Fellow must
(With all his Iliads too) be thrust
Into a Nutshel. A great knack!
Our Poet, and's Books, into a Sack
Can hardly crowded be, and yet
If you will look on's Sense and Wit,
It Is easy, and I Will make no bones
To put them in two Cherry-stones.
(1)
Then come along Boys,
Valiant, and strong Boys,
For here is a Poet I tell ye
That Naps on Parnassus
And (o Heavens bless us)
Takes Deep-sleeps too out of Helicon.
(2)
Avaunt then poor Virgil,
Thou never drank'st a pure Gill
Of Sack, to refine thy sconce:
Thou stol'st all from Homer,
And rod'st on a low Mare,
Instead of Pegasus, for th'nonce.
3.
Let Martial be hanged,
For I Will swear I Will be banged,
If he makes me ought else but sleepy;
He Is only at last
For a brideling cast,
And his Wit lies at the end of his Epigrams.
4.
Then for Ovid,
Why? was not his Love hid
In's Book of Toys, called Amorum:
Indeed there he wrote madly,
But in's Tristium sadly;
Our Poet's the Apollo virorum.
5.
And then Flaccus Horace,
He was but a sowr-ass,
And good for nothing but Lyricks:
There Is but One to be found
In all English ground
Writes as well; who is hight Robert Herick.
6.
Our Author's much better,
In every letter
Then Robin, and Horace Flaccus:
He is called Samuel,
Who ends well, and began well;
And if we are not glad He can make us.
Come forth then great Poetique Imp,
Make not the Muses all to pimp,
Whilst thou with one of them do lie,
Making her 'crease and multiply,
Hoping that they too shall come after,
Thou make the rest their teeth to water.
And hope the like sport that their Sister
Enjoyed by thee, when e'rst thou kissed her.
You Are right my friend, and I Have been told,
Thou always had a Muse in hold:
And like Cock Hen thou would her tread,
Our Authors fancy was always couchant, for he made all his Verses in Bed.
Making thy Verses still in Bed.
No wonder thou so 'obscure do write,
Thou form'dst thy Verses all in the Night.
Thou were up with the Lamb, and down with the Lark,
And only love Dealing in the Dark.
I love thee for it. -- Whip Sir Davy.
I now have done. -- I marry have I.
Incerti Authoris.
Upon the Incomparable, and Inimitable Author, and his obscure Poems.
I Am not of the race of Poets, nor e're made
A Verse, without the help of Pump, or Spade.
And yet (so sweet is Fame! and to be big
Of Glory!) that rather then dye; I Will dig,
And labor for a Verse, (not You to praise,
Too great a task!) But mine own name to raise:
That my foul Beast may be kept in your Ark,
My Joan live with your Lady in the Dark.
Give me a prospect where a towering Hill,
Soar's higher then ever did the Eagles Quill;
On whose bald-pate still undisturbed sit
Old Characters, that Adam's Grandsire writ;
So high, so wondrous high, that the light of the Sun
N'ere top's it, till the Day is near half done:
And then a Cave so deep, that who so dives
To the' bottom, e're he reach it spend nine lives.
Dark as Cimmerian Cells; horrid with Rocks,
Wreathed into one another like Els's-locks:
A lovely sight which more delight contains,
Then the confused of the Plains:
All here are at a Gaze; none pass it by
Regardless; it bids stand to every eye.
Here men go softly, who (as if they would fain
Be rid on it) ride a gallop over the Plain.
Such is thy Book! -- In it we plainly see
All the Dimensions of Poetry.
Prometheus-like, sometimes thou do aspire,
And warm'st thy Mule; at the Celestial Fire;
And then thou usest (which let none despise)
Kitchen Similitudes on thy Mother's See the Author on his Mother's eyes
Eyes.
I know some Critics say you are Hard enough,
But it is a sign of Lasting to be tough.
I read a Verse of thine, then make an halt,
(For though I taste it not, I Am sure there is Salt:)
And study for the meaning; and am vexed;
I find; cry (...): and read the next.
It is (let none for Recreation look)
A very study t'understand thy Book.
Plainness is Russick, Thou art clear from that,
Who says a Poets Plain, says he is Flat.
W. P. A. M. W. C. Oxon.

To his Ingenuous Friend, the unknown Author of the following Poems.
COme forth at last, and enter on the stage,
Great Soul of Poesy, that this purblind Age,
May have the film peeled off their Eyes, and see
How Thou do riot in obscurity:
In Thy abyss they will dive, and grope to find,
How Thy strong Wit, and Sense is so combined;
And when they have grovell'd a long time in vain,
Will say (because they are blind) Thou art not Plain.
Thus ignorant men will snarle at Thee; and why?
Because they are clogged with earth, and cannot soar high;
Their Eyes are lined with dimness, cannot behold,
How Thou in pretty turnings do infold
Thy self and Verse: How Thou do fancy screw
Into each Line, and make even The Author has borrowed several old Fancies
out of Cleveland and others
Old seem new;
Wracking each word, and syllable for sense,
And tortring both to make an Eloquence.
Thus the un-usefull Grape, when crushed and pressed,
Does lavish out a Liquor of the best:
And Camomil, until it bruised be
Blows not out any sprightful fragrancy:
How many strokes does the rough marble bear,
Before it can be polisht trim and fair?
What would men say if Poets only should
Be tied to others's sense of words? not mould
A meaning of their own; they must ascend
Above the vulgar reach; their fancies blend
Into a wonder; make Confusion seem
As if it were distinct: their Brains must teem
With darkest issues, lest with too much light,
They dazzle the poor Common people's sight.
We most admire the Sun when he is bereaved
Of luster, wrapped in an Eclipse: Deceived
Of all his Beams: when he recruits again
His former Rays; we say, He Is then too plain.
Ovid in his best Poem, let us his Muse
Begin first with a Chaos, most confuse.
The Gods when they descended from the Skies,
With Bodies vell'd their shining Deities.
The thundering voice of heaven (which speaks so loud)
Is both begot, and speaks too in a cloud.
The clear still Streams discover to the eye,
What filth and dirt do in the Bottom lie;
When the muddy boistrous Sea keeps from our view
More Treasuries then mortals ever knew.
Homer the Prince of Poets was Dark 'cause blind,
Our Author's like him, yet is more calcined.
We praise Propertius. Juvenal, Tibullus,
Horatius, Flaccus, Lucan, and Catullus,
Above all other petty Ballad-mongers,
Who are so lean, they will scarce suffice our hungers:
But I Will forbear: who so shall read thy Book,
Will think a Sybil penned it, and will look
For some t'interpret it: thus then thou wilt puzzle
Thy Readers, 'cause thy Fancies thou do it muzzle.
I Will say but this: (Others have praised thee more, and better)
Thou writ'st in Characters, though with a common Letter.
S. T. A. M. W. C. Oxon.

To the Abstruse Author on his Night-work Poems.
1
TO praise Thy Wit I cannot hope,
It is so dark, I never shall grope
It out, but by Ariadne's Rope.
2.
That I am covetous don't think,
For to illuminate Thy Ink
I Will six pence give to Boy with link
3.
In London sure thou could not escape,
On Ears, and Purse he would ma^e a rape,
Who in Lord Majors name, does gape
4
And cry, Your Lanthorn, and your Light.
Thy Verses make it more then night,
Like Ghosts Thy Fancies us afright.
5.
As when rich Wines within a Cellar's Simile.

Dark vaulted womb are welcome dwellers,
Men stagger, though they are but smellers:
6.
Thy subtle Wit so cheats our eyes,
None can discover where it lies,
And yet our Brains it does surprise.
7.
Let us have leave ( Heroic Bard)
To ask Thee why Thou writ'st so hard?
None wear their Clothes all welt and guard.
8.
Some one conceit costs us a week,
The easiest asks of Days a Gleek:
Thou play'st with us at Hide and Seek.
9.
We are your friends, you cannot do less
But send them quickly to the Press,
Their meaning then they will confess.
10.
And then (if Cooks do not bespeak 'um)
When I am big with Acertain drug, differing in color from Album Graecum.
Flavum Graecum,
Thy Book shall be my Vade Mecum.
The two first letters of the two last words, are the Christen and the Surname
of him that made those Verses.
V. M.

On Mr. Somebody's Poetical Naps upon Parnassus.
THe Indians with Mundungo fumigate
Their brains, and all their senses opiate,
To comprehend their Gods: so must I make
My self dead drunk with Helicon, and take
A Nap upon Parnassus, to admit
Thy Muses, and dark Oracles of wit;
For thy obscure, dark foggy, misty strains
Cannot be received but in as cloudy brains.
For they who such sublimities dispense,
Must find out Souls free from the miste of sense,
And cataract of reason, which must be
(Like Him who put out's eyes that He might see.)
As dark as is Thy Book: for why in the Night,
Owls (which are blind by Day) have quickest sight.
Old Homer, Virgil, Lucan, and Catullus,
Pass for good Poet, as the Ancients tell us;
So Ovid, Claudian, Juvenal, and Martial,
Yet they compared with Thee'r not worth a fart all.
For they had One, and that no venial crime,
That they were understood by th'men o'th'time:
And what is more mean than That, which fault, if any,
Makes Mat. Parker the Balladmaker, Laureat of London.
Parker's Poems vend but for a Penny.
And Katharine Stubbs for three pence, when the women
Will Not grudge to pay a Crown for Jacob Behmen.
It Is vulgar to be clear. It Is but a Quibble
To write a verse that is intelligible.
But Thy judicious Muse shun's this Offense,
And scorns the pedantry of writing Sense.
Thine are true Heights, for Thine invention
Confounds the Readers reason, and Thine own,
Thou (like to Him that shows the famous Sight
Of Bell and the Dragon) e're thou show make night.
The Heavens, by men that they so long have been,
Adored, ow't to the Clouds that are between:
So it is Thy Soot, and Smoke, makes us admire
The internal Flame, of thy Poetic Fire.
As Nature's Secret parts do not excite
So much when all go naked; so Thy wit,
If naked, had not tempted half so hotly,
As now in Peticoat and wastecoat Motly.
Through things transparent we dispatch our sight,
But gaze on those which terminate our light:
And while we view dark Objects, we never care
To take account of the perspicuous Air:
So had Thy Poetry transparent been,
We had in it no sense, no fancy seen;
But now it is so obscure, that twon't transmit
Our Rays, we may suspect both Sense and Wit.
G. C. M. A. SOAC. Oxon.

Sonetto in Lode del Autore. Or in plain English, A Jews Letter in Ink to
commend our Negro.
DIro del Bianco pie che l'herb 'inflora?
O Della Bianca man che l'arboscelli
Impera, inostra e'ndora?
O A Scotch title for the Devil.
Del bell vis' humano, humile e piano?
O Delle Dolc' Angeliche Parole?
Questi l'alba ne rec' e quell'il sole;
Quelle l'eterno ciel, co'centi Tuoi;
Ma Quant' al Tuo Tacer, che non m'annoi.
Alexandro Amidei Fiorentino.

Drollery.
Upon the most Illustrious, (though most Obscure, Dark, Black, Misty, Cloudy
Poems of the Author: Or the Aquila in Nubibus.
EVery A Maxim.
thing would live, Cuckows, and Owls,
Would fly abroad, as well as other Fowls;
And sometimes whoop and screetch, and tear their throats,
With their dire voice, and think them Angels notes.
A minore ad majus.
Rise then, take wing ( fledged Poet) let men know
If these Birds show their heads, much more may Thou.
I cannot praise Thy Works not worth a fart.
What shall I speak, what shall I say Thou art?
Such Metaphysics Thou writ'st as transcends
Our low, if not thine own Intelligence.
Yet, as they say the greater Prophets, when
Fully wrapped up with Revelations, then
Spoke things they understood not, and yet are
Canonical: Thou art still good, and rare.
Give me a Poet wrapped in a thick Cloud,
Thunder without Lightning, one whose dark, loud
Voice disdains Flashes, and 's enough to startle
Our proudest Wits, from Head even to the Well rhym'd Tutor, Brains and Stairs!
Ankle:
Thou imitat'st the World, whose first (we read)
Was a spiss Chaos, and untempered.(...)
Thou whor'st Obscurity like Ixion
Cling'st to a Cloud, and gender'st thereupon.
A Race of Centaures, such hard-headed Monsters,
As neither mine, nor thy brain but misconsters.
A Scholars Gown should be Dark and Divines
Put on black Caps; even so do all Thy Rimes.
Black Bags help Beauty, naked things show Wist.
And Phoebus shows twice bigger through a Mist.
The Sun we never gaze so much upon,
As when a black Eclipse is thrown thereon.
Keep then thy Sense. The Earth does only show
Her Common Stones, Where note she conceals her. precious stones, and the more
modest she.
which many times do throw
Us down: she shows us trifling grass, that is brave,
The twinkling of an eye; then finds a grave:
She hides her treasure, and will sooner feel
Her Bowels ripe, then show her Gold and Steel.
The deepest Streams are dark, and glide along
With a smooth, gentle motion; while the throng
Of shallow waters brooking no such stay,
Disclose their bottoms, murmuring away.
In brief Thou art our Oracle, dark, and much
Reserved, but do not cease, That should be Such.
Let others call for Sunshine, and Daylight,
Our Rest is from Thy Shadow, and Thy Night.
But I have done: only I Will tell the Readers,
One line of Thine has more then all thy Leaders,
Ovid, and Virgil, Homer, and the rest,
Who spoke but seldom Wit, and good at best:
Whose thrift of Brains was such, they needs must know
What, and to whom, how much, nay when, and how*
Thy Lines are liberal, they have a Mine
Of Lofty, because high, and high because no body can reach them
lofty Metaphors, else they are not Thine.
Thy Muse condense's Wit, which others beat,
And rarifie out into many a sheet.
Thine's Gold in the Ore, others but in a Leaf,
In theirs we Glean, from Thee each plucks a Sheaf.
Thou art no Ape of others: never riflest
Old threadbare Poets: for thou never triflest.
Homer's spew makes Thee drunk: (...)
Empties Thy Maw more then e're did Good Friday.
Thou scorn'st to imitate, or read; such helps
May serve for squemish Brains, and stupid Whelps,
Whose theeving hands (yet not Mercuriall) pick
Here a line, and there a word; some one stick
Or two, out of a Neighbors Hedge, and then
Faggot them for next town, and are fine men.
But it is not so with Thee: O mighty Stock!
Thy Head hews all out of its own great Block,
Vnletter'd Scholar! that weav'st An old Bodge.
all, and some
From Thy own fruitful Bowels, and vast womb.
Poets are born so, not made: and Thou art
Of Poets a Natural, and not by Art.
G. I. M. A. W. C. Oxon.

Carmen Proverbiale Exclamatorium in laudem Authoris. Pars prior
O Decus Anglorum! Vates famous tuorum,
Cujus pars nona facit Oxen-ford Helecona.
Saepe ego Te vidi, fecisti me quoque ride-
re, cum dixisti certe nil, sed tacuisti:
At loqueris jam nunc, and rideo plus ego quam tunc.
Cum videam Librum (qui non sensit modo cribrum)
Et Carmen nigrum, sed and ingenium neque pigrum;
Non quod ego sperno Librum quem abs lumine cerno,
(Estque Liber clarus) est Author, and undique rarus)
Haec ratio non est quia rideo, my meaning's No false position in English good
Sir!
honest.
Carminis o Fulchrum! spernit tua Musa sepulchrum!
Naviget Aethiopas inter Tuus (o Bone) linter,
Quisque ibi amat For colorem, by a piece of an Aphaeresis, and a piece of
Syncope
c'lorem libri, and monstrabit amorem.
Tu bonus, and magnus, and candidus, ut niger agnus
Est pedibus fama tua fortior omni Dama!
O digne! O docte! O nigrior ipsa nocte!
Omnibus o Pastime! O vates!
Sic exclamavit. T. F. nuper N. C. Oxon. Soc.

The second Part in the Authors Language,
Being a Verse Panegyric in Praise of the Author's transcendently delicious,
Poetical dainties, enclosed in the You may read it* Wodden*
Wicker-Basket of his Critique Poems.
SIR.
IN that small inch of time I stole, to look
On th'abstruse Depths of Your Mysterious Book;
Heavens bless mine eyesight! what strains did I see?
What Steropegeretick Poetry!
What Hieroglyphick words? what Riddles? all
In Letters more then Cabalisticall.
Perhaps our fingers may Your Verses scan,
But all our Noddles understand them can
No more, then read that Dung-fork't Pot-hook's Hand,
Which in Queens College Library does stand.
The cutting Hanger of your Wit I cannot see,
For that same Scabberd that conceals yours Fancy*
Thus a black velvet Casket hides a Jewel,
And a dark Wood-house wholesome winter fuel;
Thus John Tredeskin starves our greedy eyes,
By boxing up his new found Rarities.
Thus were Philosophers content to be
Renowned, and famous in Obscurity.
We fear Actaeons horns dare not look on,
When you do But, when he does so, he verifies the Proverb, viz. Aethopem lavat.
scowr your skin in Helicon.
We cannot ( Lynceus-like) see through the wall
Of your strong mortred Poems, nor can all
The small shot of our Brains make one hole in
The Bulwark of your Book, that Fort to win.
Open your meanings Door: o do not lock it!
Undo the Buttons of your smaller Pocket;
And charitably spend those Angels there;
Let them enrich, and actuate our Sphere:
Take off our Bongraces, and shine upon us,
Though your resplendent Beams should chance to
O were your verses stolen, that so we might ( tan us.)
Hope in good time to see them come to light!
But felt I not a strange Poetic heat
Glowing therein (which reading makes me sweat)
Vulcan should take 'um, and I Would not exempt 'um,
Because they be things. -- Quibus lumen ademptum.
I thought to have commended something there,
But all exceeds my commendations far:
I hope some Wit, when he your honor hears,
Will praise your Mothers Eyes Turpentine tears:
For my part, I can but stand still, and stare,
And cry O wondrous! strange! profound! and rare!
Vast wits must fathom you, better then thus;
You merit more then all they: -- As for us,
The Beetles of our Rhymes shall drive full fast in
The wedges of your worth to everlastin. [ g] Aufertur in fine, per Apocopen

T F. lately F. N. C. Oxon.

A Son amice, l' Autheur de cette Liver sur son Obscurity.
N'Import (grand Poet)
Si tes verse sont obscures;
C'est estre imperfecte,
Si serroient toutes pures.
L' estime cest a chooses
Qui sont pluis difficiles;
L' espine fait les roses
Non paroistre viles.
Upon the same.
WHat means thy Pegasus to take this flight?
Thy Book is forth, but when will it come to light
Are the nine Girls recluse? and art thou he
Wilt turn Parnassus to a Nunnery?
'Twas always Mountainous; but, by what spell
Have thou now made it inaccessible?
Fountains are clear; but if Thou thus go on,
Thou Wilt make a Puddle of thy Helicon.
Yet Darkness is thy virtue; were thy sense
But legible to our intelligence;
We might profane thy fancy, or despise;
Thus Persians hide their King from vulgar eyes,
They that entail a game at Chess upon
Their families to time's succession,
Making each Pawn outlive an Army; see
The Bishops move but once a Jubilee;
And Check never comes without a Comet, they
Might take thy Book to task instead of play.
Were Archimedes living; ten to one,
He Would make each Verse a Proposition;
And pore as long upon it; but I dare say
Without all hopes of crying (...)
Might none be Judges of thy Wit, but such
As understand it, it will abide the touch.
I me sure we know it not: then who can blame us
To bring Thee in, only our A Lawterm a Jury brings in, when it cannot
determine of a Case.
Ignoramus.
H. L. W. C. C.

Upon the Gurmundizing Quagmires, and most Adiaphanous Bogs, of the Author's
obnubilated Roundelayes.
THou that dwarft'st mountains into molehill sense
With Ell-broad Marrow-bones of Eloquence;
Causing thy Eel-skin'd Glasses seem to be
But North Wind Blasts of Mahomet's Nunnery.
Breath forth great Argos mast into my hand,
That I may bob for Whales upon dry land?
Send down the Mesenterick Huckle-bone
Of Crest-faln Pancakes which do cry and groan,
That ovall millstones are like tarbax't Stars,
Spher'd so on purpose by Saturn, and eke Mars.
It Is true indeed Saturn did leave his Miter,
To be Sow-gelded by 's God-son Jupiter.
What then? should Dunsmore's Bulls fall from the sky?
And Cart-ropes into Princes secrets pry?
No sure: we mortals then may fall asleep
On feathered Dripping-pans, playing Bo-peep.
But that is a work only befits the Gods,
To Weathercock their Eyes with fishing-rods.
Sail then (great Poet!) thither, where the mode is
To wear Black-pudding- Points, at the Antipodes:
Rush forth into that Stage; and then it may be
Thou Wilt Crakanthorp thy Muse with dull Farnaby.
Open our eyes with marble pick-tooths, then,
To see thy bedridden Beetles turn to Men:
Grind out thy Verses into mealy-mouthed Rhimes,
With Camomil'd Horse-plum-trees of the times.
Break out thy Muse's teeth; but be no caitiff,
To nickname Lobsters with the case Ablative:
Then, we shall see great Whiting mops in shrouds,
And Planets bounce Canundrums in the Clouds:
Then shall we see thee pass the Gallow Tyburn,
Creeping on Carret-tops, and bawl out, I burn,
I burn (great Jove) -- with that, he staid his pace,
And heard a Lady call out thus, with grace;
Dame Gargamel bids hye you home to supper,
For great In English, a Grandvifier, a grand Statesman in Turkey.
Grangowsier's Mule has broke his crupper.
T. C. of Q. K. C.

To his ingenuous Friend, the Author, on his imcomparable Poems. Carmen
Jocoserium.
Were not my friend, the world should know
How I could praise thy Works [I trow]
Sounding hence to Constantinople,
Poetique strains, I Will wage a or 6s. 8d.
Noble;
But since it is so, (Oh! Oh, the pity!)
I must laud thee in Obscurity;
Making thy Verses this the Better,
Because like thine in Word, and Letter.
Nor are they therefore to be blamed,
They will be lighter if enflamed:
Never till then, expect a Riddle
To be explained with An English saw inver'st.
faddle fiddle.
Such Lines as these were none before,
Since the cruel fight of Sir Eglamore.
And in a word; that I may end all,
Better were never made by A famous Scoth Poet I think he was.
Kendall.
Once again.
IF I may guess at Poets in our Land,
Thou beat'st them all above, and under hand;
Nay under leg too, for thy feet outrun 'um,
As far as is from Oxford unto Lon'on:
Nay, give them half in half, thou creepest faster
Then Scottish Posts, that in the greatest haste are;
Nor in thy Speed alone do lie thy Glories,
But thou 'rt so sweet, that done, thou tastest Morish.
Who e're (I wiss) did see one, like thee, handy?
And Rhymes deliciouser then Sugar candy?
To thee compared, our English Poets all stop,
And vail their Bonnets, even Shakespeare's It should have been Falstaff, if the
rhyme had permitted it.
Falstop.
Chaucer the first of all was'nt worth a farthing,
Lidgate, and Huntingdon, with Gaffer Harding.
Nonsense the Faery Queen, and Michael Drayton,
Like Babel's Balm; or Rhymes of Edward Paiton,
Waller, and Turlingham, and brave George Sandys,
Beaumont, and Fletcher, Done, Jeremy Candish,
Herbert, and Cleeveland, and all the train noble
Are Saints-bells unto thee, and thou great Bow-bell.
Ben Johnson it is true showed us how he could hit
Each humor now; and then be out of it;
Nor could he always keep his Muse a gallop,
With curb, or whip, but sometimes had but small (hope.)
Cowly alack's too plain; his Davideis,
But fit for boys to read, like Virgil's Enaeis;
And for his Mistress, and his other Poems;
Anacreontique, and Pindarique Theams,
They have no Method in 'um, and are not worth
One pin to kindle fires, and set on hot broth;
None like to Thee, but the Writer of URANIA,
Or Friar John the Poet of Normannia;
With Pagan Fisher, who e'rst made a speech,
To show that he could versifie, and preach;
And put it in the News-books too, for all
To know, how he was jeered in Christs-Church Hall.
Thou be a brave Boy, trust me if thou be'nt,
The best that ever eat salt fish in Lent;
Which makes thy Verses too to be so witty,
Because Thou seasonest so well each Ditty.
S. W. W. C. C. Oxon.

An Autoschediastique
To the Ingenuous Author, on his Poems so Miscellaneous.
CAll not these Why? who calls 'um so but you?
Miscellaneous Poems; why?
What shall we call them then? a Rhapsody.
So our Grammarians Homer's Iliads name;
And you your self do verify the same;
The difference only stands in this, that He
A Grecian: Poet, You an English be.
We style Him Father: but when that is done,
We must acknowledge you to be his Son:
Him Plato (notwithstanding all His Wit)
Into his Commonwealth would not admit:
We never deem our selves more happy then,
When we enjoy the writings of such men.
If He were blind (pardon me what I say)
You are so too; yet in another way:
So have I seen Dame Justice regent sit
With Eyes blind-folded to discern what is fit.
Your Eyes were shut, when Verses you did make:
(What would you have done if you had been awake?)
No wonder then that you are so abstruse,
That had to do in darkness with your Muse.
What though our Poets sometimes Liars are?
Each one in this has not a common share:
Nor does the formal reason of Poetry
Consist in this, that it must be a Lie.
What hinders but a man may laugh, and rhyme,
And speak the truth too at the self same time?
Tears have their Fallacies, but who e're knew
A man, a merry Poet, and not true?
Legends abundance have I read in Prose,
In Verse but only one Metamorphose:
Besides, all do not see the truths that lie
Couch't in the bowels of Mythology.
You truth have spoken; and withal so plain,
That one would think Luoilius come again;
And yet your style is so mysterious,
As that of Juvenal, or Persius.
Briefly, if any may be said to be
An Hieroglyphick Poet, You are He.
True are your Eulogies; your Satyrs keen;
Sad are your Elogies; your Silvae green.
Others have spoken this before; for me,
I cannot praise (for wondering) what I see.
Philosophers, and Poets best are new,
Your Work commends it self, and so 't must You.
N. F. C. W. F. Oxon.

Upon the nebuligerous, tenebricosiform'd Wit, of the Author, absconded in the
nigricated Womb of these Poems.
O! For the cutting knife now of Sow-gelder,
To rip thy Womb, and see thy Hans en Kelder.
Thy Wit as yet is wrapped in's Secundinae;
Which must be launc't, or else we never shall find ye.
Do You think we can see Boy wrapped up in Mantle?
For my part, how to do it surely I cannot tell.
When I thy Verses read, like in's shell Tortoise,
Thy Wits in them as Wine in quart is;
We cannot see either of them until opened,
Which if they be not, they are not worth a Rope end.
Within thy Book I Would have thee put a Comment,
We may then understand peradventure some on it;
Else we shall never do it; for now as the case stands,
When we but read it, we are put to base stands;
And then we thresh, and beat, and keep a quarter;
Then rest; then fall again on: just like Carter
Upon his Horses poor, tugging, and plucking
To get his Wain out, that the Mire is stuck in.
We sweat, and pull; but cum omne venit ad omne,
The wit within thy Verse we cannot come nigh.
We may as soon our brains knock out, as knock in
Thy mystic sense, 'cause thou writ'st still a fog in.
Go on brave Son of Tartar, black as Pluto,
Take some work else in hand, and fall a new to
Some lofty strain, that may even puzzle Jupiter
To understand: then surely thou will shut it over
Our weaker minds; and make the God of Wisdom
To fret, and fume, because it was not his doom,
To have thy Poets body, and to swallow
Such things as he will never do whilst he is Apollo.
O all you mighty Poets, whether Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, Persian, Caldee, and all the Brewers
of Italian verse, French, English, German,
If you are compared to Him, you are all but poor men.
I Will say no more but this, Thou art the man, Sir,
That better art then all our former Grandsiers.
Adoniram Bitefig of Utopia.

To his highly esteemed Friend the Author: on his inspired Poems.
CAst down your Baies (fond Poets) girt his brow,
To whom Poetic Raptures homage owe;
Whose nobler soul is only fit to be
The standard to all kind of Poetry.
Fancy lay breathless, and that sacred fire
Raked up in its own ashes did expire.
The Fount dried up; nor did the Jovial Crew
Of Sisters meet, as they were wont to do:
Apollo gone Shepherds obtained the Spring,
And Poets only went a wool-gathring:
But You (my friend) from whose moist brain does flow
A better Helicon then that we owe
(To the Horse's stamp) scorning so long to see
The God thus baffled by Obscurity;
Regained the Fort, and by thy lofty strains,
Recover'dst mountain, spring, and neighbring plains.
H. W. W. C. C. Oxon.

Upon the light-footed, though dark Poems of the Author, so nimble, that they
skip out of the Readers sight, though he hastes never so fast to overtake them.
COme blow the Trumpets, make 'um cry tarrara;
And from hence sound as far as is A Province in Italy.
Ferrara;
That they may hear the worth there of these Poems,
Which were begot in high, and not in low A Scotch word for a Belly.
Wembs*
The Authors brain; when once he did but knock it,
Verse would pour out, as water out of Bucket.
But first I Will tell the way that he accustomed
To generate his verse* His head then was tomb'd
Within a Cap of linned, or of woollen,
And then within the Bed his feet would pull in.
And all day long in it He would lie naked,
As hot as though in Oven He were baked:
There would He have both cruel Pangs and Tortures,
As if He had been pounded in ten Mortars:
Just like the Pangs that Women have in travel,
When they cry out, Back, Belly, Bones, and Navel;
Till at the last He would be unto Bed brought
Of Verses few: and all that while He fed not:
Soon as He was delivered, He would lick 'um
Over, and over, as Bears do Cubs; and stick 'um
With pen, and ink on paper. What then? wot ye
That these were Verses bad? They were not snotty.
When He had made 'um clean: no they were brave ones,
This Verse is somewhat of the longest size.
There could not be such made again, though writ with quils of Ravens.
Rare we must think them, that are made on bolsters,
(A kind of Cushion that is sold by Vpholsters.)
For all day long He did consult on pillow,
Which made him write in Thunder, not in style low.
If you ask why his Wit is dark. and cannot see it,
Always He hid himself, and writ in the sheet.
But I have done, he that shall next come after,
May make you serious, we create you laughter.
Don John Puntaeus. (...).

To the unknown Author.
I That never spoke in Verse, am come
To add my Farthing to Thy Sum;
What if I strain a Line or so,
Thy Verses Feet can make me go,
If Leg or Arm be broke: it is true
He is a Poet, right, true blue;
And whether or no I crack my brain,
True blue I Am sure can never stain.
Nay, his incomparable Verse,
Would raise me, were I in my Hearse:
His Line's so mystique, so profound,
No Treasure buried under ground
Were worth so much at coming forth,
Wer's Verses sold to half their worth:
Some one perhaps may in a puff,
Say they are pitiful enough;
Or that they would be more meet,
To make his Grandam a Winding Sheet?
Let such with their Balladian Rhymes
Exhaust their oil, and spend their times
To seek for Arts not yet revealed;
But let His Verses live concealed.
For I Will avouch't by Jove they are good,
Had we more plenty of the Brood.
R. F.

Upon the Blackness of Darkness: the Authors Poems.
SOme say Mathematics are hard to know;
Some say the Schoolmen are difficult too:
One complains of Arabic, it is not easy;
Another of Coptique, it cannot please me.
One says that Homer was a blind Poet,
And so was Persius, and Cleaveland: I know it.
Some say that Night is Dark, others again
Will swear that dark Rooms are fit for mad men.
Let 'um say what they will: I Am sure there is none
If thou be but in place, deserves the Throne;
The Kingdom of Darkness is all thine own.
Euclide is easy, and Scotus is plain,
If eithers compared with thy darker strain,
Arabique too; and any other Tongue,
May sooner be known then Thy plainest Song.
Cleaveland, and Homer, and Persius to boot,
Are clear and smooth, if compared with thy foot:
Yea, the Night it self, or the Grave (as some say)
In The midst of thy Clouds would be a Milkie-way.
Therefore the Proverb lye's, if ever it tell,
Dark Rooms are for Madmen; for in such to dwell,
Thy Wit, and Thy Fancy, do hold it full well.
Timothy Tinderbox of Jamaica.

Upon the Author's incomparable Hogan Mogan Mysteries locked up in the duskie
shady Chest of his Poems: or, Jack in a Box:
OH! that I had a quill that is snatched from Eagle,
That I may write thy praise: or the mouth of Beagle,
To throat thy worth out, for thy Verses gallant,
(Of which within thy Book there is no small want)
In which there Fancy lies up to the Elbows,
And Satyrs keen as are the Spanish Bilboes.
If thou would write (as we say) plain as Dunstable;
We might then apprehend thee; but not Constable
Now can do it, nor to boot all his Watchmen,
Although it be their Calling to Attach men.
Thou scorn'st to write in style that is called downright
Because (say thou) to this age 'twill not sound right;
Therefore do swear thou must things above Moon write.
I Will bid defiance now to Po'et Boquendo,
Such Verse as his ofttimes Ballad-Women do
Make; yes, and better too, his Turkish Turbat
Fits not our English heads; his Verses are but
Such as may be made by your Jack or your Gill;
Our Poet makes as good as ever did Virgil.
His title tells us, that upon Parnassus
He nap't to make some Verse, but as the case is,
Men scarce will credit; yet why not? f'r ought I know,
He took deep sleeps ex font Caballino.
For he that reads his Book will swear he dreamed sure,
Else never such dark Poems had he teem*d sure.
Yet ought not men to think u'm sad 'cause obscure,
They Will give you mirth I warrant, and all sobs cure.
At the end of his Book in jerking Character,
Antiquity lies bruised, he has so thwack't her.
Nor escapes from his Description Temporizer,
Who when he sees himself lasht so, will Miserere
mei Domine cry. -- But Readers haste in
To view the Lines of Poet --
Read'um I pray, for I will swear they are good ones,
And cannot mended be by a whole brood on's:
Because, if ever we intend to do it,
We must drink Foggie Ale, and so fall to it.
W. G. C. W. C.

Upon the Author's Mystery of Babylon.
MY infant tender Muse cannot praise thy tongue,
As well as others of the learned throng.
He Is perfect man and wit, whose larger brain
Can comprehend, and praise thy lowest strain.
A Hue and cry
With swiftest pace,
And nimblest race,
If it should try
And ride to spy,
Would hardly trace
Thy sense, and find
Thy mystic mind.
I cannot say thou writ'st instead of Ink
With juice of Lemons, that is too sharp a drink,
And quick; but yet as that conceals what is writ,
Writes well enough, but then
Blots out as fast again;
And so by riddling play
Brings night in midst of Day,
And none must hope to see
What Is written, though there it be.
Just so thou jugglest, speak good sense and wit,
Yet so obscure in every part of it,
As that it disappears
From all our eyes and ears,
And we must use implicit faith to see it.
Yet do not cry,
Nor be angry.
And thy friends fly,
As if they did abuse thee
Thy body's opacous
But do'nt thou mistake us,
Nor pluck thy Mystachios,
If ever thou would use me:
Because every Letter,
Is far much the better,
That wants t. inseritur per Epenthesin.
Interpretter,
And much does amuse me.
I thought to have praised some of thy Coppies,
And showed how far the excell'st other Puppies;
But thy meaning is deep,
And in it to peep,
I fear my head will turn giddy.
Thy Ale is so strong,
And bottled so long,
And close, that now it is so heady;
As that it is mouth
I would be loath
To open: it is so froppish
I know it will fly,
And smite my eye,
And make my brains quite sottish.
J. D. W. C. C.

Upon the imcomparably-high-fancied Poems of the Author, so monstrously Obscure.
GIve me some ink fetched from the Muses stream,
Lull me asleep in a Poetique Dream;
Inspire me with a rapture, let my Breast
By sacred Fury be possessed.
Reach me a quill drawn from an Eagles wing,
Teach me the way to write in the Moon, and bring
All the world to read, and hear
What in thy praise I shall write there.
Hence you Poetique Dablers, hide your heads
In Clouds and Darkness, here is one better leads
Poor undeceived mortals, and displaies
To undiscovered Lands of Poetry,
Which hitherto did unknown lie;
And will be ever so, far nearer ways.
Let Homer vanish hence, lest by the Pain
Of hearing him, he vomit once again.
Let Virgil feed on bread, leave him the Spring
From which the Poets their original bring:
Let Ovid write more Tristia's; break his quill,
He Is banished once more from Parnassus Hill.
Hence ye poor Ants that on that Mountain sit,
Hence, and give place to a more majestique wit.
He comes, fly off, lest you his triumph meet,
Cast down your Pens, and only use your Feet.
Let Us see your backs, h'as purchased all the Mount;
Here Is no room left for men of your account:
Here Is not one Turf under your Heads to lie,
After your death, unless you from Him buy.
I saw the Bargain, when the Muses gave
To him all right, which in that place they have.
Thou have exposed to the common sight
Thy Poems, yet I cannot say brought to light.
Thy modest Muse puts on a mask between
Our sight and it, sees all, and is not seen.
Thy Verses rise above the vulgar flight,
And draw themselves out of my wandering sight;
Soar up to heaven to make a brighter day,
Unless they meet the fire by the way.
Prick up your ears Mortality, and hear
The highest Lines that ever Paper bear:
Bring your Five Senses hither, all will not do
(I think) to read and understand him too.
Put on your Spectacles, and wipe your eyes,
And then you will see where the deep Fancy lies:
Attend these sacred Rimes; see, they begin
To knock at your Brains door, and cannot come in.
Think you within the small space of your Brain
To conceive that which the world cannot contain?
He Is greater far then to be chained to Sense;
Or held within that strait Circumference.
Divinity scorns sense, and Angels never
Can be confined to that Sphere.
Oracles never did descend to be
Easy and plain to each capacity;
But hovered in a mystic Cloud,
Seldom conceived, yet sounding loud.
The Gods when they came from above
To live with men, did choose a Grove:
A place in its own native darkness wrapped,
Where they the sight of vulgar eyes escaped.
The holiest place was wondered at, not seen:
The Priest himself might only enter in:
God to prophaner eyes denied the view,
Lest they contemned what they knew.
Poets should have Elijah's mantles, till the day
They go to heaven, and then cast them away.
The Suns bright beams, unless they look behind
A cloud, there wondering lookers on do blind.
None that Divine, or Angels hand,
Which with a sudden trembling did affright*
The Babilonesh Kings delight;
Unless interpreted could understand.
Should you religion show to common eyes,
You from adoring teach them to despise:
The Temple had its vail, which checked the light
Of Divine Mysteries from Prophaner sight.
The Turkish mosques are darkened by their law,
To strike Beholders with Majestic awe.
Curtains fit those that on Parnassus Dream,
Or near the Bublings of the sacred stream.
Poets a'nt pictured in transparent lawn,
But in a mantle cast about them, drawn.
They that are crowned with laurel boughs,
The leaves give shadow to their Brows.
The true Poetic fire should have its smoke;
Which might or blind, or choke
Those that approach too near; the sun
Can Draw up mists from Helicon.
Light things or top of waters are first spied;
Those of more w^^^t down to the bottom slide.
We take to get most precious things more pains,
The best things are least obvious and plain.
The eye, which in it self's all light,
In various coats is wrapped up from our sight.
The choicest Fruits which nature likes best,
From injury in diverse shells are dressed.
The purest Earth which least of mixture tast's
Lies far removed near the center placed.
Best things may be obscure; thus was the Cloud
On the one side light, on the other in a shroud.
Thus the North and Southern Pole
On which celestial Bodies roll;
Which all the Earth does come between,
Are never both together seen.
But if One gives the Saylours light,
The Other is hid from their sight.
Thus mountains in the unthrift moon,
Without the help of glasses, cannot be shown.
Thou Hieroglyphick Poet! whose deep wit
Cannot be known without expounding it.
The Turks, as many Commentatours throw'd
As might at once two hundred Camels load,
Into the waves: should all those thee expound,
They'de leave thee just as deep as first they found.
The expositions on thy Mysteries
To such a numerous offspring shall arise,
As will put down the ignorant Rout
Of those that blindely dote about
Aquinas Sums, and Lombard's cobweb stuff;
Yet swear at last they have not explained enough:
Persius may hang himself, for now he has lost
The Darkness which he only once ingrost;
That clowdy Poet, if compared to thee,
By A B C Boys understood may be.
The Devil (had Barbarus thy Verses seen)
But by some Aenygmatick notion took
From the great abyss of thy Book.
Or some deep Fancies in thy Brain that swim,
I Will lay my life on it they'de have orappled him.
Poets (as Aeolus the winds in caves)
By loading words in Fetters make them slaves:
You yours in an eternal Dungeon keep,
( Darker far then that of Ink,)
Only it wants the stink:
Through which not one small Beam of light can creep.
Fetch me Augustus eyes, or Tamerlane's,
Whose sight could give intelligence to their Brains
In thickest Darkness; or his that could spy
The enemies Fleet in Carthage Road to lie
Three hundred Leagues off; and it may be they
In this thy profound night will find some day.
They that from new made Characters can find,
And pick at last the mystic mind
Of him that made them, would be more put to it,
To search the meaning of thy fancy out.
Should we attempt to hunt thy wit,
As men do Hares by the impress of it is feet:
Be sure we never should it take,
It does so many subtle windings make.
Thy Book's a Labyrinth, which does infold
It self in many turnings, that do fly
The curious Diligence of the Readers eye;
And yet it does no Monsters hold.
Like those that writ in wax, thy wit
Is closed and sealed, as soon as writ.
I Have sometimes seen those that do bathe
Themselves in our Suns waters, first to swathe
Their Bodies in some shrowds for fear
Lest any misbecoming nakedness appear:
So thou when dipped in Helicon, come out
Hid and clouded from the vulgar rout:
Yet thou by hiding of thy light,
Compliest with the weakness of our sight.
For should thou to our mortal eyes
With all thy Beams and luster on, arise;
The exceeding brightness of that day
Would make us blind and grope our way.
Go forth great spirit, let me see
What the next age will think of thee.
Dazzle the world, show that their sight
Is not so piercing as it might.
Make Antiquaries work in the next age,
TO unty the Gordian knots of every page;
Let them admire the Ocean of thy wit,
Whilst all their leaden heads cannot fathom it.
Till the Phoenix of the world,
Into its funeral flame is hurled;
To comprehend thy depth let none aspire,
Till all our Bodley's there shall burn,
And the ashes be closed in one urn,
Till thy Book is enlightened by that fire.
T. S. W. C. F. Oxon.

The Epistle Dedicatory made by the Author (upon some dislike) and presented
to his now adopted Mother, the University of Cambridge.
Dearest Dam,
I Could now with sorrow wish, that I had hanged on the tawny Vdders of your
Charity instead of your Sister Oxfords, that I might from thence have sucked
the silver Milk of Education with the now leaden Lips of my Apprehension.
However, since it cannot now be, that I should re-initiate my self; yet be it
not presumption in me to present you the first Ears of that Corn which I could
be glad were of some standing in your Fields, though I had hazzarded the
ploughing and harrowing of my Posteriors for it. And indeed I must tell you,
that as for the Poems I here give you, for ought I know, you need not reject
them: I am sure they are good; and yet (thus ever Envy sneaks after Virtue's
heels) I have overheard them undervalued: yet such is my patience, that I can
with much facility slight unmeritted aspersions, only desirous, that they who
will not commend them, would come and mend them. I am not ignorant also, that
some shallow, ditch-brain'd fellows scruple much at my Ocean-like profundity;
little knowing what Lamprils of Wit, and Grigs of Fancy are oftentimes
inveloped in the mud of obscure Sentences; Grigs, which scorn to bite at any
hook, but what is baited with the Vermilion Worm of a most perspicacious, and
inquisitive Brain. Mother, I hope it will be no incest to rely upon you, in
hopes to beget a gallant come-off with my Poetry: if that design fail, I fear
me, my Poetic vein will look blew, and come off so too. A little of your
Candor, (like a Beggars body-louse) will go a great way. Dear Mother, verify
this unto me, and let your Approbation accompany my Endeavors, even as a
venerable Budget does a travailing Tinker; and when at any time you shall have
occasion to peruse this my little Book, deny not your loving Son these two
favors. First, to sit Cross-leggd while you read. And secondly, to tie up the
Dog of your Censures with the halter of Discretion at the Dining Room door of
your Affection. Nor would I have you at all wonder, that so many of my Friends
are pleased to empty the Quivers of their Ingenuity against the Buts of my
Poems, to Descant on me, and Paraphrase on my Text with their several harmless
Glosses; for we all know, it is the famous Don Quixot's highest honor to have
Gayton's Festivous Notes written on Him: Thus the surrounding Ivy infinitely
commends its solitary Inhabitant, whose Majestic Loneliness is abundantly
pleased to see th'exuberant mirth which the merrily-dispos'd Birds create to
themselves, at the sight of his sullen gravity. Let the Enammel of their
praises, and Encomiums who ( here honor me) set off the Medal of my Muse; and
the Aggat handle of their Applause, commend the keen Blade of my sharpedg'd
Verses. Truly, think the world what it list, I think my self much indebted to
them that have so nobly commended me in their Poetry before my Book: And I
scorn ever to be conscious of so great puselanimity, as to refuse to persecute
my subject to the uttermost, where such gallant Captains have lead me the way.
Believe me I am in earnest, and restless to rest

Your Dutiful Son K. Q.

The Answer to that Epistle which I sent runs thus.
My Dearest, Adopted Biern*
THe noise, and news of your Obscurity, and Poetry; the latter whereof you
seconded with a Letter; have extorted from me such proofs, and reproofs, as I
do very seldom use to send any of my Sons: and now, something must precede
before I can proceed. I have lately somewhat overmuch indulged my Canine
Appetite, and eaten somewhat that lies at my Stomach as heavy as a load of
Lead; the Crudities whereof have sent up such Vapors into my Head, as if the
Fenns had broken wind backward; such Fumes, that they make me foam like a
Bedlame: insomuch, that I think my self now in the same pickle, wherein the
Poets tell us Madam Tellus was, when Phaeton took Her for a Witch, and set Fire
about her ears: Yet (my Boy!) for thy sweet fake I Will do, as she did, heave my
self in the midst of my Collique fits; nay, and I will answer thine Epistle,
though there were no other Pen to be had then A Pestil. And now Son (for so you
say you would gladly be) let me give you good counsel. I am serious. In the
whole series of your Letter, I find a great many Metaphors, things, which some
count Absolute; but I tell you, they are Obsolete, and do advise you by all
means not to love them, but to leave them: I would have you take a Word, and
Twang it; then listen how it sounds; observe diligently its Reverberation, mark
its Echo, and if that chance to bring into your mind any other Consonant
word, apprehend it be sure, in spite of all the repugnancy which a dissonant
Vowel, or two may make. Take but this Course, and you shall have all my
Blessing, and none of my Curse. But now ( Son) to particulars. I wonder why you
should call me [Dam;] truly, I thought [ Madam] would have better befitted your
mouth; or rather Eve then ADAM. Then again, I am certain you could not have
found a word Odder then that same [ Udder:] think you that I cannot (...)
without being called A-Cow? But it is no great matter; courage* my Lad!
whatsoever discontents may arise, or you can raise to your self, are all to no
purpose, if you will but propose to your self the Fame you shall acquire by
this your Book. But I must have done: I am at this instant, in Post-haste. Take
my mind in a few words. I applaud your Obscurity, and commend your Darkness
amongst the Light Whimsies of this Age. I shall easily grant those your two
reasonable Requests. Your Friends I esteem very highly of. Your self, because
you are a Foot-soldier to the Muses; when you Die, I Will banish Muskets, and
Pistolls, and I Will Cannonize you with a thundering Volley of loud Elogiums; so
that astonished Europe shall take notice how much I set by

My dutiful Son K. Q.

THE AUTHORS OWN Verse and Prose.

With Marginall Illustrations on his OBSCURITIES, by a Friend, to the Reader.

Semel in anno ridet Apollo.

Printed by the same Order.

Sic Incipit.
The Author's humble Opinion concerning his Book.
They Are Dog-dayes now: he that appears in Print,
To coin his words must first find out a Mint.
I deal not by retail, nor eke by stealth,
To make of this my Book A Book much esteemed by the Author.
Wit's Commonwealth:
Then buy my Wit in cleanly words well dressed,
Wit dearest bought is always counted best.
Upon one buried after He was Dead.
WIth Eyebright water wash thy face,
Since Here there lies a Babe of Grace:
Why should Not hot in effect, but in operation.
Hot waters scald thine eye?
The Darling of the Gods did dye.
Why weep you for him, and lament?
Pluto long since has The devil a bit he h^^'s*
broke up Lent.
And feeds on flesh both day and night,
By a base carnal Appetite.
At ( Viz.) Pluto's.
this soul's glory* none can guess,
Who does (...) in happiness*
(...) in this Dust bed,
(...)
On another* served after the same cruel manner.
THe fates of late have made a Mint,
And (...) pale* faced Image in it:
We Are all their Tenants, and must pay
Our lives for Rent: Souls are their prey;
Sickness is their Apostle, sent
For to possess their Tenement*
Death did abbreviate his life,
And bequeathed Glory for his Wife.
Upon one who died, and never lived after it.
PUt on thy mourning Clothes my Muse, come cry,
If thou can weep for Him in sympathy*
Tears have their Tunes* whose music in sad cries
Is warbled forth by watery Elegies.
Nature has given our Organs leave to play
Loath to depart, Loath to depart away:
But all in vain; Death has long since compounded
For Higgledy piggledy.
Clergy-Lay, both Cavalier, and Roundhead.
A New Years Gift.
Sing this to the dismal Tune of the Lady and Blackamore.
NO Venus Gloves, or Lady's Viz. A switchlock.
Lock,
I here present to thee:
I give a Damask Rose of Love,
Mine Heart, keep it for me.
Hearts are best New Year's Gifts amongst friends,
In giving mine I Will please;
Return me yours, then so shall I
From You receive A flower that seldom grew in the Authors garden.
Heart's-ease.
On a Royal Person that disguised himself.
GIve The Author was going to dinner when he made these
thanks my Muse, let Bells the Changes
Charles is made Secretary to the King.
My Faith is huddled up in sense, I see ring:
A Revelation in this Mystery.
Here Is sweet meats for all hungry [Eyes] for [tongues] a very Figure:
Eyes, come feed,
First bless your food, and then rehearse your Creed.
The clearest Vision in a drouzie Trance,
Wisdom inwrap't in dusky Ignorance:
A Copy of a King, which sure was writ
In Bastard hand; part true, part counterfeit.
In a Jew's coat a Gentile, change the style,
And on his face you may throw Cross, and Pile.
A Prince shrivelled to a great-man, in a Damp
Of spirits he is shrunk to one of Nabal's stamp.
Majesty droops by a fantastic Wile;
The Holy Ci^^ imprisoned in a Tile*
Jew Christianiz'd* o! that he should ( A wonderful thing, that* a King should
be a man.
a man)
Be bound up like to Mahomets Alkoran!
My prating eyes tell tales; how can I write?
A Devout Saint, an hotehpot Hypocrite!
His Habit preached to us, and did dispense
The holy Scriptures in a doubtful sense;
Art, by its Sophistry did him deface,
Making him cast a Deuce upon an Ace.
Bring here an Heralds Grammar; show the Rules,
Why Sables makes a Comment upon Gules?
When Stuart could not fly from Charles, then he
Through Arts temptation acts Adultery
With his own self; and so in fine I rate
Him base begot, though most Legitimate.
When I look up, with him my thoughts commence,
Who by tranfiguration parted hence.
Mutation strange! None e're did read of this
In And a good reason too; for the King lived a little* while after Ovid.
Poet Naso's Metamorphosis.
Like as the Sun, before it sets, that shrowds,
And muffles up its brighter face in Clouds:
Those loyal Mourners that attend its fall,
And go in What should they go in else? in Blues?
Blacks unto his Funeral:
Even so did he o'recast the Heavenly Lamp
Of's Countenance by glozing a new stamp
For Charles the King; and so appeared to be
A Bird of Prey, Plumed like a A strange Bird hardly to be found in Paradise.
Pharisee.
Could I but pip my Phrase, I should not sin
To say, the Mixed Assembly's met in Him:
My saucy Muse has fed so on his face,
Pardon (great Sir) if I forget my Grace.
The Common Fire.
The Author is teaching his Muse to swim, and so gives her good counsel.
HOld up thy head my Muse, and walk aloof
In The Spanish mode; here is Boys are armor proof*
Against all petty Pistol Rimes; do'nt venture
Them to assail with such: for they will not enter.
First levy all thy force, then give thy Darts
License to tope the Gravy of their Hearts.
Turn Mountebank for once; command my Pen
Which nature Squir'd to Now he barks, bow wow.
mouth out Gentlemen
In various colors: such is this noble Rout,
I must speak often, yet not speak them out.
Like an unskilled Carver, who cannot hit the point,
Unless he first does Cuckold the poor Joint.
Tune then some Janus Rimes, that two faced Wit
Eyed on both sides such fashioned heads does fit,
Whose profound learning none can roundly praise,
Unless his Verses Backstroke, and forestroke, like a bell.
sound alikc both ways.
Saint now the Devil Poet which does fence
Bis Cloven Rimes with an united Sense.
That Grecian Echo which housed in the Roof
Of Him, which did even stone it with reproof,
Did sound, and build up it is cur'st Landlords name,
By frequent repetitions of the same;
This, this it is which must be crowned with Bays,
And all your names with much advantage raise.
The forefront man starts me, whose head is lettered 1.

With Attick Characters, not with them fettered
Like those clogged Pates, whose mute wants are
expressed
By the loud tongued Pastboard hung before their Mother,
breast.
That proud Greek sister-hood, which disclaimed their
Quickly fell out, and would not own each other.
See they shake off their Mam's old clothes, as fetters
But I think he means [effeminated] it is a difficult place this!
petticoat themselves with different Letters;
Shifting their Dialects, (even as Proteus he
New-fac'd himself with Form's variety.)
Hence cruel Wars were nursed: until it is quill
In making Peace it is dearest blood did spill:
Nor may I chain him up to words: He Is one
Cut out for Rhetorick's living Mansion.
If Ages could retreat, and sum their store
Of elegant Aires to hatch an Orator.
If A short expression for [looking cunningly.]
squinting Time could backwards run, and bring
Up in it is front, those wits, which once did spring;
Should all conspire to Man-midwife a spirit,
They could not reach one of his worth, and merit?
For why? more Rhetoricians meet in Him
Then e're at once did in our Tripos Limb.
Face about now (my Muse) and view the next; 2.

Expound him fully, but don't name the Text;
One Some read it [doubletted.]
coated up in Mists, we cannot a Glance
Of Him, unless we will pry through Ignorance;
Thus the world's Goggle Eye sometimes appears
At the first sight, strait swaddled up in tears.
Thus pale-faced Cynthia black-bagg'd in Clouds,
Doubles her form when she her self unshrowds.
That changeling soul moved slow pac't: but his skips
Through all the Datur penetratio dimensionum ergo falleris.
Bodies of lettered Manuscripts,
Of Tongues of Babel paramount in Him,
In Judgment He outvies the Sanhedrim;
String then his Judges, hang them on his fist,
That glittring Bracelet well becomes his Wrist.
Call an high Court of For [Arts and Sciences] by a Figure called Metathesis
Sciences and Arts,
In full mouthed praises let them breath their parts.
One to whom Nature has bequeathed her store,
And Godmother'd his tongue an Orator,
Unlike to him whose found-lung'd Eloquence,
Does often gape for a full pointed sense:
I speak him faintly, si'th I am not fed
With the 3.
Pampered Air, that Rome's vast Rostrum bred;
An health to that merry Boy, who tunes the spheres,
And makes my soul lie listening in my ears:
Orpheus revived, before whom the Air does prance,
And Musicks In plain English Fiddles.
wooden, Carcasses do dance*
Knowledge ingrost! whose soul is fit to be
A sprightful seed-plot of all History;
I may not bless Him, as I Have blessed the rest;
For He holds naught in Common with the rest.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * 4.
* * * Caetera desiderantur. * * *
Upon my Mothers running Eyes; presented to her for a New Years Gift.
LEt your eyes drop, he that for Sucking bottles for newborn pigs.
Bottles seeks,
Shall find two Twins a hanging in your Cheeks;
Which Nature bare, and whilst she lay abed,
Venus a Nurse became, and colored Red,
You heart's fire stills the moisture of your brain,
Through your Eyes Liimbeck which does drop
al. An Ocean.
amain:
And whilst your lungs the fire does gently blow,
Eye-water drops into your He means her blind cheeks.
Cheeks below.
The running of your Eyes does sure maintain,
That you within have got a Curdled Brain.
Within those Windows Fancy often was fed,
In which that Spider spins a watery web;
Your Eyes are pregnant with those drops, and cry
Out for your help in their Delivery:
Their circled motion turns each beam-like thread
Into a skain of spiritual white-brown-thred;
Which Nature's Semstress uses when she knits
Each object to her in fantastic fits.
Their Still may leak; but never those waters can
Quite overflow your little His mothers belly
Isle of Man.
Scollars want Gold, therefore their Brains they
sift,
To strain for friends the finest New-year's-gift:
And so want I; therefore my wit I Thats' a nasty word.
poop
The mellow Apples of your Eyes to scoop
With this my Pen, which in your brine I sop,
Which Dripping bast's your raw cheeks while they
drop.
If for your sins, then let Susanna's eye
Drop more such Beads for Heaven's Rosary.
On a Blackamore Maid courting me*
A Dialogue.
KEep The Kettle calls the Pottagepot burnt arse.
off, thy Chimney hue offends,
From which (like smoke) thy breath ascends. Author.

My Breath is smoke; hence is my smart, Blackmore.

That fire within burns up mine Heart.
The Fire of Love I cannot see, A.

Egyptian darkness hinders me.
This Darkness will soon pass away, B.

If thy Sun but afford one Ray.
My Sun of Beauty is not seen, A.

If thy dark Body comes between.
My Body's dark, but if thy Light B.

Shine clear, it cannot force a night,
When I would view thy Sloe-like eyes, A.

Mists from thy Moorish face do rise.
Clear days of Love these Mists foretell; B.

For Heat of Love shall them expel.
But thou art Black, and wilt disgrace A.

The pure whiteness of my face.
I Am Black, then let it be my lot, B.

To serve for you a Beauty spot.
Thou art both Black, and what is worse, A.

You Are clouded in thy Countrey's curse.
The best clothes Nature to thee gave,
Are but sad Emblemes of a Grave.
I Am clad in Black; Black's mine array, B.

Hence I go mourning every day.
Flay my black coat, apparel me
With thy white Robe of Purity.
I am thine Vmbra, take delight
To diaper my black with white.
Come then, let us crisp, and curle in pleasure, A.

Our spotless loves shall keep no measure.
Thy comely blackness does much grace
The sober sadness of thy face,
Thy black is subtle, thin; and rare,
A Film-hood (such Queen His (...) has now hopt into a Costardmongers Basket*
Apples wear
To hide a Blush!) a Cobweb'd skreen,
Through which thy luster's clearly seen.
You Are veiled and shadowed in my sight,
I Will dapple over thy shade with light.
Let Us twist our souls then: one spickled ray B.

Will force for us a Wedding day.
Make haste my Love: my panting soul
Dies, if we still live on Parol.
On a Reputed Courtezan.
To the Tune of the Mad Man's Morris.
SOme say that you a Book have been
Handled in sheets. Aha!
Then sure I cannot But he might ride by Sea thither.
go by Sea
To your Virginea.
A Man in your Moon there has been,
Hence men disdain your scorns:
Your Moon of Beauty is at Not at Empty.
full,
And has late shed its horns.
Let Incubus ride thy Hackney-soul,
Till death does claim its share.
In thee: And may thou ever serve*
For a Common Thorow-fare.
On a Gentleman that gave me a Bent Sixpence.
HEnce ye Tin-Merchant Poets: quickly hence,
You who pay silver by your Cornish pence.
Thus Hypocrites golden favors represent
By a Bath-yellow-sandy Complement:
But he that would your kindness full express,
Must first know how to swell in golden verse.
'T would pose an wholesale Poet for to fit
Me with fine Phrase out of his store of wit,
To set your favor off: but his Art fails,
Where naught but all the Muses power prevails.
Could I but mouth it stoutly, then perhaps
I Would flash in wit, and crack in Thunderclaps
Of Rimes, as Vshers to a shower of verse.
But that shall be your debtour to your Hearse.
My left handed success to raise my state,
Shall never vote your good will out of Date.
I do pursue your favor by the Brave Jowlet*
scent,
And find it in your bosom resident.
He that by words seeks you to recompense;
Soils Diamonds with a Bristol Eloquence.
The Drone's Indictment of the Be.
THe Be arreign'd at Natures Not Gum water.
Size,
For robbing Flora's Paradise,
Tuning his humms in goodly sort,
Makes a days journey to the Court.
Where with his Lifeguard he appears,
And all the Drone's Indictments hears.
Enter Drone. Indict. 1.
She ransackt gardens, and by stealth,
Did fill her bag with Flora's wealth;
And (lest it should be searched for)
Turns Coats: her Argent into Or.
Indict. 2.
She did deflower the beauteous fields;
And tyth'd the Crop which Ceres yields.
Indict. 3.
She watched where Flora's child did lie
And stole 'way her And that was a fire bit.
Virginity.
Indict. 4.
She Counterfeits Dame Nature's mold,
And guilds her Coin with yellow Gold.
At Nature's Bar this pretty Elf
Turns Lawyer, and pleads for it self.
Plea. 1.
Whilst Cloris lived, to me she sold
The Gardens for a Copyhold:
And when Deaths Bed did her embrace
With the Green Sickness in her face;
Her Love being dead, my Landlady
By a Fee simple gave't to me.
Plea. 2.
The Fields for Commons, and her Bed,
Plea. 3.
To take her Daughters Female, with Female! surely this Be had a Pego
Maidenhead.
Plea. 4.
'Ere since, I Natures Student try
Mine Art in natural Chemistry.
At this the Drone plucked in his head,
The Bees did hum, and humming fled.
The Mistress now being all alone,
Does sue an Outlaw for the Drone;
Who said he stole, and brake the Peace,
'Cause he held Land by Parol Lease.
Well then.

This Natures Leveller now returns,
To lie with Flora's Maid she burns:
She flames with lust, and void of strife,
Does lead a most licentious life.
What a devilish Lecher was this Be?
Every Maiden flower she meet,
She ravishes whilst that she greets,
She breaks into Diana's grove,
And all about the Woods does rove:
Her wings turn Fans to cool her face,
Whilst that by Zeal she courts her grace.
She woes her Virgins to the Springs,
And them defiles; whilst that she sings,
The expans'd sweetness that does lie
Wrapped up in Flora's Library.
In every Folio Schollar-wise
She does her use Epitomize.
She extracts Honey from the Bay
[ Horse,] and makes a Blur where was a Gay. Here Is nothing but whoring and
drinking.

She turns a Tapster to the Vine,
And quaffs the best of Flora's Wine.
The Woodbines pulse by a sense he feels,
Tippling in Pleasure till he reels.
The Indian sweets he tastes, and strains
Free quarter on the Arabian Plains.
All the day long he swills delight,
Till the evening cools his Appetite.
Upon Mr. John Cleeveland, my quondam Chamber-fellow.
Dear Jack!
COme on brave spirit; help me thy name to dress;
Lest I blaspheme thee with my homespun verse*
Reach me a deep-mouthed Quill; and let me write
Thee out at Thus; (viz. t-h-c-e.
length: a short-breathed Epithet
Will not suit you: He that would sound thy praise,
Must court in Aristophanes his phrase;
Whose words command a Parliament of Letters;
That lie imprisoned in their Attick Fetters.
Shelton's short cramped fist, can never grasp thee,
Who far excel'st all such Semigraphy.
Text only Where note the Texttakes some; and the Devil takes others.
takes you. He that does dispense
With that short-handed new found Eloquence,
Bespeaks but a poor Brieve for thy large praise;
And makes thee go a begging for thy Days.
Call him the Muses Metaphysick Reader,
Of all the Poets Troup style him the Leader;
Who with rare Novelties baffles the Sense
Of the busy pated Weeks intelligence,
For the Diurnal's kin does scrutiny,
Makes it possess its rug'd Genealogy.
We date not higher, lest I my Ink should spill,
And force his tried Committee to my Quill,
Whose blockish heads may they Cambado'd be
With Leather patcht claim their leir legs property,
And still wear Caps cut out of some Bulls Coat,
Thong-buckled under their conscientious Throat.
Beside (Great Sir) good wit in these our times,
With wisdom must be clothed as well as Rimes:
The Muses sure will worship at thy shrine,
Who are well manned by thee: for since the Nine
Drunk in thy spirits, which trickled through thy quill,
Bald-pate It wanted a Periwig.
Parnassus is a Cuckold-Hill,
And hugs his Horns, waxing most proud, that he
Cornuted was by such an one as thee.
I must needs falter now: Negations are
The best sad clothes that ever Angels wear;
These now are dumb, if not he scorns their speeches,
Having cast off such precise Logic Breeches,
Spun of old A new kind of Stuff, a-la mode.
Ignorance, which cannot him unwind,
Unless he will be penuriously defined.
Those gaudy Negatives which titely dress
A living spirit, him only dead express:
His shame-fac'd wit its countenance does shroud,
Like as the Sun when mantled in a Cloud.
It Is dark, and veiled, till the illustrious sense
Wrapped in Ink Clouds by a wise Intelligence
Is quite unbodied; then it shows its face
Through that black mask of Letters with much grace.
You Are gone men say, this is no news to me,
I deem this Land far too hide-bound for thee,
Who strides to Heaven in one Poetic story,
And makes the world but a scant Promontory.
Let that al. The Pocky Echo.
French Echo, which preaches out of holes
And makes long-winded Sermons to All Souls
Which thither throng; let that extend thy merit,
Not as it is inspired by a common spirit;
Mean while your silenced Mark that well.
Minister I Will be.
Since Learning's Body is condensed in Thee.
On the ingenuous Poet Mr. Cowley.
A Pyndarique Ode.
I Cannot now comprehend unless I Am taught
To write a strein above my self, aloft:
If that my Muse would honor him with a Song,
It must first learn to chat in the Hebrew tongue.
Stand off thou One Billingsley wrote a Martyrology in Verse, Anno 1657.
Poetaster from the Press,
Who pygni'st Martyrs with thy dwarf-like verse
Whose white, long bearded flame of Zeal aspires,
To wrack their Ashes, more than did their Fires.
Confine not this our Poet to thy Black, durty Ink,
Lest thou bespot his name, and make it stink.
Hand then at Quill that is plundered in the fight
Of Mercury, whilst he beat's by flight.
He mustered up the Forces of his Arms,
Ordered each Wing for to escape the charms
Of the easy conquered Air, and shall not I
Alarm now the Muses Chevalry?
And beat up the Headquarters of my strength,
Whose power drawn out, may help my soul at length,
To find his Ambuscado'd Verses out,
Which on all sides besiege me round about.
2.
I here condemn plain Seneca's crumpled style,
And Sentence, Cicero's longer by a mile.
For neither span'd him; none can speak his worth
More fully, then a stiff-neck't Holder forth,
Who draws his mouth at large, spins out his lungs
And never is tired with tuning holy Songs,
Whose surly Ela's note he far exceeds,
For body'd Angels clothed in Ladies In contradistinction to Ladies Flowers.
weeds
Can only throat him, whose virtues cannot brook
A spirit's knowledge through a single look.
That vaste Triumvirate's Poetique hand
Which dig'd graves for lost sense in words, is damned
By Him, and must at last grant His the better,
Who buries Mysteries in every letter.
3.
Antiquity is fettred in their Verses:
O bawdry!
Long hangers on each side the Printer Presse's,
Raised on the Public Faith, for the defense
Of their benighted, and most doubtful sense:
But stay!

That jolly Trine if any Eye will round,
A Sure the Author's wits went on woolgathering here.
flock of Books in sheep's clothes may be found:
But his Muse mounts enrob'd in Noonday glory,
Candied with light, as if his head were heary.
First dipped in those sacred streams with thee,
And when grown up coated with purity.
His Fancy in Now he conjures.
Black-art mourning owns the name
Of a dark lanthorn'd Dungeon to a flame.
Whilst I the letters, and the clear sense find;
My weaker Eye cannot reach the Soul behind.
So that in reverence my head is bowed,
Thinking of Juno clothed in a Cloud.
Like that dunc't wit, how does my willing hand
Scribble that out, which I Sanat confessio crimen.
cannot understand I
For feigned ill Husbandry let none thee mock,
Who ever heard that Poets e're did smock
Their naked coin in Napkins: frank they be
Both of their Jests, and of their Money free.
4.
That Ethnic Priest which did attire his Pelf All this I don't understand.

With the same Trunk-breeches which he wore himself.
Whilst in his wooden Pulpit stuff apparel'd
Did seem a Hogshead in an Hogshead barrel'd:
Had he but known the Grecian would disjoynt,
And burst in two stout Vulcan's Iron point,
Which tied the luxurious placquet of his Chest
In the Italian Mode, that deifi'd it might rest
Coop't up to one master: that subtle Cub
Had strait unbutton'd the Codpiss of his Tub,
And brok up his soon cooled Zeal in haste
To save his Gold from running out in th'waste,
I dare not Poet christen him by birth,
Who Atheist like adored that gilded Earth;
This only common I hold fast with thee,
I scorn such dirt, and worship Poetry.
A Knocking A Ring for the Author --
Poet sure, who jointly beds
Nine lusty Girls, which bow their Maiden-heads
To Him, and straightway left the Sacred Hill
For to attend upon his sainted Quill.
Could my weak fluttring soul to heaven fly,
Through the shuffled Clouds of Maskt Divinity,
Begot by him; there then my Muses Olet lucernam.
taper
Breathing its last, would from its socket caper;
To see a vision of him in a sound,
Would in deep contemplation my soul drowned.
Against froathy Wits.
I Like not such, who do not fear
By Juno's Pantofles to swear;
Yea, even by Styx, to brag most cruel,
That a Quart of Ceres Water-grewel
Will make their Wits to run so fleet,
That they will spue Verses without Here the Authors Muse is not troubled with
corns.
feet.
Against stealing Wits.
I Dislike those make Mercury their Chief, Clodius accusat Maechos.

And quote him, as their Captain Thief;
Under whose colors they commence
Masters of pilfer'd Eloquence.
To cheat men's Works they have got a trick
By Handy Dandi'd Rhetoric:
Who wit in Tympany do spawl,
Like a big bellied Corporal,
Whose girded waste while it does hope
For a far larger Horoscope,
At drinking time does quite disjoynt,
And crack in twain his Made of a piece of pack-thred
Codpiss-point:
So they like to the women train,
With crisped ties hair-lace their Brain;
And cap their Blocks, lest that their wits
should run a gadding in mad fits:
But ne'retheless they cry [ more scope,]
And slack their brains for want of Rope,
To raise their Jests, whilst they would spand
A world of wit, with their short hand.
The down of Proteus woolen Pelt
Made up in fashion of a felt;
Wilt suit their bald-pates, which do rig
Each man's hair for a Perriwig;
To hide their shame, but do not cry,
Or startle at That is stealing of Books.
Book Felony,
Such er'wig'd theives, that lie in lurch,
We Will yirk with the Mercurian Birch;
And put their ranging wits in pound,
For breaking into others ground.
But if they will not corrected be,
We Will hang them on the Daphnean-tree
Against Antiquarians.
I Like not time observers of our age,
Who bring up It Is plain here, that he means the Praeadamitae.
Adam on the Stage;
And by their too long wasted crime,
Blab what was done before his time.
If you will but crown their heads with Bays,
They Will publish the Acts of Joan Popes days:
They raise up Antiques from the Grave,
To fright away the wit they have.
They tell of Ixion in a fog
And a blind tale of Tobits They had read the Apocrapha
Dog.
They worship every Ancients shrine,
And kneel before the Grecian wine.
They Have top'd so much old Massick Ale,
Their running wits are now grown stale.
On the Death of his good old Tutour, Mr. G. S. of W. C.
I Keep a Fast day: now mine eyes repent,
A shower of tears falls from my Read it fundament.
Firmament:
Come paint him out (my Muse) let tears now blush,
And force his sable Cheeks to wear A kind of wear like black Skarlet.
gules Plush.
Come scan your sobs; come steep your eyes in That Is a good way to be blind
indeed.
Brine,
My eyes shall weep for him red Musca-[dell]-dine.
But here (alas) the dew that often does fall
From the region of mine Eyes Where note, that tears are not Aqua vitae.
cannot recall
Him unto life: since he has tried the mote
Round Pluto's house in Charon's Ferry-boat.
His gozling soul long sat in's bodies Tree,
VVhilest that the fates hist at's felicity:
At length being fledged by Age, it soon got loose,
Dropped into Styx, and turned a gagling Goose.
Now grazing pleasure in the Elisian Fields,
It reaps that bliss that Jove's green meadow yields.
The Popes base breasts of sin he did not nurse,
Though he adjur'd him by his triple Curse.
Of's learning let none doubt, he is dead and gone,
Who was whilst here a Now he is a dead Helicon it seems.
living Helicon.
To the Pegasides he was a Groom,
The Muses made his Head their Dining Room.
The Synagogue of Arts he did adore,
But now no No, nor Science neither.
Art can him to life restore.
Great Rhetorician sure: and now we see,
That death does prove to him a Because you know Syncope tollit de medio:
there is the wit.
Syncope.
Praise is his debt: his debts I care not for,
Since Death by right was his Executor.
Upon an Hermophradite seen in Cornwall, who went under the shape of a Woman,
and yet was no Woman: is not that strange
MAn's of the So are some women too.
Common Gender: no strange sight,
That Homo's split into Hermophradite.
Nature coined Male and Female in a spleen,
So her first stamp was purely Epicene.
Both kinds (in virtue) she in man did twist,
And now here is one turned Adam's Formalist.
She did allow the Banes; and so this Elf
Cannot commit Fornication with her self.
Stay Hymen's Priest, here is no need of you,
Since Nature finished that which you should do.
O rare Artess! your fingers sure did itch,
When that you wrought this piece in Otherwise called Rugwork, or, stripped.
carpetting
Irish stitch.
Spread-Eagle like, whose members all do wed
In one body, a Separatist in's head.
Whilst Venus for most share in it did fight,
Mars stepping in half stewed it Heteroclite.
John claims a right in Jone's Meum and tuum.
cracked Maidenhead;
Zeal them betrothed, and time them married.
Like man and wife in concord they agree;
From Mars and Venus sprang sweet Harmony,
In Morpheus reign when Nature seemed to slumber,
It kept in Sex, what then it lost in number.
Venus let fall her Garter in a Plot,
To tie these two in one true Lovers knot.
Nature did change its own command, and feature,
When it did weave this linsie-woolsie creature,
Great Boreas blustres in a sweat, when he
Casts up the Spanish Genet's Pedigree,
Whose Compater he is, and now is grown bold
To The Author excepts farting.
cough, and sneeze, since that he caught a cold.
A furious North Wind from my mouth will blow:
Yea more then Boreas I shall puff, and blow,
If I should undertake to state the Nation,
From whence first came this coddled generation.
As for this Bastard brood which is our Theme,
The mother did conceive it in a dream,
Whilst that the Surely he means the nightwizzard, for a witch is a woman, and
a woman cannot --
night-witch rid her, and so she
Produced of Sexes a Plurality.
She clucking for to sit, the wandering God
Sent his Night-raven for to have her trod.
And whilst she cackling to his Godhead prayed,
An Egg with two crowns tipped she kern'd, and laid,
And so hatched it, by whose heat in the shell,
'Twas half sod Hen; half poach't a Cockerell;
And though nick-nam'd, a Female it does go,
Yet amongst the Cocks it has a man-like Crow.
By the strange motion of the Sun and Moon,
She rose, and went to bed at Tillain-noon.
All Coin is naught with Parents, 'less it carry
The perfect Image of Grammercy Mr. Cleveland
Philip and Mary;
And that they still might bear this in their mind,
Nature it mint's and pays them in their kind.
O happy Soul! Cynthia will never scare thee
With Bugbear words, for Cod-piss thievery.
The Close of all; being an Admonition to the Reader, not to envy his Poems.
LEt no Christian that has true grace,
View these with a It Is no matter with what Eyes he look on it.
Malignant face;
But pray that Heaven their lights would snuff,
'Cause Satan plays at Blind-man-buff
With men, and hood's their Intellects,
Casting up Cock-all for those Sects.
By which the Author means the end of the Book.
FINIS.
TWO EXACT CHARACTERS, One of a Temporizer.

The other of an Antiquarian.

-- Notus nimis omnibus Ignotus moriar mihi. --

Printed by the same Order.

THE CHARACTER OF A Temporizer.
HE is One, that is always in fashion; though Time puts on New Clothes every
Day. He is divided from none more then himself. He is a Spawn of Janus the name
of a fish, yclepped, A Codshead.
Janus, who prefac't His Old Visage with a New mode, according to the season of
the Year; or as some would have it, shifted His Countenance against Quarter
Day. If I would speak him fully, I must Weathercock my Phrase, to wait upon
the unconstant Wind. What He but now applauded, He strait snarles at, and with
Rigor condemns. Like that Stout Lettered If any one can bring the sense of
this to the Crier, he shall be well paid for his pains
Trencher Man, who for Theevery burnt the Innocent Board, which before by its
harsh Parent was branded, though He himself allowed of the action, as appeared
by the Clergy of Letters, written in fair Characters on the Accusants,
Frontispice, that backed with a full Stomach Where note, Minerva's stomach is in
her back.
Minerva did plead for the Damned Instrument, merely passive in the Felony.
Look in his face, and you may see what a Clock it is though the Sun don't Shine:
When He holds up His noddle, then it is toward Noonday Glory with him. When He
casts it downwards, and doubles His Shadow (for He himself's no better) then
you may guess, that the Sun is declining upon him. He has enacted materia
prima, Queen Regent of all Forms, whilst he personally stands Her Rival
Probationer, and proves himself capable to be crowned with every one of them,
unless it be a Rational one. To name Him Proteus is too much to All to whoop
him.
hallow Him: for He Turn-Coats Himself, facing the Ancient Matter with a New
fashioned shape, which flatly falls out with the former: But our Theme new
moulds it self yet to the sight remains the Old man still. We Will coat Him for
one with Aeneus Gift, who is already Winterclothed with Rapes from others of
all kinds, and may at length stretch for them, if He timely betakes not himself
to Long-Lane for a Larger, and A Clook in Folio.
deeper volum'd Cloak to cover His Knavery. This Temporizing Turky-Cock, he
charges His winged Forces, and mounts His Crescent Tail, as Hannibal did His
half- moon'd Motley Army, against all that appear in Scarlet, unless they be of
his own In the Author's country there are Scarlet Turkycocks.
Gender. A Babel of opinions lie grip't up in this Religions Amsterdam'd He
means Cobbler.
Translator, who, if we consider as new Sold, with his Leathern converted Ears,
is always Catterwouling for Union: though he himself proves a Breeder of
discord. His Judgment and Conscience are great Separatists one from another;
what the one approves of, the other by are flect Act in greatest detestation
bannes back again; in which He murders the Intention of the wise One, who has
placed a rectified Intellect in the Forefront of the soul, to guide the
underlin faculties in their Actions. But why talk I of a Rectified Judgment to
Him, who is from Heaven cursed with its contrary: so that it is no wonder that
those Twins, which are familiar Cronies in others, turn Aliens in Him. He can
patiently put on the gaudy Materiality of a Bishopric, but as for the
Formality of it, down with that Bloody Whore of Babylon. He begets a brood
which are ready to pick out his very eyes, like to those Church-going Ethnic
souls, who viewing their Mistresses* do ( as I may say with modesty)
Fornication is no immodest Action.
commit fornication with the Virgin Pewes; which common actions makes Nature
sometimes in her operations Shitt.
work backward, and the Males bring forth a spurious offspring of Retrograding
Animals, which in a short time do attempt Orestes-like, the devouring of their
Tweakers by Jove*
rampant Genitals, Misconstrue me not, gentle Reader, I challenge any carping
Paedagogue of them all, to Wrymouth this last sentence into profaneness; yet
in that point I cannot match him, who is Religions Litter'd The Dutchwomens
issue of the DILDO.
Sooterkin kindled by the Stove of his own counterfeit Zeal. If this prodigious
Shark had appeared in Thessaly* mounted on one of the winds Spanish race, the
silly people with more reason had Centaur'd the Epithet in Surnaming him
Monstrous. Certainly when Nature penned him out, she had an eye to the Exampler
of Divelish A Description of this Character.
Nonsense, written on Queens College Library's Dutch paper Walls. She has so
articulately pointed him out the Copy, that the confused Original seems in him
in some measure understood: she begun with his Feet, those gouty emblems of his
Hands, where she fingered his Toes; from thence she ascends, and makes his
Knees wear Points* and so upwards she Comma's every bending joint, till toward
the ending of her work she infers his long sentenc't Nose within the Hairy
Parenthesis of his Eyebrows; so she proceeds stopping the course of his
rambling Eyes with a Colon, which with Sir reverence.
Reverence behold his wide gaping Mouth, where Nature wisely makes a full stop,
else she had never enjoyed Rest all her life time. He has no valor and yet
he will vie with That is when he gave Danae a clap, not a thunder clap: now this
same Jupiter was a devilish whoremaster, etc. see Farnaby upon Ovid Met.
Jupiter to ruffle in a Golden storm, so that he may Bride his Love and wear
such glittering apparel on Holy days. I cannot Nickname him, if I Epicaene
the Press, and Godfather hic et haec Homo, a A Dog and Bitch.
He and she Man. He is a Candidate capable of no other, but Infant Modern
Nobility which savours too much of Parchment, and Shrivels into nothing, even
as the Matter deceases out of which it was created. He Is a right Antiquarian in
this, that he loves to pursue Ruins. And because I Am hardly entreated by a
One Jack Saturday.
Friend, I shall attempt the description of an Antiquarian: neither shall I
much vary from the Matter in Hand, if I proceed from a Fool to an A Wit*
Antique.

THE CHARACTER OF AN Antiquarian.
HE is a Cornish Pedling Historian; for as that Country's Dwarf Merchant, grow
great Stonecutters.
monumental Tradesmen by degrees, with picking their scattered livings from
Quarries; so our Theme blisters to a considerable Historian, by rifling the
stones for History. Nay such is his fletch't Impiety, that the pure Ashes of
the Dead do not escape his Inquisition; hence it is he vexes the Tombs for almost
mortified Inscriptions, and sacril^giously steals that away from them, which
did both cover and comprehend them. That A certain kind of Vermin that has
never a letter in his name.
unlettered Vermin which daily Diets and waxes fat on Letters, devours more
learning in his progress through a Book, than he by all his jumbling
productions begets, of his own, in his whole life time. That ceremonious Soul
which idolatrously worshiped the Gentlewomans thredbare Garment, might have
quietly kissed her Rear, which questionless was the senior of the two, wiped his
Mouth with her Petticoated Antiquity, and so had escaped without a dried jeer
and like a good Husband have saved his prodigal Breath to cool his Pottage. I
wonder, as there is an Order for the extirpation of Papists out of this Land,
that Antiquarians are not inserted amongst that Roman zealous crew; for they
are both sinners of the same stock, (viz.) Worshippers of Graven-Images; and
without equivocation, breakers of the second Commandment. With what reverence
do they put off their Heads to any old broken-snooted similitude* but that
sacred Antiquated Table to whom they ought devoutly to doff their Fe^ts The
poorer sort of the Author's countrymen wear caps upon their shoes, to conceal
the holes at their toes.
Caps, they slightly pass by, without the least Ethick Nod of due respect, had
not a reverent Madam proved a she patron to some Zealots in this Doctrine: Had
not other more noble Learning club'd to the preservation of his memorable name,
certainly it long e're this had been buried with his Beard-shavings, in
Oblivion. Praiseworthy only this, that by Art he confines a Cluster of Ages
into the narrow Compass of his own. Like that Artificer which buttoned up a
full Dozen of Silver Spoons in a Diminutive Box. But more like that People,
which teach their Beds contraction, whose drouzy Pates may be truly said to lie
in their Pockets all the Day. Now I think on it, how verily do my two Theams
agree? It Is no wonder, good Wits always jump: Like Castor and Pollux, Brethren
in Iniquity, how do they crisp embraces? They both keep a general meeting in
this, that they are Men of the Times; a pair of petty Haberdasher'd
Chronologers, which keep a circumspect Mysteries all!
notary of Novelties, that so he may the better see which way the Wind fits.
But Characters should be short-handed, therefore take this for a parting blow.
May the Beasts once cast off those thick skinned Vapors, which smoking
upwards, do shadow their dull brains. Or were they by some Chemist Hat-maker
extracted, those reaking fumes by the Artist condensed, and modified, would
very handsomely beaver their Blocks, and fit them as neatly, as e're the
ancient Black-capt Cloud did the Divine Temple.

My Muses feet would surely have slipped, if I had (as I was desired) attempted
these Rocks in Verse, without a liberal expense of Vinegar'd The Author does
not accustom himself to piss in his standish.
Ink, the defect of which (cry mercy) I might have supplied out of the
Fountainhead of their sower Looks.

Sic explicit Antiquarius.
FINIS.
BOOKS PRINTED FOR Nath. Brook, And are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in
Cornhill.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are printted for Nath. Brook, and are
to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, Devotions.
THe Catholic History collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
Ancient Fathers, in Answer to Dr. Vane's Lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesensale, Esquire Octavo. 2. Bishop Morton on the Sacrament, in Folio. 3. The
Grand Sacrilege of the Church of Rome; in taking away the sacred Cup from the
Laity at the Lords Table; by Dr. Featley, DD. Quarto. 4. The Quakers Cause at
second hearing, being a full answer to their Tenets. 5. Re-assertion of Grace:
Vindiciae Evangelii, or the Vindication of the Gospel: a Reply to Mr. Anthony
Burghess Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Ruthford, by Robert Town. 6. Anabaptists
anatomized and silenced: or, a Dispute with Mr. Tombs, by Mr. J. Grag; where
all may receive clear satisfaction in that Controversy. The best extant,
Octavo. 7. A Glimpse of Divine Light, being an Explication of some passages
exhibited to the Commissioners at White Hall for Approbation of Public
Preachers, against J. Harrison of Land Chap. Lanca. 8. The zealous Magistrate;
a Sermon by T. Threscos. Quarto. 9. New Jerusalem, in a Sermon for the Society
of Astrologers, Quarto, in the Year 1651. 10. Divinity no enemy to Astrology. A
Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in the Year 1643. by Dr. Thomas
Swaddling. 11. Britannia Rediviva. A Sermon before the Judges, August 1648. by
J. Shaw Minister of Hull. 12. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the
Judges, March 24. by J. Shaw. 13. Judgment set, and Books opened, Religion
tried whether it be of God or Man, in several Sermons; by J. Webster. Quarto.
14. Isreal's Redemption, or, the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom on
Earth; by K. Matton. 15. The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, and
Profaneness; or, a more hopeful way to Grace and Salvation; by K. Young.
Octavo. 16. A Bridle for the Times, tending to still the murmuring, to settle
the wavering, to stay the wandering, and to strengthen the fainting: by J.
Brinsley of Yarmouth. 17. Comforts against the fear of Death; wherein are
discovered several Evidences of the work of Grace: by J. Collins of Norwich.
18. Jacobs Seed; or, the excellency of seeking God by prayer, by Jer.
Buroughs. 19. The sum of Practical Divinity; or, the grounds of Religion in a
Chatechisticall way, by Mr. Christopher Love late Minister of the Gospel: a
useful piece. 20. Heaven and Earth shaken; a Treatise showing how Kings and
Princes, their Governments are turned and changed, by J. Davis Minister in
Dover, admirably useful, and seriously to be considered in these times. 21. The
Treasure of the Soul; wherein we are taught, by dying to sin, to attain to the
perfect love of God. 22. A Treatise of Contestation, fit for these sad and
troublesome times, by J. Hall Bish. of Norwich. 23. Select thoughts; or, choice
helps for a pious spirit, beholding the excellency of her Lord Jesus: by J.
Hall Bishop of Norwich. 24. The Holy Order, or Fraternity of Mourners in Zion;
to which is added, Songs in the night, or cheerfulness under afflictions: by J.
Hall Bishop of Norwich. 25. The Celestial Lamp, enlightening every distressed
Soul from the depth of everlasting darkness: by T. Fetisplace.
Admirable, and Learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chyromancy.
26. Magic and Astrology vindicated by H. Warren. 27. Lux Veritatis, Judicial
Astrology vindicated and Demonology confuted; by W. Ramsey Gent. 28. An
Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy; being a determination of the Original
of the Soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter-House in Cambridge. 29. Cornelius
Agrippa, his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy; Magical Elements of
Peter de Abona, the nature of spirits: made English by R. Turner. 30.
Paracelsus Occult Philosophy, of the Mysteries of Nature, and his secret
Alchimy. 31. An Astrological Discourse with Mathematical Demonstrations;
proving the influence of the Planets, and fixed Stars upon Elementary Bodies:
by Sir Chri. Heydon Knight. 32. Merlinus Anglicus Junior; the English Merlin
revived, or, a Prediction upon the Affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644.
by W. Lilly. 33. Englands Prophetical Merlin; foretelling to all Nations of
Europe, till. 1663. the actions depending upon the influences of the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1642. by W. Lilly. 34. The Starry Messenger,
or an Interpretation of that strange Apparition of three Suns seen in London,
the 19. of November 1644. being the Birthday of King Charles; by W. Lilly 35.
The Worlds Catastrophe; or, Europes many Mutations, until 1666. by W. Lilly.
34. An Astrological Prediction of the Occurrences in England; part of the Years
1648, 1649. 1650. by W. Lilly. 37. Monarchy or no Monarchy in England; the
Prophecy of the White King, Grebner his Prophecy, concerning Charles, Son of
Charles, his Greatness; illustrated with several Hieroglyphics; by W. Lilly.
38. Annus Tenebrosus, or the Dark Year; or, Astrological Judgments upon two
Lunary Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of the Sun in England, 1652. by W.
Lilly. 39. An easy and familiar Method, whereby to judge the effects depending
on Eclipses; by W. Lilly 40. Supernatural Sights and Apparitions seen in
London, June, 30. 1644. by W. Lilly. As also all his Works in a Volume. 41.
Catastrophe Magnatum: an Ephemerides for the Year 1652. by N. Culpepper. 42.
Teratologia; or, a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody rain and
Waters; by J. S. 53. Chyromancy; or the Art of divining by the Lines engraven
in the hand of Man, by dame Nature, in 198. Genitures; with a Learned Discourse
of the Soul of the World; by G. Wharton Esquire 44. The admired Piece of
Physiognomy, and Chyromancy, Metoposcopy, the Symmetrical Proportions, and
Signal Moles of the Body, the Interpretation of Dreams; to which is added the
Art of Memory; illustrated with Figures: by Rich. Sanders, in Folio. 45. The no
less exquisite then admirable Work, Theatrum Chemicum, Britannicum; containing
several* Poetical Pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have written
the Hermitique Mysteries in their own ancient Language; faithfully collected
into one Volume, with Annotations thereon: by the Indefatigable industry of
Elias Ashmole, Esquire illustrated with Figures.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts, or Mechanics.
46. The incomparable Treatise of Tactometria, seu Tetagmenometria; or, the
Geometry of Regulars, practically proposed, after a new and most expeditious
manner, together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of Mensural comparison) and
in the Solids, not only in respect of Magnitude or Demension, but also of
Gravity or Ponderosity, according to any Metal assigned: together with useful
experiments of Measures and Weights, Observations on Gauging, useful for those
that are practiced in the Art Metricald; by T. Wybard. 47. Tectonicon, showing
the exact measuring of all manner of Land, Squares, Timber, Stone, Steeples,
Pillars, Globes; as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, etc. fit to
be known by all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners, Carpenters, and Masons: by L.
Diggs. 48. The unparalled Work for ease and expedition, entitled, The exact
Surveyor: or, the whole Art of Surveying of Land, showing how to plot all
manner of Grounds, whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood-lands, or
Mountains, by the Plain Table; as also how to find the Area, or Content of any
Land, to Protect, Reduce or Divide the same; as also to take the Plot or Cart,
to make a Map of any Manor, whether according to Rathburne, or any other
Eminent Surveyors Method; a Book excellently useful for those that sell,
purchase, or are otherwise employed about Buildings; by J. Air. 49. The golden
Treatise of Arithmetic, Natural and Artificial, or Decimals; the Theory and
Practice united in a simpathetical Proportion, betwixt Lines and Numbers, in
their Quantities and Qualities, as in respect of Form, Figure, Magnitude, and
Affection; demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed
with variety of Examples in every Species; made compendious and easy for
Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by Th. Wilsford Corrector of
the last Edition of Record. 50. Semigraphy, or the Art of Short-writing, as it
has been proved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by
them practiced, and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest
method; the meanest capacity by the help of this Book, with a few hours
practice, may attain to a perfection in this Art; by J. Rich Author and Teacher
thereof, dwelling in Swithings-Lane in London. 51 Milk for Children; a plain
and easy Method teaching to read and write, useful for Schools and Families,
by J. Thomas D. D. 52. The Painting of the Ancients; the History of the
beginning, progress, and consummating of the practice of that noble Art of
Painting; by F. Junius.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Chyrurgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
53. Culpeppers's Semiatica Vranica, his Astrological judgment of Diseases
from the decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged: the way and manner of finding
out the cause, change, and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely
to live or die, and the time when Recovery or Death is to be expected,
according to the judgment of Hipocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is
added Mr. Culpeppers censure of Urines. 54. Culpeper's last Legacy, left to his
Wife for the public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those
secrets in Physic and Chyrurgery; which whilst he lived, were locked up in his
breast, and resolved never to be published till after his death. 55. The
Torkshire Spaw; or, the virtue and use of that water in curing of desperate
diseases, with directions and rules necessary to be considered by all that
repair thither. 56. Most approved Medicines and Remedies for the diseases in
the body of Man: by A. Read Dr. in Physic. 57. The Art of Simpling: an
introduction to the knowledge of gathering of Plants, wherein the definitions,
divisions, places, descriptions, differences, names, virtues, times of
gathering tempratures of them are compendiously discoursed of: also a Discovery
of the Lesser World, by W. Coals. 58. Adam in Eden, or, Natures Paradise: the
History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with their several original names, the
places where they grow, their descriptions and kinds, their times of
flourishing and decreasing; as also their several signatures, anatomical
appropriations, and particular physical virtues; with necessary Observations on
the Seasons of planting and gathering of our English Plants. A Work admirably
useful for Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, and other Ingenuous persons, who may in
this Herbal find comprised all the English physical simples, that Gerard or
Parkinson, in these two voluminous Herbals have discoursed of, even so as to be
on emergent occasions their own Physicians, the ingredients being to be had in
their own fields and gardens; Published for the general good, by W. Coals, M.
D. 59 The Complete Midwives practice, in the high and weighty concernments of
the body of Mankind: or perfect Rules derived from the experiences and
writings, not only of our English, but the most accomplished and absolute
practices of the French, Spanish, Italians, and other Nations; so fitted for
the weakest capacities, that they may in a short time attain to the knowledge
of the whole Art: by Dr. T. C. with the advice of others, illustrated with
Copper Figures. 60. The Queens Closet opened: incomparable Secrets in Physic,
Chyrurgery, Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented to the
Queen by the most experienced persons of our times; many whereof were honored
with her own Practice.
Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, Romances, and Poetry.
61. Times Treasury, or Academy, for the accomplishment of the English Gentry
in Arguments of Discourse, Habit, Fashion, Behavior etc. all summed up in
Characters of Honor, by R. Brathwait Esquire. 62. Oedipus, or, the Resolver of the
secrets of Love, and other natural Problems, by way of Question and Answer. 63.
The Admirable and most impartial History of New England, of the first
plantation there, in the yeart 1628. brought down to these times: all the
material passages performed there, exactly related. 64. The tears of the
Indians: the History of the bloody and most cruel proceedings of the Spaniards
in the Island of Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and other places of
the West Indies; in which to the life are discovered the tyrannies of the
Spaniards, as also the justness of our War so successfully managed against
them. 65. The Illustrious Shepherdess. The Imperious Brother: written
originally in Spanish by that incomparable wit, Don John Perez de Montalbans;
translated at the requests of the Marchioness of Dorchester, and the Countess
of Stafford, by E. P. 66. The History of the Golden Ass, as also the Loves of
Cupid and his Mistress Psiche: by L. Apulcius translated into English. 67. The
Unfortunate Mother: a Tragedy by T. N. 68. The Rebellion: a Tragedy by T.
Rawlins. 69. The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate Roman Empress: by N.
Richards. 70. The floating Island: a Trage-Comedy, acted before the King, by
the Students of Christs-Church in Oxon; by that renowned wit W. Strode, the
songs were set by Mr. Henry Laws. 71. Harvey's Divine Poems, the History of
Balaam, of Jonah, and of St. John the Evangelist. 72. Fons Lachrymarum, or, a
Fountain of tears; the Lamentaions of the Prophet Jeremiah in Verse, with an
Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas; by I. Quarles. 73. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with
other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs; by R. Chamberlain. 74. The admirable
ingenuous Satyr against Hypocrites.
Poetical, with several other accurately iugenuous Treatises, lately Printed.
75. Wits Interpreter, the English Parnassus: or a sure Guide to those admirable
Accomplishments that complete the English Gentry, in the most acceptable
Qualifications of Discourse or Writing. An Art of Logic, accurate Complements,
Fancies, Devices, and Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and A la mode
Letters: by J. C, 76. Wit and Drollery; with other Jovial Poems: by Sir J. M.
M. L. M. S. W. D. 77. Sportive Wit, the Muses Merriment; a new Spring of
Drollery; Jovial Fancies, etc. 78. The Conveyancer of Light, or, the Complete
Clerk, and Scriveners Guide; being an exact draught of all Presidents and
Assurances now in use; as they were penned, and perfected by diverse Learned
Judges, Eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both Ancient and Modern:
whereunto is added a Concordance from King Richard the 3. to this present. 79.
Themis Aurea, The Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross; in which, the
occult Secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by
Count Mayerus, and now Englisht by T. H. 80. The Iron Rod put into the Lord
Protectors hand; a Prophetical Treatise. 81. Medicina Magica tamen Physica;
Magical but Natural Physic: containing the general Cures of Infirmities and
Diseases belonging to the Bodies of Men, as also to other animals and domestic
Creatures, by way of Transplantion: with a Description of the most excellent
Cordial out of Gold; by Sam. Boulton of Salop. 82. J. Tradiscan's Rareties,
published by himself. 83. The Proceedings of the High Court of Justice against
the late King Charles, with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other
Proceedings, Jan. 30. 1648. 84. The perfect Cook; a right Method in the Art of
Cookery, whether for Pastry, or all other manner of Al a Mode Kick-shaws; with
the most refined ways of dressing of flesh, fowl, or making of the most
poinant Sawces, whether after the French, or English manner, together with
fifty five ways of dressing of Eggs: by M. M.
Admirable Useful Treatises newly printed.
85. The Expert Doctors Dispensatory: the whole Art of Physic restored to
practice: the Apothecaries shop, and Chyrurgeons Closet opened; with a Survey,
as also a correction of most Dispensatories now extant; with a Judicious
Censure of their defects; and a supply of what they are deficient in: together
with a learned account of the virtues and quantities, and uses of Simples and
Compounds; with the Symptoms of Diseases; as also prescriptions for their
several cures: by that renowned P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France; a
work for the order, usefulness, and plainness of the Method, not to be
paralleled by any Dispensatory, in what Language soever. 86. Cabinet of Jewels,
Man's Misery, Gods Mercy, Christ's Treasury, etc. in eight Sermons; with an
Appendix of the nature of Tithes under the Gospel; with the expediency of
Marriage in public Assemblies, by J. Crag, Minister of the Gospel. 87.
Natures Secrets; or the admirable and wonderful History of the generation of
Meteors; describing the Temperatures of the Elements, the heights, magnitudes,
and influences of Stars; the causes of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical
Diseases, and Prodigies of Precedent times; with presages of the weather: and
descriptions of the weather-glass: by T. Wilsford. 88. The Mysteries of Love
and Eloquence; or, the Arts of Wooing and Complementing; as they are managed in
the Spring Garden Hide Park the New Exchange, and other eminent places. A work,
in which are drawn to the life the Deportments of the most Accomplished Persons;
the Mode of their Courtly Entertainments, Treatment of their Ladies at Balls,
their accustomed Sports, Drolls and Fancies; the Witchcrafts of their
persuasive Language, in their Approaches, or other more Secret Dispatches, etc.
by E. P. 89. Helmont disguised; or, the vulgar errors of impercial and
unskilful Practicers of Physic confuted; more especially as they concern the
Cures of Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases by way of
Dialogue, in which the chief rareties of Physic are admirably discoursed of,
by I. T.
Books very lately Printed, and in the Press now printing.
1. THe Scales of Commerce and Trade: by T. Wilsford. 2. Geometry demonstrated
by Lines and Numbers; from thence, Astronomy, Cosmography, and Navigation
proved and delineated by the Doctrine of Plain and Spherical Triangles; by T.
Wilsford. 3. The English Annals, from the Invasion made by Julius Caesar to
these times: by T. Wilsford. 4. The Fool transformed: A Comedy. 5. The History
of Lewis the eleventh King of France: a Trage-Comedy. 6. The Chaste woman
against her will; a Comedy. 7. The Tooth-drawer; a Comedy. 8. Honor in the
end: A Comedy. 9. Tell Tale; a Comedy. 10. The History of Donquixiot, or the
Knight of the ill-favored face; a Comedy. 11. The fair Spanish Captive; a
Trage-Comedy. 12. Sir Kenelm Digby, and other persons of Honor, their rare and
incomparable secrets of Physic, Chyrurgery, Cookery, Preserving, Conserving,
Candying, distilling of Waters, extraction of Oils, compounding of the
costliest Perfumes, with other admirable Inventions, and select Experiments, as
they offered themselves to their Observations; whether here, or in foreign
Countries. 13. The Soul's Cordial in two Treatises, the first teaching how to
be eased of the guilt of Sin, the second, discovering advantages by Christ's
Ascension; by that faithful Labourer in the Lords Vineyard, Mr. Christopher
Love, late Parson of Lawrence Jury: the third Volume. 14. Jacobs Seed, the
excellency of seeking God by Prayer; by the late reverend Divine, J. Buroughs.
15. The Saints Tombstone; or, the Remains of the blessed. A plain Narrative of
some remarkable Passages, in the holy Life, and happy Death of Mistress Dorothy
Shaw, Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Preacher of the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull,
collected by her dearest Friends, especially for her sorrowful Husband and six
Daughters consolation and invitation. 16. The accomplished Cook, the mystery of
the whole Art of Cookery, revealed in a more easy and perfect method, then
has been published in any Language: expert and ready ways for the dressing of
flesh, fowl and fish, the raising of Pastes, the best directions for all manner
of Kick-shaws, and the most poinant Sauces, with the terms of Carving and
Sewing: the Bills of fare, an exact account of all dishes for the season, with
other Al a mode curiosities, together with the lively illustrations of such
necessary figures, as are referred to practice: approved by the many years
experience, and careful industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance
on several persons of honor. 17. The exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday,
the late admired Translater of the Volumes of the famed Romance Cleopatra, for
the perpetuating his Memory, Published by his dear Brother Mr. A. L. 18. The so
long expected Work, the New World of English Words, or, a general Dictionary,
containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and perfect Interpretations of
the proper significations of hard English words throughout the Arts and
Sciences, Liberal, or Mechanic; as also other subjects that are useful, or
appertain to the Languge of our Nation; to which is added the signification of
Proper Names, Mythology, and Poetical Fictions, Historical Relations,
Geographical Descriptions of the Countries, and Cities of the World; especially
of these three Nations, wherein their chiefest Antiquities, Battles, and other
most memorable Passages are mentioned: A Work very necessary for Strangers, as
well as our own Contrymen, for all persons that would rightly understand
what they discourse, write or read. Collected an published by E. P. for the
greater honor of those learned Gentlemen and Artists that have been assistant
in the most Practical Sciences, their Names are prefixed before the Book. 19.
The so much desired, and deeply learned Comentary, on Psalm the fifteenth, by
that Reverend and Eminent Divine Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Minister of the
Gospel in York to which is prefixed a brief account to the Authors life, and
of his Work, by R. Bolton. 20. The way to bliss, in three Books, being a
learned Treatise of the Philosophers Stone, made public by Elias Ashmole Esquire.
21. Wit restored in several Select Poems, not formerly published by Sir John
Mennis, Mr. Smith and others. 22. The Judges charge, delivered in a Sermon
before Mr. Justice Hall, and Mr. Sergeant Crook Judges of the Assize, at St.
Mary Overies in Southwark by R. Purre M. A. Pastor of Camerwel, in the County
of Surrey; a Sermon worthy of the perusal of all such persons, as endeavor to
be honest and just Practitioners in the Law. 23. The Modern Assurancer, the
Clerks Directory, containing the Practick Part of the Law, in the exact Forms
and Draughts of all manner of Presidents for Bargains, and Sales, Grants,
Feoffements, Bonds, Bills, Conditions, Covenants, Jointures, Indentures; to
lead the use of Fines and Recoveries, with good Proviso's, and Covenants to
stand seized, Charter parties for Ships, Leases, Releases, Surrendets, etc. And
all other Instruments and Assurances now in use, intended for all young
Students and Practicers of the Law, by John Hern. 24. Moor's Arithmatick, the
second Edition much refined and diligently cleared from the former Mistakes of
the Press. A Work containing the whole Art of Arithmetic, as well in Numbers,
as Species. Together with many Additions by the Author, to come forth at
Machaelmas Term.
Likewise,

25. Exercitatio Elleiptica Nova, or a new Mathematical Contemplation on the
Oval Figure, called an Elleipsis; together with the two first Books of
Mydorgius his Conicks Analiz'd, and made so plain, that the Doctrine of Conical
Sections may be easily understood, a Work much desired, and never before
published in the English Tongue; by Jonas Moor, Surveyor General of the great
Level of the Fennes. 26. The Joys of Heaven, the Saints support in Gods
Promises on Earth, Christ's Sermons on the Beatitudes. An Exposition of the
fifth Chapter of St. Matthew, delivered in several Sermons by Mr. Jeremiah
Buroughs, the last Sermons he preached a little before his Death, at St. Giles
Cripple-gate, London. 27. Naps upon Parnassus. A sleepy Muse nipt and pincht,
though not awakened. Such voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verses as were lately
received from some of the WITS of the Universities, in a Frolic; dedicated to
Gondibert's Mistress, by Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is added for
Demonstration of the Authors prosaick Excellency's, his Epistle to one of the
Universities, with the Answer; together with two Satirical Characters of his
own, of a Temporizer, and an Antiquary, with Marginal Notes by a Friend to the
Reader.
FINIS.

