A DECLARATION Of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND The Council of War;
Disclaiming a Pamphlet, Entitled, ( Heads p^esented by the Army to the Kings
Majesty on Saturday, June 19. 1647.)

And another written Paper, Entitled, ( Articles agreed upon between the KING
and the ARMY, June 16. 1647.)

July 5 LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.

A DECLARATION OF His Excellency Sr. Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of War;
Disclaiming A Pamphlet, Entitled, Heads presented by the Army to the Kings
Majesty, on Saturday, June 19. 1647. etc.
WHEREAS we find a Pamphlet lately Printed and Published, bearing the Title of
( Heads presented by the Army to the Kings Majesty, on Saturday, June 19.
1647.) though we think it will of it self appear such a confused Headless
Piece, so surreptitiously crept forth, and in such a pure Pamphlet dress, as
(we hope) it will gain little belief to our prejudice; yet to avoid any
jealousies or doubtful thoughts which it might possibly breed in any honest
mind, we cannot but take notice of it, and for the vindication of the Army,
do hereby declare, That the said Printed Pamphlet is most false, scandalous,
and injurious to us, and this Army; neither has there been any such Paper
presented to His Majesty by, or from this Army: And the same we profess and
declare with great detestation concerning another written Paper, whereof we had
a Copy showed to us yesterday by the Commissioners of the City, entitled, (
Articles agreed upon between the King and the Army, the 16. of June;) And we
desire all that wish well to this Army, or the King, or Parliament, or Peace of
this Kingdom, that they would do their best to find out and discover the
Authors and Publishers of the said Paper and Pamphlet, or any thing else of
that nature that may be divulged concerning the Army, to interrupt or
prejudice the present settling and composure of Affairs. And we hope it will
not be further needful, or expected from us, that we should give particular
Answer to every such scandalous Paper, which the malice of our Enemies may
forge against us. But that what we have published to the world in our
Representation, and other papers avowed by us, may serve to clear our
intentions until we shall appear to act something to the contrary.

Wickham, July 1. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax,
and his Council of War. Signed, Jo. Rushworth.

FINIS.

