An Alarm to TRUMPETS: OR, Mount Chival to every dejected, remiss, and secure
Trumpet, either in England, Scotland, or Ireland.

By E. F.

Jerm. 4. 19, 20, 21. My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my
heart makes a noise in me, I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O
my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.

Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is spoiled: suddenly
are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.

How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet?

London, printed by R. I. for E. F. 1651.

To Horse.
Mount tag a taw naw, Mount tag a taw naw,
Mount tag a taw naw, Mount tag a taw naw,
Tinck tag a taw naw, Mount tag a taw naw,
Tinck tinck tag a taw naw, Mount tag a taw naw* etc*
woodcut of two horsemen blowing horns

Art thou seduced to sin, and do discry
Thy heart assenting to it, then straight way by
An Evangelicall conveyance say,
The Trumpet sounds to Horse, I cannot stay.
To his worthy Friend Mr. John Bret, Trumpet in special to His Excellency the
Lord General CROMWELL.
Kind Sir,
I Am persuaded that you are very sencible that we are fallen into as sad and
as bad times as has befallen this Nation, since and long before we were
acquainted with it; and indeed, let us balance the effect but by the cause,
and here is no cause of wonderment at all: We have often grieved and sadned the
good Spirit of the Lord, and now the Lords Spirit is about to saden us; we
have most unkindly lain his honor in the dust, and now he is about to throw us
into the grave; we have bin disobedient to the golden Scepter of Christ, and
now he may justly break us in pieces with a rod of Iron. Yet however the
changes and revolutions of the times may prove, it will go well, very well
with them that fear the Lord, of which number, I do confidently believe that
you are one; witness your Christian carriage amidst the sad miscarriages of
very many men of our Profession since the wars began; and though you have lain
open to as many, if not more, temptations then any of us all, considering the
very many Messages that you have bin employed in, and how you have bin
earnestly solicited both by the adverse party abroad, and importuned by your
loving friends at home; and yet the candid love and reciprocal affection you
always had to temperance and sobriety, by assistance from on high, you have
very safely waded through them all. I must confess it is a great honor to you,
that you have bin Trumpet to three most famous and renowned Generals. viz. To
the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Essex, to the right Honorable Thomas Lord
Fairfax, and to the Right Honorable the Lord Gen: Cromwell; but to be servant
to the most high and ever-living God, is an honor for you in a superlative
degree Indeed. I Will say no more for fear I may be thought to flatter you, only
entreat your love to patronize and shrowed a sheet or two under your kind
protection; in doing which, you will very much oblige me to remain,

Sir, Your faithful and assured Friend to command, Edw: Ford.

Dear Friends, and Brother TRUMPETS.
KNowing for certain that poor sinful man of all Creatures living is most
prone and incident, (especially in a natural condition) to permit and suffer
the benefits of the Lord easily to slide and slip out of his mind, and to bury
in oblivion all those great and memorable mercies that he from time to time
most graciously has bin pleased to give and bestow upon such worthless
worms, and poor unworthy Creatures as we are; and therefore to get our
hearts into a frame of better obedience for the time to come, let us a little
consider what the Lord has done for men of our quality by Sea and Land;
notwithstanding we have so grievously offended him both by Land and Sea, and
for his unparalleled love, and matchless mercies extended to us on the Ocean
Sea, there is many ancient and able Trumpets that are yet extant and living to
this day, can give a large and better testiment thereof then I, the names of
some of them, as my small acquaintance and short memory will give me leave, I
briefly shall insert to you, viz. Mr. Warner, Mr. Stock, Mr. Hopkins, Mr.
Bosgrave, Mr. Beale, Mr. Flowers, Mr. Simson, M. Farrell, M. Slaughter, M. Day,
M. Hawkins, Mr. Creammer, Mr. Deane, Mr. Loveday, Mr. Whitmeale, Mr. Cardiffe,
Mr. Walker, Mr. Anslow, Mr. Smith, Mr. Jefferies, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Gerard, Mr.
Bishop, Mr. Coe, Mr. Tailor, Mr. Hermon, Mr. Hill, Mr. Norman, Mr. Buckly, Mr,
Collins, Mr. Spilsworth, Mr. Argoe, Mr. Boon, Mr. Seaton, Mr. Williams, Mr.
Peacoke; these with many more, can evidence unto the world, what mercies and
miraculous preservations they have had, and how Divine Providence has led them
as it were by the hand, from place to place, from City to City, from Port to
Port, and from one Haven to another, and never left them till he had brought
them home, and safely arrived them where they feign would be; and for his love
and lenity by Land, there is few or none of any fashion, rank, or quality, but
can sufficiently demonstrate to the World, what choice and singular
Deliverances they have had since and before the beginning of these intestine
and unnatural Wars; and since Calamity like to a tedious Torrent, has
swiftly overtaken three poor distressed and distracted Nations all at once;
and because I am loath to appear too silent in reference unto what was said
before, I shall give you a list of some of the places, and eminent fights,
where God in mercy most graciously did appear, both for the safety and
preservation of such as did profess the quality of a Trumpet; as Branford,
Hounslow, Basing, Dorchester, Lynne, Weymouth, Tanton, Bristoll, Bridgewater,
Plymouth, Listethell, Newbury, Oxford, the Vizes, Cherry-downe, New Market,
Gloucester, Edgehill, Marston-Moore, Nazeby, with many places more, in all which
fights and several skirmishes, I never yet could learn that there was above
twenty Trumpets slain, only now and then a Trumpet wounded and taken prisoner
sometimes, which could not possibly be avoided in such notable chase and
dangerous fights as many of these same were; and how the Lord has mightily
preserved you both in Scotland, Ireland, Holland, France, and Spain, and other
remote places of the world, is not unacquainted, nor concealed to any rational
and knowing man; besides, when you have ridden solely by your selves, sometimes
forty, threescore, a hundred miles an end, how have you bin preserved from
private Ambuscadoes, Toryes, the Mosse-Troopers, Robbers, and the like?
delivering your Letters and several Messages with a great deal of safety,
civilitie, and respect; and in conclusion, very well returned to your own
Garrisons in health again, which is and has bin no small mercy to us, if we
consider of the same aright; nay, has he not very often made the very quarters
of the enemy a receptacle and place of safety for us: Moreover, how bountiful
and forward he has bin to bestow upon us many a liberal and large advance,
notwithstanding how backward we have bin to advance his glory for the same, and
what a non-improvement we, or the most of us have made of the many favors, and
the large Tallents he has given unto us, is best known unto his sacred self
and our poor sinful selves; Likewise how careful God has always bin to feed
us with the finest Wheat, and cloth our bodies with the purest Wool,
notwithstanding we have not hungered and thirsted after Righteousness, nor yet
earnestly desired to have our souls invested with the long white garment of
Christ's Righteousness, as they that live under a Gospel dispensation ought
indeed to do; and truly, if every one that has a silver Trumpet, had but a
sanctified soul annexed thereunto, doubtless we should be more sound in our
judgments, and more pious in our practice then at this day we do appear,
and manifest our selves unto the world to be; but some I know will readily
object and say, what is the meaning of all this? does Vice correct Sin? does he
that presses us so hard to consider the goodness of the Lord to us, and our
ingratfulnesse to him do so himself? do we not know he is a man that has as
much forgot the love and lenity of God as any of us all? or are we not
acquainted that he is one that has a long time had the form of godliness,
yet has denied the power and efficasie of it in a good Life and Conversation,
and to this day for ought we know, or visibly can discern, continues the same
man? Why truly Gentlemen, I must ingenuously confess with heaviness of
heart, and grief of soul, that you are not mistaken in what you do affirm,
I willingly could wish you were, on condition I should take the mistake very
patiently; for indeed I must confess; according to the allowance of the word,
that I am one that has refused to work in Gods* Vineyard, excused the great
Supper of the Lord, and slighted the marriage of the Kings Son; by which sad
consequence it has come to pass that I have sinned against the clearest
light, and dearest love that ever poor creature could transgress against; and
if any one of you that is less offensive then my self, will please to fling
the first stone at me, I shall neither snarle at the hand, nor yet bite the
stone, but kindly salute the one, and meekly kiss the other; and truly there
is great reason for the same: for if the Young Man in the law that was but
disobedient to his earthly parents, was to be stoned to death, how justly might
this sentence pass on me that have bin so stubborn, rebellious, and
disobedient to my Heavenly Father? And if in the Gospel St. Stephen suffered
for his constant adhearence to Christ and his Truth, well may I suffer for my
constant separation from the truth of Christ. In few words; Gentlemen, I am a
man that am really dead in trespasses and sins, and yet I trust in the blood
of the Lamb, I am not twice dead and pulled up by the roots, and though I have
gone a long time a stray from my God, I shall now at the last and eleventh
hour of the day, return to my dear Shepherd and sweet Bishop of my soul. In
order hereunto I shall entreat your prayers unto God for me, as mine shall be
to the Thron of Grace for you, and that in much mercy he would be pleased to
say to your spiritual desertions, and my inordinate affections, as he is
pleased to say unto the raging surges of the Sea; thus far shall you go, and
no further. This is and shall be the prayers of

Your assured Friend and Servant Edw. Ford,

A Brief description of the vanity of the times wherein we live.
A Man is happy when he does begin
For to discern the sinfulness of sin,
And when he daily does contrive and plot
To use this world as if he used it not;
And not to trust unto a broken reed,
But seeks for that is happiness indeed:
Alas what is pleasure but a Harlots smile,
Which while it strokes you, may be kills the while
and will involve you into such a snare
That will destroy you, if you have not care;
For Satan shows the milk thinks will prevail,
But does obscure the hammer and the nail.
Shows us her oily words that do distill
from her smooth tongue, but hides the dart will kill,
Then happy he that can her beauty view
Not to his hurt, but rather to eschew
Those ways of hers that do directly lead
Unto that place where many a one lies dead.
And what is riches, but a glittering prize,
Set on a pinnacle to feast the eyes?
And for to please those senses least deserve,
Whilst that the better parts is like to starve.
Have you not heard of some to purchase gold
Has both their souls and bodies sadly sold
and paun'd that jem, how slight so ere it seem,
The Universal world can near redeem?
How many men that has like horses toiled,
A little fire has undone and spoiled?
How many Merchants in this City too,
That never any want or hunger knew,
A little water that the winds has spread,
has sent these men fairly to beg their bread.
And therefore my advice in fine shall be
To labor not for Gold, but Purity,
For that will put a man in such a way
He shall be safe, when the other does decay.
Alas what is Honor, but a little fame
That Is blotted out ere one can write his name.
And what is the smile of great men now in power
Much like the morning dew or April shower
May be 'twill wet a man from top to toe,
Yet by the fire it will melt like Snow;
I mean the fire of Adversity,
Be this same Honor never so great or high.
Have you not heard or seen a while ago,
How Majesty was mastered by a Blow,
And he that had 3 Kingdoms of his own,
Could not get leave at last to live in one;
And since that time many great ones bereft
Of their dear lives, and several Stations left
To satisfy the world in the event,
There Is nothing here below that's permanent;
Then if we would have honor that will last,
Let us like good proficients, wisely cast,
To bring Jehovah honor, lauding his name
That sits in heaven, and laughs vild men to shame.
A kind of persuasion to temperance.
Do in a morning favor drink that is strong,
Then do not drink thy mornings draught too long;
However let me crave, and beg this Boon,
You do not drink your mornings draught till noon,
But you undo your solid senses quite,
If that you drink your mornings draught till night,
For many men in their excessive Bowls,
With their own bodies overthrow their souls;
And therefore never let thy own right hand
Ruin thy self, by breaking this command:
Grant me but this, and truly though I Am poor,
I Will never beg of you, nor yours, more.
Against excessive mirth in mournful times.
YOu Halcyon Lads that sings, and joyful are,
And very blithe will be despite of War,
Let me entreat this favor at your hand,
To think upon the misery of the Land,
And be not over-frolick, till you see
Some motives may induce jocundity;
For when the Churches head is sick, or aches,
Then all her Members presently partakes
Of her deplored grief, and does bewail,
Those sorrows makes her look so wan and pale;
And truly methinkes it is a grievous thing,
When God is angry, for to sit and sing,
And when his Judgments are upon the earth,
To frame our selves to fond and foolish mirth;
Therefore let me entreat each one a while
Forbear to laugh, till God is pleased to smile.
Necessary Aphorisms for a Trumpet to observe.
THree things very good for a Trumpet to practice; to practice his Trumpet, to
practice the truth, and to practice piety.

Three good things for a Trumpet to obey; to obey his Creator, to obey his
Commander, and to obey the Gospel of Christ.

Three good things for a Trumpet to remember; to remember his Creator in the
days of his youth, to remember his youth in the days of his age, and to
remember his end in the beginning of his days.

Three things very bad for a Trumpet to forget; to forget his great
deliverances by Land, his wonderful preservation by Sea, and his mavelous
safety in the City.

Three bad things for a Trumpet to be full of; to have his eyes full of
adultery; his head full of foolery, and his mind full of mischief.

Three things very unfit for a Trumpet to begin; to begin Healths, to seek
Healths and to sound Healths.

Three good things for a Trumpet to find; to find mercy with God, and honor
him for it; to find favor with good men, and respect them for it; and to
find out his faults, and obtain faith to mend them.

Three good things for a Trumpet to keep; to keep a fair correspondency with
those he deals withal, to keep good company, and to keep a good conscience.

Three good things for a Trumpet to set light by; to set light by the losses of
the world, to set light by the crosses of the world, and to set light by deeds
of darkness.

Three things very bad for a Trumpet to be an Artist in; to be an Artist in the
ways of wickedness, to be expert in the paths of impiety, and to be
delightfully acute in the wiles and stratagems of sin, and Satan.

Three things very bad for a Trumpet to lose; to lose his taste, to lose his
teeth, and to lose his time.

Three things very dangerous for a Trumpet; to look high, to feed high, and to
climb high.

Three things very good for a Trumpet; good store of modesty, good store of
mercy, and good store of money.

Three things very bad for a Trumpet to fall into; to fall into a Pit, to fall
into Perjury, and to fall into Poverty.

Three things very bad for a Trumpet; a bad Moore, a bad march, and a bad mind.

Three very hard things for a Trumpet to learn; to learn continency in the
Stews, temperance in a Tavern, and righteous actions amongst roaring boys.

Three good things for a Trumpet to keep; to keep touch, to keep tune, and to
keep time.

Three things very good for a Trumpet; a good color, good cordins, and a good
conscience.

Three other things good for a Trumpet; good Lungs, a good Lip, and a good life.

Romans 13. 14. And make no provision for the flesh.


MAke no provision for the flesh? why then
I must forbear to be, or live amongst men,
And neither must I be, or come by far,
In any company where women are,
Especially if they be pleasing to the eye,
For then I shall transgress undoubtedly;
I must not think a thought that is unclean;
Of any immodest Curtizanion,
Nor speak a syllable that may suggest,
There Is something that is unclean within my breast,
And then by consequence it will be wrought,
I must not act by no means what is naught;
Nor must I by my childish ignorance
Use any foolish, wanton dalliance,
And prattle forth such talk as may impart
My mouth is very foul, and so's my heart.
Again, if this be true, why then I guess,
I must not drink at no time in excess;
No, nor at no time eat a meal that may
Provoke the flesh, but rather it allay;
And if this Aphorism I would keep
I must be careful too of too much sleep,
I must not condescend, assent, or please
To give my mouldering body too much ease;
I must not go too gorgeous in attire,
For that like Tinder, sets man's Lust on fire;
But decently adorn my body so,
That all imperious thoughts may be kept low;
I must at no time look too curiously
Upon a beauty, whose attractive eye
May render me obnoxious, and impare
My thoughts that should be chaste, as Joseph's were.
Likewise all objects I must still deny,
That does but relish, taste of vanity;
All curious Pieces pencild lively forth,
By me must be esteemed of little worth:
All places too of pleasure I must shun,
And never to Theators, or Pastime run;
I must not sport like the Leviathan
My life away, that is but like a span;
Nor come in company, whose carryage may
Tell me, they do not love a pious way;
And while I have a being here on earth,
I must not give my self to too much mirth,
But circumspectly keep my heart in awe,
And not like children, laugh at every straw,
Working out my salvation while I am here,
With Saint-like sighs, with trembling, and with fear.
But stay, my soul, is this the way to bliss?
Then prithee say, How far art thou from this?
For by thy scandalous and knowing sin,
Thou have brought many a soul to suffering;
As first, by thy presumptuous sins so rife,
Thou have aimed to crucify the Lord of life,
And by thy breaking of his blessed commands,
Thou did surrender him into cruel hands,
And did not his great love thy hate repel,
Thou might have sought thy soul ere now in hell:
Likewise consider, it is for thy offense
Gods people suffer for their innocense,
And many a Saint is brought in jeopardy,
Not for their own, but thy impiety.
Again consider, if thy patient Wife,
Do not enjoy the comforts of this life,
The fault's thy own, that has so lavish been,
Feasting abroad, when she often fasts within:
Or does thy Children want that nourishment,
That pretty babes expects to give content;
It Is thy default that art so foolish grown,
To waste on wantons, and neglect thy own:
And do but think upon the little Lambs,
That harmlesly disports upon the Plains,
Should they, I say, want of their usual food,
It is because that in thy drunken mood
Thou have abused those mercies God has sent,
Both for thy own, and for their nourishment;
Or do thou see the Oxen, Cow, or Horse
Lament in the field, and low for want of grass?
The reason is, because thy Leprous lust
Has burned the grass, and hay, so near to dust
That they can get no food for to suffice
Their bodies, without which thy body dies.
In brief, since we perceive the efficient cause
Of all our sorrows is the breach of Laws,
It Is meet we do repent while we have breath;
Before the Nation bleed it self to death;
And that we seriously reform our ways,
Before the Sword and Famine end our days;
Look Northward, and behold a cloud of blood,
And then look Southward, and behold no good;
Take a Prospective-glasse, and view the West,
Alas the East, and that is like the rest.
Now seeing that no safety can be found,
On Irish, Scottish, no nor English ground,
Let Us go to Christ, for it is he will teach us
Away to live, where Armies cannot reach us;
And therefore in all dangers let us embrace,
And make the King of Kings our hiding place;
So shall we be secure when storms arise,
Living in bliss when our poor bodies dies.
Let me crave your patience to peruse a few lines more and I have done.
Dear friends:
According to my mean ability, you have had a little taste of the Lords
extraordinary love and lenity to us, and our empty returns of obedience to him
again. Now as we have had a feast of his favor, could he but have a little
relish of our love to him it would do well; it is not unknown to you, that
there is but three paces more especially that does direct a man either to
pain, or Paradise: He that by his little and small sins, as he accounts,
slowly creeps to Hell, does very bad; but he that by his more known and
scandalous offenses goes a round pace thither, does a great deal worse; but he
that by his more profuse and riotous living runs thither, does worst of all: So
on the contrary, he that by his small and feeble faith endeavors for to creep
to Christ, does well; but he that by a stronger faith goes lustily, does
better: but he that by the mighty power of God with cheerfulness, and
alacrity, does sweetly run his ways, does best of all; O that we could so run,
as through the strength of Christ we might obtain.

Dear Sirs, let us consider, and a little recollect our memory what we came
into this world for; was it do you think to sport like the Leviathan in the
Sea, and for to wast our days in wanton dalliance, surely no; alas, you know
our errand hither was, to get God glory, and to save our poor souls; but how
neglective we have been in he one, and constantly remiss in the other, ^s you
know known unto the Searcher and Trier of the reins far better then to us,
for we do find by sad experience, Judgments has not deterred us. Menaces has
not warned us, nor many mercies won us; and though the Sword be drawn, yet we
cannot be drawn from the vain vanities of this present life, and fading
pleasures of this wicked world.

There is a notable passage in the second of Kings, the fifth chap. and about
the 26, and 27 ver. where covetous Gehazi abusing the name of his kind Master
to Naaman the Syrian, by which means he receives of him two tallents of Silver
in two baggs, and the two changes of Garments without the consent of the good
old man, but the business being understood, and cleared up to him, he sharply
does reprove him for his fault, saying unto him, Is this a time to receive
money, garments, olive-yards, vine-yards, sheep, oxen, men servants, and maid
servants? and in few words told him, that the Leprosy of Naaman should cleave
to him and his posterity, and strait way he went out of his presence a Leper as
white as Snow. Why even so might all the good Elisha's, the Ministers of the
truth, justly reprove and say to us, when in our frantic mood we are no whit
ashamed to knock and call for Wine when we have Wine enough, and with our
Trumpet openly proclaim our follies to the world, may they not then allege,
is this a time for to drink wine in Bowls, and sound shril healths til we are
sick again? is this a time for to spend all our time to purchase change of
Garments for the body, and to neglect the covering of the soul? is this a time
to ravell out our days in filthy idle jests, and spend our precious minutes in
obscene and scurrilous discourse? is this a time to visit Theators, sit in a
Tavern, sing, rejoice, and laugh, when as the pious party and holy people of
the Land sit by the Waters of Babylon weeping, and have hung their Harps upon
the Willows, and will not be comforted because God is displeased?

One pregnant passage more between David and Vriah, and I shall conclude; it
is in the second of Samuel the 11. Chap. the 8, 9, 10, and 11. verses. After
the Prophet David had demanded of Vriah how Joab did, how the people did, and
how the wasting War did prosper, he being willing to win him to his bed, he
does use some modest motives to invite him thither; but when his purpose would
not take effect, he uses another argument to persuade him, that he had rid a
very tedious and toylsome Journey, and therefore thought it meet and necessary
he should repose and rest himself a while, but pray observe his warlike
answer to him.

And Vriah said unto David, The arc, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents, and
my Lord Joab, and the servants of my Lord are encamped in the open fields;
shall I then go unto my house, to eat and drink, and to lie with my wife? as
thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing. The
Application that we may easily collect from hence is this.

That if this gallant and heroic Christian did so readily refuse these
pleasures, and refreshments that were very good and lawful of themselves, as
to go down to his house to eat and drink, and to embrace his Wife: because
the Arc, Joab; and many of Gods people were encamped in the open fields, and
might for ought he knew, be engaged with the enemies of the truth before he
might return back to the Camp again; how should this move us then now that
the Arc, I mean the Cause of God is in dispute, and many of Gods people has
bin encamp^d in open field many a Winters night, and tedious stormy day? how
should this, I say solemnly invite us to forsake our former foolish disports,
and utterly to abandon and relinquish every unlawful lust and pleasure
whatsoever; and if our hearts be so obdurate that we cannot bring them to
suffer for the Lord in open field, let us never suffer them to sin against him
in a private room; and if we cannot be wooed to join with the people of God
for the testimony of the truth and a good Conscience, let us never join with
the people of the world against our Conscience and its testimony.

Alas, you see already here is three tottering Nations, and a few steadfast
souls; many broken heads, but a few bleeding hearts; therefore it is very
requisite that hereafter we do walk more circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wisemen, Redeeming the time because the days are evil; in order hereunto, it
is very fit that we speedily, frequently, and fervently apply our selves unto
the thron of Grace to obtain mercy, and find Grace to help in time of need:
imploring and beging of him for the son of his loves sake, to infuse into us
a principle of Life and Grace, that we may be his Children not only by name,
but by nature also; so shall we stand in awe, and sin not, commune upon our beds
and be still, counting it indeed an ignominious shame, that the Lackey should
live more in awe of his Lord, then we of Jehovah-^issi; that the Servant should
stand more in awe of his Master, then we do very often of our Maker; and that
the Child should stand more in awe of his earthly Parents, then we of our
heavenly Father. It Is time (says David) that thou have mercy upon Sion, yea the
time is come; and in order hereunto, it is time that we forsake our sins,
yea, the time is come, it is time that we abandon our impiety, when our impiety
is about to abandon us; it is time to forsake riotous and tippling houses when
the Judge is at the door; high time to get Christ into our hearts, when the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand. But I grow too tedious, consider what is said,
and the Lord give us understanding in all things.

A few fair Caveats for secure Christians.
DEclare in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem, and say, Blow ye the Trumpet in
the Land, cry, gather together and say; Assemble your selves, and let us go
into the defenced Cities.

Set up the standards toward Zion, retire, stay not, for I will bring evil
from the North, and a great destruction, Jer. 4. 5, 6.

And the Word of the Lord came unto me the second time, saying, What see
thou? and I said, I see a seething pot, and the face thereof was toward the
north.

Then the Lord said unto me, out of the north an evil shall break forth upon
all the inhabitants of the Land, Jer. 2. 13, 14.

O ye children of Benjamin, gather your selves to fly out of the midst of
Jerusalem, and blow the Trumpet in Tecoa, and set up a sign of fire in
Beth-haccerem, for evil appears out of the north, and great destruction; thus
says the Lord, Behold, a people comes from the north Country, and a great
Nation shall be raised from the sides of the earth, Jer. 6. 1. 22.

The great Day of the Lord is near, it is near, and hastes greatly, even the
voice of the Day of the Lord; the mighty man shall cry there bitterly, that day
is a day of wrath, a day of trouble, and distress, a day of the Trumpet, and
Alarm against the fenced Cities, and against the high Towers, Zeph. 1. 14, 15,
16. And behold, God himself is with us for our Captain, and his Priests with
sounding Trumpets, to cry alarm against you. O children of Israel, fight not
against the Lord God of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper, 2 Chronicles. 13.
14.

Therefore behold, the days come says the Lord, that I will cause an alarm of
war to be heard in Rabbah of the Ammonites, and it shall be a desolate heap,
and her daughters shall be burnt with fire, then shall Israel be heir unto
them that were his heirs, says the Lord, Jer. 49. 2.

Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy Mountains, let all
the inhabitants of the Land tremble, for the day of the Lord comes, for it is
nigh at hand; blow ye the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a Fast, call a solemn
assembly, Joel 2. 1. 15.

For the Builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded,
and he that sounded the trumpet was by me; and I said unto the Nobles, and unto
the Rulers of the people, the work is great and large, and we are separated
from the wall one far from another, in what place therefore ye hear the sound
of the trumpet, resort ye thither unto us, our God shall fight for us, Neh. 4.
18, 19, 20.

Shall a trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Shall
there be evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it, Amos 3. 6.

Son of Man, speak unto the Children of thy people, and say unto them; When
I bring the Sword upon the Land, if the people of the Land take a man of their
coasts, and set him for their Watchman, if when he sees the Sword come upon
the Land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people, then whosoever hears the
sound of the trumpet, and takes not warning, if the Sword come and take him
away, his blood shall be upon his own head.

He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning, his blood shall be
upon him; but he that takes warning shall deliver his soul, Ezekiel. 33. 2, 3, 4,
5.

A prudent man fore-sees the evil, and hides himself, but the simple pass on
and are punished, Prove. 22. 3.

But stay:

MEthinks I hear poor Malachi complain,
That Israel deals unkindly, and prophaine,
Their irreligiousnesse he mentions too,
It Is my default, and sighing, say, it is true:
For pray, how many times have I declared,
That i would go labor in Gods Vineyard,
Supposing it indeed a great disgrace,
For to sit idle in the Marketplace;
And strait-way has my nimble thoughts rid Post,
For to be there at nine a clock at most,
But sinful spraines made both my feet so lame,
That it was near a leaven before I came;
Nay, my lukewarm affections was so stal'd,
I had not then come, had I not been called,
And when I was arrived, the heat of day
Made me so faint that I could hardly stay,
And that which moved me chiefly to be gone,
Was, 'cause I saw that some had almost done,
And 'cause that I so long had loytering been,
That I had all my labor to begin;
Yet to it I fell, and wrought some half a day;
But was ashamed to ask so much as they;
At night the Master called to take our due,
And I received, thank God, a penny too:
Some of my neighbors muttered, but says he,
You have a penny as we did agree.
Methinks it savours of corrupted blood,
That your eye should be ill 'cause mine is good;
I must confess, the burden of the day
Has been borne out by you, yet tell me pray,
Had not my loving grace assisted ye,
For ought I know you had come as late as he:
And in conclusion graciously did say,
'Twere hard all Loyterers should be cast away.
When I did hear the Master tell them this,
My soul was ravished with his gentleness,
And thought it was great pity, men should be
Backward to work for one, that was so free.
Maker of Heaven and Earth, if thou will hire
A poor and sinful soul, that does desire
To work by the day; i will promise faithfully
To be laborious, for no one but thee:
He make no bargain with thee, but will stand
To thy own courtesy, only in hand
I do desire that thou will please to give
An earnest penny, that my Soul may live,
And to declare if I should questioned be
By any one, I do belong to Thee;
This through thy tender mercy being done,
For fear of night, I Will come no more at noone.
FINIS.

