RADIUS HELICONICUS: OR, THE RESOLUTION OF A FREE STATE
Emori per virtutem praestat, quam vitam miseram atque inhonestam, ubi alienae
superbiae ludibrio fueris, per dedecus amittere. Salust.
FAme is the life of action. He that will
Grasp at a world, must not be scared with ill,
Or any puling Sophistry that may
Clog a brave mind, or rust it by delay.
But Gallantry should ramble in the style
Of roaring Torrents, overrun of foil
That worm Obstruction: no Attempts can be
Beyond true Valors equipollencie.
Beasts were decreed to serve: Man has a free
Tenure and birthright of his liberty.
Custom enslaves us all: Our fathers were
Blinded, and we born heirs of their fear.
But our deliverance dawns; and Nature seems
To joy there is a Seed that dare redeem's.
Hang old Descents, those antique Confirmations
Of blushing Cowardice, the shame of Nations.
We are those limbs of earth which scorn to stoop
To that thing Monarchy, or kiss the poop
Of any Lawn-sleev'd hrother: Nay, so far
From worshipping a Meteor or a Star
In this our Element, we soar above
Such Spears, own no Superior less then Jove.
Laws were the curbs of Conquest: thence constraint
Made them compulsive duties; which our quaint
Insinuating Politiques did give
Soon the feigned name of a Prerogative:
A mild construction, or a gloss upon
The cruelty of Domination.
Thus captived in Succession ran the Times,
And the long Vass'lage of these Northern Climes
Linked to one Family and will. But we
That set them up, have vowed a nullitie
Of that grand pressure: Hence our lives and swords
Shall be the seals and labels of our words.
Religion wings the Cause; and he that dies
In its defense, never sinks, but falls to rise.
The Creatures, Day, and Elements are things
We equally partake bot h slaves and Kings:
The Earths productions, Rain, and Seasons are
Bounties predestined to a common share.
Why should we cramp our selves? nay, not content
With the reins of our Civil Government,
There is a pack which strive even as they please
To force our souls, and wrest our consciences.
But faith will not be pinned on any one
Synod's decree, or man's opinion.
No, there is a freedom still reserved in all
For the election of their several
Professions here: which as a public right
We Are bound to vindicate against Hells despite.
And therefore heightened with Camilla's zeal,
In rescue of a freeborn Commonweal
From the base yoke of bondage, we defy
All the dependencies of Tyranny.
And by the dint of Arms shall make it plain,
There is a Truth commands a Sovereign.
Let groveling Animals submit for fear,
And bow their necks: we cannot center there.
Our Resolutions strike a higher string
Then Tarquin's Base, Tenor, or Minikin.
Which time shall ripen, and success befriend:
The glory of a war is in the end.
Servility's a plague looked to be known
When snapt by Moors or Tartars: but at home,
Even in the womb conceived us, is a curse
Not to be paralleled in death, or worse.
He then that will not when he may go free,
Commits a sin against Nativitie.
We are not born in fetters; Nature gives
A manumission to each that lives.
No Marshals of restraint which may controule's;
The ties we find are seated in our souls.
Transgression's checked by Reason; great Crimes by
An inbred Justicer, Civility.
These by instinct: the rest we do embrace
As supernaturals, devolve from grace.
Adam knew no Star Chamber, (as we see)
Unless you mean the heavenly Canopie:
And there few Bishops sat. The pride and will
Of most extortious Tyrannies, are still
The sinew of our quarrels, which alone
Compelled us to a Reformation.
And since we have begun that fatal work,
We Will perfect our Attempts, maugre the Turk,
Or any humane nay: however, we will fall
From brave designs and gallant, if at all.
Heathens were wont to s^^l their Liberty
With universal ruin: Why should we
Be less courageous? Though not Roman bands,
Yet we have Roman hearts, and Roman hands.
Let envy swell and burst; Malignancie
Curse its hard fate, grow sullen, sick, and die:
Whiles our triumphant palms spread and increase;
Like the preservers of a common peace.
Caesar, and Cromwell: why, it is all but C.
And why not England now, as Italy?
Rome's Basis was as small, as this whereon
We hope to raise our Fame's encomion:
Nay, our encouragements are rather more.
Smile gentle Fortune, as thou did before.
Then Thames as Tybur shall rejoice to be
Crowned with the spoils of the worlds royalty:
And all the neighboring Continents implore
To be embraced under the British lore.
It Is but assayed, and finished; tried, and done:
The act's half perfect, that is well begun.
R. Fletcher.

FINIS.

