A LETTER FROM THE RIGHT HONORABLE Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Hugh Cholmley,
Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Henry Cholmley, Committees of the Commons house of
Parliament residing at York.

TOGETHER, With a Relation of all the passages at the great meeting at York,
on Thursday the 12. of this instant May, With the Freeholders Protestation
enclosed in the Letter from the said Committee to Master Speaker, and ordered
by the said House to be forthwith published in Print.

H. Elsing. Cler. Perl. de Com.

LONDON, Printed by A. Norton for John Frank, and are to be sold next to the
Kings head in Fleet Street. 1642.

SIR.
IN our last Letter we gave you an Account of our first and second waiting on
the King, we writ to you then, that his Majesty, commanded us to attend him
yesterday being Thursday, to hear what he said to the Gentlemen, Which a
little before the meeting, he seconded by a particular Message. Being come
thither, his Majesty caused the several Messages between him, and the
Parliament, mentioned in this enclosed printed Paper to be read.

This was done with much humming, and applause of the Kings Messages by some
persons who had placed themselves near about where the King stood. But when
any thing from the Parliament came to be read, with so much hissing, and
reviling the Parliament, that though in respect, and duty to the Kings Person,
we could not resent it, as otherwise we should have done, yet have since
expostulated, and complained of it to his Majesty. Some were so bold as to say
openly, That the Parliament men should set their Houses in order, for many of
them should shortly have their heads of; One of which (as since we are
credibly informed) was one Hurst, a servant to one Master William Crofts. In
this which was said by the King, you will see what reason we had to vindicate
our selves, and therefore we immediately repaired to the Deanes house with all
the other Gentlemen, and there we took notice of the rough usage we had
received; We told them that it was neither indiscretion nor disobedience in us
(as his Majesty was pleased to call it) to deliver the Parliaments Message, or
to stay here though commanded to the contrary, since we conceived no man
needed to be satisfied in so clear a case as this; That every Member of each
House ought to obey their Commands, when they were pleased to employ them. But
since his Majesty thought fit to bid them, take heed of us, not knowing what
doctrine of disobedience we might preach to them under color of obeying the
Parliament, we appealed to every man, whether we had in word or deed, in
public or in private, done any thing that became not honest men, and persons
employed from the Parliament: That we had communicated our Instructions to his
Majesty, being that we would avow all our Actions, and that we were confident
it would not be said, we had transgressed them. This was very well taken and
justified by the Country. Yesterday there came diverse thousands of Freeholders
to this City, though none but the Gentry were summoned, but receiving a
Command from the King not to come to Court they forbore, and stayed in the
Castle yard, yet sent this Petition enclosed to his Majesty, and received the
Answer annexed thereunto. There was likewise a Committee of twelve Gentlemen
appointed yesternight to consider of drawing up an Answer to the Kings
proposition concerning a Guard, but nothing could be then done, because it was
past three a clock before the Gentlemen were admitted to the King. This
morning the Freeholders assembled again in the Castleyard, and there they made
this Protestation enclosed, of their right of voting in what concerns the
peace of the Country, as having their interest therein.

When we all met this morning again at the Deanes house, we who are your
Committees received this Message by Sir Edward Stanhop, That he came from his
Majesty to command us, that we should depart from this meeting, and if we did
stay, his Majesty would judge us guilty of that he spoke on yesterday, which
was Tampering. Notwithstanding which Command, we read the fourth Article of
our Instructions to the whole Company, that being pertinent to the business
we were then upon, and desired them to consider, whether the Parliament had
not expressed therein such a care of the Kings safety, that there would be
little need of Guards: We told them that we had a good right of being there
as Freeholders of the County, but that in obedience to the King we would
depart for this time: But whenever there should be occasion of our being
there in pursuance of our Instructions and Commands from the Parliament, we
should be ready. The whole company received great satisfaction, and desired a
Copy of that instruction which we gave them. We were the more willing at that
time to go from thence, because we should not only give obedience to the
Kings command, which otherwise he would have said, we constantly disobeyed,
but because the Committee of Twelve appointed yesternight were then to
withdraw, so that there was nothing for the present for us to do; We
immediately went to the King, and befought him that since we were continually
so discountenanced by him, in the face of our County, that he would be
pleased to let us know in particular wherein we had given the occasion, for
we otherwise conceived we were deprived of that Liberty, which was our due in
respect of that Interest we had here. His Majesty was pleased to tell us, that
if we would lay aside that condition of Committees from the Parliament, he
would not hinder us to be there as Gentlemen of the Country; We humbly
replied, that we could not lay that down, nor could we be absent from any
meeting where our presence was required, for the service as Committees from the
Parliament: to which his Majesty said, That indeed he thought we could not
lay it down, neither that it was reasonable we should have Votes, and be in
a double Capacity. The Committee has been together most part of this day, but
not agreeing: Six of them have drawn up this Answer enclosed, which they have
communicated to the Gentlemen, and Freeholders. The greater part of the
Gentlemen, and all the Freeholders have agreed too, and subscribed it. The
other six have concluded upon this other Answer, consenting to a Guard of
Horse, but this we do not hear, that they have gotten many names too, nor
can we get a Copy of those names as yet, though these be very few, yet
whether they can bring in any Horse or no we cannot yet judge. The King has
received both these resolutions, which with his Answers to them you shall
likewise have here enclosed. His Majesty had declared himself yesterday, that
he would raise that Regiment, which was Sir Robert Stricklands for his foot
Guard, but he has now laid aside that Resolution. The Freeholders of the
County are now newly summoned to attend his Majesty about a week hence the
three Rydings upon three several days, but for what service we do not know.

Sir, you have here a large Narrative of the passages at this meeting; what
dangers this poor Country lies under, we humbly refer it to you to judge,
not taking upon us to deliver any opinion. The business lasted so long, that
it hindered us from giving a more speedy account. Sir, This is what at this
time is sent from,

Your assured friends and servants, Fer. Fairfax. Hu. Cholmley. Philip
Stapleton. He. Cholmley.

York 13. May 1642.
His Majesty's Speech.
I Have cause of adding, not altering, what I meant to say. When I gave out the
Summons for this days Appearance, I little thought of these Messengers, or of
such a Message as they brought, the which (because it confirms Me in what I
intend to speak, and that I desire you should be truly informed of all
passages between Me and the Parliament) you shall here read, First, My Answer
to the Declaration of both Houses concerning Hull; The Answer of the Parliament
to My two Messages concerning Hull; together with My Reply to the same; And My
Message to both Houses, declaring the Reasons why I refused to pass the Bill
concerning the Militia.

All which being read his Majesty proceeded.
I Will make no paraphrases upon what ye have heard, it more befitting a Lawyer
then a King; only this Observation, Since Treason is countenanced so near Me,
it is time to look to My safety: I avow it was part of My wonder, That men
(whom I thought hertofore, Discreet and Moderate) should have undertaken this
Employment; and that since they came I having delivered them the Answer you
have heard, and commanded them to return Personally with it to the Parliament)
should have flatly disobeyed Me, upon pretense of the Parliaments Command. My
end in telling you this, is to warn you of them; For since these men have
brought Me such a Message and disobeyed so lawful a Command, I will not say
what their intent of staying hereis; only I bid you take heed, not knowing what
Doctrine of Disobedience they may preach to you, under color of obeying the
Parliament.

Hitherto I have found and kept you quiet, the enjoying of which was a chief
cause of My coming hither (Tumults and Disorders having made Me leave the
South) and not to make this the Seat of a War, as Malice would (but I hope in
vain) make you believe; Now if Disturbances do come, I know whom I have
reason to suspect.

To be short, you see that My Magazine is going to be taken away from Me (being
My own proper goods) directly against my will: The Militia (against Law and my
consent) is going be to put in execution: And lastly, Sir John Hothams Treason
is countenanced: All this considered, none can blame me to apprehend Dangers.
Therefore I have thought fit (upon these real grounds) to tell you, That I am
resolved to have a Guard (the Parliament having had one all this while upon
imaginary Iealousies) only to secure my Person; In which I desire your
concurrence and assistance, and that I may be able to protect you, the Laws,
and the true Protestant Profession from any Affront or injury that may be
offered, which I mean to Maintain My Self, without charge to the Country,
intending no longer to keep them on foot, then I shall be secured of My just
Apprehensions, by having satisfaction in the particulars before mentioned.

THE ANSWER TO HIS Majesty's Propositions, of the Gentlemen and Freeholders
which subscribed the same at the Deanes House, where the Sheriff was.
May it please your most Sacred Majesty.
THe Propositions delivered to us yesterday from your Majesty are of so high
concernement to the weal and peace of the whole Kingdom, and does so nearely
touch upon the affection and fidelity of all your subjects in general, as we
being but a part of one County only, do not conceive it safe for us to
advise therein, but rather humbly to beseech your Majesty to impart the
grounds of your Majesty's fears and jelocies to your High Court of Parliament
(of whole most loyal care and affection to your Mtiesties honor and safety,
and the prosperity of your Subjects and dominions we are most confident) and
whatsoever shall be advised by your great Counsel therein we shall most
willingly embrace and give our concurrence and assistance to it as shall become
us, In whose fidelity and affection your Majesty has often declared especial
trust; And albeit we do not presume to advise your Majesty in that
particular being of transcendent consequence, nevertheless in the behalf of
those members of Parliament lately employed to attend your Majesty from both
Houses, being all of them Gentlemen of quality and estate in this County and
trusted to serve in that most Honorable assembly; We humbly crave your
Majesty's leave to express our Confidence in their unstained Loyalty and
affection to your Majesty to be such as your Majesty may secu^^^^ admit
their attendance to negotiate their employments, until they be recalled by the
Parliament. And for there fidelity, we do all engage our selves to your
Majesty, and we are most assured that your Royal person shall be secure in
the genarall fidelity of your Subjects of this County without any
extraordinary guard.

His Majesty's Answer to this returned by the Sheriffer.
HIs Majesty's expects the like affection from you that he does from the other
Gentlemen, and that he has the same confidence in you, that he has in the
others.

The names of those Gentlemen which were taken by the Sheriff.
Sir Thomas Fairefax Sir William Constable Sir Matthew Boynton Sir Thomas Gower
Sir William St. Quintin Sir Edward Rodes Sir William Crayley Sir Thomas
Norcliffe Sir Arther Ing^am Sir Richard Darley Sir Iarvis Cutler Sir William
Fairefax Sir Hug Bethell L^r John Savell Sir William ^^yster Sir Thomas
Renington Master. Thomas ^opson Henry St Qintin Arthur Noell Tobias Ierkins
Heney Ienkins John Ferrer John West Henry Atkinson Henry Wyth^s William
Bethell George Mountain Thomas Stockdale William Gower Richard Trewman
Sackvill Pope Thomas Heblethwaite George Eure George Marwood John Savile of
M^dlee John Saltmarshe William Copley Loynell Copley Edward Gower Cuthbert
Creake William Cobb Doyley Gower Thomas Rookebie John Calverley Francis
Grimston John A^labie Arthur Beckwith Christopher Waters Matthew Beckwith
Christopher Copley Thomas Croft William Parker Georg Trotter Henry Westbie
William Iemimgs Thomas Bradford Richard VVilbore Job Hackwod Matthew Allured
Robert Sheppard John Ackl^m John Stellington Iervas Hamond John Cholmeley
Thomas Newarke Henry Savile Lancelott Allured John Lambert Francis Grimston Mr.
Stephen Quintin VVillobie Godfrey John Stillington John Beverley Mr. Bo^nton
Georg VVestbie Benjamin Brown Charles Fairfax Henry Arthington Henry Tempest
These are the names Subscribed in one sheet there being many other sheets
filed together all of them Subscribed, and amongst them many Gentlmen of note,
but I took note only of the first sheet having no more time.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
WE Knights and Gentlemen whose names are subscribed do unanimously present
this our answer to your Majesty's propositions concerning the raising of a
Guard of Horse for the security and defense of your sacred person.

To which proposition we, as we conceive our selves bound by Allegiance, do
willingly concur. For that purpose humbly desiring that the aforesaid may be
raised by legal Authority: And likewise that it may consist of eprsons
unquestionable in their Religion, and Gentlemen.

The substance of his Majesty's Answer.
HIs Majesty gave them thanks, for it appeared as a satisfactorie answer, and
in it they had showed great circumspection and wisdom, by choosing such whose
Loyalties could not be questioned, by excluding Recusants and all suspected to
be disaffected.

To the Kings Most Ewcellent Majesty The Humble Petition of many thousands of
Your Majesty's peaceably affected Subjects of the County of York.
Humbly Shows.
THat many of your Peticioners being in their late desires of petitioning your
Majesty denied access, kept back with violence, and receiveing great affronts
from some that have dependency on your Majesty and others there assembled, yet
noe provocation could remove them from their patience, and duty, which
proceedings are taken more to heart, your Petitioners conceiveing it undeniable
that they have an Interest in the Commonwealth, and are as dutiful, and
loyal Subjects to your Majesty as whomsoever though diverse of them have been
since uncivilly pressed by some in your Majesty's name to subscribe a paper
styled the humble Answer to your Majesty's propositions, and threatened thereto
upon which blows followed and that when your Majesty's Army should be on fout
those should be first pillaged that refused such subscription, which we humbly
conceive are positively contrary to your Majesty's own expressions, and is to
the high dishonor of your Majesty, and the great affrightment, and disturbance
of your Majesty's liege people. Therefore your Petitioners having too just
cause to fear your Majesty's royal heart is still endaingered to be possessed
with some distaste of your Petitioners humbly supplicate your Majesty, to
conceive better things of them and to cast your eye upon the present state of
this your Kingdom, that as your Majesty has often declared your affection to
this County, so now your love might now be expressed in preserveing the peace
thereof, and that your Majesty would admit of a right Information of the
clear intentions of your Petitioners who are confident, that we so absolute,
and hearty observance to your Majesty's just Commands can be demonstrated as
what your Majesty in Parliament shall declare, which if it become divided (as
God forbidd) our hearts even tremble to consider the dangers and dimination of
the honor, and safety of your Majesty's posterrity, and Kingdoms will
unavoydably be put upon since it is clear to every understanding, that it is
not a divided part of one, or several Counties that can afford that honor,
and safety to your Majesty as the whole Kingdom which you may command, no
ground or fear of danger remaining, if a good Confidence were begott betwixt
your Majesty and Parliament, whose grave, and loyal Counsels are as we humbly
conceive the visible way under God to put a speedy end to the troubles of
Ireland, and establish your Throne in righteousness. And lastly your Petitioners
do most humbly supplicate that we may represent our unfittnes to become Judges
betwixt your Majesty and Parliament in any thing, or dispute the Authority of
either which they humbly conceive do fortefie each other it being most unfitt
for them to act any thing therein but by their prayers for a right understanding
between your Majesty and them which we shall heartily do as also for your
Majesty's long and prosperous Reign, and as we are bound by our late
Protestation shall be ready to maintain your Majesty's just rights, the
Previlidges and power of Parliament and the lawful liberties of the Subjects.

The Kings Answer to the Petition of the Country at the Count at York May 13.
1642.
His Majesty
HAueing with some care considered this Petition, being the first of this
nature that has been presented to him wherein any appearing well affected to
his service (though he has heard of many in the Contrary) have mild meaned
themselves, has commanded me to give you this answer.

That he does totally discover proceedings complained of in the Petition, and
expects that your and all others his Loyal Subjects shall rest satisfied with
his several Gracious Declarat ons and constant peaceable practice toward his
people to the contrary, and for further assurance upon just proof made
against any man who has committed any uiolence in words or actions (without
just provocation) full reparation shall be given to the perties-iniured. As
for the rest of this petition, his Majesty says that it is so confused that
he does not well know what positive Answer to give it. And the rather because
it is grounded upon misinformation, both of his Majesty's proceedings and
intentions, as in particular his Majesty says he never intended to have you
to be judges betwixt him and his Parliament. And for the other part of this
Petition her ferts to his Messages, Declarations, and Answers, whereby it will
clearly appear that his desire and intention is only the preserueing of the
true protestant profession, the laws of the land, the liberty of his people
the peace of the Kingdom: And the peace of this County in particular.

The Protestation of Freeholders. May 13. 1642.
WHereas his Majesty has been pleased to give Summons to the Gentry of this
County to Attend him at his Court at York the Twelft of May instant, to advise
with him in some perticulars, concerning the honor, and safety of his
Majesty's Person, and the well being and peace of this our County, and in the
said summons was pleased to omit the Freeholders of this County, out of a
tender respect of putting them to any extraordinary charge, yet we conscious
of our sincere loyalty o his Majesty our Gracious Sovereign, and conceiueing
our selves according to the proportions of our estates, equally intrested in
the common good of the County, did take bouldnes to come in person to York,
and were ready to attend his Majesty's pleasure there. And whereas his
Majesty was pleased then to propound several things to the purpose aforesaid,
at the meeting of the Country, to consider a fit answer to return to his
Majesty thereupon, the doors of the meeting house were shut against us, we
utterly excluded, and in our absence a Refer of Knights and gentlemen chosen
without our knowledge or consent to draw up the said answer: We the free-h
lders who petitioned his Majesty the day abovesaid, concerneing our selves
abundantly injured in the election (not knowing any warrant by writ or
otherwise for the same) of the said Referree, and that we ought not however to
be concluded by any resolution of theirs without our assent in their election;
do absolutely protest and declare against the said Election: and as far as
consernes us disavowe whatsoever shall be the result of their consultation
thereupon, and do desire, a new and fair election of a Referree may be made,
we admitted to our free Votes in the same, and some one or more to be nominated
by us, allowed to deliver our sense for us at another meeting: And that we
shall not make good in the lest respect any thing whatsoever which shall
otherwise be concluded upon.

FINIS

