TO THE Supreme Authority, the PARLIAMENT of England, etc.
The Humble Petition of CHARLES FLEETWOOD, Esquire
SHOWS,
THat through his ill managed Ambition, and insufficiency for Government,
together with the defection of the Army, he is enforced to address Himself to
this Honorable House, having been taught that moderation with which he lately
disciplined his Brother Richard the late Protector, and peaceably submit to
their Wisdom and Authority: And he is the rather contented with this
Providence, since he sees it is the unavoydable Fate of that Family, its
Dependants and Allies, to be bafled and become the scorn, contempt, and
derision of the Nation. His Excellency not being able to mount above the Clouds
of your displeasure (which through my Lord Lamberts diminishing Spectacles
seemed to appearance no bigger than a man's hand, and are now overspreading his
Estate and Fortunes) in most humble wise prostrates himself at your Feet,
acknowledging with the Army-sorrow his deviating into unequal paths, and his
ill requiting such Good and Gracious Masters and Mistresses as you have been,
with his rebellious and undutiful carriage and demeanor. The Woman that Oliver
gave him deceived him, and offered him of the forbidden fruit, and he saw it
was good, and did eat thereof, and LO here he is in the briars of Wallingford
Garden. And your Petitioner hops that his Ignorance and Seduction may
something mitigate and extenuate your disfavour and anger toward him.

Your Suppliant further shows, That he was plunged over head and ears into
these bottomless designs by the Anabaptists, and that instead of washing
himself clean, and making himself whole in their Jordan, he has contracted
such a Leprosy, that he deserves to be kicked out of the Camp, and never more
to come near the Assemblies of the People.

Albeit your Petitioner has some ground of hope from the remembrance of his
many signal and eminent services done to the Commonwealth, viz. his expedition
to Worcester and back again, with the loss of one nights rest; his Sea-sick
distemper in his passage to Ireland, but more peculiarly his standing in
Lamberts light and way, and intercepting his direct influence upon the Army,
and diverting the torrent of the Soldiery into a safer and smoother channel,
so that he might presume to vye Merit either with Sir Arthur or Saint George
himself.

Lastly, let his Piety, Zeal, Love to, and Delight in the Saints, all the
sincerity, uprightness and integrity of Spirit he has left, come before you,
let his meekness and temperance balance his late haughtiness and vain glory,
and let not the rigor and severity of your indignation force him to cry out
with Baalams Beast, Am not I the Ass on which thou have ridden ever since I was
thine, and was I wont to do so unto thee? Why smitest thou me?

In tender respect, and in serious consideration therefore of these piteous
Premises, may it please this Honorable House out of their Noble Goodness and
Clemency in this Blessed Time of Restoration, and as a token and earnest of
their mild and gentle Government, and that the enemies thereof may not rejoice,
and say, this is the end and reward of all Rebels; to readmit him him into the
number of the seven Commissioners of the Army, and if the places be filled up,
and there be no vacancy, to add one to the number, and make him the eighth Wise
Man. If this shall by your grave Wisdoms be thought a presumption, (rather then
run after Partridges and Larks with his Brother-in-law,) His humble request is
that you would please to confer on him the Office of Mace-Bearer to the
Speaker, it being a blunt Tool and befitting his courage, and will lie easier
and handsomer on his shoulders then the Government. But if this also may not be
conceded (he being rejected every where, and no party to take to) be humbly
implores the favor of this House for a Pattent to be granted to him for
Arche's place, it being as cheap to be a Fool of your making as of his own.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

