THE TIMES Anatomized, In several CHARACTERS.

By T. F.

Difficile est Satyram non scribere.

Juv. Sat. 1. LONDON, Printed for W. L. Anno, MDCXLVII.

THE CONTENTS of the several CHARACTERS.
1 A Good KING. 2 Rebellion. 3 An honest Subject. 4 An hypocritical Convert of
the times. 5 A Soldier of fortune. 6 A discontented person. 7 An ambitious
man. 8 The Vulgar. 9 Error. 10 Truth. 11 A selfe-seeker. 12 Pamphlets. 13 An
envious man. 14 True Valor. 15 Time. 16 A Newter. 17 A Turn-coat. 18 A
moderate man. 19 A corrupt Committee-man. 20 A Sectary. 21 War. 22 Peace. 23
A Drunkard. 24 A novice-preacher. 25 A scandalous Preacher. 26 A grave Divine.
27 A selfe-conceited man. 28 An inconstant man. 29 Religion. 30 Death.
Courteous Reader,
ANtonio Diel (a Spaniard) brings in some laughing at an old man, Burton of
Melanc. in Ep.
that by reason of his age was a little fond; but as he admonishes there, Ne
mireris, mi hospes de hoc seen, nam tota haec civitas dilirium est. Certainly
to play the Fool in this age, when the whole World's distracted, is not only
tolerable, but necessary. 1 Samuel 21.
David once in wisdom played the Fool, to deliver himself: and why may not I
once play the fool, to deliver my conscience, in a free reproof? which if ever
was, is now necessary, when vice was never more perpotrated nor less punished,
Fraus dolus in obscura, eoque in ^nitabilia. Plin. Paneger, in Trajan.
and so disguised and fenced is some, that we may say of them as Alexander of
the Scythians, Difficilius est invenire, quam vincere: More difficult it is to
find them out then to confute them. It has been my endeavor to un-mask some,
whereby to render them odious, and however you shall find a heap of chafe
for an handful of wheat, yet fear I not to profess with that witty
Epigramatist, Invenies paucos hic ut in orbebonos. Owen Ep.
Although vice be almost grown a general rule; yet are there some exceptions
from it: Some who fear not to patronize Truth and Virtue, though vagabonds.
Yet am I not ignorant that hereby I have exposed my self to the censures of
every detracting Momus, and carping Zoilus, so true is that Italian Proverb.
Chi fa un casa in piazza, o e troppo alta, o troppo bassa. Who builds in the
way where all go by,
Shall make his house too low, or high.
He that exposes himself to public view, betrays himself to every ones
censure. If Apelles will set out his pictures, Plin. Not. Hist.
he shall hear the Shoo-maker find fault with what he understands not. Much
more may I, who have entered into the Lists with so many prevailing enemies,
yet have I not aimed at any man's person, but only at the vice: if any one shall
apply to himself in particular what I speak in general, he will thereby
argue himself guilty: It Is the galled horse that kicks, says the Proverb.

It is our misery that we are miserable, but greater that we are not sensible.
Aug.
Gravissime aegrotat qui se non sen tit aegrotare: Is therefore we would return
into the right way, we must first know our selves to be in the wrong: Primus
sapientiae gradus est falsa intelligere, Lactan.
says Lactantius: The first step to health is to know our selves to be sick.
The whole Kingdom has labored these five years full, with an uncivil civil
War, one member destroying another, whilst the whole body is endangered. Me
thinks, I hear, our dear mother England calling to her contending children,
like that affectionate mother in the Tragoedy, Dum pacem peto audite inermes.
Iocasta to her two sons Etop^les and Polinites. Sen. Trag. Thebais.
weeping over the malice of her two sons, in these words, or sighs rather, Ille
te, tu illum times, ego utrumque sed pro utroque: Thy brother fears thee, and
thou him, I both, but but for the danger of you both. If when Scipio had set
Carthage on fire and saw that the flames thereof soared up to the clouds,
although he were an enemy yet tears trickled down his cheeks to behold their
ruin, Polybius cited by Melancth. Chron. fol. p. 126.
as is testified by an eyewitness, and can any one who is a member of the
Kingdom not be sensible of, and sorrowful for the distractions thereof? To see
Religion of late become a Monster with many faces, to see that Dove bespeckled
with Sects and Schisms! Si fundamentum tollitur, quid nisi ruina expectatur?
If Religion that is the foundation of a Kingdom be taken away, what can be
expected, but ruin of the whole building? To see all government contemned, and
a lawless liberty justling out all Law, laboring to be introduced. But I
would say to them as Lycurgus did, Sir Fr. Bacon. Apotheg.
who being about to reform and alter the State of Sparta, in that
consultation, one advised that it should be reduced to an absolute popular
equality, Lycurgus said unto him, Sir, begin it in your own house first.
Considering these things, and other miseries wayring upon a civil war. Quis
temperet a lacrimis! The Ambassadors of Asia Minor coming to Antonius, after
he had imposed upon them a double tax, told him plainly, that if he would
have two Tributes in one year, he must give them two seed-times, and two
harvests: But alas! never was taxes greater, and takings less then now, many
tributes to be paid, but in many places, neither seed-time nor harvest, Suet.
Tra^. in vit. Domit.
and yet as Domitian the Emperor (a few days before he was killed) rubbing a
wart upon his face, blood chanced to gush out: he said, Utinam ad huc, I w^sh
this may be all: So say I, God grant we have not the dregs of that cup yet to
drink off, of which we have hitherto but tasted: for it is observed, three
things undid the Roman Empire; Young heads, Private grudges, and Private gains.
First, Young heads, I say of them, being State Physicians, but as the Proverb
is, A young Physician, and a new Churchyard, and for private grudges, where is
the man that will do as it is reported of G. Naz. who when the Church at
Constantinople began to be divided, as he supposed, by occasion that he possessed
the Sea, he openly said, Si propter me ista tempestas: If I be the Jonas that
cause this storm in the State, why, sacrifice me to the fury of the angered
Diety? Where is now the man that would lay down his private grudges, rather
then engage the Kingdom in a public Quarrel? And for private ends how many be
there that long for fighting, because they live by it? Ex utraque part sunt
qui pugnare cupiunt, Tully
Julius Caesar was wont to say of men brought excessive low by riot, or had
committed diverse crimes, that there was no other remedy for them but civil
War. But i will conclude with this story.

Some few months before Domitian was murdered, Suet. Tran. ut Ante.
there was a Crow in the Capitol spoke these words plainly, (...). All shall
be well. And one interpreted this prodigy thus, Nuper Tarptio quae sedit
culmine Cornix
Est been non potuit dicete, dixit erit.
The Crow that sat on Tarpie news to tell,
She could not say all is, but said, All shall be well.


That this Fable (if it be so) may be turned into Truth, and the Prophecy into
History, in our Kingdom, is, and shall be the continual Prayer of

Thine, T. F.

THE TIMES Anatomized.
I. A good KING.
IS the Primum mobile of a Kingdom, the largeness of whose Orb moves all the
rest in their several places: The Sun, that not only enlightens the several
Planets and lesser Stars in a State, but also the whole Kingdom depends upon
the influence of his good or bad Aspect. All the inferior Magistrates and
Ministers of Justice, receive their virtue and power from him, as the Moon and
Stars their light from the Sun. A Kingdom without a King, is but like a body
without a head, like a heaven without a Sun, and no wonder if all mischiefs be
perpetrated, when the light of Israel is put out. Needs must the Kingdom float
in a Sea of miseries, that has lost its Pilot, and a miracle is it if it split
not on the Rock of ruin: He is the vigilant Argus, that sees all parts of the
Kingdom: to oversee the under-seers. The hundred-handed Briarius to revenge,
and right-wronged innocence. He is a mortal god, on whom the Almighty has
stamped his image in a more especial manner, with power and terror. The very
presence of a King strikes awe into men. How have some Traitors been dazzled
with the splendent rays of Majesty, that it has melted and mollified their
iron, stony and obdurate hearts into an humble and meek reluctance? The happy
Reign of a good King makes the whole Kingdom to prosper and flourish,
withwealth, peace and plenty. For like the Sun, though he move but in one
place at once actually, yet is he virtually present in all and every part of
his Dominions; dispensing his sacred influence, as well upon the lowest as the
highest. Justice has committed her Sword and Balance into his hands. Wisdom
and Power support his Throne, and Piety is his continual Handmaid.

II. Rebellion.
IS a poisonous weed growing up in a Commonwealth, by the fatness of the
soil. It may flourish for a while, but the sword of justice does in the end
cut it down, being whetted by time and divine revenge. It is a true Viper, for
as the shee-viper biteth off the head of the he, and thereby conceives with
young, and those young prove her own destruction, making their birth her death;
and thus does Rebellion when it has bitten off the head of government, it
proves its own destruction, and will be the end of the beginners thereof; And
not seldom, it is m^de its own scourge. For though Majesty may be eclipsed for
a season, yet will it at length break out again into its force like the Sun
in his greatest brightness, and dispell those misty fogs and vapors that
before had clouded it. Whilst the two petty Combatants (in the Fable) strove
which should overcome the other, they were both made a prey unto the royal
Eagle: ambition and discontent are the two main wheels this Engine moves on,
and because it is so ugly in it self, that all men would detest it, it seldom
appears but with a borrowed face for the good of the Commonwealth, and if it
get hold on Religion, it flies (too truly) like wilde-fire.

III. An honest Subject.
IS one that fears God, honors his King, and meddles not with those that are
given to change; and without question he that is a good Christian will be a
good Subject. He has learned so much loyalty from dumb creatures (taught by
natures instinct) to shelter their wronged head with their whole body, as
knowing that their life lies in their head. He has heard that Subjects often
are Adjectives that cannot stand without, and therefore should not stand
against their Sovereign: He loves peace: knowing that the sowers of discord
will reap destruction, however, in the midst of War he labors to keep peace
in his own conscience, being content with his own estate, and seeking not to
increase it by unlawful diminishing of others, for he cannot think him an
honest man that in public losses goes away a gainer. He is so far from
exceeding, that he can be content to be less then himself, accounting it more
noble to be like the fruitful bough, which stoops under a precious burden;
then to aim at the eminency of the fruitless height of the pine tree. If his
merits have brought him into the way of honor and preferment, they do not
there leave him; but he herein holds that maxim good, to keep them by the
same means he obtained them: and if he see undeserving men preferred before
him, he rather pitties then envies them, as counting it more noble to have
deserved preferment then to have it. When the the third of his natural life is
run to the appointed end, he leaves this world to enjoy a better, yet leaving
behind him the precious balm of a good name, which shall preserve his memory
more surely to future posterity, then the time-decaying monuments of Brass and
Marble, which in process of time do molder away, and their glory obscured in
fewer years then some of those sumptuons Statues have been erecting.

IV. An Hypocritical Convert of the Times.
IS a rotten Sepulcher, newly painted over with a color of sanctity. And now
none so zealous as he, then whom before there was none so profane, but having
drawn a fair glove of profession over his foul hand. He now wears the
livery of the Times; and all his policy is, if he can carry it undiscovered: he
is an essence needing a double definition, for he is not what he appears, but
like some of the Spheres, that besides their general motion with the others,
have a particular one to themselves. Like a water-man that looks one way but
rows another. But for all his out, he cannot change his inside, so that he
differs nothing from an Hypocrite, Without he is a severe Cato, but within a
cruel Nero, like those Dragons in Armenia that spit fire, yet have cold
bodies: he is a Sheep-skin lined with Fox-fur; formal preciseness keeps the
door, whilst profit and profaneness lodge within, he hangs out Religion for a
sign, but I take it for a sign he has no Religion, like the Planet Mercury
convertibly, good or bad according to his company: With the Religigious, he is
no less then a Saint, and with the profane none more loose, but no foe to a
false friend: the Devil is never so true a Devil, as when he is transformed
into an Angel of light.

V. A Soldier of fortune.
He is a Salamander that lives in the fire of War. And is commonly a younger
brother, for though the elder bear the coat, the younger bears the Arms.
Peace is his greatest enemy, for then he lies (like a fish out of water) out of
his element. Honor and pay are the two main Engines that set him on going,
hunger and cold march in the same file with him, and plunder brings up the
rear. He should be a Scholar, for he is always is controversies, bullets are
his arguments, and his sword a necessary conclusion. He questions not who has
the best cause, but the best treasury. His only fishing is in troubled waters.
His life is action, his food blood and booty, his honor valor, and his end
conquest. He is Peaces envy, and Wars darling: a horse-fly engendered of the
corruption of a Kingdom, when too much plenty has set men on quarrelling, and
then he is a necessary evil to help let out the superfluous humors, which he
effects by letting them blood, till the loss of their blood prove the loss of
their lives. But the Citizens of Athens banished a coffin maker out of the
City, because the cause of his mirth, was others sadness, and much resembles
a Lawyer, whose wealth is increased by others poverty.

VI. A discontented Person.
IS a dis-joynted member of the Kingdom, one that is fallen out with the World,
and will not be reconciled again with it, hardly with himself. He is always
weary of the present times, not because it is bad; but because it is present.
He extols and commends times past, and despairs of ever seeing the like, but is
always desiring of changes, like sick folks; thinking unquietness would
procure rest. He continually carries a cloud of discontent in his countenance,
whereby you may judge of the storms in his breast. He makes all crosses seem the
heavier by his conceiting them greater then they are; being once thus out of
tune himself, all his study is to create discords. He is an apt subject for
Rebellion to work on, as hoping thereby to ease his own by increasing others
miseries. All his speech is invectives against Fortune: and like a froward
child, because he cannot be happy according to to his own will, he will be
miserable in spite.

VII. An ambitious Man.
IS a Merchant of honor, sailing in the Venture, and aiming at the Cape of
preferment, his sayls are filled with the wind of hope: but he sometimes meets
with a tempest, that casts him away. Like a traivailer climing up the Alps of
honor, on a sudden comes a puff of crosse-wind, that tumbles him into an
abyss of misery: but his ambition is to get unto the top, not minding the
bottom: desire to rise, has taken away al fear of falling. He cares not though
he creep low, so he may thereby rise any whit the higher, and still the more
he gets, the more he desires to get: for the greater draught of honor, causes
the greater drought. He is a mere bladder puffed up with the wind of hope. Many
times he rises high, and then like a Rocket in the air, breaks, and falls
down to the wo^derment of all the beholders. Envy and pride are his two wings,
he still flutters with, to get above others. And when he is got up, he usually
throws down those whom before he made (as stairs) the means of his rising.
He is of a restless nature, and counts every stay a losing of time. He can
sail with any wind, nay, with a cross wind, rather then stand still. He is
a great incendiary, and stirrer of Wars, whilst one like Pompey, can endure no
equal; another like Caesar admit of no superior. He wishes all things turned
topsie-turvy, knowing that then, the first will be last, and the last first.

VIII. The Vulgar.
IS an untamed monster with many heads; but like roaring Cyclops with one eye:
attempting things with great clamor, but little judgment: not able to judge of
things as they are indeed, but only by outward appearances. And therefore as
the Sea is moved with every puff of wind, so are they with every breath of
their Orators. They regard not what is said, but who says it. For let the
matter be never so good, if they like not the Author, it is worth nothing; on
the contrary, let one of theirs vent nonsense, it is presently cried up for
Gospel, but their love or hatred is (like a childs) won and lost in an hour.
For whom they now extol to the Skies, by and by they will cry down, as fast as
before they cried him up: And if they take head against a man, they run
violently like a torrent to overwhelm him, without law, reason, or judgment:
making greater clamor, then the Frogs in Homer, that would not suffer the
Goddess Pallas to sleep, for their continual croaking. They are (as we say of
fire and water) good servants, but, very bad Masters.

IX. Error.
IS the Ape of Truth. A Labyrinth wherein men's judgments wander like men led
by an Ignis fatuus, to their own ruin. It is an enticing Siren, that with its
deceitful lays draws men into an Ocean of destruction. The cunning Mercury,
which luls the senses asleep, that so it may captivate the reason and
judgment. A dark cloud over-casting with its fogs and mysts, the bright Sun
of Truth, and herein it gains infinite advantages over Truth, in that Truth is
but one, but error infinite, and every one going masked in the mantle of
Truth, for did men see Error in its proper colors, they would never entertain
it: but every one that maintains any Error; does it not because it is an
error, but because he conceives it to be the only Truth. Again, Error is
more pleasing unto men then Truth, and therefore Error finds entertainment
where Truth is shut out of doors. It was the Delemma of the Philosopher, If I
speak to please the people, I shall not tell the Truth, and if I tell the
Truth, I shall not please them, but procure enmity: and therefore it is just,
that those that will not have Truth for their King, should have Error for
their Tyrant, to whom their judgments should be captivated and enslaved.

X. Truth.
IS the food of the soul. The daughter of time, yet was the daughter before
the mother. Simple without any mixture; not needing any artificial painting,
or decking with flowers of Rhethorick, but appearing most beautiful when naked
and in its proper colors. It is the touchstone and square whereby to try all
opinions and doctrines, the only Anchor whereon all things depend, and the
Chart whereby we sail unto Eternity. It is a strong Castle, which if we
defend, will defend us; for though it may be besieged, it can never be
conquered; but like a precious Mineral, it lies not on the face of the earth,
but inveloped in a multiplicity of errors. It is fitly resembled by the Sun;
for first, as there is but one Sun, so but one Truth, and as the Sun enlightens
the eyes of the body, so Truth the eyes of the soul, and though it may be
ecclipsed, it cannot be extinguished; and so glorious is this heavenly light,
that our weak sight is daz'led with the splendor thereof: so that though man
be strong enough to desire, but too weak to receive Truth, or at least, not to
hold it when received. A witty Friar told the people, That Truth was like Holy
Water, which all men call for, yet when it came to be cast on them, they would
turn aside their faces: they that cry fastest for Truth, when it comes to
them, runs fastest from it.

XI. A Self-Seeker.
IS a cunning Archer, that looking to the public service as the mark he
only aims at, yet squints aside at his own ends, which is the true Butt, all
the arrows of his endeavors are shot at. No man pretends more for the public
good then he, and yet no man can intend it less, and well may he in show
advance that which indeed advances him. This is a dangerous crime in men of
public trust, for such leaks make the vessels of the Commonwealth to sink.
Like that notorious Pick-pocket, that whilst (according to the custom) every
one held up their hands at rehersing the Creed, he by a divice had a false hand
which he held up like the rest, whilst his true hand was false in other men's
pockets: Or as a cunning Physician, that instead of lightning the disease,
lightens the purse of his patient, protracting the cure, to prolong his gains.
A deceitful Soldier, who under color of the public, fights only for his
private cause.

XII. Pamphlets.
ARE the Weekly Almanacks, showing what weather is in the State, which like the
Doves of Aleppo, carry news to every part of the Kingdom. They are the silent
Traitors that affront Majesty, and abuse all Authority, under the color of an
Imprimatur. Ubiquitary flies that have of late so blistred the ears of all
men, that they cannot endure any solid truth. The Echoes whereby, what is done
in part of the Kingdom, is heard all over. They are like Mushromes sprung up
in a night, and dead in a day, and such is the greediness of men's natures (in
these Athenian days) of news, that they will rather feign then want it.

XIII. An envious Man.
IS one that can endure no man to be happy, with, or besides himself; Nay, he
had rather see himself in misery, then his neighbor in prosperity. He had
rather go to hell alone, then to heaven with company, yet is he the greatest
foe to himself, for whilst he wishes harm to others, it rebounds to himself
and good men like Cammomile, grow the better, for envies treading, it is but as
a black ground to set off the luster of their merits: and not seldom whilst
envy seeks to wound, it cures, bringing an Antidote instead of a poison. Like
the Mirror of glass that reverberated the poison of the serpent upon her
self killing her with her own weapon. Goodness appears with greater luster
through the black cloud of envy. The envious man feasts like flies on others
soars, another Comedy in his Tragoedy. He is never merry but at others
sadness, and their cries makes the only harmony in his ears.

XIV. True Valor.
IS a virtue in the spirit, which keeps the flesh in subjection, for whilst it
overthrows its enemies it conquers it self, which is the best victory. It
resolves without fear, and acts without fainting, not daunted with multitudes
of oppositio^s, knowing that the greater the conflict is, the greater will be
the honor of the conqueror. It is a sweet temper of the soul, not cast down in
captivity, nor elated in victory, wisdom is her guide, and resolution her
companion. A good cause makes her truly noble, and pity it is it should have
any enemy but error.

XV. Time.
TIme is the universal Standard, whereby we measure Hours, Days, Weeks,
Months, Years and Ages. A Rivulet of Time, which proceeded from, and shall end
in the Ocean of Eternity, compared by that great Statesman and Philosopher of
our Kingdom, to the nature of a River, which carries down to us that which is
light and blown up, and sinketh and drowneth that which is solid and weighty.
It is the devourer of all things, the great Monarch that casts down some, and
raises others, with a kind of omnipotency and unresistable power, for there
is not any thing in the power of man can scotch the ever-circling wheel of
Time. It Is neither force nor flattery can stop his full career. It is he that
opens the windows of heaven to let in day and draws the curtains of the
night, to secure the sleep of wearied labor. And so swift is his flight that
we cannot discover it, till past. He is always the same, and yet not the same
since I said so. The only subject of honest and lawful avarice. But whilst I
speak of Time I lose it, considering that though he is known to be, yet is
his being unknown, for his name is better known then his nature. ()

XVI. A Newter.
IS a very blank, wherein you may write any thing that will make for his
profit. He is a mere Bat all the time of War, resolving to lie hid till time
and fortune have decided the quarrel; and then he will be sure to have a Bird
for the Conqueror. Fortune is his god, Machiavel his Priest, Time-serving his
Religion, and his only Counselors are Corrantoes: for by those he guesses
which way the wind of Fortune blows, and accordingly (with the Hedghog) he
turns his Den. He is only a spectator of this bloody Tragoedy, and will be
sure to reserve his Plaudite till the last Act. What he shall be he knows not,
nor what he is, yet I hold him an Independent; for whilst he sides with all,
he will be sure to none. Like a pair of Compasses, the one end of his own ends
stands fast; while with the other of his speeches he walks the round of every
prevailing faction. He is a mere Polypus, always of the same color of the side
he meets with, for he varies his shapes as often as his company; like an
Adjective, that varies case and gender with his Substantive. He uses
Moderation as a fair masque over his foul-face of Newtrality: but when he
comes to be unmasqued, he becomes then as ridiculous to all, as before he was
odious. His discourse is the very Almanac of the Times, for his judgment is as
variable as Victory. He is of a very unfit temper to make a Zelot of, being
neither hot, nor cold, but Lukewarm, which is detestable to both. We may well
term him a Waveringman, for (like the waves) he is moved with the wind of
success. He would make a very good Musician, for he studies nothing so much
as to keep Time: keeping close to the wheel of Fortune, which is sometimes
broken on by short turnings. Striving so long, to bend to all, till he break
himself. And so playing the Ambo-dexter, that he becomes at length
Ambo-sinister. But I cease to know further what he is, who knows not what he
is in himself.

XVII. A Turn-coat.
IS one that will be sure to be of the strongest side, and all his policy is,
when the contrary party prevails to tack abont, and with a side-winde, to sail
with them. For he is always of the Religion of the Conqueror; if the more
zealous party get up, then none more zealous then he; if the less severe, then
none less religious. Setting his carriage to the tune of the times, though
never so Base. The truth is, he absolute soft wax, in which the last impression
always puts out the former. He is one that sails with any wind; That will run
with the Hare, and hold with the Hound. A mere Weathercock, for by him you may
easily know which way the wind of success blows: for the Times and him are
Terms convertible. He will be sure to stand to his friend, no longer then he
is able to stand, for like Vermin, his flight is a certain token of a falling
house He never declares his judgment but in dubious Terms, leaving himself a
liberty to expound them as Times shall serve.

XVIII. A Moderate Man.
IS the temperate Zone of the times, quallifying the cold of detestible
Neutrality, and the fiery heat of over-zealous rashness. Moderation is the
ballast of his soul, which keeps him upright. He had rather for a time hide
Truth in the cave of his heart, then by his weakness, or the times wickedness
betray both it and himself to the contempt of their adversaries; as knowing
that though Truth may be over-laid and buried, yet it will have a Resurrection.
If he live in such a time (as ours) wherein two opposite parties pretend the
truth, when but one can have it, he resolves with himself, not so far to
resolve with either, that his credit, but especially t^uths, might receive auy
detriment thereby. If Truth be manifestly engaged against Error, he then
though moderately, yet stoutly holds himself bound to defend it. He is neither
of an hot fiery, nor of a key-cold temper, but of a moderate, between those two
extremes, which is the healthfullest, and will be the longest lived. But as
Neutrality gains much by having Moderation for its vizard; so Moderation
suffers more by having neutrality for its neighbor, yet may they be easily
discerned, for Neutrality has only its own ends for its aim, but Moderation
looks only at the Truth. Again, the Neuter is a wandering Planet, never settled,
but the Moderate man is a fixed Star.

XIX. A corrupt Committee-man.
HE is one of the Wens of the body politic, that draws the wealth of the
Commonwealth from its proper use; to the nourishment of his own base humors.
Like the horse-leech or the grave, he is never satisfied, but continually
trying, give, give; He is one that under the authority of the State,
impoverisheth it. A licensed Cheater, authorized by Authority, which gives him
a freedom to examine and measure every one but himself. Like Lyca^n, he
devoures men, and turns his Office into an Office of Escheat, making himself
heir to every man's estate, under color of the States service. He deals with
all that come before him, as the Giant did with his guests, he fits them all to
his size, for those that are overgrown in wealth he cuts shorter, and those
that plead poverty he stretches longer. For the liberty of the Subject he
brings all men into slavery. This upstart Ivy will in time eat out the heart
of the Oak that supports him. He is a very good Chimist, for he turns all
things into gold, the maine engine of the War, and the pipe that conveys and
commands all the treasure of the Kingdom, but there is a crack of self ends
that hinders it from going to the right end of the Kingdoms good. His very name
is as terrible to the poor Country man, as the Inquisition, speaking nothing
less then commitment, for the Prison is his rack, and an Oath the tormentor;
whereby he makes men prove Traitors to themselves worse then ever, by the Oath
Ex Officio. His will must be the Standard whereto every one must be reduced.
The under Committees he uses as a sponge, or as the Turks do the Jews, which
when they have gathered sufficiently, he squeezes, and so the greater Thieves
rob the less, and both the Commonwealth. For his Religion, if he have any, it
is altogether for Liberty of Conscience, but whilst he keeps loose his own,
he binds all other men's. Nothing terrifies him so much, as to think of an
account, it is therefore his policy to be an evil angel to stir and mud the
waters, like the fish Sepia, that he may go away un-discerned, like a Thief in
a crowd. Peace is as often in his mouth, as seldom in his heart, for like a
corrupt Chyrurgion, he lives upon keeping the soar raw: as certain the poor
Kingdom must needs be a Patient that suffers under such Chyrurgions. But how
this foundation will stand, that is raised on other men's ruins, and built on
others breakings, when the wind of Majesty, and the reign of justice shall
again descend, who knows? till then I leave him, if in the mean time his
guilty conscience do not condemn him, and he himself save the hangman a
labor, by preventing him.

XX. A Sectary.
He is one that having left the road of the Churches practice, wanders in the
Labyrinth of Sects and Schisms, and being of a Quicksilver brain, can never
be fixed in any till he become an absolute Atheist, for they that once are of
all Religions, will quickly be of none at all. He cannot endure any government
as tying him in an enclosure: for he will not be fed by the wholesome food of
his proper Minister, but will carve for himself, not discerning weeds from
herbs, poison from wholesome meat. For learning he utterly detests it, and no
wonder if they that seek dark corners, hate the light of the Sun that would
discover them, yet the Sun is never the worse nor less useful, because blear
eyes cannot endure its light. He is so strict to observe the very words of the
Scripture (though he can read never a word of it) that because the Apostles
were some of them fishermen, and Paul preached in an upper room, He thinks
him no Preacher that is not a mechanic, nor that no Church which is not in a
chamber. He rails continually against pluralities, and affects nothing so much
as to be singular. If he be the ringleader of a Sect, his only care is to
work upon the weaker sex, to deceive simple women, whom, if they follow him,
he supposes their husbands will come after them. And thus the Serpent, the
father of Heretics first tempted Eve, and then leaving her to tempt her
husband. And these all wear Christ's colors, but fight under the Devils
banner, which daily multiply by our divisions, these abstractions from the
Church increase by the distractions in the Church, and it will be as easy to
knit a rope of sand, as to unite them again thus dissipated.

XXI. Of War.
WAr is a Tragoedy, that most commonly destroys the Scene whereon it is acted.
An unwelcome guest that devoures his Host. The cursed offspring of two blessed
parents, Peace and Plenty, both which it destroys and devoures, as Pharoes
lean kine did the fat ones. Peace chains up al furies and mischiefs, which the
sword of War lets loose. War is a Wolf whose pestilent breath stops the
mouth of the Laws, whose voice cannot be heard for the cries of oppressed
people, the effect, and the roaring of Cannons, and clashing of Arms, the
sadder causes. Wars griping hand squeezes and scatters what good husbandry
had raked together in time of peace. Time of War is the true Iron Age, for it
converts all into iron, which iron will be master of all men's gold. War never
comes but attended with a train of devouring followers: Destruction and that
usually go hand in hand. this General War has so universal a command,
that no particular man can have any command of his now. But of all Wars, none
so uncivil as civil War, other wars kill foes, but this friends, in this, one
member rises up against another. If a Kingdom divided from others cannot stand,
a Kingdom divided against it self must needs fall. But the ugliness of War
will appear better, or rather worse, by viewing the beauty of Peace.

XXII. Of Peace.
PEace is the ligament or seament, that knits and unites the several members
of one Kingdom into one body. She is the mother of plenty and prosperity. The
nurse and cherisher of Arts and Sciences, and what is worth all, the best means
for propagating the Gospel, for the spiritual fishers never caught the more
for fishing in troubled waters, for such fish (as mariners say of the litterall
fish) if they see blood on the net, they will not be caught by any bays. No
this Gospel is the Gospel of Peace, and of the God of Peace, and his children
the lovers of Peace. Peace makes those calm days wherein the Halcyon of
honor seats her nest. It is the only cordial to revive a fainting Kingdom,
languishing of the deadly wounds of the keen sword of enraged war. This one
word Peace (as one well observes) is but a monosylable, yet is it big with a
world of happiness. Yet many Athenians there be who never went to conclude a
peace but in mourning garments. But I fear to speak farther of it, lest I
meet with the Florentine Law, which made it death for any one to name Peace. I
suppose the miseries of this cruel War may be as so many mouths to cry and
call for Peace, and therefore I will hold my peace.

XXIII. A Drunkard.
IS a mere beast in the shape of a man. A living pipe or conduite, through
which the liquour passes. A great assertor of Copernicus his opinion, for he
holds that all things go ronnd. He might make a resolute Soldier, but that he
staggers so often. Drukennesse is used in High Germany for the Index, or
Touchstone of a man's nature, for the parents will see men drunk before they
marry their daughters unto them, because they will know what kind of
drunkenness they are subject to; and according to the good or ill (if a
Drunkard can have good) qualities they judge him convenient or not for their
marriages: And indeed there is no passion that a Drunkard is subject to, but
Wine will make him turn traitor to himself and discover. It is not for nothing
that the word in the Original signifies Naked, drunkenness breaks the veil
of secrecy, and renders a man naked to his very enemies, when he is like
Gryllus (in Plutarch) who was so transformed by one of Circes charms, that he
could not by all Ulisses cloquence be induced to depose his hoggish nature, and
resume the person of a man. He is not then his own Master or his own man, whose
senses are fettered with Drunkenness, and yet how he boasts in making himself
a hogshead, striving to take off his liquour till he be taken of it, and become
its captive, and instead of quenching his thirst drownes his soul. And being
thus bereaved of his senses, he jumps not an inch from a madman. For as there
are several sorts of madmen, so are there also of Drunkards, and every one in
his several humor: some are mad, some merry, some raging Drunkards. How many
brute beasts will rise up in judgment against the Drunkards, who make the
sufficing of Nature their Standard in eating and drinking, which they will not
exceed no more then the Drunkard exceeds them in his drink? For there are but
two things whereby a man is differenced from a beast, Ratio and Oration, Reason
and Speech, and the Drunkard wants them both. He wants reason like him that
stuffed a porrage pot with straw to make it the easier pillow. He wants speech
also, for as the Ephramites were distinguished from the rest of the Israelites,
by lisping, they could not pronounce the letter ^. Thus Drunkards (says one
wittily) are distinguished from the Kings sober subjects by clipping the coin
of the tongue. But lamentable it is when he dares to quote Scripture examples
for proof of his actions, looking only at the evil of sin, but not at the
evil of punishmeut that follows those sins; let him show me the example of a
Saint that sinned, and had not also his affliction for it. As the Comoedian,
who when one objected to him his bringing a deboist fellow upon the stage,
thereby giving an evil example to youth: He answered, it is true, I brought such
an one upon the Stage, but I hanged him before he went off, and so I gave them
a good example.

XXIV. A novice Preacher.
IS a young Lapwing, running from his nest of the University, before maturity
of time and knowledge have cast the shel of ignorance, which therefore he still
carries on his pate. How-ever this kallow Bird weary of his Mothers tuition,
(when indeed she might better be weary of him) having hopt out of his nest,
must be chirping on every hedge, and will be straggling abroad, never minding
the danger of such attempts; but Who so bold as blind Bayard, says the
Proverb? We may say of him as of the Nitingale, Vox and praeterea Nil, His
greatest commendation is the strength of his lungs, having been but a while
like a cipher, in the place of a figure, me thinks, I hear the people saying,
to those Novices, as the wise to the foolish Virgins, ye have not enough for us
and your selves too, go ye rather and buy for your selves: for we bear ye
witness, that hitherto out of your own necessities ye have administered unto
us. And no wonder, that instead of shining Lights, they prove foolish fires to
lead their flocks into a Maze of Errors, in which they wander, not having the
clue of learning or judgment to guide them out. They are rather smoke to put
out the eyes of the seeing, then like to lend eyes unto the blind. They are
mere wels without water, and clouds without rain. His Sermons are but the
echoes of other men, in which his greatest commendation is, that he reads them
Clerk-like. For his prayers they consist most an end of naught else, save a
zealous taking the Lords name in vain, in tedious tautologies* which he is as
devout in, as a Papist would be in dropping his beads. His Library consists of
a Directory, and an Ordinance for Tithes, and if his estate will reach to it, a
Concordance.

XXV. A Scandalous Preacher.
HE is one who by his Doctrine shows the way to heaven, but by his life, the
road to hell. Like that ridiculous Actor iu Smyrna, who pronouncing o coelum!
pointed down to the ground, of whom Polemio in a chafe said, This fellow has
spoken false Latin with his hand: so does he that preaches well, and lives
ill; he speaks false Divinity with his conversation. His tongue speaks the
language of Canaan, but his life the language of Ashdod. We may say of him as
it was of Erasmus, his Encheridion, that there was more devotion in the book
then the man; so that there is more Learning and Religion in the Sermon then in
the Preacher, and what an incongruous thing is it, to see an holy Preacher and
a wicked man in one and the same person? whose life is a Traitor to that
Doctrine his tongue both professes and persuades alleagance to, as if he
thought to go to heaven some other way then what he teaches the people,
soyling the glorious robe of Religion, by putting it upon a beastly
conversation. He is a mere Comoedian in Religion, acting goodness in voice
and gesture only. His life and Doctrine is like the cloud that led the
Israelites in the wilderness, light on one side, but dark on the other, for no
man teaches better then he, and no man lives worse, teaching others what he
does not himself, like way-posts, directing travailers in their way, but
themselves not stirring.

XXVI. A grave Divine.
IS a faithful watchman, going before his flock, holding forth the shining
lamp of his Doctrine in the lantern of a good conversation. He is a good
steward, that has studied before hand to lay in sufficient provision for that
great charge he has undertaken. He leapt not from the Grammar School to the
Pulpit, but was long in the Tyring-house of the University, before he appeared
on the public Theater, where he courted not the mistrisse Divinity first, but
made his way to her the easier, by first winning the Arts, her handmaids.
Neither was he hasty to launch forth of that Port, till he was sufficiently
ballasted with learning. Being lawfully called to the Ministry, he first
thoroughly learned the weight thereof, that he may the better fit his shoulders
to bear it, and surely he that is most careful to know, will be most careful
to perform his duty. His endeavor is to fit his matter to the capacity of his
hearers, as desiring rather their profit then his applause. In any controversy
he more delights to show the strength of truth, then his adversaries weakness:
using soft words, (as one well) but hard Arguments. He is very circumspect in
ordering his own conversation, as knowing that ignorant people learn as much
(if not more) by their eyes then their ears; so that his whole life is but one
continued Lecture, wherein his parishioners may legibly read their duty. And
indeed the actions of the Minister, are the Pole-stars the people steer their
course by: therefore it is our Ministers care that they may read (as it were)
all his precepts and exhortations to them in the line of his own life.

XXVII. A self-conceited Man.
IS one that looking through the spectacles of self-love on his own worth,
which makes every small thing seem great in his own conceit. Like the Ape, he
hugs the brats of his own brain, and with the Crow, thinks his own bird
whitest. He looks only upon the flowers of his good actions, but not on the
weeds of his imperfections, which, though never so bad, are the best part of
his actions. He looks so on his own beauty, till Narcissus-like he is
inamoured with himself, being drunken with self-conceit he sees all things
double. Whatsoever he says, he counts like Pithagoras his ipse dixit, to his
scholars, that must stand for an infalible rule. His opinions are always
singular, and had rather err by himself then hold a common truth. You can tell
him nothing that is good in him, but he knew it too well before. Whatsoever
opinion he is pleased to grace with approbation, must be the only truth, not
because it is (if it be) truth, but because he holds it.

XXVIII. An inconstant Man.
HE is a wandering Star, never fixed in any resolution. Whatsoever he meant or
said, is presently altered, for he meant it not long enough to take impression,
his strongest resolutions being rather tacked then fastened. He is always
building and pulling down, striving to out-vey time it self in mutability: in
the best things continuance is quarrel sufficient, and novelty the highest
style of commendation in the meanest. His understanding writes upon his wit, as
men write on water, no sooner written, but forgotten. He is a stranger to
himself, and all his actions so different from another, that one would think
it impossible they should all come out of one the sameshop. A piece of clay,
tempered with running water, which keeps his wit in a perpetual motion. He
often resolves seldom Acts, being ruled by passion, not reason. He is the best
enemy that can be, but the worst friend, for it is a wonder if his love or
hatred, last so long as a wonder. All his purposes are built upon the floting
Islands of his several humors: but I Will here cast anchor, and leave him to the
wind of his own will.

XXIX. Religion.
REligion in it self is naturally written in the hearts of all men: which will
rather be of a false then of no Religion. It is the bond between God and us,
and therefore in our old English called Eanfastnes, as the only assurance, and
fast anchor-hold of our souls health: and therefore irreligious men cut or
dissolve this band, and then no wonder if cutting this cable, they make
shipwreck of their souls. Though there be many false religions, as many false
gods in the World, yet is there but one true Religion, as one true and only
God, who is the sole object of Religion: and all those several ones, though so
far distant from one another, yet they all meet in this, that they all worship
a Diety. Religion (like Sampson's hair) is the strength of a Kingdom: where
that is lost, the Kingdom is a true Icabod, the glory is departed: and no such
way to lose the true Religion, as in a crowd of false ones. He that opens his
hand (or his heart rather) to contein all will, retein none: true Religion is
of too pure a nature to admit of any mixture, but alas! we may too truly say of
religion in our times, as Erasmus did of the Friars Cowle in his, that it there
was like Charity, for it covered a multitude of sins, as if there was no such
way for men to fight for their own ends, as under the banner of Religion. *^*

XXX. Death.
DEath is that universal wind to which all mortals, become wind-fals from the
tree of life. Sickenesses and sleep, are as pauses and parentheses, in the line
of life, but Death the full point; the period; and Ne plus ultra, of the
longest. The grisly Atropos that cuts in sunder the strongest cord of life, it
is that unavoidable debt levied upon all mankind, by force of that Statute
enacted by God in Paradise: and recorded by Saint Paul, That all must dye. As
when one told Anaxagoras, the Athenians have condemned thee to dye, He
answered, and Nature then. It is that black night, which over-takes, and
over-spreads the brightest day of life. The grim Sergeant sent from the
Almighty with an Habeas Corpus, to arrest every one for that unavoidable debt,
due to Nature, ever since our first Parent broke and turned Bankerupt. The
grave is his Prison wherein he keeps them, till the Resurrection, the time of
their Jail-deliver from it. But to the godly, it is a friendly-fo, which by
robbing them of a mortal life, makes them capable of immortality; and by
splitting the vessel of their bodies, upon the rock of death, engulphs their
souls into Eternity: setting her free from the prison of the body, and
endenizing her into Heaven. It is their Exodus out of the Egypt of the World,
preparing them to enter into their promised Land of the heavenly Canaan: or new
Jerusalem. At this Port must weall arrive: whatsoever our Voyage be. This is
the total sum of all mankind. It is the bitter cup our father Adam begun,
and we must all pledge it: the Inheritance which he purchased, as his wages of
sin, and is entayl'd to all his posterity. A Deluge which broke in by Adams
breach of Gods Commandment that sooner or later will overflow all mankind. By
his rebelling against God, al are become subject to deaths command. what the
Epigram says wittily on the Gramarian is true of every man, that being able to
decline all other Nownes in every Case, could decline Death in no Case. All
must fall down at deaths feet, as well the Prince as the Pesant. He cannot be
resisted, nor will he be flatterd. No Orator so eloquent, that could persuade
Death to spare him nor Monarch so mighty tha^ could resist him. Hezekiah,
indeed was reprieved, by God himself, for fiften years, but he came to it at
last. When this wind blows, and when this rain descends, it irresistably
blows down, and washes away the clay tenements of our bodies. He is an Archer
that shoots, sometimes beyond us hitting our supriours, sometimes short of us,
striking our inferiors, sometimes at our right hand, depriving us of our
friends, sometimes at our left hand, taking away our foes: and then at last hits
the mark it self, and we must tread the same path, that all have, who are gone
before us, and all must that shall come after. ()

Mors, omnium FINIS.

