THE SPIRIT OF Bondage AND Adoption: Largely and Practically handled, with
reference to the way and manner of working both those Effects; and the proper
Cases of Conscience belonging to them both. In two Treatises. Whereunto is
added, A Discourse concerning the Duty of PRAYER in an afflicted Condition, by
way of Supplement in some Cases relating to the second Treatise.

By SIMON FORD B. D. and Minister of the Gospel in Reading.

London, Printed by T. Maxey, for Sa. Gellibrand, at the Ball in Paul's Church
Yard, 1655.

To the Reverend, the Dean, and Chapter of Christ-Church in Oxford, with the
Students, Graduate and under-Graduate; who are or hereafter shall be Members of
that Foundation: Together with The Reverend Principal of Magdalen Hall, and all
the Masters, Commoners and other Students there.
TO you ( Fathers and Brethren) I do upon good advice, dedicate and devote
these ensuing Treatises; partly, because of the Relation that I have had to
both Houses, as having received the first elements of rational Learning in the
one, and been admitted to an employment of special trust in the other: and
partly because the subject they treat of, was begun in the hearing of most of
you, and the enlargement of it into the bulk it now appears in, was undertaken
with the advice, and encouragement of that never to be forgotten ornament of
his College, and the whole University, Dr Reynolds, with whom I had the honor
of acquaintance whiles he continued there, and of partnership in suffering,
when he was removed thence.

I confess, this piece, if it were to be judged by an University of the old
stamp, has not quaintness enough to expect any approbation from so learned a
Body. But (I hope, and partly, know) that very many of your heads and hearts
are better acquainted with practical Divinity, then (I doubt) most of your
predecessors were. And therefore, I cannot but think, that you will vouchsafe
it a little room (and it will not take up much) in your Libraries. Here are a
great many practical Questions and cases of conscience, concerning the inward
and experimental part of the mystery of godliness, succinctly handled, (and I
shall boldly say) to my utmost abilities, sincerely and faithfully: how
judiciously, and satisfactorily, I leave it to those of you who are
experimentally acquainted with the matters treated of, to judge, as you see
cause. I am sure, I could not have spent my pains in waiting upon a more
excellent subject, nor can you in reading: Yea, if the subject have no more
cause to complain of the insufficiency of the Author, then the Author has of
the unprofitablenesse of the subject; I dare promise you, that (as I have, so)
you will receive some considerable benefit, from the study and meditation of
it: I have no more to preface to you at this time, but only by way of
encouragement, to keep up the study of practical Divinity among you, as that
which has more marrow and fatness in it, then all the quaint notions of your
ancient Schoolmen, or the highest attainers of this wanton Age; and by way of
prayer to God for you, that you may, by an useful employment of your parts,
revenues, and opportunities, confute, and put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, who wait for your haltings, observe your failings, and gape for
the spoils of your buildings and Revenues. That you may so do, is, and shall
be (by Gods assistance) part of the constant devotions of him, who is

Yours, solemnly devoted to the advancement of all pious and practical
Learning, SIMON FORD.
December. 13. 1654.
To the Readers of these Treatises, especially those of my present Congregation
in READING, and those of my once-Auditory, the people of WITNEY in Oxfordshire.
Christians.
WHo-ever you are to whom these presents shall come, know, that you are
concerned in the study of the Truths here treated on, as deeply, as it
concerns you, to live here holily or unholily, comfortably or uncomfortably;
yea, as much as it concerns you to be saved or damned hereafter everlastingly,
Whether you look on, or overlook them, (but for your own account, which I would
willingly further) is all one to me. I have learned to speak plain truth,
without being solicitous how it will go off, in this nice and tender Age. Sure
I am, that my Master will account my Talent not amiss bestowed upon such a
subject, except for this only, that my heart has been too little affected with
it, or bettered by it, in the study, and preaching thereof. My hope is by this
publication, you, and I shall (by Gods grace) improve it together, and mingle
our prayers, that it may mutually do good.

To you of my former, and present Auditories, I recommend these Treatises in a
special manner, seeing they are more peculiarly yours; the one, (I mean that of
Witney) because of my unsettlement from Oxford, having been deprived of the
full hearing of the first, and heard nothing at all of the last: The other of
Reading, having been from the pulpit made partaker of the whole, and diverse of
you desired it from the press. I hope, you will consider, that the printed
labors of your Ministers will not be so easily accounted for, as the transient
breath of an uttered Sermon. That reverend and holy man (my predecessor now
with God) Dr. Tailor, has charged much upon the account of you my present
people, and the whole Town, this way. I fear his works are in few of your
houses, and in fewer of your hearts. It were thirty or forty shillings well
spent (if less will not do it) to buy them, if not into your private families,
yet into your several Churches, to be kept among other Church Vtensills, if for
no other use, yet for a Testimony against the backslidings, and fearful
Apostacies, of diverse of his admirers and followers in the time of his Ministry
amongst you. And as for me, I know not of what esteem my poor labors may be to
after times. At present, I have (with grief of he art I speak it,) cause to
complain of many of you, that I fear I have spent my labor in vain hitherto.
It may be, much of the cause of it may be from my own ignorance of the most
proper way of winning upon you: (and I must confess, a people, so divided, and
subdivided, needed a far wiser man, and more experienced then I am to soder
them together, and beget such an esteem of my ministry in all dissenting
parties, as might render it effectual to them:) It may be, I have not
sufficiently watered the seed sown with my prayers for, and tears over you. It
may be the many public contests, which (God knows) unwillingly, have
diverted my studies, and preaching, too often to controversies, may be the
occasional cause of my too great unsuccessfulnesse among you. But however, I
pray consider, I have preached, and now print enough (if you had never heard
more from me then these Sermons) to render you utterly inexcusable, if any of
you still bar the doors of your hearts with a sinful prejudice against the
truths herein contained. I beseech you (for Christ's sake) let none of you turn
them into matter of dispute, if in any thing I differ from any of your
judgments. For I know, it is an usual policy of Satan to make use of
differences in opinions (though never so small, and trivial) as impregnable
fortifications against the power of truth, when it proceeds from persons, from
whom we differ. I pray remember, that although the matter here treated of
according to Christians various experiences, may beget different apprehensions
in some things; yet the main substance of these Treatises, is of common (and
that necessary) use to all. Let us not lose that we agree in (as to the benefit
and use of it) whiles we strive for an unprofitable victory in that wherein we
differ. I have (for the most part) avoided (of purpose) peremptory decisions in
doubtful points, and all unsavory reflections (to my best judgment)
altogether. I hope you will all make use of that wherein all Saints agree, and
not trouble others with that wherein you disagree. The Lord grant you may, and
then I know my present labor will not totally be lost. If but one poor soul be
converted, supported, comforted hereby, it will be too great a reward for my
slender pains. However, (because we must cast out the net to catch as many
fishes as we can, though we must be contented with how few soever God shall
think fit to bring into it) I have thought fit to make way to your acceptance
by this Preface; and having so done, commend it, and you, and this Piece of
mine to Gods blessing, and entreat you to do the like in your most solemn
Prayers, for

The unworthy Author, your Servant in the Gospel, SIMON FORD.
December. 13. 1654.
To the READER.
THe Subject of this Treatise being the Spirit of Bondage, and the Spirit of
Adoption, will (I fear) meet with some disgusts, at least not savingly relish
with every pala^e in these times, wherein people are so strongly addicted to a
pleasurable Religion, desiring as well an easy way to bring them to Christ
without those terrors and disquiets of conscience which usually accompany the
new birth, as a pleasing continuance in their Regenerate estate in Christ,
without those renewings of repentance, and that course of strict obedience the
Gospel calls for. Now to those who do not carry in their breasts any prejudicacy
of opinion touching the Points laid down in this Treatise, but desire earnestly
the clearing, of every saving Truth, I shall not need to say any thing; the
holy Spirit of God is promised to guide them into the knowledge of all
necessary Truths, who desire in sincerity to be experimentally acquainted with
them. But those who are likely to be offended with Doctrines of this nature let
me encourage to the serious study of this Book. As the Subject of it is
spiritual, so it is handled, not only with much solidity of Judgment, and
acuteness of Learning, but also with much ^piritualnesse; as in which the
reverend Author does not only present the tru^hs of Christ in a way of
Speculation, for the delight of the mind; but also suits them to the hearts of
people in a way of Practice, for the benefit of the soul, which is certainly
the most excellent, and most profitable way of opening Scripture: for as it is
the saving Duty of people to practice what they know, whereupon that which
Epictetus makes one of the first principles of Philosophy, (...), the making
use of Rules and Precepts in the course of life the same our blessed Savior,
and the Apostle S. James make one of the first Principles of Religion, If ye
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them; and not they who are hearers
only, but doers of the Word shall be blessed in their deed: So it is the
incumbent work of Ministers in all they deliver, either in the Pulpit, or by
the Press, for the winning of people unto Christ, or building them up in the
faith, not to keep in high Notions or Speculations of Truths, but to endeavor
to bring them to be practicable, without which all Teachings and Discourses
will be but vain and unprofitable. What Austin notes of the three great
Philosophers, that Socrates excelled in Philosophia activa, and Pythagoras in
Contemplativa; but that Plato, utramque jungendo Philosophiam perfecisse
laudatur. The same I must say of Divines, they do most excel in handling the
Doctrines of the Gospel, who make it their work to join the Practical, and the
Speculative together. How far this life blood runs in the veins of this
Treatise, will be easily discerned by the eye of every one that shall please to
take the pains to read it. They who do not before hand stomach the Matter and
Subject of it, will not (I persuade my self) be offended with the manner of
handling it. The elaborate pains the Author has taken in this Work, wherein
are many great and precious Truths asserted, many knotty points which have not
a little puzzled the spirits of tender Christians, cleared up to their comfort;
material Questions satisfactorily answered, and the spiritual condition laid
open very fully, in reference to the state of Bondage before Conversion, and
the state of Adoption after it: and all this and very much more, in a solid way
both of Scholastical and Practical Divinity, deserve much encouragement from
the people of God, for whose Souls sake He has thus traveled. But there is
not any thing of greater provocation to faithful Ministers of the Word to take
pains both by Preaching and Writing, then the diligence of People in Hearing
and Reading. As I shall therefore commend this Work to the serious perusal of
all, into whose hands Gods Providence may cast it; so in reference to the study
of it, I License it for the Press, as that which may tend exceedingly to the
improvement of Graces, the comfort of afflicted consciences, the inlightning of
the ignorant in points of so necessary concernment, the conviction of folly in
those who presume of their being in Christ before they have had any sense of
their sinful and miserable condition by nature; and many ways to the great
advantage of all, who have not yet attained to a right understanding of these
Mysteries of Salvation.

THO. TEMPLE.

To the READER.
THe Author of this Treatise has learnt to deny himself, that he might study
and exalt Jesus Christ. He is none of that Grecian strain, whom the Orator
smartly censured of old, Do illis eruditionem, do Doctrinam: fidem and
Religionem nunquam isti coluerunt. For he has been at Athens and learnt Christ
there, as Dionysius the Areopagite did, Act. 17. 34. He could not content
himself with such a Revelation as flesh and blood does impart to carnal
Gospellers, Mat. 16. 17. and therefore he has begged the Testimony,
Revelation, and Demonstration of the Spirit; 1 Cor. 2. 4. Ephesians. 1. 17.
that he might have the Spirit of God for a Witness in himself before he
presumed to testify of 1 John 5. 1. 6, 10.
the most eminent Works of the Spirit in the heirs of Heaven. He has shown
Believers that their right by the Gospel is good in Law, when it is sealed by
the Oath of God, by the Spirit of God, and by the heart blood of Christ, who is
the end of the Law for righteousness to them that believe, Ephesians. 1. 13. Romans
9. 1. 1 John 2. 20, 27. 1 John 5. 13. 19. 20. Romans 8. 16, 17. 2 Cor. 3. 3.
Romans 10. The single testimony of a deceived heart is no Authority; but when
the Spirit has enlightened and renewed a soul, he leaves an Impresse upon the
heart, and a Certificate in the conscience which cannot deceive. Let the Reader
beg the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, that he may read this excellent
Treatise with the same spirit wherewith it was written. And let them that cry
down Learning and Universities see and confess that the Spirit breathes upon
learned souls, and makes their Learning instrumental to discover the Mysteries
of godliness, even the deep things of the Spirit, with more glory and
advantage, then when he works upon duller souls, who have not Learning enough
to prize Learning, or grace enough to bless God for sanctifying of that
learning which discovers the danger of their ignorance. The Lord bless the
Labors of this practical Preacher, and teach us to grow in knowledge and grace,
that we may not be led away with the error of lawless or (...).
boundless men, nor fall from our own steadfastness; so prays

Your Servant in the Gospel, FR. CHEYNELL.

REader, the Authors distance from the Press must plead for him and it. Thy
indulgence (it is hoped) will pardon the rest, which in this review are
overseen, and correct these Errata's before thou read.

ERRATA.
Page 22. l. 10. r. this, for the first. p. 28. l. 22. r. him in. p. 34. l 27
r. with a guard. p. 59. l. 32. r. had your. p. 61. l. 30 blot out may. p. 78.
l. 10. r. read. and amend the Title of the Chapter, according to the Contents
after the Book. p. 83. l. 26. r. Saint. p. 96. l. 10 r. never leaves it. p.
104. l. 12. r. nest. p. 116. l. 6. r. the wound slight. p. 130. l. 8. r. that
is. p. 145. l. 21. r. hope. p. 145. l. 5. r. (...) l. 28. r. your patience. p.
152. l. 8. r. (...) more cutting beyond. p. 189. l. 5. r. Scripture. p. 203. l.
7. r. all lay. p. 216. read the whole sentence following (For although, etc.
after 1. Immediately, in the next page. p. 229. l. 19. r. to them. p. 252. l. 8.
r. seal. p. 278. l. 25. r. measures. p. 289. l. 23. r. wrought. p. 298. l. 16.
r. exercise. p. 339. l. 2, 3. r. particular to. p. 343. l. 12. r. bought. p.
367 l. 6. r. hasitancy. p 397. l. 15. r. manner. p 419 l. 15. for them r. it.
p. 438. l. 25 26. r. the real. p. 497 l. 22. r. accompanied. p. 579. mar. r.
(...) p. 589. l. 18. r. wrings.

I might add. p. 87. l. 8. r. expectation. l. 31. r. peccatur. p. 179 l. 6. r.
occasions. p. 234. l. 8, r. possible. p. 237. l. 10. r. a crown. p. 245. Title,
r. this evidence. p. 301. l. 4. r. humiliation. p. 321 l. 10. r. As in. p. 324
l. 12. for them, r. it. p 352. l. 24. r. yet. p. 450. l. 28. r. is. p. 456. l.
24 dele the. p. 516. l. 15. r. to. p. 526 l. 2. r. Spirit, in.

CONCERNING THE SPIRIT OF BONDAGE.
CHAP. I. What it is in the Apostles sense.
BEing resolved (by Gods assistance) to handle Theologically and practically
those two grand mysteries of godliness, the souls spiritual trouble, and
peace, in their nature, manner of working, proper differences from any other
works, and the several cases arising from the practical view of those heads:
we will first begin with that work which in the Elect of God is usually first
wrought, viz. Spiritual trouble.

Now because the consideration of a work as it relates to the efficient and
other causes, and that of a condition or state, as it relates to the subject in
whom it is wrought, are both in notion and practice distinct; and seeing both
of these considerations will frequently offer themselves to us in the course of
this Treatise, with relation to the subject in hand; therefore I have taken the
rise and spring of my Meditations from such a Scripture, as affords us both
conjoined, viz. that of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. 15. Where the Apostle [as it
is a work or effect] by a metonimy calls it the Spirit (that works) to fear;
[as it is a condition or state] he calls it Bondage. And being to consider it
as a work or impression of such a cause upon such a subject, and reducing that
subject to such a condition, he very fitly joins both notions and
considerations into this one character or description.

The reception of the Spirit of Bondage to fear: whence we will take our rise
for a brief view of these heads. 1. The efficient cause, the Spirit. 2. The
effect of that Spirit, which is the inward condition or state of the soul in
which it is. Bondage 3. The impression wrought by this effect in the subject,
reduced thereby to this condition, fear. 4. The way or manner of this work and
communication of influence from the efficient, whereby it is effected,
Receiving, 5. The persons in whom this operation is wrought, and who thereby
are reduced to this condition, and feel the impression thereof, Ye. 6. The time
of this work of the Spirit, and condition of the patients in whom it is
wrought, implied in the whole frame of the verse: which is, during the time of
Transition from Nature to Grace, from alienation and enmity, to adoption, and
friendship.


1. What this Spirit is who is the efficient cause of this work, has not a
little perplexed Interpreters. Chrysostom, and (out of him) Oecumenius, and
Augustine, and diverse modern Writers both Popish and Reformed understand this
whole clause concerning Jewish Pedagogy, or discipline under which God held
them under the Law of Moses. The two Spirits here received (says Augustine)
are suited to the times of the two Testaments, Evidentissime duoru^
Testamentorum distinct a sunt tempora; illud enim ad timorem pertinet, novum
autem ad charitatem. Aug. in locum.
the Old pertains to a season or work of fear; the Now to that of love.

So says Calvin, he calls the Old Tastament Vetus Testamentum. Calv. Inst. Gua.
in loc.
a spirit of Bondage, because it begets fear in men's minds. And with him joins
Gualther.

So Chrysostom (who goes ^arther then any (...). Oecum. in ^ocum. (...). and
(...). Chrysostom. in locum. Logem pr^ponit nud a^, quatenus in ea^ Deus nebiscum
operum respectu paciscitur.
I m^et withal in this Argument) affirming diverse things concerning the
condition of the Jews under the Law, for which he is deservedly taxed by Peter
Martyr; As that The Jews received not the Spirit. That, what is here called the
Spirit of Bondage was their Law; so termed because it was a Spiritual Law. That
the Adoption (attributed to them, Rom 9.) was a mere titular honor. That they
called not God Fatherin prayer, etc. And Oecuminius and Oso^ius follow him.

But surely if these holy men understand these things, concerning the believing
Jews, they undertake to affirm that concerning them which (besides the express
Testimony of diverse Scriptures against it, (such as) Ps. 51 11, 12 Pro. 1 23.
Ps. 89 26. Is. 63. 16. etc.) excludes them al out of heaven; and therefore, I
(in charity) conceive, that they rather understand the body of the Jewish
Church, concerning whom, these things may (with a moderate and candid
interpretation, be allowed to be spoken, with respect to the major part, who
though professed believers, yet were real unbelievers.

Calvin, and the modern writers, though they follow these Ancients in the
in^erpretation of this place concerning the Jews, and their Law, yet moderate
the language they use. If the Law, says he, (Calvin) be looked upon in it
self, it cannot but bind men under bondage, and fear of death, seeing it
promises no good but under conditions, and pronounces a curse of death upon
every one that does not keep them, Gal. 3. 10. And therefore says he, the
Apostle here speaks of the Law barely as a Covenant of works, and (so
considered) And Si lex in se consideretur, nihil quam miserae scrvi^uti
addicto^ mortis quoque borrore constringere homines potest, quia nihil boni
promittit nisi sub condition; mortem quoque edicit in omnes transgressores.
Calv. in locum: And non habuerunt sporitum laetitiae and libertatis a lege, sed
ad evangelium confugerunt. Id^m, Instit. Gratia adoptionis erat obscurius
adumbrata* and paucioribus concessa. Gualth. in locum.
the Jews received no spirit of J^y, and liberty from the Law. But what of that
they had, was from the Gospel intermixed therewith. And Gualther explains it
farther, thus. He speaks not of a distinction between the persons of the godly
under both Testaments; but of the different ministry of both. The grace of
adoption was them more obscurely shadowed out and granted to a few only, in
comparison with the times of Gospel ministration.

Thus they. But by the leave of so many learned and godly men, I shall take
liberty (in part) to follow a different Interpretation. For this reas^n;
Because the Apostle here speaks not of the Spirit of Bondage and Adoption as
received by the Jews but by Gentile Romans, who were never under that pedagogy,
and yet they were under this Spirit of Bondage once, as well as now under the
Spirit of Adoption. Yet shall I not scruple to take so much of their
interpretation as concerns the nature of the work wrought, which fills the
conscience with horror of death, as Calvin before speaks. But whereas he takes
the Spirit here spoken of only for the Instrumental caus^, the Law, I cannot go
with him there: but interpret it concerning the efficient cause; or at least
the instrumental cause as it is in the hand of the efficient, the Law in the
hands of the Spirit.

But it may still be a question, what Spirit it is that uses the Law in this
work? Augustine (before mentioned) interprets it of the evil spirit, the Devil,
under whom men in the time of their unregeneracie, are in bondage, sutably to
the Apostles other expression, Ephesians. 2. 2. (...) the spirit that works in the
children of disobedience. This Spirit indeed is a Spirit of bondage, keeping
souls in the basest slavery, taking them prisoners, like Turkish gally-slaves,
and chaining them to his oars, that they may do his will. 2 Timothy 2. 26. But
sure this wicked spirit is not here meant, for (in the Apostles phrase) the
spirit of bondage is said to be a received spirit.

Now the power of Satan in the hearts of unregenerate men, is by reason of
original corruption connatural to them, and so cannot-properly be said to be
received. Besides, the same word being used in relation to this Spirit, which
is affirmed concerning the Spirit of Adoption, (seeing the receiving of the
latter, is to be understood by way of gift and peculiar grace from God) I think
the former must be interpreted so too. Now the domineering power of Satan is no
gift received from God, from whom comes down none but good and perfect gifts.
Ja. 1. 17.

This Spirit therefore that works the bondage, and thereby the fear we speak
of, we De uno eodemq^ Spiritu loquens, diversa^i effect a tribuit. Gualth. in
locum.
have found out (at last) to be a Spirit received (as a gift of grace) from
God; and that can be no other then the Holy Spirit of God. He it is that
creates trouble in the hearts of Gods Elect in order to conversion, as well as
peace after it. And as he is called afterward a Spirit of Adoption, because he
is the efficient cause of the enjoyment and sense of that privilege: so here
the Spirit of Bondage, because by the Law, he reduces the souls of Gods Elect,
in order to regeneration, under bondage and fear.

2. This then being the Spirit from whose efficiency arises this effect, the
effect must be such as is suitable to the cause. The holy Spirit of God cannot
be supposed to bring any soul into an unholy bondage. And therefore the
condition of servitude here spoken of, is not such a servitude as we before
mentioned, a bondage or servitude under the command of sin; but a bondage or
servitude under the guilt of sin: not a bondage to sin, but a bondage for
sin: and a bondage, that is the beginning of liberty from sin, That bondage is
a voluntary bondage, a bondage which men are no way sensible of, nay they are
so far from being sensible of it unto fear (as the Apostle here speaks) that
they count it the greatest liberty, and lie under it in the greatest security.

But this bondage is (naturally) involuntary, such as a man's heart is by nature
irreconcileably averse to, and is therefore wrought in the conscience, by the
mighty convictions of the Spirit of God over-powring it by an irresistible, and
effectual illumination, and binding it with the chains and fetters of that
light, under a deep and serious conviction of the sinfulness and misery of its
own condition. It is (in a word) when a soul lies under the arrest of the
Spirit, arming the Law to seize upon it, and dragg it before the Judgment seat
of God in the Conscience, to receive its sentence according to its desert, a
sentence of death within it self (in the same Apostles expression, though in
another sense. 2 Cor. 1. 9.) upon the pronouncing whereof, the Law lays heavy
fetters and chains of darkness upon the soul, that keep it shut up to the
hope that afterward (by the Gospel) is revealed.

3. The proper impressions of this condition must needs be fearful. And thence
is this Spirit said to be the Author of bondage to fear. And is therefore
called the Spirit of fear, 2 Timothy 1. 7. This is that fear, which the Author to
the Hebrews, 2. 15. tells us that men may be all their lives long enslaved
unto, til Christ deliver them: A fear of Death. i. e. of eternal death, the
wages of sin: A fear that gives a convinced sinner a taste of hell here; it is
the very anguish, and smart of the arrows of God sticking fast in Job. 6. 4.
a man's spirit, the very wales, and furrows, which when the back of conscience
is plowed up with the knotted whips of its own guilt, do fester, and stink,
and corrupt, (as David Psalm. 38, 5
expresses it) that is, make the spirit of a man a burden to it self, and
that intolerable.

This is the condition which the Apostle expresses, and I am to handle under
the notion of the Spirit of bondage, i. e. That Work of Gods Spirit, whereby he
convinces, and terrifieth sinners in order to conversion.

4. And when he does so (in the fourth place) we are said to receive him; that
is, to be (through free grace) the patient and submissive subjects of this
influence of his, bearing the indignation of the Lord because we have sined
Lam. 3. 29
against him; and laying our mouth in the dust if so be there may be hope,
until God shall command deliverance for us, and pull us out of the horrible
pit, and out of the deep mire and clay, and break those chains of hell, and
snares of death, wherein we are fettered, and bring us forth into a large place.

5. The Subjects of this Work of the Spirit, the Apostle expresses under the
pronoun Ye, including the generality of believers among the Romans, and in
them, the generality of believers among all Nations, in all times; these works
being of a common nature to all the people of God, there being nothing in any
one Saint, which renders him a more incapable subject of this work, then in
another, and nothing in the Word elsewhere to privilege one above another
herein.

6. (And lastly,) the time of the Saints being under this work, the Apostle
plainly expresses, not to be then, when by faith they could call God Father;
the influence of the Spirit of Adoption enabling them so to do, delivered them
out of that fearful condition; whence it follows that the experience they had
of this work was before their Adoption, and relation to God thereby, as before
I have declared.

And so much shall suffice for this first Chapter, the clearing of our Subject.
And this done, we will proceed to the handling of it, in the following
Chapters.

CHAP. II. Wherein the first grand Thesis or Proposition concerning this state
of Bondage is explained.
I Shall begin with this state as a work of the Spirit of God, laying this
Thesis or proposition for a foundation of our following discourse.

That those convictions, shakings, and terrors The first Proposition or Thesis.
of conscience under which unregenerate sinners suffer bondage, when the Law
charge them home with the guilt of sin, and apprehensions of wrath, are
(ordinarily) the works of Gods blessed Spirit.

I say (ordinarily) because sometimes Satan brings, or at least keeps souls
(and those the souls of Gods Elect too) under this bondage. He promises
liberty when he tempts to sin; but brings into bondage when he accuses for
sin. And therefore we must make a distinction between the bondage which the
holy Spirit, and the bondage which the wicked spirit brings into, or keeps
under.

First, (therefore) There is a bondage, which admits, and is mitigated by the
conjunction of hope of liberty, and works toward a deliverance: and there is a
bondage that excludes all hope and possibility in the apprehension of a sinner
of ever being removed. A bondage in which the chains with which the conscience
is held, and fettered, are of the same nature with the Devils, bonds of death,
chains of darkness and despair. Now such as these the holy Spirit knits not
(except the despair be partial, and bear relation only to humane helps and
means of escape, and such a despair is in every soul that makes out after
Christ) those that we speak of now, Satan lays on the conscience; these must
needs call him Father, because they are black, dismal apprehensions like him.
Such he wrought in Kain and Judas, that made the former desperately blaspheme
the mercy of God, and the other de^perately to lay violent hands on himself:
and to those despairing terrors is a soul given up when justly excommunicated,
and therefore is said to be delivered 1 Cor. 5. 5.
to Satan; for (that censure binding sin upon a man, and God having promised
to ratify that sentence in Heaven) the Devil, the tormentor is at hand to
load such a soul with Matthew. 16. 19.
terrors enough; if he do not contemptuously go on adding sin to sin, but be
any way sensible of it, he endeavors to drive him to despair; whence the Church
is bidden upon this knowledge of Satan's devices, to comfort such a man, and
confirm comfort to him, by absolution, lest he be swallowed up of sorrow. (...).
2 Cor. 2. 8. 11.

These satanical terrors have sin in them, and therefore (as such) can no way
be the effects of the Spirit of God. Indeed, the Spirit of God may cause them
inchoative, by discovering to a man his sin and misery; but the improvement
of these discoveries in such a measure, and to such an issue, is the work of
Satan, who in this (as in things of other nature,) can counterfeit the very
Spirit of God, and so persuade a poor soul that it is his duty to refuse
comfort, and despair of Salvation.

2. I say, these terrors, when they are wrought by the Spirit of God are in
unconverted sinners: (which makes a farther distinction between the work of
the Spirit of God, and the spirit of Satan herein) the Devil makes it most of
his business to trouble converts; As for unconverted wretches, that are his
fast enough, he seldom disturbes them; as a Soldier will not disturb his own
Quarters but his enemies; and a Magistrate will not (if he be well advised)
harrasle his own dominions. But the Spirit of God speaks terror to the
Consciences of unregenerate sinners to whom it belongs; when he speaks Law, he
speaks to them that are under the Law. Romans 3. 19.

3. But therein is a difference also. If the Spirit of God lay the conscience
under terrors, it is for conversion, they are not penal only, but medicinal
also; they are one sort of Gods ^ods by which he brings men within the bonds of
the Covenant Ezekiel 20 37 makes them to enquire, what they shall do to be saved,
Acts 2. 37. brings them into such a condition that (as the Apostle speaks in
another case) they have the ^entence of death in themselves, that they may fly
out of themselves, and trust in his mercy, power, and goodness alone, who
raises the dead. 2 Cor. 1. 9. persecutes them with his storms (as the
Mariners) and brings them to their wits end, that they may cry to the Lord,
P^alm (...) ^ollows them with the hot beams of his scorching wrath, and vexes
them in his hot displeasure, that they may fly to the shelter, the shadow of
the rock: which he shows them in the promises of the Gospel. But when Satan
sets home any horrors, it is for destruction; when he sees that the sense of a
sinners disease makes him look out after a Physician, he labors, if possible,
to sharpen it so as to destroy him before he can come at him. As Pharaoh, when
God would bring Israel out of Egypt in spite of him, pursues them to drive
them into the Sea: and Jaylors when a prisoner contrives an escape, lay more
irons upon him. Thus therefore you must understand the point.

All the cramps, and convulsions, and palsies of conscience in a man
unconverted, as far as they lead not to despair, or may further conversion,
are the work of the Spirit of God. It is true indeed, that these in whom soever
they are, do not always end in conversion; sometimes rebels break these bands,
and cast these cords from them; but this is not because the Spirit uses them
not for that end, but because they harden their hearts, and make their face
brass, and resist, and do despite to the Spirit of Grace. These are media ad
conversionem destinata, as physic to the body; yet (as that always works not,
because the patients disorder themselves, and so hinder its operation; so) this
physic is often turned into poison by the malignity or negligence of those
whom it is administered unto.

CHAP. III. Wherein this proposition is proved by some Scriptures, and
evidences of Reason.
THat this proposition is true, these places of Scripture will evince. It is
the office of the Spirit to convince of sin. Jo. 16. 9. In sin there be two
things to be convinced of; the guilt and filth of it. By the discovery of the
former, the soul is brought under this bondage, and stirred up to seek release
by justification; by the later, it is brought to loathing of it self, and self
abhoring, and persuaded to come to Christ for sanctification. In this sense is
the Spirit of God said to strive with sinners. Genesis 6. 3. striving is for
conquest, and when God strives for conquest, he shoots such arrows as these,
these are (...) the Arrows of the Almighty, the anger whereof drinks up the
Spirits, Job 6. 4. Thence the Ministers of the Gospel are made binders, as well
as loosers of the conscience, Mat. 16. 19. and 18. 18. Jo. 20. 23.

And indeed they can in Reason commonly have no other Author. For the Devil (as
was before said) will not, if he can help it, trouble such men: And when he
does, it is to carry them from God. A man's own heart is so altogether stony in
it self, that nothing will affect it, it is so dead in trespasses and sins,
that except the Spirit of God set Law and wrath home, and bestow a spiritual
sense on a man to feel it, all the thunder of mount Sinai will not pierce his
ears, all the lightenings of Hell it self will not affect his eyes, all the
whippings, pinchings, lancings, rackings of the severest anatomists of
conscience will not affect his heart. He will sleep on the top of a mast, Prove.
23. 34. he will gallop on in sinful courses on the brink of hell, play with
the sting of the Old Serpent, and the paws of the roaring Lion, nay send a
challenge to heaven, and laugh at God himself, and call him coward if he will
not accept it; and all this while flatter himself in his own eyes, and say, I
shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

CHAP. IV. Wherein the premises are improved by way of support to troubled
sinners.
THat which has been said may yield some suppo^t to troubled spirits. You who
are under this b^ndage, whi^es it tends only to drive you ou^ of your selves to
Christ, O k^ss^ those chains and thank God that he has spread that net over
your souls. Many a man blesses God, for being cast in prison, and brought to
the gallows, when a pardon meets him there: such a pardon not only s^ves his
body but his soul; he had been hanged and damned, but that he was so near it.
You may truly say, periissemus nisi periissemus, you had been undone but for
that und^ing; you had been dissolutely loose, but for those fet^ers; nay you
had been the Devils eternal gally-slaves, had not God changed your prison. O!
the Spirits prison is a Palace to the Devils Dungeon. Say, Lord, these sorrows
might have been sorrows of hell, and these chains, chains of eternal
darkness, had either the Devil or I had our wills; had thou not hedged up my
way with these thorns, and put these locks upon my feet, I had irrecoverably
ruined my self in the error of my ways. I had been in hell, had thou given me
my desire or deservings long ago, whereas now I am but in the suburbs of it. I
had been in that eternal dungeon, where I had fallen lower and lower for ever,
and found no bottom; in a dungeon whence there is no way to return, in a cave
of horror in which there is not one gleame of light, not one cranny of hope to
let in the least glimpse of comfort, but I am yet in the Land of the living,
where I find some footing for hope, some possibility of recovery. It is the
blessed Spirit that has led me into this valley of the shadow of death, he
has shut me up under this bondage, and he can (when he pleases) set open a
door of faith and let me out again. Acknowledge, as Joh. 10. 12. that this
visitation of Gods has preserved thy spirit.

Obj. Yea, but my bondage of spirit is hellish and desperate, sometimes I am
apt to blaspheme the mercy of God, as not able to pardon me, and out of
desperate horour of my spirit to choose strangling, or any thing, that I might
be but out of my present terrors, and know the worst of my condition; and is
there, or can there be any thing of Gods Spirit in such a dismal bondage?

Ans. I answer, No doubt these fearful suggestions and injections proceed from
the Prince of darkness emanative, they are minted in hell, for they bear his
image and superscription. But the Spirit of God has an hand in them diverse
times dispositive, by way of disposal and management; and that thou may
clearly see, in that he has not utterly left thee to thy self, has preserved
thee many times from executing those horrid temptations, and gratifying Satan
by self destruction.

If he would have given thee over to Satan, why not sooner? If he has
preserved thee hitherto, why may he not longer? Whiles thou live there is
hope. He that is above ground is insight of heaven. See and acknowledge the
gracious conduct even of the holy Spirit hitherto, and do not by too long and
wilful adventuring to parle with the enemy of thy soul, drive him from thee.

CHAP. V. Wherein are several Cautions emerging from the premises.
NOr will this truth yield us less matter of Caution. In these particulars.

1. Take heed how you carry your selves toward the Spirit of God, you hardened
sinners; When the Spirit wooes you with Gospel language, draws with cords of
love, presenting you with the incomparable loveliness of him for whom he
sollicites, the beauty of his person, the vastness of his power, the riches of
his inheritance, the unfainednesse of his love, and beseeches you for Christ's
sake to be reconciled to God. Friends do not grieve, vex, resist, quench the
spirit of Grace. Let me tell you, if cords of love will not draw you, he has
chains of wrath to hamper you in; if you will follow other lovers Hos. 2. 6.
he has hedges of thorns to h^dg up your way withal; if he can not draw you by
the love of Christ to love him again he can take another course with you to
make you love him for your own need. Remember friends, he that now offers upon
easy terms to become a Spirit of Adoption to you, if you receive him, can and
will be a Spirit of Bondage to you if you refuse him. If he let loose the Law
upon you, he can in a moment damp all your comforts; if he shoot terrors into
your spirits, all the World cannot ease you; if he command the least sin to
seize upon your consciences, he can make a cloud of an hands breadth to cover
the whole heaven of all your comforts; if he lay but the little finger of one
curse or threatening upon your backs he can make it heavier then the loins of
all the griefs, and troubles that you ever underwent in all your lives; if he
command horrors of spirit to rack you, they will quickly break your bones, and
drink up your spirits, and make your eyes old with weeping, and your Psalm. 51.
8. Isa. 38. 13. Psalm. 6. Psalm. 31. Psalm. 38. 77. Psalm. 4.
couches swim with your tears, and your hearts pant, and your strength fail,
and your wounds stink; he can quickly fill your loins with a loathsome disease,
he can keep your eyes waking, distract you with his terrors, and turn your
moisture into the drought of summer, and make Psalm 88. 15. Isay 38. 15.
you go softly, in the bitterness of your soul. And if all this will not do,
he can deliver you over to Satan at last, to give you a taste of hell here, and
translate you from that to a worse hereafter.

2. Take heed you carnal wretches, do not miscal the Spirit of Bondage. Men too
often look upon troubles of spirit as bare effects of a melancholy distemper,
more proper for the Physician to deal withal then the Divine, and are too apt
to impute that to the infirmity of body which is indeed the immediate hand of
God upon the soul. Ignorant people, because they are unacquainted with the
dealings of God in this kind, often blaspheme the work of the Spirit of Grace,
and call it downright madness, and reproach such preachers as God makes use of
to wound the conscience, as those that make men mad. True, the body and soul
are such near friends as there can be no trouble in the one but the other
sympathizeth, and so distemper of body may possibly heighten a souls trouble,
yea and possibly occasion it. Yet must we take heed how we darken the work of
the Spirit by too much looking at that in such troubles. A discerning Minister
or Christian observing the ground and occasions of the trouble, the coherency
or incoherency of discourse, the evenesse or unevenness of carriage, and the
like symptoms, need not to be much mistaken in judging the case of a person in
the first particular. Oh friends, take heed what you do; look with reverence
and fear upon such dealings of God toward your friends, and acquaintance;
rather do what Job calls for from his friends, Take pity upon them, for the
hand of the Lord has smitten them. Job 19. 21. Remember, 'twas old Elies
uncharitable censure to take Hannah for a drunken woman, when she was a woman
of a sorrowful spirit, 1. Sam. 1. 14 Take heed of persecuting him whom the Lord
has smitten, and talking to the grief of him whom he has wounded. Psalm. 69. 26

3. Take heed of judging the condition of those whom the spirit has thus
brought under bondage. Indeed, their wounds are grievous, and appear incurable;
yet consider, he that lanced them so deep, is a wise and skilful, and tender,
and experienced Surgeon. Take heed how you think them the greatest sinners
whom he lays most fetters upon. It is the Lord whose prisoners they are, and he
may have gracious ends of Acts. 16. 24.
that severity. He may lay a Paul and Silas in the inner prison, and put their
feet into the stocks, that he may the more exalt himself in their delivery; he
may hurt the feet of his Joseph's with fetters, and their souls may come into
irons (as the original reads) Ps. 105. 18. and all this to exalt them and
comfort others.

4. Take heed how you attempt to break loose, you who are in the Spirits
fetters. Herein 2 Cor. 1. 6*
we too often offend more ways then one.

1. There is nothing more usual then to endeavor to obliterate those
impressions of the holy spirit by civil, and sometimes by uncivil diversions:
it is no small evil when we will (as Felix did Paul's Sermons of righteousness,
and temperance, and the judgment to come, Acts 24. 25.) put off the Spirits
motions, till a more convenient time. Men are loath (as the Devils, Mat. 8.
29.) to be tormented before their time, and therefore are willing to make any
shift for the present to cast those truths out of their minds which may
disturb the quiet of their consciences; such serious truths must be dismissed
till a serious time; in sickness, on the death bed, they will send for them
again; when the Physician can do no more then they will admit the Divine.

It seems too contrary to nature, and too grievous to flesh and blood to suffer
a scrupulous inquiry after the things of eternity, which they think they shall
not have to do with for many years, to deprive them of carnal contents in that
age which is only capable of enjoying them. And therefore if conscience be
clamorous, and serious questions intrude, company and employment must be made
use of, to plead an excuse for our laying them aside; youthful pleasures must
be admitted to rarify the spirits into a temper inconsistent with their
gravity; nay youthful l^sts, if they will yet take no denial, must fight for
their quarters, and d^ive the new intruders out of doors. Friends. I appeal to
your own spirits, how many Parents and Masters are there in the World, who if
their childr^n and servants begin to entertain any religion scruples (though
never so necessary) are apt to lay to them as Pharaoh to the Isr^elites, ye are
idle, ye are idle, therefore you are so inquisitive after those things; Go
therefore now and work. Exodus ^5. 17. 18 And thus becomes the word of our
Savior ver^fied upon them: the cares of this wo^ld, and the deceitfulness of
riches, choke the seed and i^ becomes unfrui^ful. Mat. 13. 2^. Thus a^ the
nai^s which the Spirit fastens by the Master ^f ^ssemblies driven out by others
Eccles. 13. 11
of the World^ making. How many pr^f^ne sc^ffers jear out such blessed guests
out of the soul of those with whom they are familiar? Lastly how many idle
drunk^n c^mpanions drown the blessed convictions of the Spirit of God in
themselves and ot^ers together with their own estates and parts in strong
liquors? Oh you that have often by scurrilous scoff, broken these bonds of the
consciences of others, take heed, when the Spirit comes to fetter your own (if
ever you be so happy, and that is somewhat rare to those that sit in the seat
of the scornful) your bonds will be made strong. Is. 28. 22. You that (to
secure your selves from those motions) have many a time made the Tavern your
asylum, your refuge (I cannot say, Sanctuary) think when God shall give your
consciences a commission to keep an Assizes in your souls, you will not find so
easy a discharge from its Court as from a drawers bar, and a Vintners
reckoning. You have broken the Spirits prison once and again, it may be, and
therefore take heed, when he takes you next, you will pay for all, he will lay you
fast enough for flinching. His own iniquities shall take the wicked, and he
shall be holden with the cords of his own sins, Prove 5. 22. or (I am almost
afraid to read the next words [v. 23.] yet take them for your warning) it may
be, it will be worse with you, the spirit may leave you to die without
instruction. etc.

CHAP. VI. A branch of the fourth Caution of the preceding Chapter, concerning
over-hastening of comfort. Wherein is also a case concerning measures of
conviction and humiliation.
NOr are those impatient souls altogether blamefree, who because they long for
the peace-full fruit of the lips, will not stay the ripening of it, but
greedily devour it green; who though the spirit have them in cure, and the
necessity of their disease require their confinement to rules of Physic, yet
will be ruled by their own heads, and adventurously break those bonds* and cast
those cords from them, as grievous and unnecessary. They Psalm. 2. 3.
cannot endure to serve an apprenticeship under a Spirit of bondage, and then
be made free in his way and time, but hastily lay violent hands on Christian
liberty, and are very angry (though perhaps they more need it) if a Minister do
but mention a searching convincing truth, which may reduce them to their Master
again. I have (my self) visited those ignorant souls upon their deathbeds, who
have called out for nothing, but, comfort, comfort, when they might, had they
seen their own need, have rather cried for conviction, conviction. Nay among
some persons, it is as much accounted a solaecisme in Divinity, to search any
ones conscience, as it is in manners to be iniquisitive into his secrets, But
beloved, take this for a certain rule, those that run away from a Spirit of
bondage, and will set up with a stock of comforts without his leave, (as too
many do) will quickly break, and turn arrant bankerupts in the matter of their
spiritual condition. He that believes makes not haste.

Q. But Sir, how long will you have us continue under a Spirit of bondage? what
measures of humiliation are requisite to true conversion, and sound comfort,
how many years must we serve, ere you will allow us to set up?

A. Truly friends it is past my Skill to determine precisely, neither is it
necessary I should. The Lord knows, I could wish it were in my power to heal
every conscience the first hour in which it is smitten. But the Lord thinks
not fit to deal so with many of his Saints; and therefore, I say, there is
danger lest we snatch comfort before it is fit for us, or we for it. And this
is all that I desire to caution you against, in this that has been said. But
that I may not leave you altogether unsatisfied in this point, and especially
that I may wound no broken ones, I shall give you some rules to judge when God
gives you a manumission from the Spirit of bondage, and by that you may guess
when you are too hasty.

1. In general. As soon as the soul is brought to see a through necessity of
Jesus Christ, and accordingly to close with him, with true Faith, it may take
comfort. For (certainly) to such an one Christ belongs. The waters belong to
every one that thirsts, and they are in a blessed condition that hunger and
Isa. 51. 1.
thirst after righteousness. And to whomsoever Matt. 5. 6
Christ belongs, immediately comfort belongs, as he that has right to an
inheritance has right to all the incomes of it. Gods Ministers are bound not
to defer comfort one minute from a soul, concerning whom they have but
sufficient grounds in charity to believe in Christ, Comfort ye, comfort ye my
people says the Lord, Is 40. 1. And Heb. 6. 17, 18. the H. Ghost tells us that
God intends comfort to all that fly for refuge to lay hold on the hope set
before them.

2. As soon as I am within any promises reach and compass, so soon belongs
comfort to me. And that depends on the former.

Obj. But will not any troubled soul cry out for Christ, and lay hold upon
Christ in extremity? A dying man will never dispute with himself whether he
shall send for a Physician, a condemned man upon the gallows whether he shall
accept of a pardon, and a drowning man whether he shall scramble up a rock if
it be within his reach. And is every such soul fit for comfort?

2. A. I answer therefore more particularly. 1. I ought not to refuse comfort,
when I find my soul weary of the bonds and fetters of sin; as much or more then
of the fetters of trouble and anguish for sin. Beloved, when the chains of
corruption are as grievous, as pangs of conscience; when I hate Satan as a
tempter, as much as I hate him as a troubler; when I groan as much to be
delivered from the body of death as from the weight of wrath, then I am ripe
for comfort. But Romans 7. 24
when I hear my heart cry louder, Oh my sorrow, and oh, my grief; then oh, my
sin, and oh, my guilt; when it follows God and Means with oh, give me
comfort; and never, with oh, give me grace; when it cries, oh, that I had
peace, and cries not, Oh that I had holiness, this soul is not ripe for
comfort. Comfort would undo that soul.

2. I ought not to refuse comfort, when I can be contented to take Christ upon
his own terms, to teach, and rule, as well as redeem and save my soul. When I
can freely deny, resign, part with every thing for him, can give up my self to
be made any thing by him, when I value Christ so as that I will not entertain
any thing a minute longer, though it be never so dear to me, that displeases
him, even my dearest lust, my greatest profit, my entirest friends, my fullest
comforts. For then I am emptyed of self, and hungry after Christ, and so fall
under the promise, he fills the hungry with good things. But when I am
disposed only to take Christ partially, cling Luke 1. 53.
about the Cross of Christ, but hang loose from the yoke of Christ; when my
mouth is open to Christ, but my ear shut, this is sad. When I drive the bargain
for Christ to farthings and half pence, (the Lord be gracious to me in this
one thing, etc.) Comfort to me (in such a condition) is bane. See how the
Apostle joins Prince and Savior together, Act. 5. 31. how Christ joines a
promise of ease and lays on his yoke at once, Mat. 11. 28, 29, 30.

3. Then I am fit for comfort when I can be contented if God see fit and
needful for me, to be longer without it; when I can in the sincerity of my
heart pray, Lord, if my rotten ^eart be not broken enough, break it more; if my
s^s^erd wounds be not thoroughly searched, lance them and search them more. If
there be any way of wickedness within me, search me, Lord, and try me, till
thou find it out: if I Psalm. 139 23, 24.
would be proud of thy favor, if thou should discover it to me, or turn thy
grace into wantonness, or get above ordinances, and duties of Religion, or
proudly despise my brethren that are lower then I, or any infirmity of this
kind would attend my full stomach, let me fast from comfort longer: here is a
soul that (if any) is ripe for comfort. But till a man come to this frame, it
is a sign he is not thoroughly broken, his bondage has not tamed him enough,
and therefore comfort to this man would be like raw meat, it would never digest
with him, the Lord has not yet gotten the absolute mastery over, and
possession of his will, and therefore no wonder if he lay more Irons upon him.
Some parents will not give their children any thing of that dish that they
impatiently cry for; and (they say) our Bishops were not to be admitted, till
they three times refused it. I am sure David was not long kept out of his
kingdom when he had professed an indifferency to keep or lose it as the Lord
saw most fit. 2 Samuel 15. 25. And (observe the Lords usual dealings with his
people) he seldom gives any comfort when men must have it, or there is no
quiet with them; what ever grace they have, or lust they master by the
continuance of soul troubles, they must have comfort, or else (in Hamans
unthankful strain) they cry, All this avails me nothing. And if persons Ruth
5. 13.
of such impatient spirits get comfort under that disposition and temper of
soul, it is as Rachel became a mother by importunity, but died in childbirth
with Benjamin. So do such oftentimes undo themselves with the comfort which
their importunity hastened to them.

More of this kind might be added, but I forbear now, as knowing shall have
cause to resume the same Argument again.

CHAP. VII. Certain other improvements of this Truth.
THis truth also may be enlarged by way of 1 Exhertation, to depend wholly on
this Spirit for a b^essed Issue of, and comfortable deliverance from this
Bondage. It is he only that makes the wound can heal it, as the rust of
Ac^illes his Sword only, cured the wounds which it made. He has the Key of
David, if he open the Heart, to receive comfort, all the jealousies and fears
of a man's own Spirit, all the mal^ce of Satan, and all the other hindrances
that possibly can be imagined cannot shut it out. So on the other side, if he
shut the door, all the promises in the word applied by the greatest Barnabasses
on earth, and by all the Angels in bleaven cannot open it Apoc. 3. 7. We are
apt to depend upon Ministers and means for peace, but Christ makes us
oftentimes like the troops of Tema, to return ashamed at our Job 6. 20.
disappointment from such failing brooks. Let the means be never so good, if
this Spirit do not anoint them with the oil of gladness, they cannot make your
faces shine. Christ was the most powerful comforter in his ministry that
could be, yet that he might do this work effectually, he is anointed by the
Spirit. Is 61. 1. 2, 3. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to proclaim liberty to the capives, and the opening of the prison
to them that are bound etc. Friends, I speak not these things to dissuade you
from the use of such means, only to warn you that you lay not the stresse of
your expectations upon means, but rather that you use them, in dependence upon,
and with addresses to the Spirit to make them effectual. For my part, I
suspect that peace and comfort which comes in a gross neglect and contempt of
Ordinances and Duties, or is attended with it. I doubt, such persons get out of
prison by a false key, the devil can pick the lock and let out the Spirits
prisoners, he can file off their chains, and set them free from trouble; but
they had better have kept in prison, then have been beholden to him for their
liberty, when men are delivered from a conscientious bondage to an
unconscionable liberty, they had need pray to God to free them from that
liberty. This I speak to prevent a mistake of my drift in this use. To return
to what I intend. Beloved, if the Spirit have brought you under bondage, apply
your selves to him that he will accomplish his end in your troubles, that he
will manage them to the subduing of your proud hearts, to the destruction of
the flesh, that your spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord.

2. Let this convince us that the ministry of the Gospel excludes not the
preaching of the Law as isntrumental to conversion. I know the Law alone
converts no man, neither does the Spirit of Bondage; yet it prepares the way of
the Lord, the Spirit working thereby, to level high thoughs, etc. that lift
themselves up against Christ. Ministers are the Servants of the Spirit and must
serve the spirits designs, in Law as well as Gospel. What would men have us do?
Shall we speak peace to those to whom the Spirit denounces open war? How shall
we keep to our Commission, if in stead of binding on earth, those who are bound
in heaven, we let them loose and help them to escape; preach doctrines of
universal Redemption, and Salvation, and teach them how to apply general
Gospel truths to harden their souls in sin? Me thinks I hear the Lord when he
gives a Minister his charge, speak in the language of Jehu, when he had shut up
Baals worshippers in a guard; If any of the men whom I have brought into your
hands escape, he that lets him go, his life shall be for the life of him. 2
Kings 10. 24. Or rather in his own words to the Prophet Ezekiel. 3. 18. When I
say, etc. Yet I must tell you, I would have the Law preached as it is in the
hands of Christ, i. e. not as casting men under an irrecoverable condemnation
for every offense, not as exacting rigorously every punctilio of a duty, under
pain of being rejected by God, not as requiring obedience as a condition of a
covenant of works to salvation. Although it be necessary too, that as a
Covenant of works it should be declared to those that are under the Law, that
by the sight of it, they may be made to fly to the Gospel, as a Map discovers
rocks and quicksands that men may avoid them; and Physic books, poisons, to
warn men of them. By preaching it as in the hands of Christ, I mean we must
withal open a door of hope, show them Christ as the end of the Law, to whom
all the preaching of the Law aims.

For my part, I meet with a dictinction often of the Law as in the hands of
Moses, and as in the hands of Christ; I think, as it is ordinarily taken, it is
grounded on a principle of Socinianisme, that the Spirit was not a spirit of
Adoption under the old Testament. But I can allow the expression in this sense.
Gospel must be held forth more clearly now then it was then, and believing
more urged then doing, and doing in a way of believing. God giving them a yoke
of observances which veiled the Spirit, and looked much like a Covenant of
works, the Ministers of the Gospel are to take off that vail, and show Christ's
open face.

3. Let this plead a little for poor troubled spirits, to Ministers and friends
that take pains to comfort them. When we speak comfort to them, and their
souls refuse it, as Heman, Ps. 77. 2. We are apt to censure them for peevish,
and perverse, etc. But friends, is this reasonable, to charge a prisoner with
peevishness, because he does not shake off his bolts, and come forth without
the keepers leave? I know sometimes there is much fault in such souls, but the
spirit works with their weakness to withhold comfort; and though they be
blameable for refusing it, yet the spirit orders their weaknesses therein to
his blessed ends. Wherefore, if you chide them for shutting the doors upon
themselves, do it so, as withal to pray the Spirit to open them, else they
cannot open them, if they would never so fain. And those of us who were once in
their condition were as untoward as they, till Gods Spirit opened our eyes to
see a well of consolation.

4. Let this humble us all who have tasted any of the powers of the World to
come, and been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, this way, for our often
grievings and vexings of the H. Spirit; That we have stouted it out against the
Spirits arrests, and refused to be his prisoners. If this were wilfully done,
O how evil a thing was it, how high a provocation! If a warrant from
Westminster in the hands of a Bayliffe will make a man stand and render himself
prisoner. How dares any man make an escape when the word arrests him by the
authority and warrant of the Spirit? Nay farther, think what a sad case you
were in, should God resolve to strive no more with you. Think on that terrible
place, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6.

If involuntarily, this is very bad, though not so bad as the Former. When you
look over the former convictions by the light of this Sermon, Friends, be
humbled to think how often was the Lords Spirit in a sermon, in the advice of
friends, in afflictions, and we were not aware of it? How often did he lay his
hand upon our shoulders, and show the Warrant of Scripture to arrest our souls
and we fought with him and delivered our selves out of his hand? Oh brethren,
when the Spirit seizes on you again, submit, yield your selves; if his Arrests
from time to time be slighted, beware of a Writ of rebellion next, See it
Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. The Lord will not spare that man, but the anger of the Lord
and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are
written in this Book shall lie upon him. Then will you be outlawes to the
Covenant of life and salvation, and God will raise all the posse of heaven, and
earth, and hell too for your ruin and destruction. Your fear shall come as
desolation, and destruction shall come upon you as a whirlwind: you shall eat
of the fruit of your own way, and be filled with your own devices. The turning
away of such fools shall slay them, and their false peace, and prosperity shall
destroy them, Proverb. 27, 31, 32.

CHAP. VIII. The second Thesis explained. First by discovering the nature of
this Work of Bondage.
2d Thesis or Proposition.
COme we now to the second Thesis, to wit, that the blessed Spirit of God, in
the ordinary way of working, becomes a Spirit of bondage, before he become a
Spirit of Adoption, to any soul.

I say (in the ordinary way) not because I think there are any extraordinary
cases, in which it works otherwise in those of full age and perfect sense; but
that I may qualify the expression to some ears, who plead such experiences as
may be exceptions from this Rule, whose spirits I am very tender of, and
therefore am contended to prosecute this doctrine in such qualified
expressions: (Although I believe, ere we have traveled together through this
Discourse, and when we come to understand one another, we shall comemore near
together, and agree upon more general terms to cloth it in.) As also, because
I will not tie up Gods hands from working miracles, in this way, as well as in
any other, if he see a cause worth the putting forth of an omnipotent Arm. But
(before I prove it) I must answer some Questions.

Q. 1. Wherein does this first work of the Spirit upon the soul consist?

Q. 2 By what means does the Spirit usually work it? And this done I shall
first enquire how it appears the spirit so does; and, secondly why he does so?

Q. 1. Wherein does it consist?

Ans. 1. Generally, this work is called conviction: and because the Spirit
convinces in a rational way, all its acts of that nature are comprised in this
Syllogism. Every one that is in a state of sin is in a state of wrath, But
thou (sinner) art in a state of sin: Therefore thou art in a state of wrath.


In this master-syllogism there are many others included; but they are all in
effect comments on, or proofs of the particular terms and propositions of this.

Sometimes it varies thus. Every unjustified person, every unbeliever, every
one in a state of nature, every unregenerate person; (and lower) every swearer,
sabbath* breaker, etc. living in, and allowing himself in such sins, etc. is
under the curse, or is a condemned person, or is in a state of damnation, etc.
But thou A. B. art such a person, ergo thou art a condemned person, etc.


But, (to be more plain and particular) This work includes these several and
distinct convictions. 1. Conviction of Law. The Charge. 2. Conviction of fact,
or case. The Indictment. Evidence.
3. Conviction of state. The Sentence. -- As also, (4ly) The proper consequents
of these.


1. Conviction of Law, is no more then the illumination of the understanding in
the truth of common Principles and Rules of Scripture, which determine in
general the state and condition of such as fall under them: such as these.

Ephesians. 2. 3.
By Nature all are the children of wrath.

Romans 5. 18.
By the offense of one, death came on all men.

Gal. 3. 10.
As many as are under the Law, are under the curse.

Jo. 3. 18.
He that believes not, is condemned already.

Jo. 3. 3.
Except a man be born again, etc.

Gal. 3 10.
Cursed be every one that continues not in every thing, etc.

Romans 1. 31.
Those that do such things are worthy of death.

Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, etc. 1 Cor. 6. 9. These and the like
common truths when we give a fixed and firm consent unto, this makes up the
first part of the Spirits conviction of bondage, because it is the Spirit of
God that leads us into all truth. Jo. 16. 13. and so into convincing truth.
This is the major of the former syllogism. and may be planted in nature, or
believed barely by an historical belief, and may not affect; or if it do, it is
but in general, except it be farther backed by,

2. Conviction of Fact. This makes up the minor of the former syllogism. And
this is a particular application of the Law to the person. As if he should say,
Thou art the man of whom this Law speaks. This fact thou have done, Psalm. 70.
21.
and this sin thou art guilty of, live in; this omission of duty, this or
that notorious actual commission thou art clearly chargeable withal. This
indictment conscience is called in to witness, and this witness (because it
is sometimes asleep, and sometimes blind, and sometimes dead, and sometimes
bribed) the Spirit enlightens, and quickens, and disengageth, and makes it
speak out to the case in hand. This is that prick in the heart, that Peter by
the home-application of their sin to their consciences, gave those Converts,
Acts 2. 37. He tells them, ye have taken and slain, and crucified, that Jesus,
who is Lord and Christ, and their hearts by a confessing, guilty application,
say, we are the men.

This is a cord that will hold, it will bring the soul under some
acknowledgments which it would not grant before: but it is not yet a Spirit of
bondage till the third conviction of state, And this is the conclusion of the
former syllogism; and the sentence, in the Spirits legal processes against any
soul: And this results from the two former. This is the work of the Judge, the
enlightened conscience in its judicial capacity. This is attended with a large
formality of circumstances. As in every sentence the matter and manner of the
suffering is expressed; as to return to jayl, and be carried thence to the
place of execution, and there to be hanged, or pressed, or burnt, or drawn and
quartered, etc. So here: the Spirit does not barely say to the soul, thou art a
condemned creature; but he enlightens the mind to understand in the most
frightful appearances, the nature of its misery. He represents a curse hunting,
and power seizing, and wrath rending a poor soul, shows hell open, and heaven
shut, the Devil tormenting, and God deriding, eternal life in eternal death,
without light, tormenting heat, yet gnashing of the teeth for cold; a lake of
fire and brimstone, nay a running stream which the breath of the Lord for ever
kindles, Isay 30. 33. And assures the soul all this and inexpressibly more will
be his portion to eternity, if he continue on this side Christ the City of
refuge.

4. The consequents of all these must needs be, 1. Soul-confounding horror.
This was the Jaylors case, Acts 16. 29. He came in trembling to Paul and Silas.
This sentence works like the handwriting upon Belshazar, loses the joints of
the loins, and makes the knees smite against each other, Dan. 5. 6. Or
Habbakuks voice, c. 3. 16. it makes the belly tremble, and the lips to quiver,
and rottenness enter into the bones, etc. And no wonder, for it is the justice
and wrath of an infinite, eternal, and Almighty God that he has to encounter:
and can thy heart endure, or thine hands be strong in the days that God shall
deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22. 14. This was it that made Christ himself sweat like
drops of blood. Luke 22. 44.


2. Soul-distressing anguish. By which the mind vexes, and feeds upon its own
sad condition thus bound fast by horror. It is perpetually vexed with the
representations of its misery, it can take no comfort in the World that is not
hereby imbittered. As a condemned man eats, and drinks, and sleeps not for
thinking upon the execution; or if he do, he finds no relish in those contents;
if he sleep, he can nothing but dream of the Gallows, and the hangman; if he
talk and converse with friends, he is scarce present where he is, scarce thinks
what he says. Thus a soul under this binding sentence (with David) eats ashes
like bread, or rather bread like ashes: mingles his drink with weeping, (Ps.
102. 9.) his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat; tastes no sweetness
in any comforts, they are all (as Job says) like the white of an egg. Job. 6.
6. His words are swallowed up, Job 6. 2. He sleeps it may be, but he is scared
with visions, and terrified with dreams, Job. 7. 14. Speak to the man in this
case of any diversions, and you do but labor to dig a channel to let out the
sea; present him any of his formerly welcomest refreshments, Prove. 26. 1.
you are but like snow in summer, and rain in harvest, speak the most
encouraging words to him that may be, if you cannot speak a pardon, he is in
the case of the Israelites in their bondage, they could not hearken to Moses
for anguish of heart, Exodus 6. 9.

Read over to a Noble man all his pedigree, to a great man all his Titles, and
famous atchievments: show a rich man all his baggs, and his writings, and tell
the Gentleman of all his pleasures, how his hawke flies, his dogs hunt, where
are the richest wines, the merriest company, etc. (things that would have taken
heretofore) now the news of them is like unpleasing meat to a nauseating
stomach, like jarring music to a judicious ear; Or in Solomon's language, Prove.
25. 20. As he that takes away a garment in cold weather, and like vinegar upon
nitre, so is he that sings songs to an heavy heart. This heaviness is the
greatest heaviness. The Spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61. 3. bitter bitterness,
says Hezechiah, Isa 38. 17.

3. Soul-distracting despair. I mean not that which shuts and bars the door
of the heart against all relief, blocks it up, and besieges it on all hands,
yea even on the side of Heaven it self: but that which excludes all possible
means on this side the infinite Mercy of God, and blood of Christ; when (as
David, Psalm. 142. 4.) a man looks on the right hand to Duties and Ordinances,
and good deeds, and resuge fails, they appear vestimenta inquinatorum, they
have guilt in them, as well as deficiency, filthy rags; he looks Isai. 64. 6
on his left hand, at the comforts of this life, and at humane means to remove
misconceived natural causes, and finds that he cannot be ransomed by gold, nor
silver, nor precious 1 Pet. 1. 8
stones, that it is in vain to come before God with thousands of rams, or ten
thousand rivers Micah 6. 7
of oil, that his wounds will not be cured by Balsoms, nor his Disease be
cured by Potions. And that there is no name but Christ's in heaven, or under
heaven that can relieve him, Acts 4. 12. This is indeed a complete work of the
Spirit of Bondage: till this, a man is never brought low enough to be lifted
up; all the convictions, horrors, and anguish of conscience, whiles removeable
by other means then the blood of Christ, are but slight and superficial
wounds: and all the power which the Spirit exercises till this, effects not a
through Conquest, a man never submits himself entirely to the Spirits handling,
till this time; never accepts of his fetters, and wears them without
resistancy, till now. As a Prisoner never quietly submits to his condition,
till he finds all ways of escape obstructed, and no way to get those fetters
off which pinch him, but by that hand that put them on. And thus these cords
that bind a soul under sin, may be made use of, and twisted with others of a
Gospel nature, to draw a soul to Jesus Christ. For here now properly comes in
the discovery of Christ to such a soul, ut infra.

CHAP. IX A farther explication, by assigning the means of its working.
Quest. 2. HOw does the Spirit work this bondage and fear in the hearts of
sinners?

Answ. The means is various.

1. Occasional. So sometimes affliction does not only fetter a man in his body
or estate, but soul also. Many times God brings down a proud heart, as
Manasseh, by this way. Manasseh never became the Spirits Bondman, till he was
the King of Babylons captive. Then, and not till then, he bowed himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12. Sometimes the death of
friends, especially if unexpected, and the thoughts of mortality, occasioned
thereby. Sometimes seeing the strictness of those we converse with. Sometimes a
reproof, a notorious sin which God leaves a man unto; sometimes the
soul-troubles of others declaring their cases and complaining, are catching,
etc.

2. Instrumental, and thus ordinarily; God uses the Word as his mighty
instrument, by which he pulls down strong Holds, and casts down imaginations,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4,
5. This Word is the instrument of conviction, and so of this Bondage arising
thence, Hebr. 4. 12. Yet is it not the bare word that can work it; no, though
we concur to it, and labor by meditation, conference, and other means to do
it; for when we have done all, We receive it, says the Text.

If you ask, What word does the Spirit work this bondage by?

I answer, By the Law (generally and principally) though some
Gospel-considerations may sometimes be admitted to whet and sharpen the edge of
the Law. I mean, the History of the Gospel, which aggravates that bondage, by
exemplifying the misery of being under the curse of the Law, the
intolerablenesse of lying under the wrath of God, in the person of Christ,
barely suffering for imputed sin; by discovering a rich and unvaluable
Treasure, and spreading all the glory of it before a man who must not lay hands
on one farthing token of it, etc.

But the Gospel concurs only per accidens; as the sight of Lazarus in heaven,
increased the hell of Dives, and the plenty in the gates of Samaria, that
Princes misery who was to dye without tasting of it, 2 Kings 7. 19. But I say,
The Law is the proper and ordinary instrument of the Spirit in this work. It is
the Schoolmaster, whose lash makes sinners backs smart. Gal. 3. 24. which
convinces men as transgressors, James 2. 9. Causes the knowledge of sin, Romans
3. 20. Works wrath; i. e. manifests it, works the sense of it into the
soul, Romans 4. 15. Makes the offenses of sinners to abound, discovers millions
of sins more then he dreamed of, Romans 5. 20. Quickens sin in the conscience,
and puts a weapon into its hand, to kill the sinner under its guilt, chap. 7.
9. It is therefore called by the Apostle, 2 Cor. 15. 56. The strength of sin;
i. e. that which only arms sin with terror, and makes its guilt an
intolerable guilt.

The Spirit interprets the Law to a man's conscience, and arms it with its
curse to pronounce against every sin; and this Law thus armed, arrests, and
endites, and accuses, and convicteth, and condemns the sinner; and when it
has done so, it stops there, it is fain to do as Felix with Paul, to leave him
bound, without any mitigation Acts 24. 27.
or qualification of his misery, till the same Spirit, whose servant the Law
is, be pleased to let him free.

CHAP. X. Evidences of the Spirits usual working in this way before Conversion.
Quest. 3. BUT how appears it that the Spirit of God ordinarily works first
this way?

Ans. 1. Because the Spirit of God (as to the order and manner of his working)
deals not with man, as we use to do with stocks and stones; (We translate them
from place to place, and condition to condition, barely by an act of
extrinsecal power; As we do raise a stone to the top of a steeple, and prop him
up there contrary to its Natural inclination, which tends another way:) but as
we do with living Creatures when we use such means to stoop them to our
designs as their natures require. Thus we make advantage of the hunger of the
Hawk to tempt him to the fist, and of the fish to bring him to the hook, and
watch wild creatures, that out of need of rest we may make them content to
become tame and tractable.

And thus does the Spirit deal with men. Their intellectual natures are moved
to higher objects, but in the same way by making use of emptiness and appetite
to work upon the moving powers of the soul, and carry them out toward an
object that will satisfy. For certainly (though I am assured that moral
persuasion is not sufficient to convert without a supernatural infusion of
perswasible faculties, wherein I stand at professed defiance with the Papist
and Arminian: yet) this supernatual work is not ordained to perfect the
conversion of any sinner, he continuing merely passive all the while; for then
a man would be saved by mere force, and faith as the condition applying the
Covenant of Grace (which implies knowledge and choice) were utterly useless,
and so might innocently be denied by the Antinomians. The Spirit therefore
infuseth new power into the faculties, and then sets them on working after
spiritual objects in an order suitable to their nature.

I dare say, There is nothing more supernatural, and yet nothing more Natural
in the world, then sound conversion. It is supernatural in its power and
principle, it is most natural in its manner, method and order, God does not
destroy, but renew our faculties in conversion, and when renewed, makes use of
them without any violence in the most natural way.

And therefore, though he renew the understanding to apprehend, and the Will to
choose, and the Affections to pursue heavenly objects, which of themselves they
had no power at all to do; yet he does not invert their usual order of working
upon each other. And so (by consequence) that transforming light which (from
heaven) swayes the last dictate of the practical understanding, where the Work
of Grace begins, so renewing the mind effectually, works upon the will, enabled
(at the same instant) to embrace it, and that (in like manner) stirs the
affections (at the same moment) made ductile and obedient to the Law of the
mind. So then, the root of this tree of Life lies in the mighty power of God,
in changing and affecting the Judgment. And that (therefore) must first be
brought, to pass a right sentence on its own condition, and the condition to
which it is called, that so the will may not make a blind fortuitous choice
when it accepts of Christ and salvation. Now can you persuade a man that
Physic is good for him, except you first convince him that he is sick? Can you
persuade a man that feels Matthew. 9. 22
no fetters to cry out for liberty; a man that thinks he is in the best way, to
take another? Can you possibly make a man apply himself to one only Physician
to cure him, and give him any thing that he will ask (yea, if he ask a man's
whole estate,) when there are many that profess to be able to do the cure, and
profer their service at an easier rate; except you can possess him strongly
that all these be Mountabanks, and he must go to that one if ever he means to
be cured? The poor woman never sought to Christ for her Flux, till she had
found all other Physicians had emptied her purse of its coin, but could not
her body of its distemper, Luke 8* 43.

2. It is the usual way of the Ministers of Jesus Christ in the Old and New
Testament, nay, the way of Jesus Christ himself, in their Labors and
Endeavors for conversion of sinners. Certainly the method of the Spirit in
working conversion, is not different from that which God will have his
Ministers walk in, and which Christ himself has thought fit to tread in to
that end. Now this I hope to clear by abundance of instances. The Ministry of
Moses, (who was not only a Law giver, but a Typical Mediator, and so his
Ministry was the Ministry of Christ) was in this method; first he lays down
the Moral Law for conviction, and ratifies it with a curse, as the proper
ingredient into that cup of trembling, which belongs to unconverted sinners:
and then supposing its work to be done, preaches Christ in the Ceremonial Law,
as the proper remedy for such a malady. Downwards observe the method of the
Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, all their Prophecies are by the Holy
Spirit cast into this order. How severely does Isaiah for five or six of the
first Chapters, convince, reprove, threaten the rebellious people for their
sins; and those precious Evangelical comforts of which he (of all the Prophets)
is most full, are cast off to the latter part of his Prophecy. Jeremiahs
commission is first to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
down obstinate and unconverted sinners, and then to build and to plant, chap.
1. 10. And (as that people were an obstinate and stiff-necked people) see how
he handles them with reproofs, convictions, threatenings for above twenty
Chapters together, before he is commissioned to speak any considerable portion
of comfort to them. Ezekiels commission also is full of Lamentations, and
mourning, and woe, a bitter Roll, chap. 2. 10. and 3. 1. etc. and for thirty
Chapters downward we find little else but the contents of that Roll, scarce a
dust of sugar to sweeten the Pill. Hosea is to pronounce the people Lo-ruhamah
and Lo-ammi, a people that have not obtained mercy, that were none of Gods
people, ere he is to administer one dram of comfort, and that which he does,
chap. 2. it is conditioned with threatenings of severe afflictions and judgments
for sin. Joel and the rest are generally in the same strain. I grant, the order
of the Prophecies does not necessarily imply they were uttered in the same
manner as they are written; yet seeing the Spirit of God who directed the
Penmen as well as the Speakers, thinks fit so to dispose them, it seems likely
he did it for some such use, as we have observed

But these may to some seem Legal Preachers; let us therefore see how our
Savior and John the Baptist, and the Apostles bestir themselves in their
Ministry. The first Doctrine that our Savior preaches is, Repent, for the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand, Mark 1. 15. And in the fifth, sixth, and seventh
of Matthew, how severe an Interpreter of the Law, how effectual a convincer of
sin, how rigorous a Pronouncer of Judgment and Condemnation upon sinners, does
he show himself? And how many woes afterward upon all occasions does he
denounce? John the Baptist convinces the Scribes and Pharisees of their
viperous hearts, and vain confidences, and threatens them with wrath to come,
lays the axe to the root of all their hopes, and scorcheth their consciences
with the flames of unquenchable fire, Matthew. 37, 9, 10, 12. The Apostles also
follow the same method. Peter, Acts 2. and Stephen, Acts 7. and Paul Acts 17.
and 24 make it their first work to preach the Law, and Judgment. So that it
seems needless to me to insist any longer on this head.

3. The Examples of those Converts, the manner of whose conversion is declared
in the Scripture, hold forth a farther evidence to this Truth. Ephraim is so
converted, Jer. 31. 18. Smites on the thigh; Manasseh is humbled greatly, and
the Crucifiers of our Savior are pricked in their hearts, Acts 2 Chro. 33. 12
2. 37. and the Jailor comes in trembling, chap. 16. 29. Paul is smitten to the
ground, Acts 9. 4. and trembles and is astonished, verse 6. And the incestuous
Corinthian is even swallowed up of sorrow, 2 Cor. 2. 7. And if any examples,
(as those of Zacheus and Lydia) seem to speak no such matter, yet seeing the
Scriptures are not so punctual in the manner, but only relate the matter, they
must rather be rdeuced to this rule, then be urged as examples against it.
Sure, if God had dealt with them another way, and would have had us to have
made any such exceptions from the general rule of his dealing with others, he
would have been more particular in the recording of those passages that might
ground them. Besides, it is concieved by some of no mean note, that they were
converted before, as members of the Jewish Church, and their then conversion
was but to Christianity from Judaism, which needed no such work. As for Lydia,
it is clear she was one that before was a Proselyte, one that worshipped God,
the Text says, Acts 16. 14.

CHAP. XI. The Designs and Intendments of the Spirit in this method of working
Conversion, in twelve Particulars.
Quest. 4. WHy will the Spirit work this way?

Answ. For several Reasons.

1. Hereby is Christ made far more precious then he would be, if he dropped this
grace into our mouths without any such sharpning our appetites by the pain of
hunger and want, to receive him. The full soul loatheth (or as it is in the
Original) treads under foot the honey comb, Prove. 27. 7. The whole will think
a fee lost upon a Physician, and the man on whom the Law has not passed, will
not say Gramercy for a pardon. And on the other side, it is necessity that
endears any thing to us. And the more extreme that necessity is, the more
welcome is the supply. A beggar that is pinched with hunger, and even starved
with cold, what course fare, and thread bare garments will he beg hard for? A
man upon the Gallows, and ready to be turned off, what will he give for a
pardon. Sharking Tradesmen know well enough what use to make of the buyers
necessity to enhance the price. A man will huck, and drive the bargain for
Christ to half pence and farthings till he be brought to this pass.

2. Hereby does God engage the hearts of men more to him. Look over the
thankful remembrances of Gods Saints over all the Word, and see how great an
ingredient their misery is into their thankfulness. Ezra, We were bondmen, yet
our God has not forsaken us in our Bondage, etc. Ezra 9. 9 David frequently
enlarges upon this common place, Psalm 18. 5, 6, 7. The cords of hell compassed
me about, and the snares of death prevented me. In my distress I cried upon the
Lord, and he heard my voice, etc. And so Psalm. 116. The sorrows of death
compassed me, and the pains of hell gate hold upon me. Then called I on the
name of the Lord, etc. And after follows a thankful enquiry, Quid retribuam?
What shall I render to the Lord? q. d. I do not know any return in the world
that may be answerable to so great a mercy. So Hezekiah, Isai. 38. 20. after
his sad complaint wherein he draws a picture of his sad condition in all the
saddest and darkest colors imaginable, at last says he, The Lord was ready to
save me, therefore will I sing my songs to the stringed instruments all my life
long in the house of the Lord.

Think how thankful a starving beggar will be for an Alms, a condemned man for
a Pardon, a Prisoner in Argier for a Ransom, a man that roars under the Stone,
or Gout, or Colic, for a cure; and (in some sort) you conceive how engaging
such a mercy as Pardon, Redemption, Healing is to a sinner broken, weary, laden
with the weight of his sins, terrified, afrighted, distracted with the sense of
Gods displeasure for them; to hear of a Savior, a Redeemer, a Comforter, how
welcome is it? How Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15, 16 I was a Persecutor, a
Blasphemer, injurious, etc.

3. Love, in such a soul, will keep even pace with thankfulness. Undoubtedly
the more low the Spirit sinks us in this dungeon, the more low thoughts will
men have of themselves, and by consequence, the more love will they show to
Christ, who even in such a condition did not abhor them, but took them out of
such a condition to advance them unto the nearest friendship with himself. For
a Prince to take a condemned Malefactor from the Prison or Gallows, and
advance her to his Bed and Throne, how endearing a love would this be? how
every way free, undeserved, unexpected, unconceived, must it appear? This is
evident in the former, Psalm 18. 1. etc. and Psalm 116. 1. etc. compared with
their following Verses.

4. Sin must needs be far more odious to to such a soul. The burnt child
dreads the fire, it is the wormwood upon the dug, that weans the child from it;
say to a condemned thief, or other malefactor that has narrowly escaped the
gallows, as the wicked tempters are brought in seducing, Prove. 1. 11. come
with us, cast in thy lot among us, we will all have one purse, will he not
(except he be a desperately hardened wretch) deny the motion with detestation?
God forbid that I that but now am come off from the Ladder, that but now have
had the bolts knocked off my hands, should any more take up that course that
brought me thither. Let a man's jolly companions solicit such an one as has
been acquainted with the Spirit of Bondage, whose feet have been hunt in the
stocks of the Law, and the Iron has entered into his soul, to a drinking match,
or a stage play, or any other of the sins and vanities of his former days,
what will he say, but as that Philosopher, when the whore valued her common
ware at so dear a rate? Non emam tanti poenitere. Friends, forbear to press me
any longer. Had you felt those heart aches, and cramps, those agues and
convulsions of conscience which I have done for such courses as those; had you
been in the Spirits house of Bondage as I have been, had you been stretched
upon the Spirits rack, had you felt the strappado of the Law, and hady our
bones broken on its wheel; had you fed upon ashes, and drunk tears and been
whipped with scorpions every morning, and ever and anon been doused over head and
ears in the gulf of Gods wrath, shaken over hell fire, and carried the coals
of it in your bosoms, as I have done for diverse weeks, months, years (it may
be) you would find out some other way of spending your times, and not treasure
up sorrow for your souls here, and wrath against the day of wrath hereafter?
One says, Sweetness before sense of sin, is like cordials to a foul
stomach. Shepherds Sound Believer.


I shall easily grant that the love of Christ is a very effectual, and the most
effectual restraint to sin when it is manifested to the soul, and set home
effectually by the spirit; but so dull are we to improve such ingenuous
inducements, that we have but too much need of experience of the bitterness of
sin, to second that consideration. And indeed, though that be most effectual
where it works, yet this is effectual with the most. And moreover (as before
was showed) the argument from love is strengthened by this experience. The
experience of the bitterness of sin makes the love of Christ in delivering
us from it, more engaging.

5. Hereby the Spirit terrifies others, and restrains them from sin; As
public prisons and gallows do not only punish malefactors, but prevent many
evils that would be committed, but for the severity used against some.

The World must needs read the torments of Hell to unconverted sinners by an
easy deduction from those terrors that they see in converts, or (at least) the
hard terms upon which they must be delivered from them. And this works often
more effectually by comparing their lives who are made the butts of these
divine arrows, with their own; when they consider that if others smart so
heavily for the fewer and smaller sins which they (to appearance) are guilty
of, their own more and greater deserve worse.

6. Hereby the Spirit teaches us to pray, to sigh and groan out unutterable
requests.

Jesus Christ upon earth, when he suffered for our sins, was under a Spirit
of Bondage: The Law said to him when he stood in our stead, whoever is under
the Law is under the curse of God, and under the sentence of eternal death: but
thou art under the Law. And this had the same effects which it has on us, it
wrought horror and anguish, and such a despair of help every way but from his
Father, that was able to deliver him from death; and that made him power out
strong cries and groans. Heb. 5. 7.

Thus David cried to the Lord in the cords of hell, Ps. 18. 5, 6. and 116. 3,
4, he groans and roares, etc.

7. Hereby the spirit keeps us the more humble all our days. And for my part,
I may suspect the other way by the pride that attends it in those that boast of
it; as when a man whose life has been forfeited to justice, and saved by mere
mercy; grows proud, we say, Sir, remember you were in another garb in such a
Prison, at such a place of Execution; so will the Spirit make use of such
admonitions ever after to such persons. Remember my fetters, the gall and
wormwood, etc.

Hereby it makes us contented with Gods slow and gradual way of comforting,
which is usual with him, which our pride and tenderness cannot endure.

8. That it may provoke pity, and tenderness, and prevent censoriousnesse in
one to another in such cases. This made Christ a merciful and compassionate
High Priest, Heb. 2. 18. that he had the experience of our griefs and sorrows.

God will have heart answer heart, as face, face. Were such works not usual,
even Prove. 27. 19
Saints would look upon such as Monsters whom the hand of the Lord has
smitten. Christ was so stared on as a Monster, Psalm 22. 17. They look and
stare upon me. And Isai. 8. 18. Behold I, and the children whom the Lord has
given me are for signs and wonders. As the World looks upon troubled spirits,
so would other Saints, but for this experience.

9. That he may fit them for the comfort of several Gospel Promises which
without this work they are not qualified for. Such as that to hungring and
thirsting after Righteousness, poverty of spirit, Matthew. 5. 3, 4, 6. To
weariness and being heavy laden with sin, Matthew. 11 28. To an humble and
contrite heart. Isai. 57. 15. To a Saint in a Wilderness, Hosea 2. 14.

How can men be the subjects of these promises without this work? Many
comfortable promises of the Scripture signify nothing, but stand for ciphers
to souls who have had no acquaintance with this Work.

10 That it may make us prize and take care to keep the favor of God when we
have it. Seeing we know by experience that if he hide his face, we are like
them that go down into the pit, Ps. 143. 7

11 That he may make the yoke of duty appear more desirable to the heart, and
feel more easy to the neck of Saints, by comparison with the heaviness of the
yoke of sin.

12 That he may settle comfort the more by such shaking at first. As the tree
grows more downward, and roots deeper, when it is exercised with storms and
shaken at first; and broken bones grow stronger, if new set again.

These are some of many Reasons that might be given why the Spirit usually
converts this way.

CHAP. XII. A Case of Conscience eoncerning the measure of this work.
Quest. 5 What measure does the Spirit work by in this bringing souls under
bondage?

Answ. He observes not the same measure with every soul, nor continues it so
long on one soul as on another. Only so much must be wrought of all the
forementioned works, as will accomplish the saving ends of those works. Now the
end of one of these works is the begetting of the other, and the end of all
Christ. Christ is the end of the Law to a Romans 10. 4
Believer, as soon as a man is brought to a full close with Christ, the works
mentioned are at an end, and so they will when they have done the immediate
preparatory work to faith, which is to drive the soul out of all other
shelters, and make it conclude it self under a necessity of coming to Christ.
So much conviction (says a godly and a learned man now with God) is necessary
as breeds Shepherds Sound Believer.
compunction, and so much compunction as breeds a through Humiliation. And when
is that? When the soul thinks no more of by-ways to escape, but accepts the
bonds, and kisseth the fetters of the Spirit, and acknowledges its
imprisonment just, and that justice might without any wrong done, condemn it to
perpetual imprisonment. These are wrought generally in all Converts, but not in all so visibly, nor do the Converts themselves alike long stay in one as the
other; some have less horror and anguish, yet perhaps a more kindly
self-denying, soul-humbling, self despair; some stay longer in this, and some
in that work. As in the way to London, every man passes through the same
Stages, but every man does not stay as long at, or take as much notice of every
Stage as another may: one quick Gallopper, and lusty young man well mounted,
will ride through in a day, and perhaps only call at every Town for a cup of
drink; another of flower constitution of body, and with worse accommodations
can scarce travel twenty miles a day, and so makes longer work of it. But all
that go the right way, go through them all; and if perhaps God may be supposed
to lead any soul a shorter cut, and help him to pass beside some of them; it
is by a private way that he only knows and can direct in. His Ministers know
no other, and therefore we must direct you in the beaten rode. Yet because the
Lord does make a difference between sins and sinners, he does ordinarily also
proportion this work of humiliation and bondage to them and their sins. And
indeed, were the ordinary way to peace and comfort no more difficult from one
sin then from another; men would thence have a great ground to embolden
themselves to the indifferent commission of greater and less sins. As good be
whipped for something as nothing, (say untoward Scholars) for a great matter as
for a small. Therefore if a sinner has sinned with an high hand against God,
and wasted his own conscience, and had a more then ordinary influence upon the
sins of others; when sins have been aggravated by abundance of patience, of
means, of mercies, of Judgments, of vows, and resolutions, and (by
consequence) of Apostasies; this man must look for more sorrows. Psalm 16. 4.
Idolaters sorrows shall be multiplied. As the most heinous Malefactors use to
be fettered hand and foot, and clapped up in dungeons, when others of inferious
guilt are not so handled.

CHAP. XIII Another Case concerning the state of a soul under this work.
Quest. WHat is the real nature of this work, and the case and condition of
souls under a spirit of bondage? are they regenerate or unregenerate, Gods
children or Satan's?

Answ. A soul is then an Embryon, that is, Camero in Heb, 6. 4 Neque regeniti
sunt isti, neque etiam irregenti: neque vero consequens est tertium genus dari.
Quemadmo. dum quod diathesin habet ad virtutem, etc.
neither altogether what it was, nor what it must be, but an imperfect creature
of Gods Spirit, that will, if the womb miscarry not, be a Saint, a child of
God. This as to the work.

And if the Question be, what the state is? I answer, A state of Nature, though
in a capacity of Grace, and in a near capacity, almost a Christian, Acts 26.
28. Not far from the Kingdom of God, Mark 12. 34. In the next capacity (if the
work be through) of grace, as the body organized is of a reasonable soul. And
therefore such have abundant need both of their own and others prayers-

These must be tenderly used, lest they miscarry. Christ is said to lead those
that are with young gently, Isai. 40. 11. As Jacob drove his tender flocks
gently, Genesis 33. 13. A soul is never in more danger then now. Questionless,
this state is a state of nature yet; for there are but two Covenants;
therefore, but two Standings under those Covenants. A man cannot at once be
equally a subject of both Kingdoms, Gods and Satan's. He is in the posture of
Israel at the red sea, or rather in it; not entirely delivered from his old
Taskmasters, but in the way of escaping. He has escaped the pollutions of the
world, but may yet be entangled again; he 2 Pet. 2. 20
has tasted the powers of the world to come, hell in its horrors, and heaven
in its supports, and hopes, but may yet fall away; which no man that is a true
child of God can do, seeing Heb. 6. 5, 6.
the seed of God (which is eternal life 1 John 3. 15.) abidet^ in him. 1 John
3. 9. What may come of it we knew not, whether a Tympany or a Birth; many fair
buds are blasted.

CHAP. XIV. An Objection answered from Christ's Invitation of sinners unto him,
without requiring such conditions as necessary to their admission.
Obj You seem by what is said hitherto to drive some from Christ, at least for
such or such a space of time, until they be humbled and broken sufficiently.
Whereas Christ invites Whosoever will to come unto him, and no where qualifies
his acceptance of him by such conditions, [Provided, That no sinner that comes
under such and such a guilt lay hold on me, without such preparative measures
of the Spirit of Bondage.] And how then can you warrant that which has been
said in this point?

Answ. I answer, 'Twere pity but that Ministers tongue should cleave to the
roof of his mouth, that forbids any to come to Christ whom Christ calls. But
you shall see, that Christ, though he call all sinners, Joh. 6. 37. Apocal. 22.
17. yet he calls them under the qualifications of hungry and thirsty souls,
Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; he requires
not money, but he requires thirst. He requires nothing to move him to give, but
something to qualify and dispose us to receive. And looks that they be weary
and heavy laden, Mat. 11. 28. else they will not value, and he knows they will
not value his rest.

I do not bid men stay from Christ til they have such qualifications, but I
invite them rather to seek those qualifications from Christ, which fit them for
him, and without which they cannot savingly come to him.

But I shall give yet a more distinct answer. Christ therefore to whom sinners
are invited to come, is an universal good, and therefore there is in him a
confluence of many good things. Now as in a public Magazine every man may have
free access to call for what is proper for him, but every man may not be
admitted to every thing there, but only some few who are privileged by their
condition and relations to the Treasurer, and are able to manage the whole for
their own private good and the public benefit. So in Christ there is Grace,
and Power, and Wisdom, and Merit, and Privileges, and Peace, and Commands, and
Rewards. Now though every man be invited to Christ, yet every one that is
called may not be admitted to finger all these precious commodities, but such
only as his condition is capable of, and at present most needs. So a soul under
the power of sin, is invited presently, even the next moment to come to Christ,
and receive his yoke; i. e. submit to his government, and yield up himself to
be saved in his way, and in order thereunto to cast himself upon absolute
Promises of the first grace, by prayer, and waiting for power so to do. He
calls sinners, to what? to Repentance, Luke 5. 32. and penitents to rest,
Matthew. 8. 28.

But to those other advantages which are offered to sinners in Christ, no
sinner is called, as a sinner; but to some as an humbled contrite sinner, to
others, as a renewed, converted sinner. Those whom God calls, them he
justifies, and whom he justifies, them he glorifies, Rom 8. 30 He calls
sinners, justifies when called, glorifies when justified. For the application
of the Merit of Christ, and Justification thereby, presupposes the
condemnation of the Law to have passed upon every person to whom it is due, and
that not only in the sentence of the Law and Court of God, but in the sentence
of the heart and Court of Conscience also Thence the difference between the
Pharisee and the Publican in point of divine Justification is in Scripture
attributed to the self-justification of the one, and self condemation of the
other; not to the procuring causes, but the disposing qualifications, Luke 18.
14. And the Apostle Paul tells us, that whiles the Jews went about to make
their own righteousness by the Law to stand, they failed of Justification,
because that kept them from submitting to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.
3. And as for Comfort and Reward, they presuppose Justification, and (by
consequence) self-condemnation, and a spirit of bondage. For peace with God,
and joy and comfort in the hope of the glory of God, follow Justification, Romans
5. 1, 2.

Thus then (to apply althat has been said:) If what has been before said,
seem too severely to knock any of those upon the fingers who lay hold on
Christ, know it is only the presumptuous sinner who is thus handled, because he
lays not hold on that in Christ, which he regularly ought to come to him for;
and fastens upon that which (in the condition wherein he stands, and under the
disposition and frame of spirit which at present possesses him) belongs not to
him. And herein Ministers are no way blameable. As if a great Prince proclaim a
free grant of some especial bounty or favor to all that will receive it;
suppose pardon and liberty to a thousand Malefactors, and that without any
consideration of any thing to be given or performed by them, only (because he
will have them sensible of his goodness therein, and warned from such courses
for the future) he resolves they shall al be brought to the trial of the Law,
and abide its sentence, and receive their pardon upon the Gallows, at the very
in meant in which the ladder is turning, or the cart driving away; and then also
not without acceptance of it upon such terms, and conditions to be mutually
signed. If now a rabble of Thieves or Murderers, that fear the Law will one
day overtake them, and therefore are willing to secure themselves for time
past, and to fortify themselves against Justice in the practice of the same
villains for time to come, shall rudely intrude and challenge the benefit of
the Princes free Pardon, without any such formalities as are before mentioned;
are they to be blamed who are but the instruments for the distributing of these
pardons, if they bid them stand off, yea, and knock off their fingers, if they
shall lay hold upon them in such a disorderly way? This is the case of the
Ministers of Jesus Christ now adays. A company of brazen-faced, presumptuous
Intruders, make a tumult and arrogate to themselves and their accomplices, the
name of Saints, and challenge an interest in Christ's pardons, privileges, and
comforts, in a way quite inconsistent with the standing rule of the Word, and
the constant experiences of all that are Saints indeed. And because the
Ministers of the Gospel will not betray their trust, and let go the pardons and
privileges which Christ has put in their keeping upon such terms, and
contend earnestly against their irregular ways of demanding them, and advise
them to be contented to take them in the way and order prescribed by Christ, to
seek of him in the use of means, a new heart, sensible of the burden of their
sins, and the wrath due unto them, and in that way to come to Christ for
pardon and peace, and it shall then be as freely theirs as any ones in the
World; these impudent slanderers reproach the Ministers of the Gospel as
unfaithful to their trust, as streightening the free grace of their Master
Christ for their own ends, and with these clamors get into corners, and forge
counterfeit writings and seals themselves, and invite others to come in, and
take the like from them, at the same rate on which they came by theirs.

And thus becomes this deluded generation to be so pestered with a rabble of
drunken, lying, Sabbath breaking, unclean, heretical, blasphemous pretenders to
Saintship, and salvation, which are the reproach and burden of this, and will
be (except God be infinitely gracious unto this Land beyond expectation) the
bane (as to Religion and godliness) of succeeding generations.

CHAP. XV. Encouraging early converts; and vindicating the preaching of the Law
from the exceptions of touchy hearers.
FRom the Thesis so cleared and vindicated, Learn.

1. What a thrifty course it is to be an early convert. If a man must come
under the Spirits bonds, the sooner the better; so much the longer true peace
and liberty we attain, by how much the earlier we have gotten through this
Aprenticeship. How rich do such grow, if not neglecting their time, and
opportunities, who get early out of their service? Whereas, if one be a man
before he becomes an Apprentice, besides that the service will be more tedious
and irksome at such an age, how much of the prime of his days does he lose,
wherein he might get a great estate, were he his own man? O how much joy, and
peace, and assurance of Gods Love, how much comfortable communion with him, how
many rich experiences, how great an accession of grace, how many opportunities
of service, and (if there be degrees of glory) how much of the weight of their
crown do they lose that pass the pangs and throws of the new birth, when they
are even ready to go out of the World! O friends, how good is it for a man to
bear this yoke in his youth, seeing it must be born at one time or other! Lam.
3. 27. The strength of the bearer is then greatest; the burden of sin at that
age, not being greatned by the many aggravations of a riper, and more
experienced familiarity with it, will be lighter; the workings and flowings of
heavenly affections under it will be sweeter, more ingenuous, and unmixed with
self ends, and hypocritical collusions; the removal of it (in likelihood) will
be the sooner, at least the surer; God having engaged himself that they that
seek him early shall find him, whosoever miss him they shall not, Prove. 8. 17.

This is much set forth by what was before said concerning the measures of
conviction which the Spirit works by. The longer we continue in an
unregenerate condition, the more do we multiply the sorrows and throws of the
new birth. The longer we are before we get the debt discharged and the book
cancelled, the heavier will the account appear when we come to reckon all the
arrearages of so many years actual sins to the grand debt of original guilt;
when we shall see the Account multiplied into millions, by interest upon
interest, from custom, and obstinacy, and delight in sin.

Friends, we are utterly mistaken, and do miserably beguile our selves, when
because we are loath to damp the joys and comforts of youth, by so unwelcome a
trouble as that of conviction, and humiliation for sin, we resist the Spirit,
and think it more for our advantage to put off such thoughts to old age. It is
as if a debtour that owes diverse thousands, should think it more for his ease
to look over his Accounts, and reckon with his Creditor, when the debt is
increased by the interest of thirty ar forty years, and the addition of new
sums. Ah! poor man, if thy conscience book be so overcharged that thou dare
not look into it at fifteen or twenty years old, how black and dismal will it
look at fifty or sixty years? When moreover, it will be the greatest trouble of
thy Spirit over and above all thy other sins, that thou have not returned
sooner; when thou shall question whether God will receive one returning so
late, under the weight of so many aggravated sins. It Is an hard matter for
those that have rejected the Spirits motions in youth, and given their lusts a
full swinge against the checks of their consciences, to take any comfort, or
build to themselves any ground^d assurance of Gods love, thoug^ they be really
converted, in age: when there are such actual sins lie at the bottom of the
heart, as they are a^raid to con^esse to God, and ashamed to make known to a
Minister of the Gospel or Christian friends, but rather choose to let the
wounds fester, and heat, and rage within, then to open them. O how many black
consciences in convinced elder sinners, which for shame of confession they
covered with a veil of formality and hypocrisy, go without noise to hell, and
are never real till the day of Judgment: and how many are by such sinners
themselves, out of anguish of spirit read over with roaring and horror upon
their deathbeds, which might have been free from those oppressing burdens,
had they endeavored earlier to relieve them! If the fetters of the Spirit of
Bondage be so terrible, that thou shunnest them now; how sad a thing will it be
to bear them in that age when the grassehopper is a burden? Eccles. 12. 5.

CHAP. XVI. Converts examined, whether soundly or unsoundly wrought upon.
THis also informs us, how necessary a work of the Ministers of the Gospel it
is, to awaken the conscience of men. O the madness of most hearers in England!
Let a faithful preacher rip open their bosoms, and discover their sins, and
lay the Law to their consciences, and the axe to the root of their deceitful
consciences, how many galled hearers will fling and kick against his doctrine;
how many, that cannot endure to be handled (so sinfully tender are their
consciences) will fly from his ministry? They cannot endure to hear him, he
preaches so much damnation, etc. Alas poor souls, had you rather be damned
indeed, then hear of damnation, that you may be warned to fly from it whiles it
is time? Do you love to sleep your selves into hell, that ye are angry at them
that pinch you for awakening your consciences, and discovering your danger? The
gnat in Virgil was requited but ill by the shepherd, when he killed him for
stinging him out of his sleep at that very instant when a serpent was about to
sting him to death. But just such usage have Gods Ministers from this
generation.

Obj. Yea, but they be Saints, and such doctrine does not belong to them, it is
unproper for them to hear.

Answ. 1. Oh that the persons that call themselves so, would give Gods
Ministers sufficient cause to think them such! Certainly, I am not to believe
every man's estate to be so good as he pretend, or (it may be) himself thinks
it to be. The Physician will not believe every patient that tells him he is
well, and nothing ails him. He knows it is a sign the disease is most
dangerous when the patient feels it not. I am sure this is no sign of
Saintship not to be able to bear a reproof, nay not to hear a convincing
sermon. Nay it gives suspicion that they are not sound but rotten, that cannot
endure to have their consciences handled. If such persons be Saints, I know not
who be sinners: if they be sound and sincere, I know not who are hypocrites.
Sure it was a note of David's sincerity to yield up himself to the Lord to
search and try him, Ps. 139. 23. to invite the righteous to smite him (not
stroke him) and account it a precious balm that should not break his head,
Psalm. 141. 5. Believe it, there is no more certain sign of an hypocrite in the
World, then to pick and choose truths; this he must have preached, and that he
must not. You know who say, preach to us pleasing things. Is. 30. 16.

2. There is no truth but one way or other belongs to every Saint, either in
relation to his past, present, or future condition. Law truths concern him,
either in way of direction, as the duties thereof; or by way of inducement to
thankfulness, consolation, humiliation, dutifulness, as its curse and
terrors, Many Gospel Truths are not suitable to a man's present condition, as
the doctrine of afflictions, temptations, etc. sometimes; but shall they be
therefore thrown away? may there not come a time of use? and should not Saints
lay up such things in their heart? ought not the heart of a Saint to be a
treasury of things old, as well as new? And may it not be of use if you are
past these throws, to remember you of the days of old; to show you your former
debts, when you can show the discharge? will not this occasion a thankful
acknowledgment of Gods goodness, and Christ's love, etc. when the heart shall
say, This was my case, I once felt those sorrows, lay under those chains of the
Spirit, but the Lord has delivered me, I will walk before the Lord in the land
of the living.

3. Suppose it no way belongs to thee, as thy condition is now; yet it may
belong to others that are now in the condition wherein thou once wast. If the
Minister were bound to confine his discourse to those of thy condition and
growth only, what would become of the work of conversion upon others? A
Minister is not only a nurse, or a waterer, but a father, and a planter also.
He must preach for conversion, that Christ's body may be complete in members, as
well as for edification, that those members may be complete in graces and
comforts.

Obj. But this kind of preaching may occasion the grieving of many whom the
Lord will not have grieved, may rub old sores and make them smart again, which
the Lord has closed, may disturb the peace of many a Saint; and make them a
fresh to question their condition.

Ans. 1. Will it so, Suppose it, and it may not be for their hurt if it do. It
may be they may have built too hastily, and though God will not overthrow the
building for every failing of the builder, yet he may exercise it with some
storms, to discover its cracks, and show where it needs props, and where it
was cemented with untempered mortar. A Christians comfort and peace may have
many materials of his own mixing, hay and stubble in the frame, and those will
God one way or other work out: there may be more of reason in it, then of
Faith; it may be rather a silencing conscience, then a satisfaction of
conscience. As a disputant may be nonplust many times by a plausible argument,
that yet is not satisfied. Now the hand of the Spirit may sometimes apply a
word to such a soul, which may partially shake its grounds, that he may thereby
rectify, and confirm them.

2. If the worst come of it that can be, viz. that some Saint in the preaching
the L^w; and the Spirit of Bondage be deeply wounded, and made to question all
its former evidences, by a word which the Minister in his intentions, and
according to the mind of God in the Scripture directs to others; he is not
blameable for this, supposing he lay down such truths with all possible caution
to prevent their injuriousnesse to any real Saint: but the fault is in the want
of judgment and discretion in the hearer so offended, to take his proper
portion; or in the cunning of Satan, making the truths of God the matter of
temptation: and (as to the ordering and disposing of the thing and occasion)
this ought to be looked upon as a providence of God, by which he will do
something extraordinary in such a soul. But the Minister is doing his duty, he
is dealing blows according to his commission among the enemies of God; if a
friend of God will needs run out of his way, and put his head under the sword,
it is his own fault if he bleed. Much of this often comes to pass through our
neglect of prayer before we come to the ordinance, that God will manage his own
sword with his own hand, directing the Minister to give every one his portion,
and enabling us to discern and receive ours, and an overtendernesse and
scrupulousness of spirit that some Saints are subject unto: of which, in the
end of the second Book.

3. Suppose it be the Ministers fault, not wilfully and purposely (for that is
a wicked Prophets character, wilfully, and of set purpose to make sad the
hearts of the righteous whom the Lord will not have made sad, Ezekiel. 13. 22.)
but through indiscretion or want of caution in the delivery of terrifying
truths, to wound the conscience of a spirit; yet he would do far more
mischief, if by the neglect of preaching such Truths from a fear of so doing,
he should suffer the wicked whom the Lord would have saddened, to flatter
himself in his own eyes, either by a perpetual handling comfortable Doctrines
in mixed Auditories, or convincing ones so coldly, flatly, and worthlessely, as
shall never lend a downright blow to the consciences of carnal and secure
sinners. Better a thousand times, that a Saints conscience be groundlessely
troubled (if one of the two cannot be avoided) then a great many hardened, and
obstinate sinners deluded by a false peace; this may and likely will damn
these, but that cannot possiby destroy the other, seeing the foundation of God
stands sure, and they are gold that fire even of temptations will not waste,
but purify.

CHAP. XVII. A further touchstone for Examination.
THis Thesis also lends us a touchstone for Examination. Here is a touchstone
whereby to try your regeneration, and conversion whether it be sound or no. And
oh that I could hide this Chapter from all tender consciences, that I might
have a free liberty to lay about me a while among the rest! But seeing it is
necessary truth, and I must not defraud many hundred of their portion for your
sakes, the Lords good Spirit, I hope, will so guide me and guard you, that no
one blow shall light but where it is intended.

Obj. Brethren, the World is full of pretenders to grace and Christ now a days.
Heretofore it was a kind of disgrace to be a Saint, and in those times, it was
not to be wondered at, if there were few that pretended to the name without the
thing. No man will personate a Saint, of purpose to be persecuted for bearing
the badge of a counterfeited holiness. But, now God has made the name o
Religion honorable (though truly except the people of God had been generally
better fitted to manage the condition God has brought them to, it may be it
had been better for the credit of the Gospel hereafter, that it had rather
still layen under hatches then been abused by Politicians; to bear the name of
Pilot, whiles they indeed steer the vessel to their own ends:) but I say, the
Lord has for some late years made the name of Religion honorable, he has put
a diadem of glory upon its head, the appearance of it has been in diverse
places the main qualification for preferments, and places of advantage; and
it is strange to see how many converts, the mere complexion of the times has
made. Religion is become the mode, and he is no body that how course soever his
cloth be, does not bestow some of the trimming of the Age upon it. There were
not more Jews made by fear in the days of Hester and Mordecai, then there are
Christians in these days by Covetousness, and Ambition. Christians, said I?
Chrestians rather, (that I may apply more truly the allusive nickname which the
Heathens in Tertullians time falsely put upon the Primitive Saints:) such as
make their preferment and profit the saddle, and Religion the stirrup to help
them into it, the World the Throne, and Christ the footstool, whereby to mount
unto it. O friends, what an easy change is there in the World from the highest
(shall I say?) or lowest Form of sinners into the most sublime, noble,
Angelical order of Saints. He that a few hours since, was as inseparable an
adjunct of an Alehouse as a bush at the door, that was a monster of
intemperance and uncleanness, a prodigious swearer, a notorious scoffer at
Religion, Sabbath-breaker, earthworme, a man that he that would have drawn a
picture of the Devil, had not wronged, if he had set him for his pattern;
Verterit hunc Dominus, momento turbinis exit Marcus dama: -- let the Persius
Devil his Master but change his coat turn the dark side inward, and the
light outward, persuade him for his own base ends to leave, or perhaps but hide
his former sins, and sprinkle his discourse with the holywater of a few
religious phrases, this man without any sight or sense of his sins, without
any sorrow for them, first gives himself the name of Saint, and then is angry
if any ever after deny it him. O sirs, it is well if Christ will own you for
such at the last day. He will not Judge you then according to your assumed
Titles, but he will know how you came by them. Believe it (sirs) the passage
from death to life, is a rocky and a stormy passage to the most that enter into
it. And you must give me leave to ask many of you seriously, as they did our
Savior, when they saw him on the other side of the lake of Tiberias, contrary
to their expection, Sirs, when came you hither? You pretend to Saintship, but
when or how came you by it? You think you are passed from death to life, but
when, and how got you so quick a passage? For my part, I cannot believe, that
you were transported by miracle, as it is said Christ and the Disciples were
immediately at the land whether they went. If you were converted in an
extraordinary way, though not miraculous, I expect eminent fruits of holiness
from such a change. For God will not do extraordinary works, but they shall
quit his cost. But when I see all that is extraordinary in such persons (for
the most part) is, pride, covetousness, injustice, oppression censoriousnesse,
scorn and contempt of Ministers, and ordinances, fearful and horrible
blasphemies and heresies, O (Sirs) shall I tell you what I think of your
extraordinary conversion? Truly (friends) I fear it will prove your extraordinary
condemnation; for Atrocius sub nominis sancti professione peccat, says
Salvian, and the Hell of Hypocrites shall be the standard to that of all other
sinners, says our Savior, Mat. 24. 51.

If your conversion were in the ordinary way, that is the way which I have
before described by its several stages.

Try then, has the Spirit ever convinced thee of the holiness, perfection,
equity of the Law of God, and (thereby) of thine own filthiness, imperfection,
unrighteousness, of thine own wretched, cursed, damnable condition under it?
did thou ever fear and tremble, quake and quiver at the thoughts of the wrath
and vengeance of a just and righteous, Infinite, Almighty and Etern^l God?
Did thou ever break a nights sleep, or loath thy ordinary food, or disrelish
thy beloved pleasures out of the perplexity and anguish of thy spirit? wast
thou ever at such a desperate loss in thy self, as to make it thy main
enquiry what thou should do to be saved? such a loss as thou saw no way
out of it, but only by an infinite, unspeakable, unconceivable mercy? such a
loss that thou accountedst it even a miracle of goodness if ever thou
escapedst out of that condition, that thou judgedst all that thou could do
toward thine own recovery, though thou could weep an Ocean of tears, fast
longer then Moses or our Savior Christ himself, and pray more devoutly and
fervently then all the Saints on earth, hear Sermons endited by a general
assembly of all the Angels in he^ven, so short of righteousness that not any
or all of them could ^e^ieve thee or bring thee one step never happiness; such
a loss that thou saw an absolute necessity of obtaining Jesus Christ and
his righteousness, whatever it cost thee, to seek him at Gods hands
importunately so as to be put off with nothing else; so as to be contented to
be denied all other things, but him only; so as to be willing to part with all
thy lusts, and all thy pleasures, and all thy profits, and all thy honors, to
be molded perfectly into the image of the second Adam, to entertain, love,
delight in, and profess holiness, though accompanied with poverty, disgrace,
displeasure of friends, hatred and persecution of enemies, prisons, racks,
exile, death it self? And Lastly, after all this, have thou in an holy self
condemnation, and an humble acknowledgment of thy own deserts, and Gods justice
acquitted God, though (notwithstanding all this) he should turn his back upon
thee, and shut his ear to the voice of thy roaring? Could thou lay thy mouth
in the dust, impute thy destruction to thy self, and charg the sole cause, and
occasion of thy ruin upon thy own sins, and (in that consideration) sit down
under thy present condition, and say, Let the Lord do with me as seems him
good. If he will damme me for ever, it is my desert; if he save me, it is his
mere mercy; if I go to hell I will carry this acknowledgment thither in my
mouth, Lord thou art righteous when thou judge, and just when thou
condemnest. If I dye, I must thank my self, if I live, I must thank thee and
thee only? And in these sad, and dolorous thoughts and workings of heart, when
thou have been (in thy own apprehensions) in the very belly of Hell, have thou
received a beam of light through a chink of a door of hope, so that in this
sinking condition thou have espied a plank to keep thee above the waves, a twig
to lay hold on to preserve thee from drowning, whereupon thou have by a secret
power from the Spirit been enabled to fasten, some free promise, which although
thou can not call thine, yet thou art told it may be thine, and (thine or
not) thou wast resolved to lay hold on it, and if in so doing God should cut
off one of thy hands, thou wast resolved to lay hold on it (as the Captain in
the Historian on the ship) with the other; and when thou could hold no longer
with that, thou wast resolved to drown looking toward his holy Temple, and in
these acts of holy reliance, have thou received a whisper Jonah 2. 4.
from Gods Spirit? Well, then seeing thou will take no denial, no repulse, be
it unto Mat. 9. 29.
thee according to thy faith; if thou will needs have Christ, take him, and
Salvation with him. Be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Christ is
thy peace, and I am thy salvation. Mat. 9. 2. Ephesians. 2. 14. Psalm. 35. 3.
Have thou felt these works more or less? If thou have not, friend, I doubt
thou setst up a profession of Saint-ship, without the Spirits leave. I would
advise all of you that are in this case to begin again, draw your indentures a
new, entreat the Spirit to admit you into his house of bondage, that the son
may make you free indeed, in his own time and way. O be not ashamed to unravel
all that clew of ungrounded confidence, which thou have deluded thy self by
all this while, and begin upon a new bottom. A mistake here is recoverable;
hereafter, it is for ever irremediable. O think how much better it is to take the
shame of an error upon thy self here, whiles ^t may do thee good, then to be
shamed hereafter before God, Angels, and men, to thine eternal destruction and
confusion in hell fire. I find it an hard matter to get out of this subject,
because I know there is nothing in this Gospel-surfeited age, which damns more
souls then a presumptuous, and heady confidence of ignorant and besotted men,
that run away with a few shredds, and odd ends of Gospel, and build a general
persuasion upon them, that they are the persons to whom they belong; and yet
they never had any such work wrought upon them, as may give any judicious
Minister or Christian any grounds of hope, that they are within a thousand
leagues of the borders of the Kingdom of God,

CHAP. XVIII. Some support to souls under this Spirit, and satisfaction in a
double case of Conscience.
HEnce also we may draw support to persons that are in this condition.

It Is some comfort to a patient that he is in a way of recovery, though he be
not assured that he shall recover, yet when he apprehends such symptoms upon
himself, as usually go before recovery in others, how much are his spirits
refreshed with this? It Is the comfort of a Traveller, when he knows he is in
the way to his journies end, after long wandering in a wilderness; whereby he
is encouraged to proceed, though perhaps it be a very difficult passage, rocky,
dirty, uncomfortable every way, in it self; though his horse be dull, or set
hard in his pace, the weather bad, yet (says he) I am in the way to my
journies end, and I may, if I carefully observe directions, attain it at last;
and this hope puts spirits into him, whenever the difficulties that I have
spoken of discourage him. Now who ever thou art, that art in a like condition,
though the way which the Spirit of bondage conducts thee in, be attended with
many difficulties and discouragements, yet cheer up thou art in an hopeful way
to thy journeys end. It Is the way in which thou may arrive at the joyful
liberty of the Spirit of Adoption.

Q. But I am before told that I may yet miss of the end, and what comfort then
can therebe in such a way, wherein I may miscarry after I have gone through
abundance of difficulties?

A. I answer, True thou may; yet there is much comfort, or support rather. Fr,

1. Though thou may fall, yet thou may not, In thy former condition it was
not so with thee: The way thou wast in, there was nothing in it but certain
destruction, that way led directly, without all peradventure, to the chambers
of death, Prove. 7. 2. 7. thou wast without hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. Now this valley of
Achor, or trouble, is the opening of a door of hope unto thee, Hos. 2. 15.

2. Thou art under the conduct of one, whose discovery, if thou will follow,
thou art assured not to fall away? It Is thy own fault, if thou do so. The
Spirit that has led thee so far, is an unerriug guide, a faithful
conductor: never any one miscarried that once came into this way, but for
neglect of his counsel, and turning aside into by ways of his own, Prove. 1.
32. It Is the turning away of the simple that destroys them, See also, v. 33.

3. This fear is a good prognostic of thy success therein. A man that is
suspicious, asks many questions of all he meets, and takes notice of their
directions, and thereby is preserved from mistakes. Certainly* fear of erring,
is a great preservative against it. As, on the otherside, there is no more
fearful symptom of a dangerous Apostasy, then self-confidenc^? This had like
to have undon Peter, no wonder therefore if the Apostle Paul direct those that
labor for salvation, Mat. 26, 33.
to do it with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. And Solomon pronounces a
blessing on him that fears always. This fear is one great security against
evil, Prove. 14. 16. The wise Prove. 28. 14.
man fears and departs from evil.

4. If thou continue in this self*suspecting fear, and follow God in the use of
all his own ordinances, if thou should miscarry at last, it would be a
singular case; Gods usual dealing with persons under such a work is otherwise.
I dare say, very few, if any, that pursue their convictions so, ever miscarry.

5. There are some conjectural symptoms of a saving conviction whiles one is
under it.

Qu. But what are those?

A. I answer, over and above that fear before spoken of, (which indeed, if it
drive not from, but rather spur on to duty, is the better, as I but now showed
likewise:) there may be a probable judgment made to another, and possibly to
thy self, of the issue, from these following notes.

I. If the sins a man is convinced of, be not only actual, but also, and
principally,

(1.) Original; when he sees not only his actions damnable, but his nature
even before he had a being, condemned; when he complains not only, or
principally of such particular sins, but alike or more feelingly complains
under the body of death, that he is possessed withal. For this man is most
likely to be seriously converted from sin, who does not only aim at the
branches or shrowds, but lays the Axe of repentance at the very root. To
another, who is convinced only of the evil of one or two master sins
(though they may make a stir in the conscience for a while, and that may drive
the man to a wall, so that he sees he must kill them or they will kill him, and
thereupon the man reformes, and is taken notice of for a renewed man) sin
will come in at a posterne door as fast as he drives it out at the great gate,
nay all his labor will be no other then Hercules his was about the many heads
of Hydra (as the Poets fancy) they multiplying upon him as fast as he cuts them
off. It being proper to sin, when dealt with single, -- crescere per damnum,
-- to gain by losing, and grow by being cut down. One particular sin may
destroy another: For,

There is scarce a lust in a man, but as it is contrary to grace, so is it
opposite to some other lust; so that what Covetousness loses, commonly
Prodigality gains, and so vice versa. But if Original sin by such convictions
be assaulted, such a man goes a compendious way to a through Conversion: he
begins at the right end. Indeed, conviction of some actual sin usually begins
this work, but leaves it never it till it strike Original too.

(2.) Not only open and scandalous, but secret and (of those especially)
Spiritual sins. Many a man may be grieviously terrified under the guilt of such
or such a notorious sin, and forsake it, and yet may not be really converted:
shame of the world, disadvantage in point of estate, or (possibly) the
downright blows of a powerful Ministry, will not let him enjoy that quietly.
But when a man's conviction is deepest for undiscerned sins, secret, inward
sins, spiritual sins, such as formality, hypocrisy, hardness of heart, etc.
this is a good sign, this conviction is likely to end in effectual conversion;
Because the grief and sorrow occasioned by these sins, bears a more immediate
relation to the holiness of God who only is offended by them, they being such
as none else can take cognizance of.

II. If a man under soul troubles be full, free, ingenuous, and impartial in
his confessions of sin, and in his censures concerning himself. I love in such
a case to hear a soul say the worst of it self that can be, when it says it
sensibly and cordially, (as in such soul troubles it has little stomach to
complement or dissemble,) Oh what a vile wretch am I? I am persuaded thousands
of my betters are in hell. Did you ever know any one guilty of my sins, with my
aggravations? Thus was Paul in his conversion (for to that time his confession
refers, 1 Timothy 1. 15.) convinced that he was the chief of sinners.

Now among all aggravations of sin (if you lay the comparison) the most
ingenuous are, such as are drawn from abundant mercies, large and liberal
means, frequent convictions, infinite patience, etc. A soul that charge it
self home here, seems to have some touches of a more then ordinary spirit.
There is a Promise to this condition, as a threatening to the contrary, Proverbs
28. 13.

III. If a man justify God and the Law by which he stands condemned. For
herein is a very great measure of humiliation evidenced and hereby is God
mightily honored. And certainly then is our design for happiness most likely
to be successefully carried on, when it involves Gods honor with it. This
heart is thoroughly broken when it will not resist God so much as in a thought,
although he go to hell for ever. Another that is not so kindly wrought upon
Romans 7. 12. Psalm. ^1. ^.
may possibly confess that with his lips, but yet secretly, the heart rising
against God and the Law, for tying up man so close, and inflicting eternal
wrath upon temporary sins; and in stead of being troubled for sin, is secretly
troubled that there is a Law against it.

IV. If the trouble be trouble of mind, i. e. be settled, fixed, rooted in the
judgment and reason, as well as in the passions and affections. And so it be
not easily to be removed or diverted by worldly avocations. Ordinarily, when
God strikes home, he does not only make men cry and roar, as children, nay
dogs will do; but grieve, as men do upon some extraordinary loss; when they
apprehend it so, as that they do not only mourn, but judge they must do so, and
therefore all other things must yield to that affection: such a mourning was
that of Isaiah in another case, Isaiah 22. 4. a resolved mourning, Look away
from me, I will weep bitterly, labor not to comfort me, etc.

V. If (which is a notable prognostic of a good issue to conscience troubles)
a man's greatest trouble be for that he is selfish in his troubles; that his
grief for sin is so much of kin to his own desire of salvation, and fear of
hell and punishment. O (says such a soul) indeed I grieve and am troubled, but
in all this I am but a base selfish creature; if it were not for fear of hell,
and desire to go to heaven, I should sin all my days and never be troubled. It
does not affect me that God is dishonored by my sins, that they are contrary
to the purity of his holy nature, and this selfishness in my trouble is my
greatest trouble. Said I, that this frame prognosticates a good issue to the
bondage of the spirit? That is too little, it immediately foreruns, if not
accompanies a good, a renewed heart. For this evidently shows some love to
God, or at least, some earnest pressing on toward it: and for my part, let me
find a soul in such a frame, I shall tell him, his salvation is near, and his
warfare well nigh accomplished. This reflex trouble (if I may so call it) or
superfoetation of the spirit of Bondage, declares something in this work more
then ordinary. To be troubled first for sin, and then for the sin of those
troubles, declares that a man pants and longs after a perfect holiness, as well
as happiness, and that is a blessed condition.

VI. And lastly, If such a soul be shy and fearful of taking sanctuary in
promising and resolving. For this is a good sign, that he will not split upon
the rock of self-Justification, and that at present he is so thoroughly humbled,
that he dares not arrogate to himself one thread in the whole web of his
salvation, that he thoroughly knows the evil and plague of his own deceitful
heart. Seldom any great Promisers under the work of Convicton are sure
pay-masters.

CHAP. XIX. Past experiences improved for the comfort of those that are gone
through this work.
TO those that have been under, and have happily gone through this work of the
Spirit of Bondage, consolation in two or three branches.

1 In that they may now stand on the farther bank of the River, on the farther
shore of the tempestuous sea, and sing Songs of Deliverance, as Moses and
Israel did, Exodus 15.

-- Forsan and haec clim meminisse juvabit, Says the General, in a storm to
his fainting followers. With what delight do old men tell over the adventures
and hazardous services of their youth to their young ones? Those things that
are most hard and unpleasant to undertake, are most sweet and refreshing to
remember when we have gone through them. That that kept David mourning, that he
had little heart to sing (as we say) whilst he was under it, becomes a great
part of his Songs of praise when he is gone through it. See Psalm, 40. 116. etc.

2 Hereby they may ground themselves very firmly in the assurance of their
effectual calling, and conversion to God. Indeed, if this evidence from the
manner and method of our conversion, because of the earliness of the work (as
it may fall out) or by reason of the speediness of our passage through it,
cannot be easily discerned, it is sufficient for our comfort, if God enable us
to see the fruits and effects of grace; such as hatred of sin, love of
holiness, and of every thing that promotes it, for its sake, a precious esteem
of all Gods Saints, because they are such, etc. but the evidence that is drawn
from b^th, is most full and satisfactory. As when a man's Title to Land is
questioned, it is true, it is sufficient to be able to prove that his evidence^
are true, but that will be more cleared if he can alledg that they were sealed
at such a time, in such company, upon such and such considerations;
circumstances of an action being so many partial witnesses to the reality of
it. I have heard that a promise, though proved, is no sufficient ground for a
suit in Law, except the grounds and terms on which it was made, appear also.

3. Hereby they are assured (if the work have been deep and through, not only
slight and superficial, if it have been attended with a saving conversion of
the soul to God) that they are perfectly delivered from it for ever after. It Is
a business that is to be gone through but o^c^, and when it is once over,
there is no fear of its returning upon a man again. I mean, not that the soul
may not come under bondage, and fear, and terror again; if I should, the
experiences of most of the Saints of God would confute me in this particular.
But here lies the comfort: No after shakings to such a soul are the Spirit of
Bondage, as Ishal show more hereafter in the third Thesis or Proposition of the
second part, concerning the Spirit of Adoption. And so they come not upon a man
with Authority from God, but arrest a man barely upon a counterfeit warrant,
and a man is not bound to submit to them. Those cavils which arise afterward in
such a soul, are not the definitive sentence of a Judge concerning a man, but
the importune, and vexing, and litigious allegations of an Adversary. Satan is
a common Barreter, and he makes it his trade to find out flaws in the evidences
of Gods Saints, and when he has found, or pretends to have found any, he makes
a great cry of a little wool (as we say) and like a clamorous and malicious
accuser, heightens every molehil to a mountain, and concludes heavily against a
man. But what is all this to a man's quiet and peaceable possession, if the
spirit of God have discharged him the Court? And such a one, after his Gaol
delivery from the spirit of bondage, is for ever so discharged.

CHAP. XX Advice in seven particulars to such persons as are under this Spirit.
HEnce also properly grows this Caution to convinced sinners. Take heed (if
this be the Spirits way and method of conversion) how you render these works
ineffectual and fruitless to your souls, and so obstruct the Spirits saving
design upon your selves.

This may be done many ways, I have instanced in some of them upon the former
point, which I shall not repeat. To those add,

1. A man may obstruct his own conversion in this work by a careless and
sloathful intermission of those means which may keep his convictions fresh and
lively, and his conscience tender. Souls under this work, should strike (as we
say) whiles the iron is hot. And if the edg be dull, he must lay on the more
strength. Eccles. 10. 10. must improve public Ordinances by private
meditation, prayer, conference. Fire will as well be put out by neglecting to
supply it with fuel, as by casting on water. The Spirit may be starved, as
well as quenched. The sluggard that after ploughing does not follow it with the
mattock and harrow, will have as bad an harvest, as he that sowes and never
plowes at all. The slugga^d when he is called, will diverse times answer fair,
and make promises to rise, and sometimes offers fair to perform them; but when
you cease calling, his endeavors cease, he finds his bed sweet, and for want of
throwing off the clothes, or starting out of bed, by and by sinks into his rest
again, and takes the other nap; Prove. 6. 10. So is it oftentimes with a sinner,
the Spirit calls, and conscience calls, and he ever and anon cries, I rise, and
sometimes starts up, as if he would get out indeed, but through sloth, he is
loath to be at the pains to pursue his good resolutions, does not follow them
by constant and fervent prayer, holy conference, strict search into his heart
and ways, and so loses his beginnings by degrees insensibly, and becomes as
secure a sinner, as ever. God when he gives grace will be sought to, Ezekiel. 36.
37. Yet will I be inquired of for this: and Prove. 2. 3, 4. If thou list up thy
voice for understanding.

2. He may do it by keeping needless society with wicked, erroneous, or vain
and unprofitable company. The former sorts scoff out, and the latter toy out
the seriousness of spirit that attends a convinced conscience. Thence is the
Apostles caution to them, who upon that prick in the heart advise with him for
the cure of that dangerous wound. Save your selves (says he) (...), from this
crooked generation, Acts 2. 49. and this he did very earnestly: the Spirit sets
it out by two words, (...), and (...), he did charge, or adjure, and entreat,
and that with many words, as knowing it to be a business of very great
importance in what company such young beginners lighted. Think you hear that
Question put to you, which the Angels put to the women, Luke 24. 5. Why seek ye
the living among the dead? Truly beloved, the unhappy lot of many a coming
soul, falls among profane friends, and they (as I showed before) by all means
possible endeavor to drown those little sparks; others longing after ease and
comfort, and (not daring to turn the stream of soul troubles in such a way)
among those friends to whom they choose to bemoan themselves, oftentimes light
upon some of unsound Principles, and they draw them from public Ordinances,
and private duties, the only ordinary means of effectual conversion, and it may
be prejudice them against those Truths that affected them, and thereby they not
being plied with those softning means, quickly return to their former
hardness, and impenitency; only they color it under a new name and
profession of Saintship.

Now for prevention of this ^vil, there is no greater caution in any thing to
be observed by persons in that condition, then to avoid the company of
heretics, as the most pernicious generation that they can converse withal.
And as for vain, and frothy, and unprofitable company, though they be not in
the same way hurtful with those before mentioned, yet are they great
hindrances to this work, and hinder the real conversion of many a convinced
sinner, whiles they dispose the soul to a vain, slight, and frothy temper, a
temper which is so far from being disposed aright for a business of such
spiritual importance, that it is not fit to manage a serious temporal
employment. And good reason, for there is in all such laughter a kind of
madness, Eccles. 2. 2. For as the conceptions of fools and madmen are fickle
and fleeting, one fancy putting out the other, as one wave another in water,
whence comes the rambling and incoherent discourse, which ordinarily discovers
distractednesse of mind: so does joy, and lightness of heart, especially if it
be occasioned by vain and impertinent objects, dilate and spread the spirit so,
as makes it incapable of being confined to any one thing, though never so
serious; but the soul in such a condition dissolves and evaporates into smoke,
and (as is said of the Heathens in another sense, Romans 1. 21.) becomes vain in
its imaginations. How often does the Apostle caution us aginst vain janglings,
and vain bablings, (...), and (...), discourses in which there is nothing but
flash and vapor, 1 Timothy 1. 6. and 6. 20. 2 Timothy 2. 16. As knowing their
inconsistency with Christian seriousness.

3. By timorous despondency and cowardice of spirit. Thus many a soul that has
begun well in this way, has met with a serious conviction in a Sermon, and
been contented to follow it, upon hope its work would soon be over, and
thereupon has set upon a serious search of his ways, and prayed, and
confessed, and mourned for sin, and for all this can see no progress at all
that he makes either in holiness or peace, multitudes of lusts strive still,
and it may be he now feels them stirring more then ever before (as a waking man
feels every flea that bites him, but a sleeping man though he have many about
him, yet feels them not) and multitudes of temptations assault him which he
could not foresee. And now (says he) I perceive I am entering into a
melancholy profession, and I see no end of it, and thus 'twill be with me so
long as I hearken to conscience, and suffer every sin to trouble me thus; I
expected peace and comfort in this way, but I see now there is no hopes of it
whiles I am so nice and scrupulous, and therefore I will give my self scope,
and elbowroome, and not lose my present contents which I can enjoy at my
pleasure, to wait for others which I despair of ever being able to attain. And
then he concludes desperately thus, I have ceased from my wicked ways, and
prayed, and sought the face of God, and waited upon Sermons, etc. yet can I get
no peace, no answer of satisfaction to my soul, God stops his ears to the voice
of my roaring, and I am out of all hopes of ever attaining a sound peace in my
conscience; heaven is everlastingly shut, and hell open to my soul; wherefore
it is the best way in mine eyes to give my heart content whiles I may, and to
take the present time, and drive away these melancholy thoughts with sanguine
refreshments, and recreating pleasures, to eat and drink seeing to morrow I
must dye. Thus the Devil that was cast out in the heat of first conviction,
returns again this way, and not only stops conversion at present, but bars the
heart ever after against all scruples tending that way. Such a thought as this
had like to have undone Israel in the desert, Exodus 16. verse. 3.

4. By a secret hanging, and bankering of heart after some sin, under soul
troubles, and the Spirit of bondage. A man may be angry with one sin, and
grievously tormented with the guilt of it, whiles he carries a more favorable
respect to another. As a father that has many children that he is displeased
withal, may fall out with one that has offended him grievously, and wish he
had never begotten him, and yet loves secretly another child who has not so
grievously offended him, and then it falls out that the child that there is not
so much spleen against, recovers his favor, and makes way thereby for the
reducing of his affections to his brother that lies under more heavy
displeasure. Or rather as a politic Prince that being vexed with the clamours
of the people, will sacrifice some favorites to save the rest. One sin may
undo such a man, as Ananias Acts 5. Magus, Acts 8. Sometimes he loves that sin
still which he is fallen out with, and wishes he had never had to do with, and
exclaims against it, and against himself for entertaining it; and that by
degrees wins his favor again: as a rogue and an whore sometimes fall out so
grievously that they call one another all the fowlest names that can be, and
utter all bitter expressions possible against each other, yea wish heartily
they had never seen the faces of each other, and yet within a few hours can be
reconciled again, and be as great together as ever they were. So Pharaoh when
he promised Moses fairest under the rod, yet still kept in his heart a desire
and resolution to keep Israel in bondage. So the Elders of Israel that
enquired diligently (in appearance) after the Lord, yet set up their Idols in
their heart still, Ezekiel. 14. 3. This a man may do, and yet at present not
discern it. He may by consequence, though not directly will the same sin he is
troubled for; i. e. Whiles he wills the temptations to it, or wishes he were
free to it, and could get leave of his conscience to live in it securely, and
without disturbance: perhaps he may have trouble for covetousness and unlawful
gains, and he seems very much bent against it, yet perhaps he has some gainful
way, which he has before persuaded his conscience to allow him, suppose that
of moderate Usury, or the like, which he allows himself in, that brings all
back again.

5. By secret hypocrisy of heart, which hinders a man from discovering the
bottom of his Wound. There is this natural evil in the heart of most men,
though they be as vile as any, yet they are loath to own their evils, at least,
with all their aggravations; indeed they are vile creatures, but yet they are
not so bad as people think them; they have done evil indeed, but they were
drawn in by others, they had a good end in what they did, they have not made a
trade of it, etc. Such hypocritical concealments as these must needs hinder the
deepness of conviction in themselves, and occasion a mis-application of the
remedy by those who are the ordinary Physicians of souls in such cases. As if a
Patient deal deceitfully with a Physician, and discover not the bottom and root
of his Disease, as far as he can, no wonder if he miscarry, seeing the
Physicians medicines are intended to meet with no distemper but that which is
discovered, and so far only as it is so.

Besides, it is possible in some soul-troubles, the hypocrisy may be more
gross in more notorious sinners, who intend to make no other use of it then
barely to right themselves by a forged repentance and contrition in the eyes of
those whom they have scandalized. These both appear notoriously in the case of
Saul; when Samuel had charged home upon him his disobedience in sparing Agag,
first he plays the hypocrite more secretly in excusing the sin, I have sinned
(says he) in transgressing the Commandment of the Lord, but I feared the
people. And when that cover will not do the deed, then he confesses it more
largely, that he had sinned, he was convinced of it, his excuse would not hold
water: But why did Saul confess so much? See 1 Samuel 15. 30. Yet honor me
(says he) before the ^ers of my people, and before Israel; if he should not
have come off freely in his acknowledgment, Samuel would not have been gained
to have owned him before the people. He plays the hypocrite more notoriously
in his confession, then he did before in his excuses. Thence sound converts so
often complain of a fear of hypocrisy even in their complainings.

6 Spiritual pride may undo a convinced soul. It may make a man take that for
the end, which is but the way, nay but the first step in the way. Trouble of
conscience for sin is a rare thing in the world, and where it is wrought in the
soul, (to any large measure especially) it puts a great difference between man
and man; this difference a soul may apprehend too soon, so as to be puffed up
with the experience of such a work on his spirit. Suppose of a crew of profane
persons, the conscience of one may be troubled for his lewd courses, and this
trouble sticks close, and drives him from his loose companions, and to resolve
upon a new course of life. Now is Satan apt to strike in, and blow up the heart
with the thoughts of this work, and the man, (by comparing himself with what he
was, and what his Associates still are) is apt to think, Sure, now I am in a
good condition, for I have been troubled for my sins, and forsaken my former
ways, and therefore I am savingly converted; and therefore I have ground to
take comfort, and apply Promises to my self, and entertain no more doubts of
my condition. Here let me (at least) allude to Matthew- 12. 43, 44, 45. The
unclean spirit may (in some notorious lust or other) be cast out, and he is
rest less till he have again recovered his possession, and therefore waits a
time till it be swept and garnished, till a barren profession of Religion be
taken up, and pride make such persons carry it high, (this furnishes a lodging
for the Devil) then he returns, but in another disguise, (such an unclean
dirty spirit must never think to be harbored again in a garnished house,
therefore) he may perhaps wipe his shoes at the door, and under a pretense of
holiness or light, may get a firmer possession. An erroneous Devil in such a
proud heart may get possession, when a scandalous Devil cannot, though
afterward he open the door to more scandalous and unclean then himself.
Neither does such a frame of spirit only give advantage to Satan, but it also
puts a man into a condition incapable of further grace from God, seeing he
every where annexeth the Promises of grace to those whom he has thoroughly
humbled, Psalm. 25. 9. Isai. 4. 6 He gives grace to the humble.

7. Indiscreet handling by godly Ministers and friends. As many a child that
comes to the birth, is spoiled by the indiscretion of the Midwife.

Now here are two miscarriages to be avoided. A birth may be endangered by
over-slacking or overhastning.

[1] An over-rigorous exacting of such and such (1.) preparatory measures in
all as in some; or (2.) such measures of preparation to grace, as cannot be
attained unto before grace; (3.) and of such dispositions to the least measure
of grace as presuppose growth in grace. So when I find a soul humbled, and
broken under the guilt of sin, and the work by all likelihood is serious, but
failing in some formalities, of what is ordinary and usual in others (for here
I must not think to fit every foot with one shoe;) if I should hide the Gospel
which only converts (as to the formal act of conversion) from such a soul, till
I see conviction of sin bring a sinner to attempt self destruction, etc.
because it brings some so far; or till it show it self in a flood of tears,
(as in others;) or till it heighten his troubles into a kind of distraction (as
in others;) here I go besides the rule on this side. Or should I require in
that sorrow for sin a freedom from all self-respect, a single aiming at Gods
glory, absolutely divided from a man's own good; should I require that those
breakings of heart which I discern, be derived from mere love to God and
Christ, etc. (tempers which must needs attend the discovery and enjoyment of
Christ, and that not only in truth and reality, but in sense and evidence, and
such as all persons who are arrived to a great measure of the Spirit of
Adoption do not find, or at least very weakly in themselves) here I should not
only be indiscreet in expecting and requiring that from the Law, which is not
to be found but in the Gospel; but occasion the damping and cooling (if not
utter quenching) those blessed affections, through despair of ever causing the
stream to ascend so high, and so furnish Satan, and man's cowardly, sloathful
heart with matter en^ugh of temptation to Apostasy. This is a great evil to
detain a soul long in the passage from death to life, Hos. 13. 13.

[2] An over hasty, and inconsiderate application of comfort, before the soul
give evidence, that it is truly and soundly humbled. And this is overhastening
the birth, which occasions many distortions, weaknesses, and defects in the
person so born into the new world, and diverse times exposes the soul to
eternal undoing, seeing there are very few, if any, over early and abortive
children, but are still-born.

Here is to be considered that all Promises that concern the Application of
Comfort to us are conditional; and we are not to administer it but only to
capable Subjects. So (as I have showed before) Christ ties his yoke and rest
together, and feeling and removing the weight of sin are in the same place
conjoined, Mat. 11. 28, 29, 30. And the comfortable indwelling of the presence
of God in any soul, is conditioned with an humble, contrite and trembling frame
of spirit, Isai. 66. 2 And blessed are the Mourners, for they shall be
comforted, Mat. 5. 4. Now certainly, ere God will speak, he will not only find
shows of these tempers, but realities; and therefore a Minister, who is Gods
Deputy, in dealing with such persons, should labor to come near him herein:
for how can Ministers keep to their commission, if they loose where God binds?
It Is true, they are not bound to an infallibility of concluding that such a
work is true, but only to judge by the effects; but when they have sufficient
evidence to sway their judgment concerning the real conversion of any soul,
then to speak comfort, is a duty, Isai. 40. 1. till then, it is a sin.

The way then how to deal with such persons is this. We must search whether the
trouble be real or counterfeit, slight or deep fowl or clean, inflamed or not,
and (accordingly) either widen the wound more, to make it capable of admitting
a Tent, or apply a lenitive plaster to allay the fire of it, or a drawing one
to fetch out the corruption; or lastly, an healing to close the Orifice. And
indeed, whiles the trouble is merely legal and from a Spirit of Bondage, the
main care and skill of a Minister or friend, as to such a one, ought to be to
find out the mean between these two extremes, the heightning the trouble so as
to render the soul too superstitiously fearful to close with Christ, and
lightning or asswaging it so as to undo the soul by a lusory and unsound
closure with him. He that can thus distinguish seasons of applying the Law and
Gospel, (let me say of him, as Luther of him that knows the difference between
them,) Sciat se esse bonum Theologum; Let him know he is a good Divine indeed.

CHAP. XXI: Four main Duties pressed upon them.
THis Truth also affords seasonable and suitable Exhortation, to four sorts of
persons. 1. To those that have been in this condition, and have had a good
issue of it. 2. To those that have been under it, and have lost both the sense
and fruit of it. 3. To those that are yet under it. 4. To those that yet are
altogether strangers to it.


The first of whom we shall speak to in this Chapter; viz.

1 To those whom the Spirit has led through the wilderness, so as after all
their difficulties to cause them to rest on the other side Jordan; I commend
these Duties to them.

(1) The practice of Humility. Pride is in no person so odious, as in him, that
(as Solomon speaks) comes out of prison to reign, Eccles. 4. 14. Thence God
always minds his people of the Wilderness, and of Egypt, to keep their hearts
low in Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 3, 14, 15, 16, 17. I have read of a King, who being
advanced to the Throne from a Agathocles.
Potter, would always be served in earthen ware, to mind him of his original.
And heard of a Doctor who attained to great dignities in our memory, who
preserved as a monument the very skin breeches in which he came first into the
University. And truly, let the choicest of Gods Saints consider the fears, and
terrors, the tears, and sighs, and groans of the state of bondage, let him
think how often he has layen at Gods doors, and begged for a crum of Grace, a
grain of Comfort, how often he has (with the returning Prodigal) been willing
to take it for a great engagement, if he might but be admitted among Gods hired
Servants: or with the poor woman in the Gospel, if she might but have the
gnawing of the scraps that fell from his table, and think whether a proud
lifting up the head, to a self-boasting, and self-pleasing frame, be a suitable
issue of such a condition, a proper conclusion from such premises.

Pone hosts, vulnusque tuum, solitumque timorem,
Post clypeumque late, and mecum contend sub illo.
Says Ajax in the Poet to Ulysses, who from being his submissive petitioner
for protection in the field, was now become his confident Antagonist and
Competitor for Achilles his arms in the camp. And think how God may then mind
you of those former passages; and that with just indignation, if now you any
way lift up the heel against him.

(2) Watchfulness: considering,

1. That (although the Holy Spirit be not the Author of it) yet fresh sins may
occasion the reducing you into the same troubles. True, thy condition (being
once in Christ) can never be so unsafe as formerly, but it may be altogether as
uncomfortable, nay perhaps more uncomfortable then it was before. I say, more
uncomfortable; because your sins will have aggravations then, that they were
not capable of before, and the hopes which you have been raised unto by
conversion, and it may be comfort, will increase the misery of your falling
from them.

That which I have said before concerning the ends of the Spirit in bringing us
into such an house of bondage, would afford us a new meditation here; it being
our duty to accomplish the ends of the Spirit in all his works. And therefore I
shall for the farther prosecution of this head, refer you to the fourth of
those ends before mentioned, only remember what I say, Sins after conversion
may make us doubt whether ever we were converted, and so make us act over all
our former Tragical parts again, which ever we passed through before
conversion, even sins of omission: and I cannot but think, that the Apostle may
intend some such intimation, 2 Pet. 1. 9 He that lacks these things; i. e.
that neglects to grow in grace (as is pressed in the preceding verses) is
blind, etc. and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins, i. e.
may question whether ever he were or no, and the following words more incline
me to this interpretation. It follows, Wherefore the rather brethren, labor to
make your calling and election sure, etc. v. 10.

2. That Satan watches all advantages to reduce you back again, if not to a
state of condemnation, yet to an apprehension of it. Keep your evidences, and
your assurances ever in your eye. Watch against temptations that tend to
enslave you again. So will a captive to the Turk, when once escaped, take heed
of staying within the reach of his cruel task-master.

But I shall take up this again hereafter, on the fifth Doctrine, and thither
refer you.

(3.) Thankfulness, which will also be heightened by these considerations.

1. How important a work it is, that God has wrought in you. It is a work that
accompanies salvation, for whom he calls, he justifies, and (by consequence)
glorifies, Romans 8. 30. So that although it were troublesome in working, yet you
may bless God however, seeing it is thus wrought, to all eternity. O how
little was the trouble to the benefit of it!

2. How many difficulties and improbabilities, such as quite damped your hopes,
and sunk your spirits, you met withal, in that dangerous* passage. It may be
there be those that can say, At such a time I was quite beaten off from all my
hopes. I said from day to night, he will make an end of me. Is. 38. 13. And I
shall surely one day perish by the hand 1 Samuel 2^. 1.
of Saul. I am cast out of thy sight. Jonah. 2. 4. I have fought many a single
combat, hand to fist (as we say) with the red dragon, the old Serpent, the
roaring Lion, and I have even been ready to cross the cudgels, and give out in
the perplexity and agony of my spirit; nay I have even fallen out with my self,
and been out of love with my very life, and thought my present condition so
bad, that hell it self would amend it, and have been within an hairs breadth
many a time of sending my self thither with my own hands, and the Lord has
stepped in, and taken hold upon me even on the pits brinke, and now here I am
through his goodness, a monument of his mercy in the land of the living. The
living, the living, they shall praise thee, etc. Isa. 38. 17, 18, 19.

3. The many provocations peculiar to that condition which you were guilty of
in your darkness. Here follow me again with your experiences, ye redeemed of
the Lord; let you and I read over Psalm 78. and 106. and let us look back upon
our wildernesse-sins how often did we speak against God, saying, Can God furnish
a table in the wilderness? How often have we murmured because of the length
and tediousness of our troubles, and wished that we had dyed in Egypt? How
often have we longed for quails for our lust, bin discontented at Gods
allowance, and thought all we had (even precious manna, gracious meltings for
sin, a tender fear of offending God, an holy importunity in following after
God, etc.) nothing, if we were not presently assured of his love, and kissed
with the kisses of his mouth?

Think how much of unbelief, impatience, pride, peevishness, unthankfulness,
despair, hard thoughts against God, weariness of his service, unjust censures
against your selves, blasphemous, murtherous thoughts, etc. has God past by,
and in all these provocations kept you from falling off from your present
convictions, and the benefit of them, and held you in his hand, and conducted
you through the wild and roaring wilderness, till he has brought you to
Canaan.

4. The multitude of those who perish under convictions, and notwithstanding
them, nay perish the deeper for them. When a man considers that the same
troubles of spirit which drove Judas to the Gallows, and Cain to despair, and
to many thousands under the means of grace, become barely means of hardening
the heart, and increasing their condemnation; prove to him the throws of a new
birth, the rough passage to a Kingdom of liberty and glory, the straight door
to a palace of spiritual peace, and comfort. Distinguishing mercy is engaging
mercy. And distinguishing mercy is greatest, when to the persons distinguished
every thing is common, but that very distinction. As if, in a common guilt,
some are pardoned whiles others dye, and in a common disease, some perish, and
others are preserved: so here in common soul troubles, one man despairs, and
sends himself to hell the sooner; another presumes, and fends himself thither
the surer, etc. Others are effectually converted, and eternally saved. Oh what
a deep engagement to thankfulness is this!

(4.) Pitifulness and tenderness to other persons in that condition. Our own
experience may tell us what grievous burdens soul troubles are, and how much
need there is that those that are with young should be gently led. Our Savior
was pleased to submit to temptation for that very reason, that he might be a
merciful high Priest, able to succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2. 18. But I
have spoken to this also before.

CHAP. XXII. Several considerations to humble such as have gone through this
work ineffectually.
II. HEnce also let all those be exhorted that have been under these troubles
of spirit, and have gotten over them without any real work of conversion, or
saving grace attained by them, to 1. Labor seriously to bewail the inefficacy
of such hopeful means for their good. O friends, it is a sad thing to come out
of any trouble, much more such a trouble as this is, and get nothing by it.
What a complaint do the Church make in relation to their temporal afflictions,
Isay 26. 17, 18. We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have brrught
forth wind, etc. That that comforts a woman in her throws, is the hope of a
child, and this is that that makes her forget it, when it is over, John 16. 21.

But if a woman fall into grievous pains, and all proves but a Tympany, or an
abortive conception, or a monster, this will not quit the cost of such throws,
and therefore when she thinkss on this time she bewails it ever after.

Much more should such an affection as this possess a man, when he considers,
how near he was to the Kingdom of God (as Christ says to the Scribe, Mar. 12.
34.) To perish within sight of the harbor; and so to come within a stride of
the goal and miss it; O how vexing a thought should this be! 'Twere well if
it were so with most men in this World, whiles they have time to repair their
losses. Hereafter* 'twill be a trouble to eternity irremediable, and that
irremediablenesse will be the greatest part of the trouble.

Here, to help this work, may be considered, that hereby,

1. The Spirit of God is disappointed, quenched, resisted. It Is Gods Spirit
that has contested with thy proud, obstinate, rebellious heart, and it is that
Spirit whom thou have so often repulsed. That Spirit is a free spirit, and is
not bound to move any more; Psalm. 51.
it is a Spirit of grace, and if he move not, Zach. 12. 10.
thou can never recover again: and when he has been so repulsed, how can
thou expect his farther attempts? God does justly resolve many times concerning
such persons, as Genesis 6. 3. That his spirit shall strive no more.

2. Your hearts are hardened. Believe this for a certain truth, that the more
the heart is melted, and softened, if it grow hard again, it grows the harder
for it. Thence it is, it may be (for I am not certain, the sin against the Holy
Ghost is there meant) that the Apostle says it is impossible to renew such to
repentance when they fall away. Heb. 6. 6. impossible, that is, as to the
strength and power of ordinary means, that work on other men; and if God
convert such an one, it is by an act of his absolute power, besides the
ordinary regulated way of his proceedings. So is the word taken, Mat. 19. 26.
that that is impossible with men, i. e. which is beyond the reach of men to
conceive how it can be done, is possible to God. Now for such a man to be
converted, is impossible to men: not only in that he has no power in nature to
effect it, (for so is every man's conversion impossible) but in that a man
cannot rationally judge him capable of benefit by any of the ordinary
supernatural means of conversion.

The Word of God, and whatever other means of conversion, will grow so familiar
with such a man, that all that was affecting in them, will (through
acquaintance) grow contemptible; and sins which at first view, and in a man's
first convictions, appeared fearful, and terrible, having once or twice
affrighted the soul, and done no more, will afterward lose their
monstrousness, by a frequent fruitless view of them: nay hell it self (as
bug hears to children, after they begin to find that there is nothing in them
but the name) will appear but an old wives fable, and its fire but a painted
flame, such as scares more then it hurts; and so no wonder if (all these
restraints removed) such an ones latter end be worse then the beginning, 2 Pet.
2. ult.

Sins before softenings are like weeds in a ground, which before plowing and
harrowing we hope to root out thereby, but afterward, they are like
invincible weeds that no plough or harrow will tear up, and therefore such
ground is nigh unto cursing.

3. Conscience is checked and discouraged. That tenderness which before
possessed it upon every sin, is in a great measure lost; and whereas it
before passed a right censure concerning thy estate, now it is grown partial
and flattering. For there is no man can get out of soul troubles without the
leave of his conscience. Now conscience in some persons is silenced by main
force, in others disheartened by a sleighting carriage, in others bribed by a
form of godliness, and so it is brought to give way to a delusive and undoing
peace, and either to flatter a man in the way to hell, or not to give him a
plain information of his condition.

Now it is a very dangerous thing to quiet conscience with any thing in the
World but the blood of Jesus. When an unsprinkled Heb. 10. 22.
conscience is at peace, this is a dangerous and undoing peace. Conscience is
the souls faithful watchman, and will (if it be not blind) when it is let
alone in its duty, give faithful intelligence of its danger in time, that it
may be avoided. Now when conscience is discouraged herein, and prevailed
withal, to speak nothing but pleasing things, how soon, and how suddenly will
such persons souls be surprised and ruined before they are aware of it? A
thousand times better to have a roaring conscience, then a sleeping conscience,
and a sullen conscience that will never speak a good word to a man, then a
fawning conscience that will never (although there be never so great cause)
speak a bad one.

Hereby does Satan secure a soul against saving conversion for the future. See
Acts 28. 27. and God says Amen to it, Isai. 6 9. John 12. 40.

4 Possibly hereby thou may be brought farther then all this. Thou have not
only laid all tongues within door, but thou will begin to silence the cocks
without door also, that thou may sleep securely for the future. Gods
faithful Ambassadors that speak too loud, and home to thy spiritual condition,
must be enjoined, or flattered, or scared into a deep silence, as to all such
points as may trouble thee, lest conscience newly laid to rest should startle
again. This was (in another case) the frame of Ahab; he was resolved upon his
war, and then all the Court-Chaplains are taught their Lesson, that they must
all prophecy good success to the Kings design, and Micaiah, because he will
not say as they do, has much ado to get a hearing, 1 Ki^gs 22
and when he is heard, gets an imprisonment for delivering his Message. So it
is with men in this case, when they are resolved to be at peace with their
defiled consciences, upon any terms, they wilfully turn their backs upon such
Ministers as say not what they will have them, and if it were in their power,
would use them no better then Ahab used Micaiah, and Herod John the Baptist.
And now I have mentioned Herod, me thinks I see him just such a man as I am now
discoursing of, a man convinced, and very likely to become a convert, one that
heard John gladly a great while; and sure he was much wrought on that could
please himself in so austere and sour a Preacher as John was: but when he had
prevailed with conscience to wink at his sinful pleasure with Herodias, then
because John made so much noise of the business, that both the King and his
Minion were afraid he would make that tell-tale awake, and look abroad again,
and stare them in the face; the Preacher must be laid in prison, and his head
must be cut off to keep his tongue quiet.

Now when a man has brought himself to such a pass (as to all ordinary and
likely means of conversion) he is desperate.

5. Possibly thou may grow into a gross neglect of duties and Ordinances. An
un-grounded peace often carries men to this: for as it was gotten without these
means, so it is maintained without them. And the soul thus set at liberty, is
afraid of coming within the reach of those means that may reduce it back again
to its old condition. And therefore (seeing these are the means to work
conversion) a soul prejudiced against these, is in a most unlikely way of ever
being savingly wrought upon. The man that under this delusion, being (even upon
this very account) prejudiced against them; because whiles he was under them,
he could never be quiet, and since he has left them, all things are in peace;
whence it appears, that he is resolved, though it cost him his salvation, not
to break (if possibly he can prevent it) his corrupt and unwarrantable security
and peace. He is asleep, and not willing to be disturbed, though he be on the
top of a M^st. Prove 23. 34.

6 After all this, it is a thousand to one if thou do not become a more
desperate enemy to, and Persecuter of the ways of God then any other, and so
by degrees fall into the unpardonable sin. Convinced men come near the Kingdom
of God, and then their hopes are high from God* and all this while they flatter
him with their lips, and are much in prayer and hearing, etc. until by their
desperate Apostacies from these beginnings, they have the sentence of
condemn^tion in their own hearts, which they bear about with them still, though
not always with the same raging and raving clamours; and this consciousnesse
of being cast off by God, and utterly deserted by the spirit of grace, turns
all their love into hatred, and no men in the world prove more bloody
Persecuters then they. Truly Beloved, it is not for nothing that we find
troubled consciences that are made graciously tender, to complain so often of
their own hearts, that they are afraid they have sinned the sin against the
Holy Ghost; for though every Apostasy from a man's convictions be not that sin,
yet every Apostasy from strong and deep workings of the Spirit of Bondage is a
great step toward it. And although it be sure, that no man has committed that
sin who can mourn upon supposition that he has committed it; yet it is no
less sure, that many who have been before great Mourners under the sense of
other sins, may fall into it, and be rendered incapable of ever mourning for sin
any more, but in Hell.

CHAP. XXIII. Such are exhorted to endeavor to recover those lost impressions.
A Question discussed hereupon, and Objections answered.
2. A Second Duty incumbent upon such persons, is to labor to reduce again
those lost impressions of the Spirit of Bondage. I confess, it is a very hard
matter to recover a spirit of conviction and compunction again, when it is once
lost; yet it may be had, the soul being first made deeply sensible (as was
before required) of the evil and danger of checking and losing it, and
following God in all his Ordinances conscienciously for its recovery. But
truly, it is a very rare thing, without very extraordinary Grace, for such
impressions to be (at least effectually) renewed. As in dangerous relapses,
nature having made many attempts to cast out her enemy, and failing, is
ordinarily so wearyed out, that it is an extreme difficult thing to apply any
Physic strong enough to conquer the disease, and yet not too strong for nature
to manage; and therefore it requires the more labor with our hearts to effect.

Object. If thou object; But Sir, these remedies are in vain prescribed to me,
who, if I could do these things, should have no need to complain of the
disease, seeing the very cure consists in being able to apply such means to
effect it. If I could be sensible of this sin, and be humbled deeply for it,
and wait upon means as I ought, my heart would be no longer such as you speak
of; I complain of an hard heart, and an impenitent heart, and you seem to bid
me get a penitent heart, that I may get a penitent heart. And this seems absurd.

Answ. 1. It may be, this very case seriously taken into consideration, will
affect the heart when no other thing will. And we find it by the experience of
Gods called ones, that they find nothing more usual, then to be most sensible
of their own hardness and insensiblenesse. And it is so, because hardness of
heart is not only a sin but a judgment. Now sense of judgment may bring sense
of sin. I advise thee therefore to be sensible of it as a judgment, that thou
may be made sensible of it in time as a sin.

2 To one in thy condition this is the great and master sin, and by
consequence, the most dangerous wound of thy soul, and therefore it is most
suitable and likely to be successeful, to begin the work of sorrow and
humiliation at that sin. As in a complication of many Diseases in a Patient,
the Physician thinks it most proper to apply himself to the Master-Distemper
primarily and principally, and the rest will abate with it, they being but
Symptomatical.

3. When I bid thee labor for a spirit deeply affected with this sin, and to
endeavor to reduce thy self to thy former convictions thereby, I purposely
prescribe this course; Because I know if thou can attain an heart sensible
of its own resistance to the Spirit of grace, etc. thou art so far recovered.
And this advantage is peculiar to this condition, that to be affected with it,
is to be recovered out of it. And this is a great encouragement to labor for
this frame of spirit. As one sin begets another, so humiliation for one, will
beget humiliation for all; for the same tenderness which renders the heart
capable of the impression of godly sorrow for one sin, renders it as penetrable
by others.

4. When I bid thee labor to recover thy former tenderness, I mean not, as if
I would have thee reduce thy self thereunto by a power in thy self, but by
addressing thy self to God by importunate prayer, to take away that
resistance, hardness, and impenitency of thy heart, which so frequently
repulseth the Spirit of God, and rejects its own salvation. Go to God* and
say, Lord, I have an hard heart, an heart that cannot repent; (according to
promise) give me an heart of flesh, etc.

Obj. But I have a great deal of joy and peace, and the course you advise to,
will put all out of order again.

Ans. 1. I have told thee before, that it is better to break an unsound peace of
conscience here, then to continue it all our lives, till Death and Hell break
it whether we will or no. Especially, seeing,

2. The breaking of this false peace is a way to recover a true and sound
peace. Then we are toward a peace with God, when we fall out with our selves
and our sins. When we combine against his enemies, in that work he is engaged
to assist us, and if we be once absolutely broken from them, and engaged to the
destruction of them, ipso facto, we become his confederates.

Obj. But I have had a great name for Religion, and have borne my self high
upon my comfortable attainements and enjoyments, and I cannot bring my self to
be willing to take the shame of a confession, that I have been beguiled my
self, and deluded others.

Answ. Therefore it is likely thy acknowledgements will do thee more good, as (on
the other side) thy example in going on in so delusive a way, will do far more
hurt. Peter's dissimulation drew many to dissemble also. Gal. 2. When eminent
professors, profess glorious discoveryes in a way of defiance to Ministry and
Ordinances, no wonder if diverse, minorum Gentium, (ambition being natural to
men) will either affirm the same things, that they may not seem inferior to
them; or else be apt to believe such things attainable. Thus I remember in
Erasmus there is a story of a Popish Apparition, which when one had confidently
affirmed that he saw, diverse others in the company would needs profess to see
it too. So do deluded souls strengthen one another til the juggle of Satan be
discovered.

2. Here is thy glory and Gods put in the balance, and it is a great trial of
thy sincerity to see which thou will take. My son, give glory to God, says
Joshua to Achan; and so I to thee, Friend give glory to God: Let the pride of
thy heart be abased, and thy high looks be brought low, that the Lord alone may
be exalted. Isa. 2. 17.

3. This is the way to thy own greater esteem. Humble thy self, and the Lord
will exalt thee in due time. Hereby will thou give to those that are truly
godly a firm proof of thy sincerity, and such a return to them will speak
more then thy stay among them possibly would have done.

4. If God do not bring thee thus low now, he will hereafter. What is temporary
shame, and contempt to everlasting shame and contempt?

Obj. But God may save me without this way, and I may be converted without the
return of the spirit of Bondage.

Answ. 1. No question, by his royal prerogative he may do, (that which no
earthly Prince may) act above, and contrary to his own prescribed rules when
he pleases. But

2. It Is unlikely that he will, and it is unusually that he does renew any man
that is an Apostate from former convictions, without deeep humiliations. And
indeed, if he should, this would encourage convinced sinners to cast off their
cords, and break the bonds of the spirit at their pleasure. These are grievous
affronts to God himself, and it is reason that he should have reparations from
us at our return to him. Now the only reparation in this kind, is deep sense,
and humble, selfe-condemning acknowledgment of our sin

CHAP. XXIV. Objections of another nature answered.
Object. YEa, But if this be so, possibly it may be as much for Gods honor to
reject me if I do really submit my self to my old Master, and reduce my soul
under the Spirits Bondage again; so that here is a greater discouragement. I
fear God will not receive so desperate an Apostate as I have been, though I
could be humbled never so much.

Answ. 1. True, it may be much for Caution to others to take heed of
affronting, resisting, quenching the Spirit of grace, that he should let thy
Conscience loose upon thee in damning terrors here, and send thee to hell with
them upon thy spirit to be thy companions to eternity. But

2. That thou acknowledgest the Justice of God herein, gives good hope of thee.
To accept of the punishment of our iniquity, and to acquit God, is one good
sign of the truth and soundness of humiliation. When a man is humbled as low
as hell, takes it for his portion, and deserved too; sure, God uses not to be
deaf to such an acknowledgment as this. The Judge at the Bench is never more
inclined to mercy, then when an Offender takes his guilt on him, and acquits
the Bench, and the Jury, and confesses his condemnation is, and execution will
be just.

3. (We may possibly offend in bringing down God to the line of men in this
case;) and therefore there are Promises of acceptance to such as thou art, Hos.
14. 4. Jer. 3. 22. Though thou can not go to God upon mere grounds of
probability, yet thou may upon his own Promises and Engagements.

Object. But possibly I have sinned against the Holy Ghost.

Answ. 1. Every sin against the Holy Ghost is not the sin against the Holy
Ghost, the emphatical sin against the Holy Ghost. Every Apostasy is not that
sin; then Peter had sinned unpardonably, and Cranmer, and diverse others in the
late times, that have recanted the Truth, and have returned again to their
steadfastness, and dyed for it.

Every wilful sin against convictions is not that sin; then had David (no
doubt) in his plotted murder and adultery sinned against the Holy Ghost, in
this unpardonable way. So had Abraham in denying his wife, and Peter also in
denying his Master; sure they knew such acts were sins. That sin is all these,
but you must add to make up the full nature of it, that it must be a total
Apostasy against full light, ending in a malicious persecution of the known
Truth and ways of holiness. The Pharisees were such Persecutors, and
Reproachers of the Doctrine and Works of Christ, as coming from Satan, (which
by the miracles that accompanied him, they could not but in their consciences
believe came from God,) and therefore Christ charge them justly with that
sin* Malice there must be; for persecution out of ignorance, in Paul's example,
is pardonable, 1 Timothy 1. 17, 18. And in an heat of passion one godly man has
persecuted another. So Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10.

Lastly, That thou have not sinned that sin, is clear, in that thou art afraid
of it, and that fear is thy greatest grief and burden, etc. That sin carries
with it an heart that cannot repent, a seared conscience. However, look on thy
present condition as very dangerous, although not desperate. Penal hardness of
heart, and the forementioned attendants of it, are a rode way to it. Timely
caution may prevent thy falling so far. Please not thy self in such sins, with
this conceit, that yet thou have not sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost, and
therefore may yet go on in them with hope of mercy. Presumptuous sins are
the ushers to the great transgression, Psalm 19. 13. (as we render the word.)

CHAP. XXV. An exhortation to certain duties proper to this condition of
bondage.
HEre is also an Exhortation to such as are under this condition.

1. Be patient under the present hand of the Spirit. A man will bear a great
trouble patiently, when he can see likelihood of a good issue in it. A sick man
is contented to be made sicker for healths sake. Finis confert amabilitatem
mediis, say the Schoolmen; and a man that has a gangrened arm or leg will
endure the sawing it off willingly to save the whole body. Troubles of
conscience are grievous troubles. But so long as they are in the hand of the
spirit as instrumental means to facilitate conversion, how patiently should
thou undergo them? If they were to thy eternal confusion, patience were meet,
partly as to a punishment deserved, and of thy own choice, partly as to a
condition, which repining at it may augment, but never remedy. How much more
when these troubles are converting, saving troubles, or are used by the spirit
to that end! The good ground brought forth its fruit with patience, Luke 8. 15.
And if ever thou will see fruit of thy soul troubles, thou must stay the time,

2. Keep up hope under all discouragements. I know a thousand discouragements
are ready upon every occasion to beat thee off thy hold and hopes. And against
them set those promises, which Scripture is every where full of to persons in
thy condition, together with the examples of others recorded there, and to
these add thy own experience, both in the persons of others, and thine own.
Think how many such sad souls in all ages Gods Spirit has conducted through
the wilderness, and caused them to rest in the full assurance and undoubted
evidence of his love. Read over the sad complaints of David in his convictions
and soul troubles, and how God at last compassed him about with songs of
deliverance, set in joint all his broken bones, and bestowed on him the joy of
his salvation. Nay, how many of those Saints that you daily do or may converse
withal, can speak no less from their own experience? Thou art under a
condition of hope, whiles thou art under this work; it is the method of the
Spirit in conversion (as was before showed.) It is with thee, as with the
people, Ezra 10. 2. though thy case be sad, yet now God has affected thy heart
with thy sin and misery, and made thee confess and bewail thy sins before
him: now there is hope in Israel concerning this, as Shechaniah says, after
the humiliation of the people for their strange wives, in the preceding
Chapter. Thou art yet a prisoner, but a prisoner of hope, Zech. 9. 12. See what
advice and encouragement the Church from her own experience gives. Lam. 3. 26,
27, 28, etc. It is good for a man to hope for the salvation of the Lord; why
so? See verse 31, 32. For the Lord will not cast off for Lam. 3.
ever, but though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion according to the
multitude of his tender mercies. O, says the soul, what is my strength, that I
should hope (as Job 6. 11.) alas, the Lord has cast me off for ever. I see my
present agony and distress of spirit, that he intends to break all my bones,
and send me ver. 4.
to hell with all my bones broken on the wheel of his displeasure. The more I
cry, ver. 8.
the more deaf he seems to be unto my prayer, ver. 4, 6.
he has brought me into darkness, and made my skin old, he has builded
against me, fortified ver. 5.
his kingdom against all my attempts, by a resolution that I shall not enter
into his rest: he has compassed me with gall and travel, he ver. 5. 6. 7. 8.
10. 11. 12. 13. 15. 16.
has set me in dark places, he has hedged me about, and made my chain heavy,
he shuts out my prayer, he is a bear and a lion unto me, he has pulled me in
pieces, and set me as a mark for the arrow: he has caused the arrow of his
quiver to enter into my reins, he has ^illed me with bittern^s and made me
drunken with wormwood* he has b^oken my teeth with gravel stones, he has
covered me with ashes; and this has been of so long continuance upon me, that
I have forgotten prosperity, I can 17.
scarce remember that ever I had a better day. And therefore it is no wonder,
if I conclude, that my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. Oh,
(says the Church) this was 18.
my very case, when I remembered my affliction, 19.
the wormwood and the gall, I even said as thou do. But I withal considered,
that though my case were bad, yet it might have been worse; sure God has shown
me some mercy in that I live. It is of the mercies (...) the Lord 22.
etc. Therefore have I hope, and therefore I 23. etc. to 32.
conclude, that though the Lord cause grief, yet he will have compassion, etc.
Read that Chapter ter all over, I have given but a draught of it, and therein
see thy case and thy cure. As to thy own experiences, urge his preservation of
thee, and support thus long, and plead for its continuance.

Obj. But how can I hope? Hope proceeds from faith, and I cannot believe, for I
am yet, you tell me, in a state of Nature, till by these troubles God converts
me.

Answ. It Is true of the grace of hope, that it proceeds from faith in order of
nature, and is a fruit of conversion, 1 Pet. 1. 3. and till conversion we
cannot rejoice in hope of the glory of God. But there is another hope, that is
not always gracious, (though possibly sometimes grace may be seminally in it,
and may first appear by it, as the first act of faith may appear in such an act
of hope as this. True, I am a condemned creature, but there are such and such
free offers of Christ, and promises of mercy to sinners indefinitely, and why
not to me?) yet I say, this hope is not always gracious, because it is common
to presumptuous as well as repenting sinners, and is the very ground on which
they presume. This hope I shall for distinctions sake call a moral or rational
hope, because it is gathered from the general promises of Scripture, in a
rational way, as also, because it is but a general, probable hope, that is
accompanied only with opinion and not faith, though it may ground faith as to
its act of reliance upon Christ and the promise of mercy in him where the
Spirit of God pleases to infuse faith in such a rational way, as diverse times
he does. Whereas the hope that flows from faith is a spiritual and infused
hope, and is not so much the apprehending a possibility, as expecting a
certainty of fulfilling the promise to me in particular, arising (I mean in the
acts of it, not in the habit or seed of it, for that is infused in the first
vital act of reliance upon Christ, which unites to Christ, and so justifies:)
arising I say, from the particular evidence of my justification by faith, and
so from an act of assurance, and is higher or lower like it. Distinguish thus.
The one is a kind of negative hope, the other a positive. The one says, I am
not excluded; the other says, I am included. Its language is, Why not I?

Now it is the former hope, that rational, moral hope, I advise thee to keep
alive in thy soul. Let no power of corruption, no strength of temptation, no
length or grievousnesse of thy soul troubles, no false conclusions from Gods
decree of reprobation* etc. drive thee out of a firm assent to this
proposition, that though thy case be sad, yet it is not desperate; God has
invited such as thou art, has offered Christ and grace freely to thee among
others, and therefore thou art by no positive declared act of Gods excluded
more then any other. It is a great support that a soul in this case gets by
such an argument as this is. For although grace do not always attend or
accompany this hope, yet the Spirit of God does use it as it does all other
preparatory works, to dispose the soul for grace. Nay, I know not, but that if
the soul follow this moral hope with a constant use of all means, and
ordinances, and in them resolve to cast himself upon Christ to be saved by him
in his own way, and upon his own terms, why this hope may not be the immediate
ground, if not the vehicle or chariot of the very first act of justifying
faith. Wherefore,

3ly. Let this hope produce waiting. Think not that thou art presently cast off
by God, because he does not presently (as to thy sense) answer thy desires.
There is a great deal of impatience usually in troubled spirits. And there is
reason why such souls should be subject to that failing. For the wound of the
spirit is an intolerable wound, Prove. 18. 14. And nothing is more grievous to a
man in intolerable pain and anguish, then delays: Hear me speedily, says
David, else shall I be like unto them that go down into the pit, Psalm 143. 7.
and when God hides long, he apprehends it will be for ever, Psalm 13. 1. But we
must labor against this corruption, and endeavor to bring our souls to a
contentedness to wait for Gods salvation, as long as he thinks fit to exercise
and discipline us in that condition.

The Scripture abounds in exhortations, promises and examples, pressing home
this duty upon us. The place, Lam. 3. 26. requires not only hope, but waiting;
[the word is (...) siluit] a quiet, silent waiting, free from clamorous
complaints against God, murmuring at his delays, and desperate expressions of
despondency of Spirit. And we have a great encouragement hereunto, if we
consider,

(1.) That this time of delay is Gods waiting time, as well as ours. Is. 30.
18. The Lord therefore waits that he may be gracious: and indeed, he has
waited upon us many years before he could prevail with us to give him the
hearing of any his gracious invitations; and do we now think it much to wait on
him till he hear us? Besides.

2. Saving grace is a thing worth the waiting for. Thou have heard often, and
prayed often, thou say, and yet see no fruit of it, thou have obtained
neither grace nor peace, conversion nor comfort; remember what the Apostle
says, Jam. 5. 7. (though with relation to another fruit, i. e. the fruit of
external sufferings; yet the force of his argument is no less herein also)
(...), lengthen out the patience into long suffering. Behold, your husbandman,
(...), lengthens out his hope; though the seed come not up after the first
rain, yet he expects another shower, it is not ripe as soon as it grows up; it
may be a wet seed time, but it may be a dry summer, and so the hazard is not
over; therefore having had a wet seed time, (...), he expects (...), the
latter rain too to perfect the harvest: so thou have sown in tears, God has
blessed the seed of the word so far to thee; expect the perfecting his work in
thee; it may be thy continued troubles are the latter rain, it is well when God
follows thee with such showers, keeps the ground (thy heart) tender; fear
not, man, this makes for the improvement of it to a joyful harvest. They that
sow in tears, shall, though long first, yet at last, reap in joy. Ps. 126. 5.
And their precious seed will yield sheaves at the last.

Obj. But I cannot wait, I have such an impatient, fretful spirit, and I have
so long waited to so little purpose, that I am even quite wearied. Though my
spirit be willing, yet my flesh is weak.

Answ. (1) It Is no less a duty, because thou can not do it.

(2.) Pray against this distemper. Lord, I have an evil, impatient, overhasty
heart, that must be relieved presently, or it will be gone from thy door. Lord,
give me an heart willing to stay thy leisure. Indeed, the things I would have,
are precious, necessary; my endeavors have been frequent, my Prayers urgent,
and importunate, and therefore my froward spirit seems to take it ill to be so
long disappointed in its expectation. Lord give me a waiting, depending,
enduring Spirit.

(3) Fetch in strength from a promise to this purpose. There are abundance of
promises made of and to waiting. Of it, see in special, Psa. 27. ult. Wait on
the Lord, and be of good courage, etc. But what if I cannot? He shall
strengthen thy heart, fortify thy heart against all temptations to weariness
and impatience. See also Isa. 40. 29, 30, 31. It Is a very full promise. So
promises to waiting, Isa. 30. 18. Blessed -- all that wait for him. Chap. 49.
23. They shall not be ashamed that wait for him.

(4.) Yet wait in the use of means. Such as;

1. The word. God having appointed the word as the means, will have us attend
it. The word must be waited on for grace. It is the word of grace, Act. 20. 32.
and the Apostle says, that there is no grace to be had (i. e. ordinarily)
without it; and that not only the word read, but the word heard, and that not
from every one that can talk of Scripture, but from a lawful Preacher. Romans
10. 14. See the connection between calling, and preaching, and hearing, and
faith. See Joh. 17. 17. And the promise that Wisdom makes, is to those that
wait at her gates and the posts of her doors, and constantly do so: He that
waits (...) day by day, ie. upon all opportunities, Pro. 8. 34, 35. And the
word must be waited on for peace too. It Is the Gospel of peace too, as follows
(loco dicto) Romans 10. 15. and that in the mouth of Preachers. And Ephesians. 6. 15.
And Isa. 57. 19. I create the fruit of the lips, peace.

2 Prayer. Ezekiel. 36, 37. I will yet be enquired of, etc. and Acts. 9. 11. The
same spirit is a spirit of grace, and supplication, Jam. 1. 5.
Zech. 12. 10.

Obj. But why shall I pray? My prayers, whiles I am out of Christ, are an
abomination to the Lord: and I sin whiles I pray.

Answ. Upon this account the Devil drives off many from grace and Christ. But
consider,

1. It is a greater sin to neglect it. It is the worst thing that can be said
of any man, that he restrains prayer before the Lord, Job 15. 4. It Is joined
with casting away the fear of God. i. e. with professed Atheism and
profaneness. See Jer. 10. 25. Heathens and families that call not upon Gods
name are put together. Prayer is sin to thee but by accident, vitio personae;
but to neglect it, is a sin in its self.

2. The Lord requires even such persons to pray, Act. 8. 22.

3. The spirit of grace and supplication is usually powered out in the
performance of that duty. Luke 11. 13.

3. Conference. The great reason why Persons go heated, and warmed from
sermons, and within a few minutes become key-cold again, is the want of this
holy help. How did our hearts burn within us, say the Disciples, Luke 24. 32.
when he talked with us?

4. Meditation. Beasts that chewed the cud were the only clean beasts, because
they best turned their food into nourishment. It Is a special advantage that a
man has in memory, seeing it is that bag whence a man Vid. infra N. Octava.
by meditation fetches back truths and chewes on them: see Psalm. 40. 3.

5 Seek in them conversion, rather then comfort, and grace then peace. The
reason of this advice is that which I have before told you, That grace is
offered, and we are invited to receive it without any qualification, but our
want of it.

But peace and comfort presuppose grace. Romans 5. 1. Real, and actual peace, by
which we are made of enemies (as we were born) friends to God; and apparent,
or apprehended peace, peace in the conscience, the evidence whereof is joy and
comfort, are the fruits of justification. Besides, if we desire peace
principally, and not grace, we give a great advantage to Satan to delude us
with a false peace without grace, as he does many a thousand.

We often fail in this, we are earnest for Pardon and peace, but not so
importunate for Grace.

6. Follow those means most constantly which

(1.) (Caeteris paribus) are appointed to thee. I think not that persons are
bound absolutely to their own Pastor. He may be unable, he may be unwilling to
employ his talent to a man's advantage. But if godly, able, and laborious, my
constant attendance is to be on his labors. Certainly my constant meals
should be at home.

2 If free, those that are most scar^h The Word that converts, it is described
by the Apostle, Heb. 4. 12. it is (...), a Word that has life in it, (...),
Active and full of spirits, (...), etc. more cutting, beyond a double
comparison. (...), penetrating (as Aqua fortis) not the ear, but the heart,
joints and marrow, Parts minimas and interiores; (...), a critical word, they
that are Critics, are accurate observers of every tittle. Those thou shall
know by the rising of thy carnal heart against them. For there is no congruity
between the carnal heart of a man that naturally loves its ease, and a
spiritual rowzing Ministry, that will search out all its hidden corruptions;
therefore suspect thy heart here, and cross it.

7. Observe, and take special notice of every step of proficiency which thou
make toward heaven, and acknowledge it with thankfulness. Our sense of wants
should not (although (through our corruption) most commonly it do) exclude the
sense of mercies. Thou want (at least in thy apprehension) grace and Christ,
or it may be, but the evidence and assurance of these; now thou perpetually art
on the complaining hand, and when thou come into Gods presence, he hears
nothing from thee but these complaints, and all that thou conversest with can
have nothing else from thee but querulous language, and it may be, murmuring
discourses concerning the sadness of thy condition and present wants. But here
is not a word of acknowledgment of what thou have. Thou never go to God, and
acknowledgest that it is a great mercy he has made thee see the sinfulness
and misery of thy present condition, and affected thy heart with it. Now
certainly this were a more likely way to speed.

8. Labor to keep your hearts warm, by keeping those things most fresh upon
your spirits by constant meditation, which most affect you. Thou go home
warm from a Sermon, affected (it may be) deeply with thy own condition by
nature, or (it may be) convinced of the exceeding sinfulness of some Master
sin or other; when thou come home, that this may be effectual to thy
conversion, dwell upon those passages in thy thoughts, and when they are ready
to dye, recover them again by fresh recollection, desiring God to fix them upon
thy spirit till they have done their work. And this puts a special force into
the Word, which it would utterly lose, if these thoughts by worldly diversions
should be buried as soon as thou art gone from the Public Assembly.

And at other times whiles this work is upon thee thou may do well to take up
thoughts on these Heads, which may be matter for meditation in such a condition.

1 The sinfulness of sin under all its aggravations, and the sad condition of
a person under it. Here thou may think what a sad Apostasy from the
perfection of man's nature and being, sin has brought into the world; how black
an image of Satan it has drawn upon the soul, what an holy and righteous Law
it is against, what a just condemnation it has subjected thee unto. And here
thoughts of hell and the eternal wrath of God under all its affecting
circumstances, may be considered in relation to thy case.

2 Your own particular sins, and their heightning circumstances. How much more
vile thou art then others, and thy sins more great then those of others; what
by means, and mercies, and judgments, and convictions, and education, and
vows, and covenants of forsaking them, by Apostacies and backslidings into
them, after a temporary desertion of them, by being accessory or Author to the
sins of others, etc.

3 The necessity of returnings to God. That (therefore) in the way thou art in,
thou art running with all speed to the chambers of death, if thou dye the next
moment, hell must receive thee, and heaven be for ever shut against thee. That
thou have no way to escape, but by a speedy return to God, and taking up a new
course, Matthew. 5. 25.

4 The impotency, hardness, deceitfulness of your own heart. That although
thou see so much need of getting into another condition, entering into another
way, yet it is not in thy power so to do; and if it were, thou have such an
heart as would dissemble with God and thee, and put him and thee off with
shows and colors in stead of real fruits of grace; or if it could bring forth
such, yet they cannot justify, and are frail and uncertain.

5 The excellency of Christ in his grace, and in his righteousness. That
(therefore) God has appointed a way in which thy sins may be pardoned, and thy
nature renewed by the righteousness and grace of another, That all that thou
see wanting in thy self, Christ is abundantly able to supply. That there is
(therefore) that in Christ, for which he deserves to be valued above all the
world, for grace and peace.

6 The riches and freeness of Gospel Promises, in which Christ is
communicated; especially those that we call absolute Promises of the first
grace. That to persons so lost in themselves, there is an abundant fountain of
Grace opened in Christ. That God invites all such persons to come to him, and
if they want wherewithal to procure Christ, that he has promised that too,
even the Spirit, Zech. 12. 10. Luke 11. 13. Faith, Phil. 1. 29. A new heart,
Ezekiel 36. 26

CHAP. XXVI. Farther Directions of the same kind.
(9) TAke heed your particular callings prove not a snare to you. That may be
two ways,

1] By wholly neglecting of them. For hereby a soul is exposed to a million of
temptations, whereunto a moderate prosecution of the affairs of a man's calling
might prove a considerable diversion. It Is true, I would have every soul upon
the first smiting of his heart to set apart some time for a serious meditation
upon it, till he has stated his condition, and (by Gods assistance begged in
Prayer) gained a clear sight of his estate, brought his heart under such fixed
impressions, as will stick upon him through all his other employments. After
which he may go about the works of his calling moderately, and take set times
out of it, to begin where he left last, so carrying on that work, yet not
neglecting the other. As a Tradesman takes time to state his Accounts, and when
so, falls to his Employment again; and having brought his Accounts into method,
he can again find where he left.

2] By over eager following them. Mat. 13. 22. The cares of the world choke the
Word. The Devil, when a soul sets all its power on work to hunt him out, runs
like a hare among a flock of sheep; and so puzles the pursuing soul, and diverse
it. A man in such a condition, if his necessary employments cannot be carried
on by other hands, may and must follow them, yet he must take heed that his
whole heart never be let out in them; still must the impressions of the Spirit
of God run as a black thread through the whole web of his business, that when
he has gained time from his business to think on it more seriously, he miss
not his heart.

10. Avoid all cooling company, and choose those whose affections are warmest,
and their zeal hottest, provided they be sound in the faith. This I have
touched upon before (as also most of the rest in a sort) and therefore shall be
but brief in it. When you are convinced, possibly your company before
conviction was merely worldly, possibly vicious, drunken, dissolute, now fly
the very occasions of conversing with them, and seek, cleave to, and esteem
only the company of the strictest. These will be sure to help you out in the
managing of your troubles, will give advice, pray with, and for you, etc. See
Act. 2. 40.

11. Keep no considerable passages of your present condition secret. O that I
could persuade people, when the Word works any impressions upon their
consciences, presently to let the same, or some other, but most chiefly, the
same Minister that made the wound know it, and so afterward give him an
account of the carrying on or obstructions of the work in all considerable
particulars. How seasonably might he advise, preach, pray; and how sutably
apply himself to them?

12. Take special care of sincerity and uprightness of heart in all your
progress this way. The heart oftentimes in such a condition is afraid to
appear as bad as it is, and therefore though for ease men will discover
something of their condition to a Minister or godly friend, yet it has ever
and anon an aptness and disposednesse to prevaricate and mince, etc. O be sure
that you deal heartily and clearly in such businesses. And take heed lest when
you begin to find a change in your selves, you be tempted to Psalm. 51. 6
be willing to appear to Gods Ministers or people better then you are, that you
may get them to speak peace to you, or esteem you the more, etc.

13 As you find improvements and enlargements, labor to keep your hearts
humble. It may be, when you have confessed your sins to God, and wept bitterly,
and prayed fervently, etc. you may find a kind of quiet begotten in your heart
thereby; your wounds do not ache and smart as before, and you have an interval
in your trouble, are prettily well pacified; but whence is it? is it not hence?
Now you think you are in a fair way, sure God will look on you now, etc. and
therefore you rise well pacified for the present. Take heed of this snare:
Rather when you have so done, labor to rise with the lowest thoughts of what
you have done, and as long as you find such a thought in you, never leave till
you have prayed it down. God cannot but be offended at such thoughts as these.
And this is one of the greatest blocks in the way of saving grace that can be.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, James 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5.
5. I am confident this is the very thing that undoes many thousand souls under
such workings of spirit. God sees they begin to tie him to their performances,
and therefore God leaves them to themselves, and they either go away presuming
they have gotten what they sought, and so all the work dies in a form of
godliness, or else if God save them, he lets them so cool again, that they see
the former heat was merely from him, and makes them beg hard for one of those
meltings again ere they can attain it. Rather on the other side, Humble your
selves under the mighty hand of God, and he will exalt you in due time, 1 Pet.
5. 6. Your own time may be an undue time. You never arise with honor from your
knees, till God say to you, Arise.

CHAP. XXVII. Persons altogether unacquainted with this work, exhorted.
HEnce also we ground a fourth Exhortation to those that are altogether
unacquainted with this work. Labor for it in order to conversion.

Object. What can we do toward this work? It Is the work of Gods spirit, and he
blows where, and when he lists, John 3.

Answ. (1) True; and yet there are Ordinances and duties, that are vehicula
Spiritus, the chariots of the Spirit; although the Spirit may choose whether
he will use these Chariots or no. As Jacob, when Joseph sent him the Chariots
from Egypt (that was the way, if ever he hoped to conveigh his old Father
thither;) but yet he might have chosen whether he would have used them or no.
So when the Spirit comes in^o the hearts of People, it is by the Chariots of
Ordinances and duties. But yet the spirit is a free agent. The saylor spreds
his sails to receive the wind* because he can make no Voyage without it; But
yet whether the wind will fill them (at least so as to further his Voyage) he
cannot assure himself. When thou waitest upon the spirit in his Ordinances,
thou do, as it were, spread thy sails, if the Spirit fill them, thou will
make a good Voyage; if not, thy endeavors are nothing. Yet, as the saylor
knows he cannot command the wind, so he knows he must not therefore neglect to
have his sails in a readiness to receive it when it blows: so it concerns
thee to take care, that although the Spirit be not necessarily tied to
Ordinances, yet thou do not therefore neglect attending them. Though the Spirit
do not always come in that way, yet when he comes he will come in that way
ordinarily? It Is a known story, and the Application of it is no less vulgar,
of the poor man that waited at the pool of Bethesda, the water was the
instrument, the Angel stirring it the cause of their healing. Had not the Angel
come and stirred the water, they had waited in vain; but had they not waited
there, the Angel would not have stirred the water, John 5. 3.

When God has appointed means of conviction and conversion, it is a tempting
of God to look for it in any way else with a neglect of those means. It Is a sad
thing when people are of Naamans spirit (till he was better advised) are not
Abanah and Pharphar rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of Israel?
may I not wash in them and be clean? 2 King* 5. 12. No, foolish man, those
Rivers are unsanctified Rivers, they are not set apart by God for that use, and
therefore they will do thee no good; so many thousand souls cry now adays, why
should we attend upon the word of God in public, and that from the mouth of a
Minister (though some will scarce own them now by that name) may I not as well
profit, and be converted by an honest tradesman in a private house?

I answer positively, no; for God having appointed means, and called men to be
public officers to dispense them for thy good, God will not go out of his way
to meet thee: such irregular ways, are heaven-cursed, heaven-blasted ways,
God has threatened it long ago. Jer. 23. 22, 32. when Prophets run upon their
own errands, and pretend the Lord sent them, there is a curse upon them, they
shall do no good, they shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord. And
find me any one separated society in the world, that slights and tramples upon
public ordinances; where there is any sound conversion to Jesus Christ, or any
building up* in holiness, humility, self-denial, etc. or where the most that
is gotten is not error, and looseness, and that in some known, remarkable
way; and I profess, I shall repent of, and lay aside much of my zeal and
eagerness of spirit against those ways, and you will do very much toward
making me a Proselite. But I dare confidently affirm that there is no such
society to be found, which is not so branded by God. And therefore, Friends, if
ever you will have your hearts wrought upon, let public ordinances be precious
in your eyes.

(2) You can commend your selves and your condition (before) to God in Prayer,
that God will make the waters of the sanctuary healing waters to you, that he
will give your souls a special and particular visit in an ordinance, that he
will not suffer your fleece to be dry, when others round about you are wet,
that he will open your eyes, that you may see wonders out of his Law, Psalm. 119
18. and open your hearts, that you may feel them too, that you may not be dead
hearers, or bare hearers; that the Law may not be a mere representing glass,
to show you the black-moors skin, and leopards spots; but an operating glass,
working your very hearts and souls to loath and abhor them, and fly to the
fountain opened in the Gospel, for sin and uncleanness, to wash them out. The
reason why the word wounds so few, is this, People seldom or never lift up
such a prayer as this before they come, and therefore it is no wonder if they
come and go stones and blocks, and a convert (even when the Gospel is
abundantly dispensed) be as rare as a black Swan; that Gods Ministers, and
those of the richest annointings every where complain that they have labored
in vain, and spent their strength for naught, Isa. 49. 4. in comparison to
what success there has been formerly to the labors of others.

3. Thou can set thy self in a grave, reverend, and attentive positure of
body in the Congregation; stir thy self up when thou art sleepy and dull, with
the thoughts of the greatness, glory, and Majesty of him with whom thou have
to do. For this is but the same moral preparation, that you would bring to the
hearing of an earthly great man. Thus had Cornelius and all his family set
themselves in a readiness for Peter's Sermon, Act. 10. 24, 25, 33. And we see
how effectual it was upon them, ver. 44. whiles Peter yet spoke, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them which heard. True, the Spirit of God can, and does often times
meet with such as come on purpose to scoff at a Minister and his Doctrine; and
such as have come to catch a Minister in malice, God has caught them ere their
departure in mercy: And therefore even from this ground I wish with my soul,
that I could but prevail with people to hear the word, (even the bitterest
enemies) for who knows, but God may spread nets for them at that very time?
Saul was a spreading his nets to take the Saints at Damascus, and at the same
time God caught him. True, Paul was not at an ordinance, but that so much more
aggravates the miraculousnesse of Gods mercy in his conversion. But sundry
examples God has made in ordinances of this kind; A more especial example we
have John 7. 32, 45, 46.
yet lest God should hereby give encouragement to men in such insolent acts of
rebellion, God has not made any promise to any such hearers; nay, he expressly
threatens them, Ezekiel. 33. 30, 31. Son of man, says he, the people are speaking
against thee still, by the wall, and in the doors of the houses, etc. Come say
they, and let us hear the word of the Lord, (i. e. in a scoff) come let us go
hear a preachment to day, etc. (for my part, I am not so skilled in their
language as to be able to repeat it at large.) They sit before thee as my
people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them. Now the next words
are read very variously (as you may see in the Margin of your Bibles) with
their mouth they show much love; but the Hebrew is (...) (so shir gnagabim
afterward, a song of loves) They make loves, or jests.
their mouths are full of scurrilous laughter, as at a filthy song, etc. These
were more modest then diverse of ours, for it seems they did this but in
corners (ut supra;) but we meet with those that can scarce refrain such
carriage in a Congregation. But what says God to them? see v. 33. When these
things come to pass (i. e. the truths they set so light by) then they shall
know, (i. e. by sad experience) that there was a Prophet among them: and see
what things those are in the preceding part of the Chapter. God does usually
prepare people to receive a preacher, before he does them good by the word, see
Gal 4. 14. Reverend attendance upon the Word is certainly a great means to fit
the heart for serious impressions from it. As in any affairs of weight, there
is nothing that is more apt to impresse serious thoughts, then the reverence
which we bear to the managers of them. Thence all affairs of justice are
dispensed in such a way of solemnity, as may stir up reverend thoughts in those
present: this is the use of scarlet Robes, and Halberts, and Trumpets, and
standing uncovered in civil Courts.

4. It Is in thy power to call in such straggling thoughts, as carry thy heart
away from the business in hand. For certainly, I have power of mine own
thoughts, and I can command them, if I have many businesses, off from one to
the attendance of another; and if I have one of more serious importance then
all the rest, I can fix them upon that. And when the heart is fixed on a
business, it is most likely to be affected. Transient objects are quickly
forgotten, but objects that are long in our eye, which we take a through view
of, remain longer: Now I shall easily grant here, that a natural man cannot by
his longest dwelling upon such a subject, affect his own heart; but I say
still, that he may thereby put himself into a positure of soul as is most
likely to be affected. The very reason why he T people but now spoken of, Ezekiel.
33, 32 did not make benefit of the word, was because their hearts were after
their covetousness whilst they sat before the Lord. Gather in your straggling
thoughts at such a time, with considerations of this nature, that it is God
speaks; that the things he speaks are of nearest concernment to you, that you
hear them now, and perhaps may hear them no more, this opportunity may be the
last; or it may be, however, this the last time that you may hear such a
Sermon, so close, so particular; that if man thy equal, much more thy better,
spoke to thee a thing that concerned thee far less, nay not at all, thou
would in good manners hear and mind what he said.

5 Minding what is thus preached; it is very hard, if thy memory (without much
ado with it) will not carry away something of what thou have heard; if not, I
am sure, to most it is an easy thing to help memory with their pens. And
truly friends, let me tell you this, if you were now at the bar to be tried
for your lives, you would, if you distrusted your memories, have your note book
by you, and write down all material passages; and if you could not your self,
you would desire some friend to help you; and should you not take like care
when the word of God is passing judgment upon your souls? I confess, that if
we watch not over our hearts, much of the life and power of a Sermon may be
lost at present to a man, but that evil is not necessary here; a man need not
take every word, but only what most conconcerns or affects him, and he may be
affected in hearing, without being prejudiced in writing what he hears.
Friends, I fear few families among us, for want of putting themselves to this
pain, hear (as they should) for afterward. Now a truth laid ^p in memory, may
perhaps work after^ard when a man is minded of it again; although a man go
away at present, and follow his sinful courses. As pills may be taken
overnight, and a man may sleep well upon them, and all night think nothing of
them, but when he awakes in the morning they then will work. Yea, Sermons
^penned (if they be not as ordinarily) written only to serve the turn for a
formal repet^tion at home, and never looked on afterward, may many years after
they are preached, do thee good.

6. It Is in thy power before thou come, when thou art there, and when thou
departest thence, to lift up a Petition to God, that he will handle his own
hammer with his own hand, make the word mighty through God, to break down
strong holds, and overthrow whatever within thy heart opposes his own glory
and thy salvation. It Is no hard matter when a word is spoken that suites thee,
to lift up an Ejaculation, Lord set home this word. Lord, thine own word needs
thine own blessing, and special application to make it effectual. Lord fasten
this nail, and clinch it firmly in my heart.

7. It Is in thy power when ^hou come home to sit down and meditate seriously
upon what thou have heard; to repeat this word in thy family, and confer of it
with others, and to apply it occasionally to others: the word that thou do
another good by, may do thee good too. For all these acts are constantly
performed by rational men in worldly affairs, and certainly the change of the
object does not take from me the power of my own act upon it, so long as both
act and object are still suitable each to other; now although the spiritual
nature of the word be not suitable to a carnal and unsanctified apprehension,
yet the sound of it, and its Grammatical and common sense is, and I require no
more of thee in these acts, then may make use of these, as far as they may be
improved in a serious way, as thou would confer, and discourse with a Lawyer
about thy estate, or a Physician about thy health.

8. It Is in thy power to endeavor to improve this word in a rational way. As
suppose it speaks conviction of sin, to exercise such an act of application
as this, this is my sin; if of judgment, to exercise such an act as this, this
is my case: if direction or motive, to apply it thus, why should not I do
thus, and thus, as I am directed, and exhorted? Heart, what have you to say why
I should not follow this counsel that is given me? This is called communing
with a man's own heart, Ps. 4. 4. and enquiring what have I done? Jer. 8. 6.

9. You can desire and importune the prayers of others in the condition you are
in. God may hear such as are his own people for you, when he will not hear
your selves. You will do so in temporal plagues. So Pharaoh, Exodus 8. 8. And in
special, Simon Magus, Acts 8. 23.

10. It is in my power to check my heart, for those unreasonable prejudices
which it has against the word, and to labor the removal of them. Imean, to
endeavor to reason my self out of them. It Is true, no total removal of
prejudice against the word can be wrought but by grace, it is grace only that
kills the enmity of the heart against God; but reason may silence and suppress
them for the time; as a Judge in the Court may command silence at present, but
cannot, except he can cut out the tongues of men, force them to ^ee totally
silent, and perpetually: So reason can. It cannot dig up the roots of
prejudice, but it may consider the word praescinded and abstracted, 1. From all
prejudicate fancies and conceits. If I have prejudice against the preacher,
that he says what he does out of spleen, etc. why cannot I put my heart
upon this issue? But let the man's intentions be what they will, what is it that
he says? etc. So Eliah, though certainly he had a legal prejudice against the
raven (if at least I may call that a prejudice, that judged him an unclean bird
according to the Law) that brought him food; yet says Eliah, here is food God,
and I have no other lawful way of supply, if the meat be wholesome, I will eat
it. 1 Kings 17. 4. 6. A man is beholding to a watchful enemy.

2. If against his meannesse and contemptiblenesse of person, want of parts and
learning, plainness of preaching, etc. Why cannot I in reason consider, The
richest mines are in the most barren and mountainous grounds? That it is the
ordinary garb of Princes to go clad in bare cloth, which is often more worth
then many a gallant Courtiers cloth and trimming? That when God does good upon
men, and takes them most, his greatest Art is to hide Art? and there is reason
for it, because even humane skill loves not to be seen in the outside of every
work, and the Artificer loves to show most of his skill where you would least
expect it, etc.

3. If that he is not of thy own way or opinion; Reason may plead for him. For,
either thy way and opinion is good, or bad; if good, thou will hear what can be
said against it, know thy adversaries weapons and play, and so wilt be the
better able to guard thy self. If bad, it is a great mercy to be convinced of
it. etc. Yet would I not in all these be misunderstood; For,

1. In all these I so affirm these acts to be in the power of the creature, as
not to exclude the common, and sometimes especial influence of the Spirit upon
them to produce them. It is in these actions as in those other rational acts of
ours concerning the affairs of this World, which are in the power of nature to
perform, but yet the Spirit of God always in a common, but sometimes in an
especial way draws out those acts, so as may be most for Gods glory and our
good, so though it be in the power of Nature to go to Church, and sit
reverently, and hearken out a Sermon, yet that I go at such a time, and that
possibly much against the grain of mine own inclination, that I observe such
and such truths, and lay them up, and meditate on them when I come home, etc.
more then others, this is the Spirits especial influence, i. e. by way of
gifts, for in all this there may be no grace. It may be of very great use many
times to observe, how in our common motions and actions about ordinances, there
is many times a particular providence ordering, and a particular influence of
the Spirit exciting.

2. In all this I imply not any necessity of connection nor tie between these
Acts and Grace. Nor therein do I any way symbolize with the Papists and
Arminians, who tell us, that if we use nature well, and do its utmost, God is
bound ex congruo, to give grace. For there is no promise in Scripture that ties
God to any merely natural or moral act of ours, but only to gracious acts; and
all those promises which respect any operation of ours, suppose the first grace
already given. And when God therefore makes promises to hearing, reading,
praying, either those acts must be gracious, or else they must be interpreted
thus, Do you such duties, follow such means, and if ever I save you, I will
meet you only in that way. I will give as many as belong to the election of
grace power to believe etc. through praying, h^aring, meditation, etc.

And thence it is that those promises are not fulfilled to all that perfrom
these actions. Because though God have made such a promise of giving grace in
such a way, yet it runs not in this sense, I will give grace to all that hear,
pray, etc. Whereas promises that are made to grace are universal. He is rich to
all that call upon him, i. e. graciously, whosoever believes shall not perish,
but have everlasting life. Romans 10. 12. so 3. 16.

Besides, these acts are mere natural acts, splendida peccata, and therefore
they can have no moral influence on God.

3. Yet must we note for our encouragement, that although God (in truth) be not
bound to any man's endeavors, but is as free to give and deny grace, as he was
before any of them: yet God seldom, if ever, has been observed to fail any in
their expectations of grace from him, doing, in the way of means, what they by
the power of nature can, and the Spirit of God moves them unto.

So, that no man ever perished under the enjoyment of such means, but he may
justly stop his mouth before God, and say, I justly perish, notwithstanding my
impotency to do my duty, and Gods decree of not vouchsafing me sufficient grace
for conversion; because I have done less toward the attaining it then I
could. For who knows, or how knew I, that God would not have given me
sufficient grace had I done my utmost, though notwithstanding he was absolutely
free to deny me.

CHAP. XXVIII. A few Objections removed; and thereby a close put to this
Treatise.
BUt me thinks I hear some one objecting.

Object. But why must I seek for such conviction, and especially labor in
Ordinances and duties to come under the work of a Spirit of bondage? God can if
he will, save me in another way. And that you seemed at the entrance into this
point to grant, when you call this the ordinary way; and are tender of denying
a possibility of an extraordiry, and different course!

Answ. 1. God can if he will, but God will not do all he can do. God could of
stones raise up children to Abraham, but he would not: Christ could have
converted the Scribes and Pharisees by a sign from heaven when they asked it,
and have sent Dives from hell to convert his brethren, but because they would
not submit to, and were undisposed to profit by the ordinary means, he would
not, but calls the first, Tempters of Mat. 16. 1.
God for desiring an extraordinary sign, when they had ordinary means, search
the Scriptures, etc. John. 5. 39. And tells the last, that extraordinary means
will not work on men without the grace of God to back them, more then ordinary;
and that it is unlikely, if God do not bless the ordinary way unto us that he
will the extraordinary. They have Moses and the Prophets (says Abraham to
Dives in the Parable) if they will not hear them, neither would they believe if
Luke 16. 3
one should rise from the dead.

2. What reason have thou to expect, that God shall go out of his ordinary rode
way to meet thee in thy bypath? Has God made thee any promise more then to
others? Has he excepted thee by name in those commands in which he has
required attendance on his Ordinances? Have thou obliged him by any courtesy
to take extraordinary pains with thee? If thou can plead nothing more then
another; then think rather, if God have left thousands to perish without
calling them in an extraordinary way, for their contempt of the ordinary, why
not me?

3. Take this for a certain rule, God never condescended to do an extraordinary
work for the conviction and conversion of those, who out of design break
themselves off from the ordinary, that they may put him to the cost of it.

Indeed it is thought by some, that the Jews shall be converted by a sign from
heaven, but if so, yet consider they are in such a dispersed condition, that
they are not capable of means in an ordinary way, and so totally prejudiced
against the truth, that they do not out of design reject that which they are
convinced is Gods ordinary way of conversion, to put God to the expense of a
miracle, but they really think they are in the true way, and Ordinances
profane, and truth error.

And Lastly, Though signs may occasion their conviction of the truth of
Christian Religion, yet without all doubt their saving conversion in and by it,
shall be in the ordinary way.

This extraordinary sign shall set home the light of the prophesies, and
history of Christ crucified, and so be the occasion, not the cause of their
conversion. For they shall be convinced of their murdering, and piercing the
Lord of glory, and they shall upon the fight of him mourn. Zech. 12. 10. It is
all one as if he should say, they shall be convinced of sin, and close with
Christ as a Savior, and their Savior, and then mourn that they have pierced
him.

4. It Is contrary to thy principles of common prudence in other things. The
market is the ordinary way to get food, thou will not neglect that on this
ground: and so physic of health, etc. Thou will not say, I need not go to the
market to buy or sell provision this week, thou will not open shop, etc.
because God can provide for thy self and thy family in an extraordinary way.
And no man when he is sick will (except in a phrensy) refuse to admit the
physician, because God can cure in a miraculous way, yea and raise the very
dead. Why should any man adventure his soul upon those principles upon which he
will not hazard his body or estate?

5. When men will not wait upon God in his ordinary way of conversion, it is
just with him to give them up to please themselves with a false and unsound
conversion, under some extraordinary delusive energy of Satan, and to mistake
that very extraordinarinesse of delusion, for an extraordinary work of Gods
Spirit. 2 These. 2. 11, 12.

Object. But if I bring my self under such sad and melancholy apprehensions,
as accompany a Spirit of Bondage, I fear, lest Gods terrors should even
distract me, as Heman complains, and we see by experience that many out of such
spiritual troubles arrive Psalm. 8. 15.
at downright madness at last.

Answ. 1. It is Gods usual way; and the way he puts any man upon he is engaged
to protect them in. If our Savior Christ had a warrant from God, to cast
himself down from the pinnacle, had there been no other way down, he would not
have stood so much upon it, as he did, the promise of angelical protection
would have secured him being in his way, which was Gods way. A man may
adventure to cast himself into Hell it self, as Peter leapt into the Sea at
Christ's command, when God bids him, and yet come off as untouched by the fire
and brimstone, as the three children were in the fiery furnace. See Isa 43. 2.

2. If the cure be dangerous, yet the disease is desperate. Better adventure
distraction, then damnation. God can save a distracted man, but he cannot an
unconverted man; because he has no where said the contrary to the former, but
he has to the later.

A man in a gangrene adventures the cutting off of a leg or an arm, and
thinks it safer to adventure his life in a way of cure, then under the power of
a certainly-mortal disease.

3. The longer thou continuest out of this way, the more art thou endangered
hereunto. The greater weight of sin thou contractest by continuance, the
greater terrors thou layest up in store against the day of evil; and if the
terrors of God be distracting, the fewer, the better.

4 It Is the ill managery of persons under such terrors, that occasion such
distractions many times, either their own keeping the Devils and their own
hearts wicked counsel, or indiscreet handling by others, etc.

5 Seldom or never has it been seen but such distempers as are merely
symptomatical (as Physicians speak) are removed with the removal of the
principal Disease, that occasioned them. A frenzy gotten by a fever, departs
with it. And so suppose the like procured by soul troubles, the removal of them
in Gods time, will remove it again.

Quest. But how shall persons under deep troubles be managed, so as such
mischief from overgreat oppression of spirits may be prevented?

Answ. Hereunto (in a word to conclude this Treatise, especially because much
has been said before, and more will be said in the next point to this purpose.)

1 If thou have a child or other friend under the terrors of God, enquire what
was the ground and cause of it, what Ministry such a party has frequented,
whence it is likely the wound was received.

2 If the wound were made by a standing Minister of the neighborhood, go to
him principally and acquaint him with it. He who made the wound is most likely
to heal it. If it were made by any other unknown hand, acquaint the next godly
and experienced Minister with it, and discover what you observe of that kind in
your friends, though perhaps they be unwilling to it themselves.

3 Let other Christians be sent for who have been under the same condition, and
let them be communicative.

4 And lastly, Keep them from erroneous and unsound company.

But all of these I shall speak more fully in the second Treatise.

THE Second TREATISE: Concerning the SPIRIT OF ADOPTION.
CHAP. I. Containing a Preface to the Discourse: a third Proposition from the
Scripture mentioned, and a description of the Grace of Adoption occasionally
premised.
A Man would wonder (if he saw the names of such and such particular men
written in the Book of Life, whom he beholds lying under the chains, and
fetters mentioned in the former Treatise roaring and howling in the bitterness
of their spirits, under the lashes of, not only the Law, as a Schoolmaster,
but Conscience as a Jailor; and withal were he blinded and hood-winked that he
might not see beyond Gods present dispensations toward them) I say, such a man
could not but wonder what strange design God has in such an appearing
inconsistent carriage, and would (no doubt) be a very diligent observer of the
series and method of Gods managing this condition, for the good of those whom
though he love, yet he thinks fit to keep under so severe a discipline, it may
be for diverse years.

And (possibly) by this time some one or other who have gone along with me in
the former Treatise, may be almost in the same maze of uncertainty; at least if
he be a sufferer under the Spirit of Bondage himself; or if not, he may well be
affected with a serious itch of inquiry after the end of such providence.

And therefore I thought not fit to send forth the former Treatise alone, lest
I should hold a poor soul under so uncomfortable an incertitude or hesitancy,
and afford him no help for his satisfaction. The latter part of Romans 8. 15.
(the Text formerly insisted on) tells such an one, that the same Spirit of God,
who lays on them those fetters, in his due time knocks them off again, and
brings them forth into a large place, becomes a Spirit of Adoption from a
Spirit of Bondage, and enables them to call God Father, and come to him as
children, whom but a while since they dreaded and fled from as a Judge. -- But
ye have (says our Apostle) received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby, etc.

In the discovery of which second spiritual Work or Mystery of Godliness, I
shall (in proportion to the Preface of the former Discourse) take this second
part of the Verse asunder, and therein observe these Particulars. 1 Some lines
running parallel herein to the former, such as these three. 1. The cause, which
is the (same) Holy Spirit of God. 2 The way and manner of this work, as it
denotes derivation of influence from that efficient cause upon the Subject,
(here, as there, called) Reception. 3 The Persons or Subjects of this Work, Ye
(the same Romans.)
2 Some lines thwarting and crossing them. such as these three. 1. The Effect
of this Spirit here; (though still he be the same Spirit) is Adoption, which
was there Bondage. 2. The Impression of this Effect upon the same Subjects,
which is now crying Abba, Father, was fear. 3. The time when this alteration is
made, and makes impression upon these Subjects. Employed in the succession of
this effect and impression to those, and that is after the work of the Spirit
of Bondage is done, which is at and after conversion.
3. A twofold particle amplifying the present change, and aggravating the mercy
of it. 1. One Negative, Not again; Ye received the Spirit of Bondage once, but
no more, Not again. 2 Another Affirmative and Adversative, But; i. e, in lieu
of it, you have received another-guise gift, the Spirit of Adoption.



All these parts shall receive their fuller explication in the following
Treatise, which I shall marshal under four Propositions or Theses. Whereof the
first is,

Theses I.
The Spirit of Bondage in Gods Elect ends in a Spirit of Adoption.

The handling of this point will afford us these main heads of Discourse. 1
What Adoption is? 2 What is the work of the Spirit of Adoption? 3 How this
Thesis is to be understood? 4 How the truth of it appears? 5 Why the Spirit
does in such persons so work? 6 Certain other Questions, and the use of the
whole.


Concerning the first, (that falls in occasionally) in this Chapter.

Quest. 1. What is Adoption?

Ans. Adoption is to be looked on under a double respect 1 Active, and 2 Passive
whereby it has relation 1 To its Causes 2 To its Subject
So it is 1 An Act of Grace, as it is the work of God Adopting. 2 A gracious
Privilege, as it is the state of man Adopted.


We shall join both together, and describe it as a privilege of ours, but
depending upon its causes. Thus;

Adoption is a gracious privilege whereby the Elect of God, and they only are
out of the special grace and good will of God the Father, made his children
through Jesus Christ, and entitled with him to the joint inheritance of all
the privileges belonging to the sons of God both here and hereafter.

1 The general nature of it, is a gracious Privilege. And so the Scripture
speaks of it every where, 1 John 3. 1. Two special Notes set it out; a note of
Attention, [Behold] and another importing Admiration, [What manner of love is
this? etc.] The word is in the Orignal. [In what soil does this strange plant
grow? (...), In quo solo natus est talis amor?]

If David thought it so great an honor and privilege to be the Kings Son in
Law, 1 Samuel 18. 18, 23. if it were noted as a special act of self-denial in
Moses to reject that offered relation of being an adopted Son to Pharaohs
daughter, Heb. 11. 24 which imports it was such a privilege, as scarce any but
a Moses would have refused: certainly it must be a privilege of an high nature
to be made a Son or Daughter to God Almighty.

And this must needs be a gracious privilege, seeing the picture of it is so
full of glory, Romans 9 4. it is (...), a special Right, Authority, Joh. 1. 12.

2 This the more appears because it is appropriated to a very few; the subjects
of it are Gods Elect and they only, Ephesians. 1. 5 He has predestined us to the
Adoption of children. And those Elect are not actually so till they become
actual Believers. John 1. 12. To as many as received him (i e. believed in his
name) he gave power. etc. and needs must it be so, for by nature we are
children of wrath, as well as others, Ephesians. 2. 2 And we are the children of
the first Adam till we are the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal.
3. 2.

3 The Causes of it are 1 Principal. 2 Less principal.


1 The principal cause is God the Father, the Fountain of this relation. His is
the power of adopting Sons. 'Twas the usual act of the Father thus to adopt. No
child can adopt a father, because it is an honor; and the Superior is not
honored by the Inferior, but the Inferior by the Superior. Ephesians. 1. 3, 5.
compared. So 1 John 3. 1 What manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the children of God? The vouchsafement of it is from
him to us

2 The less principal, is either, 1 That that inwardly moved him, which the
Schools call, (...); and that (as follows) is his mere grace and good will,
(...), Ephesians. 1. 5. (and this Chapter from ver. 3 to 14. is a perfect common
place upon it,) Having predestined us to Adoption, according to the good
pleasure of his will, and therefore he will have that grace of his alone
glorified thereby, ver. 6. And indeed what else could move him, we being poor,
forlorn, condemned creatures, the seed of a Traitor, and cast out in our
nativity to the contempt of our persons? etc. as is described, Ezekiel 16. 3, 4 2
The outward procuring cause (called also by them, (...)) is Jesus Christ (which
follows next in the description, Through Jesus Christ.)


Now Christ has a special influence upon this work two ways.

1. As the purchaser of it unto us. For he redeemed us that we might receive
the Adoption Gal. 4. 5.
of sons. We were not capable of this Adoption, till redeemed unto it, for we
were by nature the subjects, nay the slaves to another Prince, who rules
effectually in the children Ephesians. 2. 2.
of disobedience; nay we were condemned by the justice of God, and so til our
lives and liberties were thus purchased, were not capable of any inheritance,
our very beings and estates were legally forfeited, and but by Christ's
purchase, we had never been capable of inheriting any thing but Hell, Ephesians.
1. 7, 11. 1. Pet. 1. 3, 4.

2. As the deriver of it upon us. He being the head of all the Adopted family,
from whom the privilege of the blood, and right of inheritance is derived, as a
stream from the fountain upon us, God first Adopting Christ; and in him us.
For our privilege does not flow properly from the natural relation of Christ to
God the Father, but from the moral and assumed relation, that which Christ
received from him, when he undertook to bring many children to glory; for the
privileges of Christ's natural relation to the Father cannot be communicated;
therefore he is called Gods only begotten Son. (And this is the blasphemy of
the Familists both old and new, that the Godhead dwells in the Saints as it
does in Christ; whence it will follow (contrary to scripture that the Saints
also are the natural Sons of God) This is that that I would say, God has
anointed Christ as the second Adam, and the head of his Church, with the oil
of gladness above his fellows, bestowed upon him the graces of Justification,
Sanctification, and all privileges belonging to them, in an eminent manner,
and so made him the first born son of his grace by Adoption, Psalm. 89. 26, 27.
I will make him my first born. This filiation is not that natural relation to
God, for he was never made the natural Son of God, and in that respect seeing
he had no brethren, he could not properly be a first born. It must therefore be
meant of a primogeniture by Adoption; and because primogeniture carries a right
of Authority with it among Princes, therefore it follows, Higher then the
Kings of the earth; I Will give him power over all the Creation; upon which
account also possibly he may be called the first born of every Creature, Col.
1. 15. compared with 17, 18. but more clearly yet, if we compare Isai. 8. 18
and Heb. 2. 11, 13. Behold I (says Christ) and the children which the Lord
has given me, for of him the Apostle interprets it. Now says the Apostle, He
that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are (...), have but one Father,
and yet Christ is brought in calling them children, as well as brethren.
Brethren then they were as sons to the same Father, i. e, by Adoption, for
otherwise Christ had no brethren; and children as sons to that father by a
derived adoption from and through him. And therefore Ephesians. 1. 15. The whole
family, i. e. the Church, (called the household of God, Ephesians. 2. 19. and of
faith, Gal. 6. 10.) is named from him. Named? what? Saints, children of God,
etc. from him, i. e. from their relation to him as the head of the Family.

And remarkably clear is that, Romans 8. 28, 29, 30. God (says the Apostle)
predestined us that we should be conformable to the Image of his son. Wherein
consists this conformity? No question, in condition, privileges and duties,
and primarily in sonship; for it follows, that he might be the first born
among many brethren, that he might have many brethren, to be partakers of those
divine privileges and perfections that belonged to him: God deals in this with
Christ and Saints as men do when they entayl honors and estates to the line of
such a man. He is the head of the Family, the fountain of that honor to all
that descend from him.

4. The special or formal nature of it consists in our being admitted into a
relation of sons and daughters to God. 2 Cor. 6. 18. Ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Now this relation (as I said
before) is no natural relation, but moral, depending upon the will of the
person adopting, and taken up upon special grounds persuading thereunto.
Therefore it is a love bestowed upon us, and we are said to be called the Sons
of God. And yet it is 1 John 3 1.
not a mere relation secundum dici (as they say) for which there is no real
foundation. This Adoption is attended with a spiritual and mystical generation,
and a communication of a divine nature, whereby we are most 2 Pet. 1 4.
really conformed to the image of his Son, as being begotten by him in his
own likeness: he being the brother of our nature, but the Father of our
persons, in that the seed of God abides in us. 1 John. 3. 9. And therefore the
bond is not so loose on both sides, as ordinarily in humane adoptions it is,
whence we are God the Fathers children (in a sort) one degree removed. And as
Jacob adopted his son Joseph's children, Genesis 48. 5. So does God his Son
Jesus's. We are the Fathers seed by Adoption, being Christ's by justification
and regeneration.

The consequent, or rather concomitant of this relation, is a title to the
inheritance of children, both here and hereafter. For this special relation
has more in it herein then ordinary relations of that kind among men, seeing
here every child is an heir, and in that respect every Saint is a first borne,
whose privilege it is to inherit, Heb. 12. 23. And therefore in this respect
Saints are conformed to Christ, not only in Sonship by adoption, but in his
primogeniture or first sonship. As the Apostle very clearly and comfortably
concludes. Romans 8. 17. If children (says he) then heirs; heirs, to whom? and
what? heirs of God, i. e- of all that is in God; for the Lord is the portion
of his people, the portion of Jacob. Jer. 51. 19 and Coheirs with Christ,
[ejusdem gloriae, but not ejusdem gradus] heirs of the same glory with Christ,
but not of the same degree and measure. He that overcomes, shall sit with me
in my Throne. Apoc. 3. 21. According to John 21. 17. More particularly the
Apostle (and upon the account of our descent from Christ, before spoken 1 Cor.
3. 21, 22 23.
of) all things (says he) are yours. And then there follows a large
inventory annexed to this general deed of gift, whether Paul, or Apollo, or
Cephas; all means, and ordinances, and ministers, for their spiritual growth
and improvement; or the world, creatures of the world, men of the world; a
Saint has title to all the good that all the world can afford him, as far as
it is good for him: or life (as long as he may do good with it) he is sure to
live as long as shall be for his advantage; or if life be for his disadvantage,
as it may be, then death (where note, that even death is part of a Saints
inheritance, part of his goods and chattels:) and to sum all up, things
present, all temporal, and things to come all eternal mercies. But how comes
this title to be firm in Law? If a Christian cannot prove his genealogy, then
it is questionable; but if he can, then jure haereditario, he may make good his
claim against all the Devils in hell, it is by entaile settled upon Christ and
his seed, ye are Christ's, descended from him, and Christ's is Gods, the
principal Donour, the Author of the relation, and he will never recall his
bounty, never cut off the entaile. For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance. Romans 11. 29.

And so much shall suffice for the opening of this preliminary question,
concerning the nature of Adoption. A second follows, which we shall cast off
to another Chapter.

CHAP. II. Concerning the Work of The Spirit of Adoption, which is explained
in four Particulars.
Qu. 2. BUt what is the work of the Spirit of Adoption?

His work is fourfold: He is, 1. Vinculum unionis. 2. Testis and sigillum
relationis. 3. Advocatus causae. 4. Dux juventae.
that is, 1. The bond of our union to Christ and God by Christ. 2. The witness
of our relation resulting from union. 3. The Advocate of our cause. 4. Tutor of
our lives.
The first of these is the most noble, as the source of all the rest. All which
depend on it, and in their proper order and season flow from it.

1. He is the bond of our union to Christ. Whence the Apostle argues, that if
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Rom 8. 9. Thence we
are said to be justified by the spirit of God. 1 Cor. 6. 11. i. e. by his
uniting us unto Christ our righteousness; and sanctified also, being made an
habitation of God through the spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. And thence also is our
regeneration, which accompanies, confirms, and evidencheth our adoption,
expressed by our being horn of the spirit, Joh. 3. 6. etc. This Spirit it is,
in his blessed operations, which is the seed of God in us, we have received of
his spirit, 1 John 4. 13. So then in the first place he bestows upon us the
right of Adoption, as the most properworker of this union. And as our Faith is
the instrument of union, so he is the giver of faith, 1 Cor. 12. 9. Faith
indeed, Divines ordinarily call an Instrument, but it is but an improper
instrument; for as all its efficacy depends upon the relation which it has to
Christ, as an hand is the instrument to make rich, when it receives a treasure,
or lays hold on it when freely offered; so it does nothing at all on Gods
part. But the Spirit is (in a sense) a proper instrument on both parts,
applying both Christ to us, and us to Christ: Christ to us, by reaching us a
promise to lay hold on, and us to Christ, by giving us an hand to lay hold on
it, and rest our souls upon it.

2. He is the witness of our Relation. And this work is principally set out
to us in the verse preceding that which is the ground of our discourse. The
Spirit also witnesses Romans 8. 14.
with our spirits, that we are the Children of God, Concerning the manner of
the Spirits testifying, I shall say somewhat hereafter; only take notice now,
that he is said to witness with our spirits, i. e. to say the same thing with
our consciences rightly informed of their condition. Thus he is a seal and an
earnest, not to confirm on Gods part, but to assure our legal title on our
part, Ephesians. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 22.

In the discharge of this work, he is the comforter, who takes of Christ's and
shows unto John 6. 14.
his people, i. e. not only saving truth in illumination, and saving grace in
regeneration and justification, but also special light and comfort in
manifestation of our interest in God through Christ; he takes the Deed by which
Christ is made the adopted head of his family, and all the territories of
heaven and earth are given to him, and his seed for ever, and shows it to the
Saints, and bids them cheer up, for though they be now poor and persecuted,
wandering in sheepskins and goat*skins, hiding among wild beasts in dens and
holes of the earth; yet they are heirs to all that heaven and earth contains,
and the time will come when this great estate shall come in hand; and therefore
they should lay out liberally upon their hopes at present, and throw away all
these things in a kind of holy prodigality, when God calls for them, being
assured that their future inheritance will make amends for all.

This is the assuring act of the Spirit, and differs from the former thus:
there, he barely discovers to us a promise, and stirs us up to adventure
upon it upon general invitations: here he gives us an evidence, that that
promise is ours, and enables us to make use of it by particular interest:

3. He is the Advocate of our Cause. And thus he is said also in this Chapter
to make intercession for us. When our title at any time comes under dispute, or
when any thing is detained from us which our relation and the evidences which
confirm it entitles us unto, he enables us to sue out our interest; or if any
thing befall us unworthy the children of God, he helps us to write letters to
our Father to complain of, and bemoan our condition, Romans 8. 26, 27. And this
is that that is principally intended in the Text, together with the former,
which is the ground of this, the Spirit helps us to cry Abba, Father, by
assuring us that God is our Father, and putting us upon earnest and importunate
requests to him, as the requests of children use to be to a tender and
compassionate Father. And this work of the Spirit is so frequent and constant
in the Saints, that it is (in effect) attributed wholly to the Spirit; God has
sent the Spirit of his Son into our heart, (...) crying, (as if he merely acted
our tongues) Abba Father. Gal. 4. 6.

4. He is the great guide of our way. Ps. 143. 10 He is the T^tour of our
youth, we are not adulti, till we be ripe for glory, Ephesians. 4. 13. So we are
said to Walk after, and to be led by the Spirit. verse 1, 4, 14. of this Chap.
Therefore new obedience is called the Law of the Spirit of life. v. 3. And the
Spirit of the Lord, is said to give liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Cameron. in locum.
And so diverse interpret the words of my Text, with an opposition of servile
obedience, and filial obedience.

CHAP. III. Two practical Queries concerning the extent of this work, as to
the subjects of it, in the forementioned particulars.
Qu. WHat sense must this proposition be understood in, That the Spirit of
Bondage in Gods elect ends in a Spirit of Adoption? Under which are comprised
these farther enquiries.

Que. 1. Whether the Spirit of Adoption do work all the aforesaid works upon
the hearts of all those that are elected, or some of them only upon all, and
all but on some?

Qu. 2. Whether upon all of them that have been under a Spirit of Bondage, the
Spirit do perform all the aforesaid works or no?

Answ. To both I shall give this preliminary answer: and then give a more
particular to each by it self.

1. The Spirit does give all Gods Elect, at one time or other, a true, real,
and unquestionable title to the grace of adoption, and all the privileges
belonging thereunto.

1. In justification, making application of the soul of every elect person to
Christ, and of Christ to the soul.

2. In sanctification, making them partakers of the Divine Nature, by the
application of cleansing promises. 2 Pet. 1. 4.

For else two links of the chain next election would be broken. Romans 8. 30.
Whom he predestined them he called, and whom he called, he justified.

And this is the first work before spoken of.

2. The spirit does work in all persons, that are really converted, (whether in
the method of a Spirit of Bondage, or no) at one time or other, so much
persuasion of the love of God, as encourages the soul to lay hold upon the
promises of the Gospel, and to lay claim to them, and to adventure the soul
upon them. For this is the ground of that reliance by which the soul leans upon
God, and hangs upon Christ for salvation, wherein the nature of justifying
faith (in my judgment) does consist. But there is a difference between this,
and particular assuring faith. For this is grounded only upon the free and
unlimited offers of the Gospel, which offers Christ and Salvation to all that
receive him and come to him, and the Gospells invitations to accept of it: that
is grounded upon particular evidence, that we have already accepted of him, and
thereby he is become ours, and we his, from the effects of a true and saving
reliance upon him.

And this general persuasion so far emboldens all Gods elect, that upon the
warrant of that, they lay claim to God as their Father, not as actually and
assuredly so, but as one that has offered himself to that relation, and will
own it to those that (upon that offer) claim it at his hands. Thence though
they know not God to be their Fateer* yet they lay hands on him upon his free
offer as engaged to be their Father, and so by frequent acts of relyance, grow
up into assurance that he is so, when they find such fru^ts of their reliance,
as evidence a real relation between God and them. I know many of Gods Saints do
(and I think they should) call God Father, when they scarce know whether they
may be so bold or no, and speed that way.

3. That if any one of Gods elect want the assuring testimonies of Gods Spirit,
it is their own fault, seeing God holds it forth to them in many a precious
promise. And if they dare not call God Father, it is because through clouds of
temptation and corruption they darken those evidences which might demonstrate
their sonship. For justification and sanctification, if discovered, are sure
foundations of comfort, and assurance. Thence their condition is expressed by
darkness, which is not the extinguishing of light in the object, or in the
eye, but clouding it.

4. Of those that have this assurance and enlargement thereupon, very few or
none keep it at all times alike, and can alike improve it on every occasion.
Great sins, and great troubles etc. may many times cloud, and sometimes as to
the act, blot out the evidence of their Adoption. Thus David wanted this
Spirit, Psalm. 51. 11. 12. A child having offended, may scarce dare call Father,
whiles that guilt remains uncovered.

5. Even the high and heroical acts of assuring faith in Gods Saints are not
always free from some mixture of doubting, else there were no difference
between assurance, and plerophory, or full assurance.

Answ. ^. But to answer more particularly.

1. To the first Question.

1. All the Elect of God have not presently (when called) the particular
assuring testimony of Gods Spirit, though even that belongs to them, because of
some obstructions that either from Satan, or their own hearts may be put in
their way. A man may be long a child of God before he know himself to be so.
There must in order of nature be the certitudo objecti, before certitudo
subjecti; for I can never be sure of a thing before it is. And how long this
proposition, I am justified, may be true before this, I know I am justified, I
cannot tell, it may be diverse years.

2. An elect child of God (for any thing I know, or to my utmost knowledge the
Scripture reveals) may go to heaven without that particular actual assurance,
or a particular confidence to address himself to God as his Father, otherwise
then by claim (as before;) for I conceive it is not essential to the having of
eternal Life, to know that a man has grace actually, but only to have those
things in him whence the evidence of the truth of grace may be to a clearer and
more enlightened spirit discovered. Though it be said, He that believes not
shall be damned, yet it is no where said, he that knows not he believes, shall
be damned.

3. Yet is every such elect child of God, The reality of his relation to God
produces in a Saint those fruits, even when he himself does not know them. As
appears in second troubles in Gods people after conversion. Faith produces
those acts not by its assuring, but uniting act.
carried out after holiness, and obedience to God, by the secret seed of God,
that is in him, by a natural inclination, I mean from the new nature; though he
be not so visibly acted by moral persuasion, or force of argument from graces
received, as those that see they have grace and are adopted, usually be. As in
those creatures that want reason, there is (...), and in Infants, a natural
love to parents, though they cannot argue themselves by reason into the duties
that evidence it, from the particular knowledge of that relation. And upon the
same account they are affected with the evil of displeasing their parents,
although they feel no stripes, and do not draw out that sorrow by argument
from their Fathers love.

2. To the Second Question, I answer,

(1) That neither is it necessarily thus, in all that have been under a Spirit
of Bondage, though elected, upon the reasons before alleged.

(2.) Yet have such that have been under a Spirit of Bondage, more special
promises of this kind, which could they lay all hold on, they would attain it;
but Satan taking the work of the Spirit out of his hand, and finding them
prepared for such impressions of trouble, by the former work, keeps the very
stamp of a Spirit of Bondage on them when they are as to their condition under
a Spirit of Adoption, Mat. 11. 28. Isa. 57. 15.

(3.) Nay, when they get comfort and assurance, it is commonly the stronger and
more full and firm.

Understand this point thus then. That usually, and in Gods ordinary way of
dealing with his Elect, when he has brought them under bondage by the Spirit,
he does send them a Spirit of Adoption, in its evidencing acts, as well as in
the rest. Though he may sometime vary from the usual and ordinary rule. And the
giving of the Spirit of Adoption in these acts is to be understood as that of
the Spirit of Bondage, and its method before discovered, that except possibly
in some few singular cases it is ordinarily so

CHAP. IV Arguments to prove this Thesis or Proposition.
NOw let us advance to the proof of the Thesis.

Quest. How appears it that God does so ordinarily?

Ans. 1 By his Promises.

2 By his Design in bringing under the Spirit of Bondage

3 By the Duties that he expects of his Saints.

4 By the Experiences of his people.

Arg. 1 By his Promises which engage him thereunto, John 16 10, 11, 12 the same
spirit that is promised to convince of sin (says Christ) shall convince of
righteousness, and of judgment; Of righteousness, because I go to the Father;
i. e. he shall convince poor burdened souls that there is a sufficient
righteousness in me to cover the guilt of all their sins, and this by my
Ascension, which declares the full discharge of the debt which on the behalf of
my Elect I contracted: and because I go to my Father, my admission to my Father
gives full assurance that I am again received into his favor, and so there
remains no cause of his displeasure against me or mine, that cast themselves
upon me for righteousness. Of Judgment; i. e. of the truth and reality of
their own graces: as Isai. 43. 1, 3. Or, Of judgment, because the Prince of
this world is judged: i. e. a judgment of absolution of their persons and
cause, which shall appear by the contrary sentence on their accuser: it shall
be made appear that God has condemned him that accused you, and kept you in
bondage, and shall enable you to set your feet on his neck, etc.

More clearly Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3. He gave Christ, and anointed and sent him for
that end, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prison to
them that are bound, and not only to proclaim it by the Word, but to apply it
by the Spirit, ver. 3. To appoint to them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of joy for the spirit of heaviness, or the Spirit of
Adoption, for the Spirit of Bondage. So Psalm. 126. 5, 6. They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy, etc. And Isai. 57 15. a remarkable Promise, I dwell with the
contrite and humble spirit: wherefore? To revive the spirit of the humble, and
the heart of the contrite ones: For I will not contend for ever, lest the soul
should fail before me, and the spirit which I have made, See v. 18, 19. The
Spirit that is promised by Christ is called the Comforter. Why so? if not to
denote the principal part of his work, the comforting of the hearts of Gods
people? John 14. 26.

Arg. 2. The Design of God in troubling the conscience. Soul-troubles are not
brought on us merely for their own sakes, for God afflicts not willingly, nor
grieves the Lam. 3. 33.
children of men, but they are ordinary Prologues of Comfort and Peace, and
therefore ordained to fit us to receive and prize it, Hos. 2. 14. I will bring
her into the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her; [to her heart, Heb.]
Into the Wilderness; i. e. a maze and wood of troubles, that she shall know no
way out of, into such a condition in which a dram of comfort will be dearer
then all the world, and then I will speak to her heart, when she is quite out
of heart. Gods usages to his people in this world are like Tragi-Comedies, sad
beginnings diverse times, that put all the Spectators into a maze to think what
will come of them, that so he may come off the more gloriously at the last, by
giving a comfortable close beside all men's expectations. He sets off (as
Painters do) a light color by the neighborhood of a dark. He caused light at
the first to shine out of darkness; not before it, or 2 Cor. 4. 6
without it, but out of it. And as he does in conversion, so in comfort. First
darkness in conversion, then light, Ye were darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8
etc. so he does in the work of consolation, When I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light to me, says the Church, Micah 7. 8. So in the Apostles
experience. We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we might trust,
not in our selves, but in him that raises the dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9. And as Christ
would not keep Lazarus from dying, when he could have done so; but rather chose
to raise him from the dead by a miracle: so will Christ deal with his people,
quite bring them to the grave, that then he may get the glory of a kind of
miracle, and say, Return ye sons Psalm 90. 3
and daughters of men. Now can we think that God will lose the glory of his
grace, when he so aims at it in those troubles that work it? And surely he
will do so, if his people perish under them. Thence the Spirit of God teaches
the Saints in darkness to urge that as an Argument, Will thou show wonders to
the dead? etc. What remembrance of thee is there in the grave, where all things
are forgotten? Psalm 88. 10, 11 and 6. 5. q. d. I know thy aim in all these
dark nights that I undergo, is to make thy glory shine the clearer; and is this
the way to let a poor soul that would fain praise thee, to drop into the grave,
and (for ought he knows) into hell, in darkness without the least smile from
thee? etc.

Arg. 3. The duties God expects of his Saints, which cannot be so perfectly and
ingenuously performed by any, as by an assured spirit. Indeed, the truth of
them may proceed from a soul that is not assured, but such high and noble
measures cannot.

1 Love to him again. A man may, and every Saint does love God by a holy
sympathy, as soon as he is regenerated, whether he know it or no; and the
demonstration of that love in the Saints, when they come to discern it,
becomes a means of assurance to them. As in Antipathies, sometimes they are
strong in nature; and no reason can be given for them. Non amo te Sabidi, nec
possum dicere quare, etc So in sympathies, founded in the nature of the things.
Why does Iron love the Lodestone, and cleave to it, or the needle touched with
it point Northward? This I constantly affirm, that where the soul loves God,
Gods love is the cause of that love to him; and so it is, whether it be
manifested to his conscience or no; because every grace is a fruit of Gods
eternal love. This I am sure is held out in that excellent place, 1 John 4. 19.
though I shall not grant it a fruit thereof only when known. It Is not said,
Because we are assured he loved us first, but Because he loved us first. But
yet the love that is without assurance, is not so strong, so rational, so
active, as that that proceeds from assurance, when the love of God is shed
abroad in the heart by the Holy Ghost; for this will enable a soul to love
much, Luke 7. 47. to rejoice in tribulation, Romans 5. 3, 5 and do many other
difficult duties with more vigor and activity.

A young child may truly love the Father, when it is unable to reason it self
into the duty of love from experience of the Fathers love; but the love that a
grown child shows to the father after his experience of many acts of love for
many years, is more strong, solid, and rational. So when a soul can say as
David, I love the Lord, for, etc. Psalm. 116 1

Now God requires his children should grow up into an ingenuous filial love,
upon grounds of thankfulness and reciprocation, Ephesians. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19 He
would have them be rooted and grounded in the experimental knowledge of the love
of Christ, and thence to draw strength to obey him in all things. And therefore
it must needs be his ordinary way to those Saints from whom he expects this
fruit, to give them the Spirit of Adoption to testify this Love to them. And
there is a Promise, that love of good will to Christ, shall be seconded with
manifestation of love from Christ, Joh. 14. 21.

2 Joy in the Holy Ghost, and that always, 1 These. 5. 16 Now although a soul
may have some sprinklings of joy upon the general hopes which it gathers to it
self from general Promises, yet it is nothing to that which particular
assurance gives. Now God will have the joy of his Saints full joy, John 15. 11.
And good reason, for the joy of the Lord is their strength, Nehem. 8. 10.
Though God bear sometimes with their weakness as well as darkness.

3 Thankfulness. Indeed there is a thankfulness arising from temporal and
common mercies, and there is a thankfulness for general and comprehensive
Promises, and free offers of Christ and Ordinances, etc. before Assurance. But
thankfulness is never so large, so liberal, as upon assurance; then a man can
give thanks in all things, and for all things, 2 Thessalonians. 5. 18. then he cries
out, What shall I render unto the Lord? Psalm. 116. 2, 12. and then his language
is full, Bless the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy
name, Psalm. 103. 1, 2

4 Sometimes to deny all and suffer for him. It Is also true, a man that sees
not the love of God to him, may go very far upon conscience of duty, and upon a
mere faith of relyance upon general Promises, and upon secret supports of the
Spirit, by which he keeps up hope in himself, that such Promises may be his and
upon the necessity of that choice which he is put upon, taking that as the
safer way, which carries him out to adventure himself that way, rather then
certainly ruin himself by Apostasy. So was that holy man carried to the
stake, before he cried out, He is come, he Glover in Acts and Monum.
is come.

But it is very seldom that a soul will go so far merely upon a faith of
relyance, and therefore God ordinarily gives such persons special Assurances;
the Spirit fills their hearts with comfort, joy, and peace, and this will make
them far more Heroical in suffering, Acts 7. 55, 56. 2 Cor. 1. 4. Guilt of sin
saddens a suffering to a man. So does uncertainty of his estate for the future;
for who will adventure soul and body at once, if he judge his condition in a
rational account, but a desperate man? And if Saints in darkness suffer much,
it is by extraordinary support. But on the other side, when a man can look
within the vail by assurance, and challenge glory; The sufferings are not
worthy the glory that shall be revealed, Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. ult.

Arg. 4 the experiences of Gods people constantly manifest this. One while we
have David complaining of broken bones, and a watered couch, etc. another while
he is all joy and praises. Those (Acts 2) whose hearts were pricked so deeply,
what is the issue of it? see v. 46. They did break bread from house to house,
and eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart. See what became of
the Jailor after his trembling fit, Acts 16. 34 He rejoiced, believing with all
his house. And certainly, although God may save a soul, and bring him to heaven
hood-winked, yet it is very seldom that he does so; but that at one time or
another, carrying on his people in constant acts of reliance, he gives them a
witnessing and assuring spirit at the last.

CHAP. V. Reasons of Gods working in this way by his Spirit.
COme we now to the Reasons of this Proposition.

Quest. Why will God bestow the Spirit of Adoption upon his Elect after the
Spirit of Bondage?

Answ. For these Reasons principally.

Reas. 1 Because Religion else would be an uncomfortable profession, and would
have little alluring in it to the eyes of those that are without. Men are apt
to receive prejudices against Religion, as that which will put a period to all
their comforts. And this mistake is much occasioned in them by the sad and
drooping lives of those that profess it. So that were it not that usually God
brings joy out of sorrow, and puts on his Saints the garment of joy for the
spirit of heaviness, no man would choose the ways of God, that are strewed
with so many thorns and difficulties, but rather choose to wallow in sinful and
worldly pleasures. As the afflictions of the godly, and the prosperity of the
wicked in outward things are great stumbling blocks, so much more would
burdens of spirit, if they should be constantly and unremoveably laid on the
spirits of the Saints. Surely, God that will have us tender of the credit of
Religion in our carriages, will not prostitute it by any carriage of his own.

Reas. 2 The Lord does it, that he may keep up the spirits of his people from
fainting under a spirit of bondage. Soul troubles are tedious troubles,
spending troubles. Those Diseases that affect the spirits, are so in the body,
and therefore they had need of strong Cordials to keep up their hearts who are
under such Diseases: Soul troubles overwh^lm the spirits; Psalm, 142. 3. and
143. 4 Soul troubles sink and drown the spirits, and if God should not now and
then support his people with a Cordial, they would faint away quite, Stay me
with flagons, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love, Cant. 2. 5. Psalm.
119. 91. My soul faints for thy salvation. Now the strongest Cordial God
gives his people at such a time, is this, that they shall have an expected end,
that he will not contend for ever; and this is the reason why he gives them
this assurance, Lest the Spirit should fail before me, Isai. 57. 16. or (as
others) ne spiritus obruatur, lest the spirit should be overwhelmed. This
supports the Church in a waiting frame, Lam. 3. 26, 31, 32.

Reas. 3 That he may thereby, in their own judgments and consciences, confute
the hard thoughts they usually have of him in times of darkness. Man's heart
under soul troubles, is a forge of all misapprehensions and unjust censures
concerning God. Sometimes he is an enemy, a cruel one; sometimes he has
forsaken them and forgotten them, their hope is Lam 3 Isai. 49. 14 40. 27.
perished from the Lord, and their judgment from their God; sometimes he is
unfaithful, and his Promise fails for evermore. Now Psalm* 77
God is concerned in point of honor, to cause the light of his countenance to
shine on such, that they may be convinced of the vanity and folly of such
thoughts, and to make them confess that they have injured God in such
mis-judgments of his proceedings. Then they will confess, such thoughts were
their infirmity, as Psalm. 77. 10. the Psalmist does, and that his ways are
neither like their ways, nor his thoughts like their thoughts, Isai. 55. 8. as
David confesses by experience, Psalm. 103. 11.

Reas. 4 God will hereby show that it is not in vain to serve the Lord; and
abundantly recompense to his people all the pains, care, and trouble that they
are, and have been at, to follow after him in a dark condition. Beloved*
assurance of Gods love, and joy in the Holy Ghost arising there from, is part
of our wages, and God of his goodness to his people, gives them part of their
money in hand, to encourage them in the service he puts them upon. As he gave
the Israelites a taste of the Grapes of Canaan to encourage them to fight for
it. Satan and Numb. 13. 23
a man's corrupt heart are apt to discourage a soul under Bondage from hence.
What profit Job 21. 14 Lam. 3. 8.
is there in serving God? etc. Thou prayest, and he casts out thy prayer;
thou hear, and art in trouble still. Now God props up his people against
such temptations by such Promises to all, and performances to most of his
Saints.

Reas. 5 God does it to wean his people from this world, Now Lord let thou
thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, says
Simeon, when he had seen Christ in the flesh, Luke 2. 29. And when a soul after
long troubles of spirit recovers the assurance of Gods love, O what poor things
are all the treasures of the world to him! Lord, (says David) lift up the
light of thy countenance upon me, and then take corn, and wine, and oil, who
will, Psalm. 4. 6. And then let the eyes of wicked men be even ready to strut
out with sat, and let them have all that they can wish, yet (says he in
another place) I will not change portion with them, for the Lord is the
strength of my heart, etc. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and bring me
to glory, Psalm. 73. 25, 26, 27, 28 A man that is called to be a Favorite to a
King, will quickly grow into a dis-esteem of his shop and retaile Trade, his
sheepfold or cow-stal. Take no care for your stuff (says Joseph) for all the
fat of the Land of Egypt is yours, Genesis 45. 20. So says God to an assured
soul, Take no care for these earthly things, thou have in heaven a richer and
more enduring substance.

Reas. 6. Because God delights to hear from his Saints often. Not only as a
Master from a Servant, nor as a rich man from a beggar, nor as a Conqueror from
a Captive, but as a Father from a child, as a husband from a Spouse. Cant. 2.
14. The voice of a Spouse of Christ in the cleft of the Rock; i. e. relying on
him upon assurance of his love, is sweet. Joseph could not abide long under the
mis-apprehensions his brethren had of him: [My Lord, and Thy servants] Joseph
thought were strange Titles to that of Brother; he longed to hear them call
him by a name of relation; so says God, Hosea 2. 16. to an afflicted Church.

CHAP. VI. A Question concerning the mediate and immediate Testimony of the
Spirit.
HOw does the Spirit testify our Adoption? (For although diverse godly Divines
are of a different judgment in the point of immediate evidence; yet I cannot
be persuaded, but that there is something in the work of the Spirits testimony,
which may deserve to be so expressed.

Ans. Two ways: 1 Immediately. 2 Mediately.


I. Immediately: wherein the Spirit acts as in illumination and infusion of
good motions into us by his secret influence upon the heart, quieting and
calming all those waves of distrust and diffidence concerning its condition, by
his own immediate power, without the present application of any Scripture
grounds to convince a man's reason that his testimony is true. I shall parallel
it with the motions of the Spirit thus; As the Spirit many times excites a man
to such or such a duty by laying his hand immediately upon the heart, and
therewithal a kind of secret force and power, inclining the heart to obey those
motions; and as it many times opens the heart to such and such spiritual
impressions by a physical injection of holy motions into it, and warming the
heart to receive them: so in this case when a poor soul sits in darkness and
sees no light, sometimes upon a sudden a light from heaven compasses it about,
and it is, it knows not how, in a moment (as it were) taken up into the third
heaven, its fears are banished by a soft whisper from the Spirit of God in the
heart, Thy sins are forgiven thee; and this is in such a way, that though the
spirit of a man really believes it, and is immediately calmed by it, yet it
cannot tell how it comes to pass.

And so it is sometimes in overcoming temptations, a soul some other times is
enabled to knock them to the ground by a scriptum est, (as Christ did Matthew.
4.) but sometimes it is stirred up to decline them, and abhor them, by a
secret rising of the spirit against them, and to club them down by mere
force, setting the bent of the will and affections against them, without any
present direct recourse of the soul to the written word. And of this kind, is
that work of the Spirit, stirring up in us sighs and groans in prayer, that
cannot be uttered; whereas at other times it furnishes us with abundant
matter of prayer from the promises, and other strains of Scripture, useful
thereunto.

And thus (as I said) in conveying the evidences of Gods love, the Spirit can,
and surely oftentimes does alter the whole frame of a man's Spirit by a secret
irradiation of comfort, a man cannot tell how: for as there is a kind of
spiritual instinct in the soul by which it does the things that are pleasing to
God, after conversion, though many times it knows not the principles upon
which it acts: so is there a secret and spiritual faculty in the divine nature
that is infused unto us, by which when the Spirit speaks peace to the soul,
it closes with it without any reasoning or recourse to evidences, as at other
times. As (says a learned man) there is in the eye, lumen innatum, Rutherf. on
Jo. 12. p. 100.
and in the ear, aer internus, a certain imbred light, to make the eye see
lights and colors without: and a sound and air in the ear within, to make it
discern the sounds that are without; so is there grace, a new nature, and
habitual instinct of heaven to discern the consolation of Gods spirit,
immediately testifying that we are the sons of God. There are some secret and
unexpressible lineaments of the Fathers countenance in this child, that the
renewed soul at first blush, knows, and ownes it. But for the understanding of
this, you must observe with me these few particulars for explication of this
secret of experimental godliness.

1. That although the Spirit may testify this immediately, without any
express and formal application of a word; yet he never testifies but
according to the word, i. e. to subjects capable thereof, and in such ways as
they are discovered to be capable by the word: so that the Lords speaking peace
to the soul, being in the Scripture bound up to persons under certain
qualifications, the Spirit never speaks peace, but where those qualities are
real, though not always visible in the soul. As for example, if a man that
feels not sin a burden heavyer then all the world, that throws away all duties
of religion, never prays, reads, hears, meditates, nay goes on in some sinful
way without remorse, be filled with joy and peace, and assurance of Gods love;
it is certain the Holy spirit is not the Author of this, because the promise of
peace, belongs to none of this stamp, Matthew. 11. 28. Isa. 57. 15, 16. Matthew. 5.
3, 4. 8. etc. Undoubtedly this assurance is from the spirit of error, a false
light to lead into a bogg.

2. That (ordinarily) he thus testifies either in or after waiting upon God in
some duty or other, as in praying, meditation, hearing, receiving the
Sacraments. By which testimony God seals to the dutiful attendance upon him in
such ways, Isa. 57. 19. and 56. 7.

Or 3. In such great and grievous temptations, and darkness of spirit, wherein
a man by the cunning of Satan, has so entangled all those evidences of grace
and sanctification which he might draw assurance from, with sophistical
evasions, that they will not fasten any thing of comfort upon him. Then when a
man cannot untie those knots, by which Satan has entangled his spirit,
sometimes the spirit of God by such a sudden irradiation puts a soul upon an
inartificial and illogicall way of solution, enabling him to hold to his claim
of Christ, by a kind of resolute confidence, though he be not able to prove
it sound at present, or answer Satan's sophistry to the contrary; as Alexander,
when he could not untie the Gordian knot, hewed it asunder with his sword: And
as that holy Martyr, that answered all the Romish Doctors Sophistry, by a
fixed resolution of dying for Christ, though she could not dispute for him.

Now we must take notice withal.

4. That such testimonies of the Spirit do beget but an actual assurance during
the present exigency, or in order to some present design that God is working
thereby. These are extraordinary dainties, that God will not have us feed
constantly upon. A gleam Rutherf. ubi supra.
of light (as one calls it) in a dark night, when a man cannot coast the
Country, and diseern his way by those marks which direct him at other times;
perhaps lightning from a thunder-cloud, that comes just in the moment, when a
man is stepping into a pit that would swallow him up, or to discover a cottage
which he may turn into, till the storm be over, etc. Now a Traveller will not
depend always upon such a guide, but if he can, will learn out such
way-marks for his constant direction, as may be standing assurances to him
that he is in the way; and rather choose to travel by day, when he may see
them distinctly. Thus though Gods Spirit diverse times takes this course, to
shine peace into our hearts upon unusual occasions immediately, viz* after
extraordinary seeking God in duty, under the immediate violence of some
desperate temptation (in which cases God has sometimes condescended even to a
kind of miracle; as when he preserved the glass from breaking, which the
troubled and almost despairing Gentlewoman threw against the ground, making its
breaking to pieces, and her own Mrs. Honymood
damnation a like certain) or at the hour of death, especially Martyrdom;
yet to take these for ordinary presidents, and look for them constantly,
without endeavoring by standing evidences, to make out an habitual assurance
to our souls of our calling and election, is a bold and presumptuous tempting
of God. And therefore,

5 It is a fearful error of the Antinomians, which teaches us to reject the
graces of sanctification from being grounds of our assurance; whiles they tell
us, that they are all deceiving evidences, because that were to light a candle
to the sun, (they mean to the immediate testimony of the Spirit.) For certainly
the testimony of the Spirit, cannot be without the indwelling of the Spirit,
and is accompanied always with the leading of the Spirit. See the connection of
these two in verse. 14. 15 of this chapter, compared. Romans 8. 14, 15 compared.
And, we know that he dwells in us, and we in him, because we have
received of his Spirit, 1 John 4. 13. And John 14. 16, 17 Christ promises them
the Comforter: but how shall we know him, might they say? seeing the world (as
you tell us) knows him not. He shall (says our Savior) dwell in you. The
in-dwelling therefore of the Spirit, is an evidence of the truth and reality of
the assurance that we have from the Spirit: Hence are all those marks and
signs that the Scripture every where holds out, called fruits of the Spirit,
Gal. 5. 22. so that though the Spirit testify immediately, yet it submits the
trial of his own testimony to his works; Nor is this any dishonor to the
Spirit, to be tried by his works, seeing our Savior Christ was content to
submit the trial of his Godhead to the evidences of his works. John 14. 11.

But more of this in the second way of the Spirits testimony, which is,

II. Mediately, and that is twofold, 1 Without Argumentation. 2 With
Argumentation.
but both from the Word.

1 Without Argumentation: The Spirit sometimes applies the word to the soul,
and enables the soul to close with it for comfort in some particular promise
of Scripture; wherein God speaks so patt to its case, that it takes that word
as a message from heaven, and rests in it, upon the very first apprehension of
it: And such is the peace that a soul gets from those promises that either
express not any condition, or else such a condition as the soul presently
apprehends it self under: as suppose, thou art burdened for some sin, have
prayed earnestly for pardon against it; suppose it a sin of backsliding, and
whiles thou art praying for pardon, or waiting upon God in his word, a secret
whisper of the Spirit casts into thy heart, Hos. 4 14. I will heal thy
backslidings, and love thee freely; or suppose that Matthew. 11. 28. Come to me
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest, etc. This is a direct
testimony, and must be understood under the former limitations of immediate
evidence.

2. With Argumentation, when he testifies the truth of thy sonship by grace,
when he applies conditional promises, and upon search enables thee to apply the
conditions of them. This is the usual way for getting habitual assurance, a
reflected testimony from our own graces, which are the love tokens of Christ
to us, and discover that love even when, as to present influence, he is absent
from us.

And thus does the Spirit (properly) witness with our spirits, as follows in
the next verse. In the other two he witnesses Romans 8. 16.
to our spirits; in this properly, with our spirits. And there is as much
difference between these, as between the assurance that Jacob had of his Son
Joseps life, from the Word of his sons, and from the Chariots that he had
sent for him, Genesis 45. 26, 27, 28, when they only told him so, he was (indeed)
overjoyed, but was also even in a fainting condition through the struggling of
fear with joy, as the disciples at Christ's resurrection, Luke 24. 41. But when
he saw the wagons, then he was fully satisfied.

So the immediate and direct Testimony of the Spirit (though sometimes when the
Spirit gives a man to believe it, it may drown all doubts and fears, yet) in
a time of temptation, when a soul begins to question whether all its former
refreshments from the Spirit were not dreams and delusions; it is never so
fully satisfied, as when it evidently sees and ownes the tokens of Gods love in
its own heart, the fruits of her marriage with Christ, and feels the child of
grace leaping in the womb: then says the soul, sure I am married to Christ,
for he does not drink waters out of any cisterne but his own, and the seed of
true grace cannot possibly be the issue of an unlawful bed.

CHAP. VII. A discourse concerning the manner of the Mediate and Argumentative
Testimony of the Spirit.
Q. HOW we may distinctly conceive the witnessing of Gods Spirit with our
spirits in that Mediate and Argumentative way which we last spoke of?

Answ. For Answer hereunto, seeing this work is directly opposite to that of
the Spirit of Bondage before mentioned, I shall review that again here, and
lay the comparison between them, which (I conceive) will give us a clear
light in this particular.

In the work of the spirit of bondage, I told you, the soul was brought under
the Conviction of a practical syllogism, such an one as this,

Every unbeliever, every person that is in a state of nature (in general;) or
(in particular) every drunkard, swearer, etc. living under the reigning power
of such, or the like sins, is a child of wrath, etc.

But thou art, (says the spirit of God;) I (says a man's own spirit) am such
an one.

Therefore thou art (says Gods Spirit;) I am (says a man's own spirit) a child
of wrath, etc.

The three Propositions of this Syllogism, I told you employed three sorts of
conviction. 1. Conviction of Law. 2. Conviction of case, or fact. 3. Conviction
of state: with the consequents of these.


Sutably in unlocking this prison, there must be a key of as many wards, as
there are in the lock, and those answerable to them. For a key will not unlock
a door that has not answerable wards to the lock that fastens it.

Now these wards of the Spirits key are, 1. Conviction of Gospel, opposite to
that of Law. 2 Conviction of another case, suitable thereunto. 3 Conviction of
another state, arising from both these. 4 And the consequents.


1 Conviction of Gospel: For as the law, the bondwoman, from mount Sinai, is
the ground of terror, engendring unto bondage, Gal. 4. So the Gospel is the
free woman, the Jerusalem from above, that engenders to liberty, ibid. and 2
Cor. 3. 17. and so is the special ground of comfort. The Law is the warrant
upon which the spirit imprisons the conscience; and the Gospel the warrant on
which it releaseth it again. And as it is in civil affairs; a man that is
under an execution for body and goods by such or such a statute, hides, and
flies, and is under fear, and sometimes laid fast in prison, and cannot be
released, but either upon a repeal of that law, or the annexing some condition
to it, under which he sues for, and recovers his liberty; so it is in this
case. The Law says, every one is accursed that continues not in every thing
written in that book. No fornicator, idolater, covetous, etc. shall enter into
the kingdom of God. Now a man that is under the sentence of this law in his
own conscience is capable of release no way, but either by the repeal of that
Law, or adding some such limitation, or restriction, or condition to it, as may
include him. Therefore when the Spirit gives peace from the word by way of
Argument, it first produces the law of liberty, the Gospel against the law of
bondage. It is confessed, (says the spirit in the conscience of a converted
sinner) the law gives me no hope; but there is an addition to, and an
exception from that law, which I plead for my release. There is a pardon
proclaimed for such sinners as I am. Isai. 55. 7. Prove. 28. 13. The Law in the
new edition excepts believers, Joh. 3. 26 from its sentence.

Now the apprehending and assenting to this truth, is the first work of the
spirit in order to this regular assurance of a man's heart before God. A man in
a state of spiritual darkness, is like Hagar in the wilderness, Genesis 21. 19.
she and her son Ismael, are ready to dye for thirst, when there was a well
near them, but they could not see it till the Angel showed it them. So is it in
the children of the Law, that Hagar, and Ismael shadowed out. When they are
under Bondage of spirit, there be many precious wells of salvation in the
Bible, but all these are hidden from their eyes, the Bible is a sealed book to
them, and the fountains of life are fountains shut up (as to them) till the
spirit that leads into all truth direct a man or woman in such a case to such
promises as may be a ground of peace to him, that may satisfy the weary soul,
and refresh the sorrowful soul. Jer. 31. 25.


I appeal to the experience of all the Saints of God that know what this means,
whether the Spirit of God has not many times guided them to places of
Scripture (as it were) by his own finger. When they have even thrown the Bible
away, after much search for a comforting word, and resolved to look no more for
that that is not to be found there, has not a secret whisper, (like that to
Augustine in his Conversion, toll, lege) been cast into them try once again?
and have they not unexpectedly dipped and lighted on a place that has satisfied
them as with marrow and fatness? Has it not been with them, as with a godly
Minister that I knew when I was a child, who having been under a Spirit of
Bondage for many years, and now even ready to dye in that condition, when the
eighth chapter of the Romans was read to him a little before his last gasp,
stopping at the first verse, now there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, etc. Stay, said he, I never saw so much in those words in my days
as now, though I read them often: so (I say) can you not say that you have read
such and such chapters, ten, twenty, thirty, forty times over, (and that not
slightly or cursorily, but deliberately and with meditation) and yet could see
never a well of Salvation in them, and yet afterward from those very places of
Scripture the Spirit of God has made you draw water with joy! So that it is the
Spirit that does this first work, discover and convince of Gospel truth, the
ground of our assurance. Now this conviction is either,

1. General, and so the soul is convinced of those very truths long before it
can take comfort from them, and believes them with such a faith as he believes
the Bible to be true in every part of it: and this appears in those that are
under a Spirit of Bondage. Produce such and such promi^es to them, they will
say, true, these promises are excellent promises; and will (no question) yield
abundance of marrow to them to whom they belong; but they can see nothing in
them that belongs to them. Here is a full well, but they have nothing to draw;
or it is a well enclosed, it is not free for them.

(2 Particular. When the Spirit helps the soul to single out such a word, and
opens a door of hope to the soul, that it has a share in it; and this is that
that makes way for, and is completed in the Minor of the former Syllogism;
which I call,

(2) Conviction of Case: Thus the Spirit enlightens the conscience to apply the
Promise to its self by owning the condition of it. The Word says, Such and
such persons are children of God: the renewed conscience enlightened by the
Spirit, says, This is my case, I am such a person. Now here the Spirit either
enlightens a man to see himself under that condition, by working a present
assent to the truth of this Minor Proposition; (As suppose an Argument from the
Promise [He that believes has everlasting life:] but I believe: Ergo. The
assent to this Minor Proposition, I believe, may be wrought by a sudden work of
the Spirit, as soon as the major Proposition, whereon it is grounded, is
apprehended; and so it is a work somewhat near of kin unto that of the first
branch of Mediate Testimony, wherein the testimony was supposed to be by the
word, yet without Argumentation:) Or else (as usually) by eliciting and drawing
forth the soul to such an assent, by a farther evidence of Argument. For it is
very seldom seen, but that such souls as have been exercised with a Spirit of
Bondage, are not easily brought to own any good in themselves, so that even the
Spirit of God has much ado to answer all the cavils of Satan and their own
suspicious hearts in point of gracious self-Justification, which such souls are
much afraid of; and not more difficultly brought to any thing, then to own this
Proposition, [But I believe,] or the like. Now in such a case the Spirits work
is longer, and he is fain to bring many more Arguments to confirm this Minor.
True (says the soul) he that believes has everlasting life, but I am none of
those Believers, and therefore quid ad me? What does this Promise concern such
an unbelieving wretch as I am? Then the Spirit satisfies the soul in the Minor,
by producing such proofs of Scripture, as evidence faith in the Subject in whom
it is, such as purifying the heart, love to God, his ways, his Act^ 15. 9 Gal.
5. 6 Zech. 12. 10
people, grief for sin, etc. And possibly goes farther, and proves those graces
to be in the soul by farther Marks, drawn from the acts of them which discover
the habit whence they proceed. This is a work of conviction, I told you before,
and may be done by many Arguments or few, according to the light that
accompanyes them to the soul.

Nor is there any reason why Dr. Crisp and his followers should cry down this
way of getting assurance by Marks and Signs as uncertain, seeing the doubting
soul will find something that seems faulty in every grace which is presented
to it as an evidence.

Object. If the Spirit say, (say they) Thou art a Believer because thou have
love, that is a fruit of faith; the soul may still doubt, Whether it have love;
if love be manifested by delight in Gods Commandments, etc. the question will
still be, Whether that delight be sincere or counterfeit, pure or mixed,
ingenuous or self-ended; and therefore say they, there can no judgment be made
certainly concerning a man's Justification by his sanctification, or concerning
sanctification by the operations of particular graces.

Ans. To this we answer, True, these graces whiles I barely endeavor to
discover them by my own reason, may be still subject to question, and so can
make no firm assurance. But in the soul that is graciously assured this way,
the Spirit of God rests the heart upon an ultimum quod sic, convinces him by
that which is most visible in him, and stops the mouth of cavilling reason from
perplexing the Question any more. As a wise Moderator in a Dispute, that when
the Argument has been spun out so long by a wrangling companion, that there
can be no more said, but in away of groundless cavilling, and angry
reflections, etc. breaks off the Dispute, checks the wrangling Antagonist, and
determines the Controversy by his own sentence upon the whole matter. So when
a man's own cavilling heart, and Satan helping it, have picked out all the
flawes possibly in his evidence for heaven, and have left no stone unturned to
invalidate it, and withal the Spirit has enabled a man to plead to all
exceptions of moment, and yet these wrangling companions will not be satisfied;
at last the Spirit makes a man to see, that there is nothing can be said that
has not been answered, but only such wranglings as deserve no answer but
scorn, and so determines, and enables the soul to determine the great Question,
by inferring the conclusion with undeniable evidence. I know not why this way
(the Spirit of God assuring) should not be less subject to question, then
immediate assurance. Seeing in a time of darkness, that is as questionable,
and will require as long a debate to satisfy the soul, whether indeed it were
the voice of the Spirit, or a man's own heart, and Satan colluding with it to
deceive a man. Let any man show me that it is easier for a man to be certainly
convinced, that the Spirits immediate testimony is true, and proceeding from
the Spirit, then that such and such fruits of grace (the matter of its mediate
testimony) are not counterfeit, and I have done pressing this Argument any more.

3 The third thing the Spirit does, is to infer the conclusion of the grand
Syllogism, in a conviction of a gracious and happy estate; thus: therefore,
Thou art a child of God, an heir of glory, justified, sanctified, etc. (For all
these terms and many more are of equal import to the case in hand; the
concluding any thing in a man that necessarily accompanies salvation, concludes
the certainty of salvation to that person, and seals up assurance.) In the
former two acts, the Spirit is the candle of the Lord, without a man, in
pointing out the word; and within a man, in the application of his case to the
Word; and in this he acts the part of a just determiner of the controversy
upon this evidence, a Judge in the conscience quitting and justifying the
Prisoner; and this is his sentence of Absolution, and therefore when it is
pronounced by his Ministers (as most commonly it is) it is called, loosing the
conscience, Mat. 16. 18, 19. And this I call conviction of a gracious and happy
estate, which is opposite to that conviction of a wicked and wretched estate,
discovered in the conclusion of the legal Syllogism before mentioned.

4 The Effects of this Testimony when it is finished, are quite contrary to the
former of the Spirit of Bondage.

1. Calmnesse and sedation of spirit by the allaying of those boisterous winds
of temptation, that raised the waves. This is contrary to that soul confounding
horror, that soul-ague, soul-quake that I spoke of formerly, and is called in
the Scripture, Peace, Isai. 57. 19, 21. and it is opposed to the horrible
confusions that are in a wicked man's awakened conscience, ver. 20. But the
wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest, therefore the godly man's
pacified conscience is like the calmed sea, that has not a wrinkle in its
face, not a blast to stir any there, no wind breathing on it, except that of
the Spirit of God to excite it to love and thankfulness.

2. Joy and sweetness, and self complacency in the heart. Which is opposed to
that second fruit of the Spirit of Bondage within a man which is before
mentioned; viz. Soul distressing anguish. A man that was before not only a
terror, but a burden to himself, and was weary of living through his anguish
of heart, now begins to take pleasure in himself, and begins to eat his bread
with joy; and goes about his business rejoicing, as it is said of the Primitive
Saints, Acts 2. 46. and 8 39. This is called, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.
17. and 1 Thessalonians. 1. 6. Of the Holy Ghost, because proceeding from this
Testimony of the Holy Ghost. It is like the content a man takes in viewing a
great deal of wealth heaped up together, and a man can ^ay, This is mine; when
a Miser does sibi plaudere, applaud himself (in the language of the Poet) and
bless his soul in the Horace.
language of the Psalmist, Psalm. 49. 18. such a soul can go through the whole
Treasury of the Word, and wallow on the Promises as o^ so many heaps of gold,
and cry out rejoicing, All this is mine; Can look abroad among all the
providence of God, and say, All these are mine; and look upward to heaven, and
to crown of glory, and an innumerable company of Angels, etc. and say, All this
shall be mine too, in possession, as it is now in Title.

This is like the triumph after a peace: and expressed by the Apostle, 1 Cor.
15. 55, 56, 57. in some such height of actual assurance of Gods love and his
own happiness. Such a soul looks (as God promised David's house should be) like
the grass springing up by 2 Samuel 23. 4
clear shining after rain.

3 Soul supporting hope. And this I set against soul-distracting Despair, which
was reckoned (in the former point) among the fruits of the Spirit of Bondage.
This is not that hope which is the ground of justifying dependence upon Christ,
of which I have spoken before, but that which is the daughter of assurance, and
differs from the other, as I told you, as Negative and Positive, as rational
and spiritual differ. That hope is the daughter of notional knowledge, this of
Experimental. Experience produces this hope, Romans 5. 4. This is that that
raises a man to a certain and patient expectation of, and waiting for the
things which faith of evidence assures him he has a title unto, and shall
certainly enjoy. We through the Spirit wait for the hope of Righteousness by
Faith. Where [waiting] sets out the nature of this hope, (...), we do look out
for, and expect with earnestness (as the mother of Sisera is said to do,
Judges 5.) [the hope;] i. e. the matter of the hope; which is [Of righteousness
by faith,] which justifying faith assures us of; and this is [By the Spirit;]
the Spirits testimony is the ground of this hope; and his assistance the cause
of it. This is called the Anchor of the soul, that stays him from being
carried away with waves of despair upon the rocks of certain ruin. And this
is that that is the Helmet of our salvation; guards all blows from our heads,
all the blows of temptations, Heb. 6. 19, 20. 1 These. 5. 8.

CHAP. VIII A Case concerning Absolute Promises, and general offers of the the
Gospel, and conditional Promises, in reference to the Spirits Evidence.
BUt here arises another Question.

Quest. Does the Spirit in its mediate testimony witness from absolute
Promises, or from Conditional Promises? From general Offers or special Marks.

Ans. By Absolute Promises I here understand such as suppose no preceding grace
infused into, and acted in us to the fulfilling of them, as the Promises of the
first grace, and of the price and purchase of it, the blood of Christ, etc.
which suppose no gracious condition at all in us required to the performance of
them. If (at least) these may in a tolerable sense be called Promises.

By Conditional Promises, I mean those which express such and such
qualifications in us as disposing us to receive the benefit of such a Promise:
as when Christ is promised John 3. 16 Matthew. 5. 4 John 14. 21*
to believers, comfort to them that mourn, acquaintance with God to them that
keep his Commandments, etc. By general offers I mean such Promises in Scripture
as tender Christ to every one, excluding none: by special Marks, such
characters in Scripture as discover who they be that have received him.

Next I shall distinguish between a supporting testimony of the Spirit, and an
assuring testimony of the Spirit.

1 The supporting testimony of the Spirit is such a witness in a man's heart,
as in a grievous plunge of temptation, keeps him from sinking, a plank in a
desperate shipwreck that saves him from drowning. And it is ordinarily the last
refuge of a soul: when Satan has quite conquered Assurance, then the Spirit
acts that soul by a faith of relyance wherein he does petere principium, in a
good sense, acts faith, as at first in Justification. Well (says the soul) if
I am no Believer, if I am no lover of God, if I be a Formalist, an hypocrite;
yet there is faith, repentance, love, sincerity for me in Christ, and God
offers it freely and unconditionately, I will stay my self upon those Promises
or gracious declarations.

Thus Absolute Promises may be and are the ground of the Spirits supporting
testimony.

2 But secondly, There is an assuring testimony of the Spirit, that that a
Christian lives by in calm and clear times, and trades by; that whereby we are
said, to know that God dwells in us and we in him, 1 John 4. 13. Therein the
Holy Ghost is said to come in the Gospel in much Assurance. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
(...), with a full sail of peace and spiritual satisfaction; so that not only
all doubtings are removed, but all the grounds on which a man doubts are
satisfied. There is as much difference between these two acts of the Spirit, as
there is between such a plea as diverts a judgment against a man at present,
and that wherein by an evident deed or writing, it is certainly determined on
his side.

And so we may distinguish Comfort and Assurance, and Comfort and Peace. For
though Comfort always follow Assurance, so that there can be no assurance but
it must comfort, yet where ever there is comfort, it follows not there must be
Assurance. For there may be comfort in a less evil compared with a greater;
and a poor soul may take comfort in this, that although he be not sure he is
included in the Promise, yet he is not excluded; but Assurance presupposes an
actual persuasion, that a man has a share in the Promise. A man may be
comforted with this, that although it is bad with him now, yet it may be
better; but Assurance supposes a sense of his good condition at present.

Now to apply this distinction to the answer of the Question propounded, I am
not satisfied that any man can draw Assurance, as it is thus distinguished from
support and comfort, from an Absolute Promise, because an Absolute Promise is
no legal plea for me in particular, as to my present Title to God though it be
for my future hopes of such a Title. And my ground is this, That which all are
called upon to believe, and which is offered to all alike, cannot be a grounded
plea to put a distinction between me and others. but particular Assurance puts
a special Mark of distinction between me and others; and absolute Promises are
offered to all alike; and therefore Assurance cannot flow from an Absolute
Promise. Nay let me add, it is the constant guise of Presumption to plead
Absolute Promises in point of Evidence, as the Promise of giving Christ to dye
for sinners, and therefore they are confident he is theirs as well as others.
All that Gods Saints draw from hence is a comfortable ground of applying
themselves to Christ, with constancy and perseverance, because the Spirit
testifies to them, that they are capable of the mercy that is held forth in
such Promises, if they so adhere to them, and leave not to urge God with them.
And the case is the same with general offers: Gods general Offers and absolute
Promises are of the same nature in this case. Both may support, comfort a man
for the present, but are no evidences for the future.

As a Prince proclaims an Act of Grace, an Act of Pardon and Oblivion to
Traitors, and invites in general terms all persons to come and receive it upon
such and such conditions; among the rest, one that apprehends himself more
guilty then all others, doubts whether it shall reach to him or no, he comes
into such a Market and hears the Proclamation to all Traitors etc. whatsoever;
hereby is the man so far quieted and supported with this news; Now (says he)
I hear I am not excluded, I am not unpardonable. But now if this man go no
farther, but a while after come to trial of Law for his Treasons, and he thinks
to plead the general Proclamation and the mercy of the Prince, extending it
self to all Malefactors, will this serve for a Legal evidence to a Jury, that
he is a pardoned man? Will it not be asked, Sir, What Evidence have you, that
you laid down your Arms and accepted this pardon? Here now is required another
kind of testimony.

So here: God proclaims mercy in Christ to the greatest sinners, and this he
declares to proceed from his vast and unspeakable love, and thereupon invites
all sinners to come and accept of it, for he is a God merciful and gracious,
abounding in mercy and truth, and Exodus 34. 6.
will abundantly pardon returning sinners. Now a poor soul doubts, whether he
be included in this offer. Doubt it not, says the Spirit, in a Sermon or other
Ordinance; be of good cheer, man, the pardon offered concerns all. Now if a man
rest here, and believe hereupon that he is pardoned, because in Gods absolute
and unconditioned invitation he is not excluded; when conscience is awake, it
will say, But might not Judas and Cain, etc. plead as much as that? How can you
make it appear that you have accepted that pardon by Faith? Here need Marks and
conditional Promises.

I may plead absolute Promises, and general offers to God in Prayer, but I
cannot plead them before God in Court. God says I will give you a new heart; I
will power out the spirit of grace and supplication: and so in Zech 12. 10
general offers, Let whoever will, come and drink of the water of life freely.
I may go to Apoc. 12. 17
God on these Promises and Offers, and say, Lord give me a new heart, Lord give
me Christ. But if I stand before the Court of Conscience and plead these in way
of Evidence, That I have a new heart, that I have Christ, I must not prove it
by Gods promising these blessings in general to me with all others, but by the
Evidences of my acceptance of these Offers, and Gods fulfilling of these
Promises. I must be able to say here, Lord thou have made such offers, and my
heart has accepted them. Thou have tendered Christ unto me, and I have taken
him upon thine own terms; Thou have promised a new heart, and I bless thy name
I find my heart renewed. Are not these the badges and proper cognizances of thy
children and servants? May I not conclude a saving interest in thee, who have
received such saving mercies and bounties from thee? Thus have I showen you,
that (although general offers, and absolute Promises may support, and (in a
sort, comfort, yet) conditional promises alone properly assure.

CHAP. IX. The maine Proposition applied. A Case concerning Election; and that
the misapprehension thereof hinders its Evidence.
NOW comes to hand the application of this point.

And in the first place this may reconcile the thoughts of many precious ones
under bondage to a good opinion of their present condition, in that it is not
only the Spirits usual method, where he becomes a Spirit of Adoption, to
become first a spirit of of Bondage (as in the former Thesis was declared) but
that when he has been such a spirit of bondage, he usually becomes a Spirit
of Adoption, witnessing our Adoption. It is a great encouragement to a sick
man, though he be grievously pained at present, that his disease is such, out
of which most recover; that though sometimes it be, yet seldom it is mortal.

Object Yea, but you tell us, the persons to whom it is not mortal, and to whom
it usually ends in ravishing comforts, are the elect of God. But I doubt I am
none of them, and therefore I may, and shall die of this disease for any thing
you have said, and never see the face of God in comfort here or hereafter.

Answ. 1. Observe the policy of Satan in dealing with thy soul. Now he has
gotten an oar into the spirits boat. Thou may discern him by his usual guise
of tempting; which is to direct thee from the study and care of things
revealed, to things secret and uncertain. In men's unregeneracie, when they
wallow in sin securely, the word threatens curses and wrath against them, see
then how Satan withdrawes them from the study of, and surrendering their hearts
unto the power of that word by a false prophecy. I shall have peace. Deuteronomy. 29
19. I may live many a fair day yet, and repent, and die a child of God. Ye shall
not die, Genesis 2. And so he drives men to presume. And if I be elected (says
such a wretchlesse sinner) I shall be saved at the last, let me walk how I will
in the mean while. But I hope I am not a reprobate etc. (will such an heart
be apt to assume) and the issue is a resolution to continue in sin, and put
it upon the adventure. But when a soul is under a Spirit of bondage, he turns
his note; but how is it? Is it not the same plot new dressed? Now he prophesies
an utter irrecoverablenesse to thy condition, and upon what ground? why,
(forsooth) he has looked over Gods book of life, and he cannot find thy
name there, and therefore do what thou will, thou can hope for no better, but
worse rather then what thou now feel. He will not suffer thee now to
conclude at the same rate as before, that thou hopest thou art not a Reprobate,
but may (for any thing thou know, be elected as well as any other.

The only remedy thou have in such cases, is to consult the written Word of
God. Satan says thou art not elected, but is there any Mark in the whole Word
of God, by which a man may know he is not Elected? No; God in his infinite
wisdom and goodness has not given any such Marks by which men may know
Reprobation, that so he might retard no man's endeavors after grace. Indeed,
there be marks of Election, by which we may make that sure to our selves, 1
Pet. 1. but the want of these does not discover Reprobation, because these are
all wanting in the dearest Saints of God till they be truly converted; and so,
if that consequence were sound, Such true Graces discover Election, therefore
the want of them discovers Reprobation, it would follow, that Gods Saints
before they are converted, (seeing they want those graces) are either not
elected, and so Election would not precede Calling, contrary to Romans 8. 30. and
Election would not be from eternity, contrary to Ephesians. 1. 4 or else they could
at one and the same time be Elect and Reprobate, which implies a manifest
contradiction. The Word speaks plainly in this case, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. Secret
things belong unto God, etc.

2 Thou have abundant grounds to believe the contrary, viz. That thou art
Elected, if thine eyes were open to see them. The Sanctification of the Spirit
is a certain consequent, and therefore a sure evidence of Election, 1 Pet. 1.
2. and Romans 8 1. In stead therefore of searching the Decrees of God, whether
thou be elected or no, search into thy own heart, and see whether thou can
find that thou art called, and so in any measure sanctified; the discovery of
grace in thy heart, though but one grain, and that of mustard seed; will assure
thee of thy Election, and final salvation. Can thou not find in thy heart any
sorrow for sin, any earnest desires after holiness, any solicitousnesse to
please God, any tenderness of conscience and fearfulness to offend him, etc? If
thou can, think these be flowers that use not to grow in Natures garden.
Well, conclude then; I hope I am called, and therefore elected, and therefore
shall be assured in due time.

CHAP. X. Excitation and encouragement to labor for the experience of this
work.
IN the next place how effectually should this stir up all of us that are
converted by way of a Spirit of Bondage, to labor after a Spirit of Adoption,
in its witnessing act.

1. You see that the Spirit of Adoption is attainable, and especially by you of
all other men. You are under the qualification of those to whom he does
especially belong. See Isa. 61. 1, 2, 3. To you is the word of this salvation
sent. Christ was anointed with the Oil of gladness for your sakes.

Are not your hearts broken, are not you mourners in Sion, are not you the
subjects of a spirit of heaviness, a wrinkled, a contracted spirit, as the
Word signifies, a Spirit even grown old and wrinkled with grief? Here then is a
word of encouragement for you, let it not fall to the ground.

What striving is there for places when they fall in the Universities under
such and such qualifications, how does every one within the qualifications
bestirre himself for his interest? And will you (being in such a capacity) lose
the privilege of that capacity?

2 The Spirit of Adoption in its assuring act is a precious mercy. Friends, do
you count it a great matter to be assured of such a temporal inheritance? Will
you think it worth your time to search Deeds, and Records, and Offices to
confirm a title to your selves and your heirs; and is it worth no pains to
assure your immortal souls of an eternal inheritance? When a Merchant
adventures a ship to the sea, if he adventure much in the Vessel, how does he
hye him to the Assurance Office, that if he can he may be no loser by his
Adventure, what ever chance befall him? O Friends, you are every day lanching
forth into the Ocean of eternity, your Fraught is your precious souls, that are
more worth then all the world. The Spirit keeps an Assurance Office, hye you to
the Spirit, and never leave till you have assured your present Adventure.

1. I am assured of this; Without the witness of the Spirit, that you are the
children of God, no soul here deliberately dares to dye. Possibly a Roman
Valor may carry men on upon desperate dangers, when the temptations of honor,
etc. are present, to put out of their minds the thoughts of an adventured
eternity with the hopes of the present life. Those Parents that sacrificed
their children to Moloch, could not have endured the cries of their dear little
ones, roasted alive in the Arms of the cursed Idol, had not the Drums and
other loud Instruments drowned the noise. And truly no man can deliberately
sacrifice his soul to Satan, or adventure his soul near the borders of hell,
whiles his ears are open to the fearful yellings and scriechings of damned
spirits; and therefore Satan makes a terrible din in their ears, jingles the
fine things of this world, and makes such a noise with them, that he leads them
first into a fools Paradise, and from thence into utter darkness.

Friends, Did such thoughts as these possess any of you now and then, Here I
crawle up and down in the world, a poor worm of two or three cubits long, and
after a few minutes more be spent (it may be this night) this hour the foot of
death may tread me into the earth; I carry a Jewel in this earthly Cabinet,
that is more worth then all the world. If Satan lay hands on it, I am
infinitely miserable to all eternity; and whether (if I dye this night) the
devils may not come to fetch away my soul I know not. O if I could dye into
another world once, and have hopes to live again and recover my condition, if
it proved worse then my expectation, I might adventure one of those lives upon
an uncertainty; but when as I must dye into eternity, that my Sun must set and
never rise again; that what is said of a war is more true of death; that in it,
non licet bis errare; that (though the tree that is cut down through the sent
of water, may grow again, yet) when a man dies, he cannot live again in this
world, Job 14, 9, 10. 14
but must measure out either woe or happiness by the minutes of eternity. O
what is it worth to have the Spirit of God testify, that we are his children,
new born to the Inheritance of the Saints in light? O how precious a mercy is
it to have the zeal and earnest of that Spirit to assure it beyond Question.

2. I am assured of this also, that without the witness of the Spirit you
cannot so fully have your hearts untyed from wordly encombrances. It is true
indeed, that a soul that hears of the excellency of Christ, and the glory of
those things that are within the Vail, may be convinced by the Spirit of God,
to adventure all that he has for them; but it is still with fear, lest he
should miscarry in the loss of both. As a Merchant that is fully assured that
there is Merchandise in the Indies that is more precious then those English
Commodities that he adventures for it, may be drawn to put his whole estate in
hazard, that he may make a voyage thither: but still there are misgiving and
distracting cares attend this adventure. O (says he) I have put all I have
into such a bottom, indeed if it return safe, I may be a hundredfold gainer;
but sea and Pirates may rob me of all my hopes, and then I am lost both in my
present estate, and future expectations. So a man to whom the Gospel is
preached, upon the presenting Christ as infinitely precious to the soul, may be
brought to deny himself, and forsake all to follow Christ, out of hopes to
enjoy him, but it is with much fear. True (says he) if I get Christ, I am an
infinite gainer. But if Satan cheat me, or if Christ will not entertain me,
then I am of all men most miserable, I have lost all my comforts, my portion of
this life, and eternity too. And therefore till the soul be sure of Christ, it
ever casts an eye backward as Lots wife on Sodom; though Grace check those
fears, and keeps the soul on in its course yet still I say, it meets with many
temptations to think upon its adventure (especially if Christ frown a while)
and to wish that it were to do again, and many sad str^glings of spirit it has
with these temptations. It Is an hard thing for a poor soul to adventure all the
world, and have nothing in hand for it, but only to expect its returns
hereafter. What says the worldling? A bird in the hand is worth two in the
bush; and that Cardinal, Give me my part in Paris, and take who will my part in
Paradise? And as some say now, as well as in the Apostles time, Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye, 1 Cor. 15. 32
and after death we know not where we shall fare better. But a man that gets
the witness of the Spirit, is like one that adventures for a present
Commodity, a Commodity in hand, a thousand times beyond his price; or has the
earnest of his bargain put into his hand, and is certainly assured of the
faithful delivery of the whole at an appointed time. He never looks back upon
his bargain so as to be tempted to repent it, but rather as rejoicing that for
so little he has gotten so much. See how the Apostle triumphs in this, Phil.
3. 7, 8. and 2 Cor. 4. 17. and those Saints, Heb. 11. 9, 26, 35, and 10. 34.

3 I am assured also that you cannot be assured of your state of Adoption, but
by the Spirit of God. The Arguments from which carnal men draw their evidences
for Gods love, how weak, how fallacious are they?

God l^ts me thrive (says one) therefore he loves me. Ah fool, so does the
Grazier fat his beast for the day of slaughter.

My conscience never troubles me, says another. O mad man, 'twere thy
happiness if it did. No more does the man in a Lethargy complain of pain, and
yet he is the nearer to death for it.

But I live under the Gospel, and go to Church etc. Thou shall lie the deeper
in hell for that, if it prevail not with thee to conversion.

But I pay every one his due. So did many millions that are now in hell,
Heathens and Pharisees.

But God is merciful, and I hope will have mercy on me at the last. Though he
be so, he has damned many millions in hell already, that had as much
confidence in his mercy as thou.

But I am not such or such a sinner. So said the Pharisee, Luke 18. 11. and yet
was unjustified. The Angels sinned but once, and that (it is likely) in
thought, and are in hell; and many thousands are there, that have sinned far
less then thou.

But Christ has dyed for all men, and so I have a share in his blood. O
desperate Delusion! Does not Scripture say, He laid down his life for his
sheep? and are all his sheep? are not the most of men goats, and shall be set
at his left hand? Might not all the damned in hell have hoped for heaven upon
that ground as well as thou? And are they not disappointed?

But I have gifts more then ordinary. I can pray and expound Scripture, and
convert and build up others. And yet thou may be like sounding brass or a
tinkling Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2.

Those that are converted, they seek Assurance in unlikely ways too till they
receive the Spirit of Adoption.

One resolutely chears up his heart, and (as it were) enforces himself to
take comfort, and to be at peace in the assurance of his good condition)
without following God in Duties and Ordinances for it.

Another begins to idolize his Duties, etc. and now sure (says he) my estate
is good, for I hear attentively, pray affectionately, shed tears over my sins
abundantly, etc.

Another reasons himself into this persuasion, fetching from the Word such and
such grounds which he persuades himself suites his condition, and thence
concludes all well. And you shall see hereafter how fallible these are.

3 The longer you go without the Spirits testimony, the more difficultly will
you obtain it: the more will your hearts be instructed in Satan's Sophistry to
elude Arguments of comfort (if you be such as look toward God;) the more
experience will you have of your own hearts deceitfulness; so-that you will
deal with them as we ordinarily do with common liars, hardly be persuaded to
believe their Testimony, when they speak the truth concerning you.

If you be such as neglect both grace and assurance, know that the more
difficultly will you bring your selves to accept of grace, the longer you delay
it; the heart will be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. The
Spirit grived, etc. And if you get grace, a thousand to one if you get the
witness of the Spirit to testify that you have it. Though God give such men
grace as put it off to the last, yet it were too great an encouragement to
others to delay in like manner, if he should ordinarily let them know it. It Is
no easy matter at any time to get it, much more difficult when delayed: Many
souls for many years together eat no pleasant bread, and when they drink mingle
their drink with weeping, their sleep departs from them, and all the comforts
of their lives are overcast with a sad cloud of darkness, they go from sea to
sea, to wait on the Ordinances, rise many a night to pray when others sleep,
chasten their souls with fasting, and go heavily all the day long; and this,
(as I said) for diverse years together, and this in the flower of their years
and strength and yet with much ado can get little more then some flashes of
comfort now and then, some gleams of light (as I told you before) to save them
at a desperate pinch; and after long exercise in a doubtful medly of hope and
fear, a sad twilight of sorrows and supports, at last recover this testimony
in and to their hearts, that they are the children of God. And therefore it is
not to be thought, that persons who out of wilfulness or spiritual sloth put
off the procuring this blessed certainty to themselves till old age or the
approaches of death, should suddenly leap out of a certain damnable estate,
into an assured certainty of salvation. Sure the stream of Promises in the Word
is least favorable to such persons, and it is a thing most righteous in the
eyes of reason it self, that God should be as slow in giving, as they are in
seeking this assuring testimony.

CHAP. XI. Certain Hindrances of getting Assurance of our Adoption, removed.
Quest. BUt how shall I get the testimony of the Spirit, and thereby be assured
of my Justification and Adoption?

Answ. 1. There are diverse Hindrances to be temoved, and then diverse Directions
to be followed. Hindrances are

1 A secret murmuring frame of spirit against Gods present dispensations
toward thee; as if God dealt very hardly, and contrary to his wonted course
with thee. As if God had set thee up as the only mark of his displeasure; which
discontent is secretly augmented by the enjoyments and seize of others.
Such and such have attained such and such comforts, and walk cheerfully, but
God keeps me in the dark, like them that art dead long ago. And then, (as the
children of Israel in the wilderness) the soul many times quarrels at God for
doing what he has done, and wishes any change, even to what it was, or the
worst that can be, Would God (say they) we had dyed in Egypt; nay, would God we
were out of the world, any way rather then to be thus tossed up and down in
these tempests of spirit, to be made Satan's Tennis-bals, the gazing stocks of
the world, and a terror to our selves, etc.

Friend, who ever thou art, that art in this frame of spirit; know, the Holy
Spirit will not be wrought to smile on thy heart by these means. Such a dogged,
sullen frame of spirit will but procure thee the more lashes, and continue thee
the longer in the wilderness. Isreal's murmurings kept them forty years in the
wilderness: hereby they vexed Gods holy Spirit, Isai. 63. 10 and so do thou,
and thou may expect a proportionable dealing at Gods hands.

2 A kind of delight in complaining against thy self, and taking Satan's part
many times in bearing false witness against thy own soul. Sometimes a kind of
sinful humility, sometimes an apprehension of ease, in venting the causes of
their trouble, and sometimes a design of provoking others to humor them in
applying those corrasives and terrors to them which they think are their
portion; makes many persons liberal in charging themselves in this sort. And
sometimes (Satan helping them) they are apt to lay more load upon themselves
then indeed belongs to them, aggravating their sins beyond measure, and
condemning themselves for the vilest creatures upon the face of the earth. And
(by constant use) I know not what kind of pleasure, grows out of such libelling
themselves, and they are never so well, as when they are in that tune. I grant,
a serious, moderate, and discreet complaining of our sins, and wants, to such
from whose advice and prayers we may expect good, and for this reason, that we
may get their advice, and prayers, they knowing our condition particularly, and
being thereby enabled to help us, by such a through knowledge of our case; is
not only lawful, and expedient, but necessary. But to be always, in season,
and out of season, urging these indictments against ones self, and merely for
this reason, that we may put from our selves those comfortable truths which are
endeavored to be fastened upon us, does but more indispose us to peace and
satisfaction of spirit, and teach Satan an art of troubling us everlastingly
with our own liking and approbation. Take this for a certain rule. That soul
that will not open to the Spirit of Adoption, till he can find no matter of
complaint against himself, may go mourning all his days, and thank himself for
it.

3. An unthankful denial of the works of Gods sanctifying spirit in the heart.
Which are the material ground of all regular assurance from the Spirit of
Adoption; or (at least) mitigating, qualifying, and extenuating them. This
ordinarily accompanies the former. A soul that delights it self in picking
quarrels against its own peace, will not be easily brought to own any good
concerning it self. Tell a man in this frame, Sir, you are one of Gods called
ones, for you have had experience of a gracious change upon your heart. You now
hate sin, and count it your greatest burden, which once you loved and judged
it your greatest comfort; you have an unsatisfiable longing after Christ, not
only in his merits, but in his graces, and the communication of his holiness,
and all the World will not satisfy you without him; you have an heart perfectly
broken off from all your old company, and all your delight is in the Saints
that are upon earth, and them that excel in virtue: you have a tender heart,
that is deeply affected with every known sin, etc. O sir, (will such a person
oftentimes say) I find no such things in me, and if there were, I fear it is
all in hypocrisy. Friend, you do well in fearing hypocrisy: but you do not
well in not owning what God has wrought in you for fear of hypocrisy. Indeed
it is not good to boast of the good that is in us, when we have temptations
from the approbation of others, to glory in it; neither is it good to deny what
is in us when we have a call thereunto by those who are sent by God to examine
our estate; which they can never do, nor can they know how to deal with us, if
we deal not plainly in confessing what we know and find in our selves.

And it falls out too often that such denyalls (as I said before) are the fruit
of unthankfulness, which oftentimes causes us to overlook, and (in a kind of
comparative way) to deny what we have received, because we have not as much as
we would have. As it falls out in the covetous men of the world (and there is a
sinful spiritual covetousness too) that are ever complaining they have no
money, no bread to put in their mouths, etc. whereas indeed they mean, they
have not so much as they would have. This is an unthankful denial of Gods
providence toward them, in bestowing on them what they have. And thou may
judge the like of thy self in this case. Saint Paul was of another temper, Romans
7. he makes many sad complaints of himself, I am carnal sold under sin; in me
there dwells no good thing; how to perform that that is good I find not; when
I would do good, evil is present with me; I see a Law in my members warring
against the Law of my mind, etc. O wretched man that I am, etc. yet still he
mixeth acknowledgments of the grace that he has received, I am carnal (says
he) sold under sin; yet (says he) I bless God my judgment goes with the Law,
I think it holy just and good; whence though I am over-byassed many times unto
evil, yet I allow it not; I would do better then I do, and I hate the evil that
I am captived unto. In me there dwells no good thing; but mark the
Epanorthosis, or correction of himself, as if he had spoken a word too large;
What said I? there is no good dwelling in me? let me not be mistaken, I mean,
in my flesh, (for so much the (...), ver. 18. will bear) for though I have no
power to do, yet I have some good in my spiritual part, I can will that that is
good, and that will (...), is always at hand; I have good wishes and desires
in readiness upon all occasions. I do not the good that I ought to do, yet I
would do it, I delight in the Law of God in the inward man. Sin laws it, and
lords it in my members, but I have another Law in my mind, so that with my
mind, i. e. in my judgment, and resolved bent of will, I serve the Law of God;
and there is a special Emphasis in that Pronoune, [my self,] that follows, ver
25. (...), I [my selfe] serve the Law of God, that is, even I, though I
complain so against my self, yet must needs say so much for my self, to the
praise of God, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Here is an excellent example for thee that sit in darkness, and art ever
complaining against and defying thy self; do not deny the grace of God, that is
not so much a denial of thy self, as Gods goodness, and the Spirit of Grace.
If thou witness against the Spirit, do thou think the Spirit will witness
for thee? Thou denyest the Spirit, the very medium by which he would testify
to thy good condition.

Take notice also of the peevishness of thy spirit. Thou have long wooed
Christ to accept of thee, and be married to thee, and Christ has sent thee
Love Tokens by his Spirit to assure thee that he owns himself to be thy
busband. Now Christ expects the duties of a wife from thee, now thou
questionest whether thou art married or no, and not only questionest, but
peremptorily denyest all his Love Tokens, or at least extenuatest them and
set light by them. Think what a sin this is. No wonder now if the Spirit,
that Messenger that brought them, take offense at such dealing, and refuse to
testify to thee, who art resolved to question his testimony, be it never so
clear.

4. An unwarrantable thrusting off those Promises and comfortable truths which
God in the Ministry of the Word or otherwise brings home to our condition, and
snatching greedily at all the terrible places of Scripture and denunciations of
wrath as our portion. I have known those that have thrust away with both hands
all that might make for their comfort, as that that belongs not to them. O the
cursed pride of our hearts! When will men leave prescribing to the infinite
wise God? When people please themselves in their sins, then they will hear no
Minister except he sing a cursed requiem to their spirits, preach pleasing
things, and cry, Peace, peace. And when the soul is under trouble for sin, then
God must denounce judgments in every Sermon, speak to them in thunders and
lightning from Mount Sinai, answer them cut of the whirlewind, or else they
will not hear him. Believe it, no soul receives good by the Word, but that
soul that thinks every Word of the Lord good; and labors, as it is proper to
its condition, to apply it. Satan in times of unregeneracy has an Art to make
the Word unfruitful, by causing a man's heart to stand loose from the Law, to
rub off the eating, corroding plaster, and say, This concerns such an one,
and such an one, but not me. And after our conversion, he keeps the Word from
fastening comfort to the soul, and assuring the heart by a like Artifice. True,
these are comfortable truths, and concern such and such, but not me. This was
the Psalmists case in desertion, and is thine in the present darkness: My sore
ran in the night, my soul refused to be comforted, Psalm. 77. 2.

Indeed friends, if you refuse to receive comfort when the Spirit offers it, no
wonder if when you would have it, the Spirit refuse to offer it. None of Gods
offers are refused by the creature gratis. God will stand upon other terms
when we come to his shop after we have once refused a good bargain once
offered.

5 A groundless surmising of an irrecoverablenesse in our condition from such
and such threatenings of Scripture as concern us not. This follows from the
former; When a soul is willing to hear all Thunder and Cannon shot from the
Word, ordinarily the devil has two or three places of Scripture from whence he
plays thick upon the soul. Those are two places in the Hebrews, 6. 4, 5, 6.
and 10. 26, 27, 28, 29. And one in the second of Peter 2. 20, 21. In the
ambiguity of some dark phrases in those Texts of Scripture, does Satan perplex
the soul, and this is a strong hold that he will not presently surrender. Thus
he persuades them, that every neglect of duty, every vain thought or wicked
action after illumination, and the work of conviction, utterly, and totally
excludes them from repentance or pardon; and therefore it is in vain to
endeavor their comfort, who have sinned against the Holy Ghost that should
comfort them, and that unpardonably, and irrecoverably.

I have spoken to this already in the second point, and shall again hereafter.
And therefore it shall suffice at present to warn you of this rub which Satan
lays in the way of your peace, and to entreat you to take no heed to it, when
it is obtruded to bar you from laying hold of the promises of mercy and
pardon, which are proclaimed unto you. For take this for a certain rule, God
never intends any terrors of Scripture, as bugbears to affright any sinner
from Christ who earnestly desires him, (the severest scorpions of the Law are
intended only to drive us to Christ, Gal. 3. 24.) much less does he intend
that any of them should conclude any soul under an apprehended impossibility of
pardon; for then he would be chargeable with all those desperate conclusions
which men usually draw from such premises. But he always encourages the
greatest sinners to believe, and (supposing that) to take comfort from the
boundlesnesse of his mercy in pardoning all manner of sins. Isay 55. 7. and 1.
18.

How frequently does he (for their sakes) display his bowels of tender mercies,
as if he foresaw that the greatest difficulty of his work would lie in
persuading them of those?

CHAP. XII. Certain other Hindrances removed.
A Sixth Hinderance is, 6. Keeping Satan's counsel. Many a soul bears sad
burdens in this kind oftentimes, because he is ashamed to utter what it is
that troubles him. As many a man bears a Disease in some part, which he is
loath to discover, and will not be known of it till there be no remedy but he
must dye of it. This is Satan's policy, to represent the soul before conversion
as beautiful in all the ornaments of civility and good nature (as we say) and
formality as is possible. But after conversion, when the soul pants after
Assurance of Gods love, then to show it its own face in as black a glass, as
hell, or (its Landscape) an accusing, terrifying conscience can afford. And
therefore he enlarges ordinary infirmities into monstrous Apostacies, and sins
against the Holy Ghost; and if the soul be satisfied that its sins are not of
that dye, because it never entertained a thought of malice and envy against God
or his ways, (which is required to that sin) Then he will inject fearful
suggestions into the mind, horribilia de Deo, etc. horrid thoughts of God,
Christ, Religion, Scriptures, etc. And then he acts as a wicked Whore; when he
has laid these brats of his at a Saints door, then he pursues him as the
father of them for maintenance, solicites Reason to defend them, or at least to
dispute them; and if a soul throw them out as fast as he casts them in, then he
makes it his next business to persuade it to keep his counsel in these
thoughts and temptations; for (says he) what will godly people think of thee,
if thou should discover such things as these? No one that fears God would
ever come nigh thee any more.

So concerning thoughts of self-murder, temptations to fearful and horrid
pollutions, etc. If he cannot fasten them upon the heart, he will labor (at
least) to prevail for our secrecy in them. And then he knows he can make great
advantages of those concealments. As a loose companion when he has tempted an
honest woman to uncleanness, and cannot prevail, his next design is to
persuade her to keep his attempt close, and to allow him her company still;
which if he can do, he will afterward (as being one that regards not his own
reputation) blast her, as if she were really guilty of the Fact, and endeavor
to make her concealment of his temptations, and continued converse with him,
the Argument to prove her so: So if Satan can prevail so far, he will quickly
persuade a soul that he has consented to what he has concealed, and so lay
all that load of desperate conclusions which would follow from the sins
themselves upon the suspicion of them. And therefore as a woman that is honest
and wise, will discover such solicitations to an husband or near friend, and
desire them to watch over her, lest she be overcome by importunity to an act
she so much abhors, and if need be, will reveal them more publicly, by way of
Caution, for her fuller Vindication: So in this case it is the best way to deal
with Satan. Let no such thought arise, but away first to God, and then to a
godly Minister, or a godly friend, and unbosom thy self, for hereby thou shall
be able to call witness against Satan upon every occasion, and take away the
advantage from him of suggesting many desperate thoughts to thee, which if he
have so much footing as thy bare silence, he will inject with a great deal of
vehemence. On the other side, he will quickly be discouraged from tempting, if
what he speaks in secret, were published upon the house tops.

7 Secret tempting of God, and dependence upon such means and such men for
peace, and limiting God to such and such a time, and resolving not to wait on
God beyond that time, or not to expect it from any other means. It may be
slighted means and an unexpected time shall bring thee that comfort which thou
have in vain looked for from more likely instruments, and more probable
seasons. Truly friends, God will have peace as well as grace to be every way
free, and unconfined. Say not, such a Minister indeed is an honest man, and
preaches well, but I shall never profit by him; if ever I have comfort it must
be from such or such a mouth. Say not, if God answer me not in such an
ordinance, or such a duty, I am hopeless, etc. It oftentimes falls out here as
it does in dangerous diseases among great personages; They persuade themselves
that such or such a plain, honest Physician, whom they vouchsafe to consult
with in ordinary cases, is able to do them no good in their present distempers;
he is not studied, or has not experience enough, and therefore they must
advise with such or such a Court Doctor of eminent practice, and then they
think they cannot miss of a cure.

But many times it so happens, that after they have spent their strength and
estate on fees and bills, and are come down into the Country to dye, a plain
country Physician, and a little Kitchin-physick has restored them. Truly
friends, it is so in the case of assurance from the Spirit, Because some godly
Ministers cannot preach so every way experimentally as others can, many
troubled spirits decline them, and their ministry, and will scarce vouchsafe
to discover their cases to them. None must be supposed able to do them good,
but such, and such: Well, such men's ministry is tried, and it may be (not out
of any deficiency in them, who it is possible may preach truths, and apply
medicines of sovereign value and virtue; but merely) through a secret hand of
God rendering them unsuccessefull, that he may keep the meanest of his
Eembassadours from contempt, and the most eminent humble, and let people know,
that the Spirit of consolation and Adoption, as well as that of grace and
supplication, blows where, and whence, and when, and how he lists* the
soul-patient finds no recovery, but it is fain at last to be beholden to a man
of very mean abilities, and to a word which seemed empty and barren before, for
comfort and assurance.

So, for time. A soul enlarged in prayer, steeped in tears, enflamed with
desires, thinks, now verily the time, the set time is come, God will be found
of me in a way of peace, and satisfaction. No friend, no such matter. God (it
may be) will make thee stay till thou have even doubted thy self out of all
hope, because of thy barrenesse, and deadness, and inability to perform any
service as thou ought, and then he will send his Spirit to shed abroad his
love in thy heart: thou shall bring sorth this child of comfort, when, as
Sarahs womb, thy soul is dead, and almost hopelessely barren.

8. A sinful ambition of self-preparations for comfort and peace: were I so
much humbled, says the poor soul, so kindly and ingenuously affected with my
sins; could I recover of this deadness, and flatnesse of spirit into any
measure of liveliness and spiritualnesse in my performances; then I would
believe comfort, and assurance of Gods love belonged to me; but that a soul so
little, so legally broken as I am, so barren, saplesse, lifelesse, spiritlesse
in all my services should have any share in Christ, any title to the Covenant
of Grace, any part or portion with the Saints of God, I cannot, I will not
believe. This is just like Peter's unreasonable motion: Depart from me, for I am
a sinful man, O Lord. Luke, 5. 8. Foolish man, to whom should the Physician
come but to the sick? 'Twere a fond thing to imagine the patient must be
recovered, before he comes that he may be sit to entertain him. So here; Thou will not entertain any persuasion of an interest in Christ, till thou attain
such and such proportions and measures of grace. Alas! man, till thou have some
evidence of thy interest in Christ, thou will never a tain them: it is want of
that evidence occasions thy defects in humiliation, thy deadness and
sapplessenesse in duties, etc. Men travel heartlessely in the dark, because
they know not whether they go backwards or forwards, whether the next step may
not be a precipice to ruin them. But when the daylight arises, and shows
them by the coast of the country, that they are in their way, this puts new
life and spirits into them. The joy of the Lord is a Christians strength. Neh.
8. 10. Nor is it meet, whiles thou art in this frame, that thou should have
this witness in thy Spirit, For if thou should recover more life and vigor
of grace and duty, and thy assurance therein, thou perhaps would be proud of
thy seize, and attribute thy assurance to them, and so God would have
less honor and thou less certainty of it. God would have less honor,
because (as I said) grace I would scarce be seen through such qualifications.
The smell of some delicious fields (they say) so takes the dogs, that they
forget their prey, and follow it no more: such delicious fields of duties may
d^aw off the soul from the sent of Christ.

And thou would have less certainty of continuing it. For it would rise and
fall according to thy own qualifications and ablities. For water in a
watercourse will never rise above its spring; if the spring of assurance be
your own perfections, then as that is higher and lower, so will the assurance
be. You that one time find your graces at a spring tide, another time will find
them at the lowest ebb, and then your assurance will ebb with them, as it
flows with them.

9. Giving too much way to prejudices against God, and his love, from present
sense and feeling. For hereby we make the spirit double work: First to untie
and untangle our own knotty, and snarled reasonings, and then to build in us a
new persuasion upon new arguments of his own. A man had better Catechize a
child or a rude ignorant heathen, then endeavor to reduce an heretic, because
the one (as he knows not the truth, so he) is not prejudiced against it; the
other is not only ignorant of it, but he is possessed with contrary principles,
and has subtilty of argument to resist it. So a builder that is to lay
foundataions where the ground is clear, and has not been occupied that way
before, will not need to do much ere he set upon his work. But he that is to
lay new foundations, and build a new house where the ruins of an old Abbey are
already, must have double work, digging up the old, and then laying the new.
Now it is strange to hear, what arguments Souls in this darkness are
prepossessed withal, that God does not love them.

1. Present smart. Can love consist with such blows? Those strokes sure are
the strokes of an enemy. To deliver me over to Satan, to be buffetted by him
in such a manner, to set me as a spectacle to Men and Angels, and shut me up in
such a dungeon of horror as none besides me ever came into. Is this consistent
with love? 2. Past obstinacy. God has said, he will not hear me, and justly:
for he has called many times, and I have turned the deaf ear to him. Yea,
this is that the Lord has said, Prove. 1. 24. etc. Be sure to stop the mouth of
these prejudices by, Heb. 12. 6. and Isay 55. 7, 8, 9. Jo. 6. 37. and other
such places.

10. Slacknesse and remissness in (occasioned by successelessenesse of)
Ordinances and Duties. When once those prejudices cause a soul to cry out,
there is no hope, God Lam. 3. 6, 7, 8.
has builded against me, he shuts out my prayer; then there is no
temptation more likely to succeed then this. Why man, what do thou labor
for? Why do thou sow thy precious prayers on the sand of the sea shore,
whence there can no harvest be expected? And hereupon the soul is, if not taken
off from duties, yet for want of faith (which is the l^fe of duties) the
chariot moves slowly when the wheels are taken off Hope to speed is the
greatest encouragement to duty. You clip the wings of duty, if you present
unconquerable difficulties before it. And when once the wings of duty are
clipped, that it cannot fly abroad to gather sustenance for faith, no wonder if
that pine away and dye too. And if faith dye, assurance is h^pelesse.

CHAP. XIII. Another Hindrance removed.
THere remains yet one Hindrance more to be discovered in this Chapter, which
is (eleventhly and lastly) over-scrupulousness, and scepticall-question-fulness
in the business in hand. Satan's policy in troubling souls is like that which
he uses in deceiving them.

First, He sets them a gogge (as we use to say) persuades them they must try
all things, therefore they must question all things they must hold no
principles, merely by a tenure of faith, but of their own reason; and then he
inveigles their snarled apprehensions, and makes their entangled and
immethodical reason to find knots in every bulrush, and those knotts being too
d^fficult to be untyed by their weak heads, he brings them at last to condemn
all truth upon mere suspicion of error, and renders them so confident of the
justice of that sentence, that they become obstinate and irrecoverable
heretics.

So in troubling the conscience, or continuing it in trouble, he persuades the
soul in the first place, to question every thing that ever it has had
experience of from the first moment of convict^on; nay, those things that have
been as sensible and palpable as can be, yet they must now be suspected whether
in point of past and present practice, or in point of comfort. In point of past
practice, whether it have not sinned in such or such things, which when done,
were done with the fullest assurance possible of their lawfulness. And so in
present practice, he will scarce suffer a poor soul in such a troubled
condition to eat, drink, or sleep without scruple.

A tender conscience is a great mercy, but a scrupulous conscience is a great
affliction. Such a conscience does not only hinder a man from that which is
evil, but abates much of the life, activity, and comfort that is in good
actions.

And so in point of comfort. Urge to a soul in trouble, Such and such gracious
works God has wrought in you therefore sure you are one of his: Such
experiences you have had, with which you have been formerly satisfied. I
question that, (says the soul) whether there were any such things or no. I
once believed that there were, but I doubt I was then deceived, etc. and so I
may be now, if I grant any such things as you say. A soul under this frame,
although very well experienced in the School of Christ, and who has been
banquetted in Christ's own Parlour many times, may be turned quite off the
hinges merely by his own over-scrupulousnesse. The Disciples were well
acquainted with Christ, yet when he came to them upon the sea, they were
afraid, thinking it had been a spirit, Matthew. 14 26. And the reason was, they
were then in such a Tempest, that they feared every thing, and so suspected
Christ himself, when he came to relieve them.

Quest. But what shall I do in such a case? If I be over-credulous and too
easy of belief, I may ruin my self that way; and if I be too scrupulous, I
may undo my self that way too.

Ans. (1) Labor for a distinct knowledge of the nature of grace in general, and
the known Marks by which it is distinguished from hypocrisy. And although you
labor for the greatest means of grace, yet enquire diligently into the Signs
and Tokens by which you may know the least. I confess, this would be better
done before trouble of mind comes. There is a great advantage that a well
catechized Christian has of an ignorant person in this present case; viz. the
discrimination and distinguishing true grace from counterfeit. It Is bad laying
principles in a mind full of confusion, that (by reason of darkness) can see
nothing distinctly. Those should be laid before in tender years, or at least
calmer seasons. But if there have been a neglect either in the person, or those
under whose inspection he has lived; so that he be to learn to spell now, when
he had need be able to read the works of the Spirit of God distinctly; then I
would advise such a soul to search into the Word with the advice of godly
Ministers and Christians after those proper distinguishing Marks between
sincerity and hypocrisy, upon which he may ground his own enquiry after his
own condition. If I should make an Hue and Cry after a man, or cry an horse or
cow in ^e Market, and know not by what marks to describe him; or if I search
among many other cattle for mine own, and know not what Ear-mark, or
Flesh-mark, or Hair-mark they have, I cannot hope but to spend my labor in
vain. I might say the like concerning thy spiritual condition. If thou be to
seek what grace is, under darkness, no wonder if thou be scrupulous to own it
when it is presented to thee.

But thou must take heed here that thou do not enquire after the tokens of the
least m^asure of grace, that thou may rest in it, and think thou art well
enough secured to eternity, if thou have but just so much as denominates thee a
child of God. For this is a shrewd sign that thou do not desire grace, for
its own sake, but merely as a bridge to heaven; and if thou do so, it is a
thousand to one but (partly by Gods just judgment, and partly by thy own
spiritual sloth,) thou will be endangered to cut it an inch or two too short
to reach the other side of the bank. But if thou desire to know the least
measure of grace merely for this reason, that thou may not (like an unskilful
Gardener) weed it up when it is tender, for a weed of hypocrisy, but cherish
it, and water it, and improve it to greater measures of perfection, this is a
good design.

2. Give way to no Scruples without a word. Enquire of thy own heart what word
occasions such a doubt, such a question; and where thou find no word lay it
by. This is a good rule in our actings. There is much superstition oftentimes
in Scruples, (if that may be taken for superstition, which is supra institutum,
over and above Gods revealed will) and the ground of superstitious fears, is
fancy. The way to confute a superstitious Worshipper, is to require a word for
his practice; so the way to silence a superstitious Scruple, is to demand a
Scripture reason for it. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou
thus disquieted within me? Psa. 42. 5, 11. and 43. 5. q d. Soul, you are
troubled, but is that trouble a warrantable trouble, is it a trouble that God
allows? if so, show me his warrant for it. So when Satan pursues thee with
Scruples and Fears, and arrests thee as a prisoner in Gods name, ask him
presently Quo warranto? (as Lawyers say) Satan, let me see your warrant: it is
not enough here for him to reply, Thou have a deceitful heart, and thou have
had great experience of it, and there be many hypocrites, and there is much
counterfeit gold, etc. These are generals. Ask him by what warrant from the
Word he bids thee doubt whether thou be an hypocrite, and thy gold be false. If
he show not his warrant, fall pell mell upon him, spare him not, for an illegal
Assault and Battery.

3 Wordlesse Scruples must be silenced; especially if I either have, or have
had (to my best and most deliberate judgment) sufficient ground to convince me
of the contrary. In such a case, if I have been formerly satisfied upon
Scripture grounds, I am to rest in that satisfaction; if not, yet if now such
grounds be presented to me, I am bound to receive it, and (at least) to silence
all Scruples to the contrary. Otherwise, the Authority of Gods Word, would be
far less with me then that of mine own groundless fancies or Satan's vexatious
suggestions. Conscience is an Officer of Gods, his Deputy-Iudg in the soul, and
therefore it must determine from, and according to the most preponderating
evidence from the Word of God. As in matters of Law, a Judge is not to hearken
to every litigious Lawyer, that puzleth and perplexeth a cause, farther then he
speaks Law to justify his allegations; but if he can bring none, may and ought
to proceed to sentence, upon those rules of Law and Justice, upon which he has
formerly judged in the like cases, or such as being now urged on the behalf of
the Defendant, have nothing of moment objected to the contrary. I know Satan
can, and does often tempt with a Word in his mouth, as he did our Savior with
[It is written,] and so without all question does (where he sees the soul will
not be taken with chaff, or baffled with mere scare-crows of groundless
suggestions) urge Scripture in troubling the conscience. And in such cases we
had need of a Spiritual palate exercised to taste words, as Elihu lays the
comparison, between inward and outward sense, Job 33. 3.

But if all the Scruples of our spirits were reduced to this trial, not one to
a thousand but would let fall its suite rather then discover its weakness by
the impertinency of its allegations.

Object. But if I have never so plain word urged upon me to satisfy me, yet
(if the Spirit do not make the word satisfying) Satan is an impudent Accuser,
and mine own heart is full of darkness, and it will question whether it be day
when the Sun shines, and (with those that are resolved to conclude snow black)
rather condemn the most certain of the senses for a mistake in so clear an
Object, then acknowledge an error in its own reasonings.

Ans. I grant it: Yet this I must do in the case in hand.

(1) I must acknowledge that I ought, or that I see no reason (at least) why I
ought not, to be satisfied with such clear evidence, there being so little
objected that may reasonably disparage it.

(2) I ought to condemn, bewail and pray against such unwarrantable slownesse
of believing, where I have so much apparent ground.

(3) I ought (at least) to suspend those groundless Scruples for the present,
and act upon the conclusion which I am convinced, appears most justifiable from
Scripture, (though I cannot apprehend it altogether, beyond question at
present) as if it were unquestionable, till some new grounds of more
considerable weight are urged to obstruct my proceedings. As in a case of Law
among men is clear; A man has a Title to such Lands, as by the advice of
Lawyers, and from Law he conceives to be good, or (at least) after many
debates with an adversary that obstructs his quiet possession, he sees not by
any thing that can be urged to the contrary, but that his own is the most
likely Title. If this man enter upon this Estate, and use it as his own, till
the Advarsary produce a more legal evidence then his, and justify it in Court,
the man offends not.

So in conscience. Gods Ministers that are the Counselors in its cases, tell
thee according to their best knowledge in the Scriptures, that thou art a child
of God, and have an unquestionable Title to him; this they prove by Scripture,
compared with the operations of Gods sanctifying Spirit in thy heart. Satan
says no, and thy own misgiving heart fears lest he say true. However thou
see no reason he brings from Scripture, or at least none so weighty as that
thou see sufficient cause from his allegations to reject those other that
make for thee; nay, it may be thy judgment inclines to them, but thy heart is
yet fearful and trembling: in such a case thou may safely practice, as
occasion serves, upon that conclusion which thou see least to weaken. I mean,
thou may act as a child of God, apply Promises, urge them in Prayer, etc. as
if they were thine, till some more considerable grounds be offe^ed to weaken
the former upon which thou actedst. This I say, because I know it is the doubt
of some precious souls, whether they may pray or apply any Promises, til they
be altogether out of doubt that they are the children of God.

(4) Nay let me say more. If thou have but the least ground to hope, that
though thou be not a child of God for the present, yet thou art no where
excluded from a capacity of being so; thou may lay hold upon the Promises
which belong to Saints, so far as to improve them to duty, though thou may
not so far as to build an Assurance upon them. And the reason is, because the
Gospel becomes mine by my laying hold upon it, and claiming it as mine. And God
allows a Christian an holy violence in entering upon the precious possessions
thereof; the violent Mat. 11. 12
take it by force. If a man should never lay hold of a Promise till he be
assured that it belongs to him, he would never lay hold of any: because (as I
shall tell you more hereafter) Assurance that the Promises and the things
promised in them are mine, depends upon my laying hold of them, and claiming
them as mine, and therefore cannot go before, in an orderly and ordinary way.

4. Sometimes when mine own scrupulous heart will take no satisfaction, I ought
to lay some weight of confidence upon the judgment of others, godly Ministers,
and experienced Christian friends. A stander by (say we) oftentimes sees more
then the parties in action can see themselves. I believe my Physician
concerning the state of my body, and my Lawyer concerning the state of my Suit,
though (it may be) I have strong inclinations of my self to make a contrary
judgment; and upon their judgment, I follow the ones Physic, and the others
counsel. It Is not a matter of small moment, when upon the sight of thy serious
humiliation and sorrow for sin, earnest and restless desires after Christ and
holiness, and the like signs a Minister of Christ in his name shall declare,
that (as far as the Word gives him ground to judge of thy case) he fully
persuades himself that thou art a child of God. The Lord has promised to
confirm the Word of his Servants, and perform the counsel of his Messengers,
Isai. 44. 26. And it is not for nothing that he has promised to loose in
heaven what they loose on earth, Mat. 16. 19. It Is true, they may err in the
Application; and God is not bound to justify them in their mistakes. But yet
it is as true, that seldom does a godly knowing Minister (and such an one only
is fit to be consulted in such cases) so grossly mistake the case of his
Soul-Patient, as to mis-apply comforts, but upon such grounds as will hold water
according to the Word; and he cannot be so much an enemy to thy soul and his
own, as to go about wilfully to deceive thee.

So may it be said of the judgment of serious and experienced Christians, that
although they cannot absolve the troubled soul Authoritatively (as Ministers
can) and charge you to rest in their word in the name of Christ; yet they may
pass a private sentence upon your condition from the Word, and their own
experience; and you are bound not to reject it rashly and incons^derately, but
to allow it some weight in your serious thoughts.

The least that you can allow to the testimony of such persons of both sorts
concerning your estate is, (1.) A charitable Interpretation of it, and the
grounds upon which they give it; so far as to think thus of it; Why may not I
(in darkness and confusion of spirit) be rather deceived in my judgment of my
self, then such persons, who (as they are free from my distempers, and entirely
love my soul, so) have more intimate acquaintance with God, and the light of
their own experience to keep them from mistaking? (2) Hearty prayer to God,
that he will make good the words of his servants, and open your heart to
receive them. (3) A suspension of any severer determination or sentence
concerning your self, seeing you find so many (supposed abler then your self)
to be of another judgment. (4) A striving and laboring with your own hearts by
meditation upon the grounds upon which they pass their judgment of you, to
incline them to receive it. (5.) To follow their advice and counsel (grounded
thereupon) as far as possibly you can, and to blame your selves before God when
you do not do so. Isai. 50. 10. Who is there among you that fears the Lord,
and [obeyeth the voice of his servant,] that walks in darkness? etc.

CHAP. XIV. The first Direction to the attaining of a Spirit of Adoption in its
witnessing Act. And first concerning exercising frequent Acts of Relyance. As
also a Case concerning the exercise of Reliance in want of Assurance; How it
can be. Faith in four noble Acts described.
AFter the removal of Hindrances, follow these Directions.

I. Exercise frequent Acts of Relyance upon the free grace of God in Christ,
and the Promises in which it is held forth unto thee, together with the offers
and invitations of the Gospel backing them.

Quest. But how can I rely upon that grace which I am not assured belongs unto
me? If I rely upon a friend in a matter of moment concerning whom I have no
certain evidence that he ever intended me any good* I may deceive my self, and
thereby undo my self, while I lean to a broken reed.

Answ. 1. The being assured that God is mine in particular, is not the only
ground of my relyance upon him. It Is true, there be acts of relyance that
follow Assurance; when a man relies upon God as a, known friend. But yet there
are acts of Reliance that precede Assurance, as when I rely upon God as one
that has offered to be a friend to all that will duly make use of him. Such a
friend I am not assured is my friend in particular, before I go to him; but I
go to him, take hold of his offer, claim his Promise, and resolve to adventure
my self thereupon, and thus at last I get a good word from him that gives me a
particular assurance that it shall be with me according to my faith, Mat. 9. 29.

That you may understand this the more clearly, know, there be these four acts
in faith, and they are like so many stairs one above the other, the one being
the ground of the other. I deny not but they may all be brought together in
time. But in nature (I apprehend from the Word) they are produced in this
order: Those are

1 Acceptance. The Gospel reveals life and salvation to poor undone sinners
through Christ, who abandoning and renouncing their own sins and righteousness,
are contented to receive it from him in his own way. The answer of the heart to
this Truth is, It is a saying worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15. And
(accordingly) I accept of these terms and resolve in Gods strength, I will not
seek salvation in any other name. Lord Christ accept of me, I surrender my self
into thy hands, I beseech thee discharge all thy Offices on, and for me. This
is called receiving, John 1. 12. It is sometimes expressed by a term of motion,
coming to Christ, John 6. 37. yea, flying for refuge to him, Heb. 6. 18. Both
which imply, renunciation of other security, and accepting his alone.

2 Claim. The next thing apprehended in the Gospel, is the general offer of
these terms, and salvation by them, unto all that come unto Christ, and Gods
earnest invitation to accept of it. The first is the discovery of the way of
life, and that the soul likes, and accepts and comes. This is the discovery of
the persons to whom this way is passable, and those are all that exclude not
themselves. Ho, every one that thirsts, come, Isai. 55. 1. Apoc. 22. 17. Let
whoever will, come. The Answer of the heart here, is, Lord, I come; Lord, I put
in for a share in this Offer. This is called, Laying hold upon the hope that is
set before us, Heb. 6. 18.

3 Relyance or dependence. This is a gracious Offer indeed (says the soul) and
I have put in for a share in it: but may I depend upon it. Yes, says the
Gospel, and (there comes in the Promise seconding the Offer and Invitation)
thou may adventure thy soul on it: for God has said, that who ever comes to
Christ he will in no wise cast out, John 6. 37. That he that thirsting comes,
shall eat that which is good, etc. Isai. 55. 1, 2, 3 Matthew. 11. 28. The answer
of the heart here, is, Sink or swim, I will adventure my soul upon this
Promise; I will carry it to hell with me in my dying gripe, if I must perish.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him (as Job says under affliction) Job
10. 13. This act is usually expressed by trusting in God, Ephesians. 1 12, 13.
Trusting and staying a man's self on God, Isai. 50. 10.

4 Assurance. A soul having gone thus far, the next question is, But what if
(seeing there be many that come and claim an interest in Christ, that shall at
last be cast out, because they do not indeed come and claim Christ as they
should) I say, What if I be found among them; and then I shall be ashamed of my
hopes, and my relyance at the last, when I have expected so much from it? Now
to this the Scripture says, There is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 1. John 3. 16. Whoever believes shall have everlasting
life. etc. Hereby shall ye know that ye are passed from death to life, etc, 1
John 3. 14. John 14. 21. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect, etc.
Psalm. 119 6. The answer of the heart to this, is, Such an one am I; therefore
my faith is true, therefore I am under this condition or state: I know that I
am passed from death to life; I know that I am of God, 1 John 5. 19. I need not
be ashamed.

Now the third of these Acts, to wit, Relyance, is an act to be exercised
perpetually, in order to the getting the Testimony of the Spirit in the last,
viz. Assurance; when Assurance (as most ordinarily it comes to pass) is not
enjoyed at the same time together with it. For

1 This is the advice. Isai. 50. 10. Let him trust in the Lord, and stay
himself upon his God. Who is he that is thus advised? One that walks in
darkness and sees no light, and therefore is not assured that God is his God
(though he be so;) he must stay upon his God; first he must lay claim to him as
his God, and then stay, and depend, and rest upon him. I illustrate it thus,
Suppose such a friend as I before mentioned, that offers the highest acts of
real friendship to all that come to him, accept of it, upon such and such
terms, claim his favor, and rely on his promise. Which is the way for me to
be assured that this man will be my friend in particular? Is it not this? to go
to him and tell him, Sir, your publication of your good will encouraged me to
accept your offer, emboldned me to claim an interest in your friendship, though
neither your Proclamation, nor offer, nor Promise named me in particular. And
now (Sir) I rely upon your Promise to enterpose for me between me and Justice,
to pay such a debt for me; if you fail me, I am an undone man. I have such an
esteem of your word, that I am resolved I will adventure my self upon it, and
all that I am, though I know your mind no farther concerning me in particular;
yet I cannot withal but desire, that if you think fit, you will give me a
particular assurance that I am accepted by you as one of those to whom you
stand so engaged, that by the knowledge of my particular obligations to you, I
may be encouraged the more cheerfully to serve you, and to be the more heartily
thankful. I appeal to all men, whether this be not the likeliest way to get a
particular engagement from this man.

Apply this to the case in hand, and you will see reason in my Direction to act
reliance in order to Assurance.

2 Besides, Reliance frequently exercised will yield Arguments of Assurance;
especially, being acted in particular cases: as suppose temptation, corruption,
straights. As though a man have no particular obligation from a friend, yet
knowing his principles, that he never fails those that depend on him, and
having relied upon him often, and found he has not failed him at any time, at
last he becomes assured that he will not. So seeing I know that God never
fails them that trust in him, and I have found that he has stood by me in
many a sad plunge of spirit, in pursuance of that and the like obligations, I
hence argue, sure he will never fail me. So the holy Prophet argues, 1 Samuel 17.
37. And so the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. God has delivered, God does
deliver, and God will deliver.

3 Assurance is recovered the same way when it is lost, wherein it is to be
gotten when a man is utterly a stranger to it; and this I evidence thus. A soul
in desertion looks upon himself as having no grace at all, and therefore he
does act, and (if he can act no higher) we advise him to act as if he begun
all anew. This course were in vain, if not the same in both.

CHAP. XV. Another Direction concerning seeking Gods face in Ordinances; Such
as the Word and Prayer.
Direct. 2.
II. SEek diligently in all Ordinances after the testimony of the Spirit. The
way for recovery of lost evidence is that (as was said before) which is most
proper for getting it at first. The Church in Cant. 3 1, 2, 3, 4. had lost her
Beloved, 'twas night (a night of desertion) and he had slipped away in the
dark; what does she then? She seeks him first upon her bed, lay still (its
likely) and sent some sleepy calls after him. But Christ will not be found at
that rate, I sought him, but I found him not. What then? See what follows, I
will rise now; yea, that is a more likely course, shake off that sinful sloth,
and seek him in good earnest. So she does, I will go about the City in the
streets and in the broad ways. In the City, that is in the Church (set out by
a City often in Scripture, because of communion, defense, order like a City;
and often by the City of Jerusalem in particular) In the streets and broad
Apoc. 21. 2.
ways; i. e. the places of concourse, the Assemblies of the Saints; there
Wisdom utters her voice, Prove. 1. 20, 21. there she meets with the
Watchmen, and she asks them, etc. and then when she had advised with them,
and followed their Directions, see what follows, ver. 4. It was but a little
that I passed from them, but I found him whom my soul loves. I found him; that
is, in the evidences and refreshments of his Spirit.

1 Seek in the Word. If God give any soul peace (in an ordinary way, and who
are we that we should put God to the charge of extraordinaries?) it is the fruit
of the lips, Isai. 57. 19. The fruit of whose lips? even the lips of those
whose lips are appointed to be the Treasuries of saving knowledge for the
Church. The Priests Mal. 2. 7
lips shall preserve knowledge, and the people shall seek it at his mouth. But
(may the soul say) what can he do toward that work? it is not in the power of
man to ease me; Man cannot heal the wounds that an Almighty God makes. Yes,
such a man may do much (ministerially and instrumentally) for he is the
Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. Certainly God could have given
Cornelius direction what to do without sending him to Peter; it was as easy
for him to have said, Cornelius, do this or that, as to say, Send for Peter and
he shall tell thee what to do, Acts 10. 6. But God sends him to Peter, and
Peter must come, and direct him in a set Sermon, that God might keep up the
credit of his Messengers, and his standing Ordinances. There are special
promises to this purpose to be fulfilled to the people of God in public
Assemblies of the Church. Isai 56. 7. I will make them joyful (says God) but
where? in my House of Prayer; which was (among the Jews) the Temple, and among
the Gentiles any place of public Worship. Isai. 60. 7. I will glorify the
House of my glory. And it is remarkable, that in both places the Promises are
made to the Gentiles when they should be converted, as appears by the Context.
God would have an house of Prayer, places of public Assemblies, in the Gentile
Church, and in them, God has promised to make his people joyful. Come forth
here all ye old Disciples, experienced Christians, and give in evidence from
your experience. Cannot you say, that the banner of love which God has spread
over your souls, was lifted up in these Banqueting Houses? Has he not here
stayed your souls with flagons, and comforted you with apples? Cant. 2.

2 Prayer. There is an holy Conference and Dialogue between God and the soul in
holy Duties. This of Prayer is the Duty in which we speak, and the Word and
Seals are the ways in which God speaks. We ask Counsel in Prayer, God answers
in them; We ask strength and peace in this, God returns answers of peace in
them, and we reply in thanksgiving again. God in the Word tells us what he is
offended at in us; we confess it in Prayer, he assures us we are pardoned in
the Word, etc. We return thanks in prayer again. And indeed, this is the way
how to know Gods mind; as we know man's mind by desiring a conference and
proposing our doubts or dissatisfactions, and receiving his answers when he
gives them, or pressing for them, when he denies or estrangeth himself. Thus
David used to enquire of the Lord. Psalm. 27. 4. And when he had enquired in
prayer, then he holds his peace, and waits to hear what God will say, Psalm 85
8.

1 Neglect not this way of conference with God. Especially in the set seasons
thereof. They have a fancy among the Philosophers, of two needles touched with
the same Loadstone, which being set in two Compasses, written round with the
letters of the Alphabet, will conveigh intelligence from one friend to another
at the greatest distance. Thus each friend having recourse to his own Compass
at fixed times, shall find that as his friend at distance moves his needle to
any letter, his own, (without any touch of his) will turn to the same; so that
by putting together those letters, he may read his friends mind. I have not
faith enough to believe the conceit; but I can make a good use of it in
Spirituals, wherein I am sure it is true. Gods heart and thine are touched with
the same Loadstone of love, and if thou at seasons of conference shall have
recourse to the needle 1 John 4. 19
of thy heart, and by the experience of holy affections in prayer, shall point
out to God thy wants and burdens, the heart of God by a sacred sympathy, will
work the same way, and copy out thy case in his own bosom; and then it cannot
be long ere his fatherly compassions set the needle of his affections a turning
toward thee again, to produce a reciprocal assurance in thy heart by a like
secret sympathy. This the Scripture holds forth clearly. See Jer: 31, 18, 19,
20. There Ephraims needle first turns in confession, Thou have chastised me,
etc. Then Gods needle falls to work presently, to give him intelligence of
Ephraims complaint, Surely, I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself. And when
Ephraims story is done, then God falls to turning his needle by way of answer
to Ephraim, My bowels are troubled for him. Is Ephraim my dear son? Yes that he
is, and he shall know it too, For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still. Then comes the answer to Ephraims heart, I will surely have
mercy upon him, says the Lord.

Thence in the Text the Spirit, that is the witness from God to us, is the
Sollicitour within us to God. The same Messenger that carries our Letters,
brings our Answer, ver. 16.

Oh Friends, you know not what mischief Satan does to you by cooling your
hearts in prayer; nay, by prevailing with you only to neglect a set time of
prayer, public or private. If you appoint a friend a set time of meeting and
conference so often every day, and you fail him twice or thrice together
(especially when he knows you have none but trifling businesses to hinder you)
how can you expect but that he should serve you in the same kind? True, a man
may lay bonds upon himself in appointment of times of duty, which (as he may
order the matter; that is, if he lay them so upon himself as to pronounce it
absolutely unlawful upon any occasion to over-slip that very time) may prove
but snares to entangle his conscience: but yet on the other side; to set apart
appointed hours for this duty, as a convenient means to keep our heart from
framing petty occasions from hour to hour to put off the duty, and that with
resolution not to fail at the appointed time, but upon very weighty occasions,
and upon such failing at any time, to resolve to make up that defect doubly, as
soon as the occasion is over, sure, is a very profitable way for the getting
and keeping acquaintance with God. And no question if God find (as he knows)
that very slight occasions divert us from meeting him at fit or set times, but
he will be out of the way at other times, when our leisure will serve us to
seek him.

But this by the way concerning set times of prayer. 2.
2. A soul that wants the witness of Gods Spirit, though he neglect not those,
yet he will not content himself with them; but he must now and then visit the
Throne of Grace in extraordinary ways of duty, adding fasting to prayer, and
spending whole days in following hard after God. Certainly, this duty is much
neglected among Christians in these days, to what it has been formerly, both
in private and public. Surely, when Gods Saints were more acquainted with it,
there was far more acquaintance with God then (I fear, if I may ghess at others
condition by mine own) there now is.

There be some Devils (says our Savior) that will not be cast out without
prayer and fasting, Mar. 9. 29. so may I say in this case, there be some doubts
that will not be cast out of the soul till a man try this way? Not that fasting
adds any thing to prayer in it self, or by any proper efficiency of its own;
but it disposes a man to humiliation, and humiliati^ disposes a man to
partake of the secrets of Gods counsel, and especially in the matter of
particular assurance. Isai. 57. 15.

Caution
Yet is not this help so absolutely necessary as that I should put it in
practice under every condition of body: if I am not able without prejudice to
my health to bear fasting, I shall thereby more distemper my body, and
(consequently) more weaken my spirits, then is convenient or indeed lawful;
and thereby give greater advantage to Satan to trouble my tired mind, then he
had before.

In such a case, commend thy condition to the public prayers of the Church,
especially upon days of solemn seeking God. If persons be sick, and in danger
of death, then a Minister shall have a bill handed to him to pray for their
bodily health, (and that is good, that in these days wherein every Ordinance of
God, and Duty of ours grows into disreputation, men show they value the
prayers of the Church:) but I wonder that among all our bills, there are no
complaints of soul-sicknesse. Oh Beloved, it would do a Ministers heart good
(as we say) to receive a score or two of bills upon a Sabbath day to this
purpose. One that has an hard heart, that has been often heated and is grown
cold again, one that has been long under conviction, and finds no gracious
issue of it; one that cries aloud after God, and can have no Answer; one that
is assaulted with fearful temptations, that cannot get any evidence of Gods
love, and goes heavily all the day long, etc. desires their prayers.

It may be God expects you should thus make many friends to speak to him, that
thanks may be rendered by many on your behalf, (as the Apostle expresses
himself in a like case, 2 Cor. 1. 11.) And neglect not to be present as often
as possibly thou can at the public prayers of the Church, especially such as
are put up in relation to thy case. There is a remarkable story of one out of
whom by the prayers of Mr. Rothwell, an eminent Minister of late years in the
North, See Clark in the life of Rothwell.
and some faithful Brethren, a Devil was cast; the man yet continuing dumb for
some years after, till he being present in a Congregation where he was
particularly prayed for, at the close of the petition God opened his mouth, and
he said, Amen publicly, and spoke to Gods glory ever after.

So in thy case, who knows whether God reserves comfort for thee to be
dispensed in such a way?

Lastly, Every day the Saints of God (especially under bondage and darkness)
can find occasional times; to knock at the door of grace, when they are at
leisure from necessary employments. There be some haunts where most men bestow
themselves, in the intervals of business, in the breathing times between one
employment and another. One man fills up these breaches, parentheses, and odd
ends of time with idle discourse, another with such and such pastimes
(lose-times we may better call them, as commonly they are used;) a third haunts
the Alehouse, or a worse place, it may be: but such a souls usual haunt as I
am speaking of, in those fragments of time, is, the throne of grace; and
prayer, and holy conference with God in other private Duties, that is his
pastime. Will you know where David haunts at midnight, when he cannot sleep? At
midnight will I arise and Psalm 63. 6.
praise thee, 119. 62. Will you know where his haunt is after meals? Not only
evening and morning, but at noon also will I cry unto thee, Psalm. 55. 17. If
you enquire what time he begins in the mornings, see Psalm 119. 147. I
prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried. In a word, (to shut up this
head) some people (I know) charge this way of seeking assurance, with trusting
in Duties, and the persons that so seek, with pride in them. But sure there is
more pride in not condescending to beg, then in begging. 'Twere an unheard
thing that a beggar should be proud of his trade: He that prays feelingly, has
the greatest security against pride.

CHAP. XVI. Concerning seeking Assurance in Sacraments. Where a practical
Question, whether and how Baptism administered in Infancy, can be helpful
hereunto.
THis assurance is promoted by Sacraments.

These we call by the warrant of St. Paul the Apostle, seals, Romans 4. 11. Now
the Spirit that is the personal seal, may make use of the Sacraments as the
instrumental seals of this assurance.

1. Baptism. I mean not the repetition of it, which is a course some vain
people are seduced unto, in hope to get comfort by it; but many have found it
has been an occasion of many sad and fearful Apostacies from the standing
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, and so has eaten out the heart of their love to,
and zeal in following God in them, whiles their prejudices to their former
baptism, have caused prejudices against the Ministers that dispensed it, and
the Churches wherein they received it, and so they have proceeded by degrees,
(as finding no persons or administrations free from exception) to throw off all
ways of worship and duty altogether, which when they have been made to see the
evil of their way (as it may by Gods goodness come to pass, though seldom it
do) they find all the peace they got in those ways was but mere imposture.

But I mean, the renewed meditation of the spiritual signification, and end of
that seal of the Covenant, which (having been applied to thee in thy infancy)
becomes of force to thee as soon as thou come to know and to accept of the
Covenant in the serious choice and intention of thy heart.

One main intent of Baptism is, to work an assurance of the pardon of sin,
by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ: And herein it answers to
Circumcision. Col. 2. 11, 12. compared with Romans 4. 11. Which Circumcision was
a seal of the Righteousness, which is by faith, i. e. of the righteousness of
Christ made ours by faith for justification.

It Is called the baptism of repentance, for remission of sins; that is,
signifying and sealing forgiveness of sins to the conscience of a penitent
sinner. Now if a man Mark 1. 3.
have not only a great Landlords word, but his seal. to assure him of such an
estate, he is confident thereupon, to abide a trial at law before a just Judge:
so if thou make a right use of this seal, thou may plead it whenever
Conscience shall sit upon thee, and call into question thy Spiritual or eternal
condition.

Think now and then upon thy baptism and the end of it, and labor from thence
to rise to a belief of the performance of that to thee in truth, which was
sacramentally exhibited to thee in the sign. And know this, That laying hold
of the graces promised, and sealed in Baptism, upon the terms convenanted,
gives thee a just and legal claim to them.

Object. But this Sacrament was administered to me in my infancy, and therefore
I want the lively, and sensible application of the element to me, which might
possibly (if it were now to be done) prove effectual to give me this assurance.
What use can I make of such a past Sacrament? Were it not beter to re-new it?

Answ Thou may make the same use of it as the Jews did of circumcision,
although many years after. The Jews children no more saw their own circumcision
understandingly, then thou did thy Baptism.

Object. Yea: but the mark of Circumcision (says Anabaptists) was visible
afterward, and so though they were circumcised in infancy, yet they might know
that they were so, otherwise then by bare relation. But I know that I am
baptized merely by the relation of friends or the Register.

Answ. The Jews, when men, might see that their foreskin had been cut off: but
that it was done in a sacramental way, they knew only by relation, as we have
our Baptism. For how did a Jew know that he was borne of Jewish Parents, and
not of Ishmaels posterity, or Esaus, among whom circumcision continued, when
the Covenant was removed from them, but by tradition? But I will rell thee how
thou shall improve even thy Infant Baptism. Whenever then thou see that
sacrament administered upon others, reflect upon thy self, and draw an Argument
of Assurance from it thus. Lo here (my soul) the blood of Christ (in the
element of water) not only powered out, but applied to yonder little one. And
has not God done as much for me? And has he thus sealed to me the promise of
pardon, and shall I not believe it? Have not I performed (by his grace) my 1
Pet. 3. 21. Anima non lavatione, sed responsione sancitur. Tert. l. de
resurrectione carnis.
part of the Covenant, in the answer of a good conscience, seriously desiring
and resolving to take him for my God, and do my duty to him to the utmost, in
the strength of Christ? And shall I doubt his performance on his part? Did not
God show his willingness to receive me into his favor, and pardon my sins,
when he was so gracious as to seal his Covenant to me in my very infancy? Sure,
that was a great mercy to me, that God afforded me that seal then, whereas if I
had lived unbaptised to these years, possibly my scrupulous spirit would have
kept me from it altogether, as being unfit to receive it (as now it See more of
this in another Treatise of the same Author concerning the practical use of
Infant Baptism, lately published.
does from the other Sacrament.) Now, seeing the Lord has prevented me with
this mercy, and claimed me before I could claim him, let me not think he will
not hold his claim to me now I do claim and lay hold upon him; and let me not
doubt but if I follow after him, I shall in time apprehend that for which I am
apprehended (in this visible way of claim) by Christ.

2. The Lords Supper. This is an Ordinance in which (rightly received)
Assurance comes on horseback to the soul, if I may so speak. so many speaking
actions, and so many special applications, in the name of Christ, by a
Minister standing in the stead, and representing the person of Christ, may
probably be the means to conveigh this blessed message to thy soul from Jesus
Christ. Son or Daughter, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

CHAP. XVII. Containing some practical cases concerning the Lords Supper with
relation hereunto.
BUt here arises an objection.

Object. I am not a fit receiver, without this Testimony of the Spirit, which
you speak of: and therefore it is improper to bid me seek that testimony this
way, whereas I cannot apply my self to this way, till I have it in actual
assurance.

Answ. Hereto I answer Negatively. That proposition which is the ground of thy
mistake is but mistaken for truth; to wit, That none is a fit receiver of the
Sacrament of the Lords Body and Blood, but one that is certified by the
Testimony of the Spirit that he is a Child of God. This is that that puzzles
and embroyls many a poor soul, that he knows not which way to take, between
sinning against Gods invitation in refusing to come, and against the
institution in coming unworthily.

But I hope to speak a word satisfactorily in this case. That this is a
mistaken principle I prove by this Argument.

The actual assurance mentioned, is not required under any of those things
wherein we are to examine our selves before we come, therefore it is not
necessary to make a fit receiver.

The graces to be examined (among the Protestant Divines) are usually these
four, Knowledge, Faith, Charity, and Repentance.

Under Knowledge, Charity, and Repentance, I believe no man comprehends the
certainty of his interest in Christ; they being graces (in their natures) quite
different from it, though possibly in some higher actings of them it be
supposed. I dare not think there can be none of these without Assurance.

All the doubt is concerning Faith, whether the Faith required to the receiving
the Lords Supper, be not Faith of persuasion, that I am a Child of God, from
the Testimony of the Spirit?

I conceive the Faith required to my coming to the Lords Supper, is no more but
the having accepted the terms of Salvation revealed through Christ, my having
claimed my share in the free offer thereof in the Gospel, and my reliance and
dependence upon Gods faithfulness in the making that claim good unto me. And
if I can find these acts have seriously (to my utmost knowledge and search) been
performed by me, I need examine no further whether I have sufficient Faith to
fit me for the Sacrament And my grounds are.

1. Because by these acts there is a real application of the soul to Jesus
Christ for justification, which the Scripture expresses by coming to Christ,
believing and trusting in him, as was before shown: and of Christ to the soul,
which is expressed by receiving him; and Psalm 2. 12 John 1. 12
in these acts the nature of faith, as it applies Christ for justification is
sufficiently expressed. Now those that come to Christ cannot be supposed to
have the witness of the Spirit in their heart that they are Christ's.

For rest, or peace of Conscience (which is the immediate fruit of that
assuring Testimony of the Spirit) is promised as the consequent of coming to
Christ, Mat. 11. 28. and becoming the children of God, (which is less then
knowing we are so) is set down as the consequent of receiving Christ, Joh. 1.
20 And therefore (by the way) to receive Christ, is not to know that I am a
child of God, but to apply my self to him, that I may be so. And as for
trusting or believing in Christ, that it is truly done without actual
assurance, is clear, because trusting in Christ the object of the Gospel, is
spoken of by way of distinction from this sealing or assuring act of the
Spirit, as that which goes before it, Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom after ye heard, ye
trusted; and after ye believed (...), Aor. 1. Postqua^ credidisseti^ not, (...)
dum credidistis.
(or trusted) ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise; and received its
earnest See also 1 John 5. 13. Now coming to Christ, receiving Christ, applying
Christ for Justification, is sufficient qualification to enable a man to
receive the Sacrament with profit, Because where spiritual life is, there is a
right to all such food as may strengthen it

2. The Sacrament is a Seal of the Covenant in all its promises. Now Promises
become mine by claim and relyance. If then I have right only to one Promise;
nay, if I can but lay claim to one, I may come to the Sacrament to have that
sealed to me. Suppose this; I find my heart made weary of sin, and account it
the greatest burden in the world, I apply my self to Christ to ease me of it:
hereupon I lay claim to the Promise thus, Lord Jesus, thou have done thus for
me, (blessed be thy name) whereas I accounted sin a pleasure once, now I
account it a burden; make good thy Promise to me, ease me, I claim this on the
credit of thy Promise; Mat. 11. 28. If hereupon I come to the Sacrament,
desiring God to seal to this Promise which I lay hold upon, I cannot be said to
come unworthily, though I have no witness in my heart from the Spirit that I
belong to Christ. I told you before, that it is the claiming of Christ, and
standing to that claim, and being resolved to adventure my soul upon it, that
entitles me to him, and that that entitles me to Christ, gives me a right to
the Sacrament, as I said but now, upon the former head.

Object. But let this faith be what it will; I must know that I have it, ere I
come: else it is in vain to require Examination before I come. And if so, then
it is all one (for substance) to be assured that I am in Christ, and to be
assured that I believe in him, because believing in him necessarily implies
being in him.

Answ. Sacramental Examination does not presuppose a necessity of a certain or
assured knowledge, that I have the graces which I examine my self for. But only
a finding those acts in my self which ordinarily those graces appear in (my
heart dealing plainly and faithfully with it self in the search) and my earnest
desire and endeavor that they may be true, though at present I see not that
they are true, supposing that I see nothing of weight (according to the rule of
the Word) to judge them false. Nay, if I should see cause to condemn those
former acts, which I took for gracious, as false and unsound; yet upon that
conviction, if I seriously labor to set them right now, I ought not to keep
from the Sacrament for that, but to draw nigh, and from thence to expect
strength to prosper my endeavors, and give me evidence (in Gods time) of the
reality of them. If this were not true, then every Christian under desertion
and doubting must be excluded from the Sacrament. And surely, if so, the
fittest persons that can be will be debarred; there being none more fit for a
strengthening Ordinance then such souls. To exemplify the present case. A man
examines his faith, repentance, etc. he finds some such acts as look like the
acts of those graces yet he doubts whether they were true or no; he therefore
examines faith by the rule of the Word, purifying the heart, working by love,
overcoming the world; Repentance, by hatred of sin, of all sin, sincere
endeavors of future obedience; some such things as these he sees no sufficient
ground to conclude he has not; and yet he thinks he may deceive himself in
thinking that he has them.

Here is his case: What shall this man do? Shall he come to the Supper or no?

I answer, Yes. For I am fit for the Sacrament, when my heart does not upon
good grounds condemn me: Unwarrantable Scruples do not unfit me: it is not
required that my heart do always clearly absolve me. See what John faith in
this case, 1 John 3. 20. If our hearts condemn us not, (he does not say if
they actually absolve us, many needless Scruples may hinder that) but if they
condemn us not, (it must be meant of the conscience enlightened by the Word: An
ignorant wordlesse conscience its absolution or condemnation is nothing in this
case, but an enlightened conscience) then have we confidence; i. e. ground of
confidence, toward God. And by consequence ground of approach to those Seals
in which this confidence is bestowed, and increased.

2 It is not necessary to a worthy participation of the Lords Supper, that I be
able satisfactorily to evidence to my own heart the truth of every grace
required thereunto. One grace sometimes may be more conspicuous then another.
And it is sufficient it I can see any thing in my self of the new creature,
though I know not how to improve it by Argument, to prove such or such a grace
thereby. For example, sometimes repentance may be more conspicuous to a man
then faith, sometimes love more visible then both. sometimes a man may be able
to see neither of them all distinctly, yet he sees something which he cannot
but acknowledge is a fruit of a mighty and supernatural change; and this change,
he finds, he cannot rest till it be increased and improved to greater
perfection If he can see nothing else, yet he finds earnest and hearty desires
after Christ, not only as a fountain of pardoning, but also of purging grace.
These desires (as far as he can judge) are not counterfeit, though many times
weak. Now in such a case as this, the soul must consider, that Christ has
promised not to break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. Though a
man's grace be very infirm (if it be not a staff but a reed, and a reed too not
firm, but bruised,) and though the kindlings of grace be but in smoking flax,
(a Metaphor taken from those that kindle a fire, that put some pilled stalks of
flax or straw, or some such combustible thing under the wood to make it burn,
which if it be moist will not flame out by and by, but smoke a while, and then
kindle) though grace be but yet an embryo, as fire in smoking flax, which a
man can scarce tell whether it will burn or no: yet God will not quench, that is,
he will make much of it (as a servant does of a little spark of fire in a wisp
of straw) and gently blow it up till it flame, Isai. 42. 3. He is to consider,
moreover, that he ought to conclude from these small measures (as far as he is
groundedly persuaded that they are true) that though he cannot see faith,
repentance, love, yet where these desires are, they are good signs of a
gracious change, though yet but in the beginning, and a gracious change
comprehends every grace in kind; and it concerns him to come to the Sacrament
to promote it.

Caution. Yet let me add (lastly) that I speak not this to encourage a lazy
credulousness by which we are apt to be easily persuaded (without any
sufficient enquiry) to take it for granted that we have grace, because we have
now and then some good wishes, when as our own hearts, if they were well
searched, would witness to us, the faintness, coldness, inconstancy, laziness
of our affections toward heavenly things (especially in comparison with those
large measures of earnestness, importunity and diligence with which they are
attended in the things that concern this present life) which might be a
sufficient confutation of all our good conceits that we have of our selves.
Friends, take heed that you do not make such truths as these a protection for
your supine negligence to examine your selves more thoroughly and exactly. The
truth is, the persons to whom this cordial is intended, are only those, who
after earnest enquiry after their own estate from other evidences, are driven
to this Sanctuary as their last refuge; not to those who because they will spare
their pains to enquire more at large, and particularly fly to this as the most
compendious way, and that wherein least pains is required, to satisfy
themselves concerning their condition. Yet I fear such truths, by Gods just
judgment, accidentally stumble many souls: and no wonder, the Doctrine of free
grace, I dare say, accidentally, damnes millions.

CHAP. XVIII Three other Directions, And a Case of Conscience concerning the
discerning the Motions of the Holy Spirit from tentations, and the inclination
of our own hearts.
3 TAke notice of the least approaches Direct. III.
of the Spirit of God to the soul in a witnessing way, and follow them by
Meditation and Prayer. Sometimes the witness of the Spirit is not full and
through to the satisfaction of all our doubts, yet it speaks something tending
that way: it speaks many things severally and by parcels, which laid together
would amount to a full Testimony. Now in such cases a soul must be very watchful
to take and improve the least hints of the Spirit. As in an humane Testimony,
the witnesses that witness in a case before a Judge, do not all speak
point blank to the case in question, but sometimes very faintly, brokenly, and
imperfectly. Now a good Judge in such a case, does not slight such Testimonies,
as come not full up to a business, but observes and retains in memory every
thing that is deposed, though very defective as to a full proof; and at last,
what one testimony did not sufficiently clear in terminis, many testimonies
will make up a full proof of, if laid together by a skilful and judicious
Lawyer.

This Art we find the Church using in desertion. Cant. 29. There she discovers
Christ first at a distance, leaping upon the Mountains, removing the great
impediments to the manifestation of himself; suppose conquering mountainous
corruptions, and mountainous temptations; suppose, deadness and flatnesse of
heart in duty, etc. which looks like a mountain of separation between Christ
and the soul, ver. 8. she finds her self unexpectedly enlarged and opened in
her addresses to him: Thence she concludes, he is a coming, he prepares his way
(as it is said in another case of John) he makes every mountain and hill low.
Isai. 40. 4. and every valley he exalts, that he may make his way smoother;
then she espies him behind the wall, looking in through the lattess; nearer
then he was, but yet he stands much undiscovered: the wall and the lattess here
(it may be) are the obstacles of prejudice, and doubting, and distrust in our
own hearts, which keep us from seeing Christ clearly when he comes to us; but
yet something of Christ shines through them, and the Church takes notice of
these dark approaches, puts a [Behold] upon them all. Behold, he comes,
behold, he stands behind our wall. And at last he calls her forth into a
pleasant converse and walk with him, v. 10. 11. and there fully manifests
himself to her.

If God write thee a love-letter, though the hand in which it is written be but
uneven, and it be not to be read but by spelling every word; will thou not take
that pains, that thou may understand it? The spirits testimony when it comes
under Gods hand and seal to the heart, is oftentimes so obscurely written, that
a man is fain to spell and put together many words, experiences, providence to
make it up. However, the evidence may be sufficient, that is picked out of them
altogether. Think then, such a time, I was refresht at a sermon, enlarged
extraordinarily in such a Prayer, my heart was affected with an extraordinary
measure of tenderness in such a Sacrament. I was even ready to despair, and
God stayed me by a promise; even ready at another time to make away with my
self, and God stayed me with an unexpected providence, etc. All these put
together, may perhaps make up as much as this. Fear not, I am thy Salvation,
etc. Thy sins are forgiven thee. God answers sometimes Psalm 85. 8
in a soft voice, in a whisper, and it concerns us to observe narrowly, as
Benhadads servants, 1 Kings 20 33

4. Labor aft^r more of the Spirit of sanctification, and that is the way to
get the Direct. IV.
witness of the Spirit of Adoption. The spirit that seals us up to an holy
assurance, is an holy Spirit, Ephesians. 1. 13. This is certain, the more
holiness, the more assurance. The promise runs so. Isai. 32. 17. The work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and
assurance for ever. I conceive the place intends inherent righteousness,
comparing it with the former verses, where it is attributed to the Spirit, as
his work in barren hearts. The like promise we have from our Savior, Jo. 14.
21. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me,
and he that loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
manifest my self unto him. I am confident, the reason why many persons do not
recover an evidence of the Spirit assuring their consciences of their good
condition, is either that in their judgments they prefer peace before grace,
ease before holiness, and power out many more prayers and tears for those,
then for these: or else, that they content themselves with finding in
themselves some generalities of good desires, and sincerity in the main, and so
sit down in a form of godliness, contented to stand at that stay. Beloved, it
will concern us, to press hard after the Lord, to follow after, reach forward,
and press on (they are the phrases of the Apostle, Ph. 3 12, 13, 14.) that we
may apprehend that for which we are apprehended.

1. If an evidence be never so fair yet if we be careless of it, and let it
gather dust, or dirt, or filth, we may not be able to read it. And certainly
such a defiling, sullying thing is the guilt of sin. For sin making a man
obnoxious to the Law, occasionally ingenders to See in the case of David, Psalm
51. 12.
bondage, Gal. 4. 24.

2. Nor will the glory of God permit him to seal assuring evidences of his love
to such, whose conversation would reproach him, for admitting them to so much
intimacy. As to a Covenant Interest in God, so it is in Covenant peace when a
wicked man claims it, God stands upon terms of defiance, Psalm. 50. 16. What
have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thy back? To whom then will God
indulge such a boldness? See ver. 5. Gather my Saints together, and verse. 23.
who so orders his conversation aright, to him will I show the salvation of
the Lord.

3. Regular assurance (as I have told you before) arises from the discovery of
grace. Now the more large the matter of my assurance is, the more must my
assurance be. Me thinks the connection of these four verses, in Tit. 2. 11, 12,
13, 14. shows this. When grace that appears to us, teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts; etc. See what follows, then we are most likely
to look for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. And that prayer of the Apostle for his Ephesians speaks it as
loudly. That God would grant them to be strengthened by the spirit, etc. to be
rooted and grounded in love. And what then? That Ephesians. 3. 16, 17, 18.
ye may comprehend with all Saints, the length and breadth of the love of God.

5. Follow the guidance and conduct of the Direct. V.
Spirit in all things. Stifle not any motion of the spirit. Quench not the
Spirit. 1 These. 5. 19. Grieve not the Spirit, by unkind repulses. And that is
pressed upon this ground. Ephesians. 4. 30. by which ye are sealed to the day of
redemption. Certainly if we sadden the Spirit, the Spirit will not comfort us.
And there is nothing that saddens the Spirit of God more, then the dishonor,
and unkindnesse of a repulse. Great men, if they show extraordinary favors to
us, they expect we should observe them and be ready to serve them at every nodd
and beck.

1. He that will be a favorite in a Princes Court, and enjoy his constant
smiles, must be very careful of all punctilio's of observance. If you will
obtain the holy Spirits smiles, you can (surely) do no less, then observe
every breathing of the Spirit, and follow him where ever he leads. See v. 14.
of this Chapter in connection with my Text. They that are led by the Spirit of
God, those are they that receive this Spirit of Adoption, to call God Father.

2. The Spirit best knows the mind of God toward thee, and the season and way
wherein the Love of God will break out to thee: and if thou miss of following
any motion of the Spirit, thou may put thy self out of that very way wherein
thou might have found comfort, and assurance. The Spirit (it may be) urges
such or such a duty, and thou neglect'st it. How know thou, but had thou
been guided by the Spirit in such a motion, thou might have obtained that
that thou longest for? When the Spirit blows, thou must hoise thy sails, and
be assured, that gale can carry thee no whither, but to the region of peace and
comfort.

When the Angel conducted Peter out of Prison, he follows his deliverer,
step-by-step: So when the Spirit comes toward thee, to deliver thee from the
Spirit of Bondage, take heed thou leave him not one step. And the caution which
God gives to the Israelites when he brought them out of Egypt is very useful
here. Exodus 23. 20, 21. Behold, I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in
the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared. Beware of him,
and obey his voice, povoke him not, etc. Apply it to the present case. If God
send his Spirit before you, beware, obey his voice, etc.

Qu. But how shall I know the motions of the Spirit of God from temptations,
and the motions of my own heart?

Answ. 1. Thus, The Spirit of God always moves according to the Word. If I
leave the word in any thing, I cannot follow the Spirit.

It Is clear, that that Spirit is a Spirit of truth, and therefore cannot
contradict Joh. 14. 17.
himself; and those things which he delivers in the Word, he cannot deliver 2
Pet. 1. 19, 20. 21.
the contrary to them in my heart. The true evidence of the Spirit of God in
the heart, is dependence on the Word of God. 1 John 4. 6.

2. The Spirit of God always presses to some Duty or other, some exercise of
holiness or other. And when any motions arise in our hearts, prejudicing it
against any ordinance or duty of Religion, this prejudice is no motion of the
Spirit. We receive the Spirit in hearing, Gal. 2. 1, 2. Pray by the Spirit,
Ephesians. 6. 18.

3. The Spirit moves regularly, and orderly, makes not duties and ordinances to
clash and enterfere. The present opportunity of an ordinance, is the season of
the Spirit. If the Spirit come in a private ordinance, it is in its season; if
in a public, in its season. Public ordinances separated from, are not the
badge of the persons that have, but that want the Spirit. Jude 19.

CHAP. XIX. A Case. What is to be thought of a man that (as to his own sense,
and other men's) lives and dies without any experience of this Testimony?
Qu. SUppose I never attain the Testimony of the Spirit, but live and dye in a
state of darkness, (as to assurance of Gods love) what think you of my case?

Answ. 1. I suppose thou labourest after it diligently, and constantly, in the
use of all the means prescribed, and other such. Otherwise I have nothing to
say to thee in this case, but this; that that man is neither fit for assurance
here, or glory hereafter, that thinks much of his pains to attain them. But
supposing (as I said) I say to thee farther.

2. I know no place of Scripture that says, No man shall enter into the Kingdom
of God, that knows not of it before hand. I readily yield, the Papists teach
all believers a doctrine of desperation, when they tell us, that no man can be
assured of Salvation till he come to heaven: and I am confident that occasioned
many of our Protestant Divines, engaged in the Controversy against them, to
make persuasion of salvation of the essence of justistifying Faith: But I
conceive they needed not to have bended the bough so much that way, to set it
straight. It Is no good rule for Christian disputants, which is observed by
cunning tradesmen, Iniquum petere, ut aequum ferant, to ask double, that they
may persuade those with whom they deal, to give a sufficient price. I believe
this proposition, [Some believers are, and all believers may be assured of
t^eir Salvation in this life] well proved, sufficiently confutes the Papists
erroneous Thesis, that no believer can be assured. And I fear, the maintaining
the universal necessity of actual assurance to Salvation will trouble more
tender Protestants, then it ever confuted Papists. But to return where I left.
I say to thee, that propoundest the Question. Thou need not fear exclusion
from heaven for want of that which Scripture requires not as necessary to
Salvation. I must tell thee, that I verily believe, if any of Gods Saints dye
without some glimpse or other of Gods love, it is a rare case, and I persuade
my self God seldom takes a Saint of his away in such a sort, except such an
one as has so shamefully fallen, that it concerns God in point of honor if
he save him, to let no body know of it. Yet I dare not bar the door of heaven
against such an one as living holily, dies comfortless.

3. Labor to accept of, claim, and rely upon the Lord Jesus for Salvation, on
the terms of the Gospel. It Is impossible a soul should go to Hell, that can
cling fast to any promise, truly apprehended according to the intention of the
Gospel. There are three or four promises, I persuade my self, the reliance
whereon has ferried many humble souls to heaven, who have been afraid to say
in all their lives, I know that I am a child of God: those are, Mat. 11. 28.
Jo. 6. 37. Isai. 55. 1, 2. Apoc. 22. 17.

4. Lastly, (If thou think this will not serve the turn in such a case; I
think such a thought may condemn the generation of the Righteous. Are there not
some in the fruits of whose holy conversation both public and private, we see
abundant cause to pronounce them (by a judgment of charity) children of God,
would be by this judgment, condemned to Hell? concerning whom it cannot be
affirmed, either in their own knowledge, or the knowledge of others, that ever
they received this witness in their spirits to the last moment of their lives.
And truly (for my part) I humbly conceive this assuring Testimony of the spirit
to be part of our reward (as the Apostle calls the Spirit the earnest of our
inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 14.) and therefore God may choose whethe he will give any
part of it here or no, as he sees most suting his glory and our good. It Is for
his glory sometimes that his people are in Jobs case, Job. 13. 15.

CHAP. XX. The second Thesis, cleared by Scriptures and Reasons. A Case from
the first branch of the reason. Whether a man may be assured of his sonship a
priori, from the first Acts of Faith and Repentance in conversion.
COme we now to the second Thesis or proposition, which is.

The witness of the Spirit of Adoption, is a certain evidence of a state of
Adoption. [This arises from the connection of this verse with the former. In
the former, the Romans are told by the Apostle, that as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, are the Sons of God: this he confirms in my Text, and the
verse following. For says he, they that are led by the spirit, have ordinarily
the witness of the Spirit (who never witnesses to a falsehood) witnessing with
their own spirits, and upon that testimony enabling them to call God, Father.]
So much for the ground of the proposition. It amounts to no more then this,

That man may be certainly assured that he is a child of God, to whom the
spirit testifies, that he is so.

I shall not need be long in the proof of this point, but only lead you into
the consideration of some particulars; not so much for evidence of this truth
(although they will also make it out abundantly unto us) as for the clearer
opening to you some points by the way, which will yield some special use or
other, that will not so orderly fall in any where else.

The proof is partly Scripture; and partly Argument.


1. Scripture. The Spirits Testimony both concerning sin, righteonsnesse and
judgment is a convincing Testimony John. 16. 8, 9. 10, 11. that is, such a
Testimony as will not suffer any scruple to remain, but as soon as any appears,
it presently falls before the light of its evidence. There are also two
expressions, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. very full to this purpose. The Spirit seals the
Saints, puts a mark upon them, by which he knows them, and gives them ground
enough to know themselves to be the Children of God: (...). Spiritu ilso qui
non adfert legis and servitut is terrorem, sed promissionem gratuitae adoption
is obsignat in credentiu animis. Est autem hoc loco triplicatus Articulus
diligenter observandus. Beza in locum. And to this purpose it follows (...),
who is the earnest of our inheritance: So that it is clear, it is not merely a
privy s^al known to the Spirit alone, as that, 2 Timothy 2. 19. but a public
seal, by which the party himself, as well as others, may and ought discern
him to be an heir, and such an one as may sue for his inheritance as a debt.
For an earnest is nothing, if it be not a security to the receiver: the
principal intent of an earnest is to assure the party to whom it is given, of
the full payment. The mere giving of grace, (although it be materially an
earnest from God of eternal happiness, yet) is not a formal evidence to me,
till it work certainty in me; because I can no farther plead it, then I can
adventure my estate upon it.

To this purpose, and in the same expressions, the Apostle also speaks to the
Corinthians. 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22. (where you may also take notice of one clause
that confirms the exposition before-given of Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. and that is this.)
v. 21. He tells them that the confirmation of all the promises, both as preached
by Ministers and received by hearers, depends upon the merit of Christ. He
stablisheth us in Christ, i. e. by uniting us to him, by the communication of
the Spirit in and through them, from the Father. Now from the Spirit, the
Apostle draws two Arguments to assure them; the first is its renewing work,
(and that is the matter of our regular assurance, as I told you formerly) in
the words (...), who has anointed us. Now although there be an anointing
with gladness as well as grace, yet the anointing with grace is here meant,
because it is distingnished from that anointing by an [also] [(...) etc. v.
22.] who [also] has sealed us, and given the earnest of his Spirit in our
hearts. This is the second argument; its witnessing work, which is on Gods part
a sufficient assurance, and the reception of it renders it so also on our part.
So then the witness of the Spirit, is the seal and earnest that confirms all
the promises to us: they are yea and amen, sure and firm in Christ, by virtue
of his purchase, propter pretium solutum, as a barg^n is to the purchaser upon
consideration of the price, whether any man think them so or no: but it is the
Spirit that makes them sure to the parties for whom they are purchased, per
possessionem inchoatam, by an inchoated possession, as the Jews were put in
possession of the lard of Canaan by a few clusters of grapes; and a man enters
upon a great estate by the cutting of a turfe upon the land. Assurance is a
turfe of the land of promise, and this is put into our hands by the Spirit. I
could add many more places; I will name at present only one more, and that is
Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost that
is given to us. And what is the fruit of that abundant sheding abroad of the
Spirit? Hence it comes to pass, ver. 4. that our hope makes not ashamed. If
one man build upon the Testimony of another in businesses of concernment, and
when he comes to produce him in open Court, his Testimony come not up to the
business in hand, or his Testimony appear suspicious, a man does not only lose
his Cause, but his Hope also, and is publicly shamed for his confidence in
such a Testimony. But (says the Apostle) if the Holy Ghost shed abroad the
love of God in our hearts, i. e. plentifully assure us of it, the hope that is
grounded thereupon, will never make us ashamed. His Testimony will bear a man
and his cause up before the Judgment Seat of Christ, or his Deputy,
Conscience, whenever it shall be called in question, whether here or
hereafter, at the great day.

2. Reason. And herein consider two things,

I. The matter of the Assurance, which the Spirit gives regularly, is a
Demonstration. A Demonstration (say Logicians) is, Syllogismus Scientificus, an
Argument that produces a certain knowledge of the thing concluded.
Demonstration is of two sorts; (...), That, and Why.

(1) That a thing is. I can certainly prove, that the tree lives, because it
grows, and brings forth leaves and fruit; that a man is in a present good
temper of body, because he has a good pulse; and this is called Demonstratio
ab effectu, or Demonstratio (...). Thus the Spirit certainly proves that I am a
child of God by the Effects of Adoption; thus, He that is led by the Spirit of
God, is a Son of God: But this man is led by the Spirit of God; Therefore he is
the Son of God. Here is a certain Testimony. The Major of this Argument, [He
that is led by the Spirit of God, is the Son of God] is plain Scripture, and
sets forth the proper effect of being the Son of God, to be led by the Spirit,
or to endeavor to be holy in all manner of conversation. The Minor (or second
Proposition) is true by experience, which I see by the spiritual sense which,
the Spirit gives me; and therefore the conclusion is demonstratively true, Such
a man is a Son of God.

(2) Why it is. And this also has place here. I can certainly and
demonstratively prove, that it is day, because the Sun shines, that makes day.
So if the Spirit conclude thus, He that is begotten of God, is the Son of God;
But such a man is begotten of God; Therefore, etc. The Argument is
Demonstrative, and producing (where the Spirit sets it home) a certain assent.
This is Demonstratio (...), that concludes the Effect from the Cause.

Quest. But here is a Question, Whether a man may be assured of his good estate
by an Argument, a priori? that is, by that which constitutes him in such an
estate; as (suppose) Whether a man may know that he is a child of God from the
very act of his conversion which constitutes him such? or rather, Whether his
only evidence that he is a child of God, be not from the effects of his
relation to God, and that converting grace that made him so? because grace in
its first generation is dark.

Answ. Hereunto I answer in a word,

1. If the Spirit may and does sometimes immediately testify, or mediately but
not by Argument; (as has been declared heretofore) then he can assure a man
without the present use of either of these means to prove it so, that he can
(if he please) work an immediate consent to this Proposition at first
conversion; I am at this instant begotten of God, which is the Minor
Proposition in the Syllogism, which is an implicit assurance, that such an
one is a child of God.

2. The Spirit testifying, as he ordinarily does (i. e. by Arguments) is at
liberty to use his own Arguments to satisfy the conscience; and the evidence
or in-evidence of the Propositions shall not hinder the assent of the soul to
the conclusion, if the Spirit give light to them. If the Spirit will tell a
soul under his own vis plastica, in the very womb of renewing grace in the act
of Regeneration, This work I am now working is a regenerating work, God is now
begetting true grace in thy heart, therefore thou art a child of God; I know
not why it should not be a demonstrative evidence; because the truth of this
Conclusion, Thou regenerated person art a child of God, depends on the truth of
this Proposition, Every one whom God begets to a life of grace is a child of
God. And so certainly from Scripture, The Assumption, But thou art one whom God
at this instant has begotten to a life of grace, is true, by the evidence of
the Spirit, testifying to a man's own spirit, who by spiritual sense is enabled
to feel that work upon himself. And therefore this evidence may be a sure
evidence, though it be a priori.

Yet would I be understood warily in what Cautions.
I say herein. 1. I only affirm a possibility of receiving Assurance this way,
not an usual or ordinary course of the Spirit toward all or any that I know in
particular; because it is that which I hear oftentimes pleaded for by some of
Gods precious ones, whose experience in this secret work of the Spirit may be
more then mine; I cannot say less then this: Yet for the sake of others of an
Antinomian spirit, that reject all trial by the effects of Regeneration, which
I still affirm to be the usual rode. way of the Spirit in giving Assurance, I
dare not say more.

2 Remember that before I told you, that habitual and fixed, settled,
permanent, actual Assurance, is collected from the fruits of the Spirit that
follow the first act of uniting grace; though a present, temporary, actual
Assurance, may possibly be given in the very moment of actual union between
Christ and the soul. And therefore it concerns every one that has been so
assured at first, not to rest there, but to endeavor to ratify and habituate
that assurance to himself by Arguments a posteriori, from the effects of that
converting grace which he has for the present had actual Assurance of.

II. The formal act of Assurance (as it is the work of the Spirit testifying
our Sonship from such Arguments as have been mentioned, or without them) is
likewise certain, and evidencing, if we consider the witness who thus
testifies, the Holy Spirit of God. In whom there are these things considerable,
which make a witness credible. 1. Knowledge. 2. Faithfulness. 3. Disengagement.


1 Knowledge. This testimony is between two parties, God and Man; therefore 1 John 5. 6, 7. The Spirit witnesses in heaven and in earth too. The Spirit of
God knows both thoroughly, and not only the parties, but all their thoughts and
actions; he knows the Scriptures, he knows the mind of God, yea, even in the
deepest things, Gods secret decrees and intentions concerning men, and their
final and eternal condition, which are called, (...), the depths of God, 1 Cor.
2. 10. even those (...), of which the Apostle speaks, Romans 11. 33. concerning
which, in a way of admiration and amazement, he pronounces an utter
unsearchablenesse by all power of nature, and these (...) he searches out, i.
e. enables his people to search out: he can enable his people (for he is God,
and needs not himself search for that knowledge) to search into the very decree
of God concerning their eternal predestination to life. And no wonder, for all
those secrets of God come through his hands (as we say.) He had the drawing up
of all the eternal Records of Gods Decree. He is (let it be understood with
reverence) the Secretary of God, as a man's spirit is his Secretary, and only
knows what is in him, 1 Cor. 2. 11. See how the Apostle enlarges upon that
Subject in the former place; compare ver, 4, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12. And all those
things that are done in nature or grace, they come through the hands of the
Spirit. See in Creation, Genesis 1. 2. Redemption; He miraculously operates in the
Conception of Christ, Luke 1. 35. in the anointing him, Isai. 61. 1, 2. Luke 4.
18. Regeneration, Job. 3. 5. Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1. 2. He must needs be an
able witness to the works that he does himself. Then (for the knowledge he
has of man,) See Psalm 139. 7. compared with the preceding and the following
verses, Romans 9. 1. Thou know no good in thy self, but the Spirit of God
knows it, because he is the Author of it. He knows all thy sins, and
therefore when he brings under Bondage, he can and does set all our secret sins
in order before our eyes. A man sees himself by a new light, Psalm. 50. 21. So
in Assurance, he gives a man a clear sight of that in himself, which before he
could not see. The Spirit knows thy secret groans, because he makes
supplications in them, Romans 8. 26. Thy secret graces are his fruits, Gal. 5.
22. He knows the meaning of the Scriptures, and can apply comfort soundly,
according to the mind of God, 2 Pet. 1. 21.

2 Faithfulness. A man that is not known to be of sufficient credit for
honesty and faithfulness in his words, is not admitted for a sufficient
witness; but an honest man that makes conscience of his words, is credible in
every Court and case. The Spirit is such a witness, John 15. 16. He is called
the Spirit of Truth. Indeed Truth is his Essence, for he is God, and he cannot
lie but he will cease to be God. 1 John 5. 6. The Spirit bears witness of
the blood of Justification, and the water of Sanctification; but how are we
assured his witness is true? He answe^eth, because the Spirit is Truth. The
Spirit will never be induced to give a false evidence. He never calls good
evil, or evil good. The strength of divine consolations lies in this, that it
depends upon the credit of God, who cannot possibly lie. Heb. 6. 17, 18.

3 He is disengaged. And that adds a third particular.

1 To the value of his Testimony. The Spirit is no way a party with them for
whom he testifies; stands in no relation to us farther then he assumes us into
communion with himself of mere grace, gets no benefit to himself by his
Testimony, even the glory that he gets by it adds nothing to him. If our own
hearts witness alone, they are parties, and may flatter themselves. If Satan
witness, he is also a party, in that he seeks his own end; viz. the eternal
undoing of poor souls with himself by such a delusive comfort.

2 Nay more, the Spirits Testimony is the Testimony of one whom we have often
resisted, grieved, vexed, quenched. Now though a persons testimony whom a man
has offended, avail not against him in Law, yet a discontented persons
Testimony for him with whom he is offended, is of great force. And yet is the
Spirits Testimony even against a man no less true, because the sinner stands
as an enemy against the Holy Ghost, because partly, that Testimony is for his
good; and partly, because (though an enemy, yet he has often labored to
persuade the sinner against whom he witnesses, to be reconciled, which takes
away all suspicion of malice from the Spirits condemning testimony.) But I here
show only this, that if notwithstanding a state, and acts of enmity, the
Spirits Testimony be valid against a man; it must needs be more probable when
it speaks for him, though actually offended by him. So much for the proof.

CHAP. XXI. A Case, Whether this Privilege be so certain, as it excludes all
doubting?
HEre it will be needful to handle a Question before Application; that is,

Quest. Whether this Evidence be such, as to admit no doubting?

To which I answer.

1) The Testimony of the Spirit is sometimes full and plain to the point;
sometimes it is but partial, and speaks something toward it, but not
thoroughly to satisfaction. A full Testimony is a satisfying testimony, and
cannot at the same time admit of partial doubting, This is called full
assurance. But Heb. 6. 4.
a partial evidence may admit partial diffidence There is therefore a rejoicing
with fear and trembling, Psalm. 2. 11. though the matter of it may be
sufficient at another time to evidence; yet it will not do it then.

2) Full assurance, arising from an entire and home-testimony of the Spirit at
one time, may admit such measures of doubting and diffidence at another time,
as may raise strong prejudices against it self, Sometimes a Saint is at the top
of the ladder of Assurance, ready to put his foot on the threshold of heaven it
self; and at other times under such a sad pang of doubting and diffidence, as
brings him to the very brink of hell. See David, Psa. 27. 1. and 4. 6. and 51.
8, 11. and 42. and 43. ult. and 13. 1. and Job, Job 19. 25. and 6. 4.

But this arises not from defect in the evidence, but in the man's use of it.
If I have never so good an evidence, and lay it out of the way, or blot it; the
fault is not in my Evidence, if the Title be questionable again which it
confirms. And the truth is, very few of Gods people enjoy an un-interrupted
actual Assurance. Indeed it is such a sparkle of glory that a soul cannot bear
it. And as a Testimony, though never so full to a Cause, so that in one Court
it carries the judgment without farther ado, may be upon review in another
Court called into question again, and be perplexed so by a cunning Lawyer, that
it may seem questionable again: So the evidence of the Spirit, that once gave
full assurance in the conscience, may by Satan be brought to the Court of sense
and reason, and made disputable again. Yet as to habitual assurance, it is
true, that it can never be quite extinguished by doubting. It may be dipped,
but not drowned: It may be in a swoune, but not dye. A Saint may say to Satan
when he tryumphs most over his assurance, as the Church, Mic. 7, 8 9. Rejoice
not over me, etc. when I am in darkness, etc. God has promised it, Isa. 57 15,
16, 17. Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm
306.

And indeed, Assurance being Gods Seal and Earnest, if this gift of God be not
without repentance, neither is his Covenant for eternal life and glory
irrevocable. If God recall his Earnest, he recants his bargain; as the taking an
earnest back again among m^n makes the bargain void, and the pu^ling off a Seal
cancels the Deed.

Yet let me not herein be mistaken I would Caution.
not be conceived to affirm, that a child of God always recover his Assurance
again after loss, in this life, in as full a measure as he once had it. A man
may lose his Assurance for his ill managing of it, and possibly such may be the
hainousness of such a miscariage, as may provoke God to let him lie long under
broken bones; and whenever by renewed repentance he recovers it, he may justly
withdraw from him some measures of that boldness and confidence in his
presence, which he had before. Nay, I know not why a true child of God, may not
after lost Assurance (if lost in such a way of provocation on his part) go
mourning all his days, and hardly ever be able to Isai. 3^. 15.
act it again directly and formally; yet the habit of it may be still firm and
unmovable, and in it self still capable to be reduced into act, but that he is
by reason of those obstructions which he has laid in his own way incapable of
reviving the Acts of it. Now that even in such an one the habit of it remains
still, is evident from hence, that he still produces some visible fruits of
it, keeps up a contest, though but a weak and faint one, with doubting, and
does not quite lay down the weapons to despair; that though he apprehends his
hopes exceeding small, yet he will not be bought out of them by all Satan's
offers, and even in this darkness many times chooses affliction for
righteousness sake; as that holy Martyr, that under those sad desertions was
going to the stake, and re^olved to dye, though he had not received that actual
assurance again, which made him cry out. He is come He is come. But Glover.
all these acts are not the direct acts of Assurance, but indirect and vertual
acts, such as suffice to keep the life and soul of Religion together (as we use
to express our selves;) but such as discover much of the vigor of a Saints
spiritual constitution to be impaired.

Other Questions there are that might be pr^mised here; but I shall find time
to take them up in the Application.

CHAP. XXII Popish Doctrine concerning doubting and uncertainty, confuted. Our
own certainty and Assurance of Salvation examined. Where several Cases
concerning the distinction of the Spirits testimony from Satan's or our own
hearts.
THis affords us matter of Confutation of the Erroneous Doctrine of doubting
Application.
and uncertainty which the Papists, and persons among our selves un-experienced
in the things of God, take for truth; viz. that a man cannot in this life, be
certainly assured of his own salvation. These persons rob the Holy Spirit of
one of his special Offices, that of being the Comforter; the Lord Jesus, of one
of the glorious fruits of his Ascension, which is the sending the Holy Ghost to
his people to that end; God the Father of a great deal of glory and service, at
least of the most noble and generous part of it, that that proceeds from love
and thankfulness; the Saints of their greatest encouragement to obedience,
support in tribulations, comfort in sufferings, and hope in death; and lastly,
evacuate one main end of the very Scriptures themselves, which were therefore
(at least) a main part of them, written, that the Saints may know that they
have eternal life, 1 John 5 13. And if there were no other reason why we should
abhor the Romish Synagogue, yet were this sufficient, that they professedly
hold forth a Doctrine of despair, that is, such a Doctrine, in which a man can
neither comfortably live nor dye. But it is no wonder that those that preach up
the merit of works, should preach down certainty of Salvation; for if God love
me or hate me, as I believe or not believe, obey or not obey, persevere or not
persevere, its no wonder if from the sight of my own frequent failings, I be in
a perpetual hesitancy as to my estate. No certainty in the conclusion can be
gathered from uncertain premises.

Use 2. This lets us know, whether the persuasion that we have of our own good
condition, and the peace and joy that possibly we get therefrom, be sound and
certain, or no. If the Spirit witness it, it is sound; if the Spirit witness
it not, it is suspicious, and can afford no sufficient and satisfactory peace
unto our spirits.

Quest. But how shall I know whether the persuasion that I have, that I am a
child of God, do proceed from the Testimony of the Spirit, or no? May not Satan
be the Author of such a persuasion, and may not I reason my self into it? and
if so, how shall I know the Spirits testimony from these?

Answ. This is a very difficult Question: And therefore I shall take up some
time more then ordinary to sift the difficulty to the bottom, and then take it
away, as God shall enable me.

Somethings I shall premise by way of Concession. As,

1 It is undoubtedly true, that Satan may so transform himself into an Angel of
light, as to suggest to a man a certain persuasion of his own good condition.
He is a lying spirit in the mouth of false Prophets and inspires them with
plausible Doctrines and comfortable dreams, where with they pronounce peace to
those to whom the Lord says, There is no peace. And this he does not only by
stupifying the consciences of profane wicked men, which occasions their crying
Peace to themselves, though they walk in the ways of their own heart, but even
in civil and moral men, he can many times counterfeit the work of the Spirit of
God, and give a false peace in a serious and seemingly regular way.

1 I shall not here speak much of those sudden irradiations of joy and comfort
wherewith he can fill men: only thus much, that in all ages he has had
advantage over credulous spirits by sudden raptures and exstasies. It has been
an old Art (as the stories of the Anabaptists will sufficiently inform us) by
which he has deluded millions of souls. Now those exstacies proceed originally
from disturbing and discoloring the fantasy, that it may apprehend objects
as he thinks fit to represent them. And no question he may thus abuse the
fantasy by the representation of false matter of comfort and joy, and set it
home with so strong an appearing evidence, that a man may verily think that it
comes from God himself. Certainly, Satan, if (as was abovesaid) he can
transform himself into an Angel of light, can second these delusions with
visions of an heavenly appearance: possibly he may usurp the name of Christ
himself. I knew such a case once in mine own experience. A woman not till that
time noted to have had any ordinary At Pool about ten years since.
proportion of knowledge, on a sudden in child bed, is taken with abundance of
joy, and Christ himself (as she fancied) appearing to her, giving her a
revelation against Infant Baptism, and perfuming her, of which she was so
confident, that she would ask those that were about her, whether they did not
smell those perfumes? I that had a little before spoken against Anabaptistical
revelations, was sent for to be confuted by so pregnant an example, and she
told me as much. I gave her good advice; told a friend, I suspected an
imposture, and departed. Within a few days after, the woman was grown perfectly
distracted, and then the Devil put on his own blacks, and appeared in his own
colors, and she smelt him in every thing, and her sweet perfumes ended in
filthy stenches, etc.

I have before shown you the rules by which you may judge of such immediate,
and reasonlesse raptures of assurance. I shall only add here, If you will
discern them, mark the end of them for which they are given.

Que. How shall I know that, will you say?

Answ. Thus. Observe what is infused with them. Satan seldom uses this Art to
any soul, but he withal infuseth some erroneous doctrine or other, or stirs up
to some or other irregular practice. The End of that dealing of his with the
party before mentioned, was to scruple her in point of Infant Baptism (as she
confessed to me;) and his end, in others, is to propagate one error or other,
as appears in these days of delusion by ordinary experience. A like revelation
there was in these parts lately (concerning which more may be said shortly in
print) to persuade a woman to leave her husband, who by that very suggestion
discovered it to be a delusion, because it was quite contrary to the word.

Now a Christian must be so confirmed in the fundamental points of Religion,
and so well satisfied in all things that concern the practice of Godliness,
that he should be able even hereby to discover Satan's impostures, by the Rule
before I laid down, [The Spirit of God always moves according to the Word.] In
a word, you may do well to demurre to such an evidence. It Is not good to be too
hasty in owning such extraordinary persuasions at the first dash, as we say. A
man offends not, that rejoices under them with trembling. If they come in
seasonably, to encourage me to any unquestionably good duty. I may (at present)
act in the strength of them. But afterward, I may safely desire an evidence
from a known rule, whereby I may regularly be certified that they are indeed
from God. Nor will such a suspension of my full assent to them, be charged
upon me as any affront to the Spirit of God (supposing him to be indeed the
Author of them) or as an act of unbelief; but will be kindly taken, as an act
of holy wariness, proceeding from a soul, that puts a due valuation upon the
word, and desires (as it ought) to make it in all things a light to its feet,
and a lantern to its path. Psalm 119. 105.

God himself has told me, that the written word is a surer word of prophecy
then immediate Revelations, 2 Pet. 1. 19 and he tells me moreover, that I do
well to take heed to it, as to a light shining in a dark place.

2. Nor shall I tell you at large, How far Satan may concur in giving
assurance from marks and signs (though certainly he may do much this way:) or
how far he may misapply Scripture it self to delude men into a false peace
(though this he may do also:) The joy of the close Hypocrite, and of the mere
civil Justiciary, are evidences of this imposture every day to be found,
almost in every Congregation where the word is preached in a convincing
searching way; every such person has his (...), his preservative or Antidote
of this kind, by which he keeps the word of God at a distance from his heart,
when it approaches with conviction of sin. Most of both sorts can plead good
desires, love to the brethren, strictness in religious duties, and moral
conversation, etc. And though in all these they be miserably mistaken, yet (how
ever) for the present these g^ounds stop the mouth of conscience, and give a
present repulse to the power of a shaking sermon: we will take these things for
granted

2. It is as undoubtedly true, that (Satan thus misrepresenting Arguments) a
man's own spirit may consent to him and make use of them, and so by deluded
Reason argue himself into a strong persuasion that he is a child of God; when
there is no such matter. Nay, I doubt not, but the very same Arguments which
delude one man in this case, may truly satisfy another, and the application of
the same Scriptures, (Satan playing the Sophister whith his reason) may give a
false persuasion to one man, which by the convincing evidence of the Spirit may
give a sound assurance to another.

But let me not here be mistaken. I say not that these Arguments, and
Scriptures may Caution.
be managed the same way in both. For seeing the conclusion is false, which in
a delusive assurance is to be inferred, there must also be some falsehood in
the premises. As in Temptation, when Satan came to Christ to tempt him to
break his neck; the conclusion which he would persuade him to entertain from
that place in the Psalm, was wicked, and false, viz. that it is lawful for a
man wilfully and without a calling to endanger his own life; therefore he must
needs juggle in the premises, which he does, by leaving out [in thy ways] out
of the Scripture cited: so in Assurance, if Satan delude a man's reason into
such an Assurance, to whom assurance does not belong, there is some fault or
other in the premises whence the conclusion is deduced.

3. There may also (I conceive) be a rational assurance, whose conclusion is
true (as to the state of the person whom it assures) and yet it may not be the
special Testimony of the Spirit, but merely the Testimony of a man's own reason
enlightened by ordinary illumination. For as the Spirit when he testifies,
testifies with our spirits, Rom 8. 16. So sometimes our spirits may testify,
when the Spirit does not. As there may be in a man that is convinced of sin, a
true conviction by the common illumination of the Spirit, which differs widely
from that special and effectual conviction which ushers in saving conversion.
So in this case the child of God may be let alone to frame to himself a peace
by arguing and reasoning his case from the Word of God, and the Spirit may
accompany this endeavor of his by common illumination; wherein the conclusion
may be true, and truly inferred; nay, sometimes the Spirit may leave a man that
is truly converted, even in the business of illumination, and suffer him to
conclude his good estate irregularly, though truly. As (I will give you this
case for explication) A man that has prayed and waited long for Assurance, and
cannot obtain it, grows weary, and can wait upon Gods pleasure no longer; nay,
I shall suppose, that the man may be unwilling to be assured without the
Spirits own Testimony, ye he thinks it is long a coming, and therefore desires
to hasten it. In this case, the Spirit of God may justly let him weary himself
in a maze of his own reasonings for a time, and permit him to persuade himself
that he is in a good condition; and afterward, because though this conclusion
were true, yet it was not gathered in a right way, may suffer him to fall into
such a sin, or such darkness, as may make him see a need of farther evidence.
And in this case God may deal with a man as he did with Israel in the
wilderness; God had promised them Canaan, and they thought long ere they had
it, were loath to stay till Gods time; and therefore whiles they think to
hasten the time, they are many of them destroyed at Hormah, and all turned back
into the wilderness Numb. 14.
for forty years.

CHAP. XXIII. A Case, how to know a false Scripture Assurance from a true.
THese things being premised, I come directly to answer the main Question in
both its parts.

Quest. 1. How may a man know a false Assurance gathered by a man's own heart,
with the concurrence of Satan, from that which comes from the Spirit of God?

An. (1) Regular Assurance, from the testimony of the Spirit, is an
heart-purifying Assurance. 1 John 3. 2, 3. We know (says the Apostle) that
when he shall appear, we shall be like him; i. e. in glory (for of that he
speaks) his glory shall reflect its image upon us, as the Sun does upon a
glass or the water, for we shall see him as he is: A blessed hope this. But
what kind of people are we to be on this side glory, who have this assured hope
of being so glorious hereafter? It follows ver. 3 He that has this hope
purifieth himself as he is pure, (...), (a Metaphor taken from the legal
purifications of the Jews, wherein as soon as legal uncleanness was
contracted, they washed their bodies, and their garments, and vessels, that
they might be sure nothing they had to do withal, might defile them again) he
is ever washing himself from sin, and watching against it, and takes all
possible care to keep himself unspotted of this present world, James 1. 23.
Hates the very garment spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. (alluding again to the
Levitical Law, in which the very clothes of a Leper, one that had an Issue, a
menstruous woman, were unclean) he does not only avoid the sins themselves, but
the very garments of them, not only all besmeared with the flesh, but garments
spotted by the flesh. In heaven, where enjoyment is greatest, purity is so too.
The grace of God when it appears to us as a grace bringing salvation, teaches
us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in the present world, Tit. 2. 12.

It teaches all men so Doctrinally, in the publication of it, (no Doctrine in
the world such an enemy to looseness as the Doctrine of the Gospel) but it
teaches the Saints to do so powerfully and despositively, it inclines and
enables them to it.

(2) Regular Assurance in not only a heart-purifying, but an heart sanctifying
Assurance. Holiness (in the nature of it) is the Dedication of a man's self,
and all that he is to the honor, glory, and service of God alone. So God is
infinitely holy, because he is in all things most entirely and inseparably
addited to his own glory; (which (because he is the most excellent Being,) he
may not only lawfully do, but he must naturally and necessarily do) and therein
consists the perfection of his nature: as the perfection of every being
consists in the end to which it is; so Gods perfection lies in this, that he is
to himself, seeing he has no nobler end to which his affections and actions
can be referred: wherefore if God could deny himself so far, as to prefer any
thing else above himself for a moment, he must needs sin, and cease to be happy
for that time, because he would be so much removed from his end, which is his
happiness. And of the same nature is holiness in a Saint, an entire devoting
of himself, and all to God, Now a Saint assured of Gods love, must needs be
holy, because knowing the infinite excellency of God in his own light, he
cannot but conclude him the most worthy of all love, and service, and so be
taken up in contemplating and conversing with him, and acting for him, which is
holiness; and so far as he at any time lets God fall low in his eye, so far he
charge himself with unholinesse. This we find the Saints frequently promise
upon such discoveries, Psalm. 23. ult. Psalm. 116. 11, 12, 13. Indeed this is
that which (as it comes from us, and proceeds from the consideration of Gods
goodness to us) is called thankfulness; as it respects his own excellencies,
it is called praising and glorifying him. Whence also take this Note by the
way, The more thankful, the more holy. Thankfulness and holiness are the same
things understood in a different conception.

Now how large praises does God get every where in the Scriptures from his
people under the light of such Assurance! How many such whole Psalms did David
pen under such Discoveries of Gods countenance!

But false Assurance, begotten by the collusion of Satan with our hearts, lets
men more loose from holiness, remits a man's love to, and zeal for God. A man
that was diligent in Duties and Ordinances (the exercises of holiness, in which
there is a peculiar Sequestration of the soul to God) begins to grow remiss and
careless, he that was contriving and plotting for Gods glory and honor, now
can spare the busying of his brains that way any more, and begins to open shop
and set up for himself, which is a sign that his former activity was but
selfish, intended merely as a bribe to God for the light of his countenance and
peace of conscience, and therefore when that seems to be attained (in any how,
as we say) God hears no more, or very little more from him.

(3) False Assurance makes careless and secure, true Assurance makes watchful,
and solicitous how to keep it. A man that has recovered true Assurance, he
knows the worth of it, and how many enemies he has that watch all
opportunities to rob him of it, and he is perpetually fortisying against them.
Whereas to another it is not so precious but that he is exceeding apt to
adventure it upon every slight occasion; Light come, and light go, we use to
say. His design is only to satisfy his conscience, and when it has done the
present turn, he looks no more after it. A man will not care to manure or
improve Lands to which he has but a cracked Title. Tenderness of conscience 1
Pet. 1. 17, 18, 1 Pet. 2. 16
attends true Assurance; one that has it indeed, takes no more latitude then
before, he presumes not upon it to embolden him to make the most of his liberty
which he has by Christ. False Assurance lets a man more loose to suspicious
practices, it may be sinful ones presumingly. 2 Pet. 2. 19 compared with ver. 1.

(4) False Assurance is attended with a great eagerness after the things of the
present world. And this is the ground of dangerous Apostasies to diverse
persons, after they have been thus assured, the world and worldly principles
get an entire possession of them, and therefore the joy which they have, is not
so strong as to fortify them against a time of trial, when their outward
enjoyments are endangered. See in the case of the stony ground, Matthew. 13. 20.
This is clearly affirmed in 2 Pet. 2. 14. They speak great swelling words of
vanity; great joys and assurances they speak of, they profess the Lord Jesus
has bought them, ver. 1. and 18. yet they have an heart exercised with
covetous practices, ver. 14. (...); trained up in all the Palestrae the
fencings and wrestlings of a worldly mind, (that Metaphor is taken from such as
contend for victory, who are trained up to all those Arts by which they may
foil an Adversary; or from a School wherein the Students are trained up in an
Art or Science) these men are most profound, subtle worldlings, Masters of that
Art, can make the best advantage of their worldly enjoyments, are able to lay
most men upon their backs in those contests; and they have all excuses and
evasions at hand, by which they may justify their (...), (which word we render
[covetous practices,] but it is covetousnesses; i. e. all sorts of scraping and
penurious ways to advance their worldly estate, by heck or by crook, as we use
to say.) Self seeking and covetousness (let men make what pretenses they will)
is a sure evidence of a false profession, and false evidences of salvation. But
true Assurance of Gods love is a mighty means of bringing the soul off from
self and the world. How liberal Jacob was to his Brother, Genesis 33. 11. Nay,
take my present, Brother, for I have [All] Heb.

I have told you above, that faith of Assurance yields the strongest Arguments
to contempt of the world. What need has he to make much of a few perishing
enjoyments, that is assured after a short term of life, to enjoy an Inheritance
that fades not away? What need he care for an house made of clay, to provide
so much to keep it in repair, that has interest in one without hands, eternal
in the heavens?

5 False Assurance is a principle that will not bear a man out in time of
trial. Thence so many braving spirits faint in a day of trial, Mat. 13. 20.
Thus it comes to pass that persons that have tastes of the powers of the world
to come, (which tastes I conceive may include the joys and comforts that arise
from pretended Assurance) may and do fall away, Heb. 6. 5, 6.

Thence in times of Error such persons are quickly brought to deny the Lord,
that they pretend to believe has bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1.

But true Assurance will bear the trials of persecutions, and false Doctrines.
As for Persecutions, see Heb. 10. 34. 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7, 8 and 1. 12.

And as for the trial of false Doctrines, undoubtedly, seeing Assurance is
founded upon truth, such as truly enjoy it, will preserve Truth as its
foundation

Not as if a soul that has had true Assurance Caution.
may not fall foully in a day of temptation; but he does not so contrive, plot,
and lay out for ways of escape as other men do; does not invent evasions and
distinctions to justify unjustifiable defections, and complyances. An assured
man does his Duty, and if a cross meet him in his way, he steps not out of his
way to avoid it (except possibly the violence of a sudden temptation make him
yield a little to a present storm, which infirmity yet he allows not in
himself, but quickly recovers out of it with taking shame and confusion to
himself) but is prepared (in the constant frame and standing disposition of his
spirit) not to choose sin before affliction. The Apostle Paul's temper is such a
temper, Acts 21. 13.

(6) False Assurance makes the soul light, and vain, and frothy, carrys it out
into notions Tit. 3. 9 2. Tim. 6 3, 4
and speculations. They that have no better fare to entertain their own hearts
and others ears withal, it is no wonder if they lay out the strength of their
time and spirits upon chaffy disputes. And the reason is this, false Assurance
is founded on some mistake or other: for (as I have showed) if there be an
error in the conclusion, it must be grounded on some falsehood in the premises.
Some Scripture mis-interpreted, or some heterodox opinion or other founds it;
and because there is a chain that links errors together, and one cannot
maintain it self without company, rather then men will have their main
copyhold touched, or that error weakened which founds their Assurance, they
care not in what disputes they engage, to secure the main chance. This I am
confident is the foundation of the Antinomian disputes generally; and it were
easy to show how it comes about. Men's own false experiences lay the first
stone in an erroneous frame, and then the Word must be interpreted so, as it
will suit those experiences (whereas men should bring their experiences to the
Word, and not the Word to their experiences) and then one mis-interpretation
draws on another, and thus they multiply into vain janglings and unnecessary
disputes.

But true Assurance is a serious, solid thing, and brings along with it a
general, experimental knowledge of all necessary truth, which once learned out
of the Word, it seals unto, and so it confirms a man in a practical, savoury
acquaintance with it; whence such a sonl is full of the hidden treasures of
divine truths savingly digested, and is to seek for nothing but freedom of
spirit from heterogeneous employments, and a little serious affective
preparation of heart to ruminate upon them, to dispose him to make a constant
feast upon those dainties in his own private retirements, and to communicate
liberally of the same fare to others. Thence there is nothing more grates his
ears or afflicts his spirit, then to have the strength and fervor of his zeal
drawn out into Controversies, seeing he can tell how to spend his time, and
that better.

As a studied Scholar, that by long study and experience has digested all
manner of learning, and can upon all occasions make profitable use of it, will
think his time lost to hear a company of fresh men maintain a Dispute about
Grammatical and Logical trifles. But a young raw headed fantastical Novice,
that has gotten a little flashy learning in his brain, looks upon them as
matters of weight and moment, and thinks himself the bravest fellow in the
world, when he can wrangle out such an inconsiderable Dispute.

(7) And lastly, True Assurance is a constant spring of humility and lowliness
of mind, it being impossible that so intimate a converse with God, and the
light of his countenance, should not reflect low thoughts upon a man's self,
concerning himself, such a man cannot but say, Lord what am I that thou have
brought me hitherto? what? for such a peevish unbebelieving, impatient soul as
mine, that have tempted thee by abundance of murmurings, and other sinful
provocations even in the wilderness, and at the red sea, to be
notwithstanding, so carried in thine arms, and cheered with thy smiles, and
enjoy the comforts of thy Spirit? O what am I, vile wretch, that God should
deal thus with me? False Assurance (on the other side) makes proud, boasting,
selfconceited, etc.

CHAP. XXIV. A Case, how to know whether a true Assurance be merely rationally
gathered, or from the witness of the Spirit.
NOw come we to the second branch of the Question.

Quest. How may a man know whether a true assurance (as to the substance of it)
be gotten merely by rational deductions, or from the Spirit of God? Wrought out
of a man's brain, or wrought into his heart by the Holy Ghost.

Answ. I can but help you to guess at the difference. These works though they
really differ in themselves, yet to appearance are very like: and therefore I
shall speak warily in a few particulars.

1. Most of the former distinctions between the Testimony of the Spirit and a
false assurance from Satan and a man's own heart, may be repeated here. A true
assurance gotten in an irregular way, wants the advantage of a supernatural
assistance to elevate, and improve it; for as it was gotten in the strength of
reason, so it must act only in the strength of the principle from whence it had
its being; and by consequence, can have no influence but moral and rational to
the production of those impressions of purity, holiness, watchfulness,
heavenly mindedness, patience, seriousness and solidnesse of spiritual
self-entertainments, humility; and so all these must needs be thin and scanty,
and superficial in comparison of the same effects when they proceed from a
divine assurance. Thence it is that you shall ordinarily find in the world a kind
of formal, cold, thin-spread honesty, just enough to keep life and soul
together (as we say) in many persons that are really godly, of whom a man may
say as the Apostle Paul of diverse of the chief men in the Church of Jerusalem,
Gal. 2. 6. Those who seemed to be somewhat in conference added nothing to him.

And therefore let this be the first difference. There is a mighty odds between
a man divinely assured and rationally assured, in the vigor and activity of
all those fruits wherein it shows it self. As you may see in matter of
knowledge. A man that is assured of a Truth, teaches it with far more life,
and authority, then a man who sees it only in a rational probable light.

2. In a mere rational assurance there is formido oppositi. As in an Opinion
that a man holds merely on probable grounds, though a man may stiffely adhere
to it in comparison with the contrary conclusion, yet the grounds of this
confidence being but probable, and therefore such in which he may be deceived,
he is ever and anon subject to say, but what if it be not so all this while?
And though this opinion be truth, and a great many other useful conclusions as
branches grow from its root, yet so long as he is but probably persuaded of
it, he gives his Assent to it merely with a reserve. This is true to me, in the
mind I now am in. But I may possibly see grounds to alter my judgment.

Thus in point of assurance. Rational assurance, be it never so full, excludes
not haesitancy. Thence you shall find when you have reasoned with a doubting
Christian a long time, it may be when you go away from him, you leave him (to
appearance) well satisfied, and pretty comfortable (as we use to say) but a
while after, when Satan and his own heart have had a little time to unravel the
web of your reasonings, he begins to think he was in an error, As an unstable
man in matters of judgment, Let an Orthodox Preacher speak an hour with
strength of Scripture and reason upon a controverted point, the man seems to be
fully satisfied, and altogether of his mind. But this holds only till the next
cunning seducer assaults him with counter-reasons, and then the man wavers and
cries, why may not this be the truth? And so if twenty come one after another,
he shall still suspect what the former has said, by means of the Sophistry of
the latter.

Thence a man rationally assured, can (to the most) say no more for himself
then the Apostle Paul (to allude to his expression in another case,) 1 Cor. 4.
4. I know nothing by my self. I confess, I cannot but incline to think bettter
of my self then formerly; yet am I not thereby justified: I dare not stand to
the persuasion that I am a child of God, before the judgment seat of Jesus
Christ. I would not willingly be deceived, but I may be deceived. What if that
that I take for love of God be but lelfe-love? and what if that that I take for
repentance be but legal sorrow? and what if my hatred of sin be but a mere
falling out with sin without a total alienation of mind from it? It may be so,
though at the present, I cannot but think it is otherwise with me.

Now it is true (as I before said) that divine Assurance, if it proceed not
from a full Testimony of the Spirit, excludes not doubting; but the difference
between divine and rational Assurance, in point of doubting, is very great. For
when a man divinely assured doubts, it is only so with him because, and whiles
his evidences are not full and clear. But let a rational assurance (that is
merely so) be never so full, yet its utmost height and perfection, is thus
encumbered with haesitacines, and unresolvednesse of spirit.

In a word, he that observes in his own spirit the differences between an
Opinion, and a certain Knowledge, may give (by the same rules of difference) a
very probable guess at the difference between a merely rational and divine
Assurance.

But there remains yet a third and fuller mark of distinction, which is,

3. The way in which a rational assurance comes. And this may give some farther
light to discover it. As for example, Judge by these six things.

1. If assurance be ushered in with an impatient weariness of soul-troubles.
This is apt to put a man upon contriving his own escape, and therefore may be a
temptation to an endeavor of reasoning them out of the soul.

Now it is true, that the soul may, and ought in cases of desertion and
discomfort, to put it self to the question, as David does (more then once.
Psalm 42. and 43.) why art thou cast down (O my soul) and why art thou
disquieted within me? And the reason is, because the soul-Troubles of Gods
Saints (after assurance had, are mostly ground^d on phantasy, and not reason;
so that if he put that question many times to himself, he will find he is able
to give very little reason why he is troubled; and therefore he may lawfully
endeavor to reason down reasonlesse Scruples (although possibly it may be
safer sometimes to cast them off without vouchsafing them so much respect as to
spend reason upon them) But in this case, I must take heed how through
weariness of staying Gods leisure for a release, I betake my self to these
reasonings; for this is to abandon Jordan, and fly to Abana and Pharphar; to
forsake the waters of Siloah because they run softly, and Isaiah 8, 6.
make not so much speed toward us as we desire, and labor to quench our
thirst in muddy streams of our own. This is to endeavor to break the Spirits
prison (as I have before told you) rather then to stay his leisure, til He turn
the key. And when a man seeks his Assurance only from his own reasoning, it is
just with God to leave him to try it out what he can do in that way.

2. If it be attended with a low esteem of prayer, and other Ordinances of God,
as those which begin to appear bootlesse and unprofitable, after so long trial
to so little advantage. Reason managed by prayer, and by holy pleadings with
God in prayer, is a special means in the hand of the Spirit to work assurance;
but it is dangerous when it comes in the stead of prayer. The nearer a soul is
to a divine assurance, the more he values these divine duties and Ordinances
of Gods appointment: but when he grows slacker in these, and flies to Reason,
out of a distrust of these, the more he is endangered to a rational Assurance.

3. If a man, when he sets upon reasoning out his evidences, find himself
overwilling to receive satisfaction, and to take every small hint as sufficient
to bottom his confidence upon, is willing to think the best of himself, and so
ready not so much to answer, as to silence material doubts, with general
salvo's of the freeness and fullness of Gods grace, the general offers,
invitations, and promises of the Gospel (which (as I have told you) are rather
foundations for relyance and hope, then Assurance and evidence) and apt to sit
down upon these, without descending to more differencing and distinguishing
enquiries; this is suspicious, that the peace that arises thence, though it be
suitable to the estate of such a soul, and so (he being within the Covenant)
materially true, is but rational Assurance.

4 You may guess at it from the frame of your spirit under after-desertions. A
man that has been assured by the Spirit, is much maintained in his dependence,
by a reasonlesse support. I call that a reasonless support which keeps up a
soul in a way of relyance and dependence when he sees no reason why he should
do so; nay, it may be, sees reason why he should not do so. As it is said of
Abraham in another case, That he believed in hope, against hope, Romans 4. 18.
that is, Faith told him there was hope that he should be the Father of many
Nations, when Reason told him there was none. So, a soul after Assurance
received from the Spirit, can appeal to his former tastes and experiences, and
believes himself out of a plunge, when Sense and Reason tell him, there is no
hope.

But a mere rational Assurance when it is counterbalanced by reason as probable
on the contrary side, affords no prop at all; but (says such a sou^) I
perceive now all my former hopes were but delusions and dreams of golden
mountains, for I am yet in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity.

I shall easily grant in this (as in most of the preceding differences) that
the distinction between the Spirits evidence, and reasons to be gathered hence,
is not always certain. For possibly the Spirits evidence may afterward be
called to the Bar of suspicious reasoning; and a soul that has had it may (by
Satan's Sophistry) be at a loss; but sure a man is not so liable to be reasoned
out of that Assurance, as one whose Primitive and Original Assurance was merely
rational. As a man will easier be baffled out of the dictate and conclusion of
his reason, then of his sense. And the Assurance of faith or divine Assurance
is something in the soul like sense in the body.

5 Ordinarily, the Assurance that the Spirit gives, surprizeth a man
unexpectedly. God therein loving to endear himself to his Saints, comes upon
them when they look least for him. I mean, as to the particular time of his
coming (though they look for him indefinitely every day) he takes them at
unawares. There is little of man's plotting or contrivance in the bringing it
about; it may be in a Sermon that a man came accidentally to, in a Prayer or
Sacrament, whence (if a man might judge by the frame of his own spirit) he had
least cause to expect good, it may be in casting a transient glancing eye upon
a Scripture, without a man's pre-determining such a means (at least in a way of
special confidence upon, or expectation from it) to such an end. In rational
Assurance a man lays the whole design in his head before hand. Now (says he)
I will go meditate on such or such a subject, and methodically discuss with my
self such doubts and objections, and labor to answer them; and as he expects
satisfaction from so doing, so in the close he finds it, God lets him alone to
hammer himself out a peace upon the anvil of his own thoughts.

6 Lastly, Mere rational Assurance (though it may be from true, yet) oftentimes
is drawn from mistaken Scriptures. And this arises from the willingness
before spoken of, to receive Quod volumus, facile credimus
satisfaction, which makes a man easy to believe that which he would have so.
As in the maintaining of an opinion, it many times falls out, when a man takes
up an opinion first, and then seeks for Scripture to maintain it, it is
wonderful to think, how plain he presently is persuaded to think, the whole
Scripture speaks for it: so here, when this is laid down before, I must have
peace; and hereupon a man searches the Word of God, many times dark
Scriptures, that another man can see no such thing in, shall serve the turn;
Prophetical Scriptures, and Historical, and it may be Doctrinal, but grossly
mistaken. Now spirtual Assurance is usually grounded upon Scripture rightly
understood, (and if habitual, is certainly so) and the clearer the Scripture
is, and the more plain the deductions from it, the better it is. For the Spirit
of God understands Scripture perfectly (as being the Enditer of it) and so it
cannot be supposed he will ground his Testimony on a Mistake. Yet we must not
think that it is every mistake of Scripture that is sufficient to annul a
Testimony; such as is circumstantial, and not of moment to cast the conclusion
this way or that way, will not weaken the Testimony, but only that which has a
material influence upon the deductions which I build upon it. So a small
circumstantial mistake in a witness in Court, is often overlooked by the Judge
and Jury, and the Spirit himself often quotes the sense of Scripture, and omits
inconsiderable circumstances. As in many instances it were easy to make
appear, Micah 5. 2. Matthew. 2. 6.

Understand what has been said with these Cautions.

1 Think not I condemn the matter of such Cautions.
an Assurance, as either has all or most reason in it, for false; so that a
man who has reasoned himself into this persuasion, must now question the
persuasion it self as false. For a true conclusion may be drawn from false and
incongruous premises; and it may be (as to form) in the deduction there may be
no error: and a conclusion that a man receives only in a way of opinion, may be
certain in it self. All that is in this case to be done, is to hold the same
conclusion by the strength of the Spirit drawn in by Faith in Prayer (for the
Spirit may testify to that singly (as I have before shown) and immediately;)
and having so done, to improve it to all intents and purposes, as if it were
never so unquestionable. So a man may hold his land by a true Title, but his
evidences for it may not be as clear as he could wish; now in this case, he
will not presently cashier himself out of the possession (as soon as he
discovers it) but keeping that, will labor by Act of Parliament, or some other
way to strengthen his evidences. So when thou have examined thy Assurance by
the Marks of distinction between false and true, before mentioned, and find
it true, though but rational keep thy hold, and apply thy self to the Spirit to
super-add his Testimony to the confirmation and improvement of it.

2 Think not that I utterly exclude, the help of the Spirit in drawing a
rational evidence from the Scriptures. I am so far from that, that I rather
judge, that he helps in an ordinary way (when the deduction is proper, and the
Scripture that grounds it, is not in any material point mistaken) as he does in
other works of common illumination, (as it was before hinted in the beginning
of this last Discourse) To add only a few words to the farther illustration of
what was there affirmed. A man may be said to preach or pray by the Spirit (in
a general sense) when he does those duties by the strength of common
illumination (and so sometimes even godly men do,) and the Doctrine he
preaches is the Doctrine of the Spirit, and the prayers he puts up, they are
inspired by the Spirit, in a way of common assistance: But there is another
kind of praying and preaching by the Spirit, which the Scripture so often
speaks of and calls the Spirit of Supplication, and the demonstration of the
Spirit, performed by a special and peculiar assistance Zech. 12. 10. 1 Cor. 2.
4.
of the Spirit. Of which more hereafter in the handling of the last point. And
the like twofold influence of the Spirit is there in putting forth acts of
Assurance in the heart, even of a godly and sound Christian. The very same man
may act Assurance sometimes rationally, and sometimes he may be acted to act it
spiritually. And yet in the former the Spirit acts too in a common way; the
latter only is that which because of special assistance, is peculiarly said to
be the Witness of the Spirit. For denominatio sequitur partem potiorem (though
sometimes the denomination follow the best part in a thing composed of diverse
parts (as a godly man is called a spiritual man, though he have a carnal part,
and that may be possibly most prevalent, yet) most commonly the name is given
from that which is most in the mixture or composition; as we say an heap of
barley, though there may be many grains of other grain in it; and in this sense
the Apostle Paul calls Babes in Christ carnal, 1 Cor. 3 1. So when the
Assurance in the specialties of it, is rational, though there be some common
work of the Spirit accompanying it, I call it justly, by way of distinction, a
rational Assurance.

Thus have I both answered the cases before emerging concerning a rational
Assurance, and withal, let you know, what use may, and may not be made of it. I
add, for a close, that it is well for the standing peace of the Saints, when
their spiritual evidences are rational, because Assurance that is
praeternatural to a man, is so far violent, and so cannot be perpetual; and
therefore the Saints will do well to endeavor to make even the Spirits
evidence rational; and on the other side, it is well for the certainty and
security of their evidences, that they labor to elevate the Evidence of
reason, into a Testimony of the Spirit.

CHAP. XXV. The Duty of keeping the Evidences of the Spirit, pressed with
several Motives.
THis also affords us an useful Exhortation in several branches.

I. Labor to keep and maintain this evidence when you have it. For

1 It is the surest evidence of the best inheritance in the world. If a man
lose all his evidences for an unconsiderable part of his Estate, or the weakest
Evidences for the best part of his Estate, it troubles him not much, so long as
he has still the firmest Evidences of the best part of his Estate remaining;
because those he may bear the loss of without undoing. But if these be lost,
he is losttoo. You may lose your Evidences of your earthly estate, and if
heaven be sure, you may not only not grieve, but even rejoice in the loss. But
if you lose your Evidences of heaven, you are (as to all the truest comfort of
your lives) undone men.

And yet if you lose but some of these, and retain the main, you are in a happy
condition. It may be you lose the evidences of Grace, the spirit of Prayer in
its sensible assistance, the verdure, life and activity of your souls in the
ways of God; nay, you lose the Promises, you cannot find one Promise in the
Word of God that you dare own. Now stick to the Testimony of the Spirit, keep
that and you have an Evidence still in stead of all, and that will recover them
all again.

2 It may easily be lost, as to the actual enjoyment of it, though the Habit
cannot be lost. The check of one holy motion may grieve the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30.
the commission of one sin (especially by way of presumption and backsliding)
may remove him. See in David, Psalm 51. 12. Lusts be cunning Thieves, and if
they get into your heart again, the thing they most rob you of, is your Deeds
and Evidences for glory, and then they know you are prone to be persuaded to
take a portion here, seeing you have lost all certain grounds of expecting a
better.

3 Satan is always at hand to deprive you (if possible) of the influence of
the Spirit this way. He knows what a mighty rub it is in the way of all his
Temptations, that Gods people walk in the light of Gods countenance, and in the
comfort of the Spirit. Therefore the greatest and most desperate temptations of
converted souls, tend to the hindering or weakening of Assurance. As a cunning
Adversary in Law, lays plots, if possible, to weaken the validity of his
Antagonists strongest evidences, or to get them into his hands, and suppress
them.

4 The Evidence of the Spirit lost, will not easily be recovered again. It cost
David many a tear, and many an heart-pang ere he could recover him again, Psalm.
51. 11, 12

Satan having gotten your deeds into his hands, or made them suspected in the
Court of Conscience, or it may be damned in the Starchamber of a man's own
deluded heart for counterfeit; it will be an hard matter to prevail for their
admission ever to appear in Court again. The greater intimacy and secrecy of
communion there has been between thy soul and the Spirit of God, the more
difficulty will there be to make up a breach if it fall out between you. See
Prove. 18. 19.

5 Lose that, and you lose all the rest. Graces will not shine, Duties will be
cold and dull, Promises will speak nothing, our own spirits when they are
called forth will bear false witness, if the Spirit be dumb. They will all say
as the King to the poor woman, How can we relieve thee except the Lord help
thee? 2 King. 6. 27. Thou may go to the Word, and not one syllable of it, but
will witness against thee; to thy own heart, and that is possessed by Satan
and dismal despair, and there is nothing but blackness. Call forth thy Graces,
and ask them, and there is not one will answer to his name. If thou say, Come
forth Love, and evidence for me. I am mis-called (says Love) I am but
selfishness. Call forth Faith, that is not my name (says Faith) I own no name
but Presumption. Repentance will be called by no name but Legal sorrow; Zeal
will be called fury and rashness; new obedience, hypocrisy and formality, etc.
Call to Duties, and Prayer will say, I am tongue-tied, and cannot speak;
Hearing will say, All that I can meet with in a Sermon is terror; the
Sacraments will say, thou have eaten and drunken damnation, there is not a dram
of comfort for thee in us. If the Sun hide, the Moon and Stars give none, or a
very obscure light.

All Hamans intimate friends, when the King but frowns, are so far from daring
to speak for him, that they cover his face, and are all ready to have him away
to the Gallows: whereas on the other side, every grace, duty, providence,
ordinance, has something to say for a man, when the Spirit of God is the
foreman of the Jury; they all say as he says.

CHAP. XXVI How this may be done. And first concerning keeping Records of them.
Quest. BUt how shall I keep the Testimony of the Spirit when I have it?

Ans. 1. Record it carefully. That is the way for a man to secure an Evidence
of his Lands or estate to serve him at all turns, to record the Deeds of
bargain and sale, or Donation, or whatever other way the Title is secured, with
all the formalities of Law, etc. that may illustrate or confirm them.

There be two Courts in which these evidences are to be pleaded or impleaded.
And therefore it will concern you to have a Duplicate of this Evidence, that
there may be a copy in each Court.

1 The Court of Heaven. Now it is true, that God enrols all such Acts of his
Spirit there; but this is but a private record (as I may say, with reverence)
for Gods own use, The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. This private
record I cannot produce at any time, because Secret things belong to God, Deuteronomy.
29. 29. But there is another way of laying up a more serviceable Record in
Heaven; which a man may have forth coming, (as we use to say) upon all
occasions; that is, by commending our Evidences to God in Prayer, desiring his
own Spirit that gives them to be our Remembrancer of them in times of need.
This is one of the Offices of the Holy Ghost, not only to be the Comforter of
the Saints, but their Remembrancer and Recorder too. John 14. 26. Christ had
told his Disciples many comfortable things in the whole preceding part of the
Chapter, and now toward the upshot and period of all, the great comfort with
which he interlines all the rest both in this and the following Chapters, is, I
will send you another Comforter: And the Comforter shall come, whom the Father
shall send in my name. But what shall he do when he comes? Why, he shall first
be their Instructor, and the Promoter of their farther progress in saving
knowledge, wherein they were but Novices till Christ's Ascension; He shall teach
you all things; and he shall be their Recorder or Remembrancer, he shall
suggest, (so Beza renders the word, (...), suggeret) or prompt your forgetful
memories in all things which I have told you. True, there it is not spoken
barely of the things immediately preceding, but of all the Doctrines of Faith,
etc. which he had acquainted them withal from their first vocation; but it
includes even those Doctrines of comfort which precede, in the number of those
Truths, they being part of what Christ had told them.

2 The Court of Conscience. It will be needful (having once verified the
evidence by the test of the Word) to lay it up against a day of trial. Divine
Truths must be laid up in the heart for Direction, and divine Experiences for
Consolation in an evil day. This Courts Recorder is Memory, and its Records in
such a day are of especial use and importance. Records of Gods dealing with
others formerly, see Psalm 119. 52. I remembered thy judgments of old, and have
comforted my self; i. e. Those judgments by which thou have caused thy people
to triumph over their enemies in former times. So also of our own experiences;
see both together, Psalm. 77. 5, 6 The holy man had been utterly at a loss, had
it not been for this Recorder; and yet it seems he had been too to blame in
the laying up his evidence, so that it cost much search before he could find
it. I communed with my heart, and my spirit made diligent search; the
Septuagint reads, [(...),] my spirit dug, as we do for hidden treasure, that
must have much rubbish removed ere we can come at it. But their sense is
grounded upon a different reading of the word in the Hebrew.

Others read Scopabam, I swept; it seems by his careless keeping, he had
suffered his evidences to be thrown in^ dusty corner among waste papers, and he
was fain to sweep for them ere he could find them; but however, when he found
them, he made excellent use of them, for by them he recovers strength to check
his present unbelief, I have considered the days of old, ver. 5. and I call to
remembrance my song, ver. 6. I will remember the years of the right hand of the
Most High, ver. 10. and I will remember the works of the Lord, etc. v. 11. And
these remembrances prove a great strengthening to his Faith in that hour of
temptation. David has some Psalms to bring to remembrance, Psalm 38, and 70.
And Christ has left Ordinances for this end: The Word, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13. and
Sacraments: Do this, (...), Luke 22. 19. in remembrance of me. And there is the
same use of the communion of Saints, which is the special means of keeping
fresh one another experiences by conference and communication. Therefore it
will be a very good course to charge memory to record carefully all the visits,
and smiles, and embraces of Gods Spirit, together with all the passages which
may confirm the truth of them afterward. As we do in Evidences concerning a
temporal estate, we record the Sealing days, and the Witnesses, and the
considerations of the conveyance. So in this case, bid memory put down, At such
a time, in such a place, upon such a Prayer, Sermon, when I was in such an
exigency, and there was but an hairs breadth between me and despair, such a
sad cloud was scattered, the Spirit of God by such a Promise gave me as much
comfort and joy as my heart could hold, and I then set to my seal, that God is
true by believing. Joh 2. 33 And I was confirmed in the reality of these
experiences, by a following assistance against such corruptions, or strength
against such temptations, or power more then ordinary to walk in ways of
spiritual communion with God, etc. This course being carefully taken, it cannot
be imagined how great an awe it will cast upon a man's jealous and suspicious
heart, that it will scarce dare to entertain a doubt against an Evidence so
clear, and so carefully recorded. Except Satan can imbezel the Records, or
corrupt them by the concurrence of our treacherous memories) in some
considerable passages, it is in vain (he knows) to commence a fresh suit against
the soul. The soul in such cases will (as the Psalmist) have recourse to those
Records, and clear his Title against such disturbances. Psalm. 77. supra.

CHAP. XXVII. The Means to strengthen these Evidences.
IN the second place,

2 Strengthen your Evidences daily.

1 By strengthening Ordinances.

1 The Word heard, read, meditated upon, (all these in their proper place and
time are to be used with care. David always keeps up a fainting Assurance with
a word. My soul melts for heaviness, strengthen thou me according to thy
word, Psalm. 119. 28. This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy Word has
quickened me. Psalm. 50. Uphold thou me according to thy Word, etc. Psalm. 116.

Promises are the food of Faith, Cordials of Hope, the crutches of Patience,
the principal feathers in the wing of Prayer.

Threatenings caution us against those courses as will weaken Assurance,
Precepts direct us in such ways as will continue and improve it; Examples are
so many ruled cases (as they say) in Law, which may add light to a man, when
there is need to search records, as before said.

The whole Word is the fuel that maintains the fire of Assurance and
Meditation blows up the coals.

2 Prayer. And this applies the Word: it is a souls perpetual plea against all
litigious molestations. If Satan or a man's own heart at any time call his
Evidences into question, away flies Prayer to God, and pleads Promises and
Examples, holy Presidents, and stops the mouth of Temptation this way. It Is
that way of continual intercourse with God, that brings a man daily returns of
holy familiarities, which cannot but nourish a constant persuasion of his
unchangeable Love; as mutual Letters, maintain a good intelligence among
friends.

3 Sacraments. As they are remembrancers of the death of Christ, and Ordinances
appointed for the Sealing of the benefits thereof to the soul, by particular
applicatory signs and tokens, must needs be means not only to give (as has
been shown before) but also to confirm and continue it. And upon this account,
it is no wonder if Christ in the Institution of the Lords Supper require a
frequent attendance upon that Ordinance. 1 Cor. 11. 25. As often as ye drink it,
implies frequent drinking it. All our faith is grounded upon the death and
satisfaction of Christ; and the frequent reduction of those grounds of faith to
our consideration must needs strengthen it; habits of the mind are strengthened
by a frequent repetition of those actions by which they were first begotten and
produced. Now though gracious habits are not gotten in the strength of natural
or moral powers, as natural or moral habits are; yet they are produced, as I
before have showed (by a supernatural power) in a natural method and order. And
therefore though no grounds apprehended by the understanding, can of themselves
beget faith, yet a divine power never produces them, but by the representation
of some grounds. And therefore the representation of the death of Christ, as it
is held forth by God in all its benefits, to be laid hold on by me, being the
ground of faith; the frequent repetition of that representation, especially by
such visible signs, must needs feed it. And suppose it feed merely a faith of
Applicatory reliance and adherence, yet (as you have been also before taught)
Acts of Reliance frequently exercised will grow into Acts of Assurance.

4 Conference with the people of God, especially those who have and maintain a
constant communion, and familiar acquaintance with God; such as walk in the
light of his countenance, and the joy of the holy Ghost all the day long. A man
that will keep a good constitution of body, will sometimes converse and
discourse with an aged healthy father, and know of him how he has ordered
himself to live to that age, and maintained a constant good temper of body so
long. And it would be much for our advantage to converse with such persons as
are most commonly in the Sunshine, to learn from them how they maintain such a
constant light upon their spirits, whereas others have it but as a flash of
lightning, and it vanishes away again: how it comes to pass that God, that is
to others but like a sojourner, or a Traveller that tarryeth but for a night,
becomes their constant Inmate.

Besides, such persons mouths are usually full of the high praises of God,
they speak of Psalm. 149. 6
the righteousness of God, and make their boasts of God all the day long. They
will tell Psalm. 44. 8 and 71. 24
you what God has done for their souls, Psalm. 66 16. and glad they will be
that you will give them the hearing with any delight. Now it must needs feed
the same gracious assurance in you, to find others record the same great things
of God working for, and toward them, which you find in your self. As it
increases and confirms a man's knowledge to talk with knowing men concerning
their experiences in that way of learning in which he himself is a
Practitioner. A melancholy man is affected more deeply with the sad stories of
a melancholy companion: and no question but there is a like sympathy in the
affections of joy and confidence, etc.

So it is in way of Duty. As iron sharpneth iron, so does the countenance of a
man his friend, says Solomon.

And no question, God will bless that means which he himself has bestowed
upon others, that they may administer upon occasion 2 Cor. 1. 5.


2. Strengthening Exercises. Exercise of Acts of assurance strengthens the
Habits. Renew the Acts of that faith of evidence which thou have, every morning
and evening (or oftener (if it may be, frequently, every hour) as God gives
occasion.)

Get renewed experiences of the love of God often, by trusting him often in
particular cases. David often does so, for the conquering of such or such a
corruption, for the resisting such or such a particular temptation, etc.
Adventure your selves now and then upon the credit of particular Promises,
which are so many Specimina, so many exemplifications of our interest in God.
Answers of Prayers in particular cases, are a great strengthening to Assurance.
Saving gifts and sanctifying gifts, are in themselves evidences of Gods love,
much more when particularly asked.

Yet take need of tempting God: Which I do,

1 When I oblige him absolutely, where he is bound but conditionally As in
temporals and in spirituals, not absolutely necessary in themselves, or not so
necessary as some other thing may be, which possibly we ask not.

2 When I put too much weight upon my desires, as resolving to make experiments
of Gods love by them; and to conclude in case of suspension or denial, that it
is an answer from God that he loves me not. God will not have them made trials
of his love. A Father will not allow a child to say, Father, if you love me,
give me this or that. But when a child submissively begs and receives them, he
will allow him to say, Now I know my Father loves me, by his giving such and
such things.

3 When I tie God up to circumstances of time, manner, measure. Let me ask the
things believingly, according to the rule of the Word, as far as they are good
for me; i. e. may not hinder some better design of God, or a greater good to
me; and if I receive, take comfort in my Answers from God, as those that are so
many pregnant examples of his care for me.

3 Strengthening Providence. Providence alone is no evidence that God loves me;
but when he does love a man before, and a man knows it by more certain rules,
this is a good confirmation to our faith, Psalm 41. 11. such a one David calls
a token for good, Psalm. 86. 17. Some passages of providence have a stamp of
some immediate interposition of divine grace and power for a man's good.

CHAP. XXVIII The discovery of several moths that eat out a Christians
Evidences.
3 TAke heed of several things that tend to the weakening of Assurance, that
promote Satan's malignant design against it.

1 Of spiritual pride. This is a sin which is fed by the highest seize of
a Christian in this life. It is thought it got into heaven in the falling
Angels. It Is a hard matter for a poor contemptible worm to be taken up into the
bosom and familiar acquaintance with God, and not to be proud of it. The
proudest persons in earthly Courts are those, who from a mean estate are raised
up to be Favorites. The stronger the liquor is that a man drinks, the sooner
it will fly up into his brain and intoxicate him. Temporal distinctions
between Saints and others, find matter enough in our corrupt natures to blow up
our hearts with high conceits. And certainly then, that which makes great
difference, if it find an heart apt to kindle, will make the fire of pride and
self-conceit flame much more. But this is a dangerous sin in such a case. It Is
the ready way to procure an abatement (at least) if not a total withdrawing of
the fuel that kindles it. This is a continual smoke in Gods nose, a thing that
will make him turn away his face, Isai. 65. 5. See a remarkable example in this
case, 2 Cor. 12. 7. The Apostle Paul had been taken up by a special rapture
into the third Heaven, and had abundance of high revelations, and (likely
enough) he was apt to be lifted up with them in his own spirit. But lest it
should be so, God graciously prevents the kindling of spiritual pride by a
Messenger of Satan which was sent on purpose to buffet him, to prevent it, and
he was in such a case, that he was feign to pray hard and often, I petitioned
the Lord thrice; and yet he could not prevail for the removal of it. If God
give such harsh potions for the mere prevention of this Disease; how bitter
(think we) will he give for the healing of it? Sad temptations, sad falls, and
sad desertions ordinarily attend spiritual pride.

(1) This occasioneth the devil to be more busy then ordinary, from a
principle of envy to endeavor to supplant you. This moved him to tempt Adam
and Eve. As a proud Favorite shall never want enemies who will endeavor to
lift him out of the saddle.

(2) This makes us neglect our walking, and whiles we build Castles in the air
by our high conceits, we fall into many an undiscerned Prove. 16. 18
ditch that is dug by the cunning Tempter for our souls.

(3) Lastly, This so offends God, that it provokes him to change his
countenance toward the soul, and endeavor the cure of the Disease by
withholding those dainties which feed the humor. Nothing more provokes a
Prince, then to see a Favorite grow insolent upon the encouragement of his
smiles. So God, Psalm 138. 6. He knows the proud afar off. before he brought
them into the Banqueting house and kissed them, etc. but now uses them
slightly.

3 Take heed of security. You are upon an high pinnacle, and you bad need look
to your standing. You have a charge of precious Jewels about you, and it
becomes you to have an eye in every bush and by-lane; you have many thieves
lying in wait for it. No head is more thoughtful, no person sleeps less no man's
brains work more, then a great Favorites. To such a man to be secure and free
from jealousies, and suspicions, will quickly be ruining. The sleepiness of a
soldier upon the Guard may rout an Army, more then all the assaults of an
Adversary, if the Guard give timely notice of their approach. If God speak
peace to thy soul in the assurance of his love, it is a blessed thing to fear
always, lest thou be robbed of it. Holy Fear is the best Sentinel that thou
can employ to secure thy Treasure. It Is an excellent thing to rejoice before
the Lord with trembling, Psalm. 2. 11.

Hezekiah had a bitter time of it when he was at once sick in body, and
afflicted in mind too, Isai. 38. and when came this upon him? See v. 17. Upon
my peace I had great bitterness; it surprised him when he was at peace, and
expected no such thing. The example of David would seriously be thought upon by
an heart that loves to keep acquaintance with God, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. He had been
when he penned that Psalm, under a grievous affliction, and (whether it were
principally that, or whether it grew to that, it matters not much, but) it
seems the hiding of Gods face was a main matter in his trouble. But that I
would have you observe. is the occasion of this withdrawing on Gods part,
which was so sadly resented on his, see ver, 6. In my prosperity I said, I
shall never be moved: Why so? What security had David that made him so secure
of his estate? why, the sense of Gods extraordinary favor, Lord, by thy favor
thou have made my mountain to stand strong; I built upon the favor of God,
and thought I had such a settled patent of it, as nothing should ever bring my
Title into question again. But whiles David was secure, God begins to alter his
countenance, Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled, v: 7.

2. Beware of carnal boasting of your spiritual enjoyments. This ordinarily is
the breath of spiritual pride. I caution you against carnal boasting. I know
there is an holy, thankful boasting of God, which the Saints of God are allowed
and called unto, Psalm 34. 2. 1 Chronicles. 16. 10. Psalm 64. 10. 1 Cor. 1. 31. But
this is a serious, grave thing, intended principally for the glorifying of God,
by procuring praise from serious Christians on our behalf, or for the
encouraging and drawing on of others to choose and trust in God upon the
inducement of our experiences, and it is mainly and principally accompanied
with a lowly and humble esteem of our selves.

That which I here condemn and caution you against, is a slight, vainglorious,
and useless boasting of spiritual experiences in any frothy vain company, with
a design to advance a man's self or his party, or draw Proselytes to his new
ways; which is very frequent in the tongues of many vain persons in these
days. Believe it, if there were truth and reality in those experiences, as
they pretend, they would be more sober^ and self-denying, and modestly sparing
in speaking of them. I am sure the Apostle Paul when he had been disciplined
against spiritual pride in his revelations, is so modest, that he speaks of his
own experiences in a third person, [I know a man in Christ that was taken into
the third heaven, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 2.] he does not say, it was I Paul, but
leaves us to gather it was himself, by some intimations. which he lets fall by
the by. A man that travels to London with a great Treasure, will not boast and
crack of it in every company where he comes, lest he invites thieves to rob him
of it.

Indeed, when we consider who made us to differ from others, and that he that
made us differ, can easily take away that difference again, and shake us
together into the same bag with others; and that there is nothing more likely
to provoke him to do so, then such a foolish magnifying of our selves, from the
mere Liveries which his goodness gives us to wear; it were enough to
ingenuous spirits to allay all the vauntings and crackings which they may be
tempted to.

4 Take heed of presumptuous sins. Sins of infirmity and ordinary incursion, if
they grow upon us by our want of watchfulness, are enough to provoke God to
withdraw his presence from us. But if we adventure upon sins of presumption
and wilfulness, it is no wonder if he shoot our hearts full of poisoned
Arrows, and break our bones on the rack of his heavy displeasure. David
adventured so once, but he paid dear for it, he lost the light of Gods
countenance so, that he began to fear he should never recover it again. If
the greatest Favorite that is, abuse a Princes favor, and presume upon it to
bear him out in extravagant and irregular practices; it is the ready way (when
his Master comes to know it) to bring him under his severest frowns. And the
reason is, because people are apt to think, that those who do such unjust
things, would not dare do them, but that they have encouragement from the Power
that countenances them; and so the miscarriages of Instruments redound to the
dishonor of the Prince that imployes them.

Thus, if persons that pretend, and bear the world in hand, that they live high
in the light of Gods countenance, and are special Favorites in the Court of
Heaven, shall adventure upon such practices as the wicked and profane wretches
of the world do; if they shall lie, and steal, and commit Adultery, and use all
means of indirect courses to make them great, and feather their nests in the
world; the dishonor of this reflects upon God: the world will think, that
(sure) God loves such things as these well enough, however (for state and form)
he must speak great things against them in his Word: Else why does he lodge in
his bosom, and entertain intimate familiarity with such persons as he knows
are thus notorious? And can the Lord bear this? It was hainously taken at
David's hands, that he had caused the enemies of God to blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.
See how God complains of such Boasters of God, that they made their boasts of
God, and the Law, and yet by the transgressing of the Law, dishonored God, and
caused his name to be evil spoken of, Romans 2. 24. and Psalm. 50. 16, 17. God
threatens such a person that he would terrify his conscience to the purpose,
and set all his sins in order before his eyes, as took his name into his mouth
in a boasting way, and yet cast his Law behind him. And truly (friends) I even
tremble to think what a sad time, not only in respect of spiritual desertions,
and terrors of conscience, (which I am persuaded will eminently haunt such
professors one day) but even in respect of temporal judgments, hangs over the
heads of many hundreds in this Land (if not on the Land it self for their
sakes) who have given up their names to Christ, and make great boasts of God,
and special intimacy with him before the world, and yet have plunged themselves
into such notoriously scandalous practices, as amaze the very Turks and
Infidels, that are any way acquainted with the state of our affairs.

Truly friends, (if ever God recover the credit and reputation of his
Ordinances among us, especially of a strict and severe Discipline in the
Church) I look to hear of roaring consciences good store abroad in the Land:
for surely, God must (if he spare us in temporal visitations) have some way for
the reparation of his honor upon such persons, as having eaten of his bread,
have thus lifted up the heel against him.

5 Take heed of formality and spiritual sloth in the Duties of Religion.
Labor to keep your spirits as high and vigorous in Duties, when you have
attained Assurance, as they were when you sought it. Let not your Devotion (as
the Popish Mariners in the Story) fall from a candle as big as the Mast of a
ship, to a candle of twelves in the pound, when the Tempest is over. Remember
and pay the vows that you made in the day of your distress. The truth is, you
that could pursue so eagerly after God in the dark. when you were fain to grope
out your way, are utterly unexcusable if when you have the noon-day-Sun of his
countenance shining upon you, you cannot walk as freely and zealously in the
strength of communion with him. I have often told you of that of Neh. 8. 13.
The joy of the Lord is a Christians strength: sure I am, it should be.

Princes expect that their Favorites should be more zealously at their
devotion when they have advanced them, then ever they were before. Their former
services are looked on as stairs for their ambition to climb by; but their
after services are looked upon as a tribute of thankfulness. It Is true, the
affections of the Saints may, and do flag after the completing of their
Assurance of Gods love in some passionate heats; as the Affections of an
husband, are not so wild and impetuous as the Suitors are: but yet there is
still a steady fire burns in faithful yoak-fellowes, by which they as really
endeavor mutual satisfaction as ever they did before, and their real
impressions of affectionate love are constant, though the over eagerness of
them be allayed by mutual enjoyments. All those flames which hope and fear
added before, are now extinguished; but those of love and good will, still
continue as high or higher then ever.

Do not look therefore so much at the heat of your affections, as at the
reality and seriousness of your expressions of them. But it is a sad thing,
when any slight matter is good enough for God afterward, whereas before we
thought our best too bad. See how God abhors this dealing. Mal. 1. 8, 14. It Is
a thing would much discontent a wife, if a hot Suitor, afterward prove a cold
Husband.

6 Take heed of mixing the comforts of the Spirit of God with carnal
contentments. There is no greater contradiction in the world, then Assurance
from the Testimony of the Spirit, and a covetous prosecution of the things of
the world. Will any man believe, that he is certain heir to a Crown, and
infallibly knows he shall enjoy it; whom he sees gathering rags out of a dunghill
to get a penny? Nothing (as I have told you) in the world makes a more generous
and noble spirit, and less engaged to things below, then the assurance of Gods
love. The Apostle Paul calls them, Ephesians. 3, 8. (...), Dogs meat, dung. And of
Luther, the Pope was used to say, The Germane beast would not be tempted with
Gold.

And indeed there is no greater damp upon Assurance then this. Because

1) The good things of another world and this, are of a nature utterly
inconsistent, and the pleasures that are taken in them are utterly
incompatible, I mean, in any eminent degree. As to be conversant among base
Drudges, abaseth the spirit of a Prince, and unfits him for taking contentment
in noble and generous employments.

Certainly, the joys of the Spirit are too serious, spiritual, and heavenly,
to suffer themselves to be mixed with vain, and frothy, and earthly
contentments. The light of the Sun will dim and put out the blaze of a fire, or
candle. This Oil of gladness will not incorporate with any thing, though
never so rich in the composition, which is not of the same nature with it self;
It will swim at the top, and if you will come at the inferior liquor, you must
first skim that off. And therefore if you descend to these meaner
satisfactions, you must first lay aside the severity and seriousness of your
spiritual contentments, and let fall your spirits to a level of vanity, and
slightness, suitable to the refreshments you seek after.

2) And when God sees us so undervalue his favor, as to proclaim to the
world, that is not sufficient, (of it self) to fill the desires of the soul
(as all going out after the Creature does; see how God complains, Jer. 2. 31.
it proclaims to the world, that God is a barren wilderness;) it is no wonder
if God desire not to bring his grace and favor down to so low a Market, as
such customers expect. This is spiritual Adultery; and that must needs breed
strangeness, and a temporal separation, if not divorce. The Law is, Prove. 5.
19. Let her breasts satisfy thee, and be thou always ravished with her love.
So does God when he is married to the soul, expect that his breasts should
satisfy us; and when they will not, can you blame him if he grow strange? This
is to proclaim to all men, that a man was mistaken in the choice of God, that
he finds he is not that God he took him for, that there was error personae in
the Match.

7 Beware of (that which I have often before warned you of) vain, unprofitable,
Erroneous, or ungodly company. This will not only damp convictions, (I have
showed you so much before) but comfort also. Ordinarily, our spirits by
sympathy become muchwhat of the temper and alloy with those with whom we
converse. It Is a difficult thing for a man's spirit to continue free from
impressions of sadness, that converseth with a mourning company. And it is no
less difficult for a soul to be seriously affected, though he have never so
important business in hand, when the persons he is most familiarly conversant
with, are all set (as we say) upon a merry pin.

(1) Vain and unprofitable company have not weight enough in them to add any
balast to a spirit under the full sails of gracious Assurance; nay, they
substract and withdraw that which it has before within it self; and then it is
no wonder if it be overturned, whiles the heavenly gale that fills those sails
(for want of a serious care to manage it) leaves the soul to a blast of frothy,
carnal delight, which will soon over-set it.

(2) Erroneous, and (for in this case we may very well put them together)
ungodly company, on the other side will make it their business to bore holes
in the vessel it self, to corrupt a man's principles, and let in upon him such a
flood of brackish and unsavory waters, both opinions and practices, as will so
mar all the precious lading of the soul, that the Spirit (in just
discontent) will refuse to fill its sails any more (it being not worth the
labor to bring that vessel to harbor which is laden with mere trash and
rotten Commodities.) Erroneous company will endeavor to break the chain of
Truth in which Assurance hangs. One Truth lost, loses it.

In a word, The holy Spirit of God will not partake in the scandal of such an
Association. If I be never so much an acquaintance, or intimate friend to a
man, yet I will not accompany him into all Societies, which possibly he may be
engaged unto. If he will converse with me, I expect that he should do it either
in a way of privacy, or (if in a more communicative way, yet) in such company
only, as may suit my genius or disposition, my quality and reputation, or else
there I will leave him; and if I see he intends to make a consolidation of
acquaintance and converse between me, and such as I cannot comfortably converse
withal, I will break off familiarity with him altogether. And surely, I cannot
expect that the Spirit of Grace, truth, and holiness should serve me
otherwise, if I abase him so far in my esteem, as to endeavor to draw him
into Partnership with me in the Society of empty, erroneous and wicked men. No
question but such an affront will cause him to withdraw.

CHAP. XXIX A fourth and fifth Direction, concerning the use of our Evidences.
4. BE much in the Actings of Love and Thankfulness.

1 Love. Coolings of affection on our part toward God, God cannot bear. It
were an unnatural and monstrous ingratitude at such a time to flag in our love,
when we are under the fullest and most enlarged enjoyments of his love to us.
Then (if ever) when Gods countenance shines upon us, will it make our faces
reflect the same smiling beams of love upon him again.

Surely, such enjoyments act much beneath themselves, if they produce not a
love stronger then death it self. If the Saints of God use to love God, (and
it is their duty so to do) even then when he breaks them in the place of
Dragons, and covers them with the shadow Psalm. 44. 19.
of death: if when he will not vouchsafe them one smile upon their souls, will
not speak one good word to their aching hearts, but all they see from him is
ghastly frowns, and all they fear from him is chiding and thunder: How much
more may we think it reasonable and just, they should do so, when he spreads
his own banner of love over them, when he brings them into the Banqueting
Cant. 2. 4.
house, when he lays his left hand under their heads, and his right hand
embraces them, Cant. 8. 3. 1. 2
when he kisseth them with the kisses of his mouth and paves all those Chariots
of Ordinances and Duties, wherein he conveyes himself to them, and them to
himself, with love?

And Cant. 3. 10.
therefore if at such a time your love kindle not beyond the ordinary
proportion, you cannot but provoke him to withdraw in displeasure. See what
one cold entertainment of a visiting Christ cost the Church, Cant. 5. I opened
to my Beloved, but my Beloved had with-drawne himself, and was gone. His love
was hot in the visit, but hers was too cold that gave him such an
entertainment; and therefore when she opened at last, he was gone. v. 6. And
then when the Scene was changed, and the visit fell out to be on her part, he
served her in the same fashion, he would not be within, She sought him, but she
found him not.

(2) Thankfulness. I cannot imagine, if a soul were to wish a good thing on
this side heaven, and have it, what it could desire like spiritual Assurance of
Gods love. It is as near of kin to heaven it self, as possibly can be. It is a
kind of beatifical vision, proportioned to the capacity of a mortal creature.
And certainly the more we are admitted to the life of heaven, in happiness, the
more near we ought to come to the life of heaven in thankfulness. Because an
heavenly life is a life of the greatest fruit ion, therefore it is a life of
greatest thankfulness. To receive extraordinary mercies with an ordinary
spirit, a spirit not warmed into extraordinary sensibleness of it, and
thankfulness for it, is among the greatest provocations of God the giver of
them that can be.

Discoveries of Gods love have used to nonplus the utmost abilities of a
thankful heart, Psalm. 116. 11, 12. What shall I render (says David) to the
Lord for all his benefits toward me? And then is thankfulness greatest, when
(like the peace of God which occasions it) it passes all understanding.

5 Let love and thankfulness carry you on with delight in all the ways of Duty
and obedience. The truth is, this is the proper use of divine discoveries. Why
does the father smile upon, and make much of his child? is it not that he may
be thereby encouraged to dutifulness and obedience? Why does the Sun shine upon
the earth, except to make it fruitful? Upon these terms the Church is engaged
to run after Christ, Cant. 1. 2. 3, 4. If Christ draw with Ointments and
kisses, the fragrant allurements, and temptations of his love, it is an addition
of strength and agility to a poor crippled soul. Now if Christ find that you
receive his favors, but reject his commands; that his countenance is
delightful, and his embraces welcome to you, but his Commandments troublesome,
and his yoke intolerable, (especially considering that he affords you those
refreshments that they may oil the wheels of your spirits, and make them go
the more nimbly in his ways,) Is it not just with him to withdraw the
encouragements, and leave you notwithstanding to your tasks of duty, to toil
in the brick-kilns, and work out your very hearts in an uncomfortable drudgery,
without the least refreshment at all to quicken your spirits thereunto? These
are the terms upon which God will manifest himself so to his people, as to dwell
and abide with them, John 14. 21, 23. If a man love me, he will keep my words.
And my Father will love him, and we will come to him. So it may be (will a soul
say) but how long will he stay when he comes? Why? the next words show, We will
make our abode with him; We will dwell with him for continuance. That expression
of our Savior Christ's, seems a strange expression, When ye have done all those
things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable servants; why? Because
we have done but what was our duty. As if it were to be the complaint of a
Saint, that he can do no more for God then he should.

CHAP. XXX. An Exhortation to improve Assurance received, by (1) living upon,
(2) pleading our Evidences.
II. Labor to improve and make use of Exhortat. 2.
Assurance had, to the utmost. You need not forbear this duty, because your
Title is but weak and disputable. This makes a man many times careless of
bestowing cost upon a piece of Land, because there is a flaw in his Evidences.
But here you need not withold your hand for that, because yours are as sure
as heaven and earth can make them.

Quest. But you will ask me how? I answer,

Answ. (1) Live on it at all times. A Christian has a threefold life here by
faith, The Just lives by faith.

1 A life of Justification; and this life he lives by faith in an applicatory
relying Act, in its adhering, depending act, John 5: 40. Rom 1. 17.

2 A life of Sanctification. And this we live by the same Act of faith
radically and originally; Because it is that grace which on our part makes
application of Christ to the soul, and the soul to Christ, and so the
Instrument of union. Now from this union and engrafting into Christ for
Justification, Christ becomes to us a root of Sanctification, John 15. 5.

But we live a life of Sanctification, quoad actus exercitos, in the fruits and
streams of actual holiness; not only from that act of Applicatory reliance,
but also, (because these fruits are moral acts, and so must be brought forth in
a moral way, by Motives and Encouragements, and in their most noble actings
they are always so) from the Faith of Assurance or Evidence (as was before
shown.) So Gal. 2. 20.

3 A life of Consolation. John 14. 1. And this life we live by improving a
Faith of Assurance only. Faith of Relyance (as I have shown) may give support,
but it cannot give comfort. But faith of Assurance gives comfort in the saddest
cases, 2 Timothy 1. 12.

Improve your Assurance then to a life of Sanctification and consolation.

1 Improve it to a life of Sanctification. Believe up your graces when they are
low, believe down your corruptions when they are high. Believe into your
Judgments light in darknesses and doubts; into your Wills, strength and
resolution in temptations and assaults. Every grace that is purchased by
Christ, promised by the Father, wrought by the Spirit you may challenge. You
may, if you want any materials for the spiritual Edification of your souls,
have recourse to your Evidences, and they warrant you to take it upon the Lords
soil wherever you can find it. Go to the Lord boldly, and say, Lord, I am
troubled with barrenness, and deadness, but I find in my Evidence a Promise
that my soul shall be as a watered garden, Isai. 58. 11. that the desert shall
blossom as a rose, etc. Isai. 35. 1. I find a great deal of weakness,
faintness and weariness upon my soul in holy Duties. But I find upon my
Deeds, that the yoke of Christ shall be easy, Mat. 11. 30. That they that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength, that they shall mount up with Eagles
wings, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint, Isai.
40. ult. That the way of the Lord shall be strength to the upright, Prove. 10.
29. I am fickle and fleeting in my resolutions. But my Copy says, Be strong,
and God shall strengthen your heart, Psalm. 31. 24. That God will strengthen me
with the right hand of his righteousness, Isai. 41. 10. That he will write
his Law in my heart, and his Statutes in my inward parts, that I shall not
depart from him, Jer. 31. 32, 33. and 32. 40. I am very subject to powerful and
domineering lusts and corruptions; but I find in my writings, that my old man
is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin may be destroyed, That sin shall
not have dominion over me, Rom 6. 6, 14. That God will subdue mine iniquities,
Micah 7. 19. I want particular graces, I cannot believe; But my Evidence runs
by way of Promise, The just shall live by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. That thy people
shall say, My God we know thee, Hos. 8. 2. I want Repentance, but Lord it is
written, Thy Saints shall look and mourn, Zech. 12. 10. Patience, but I find,
that thou art my God, and thou art the God of patience, Romans 15. 5. 1 Cor. 10.
13. I am under Affliction, and I desire it may be sanctified. And it is written,
That all the fruit of Affliction shall be to take away sin, Isai 27. 9. That it
shall make me partaker of thy holiness, Heb. 12. 10, 11. Say; Lord, I find
those in my Deeds, sealed in the Sacrament, and I know they are growing on the
soil of thy love, and Christ's merit, Lord, give them me.

2. Improve it to a life of Consolation. There is no condition, but thou have
peculiar comforts to live upon. For Spirituals, Isai* 40. 1. Against sins,
Isai. 1. 18. Mic. 7. 19. Hos. 14. 4. Against sufferings spiritual, Isaiah 50.
10. Against Temptations, 1 Corinthians. 10. 13, In Temporals, as far as they are
good, Psalm. 84. 11. Against poverty, Psalm. 34 9, 10. Against sickness, Psalm.
91. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 41. 3. Against reproaches, Math. 5. 11, 12. Against
persecutions, Math. 5. 11, 12.


And abundance more of all sorts you may find in that excellent Treatise of Mr.
Leigh, concerning the Promises.

There be some special comforts which are depending upon the doctrine of the
Assurance of the Saints by the Testimony of the Spirit, and you have several of
them in the following part of this 8 of the Romans.

1 That however low your condition be for the present, and how sad soever Gods
dispensations of providence may seem toward you, yet you are sure of a glorious
and happy condition hereafter. This you have ver. 17. And therefore that the
present sufferings which you undergo are no way worthy to be laid in the
balance to abate the least dram of your joy, ver. 18. for you are heirs, not
younger children, or servants, to be put off with gifts (as Abraham did the
rest of his children besides Isaak) but heirs to the estate; and what is that
estate? Heirs of God, of all that God has, and is; and you partake of the same
inheritance with Christ himself, coheirs with Christ.

2 That in the greatest dejections, deadness and decays upon your spirits, you
are sure you shall have assistance enough to keep the intercourse between God
and your souls alive, verse 26, 27. It may be (Soul) thou art in a strange
stupidity of spirit, that thou know not what to desire; the Spirit shall
teach thee what to pray for. But (though (...), bears, or lifts against, as a
partaker of the same burden.
thou know what would do thee good) thou can not ask it; the Spirit shall
help thy infirmities. But it may be thou can not speak a word when thou go
to seek God, yet the Spirit shall help thee to groan. But will God understand
those groans? Yes, for he that searches the heart, knows the mind of the
Spirit.

3 That you shall receive benefit to your selves from the saddest of
Providence, ver. 28. All things shall work together for good. All things;
Ordinances, Providence, Prosperity. Adversity, sins; (...), work together.
They are at work, it is their bussnesse. All the business of the Creatures
(being servants to God) is for the good of his children, and they work together
for their good. Things never so different in their natures and operations
conspire for their good, as several contrary ingredients in the same Medicine,
^ee Ver. 31
correcting each other, and one doing what the other cannot.

4 That you shall want nothing, that you had not better want then have, ver.
32. He spared not his Son. Had he exercised that severity on an Angel, it had
been much. But he spared not his Son; not a Son by Adoption, but a Son by
Nature, (...); But delivered him up for us all. Delivered? to whom? to Herod,
and Pilate, and Judas, and Satan: to what? to the curse and wrath of God, to
the death of the Cross; for us, in our stead. And how shall he not with us
give us all things; (...) How shall he not gratify us with a free grant of all
our desires? A Saint assured of Gods love, has all the treasures of heaven and
earth at command. He is assured, if God or creatures can supply him, he shall
never want any good thing. Psalm. 23. 1. Psalm. 84 11.

5. That whatever your own misgiving heart tells you, or Satan maliciously
suggests, you can never (by all the power of earth or Hell) be deprived of any
of these privileges; nor lose them by your own sinful miscariages. Sins
cannot deprive you. For this would destroy the satisfaction of Christ, either
Christ suffered for all the sins of Gods elect, or for some only; if for some
only, then none can be saved of all Gods elect, seeing he cannot satisfy for
that himself which Christ has not satisfied for. If for all, then none of
them can be condemned. Sin may trouble them, sadden their Spirits (as it ought)
hide Gods face, but it cannot condemn them. The Apostle challenges sin and
Devil, and all in that case. v. 34. And all creatures in the following verse.

2. Plead it at all times.

1. Before God. In all those things which you come to God for, you must plead
Title. If you come to God for any good thing, you must plead some engagement
upon him, and the ground of your plea must be either a general, or a special
promise. It Is true, general promises are a good plea, when a man has no other.
But God loves (and it is much for the comfort of Saints) that we urge him upon
special bonds; Therefore the Saints are bid to say Father, and our Father.

2 Against Satan and his suggestions.

1 Sinful. It Is a good Argument against temptations to sin. How shall I, that
have had such tokens and tastes of Gods special love, do this great wickedness,
and sin against such a God? Genesis 39. 9. And if God makes it an aggravation of
sin, as he does, 1 King. 11. 9 why may not we make it an Argument against sin?

2 Troublesome. When Satan molests the soul with fears and doubts of thy
condition, have recourse to thy Evidences. Tell him, thou will plead against
him before God as a common Barretor, for molesting thee in so clear a Title.

3 Against the unbelief upon thy own heart: This David keeps up withal; Psalm.
73. 26. I confess (says he) I am at an utter loss both without and within,
yet God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. Psalm 42. ult.
and 43. he checks his heart in sadness upon this account, Why art thou cast
down, etc. Trust still in God, who is the light of my countenance and my God.

CHAP. XXXI. An exhortation to recover the lost evidence of the Spirit. And
some advice how to do it in two particulars.
HEnce be exhorted (thirdly) to labor to recover it, if lost.

Qu. How shall I do that?

A. 1. Sit not down quietly, rest not in that condition. If a man have lost the
evidences of his land, he will look over all his boxes and chests, and romage
every corner (as we say) and will not leave, till he has found them again.
Thus (in the place before quoted) did the Holy man, Ps. 77. My spirit made
diligent search.

The Saints of God in the Scripture could never sit still under such a dark
condition. It was death to them, Psalm 13. 3. and 143. 3, 4, 7.

And no wonder; for the darkening of their evidences, is a suspension of all
influences. As during the darkness of the night, or the eclipse of the sun by
that interception of light, there is a suspension of that quickening influence
which the sun has in things below. All graces will wither when God thus hides
his face, all Duties will be dead, and barren, all comforts clouded, and
imbittered, as I before also showed you.

A woman that loves an husband, and is reassured of his affection to her,
cannot endure long absence from him. If ever you have been ravished with the
love of God, you cannot bear his absence long.

Here I do not advise you to an impatient Caution.
restlessenesse under that condition. No, that is too often the fault of
Saints. But I caution you against a sloathfull resting in such a condition. I
must be contented with it as it is Gods pleasure, but I must not be contented
with it, as it is occasioned by my default.

(To know this) you must.

2. Enquire where, and how you lost it. I have before shown you what duties
will preserve it, and what sins will forfeit or obscure it. Examine your
memory now: what duty have I failed in of all those, or what sin have I
fallen into, which is before discovered? In the day of adversity, consider,
Eccles. 7. 14. Examine the particulars. Have I not been careless in recording
my evidences, either in mine own memory; or if I have not, have I not entrusted
them more with my self then with God; have I not relied upon my own strength to
preserve them? Have I labored in the use of all means to strengthen them? Have
I not been guilty of spiritual pride in them, carnal boasting of them, security
and carelessness in preserving and maintaining them, presumptuous sinning
because of them, formality and spiritual sloth in the duties of Religion,
earthly-mindednesse, keeping cooling company? Have I lived a life of love,
thankfulness, and obedience under them? In a word, have I carried my self as
became the receiver of so great a mercy, the possessor of so rich a treasure?

If you find where and how you lost it, seek it there. It may be it was but
mislaid by carelessenesse. Think then what duty thou have been careless in;
remember whence thou Apoc. 2, 5.
have fallen. Or if by some sin thou have lost them, find out that sin, and
when that is removed out of the way, it will be found again.

David had laid two great blocks upon his box of writings, and they were even
lost for a whole year, or very little less, till renewed repentance removed
them, and he reenjoyed them. So Peter by denying his Master, lost his comfort,
but repenting, he recovers a favorable respect from Christ again. Go tell the
Disciples, and Peter, says the Angel, that he is risen, Mar. 16. 7. Tell Peter
in particular, by way of peculiar favor.

Qu. But how shall I know what sin it is that obscures, or mislays, or steals
away my evidence? How shall I know why God denies me the wonted influence of
his comforting Spirit?

A. First, Enquire or God, Job 10. 2. And then,

Secondly, search by these Rules.

1. Ordinarily, that sin which (upon serious search of thy heart and ways)
first presents it self to the eye of conscience, is the sin, whether it be of
omission or commission. God is not a little seen in the experiences of his
people this way. The voice of conscience is the voice of God, not only in those
things for which it has a certain rule, but in those things where its
knowledge is but conjectural (many times) it speaks by an immediate suggestion
from Gods holy Spirit: certainly Jacobs sons had other sins upon them, when
they were in that straight in Egypt, which we find recorded in Genesis 42. but of
all their other sins, they are directed by the Spirit in a special manner, to
their former unnatural cruelty toward their brother Joseph, committed about
twenty years before, and they take this voice of conscience as the voice of
God, and fasten on that particular sin. v. 21. Therefore (say they) is this
distress come upon us. The soul will bleed afresh (as dead bodies do) at the
approach of that sin, which is guilty of occasioning its spiritual trouble.

2. Ordinarily also (though it were not so in the case of Joseph's Brethren
before mentioned, nor is it always so in the present case, with diverse others,
yet) I say, ordinarily, the sin that is most freshly committed, before Gods
withdrawing from the soul, is that which that affliction points at; and that
(being last committed) is ordinarily also in the eye of Conscience. Conscience
immediately after the fact committed, uses to blush, and thereby betrays its
guiltiness, if it have not, by a frequent repetition of sins, lost all modesty
and shamefastness altogether, and contracted an whores forehead, which a soul
acquainted with God cannot easily do. If an Officer come in upon the sudden
after a murder is newly committed, it is no hard matter for him to find (in a
throng) who did the Fact, by the fresh circumstances which he cannot easily
overlook. So (though all other sins have an hand in this fact, yet) a man shall
commonly observe in the sins newly committed, some tokens and indications more
then ordinary, which may provoke the soul immediately to lay hold upon them in
an especial manner, and indict them for the Fact.

(3) Examine what sin thou did (when (as yet) thou did walk in the light of
Gods countenance) most fear and suspect, as laying wait for the life of thy
Assurance. Commonly the Saints observe in themselves some one constitution-sin,
or other darling corruption, which at all times they find themselves most
inclined to, and that sin (if they manage their comforts as they ought) they
set a special guard upon, as suspecting it more then ordinary, Psalm. 18. 23.
Now if it chance at any time that this guard be slackned, it is ten to one if a
backsliding into that sin do not murder their spiritual peace. And if so, it is
no hard matter to find it guilty of the fact by strong circumstances and
probabilities, if not by certain and convincing Evidences; because God puts a
special Mark upon such sins, as enemies to the peace of his Saints. Psalm. 85.
8. God will speak peace to his people, but (then) let them not turn again to
folly; let them take heed of Apostatizing and falling back to their former
master sins; q. d. if they do, they will quickly lose their peace again. I
kept my self (says David) from mine iniquity, that sin which I was peculiarly
prone to.

Now this is a good rational and probable ground of proceeding against such a
sin, that there are such suspicious against it. If a murder be secretly
committed, and the Author of the Fact not presently apparent, yet if from
certain evidence it can be gathered that such a person threatened him often, and
laid in wait to take away his life formerly, and the murdered party had a
constant jealousy of him, it is as great evidence as circumstances can make,
that such a person did the fact; and therefore the Judge will examine such a
person narrowly, where he was when the Fact was committed; and if he cannot
give a probable account of his distance from the place at that time, 'twil go
hard with him. Now take thou the same course: Some sin or other has taken away
the life of thy soul, which is the comfortable presence of God, Psalm 30. 5. If
thou can not find the murdering sin presently, and upon the place; then
examine that sin which has often threatened it, and has watched frequent
opportunities to do it, and enquire whether that sin were so far from thee
about the time of Gods departure, as may excuse it from the suspicion of the
Fact: and if not, but that thou have (at least in thy heart) near that time,
taken acquaintance with it again, there needs no farther evidence. Take it and
crucify it.

(4) Possibly it may be a sin of ordinary incursion, which thou have been most
secure of, and made (ordinarily) the least account of, when thou have at any
time fallen into it. Sometimes, whiles a Saint watches diligently against the
incursions of greater sins, or such as are more suspicious to him, some sin
that he makes little account of, lies lurking in the throng to do him a
mischief, like the Adden in the path (as Dan is described) Genesis 49. 19. biting
the horse heels, so that the Rider falls backward. Now the truth is, no sin
is small in it self, and a small sin (in comparison) frequently admitted, either
by wilfulness or security, may (like a little thief) as well steal away such a
Jewel as thy spiritual Assurance is, as a greater; nay, because thou think
it small, it thereby becomes great by customary commission. It may be thou have
not repented for it in particular (though often fallen into) as thou have of
others; and that has made thee so easy to admit it again into thy heart of
late, that now it is grown a familiar sin, and thou beginnest to regard it in
thy heart. It need not amaze thee, if (in this case) God withdraw the light of
his countenance from thee; and that small sin may do thee that mischief, which a
greater (of which thou art more jealous) cannot. As a Pick-purse in the habit
of a Gentlewoman, is least suspected in a Fair, and can more securely steal,
then in ragged beggarly accoutrements. That sin which is most unlikely may do
it the more easily, because it is so unlikely.

CHAP: XXXII. Seven other particulars of Advice in this case.
3 IF you find that you lost it by such or such a miscarriage of your own, you
must speedily labor by proceeding in an holy severity against the Malefactor,
to turn away wrath from you. The longer thou delayest, the harder it will be to
recover the clear sight of thy evidences when thou have suffered them to lie
long under the dirt and dust of such sinful pollutions. Take this course then.

1) Lament and bewail both your loss, and the cause of it. When sin provokes
God to hide his face, there is a double cause of mourning. If a man could
(notwithstanding sin) enjoy the smiles of Gods face, yet it is the duty of Gods
Saints to mourn for sin; and certainly the Saints never mourn more kindly then
when the warm beams of Gods love distill the soul into tears (as they will do,
and that upon this account, that it is a thing directly contrary to Gods holy
nature and Law, and therefore displeasing to him, though he do not always
testify his displeasure against it.) But now, when to this shall be added the
actual manifestation of his high displeasure in the turning away of his face
from the souls of his dear Saints for its sake; here certainly, their sorrow
has a double occasion, and they are inexcusable, if they shall (in this case)
rejoice as other people, Hos. 9. 1.

Those persons are vain talkers (as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 1. 10.) who deny
the Saints of God the exercise of so necessary an affection as godly sorrow in
such a condition, which is (in effect) to expose them to a continual darkness
and uncomfortableness under the absence of God, seeing God has professed, that
he will withdraw till men acknowledge their offense, Hos. 5. 15. and has
annexed comfort to a mourning condition, Mat. 5. 4. and promised to dwell with
the contrite spirit, and to revive their hearts, Isa. 57. 15. and 61. 2. and
anointed his son with the oil of gladness, in especial manner, for the sakes
of them that mourn in Zion, and especially confines his healing grace to
brokennesse of heart, Isai. 61. 1, 2, 3. putting so honorable a name upon it,
as to own it for his chiefest, and most acceptable sacrifices, yea to account
it in stead of all other sacrifices. For so the expression imports, Psalm. 51.
17. Friends, will you lament the loss of your temporal evidences, and vex at
your own folly in mislaying them, or parting with them? and can you so easily
bear the loss of eternal ones?

(2.) Repent, and do your first works. Except Apoc. 2. 5.
the cause be removed, the effect will still remain. Till the sin be removed
for which God has withdrawn himself, God will not return. He that avoyds a
place, because of the infectious air, or any other inconveniency in his
habitation there, will not (in reason) return, till the cause of his removal
be removed. If thou will have Gods face toward thee as at former times, thou
must set thy face toward him as at former times. I have formerly enlarged upon
that remarkable place, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. Where as soon as Ephraims heart
turns, Gods bowels are turned too. Is Ephraim a pleasant child? etc. therefore
my bowels are troubled for him, etc. It is no boot for men to bewail their
loss, except they remove the sin that causes it. God may say in this case
as he did to Joshua, Why lie thou upon thy face? Israel Josh. 7. 12.
has sinned, and I will be with you no more, except you destroy the accursed
from among you. So he may say to thee, why do thou lie whining at my feet? Up
and destroy the accursed thing, take away the sin that makes me leave my
habitation, and I will return again: but till then I will not be drawn to
rteurne by all thy prayers and tears. Mourning for sin, pleases God no
farther then it turns us from sin.

(3.) This and some other special duties, which may tend to Gods special glory,
you may bind your selves to by vows, Psalm 51. 13.

4. But if you cannot find any thing extraordinary in your selves (as to
matter of sin) which may move God to withdraw, and the Spirit to detain from
you the clear sight of your evidences; it will yet be good to wait upon God in
all duties of Religion with double diligence at such a time, and to labor at
adventure (in the exercise of those duties) to affect your hearts with the
farther sense of your inclination to those sins which are more peculiarly
hinted out to you before, as especially active in procuring all such sad days
to the people of God; to wait patiently upon God without those usual
distempers of spirit, which oftentimes the people of God prolong their troubles
by during this time of expectation.

5. Labor as much as possibly you can, to grow in selfe-abasing humility, and
an high prizing and precious esteem of Gods presence, that thou may thereby
answer Gods expectation in his present cloudy walking toward thee, seeing
perhaps he withdrawes his witnessing spirit, merely by way of prevention, as
often times he does. God may foresee the inclination of thy heart to spiritual
pride, which thou do not see. God may foresee that too much familiarity with
him, may be apt to be answered with contempt on thy part; and if so, he may in
pity and prudence withdraw the matter of such a temptation before hand, as a
Physician keeps that body low in flesh, which he sees inclined to evil humors,
though it be not actually distempered by them. Now if thou cooperate with God
in this design (as possibly it may be this, he aims at) surely thou will
hasten thy deliverance from thy present darkness.

6. Labor to live by faith in the mean time. For (as I told you before in the
directions to the getting of Assurance, so) I tell you now in the way of
recovering lost Assurance, the main work is to exercise an holy reliance upon
God, in a condition so sad and uncomfortable as this must needs be. This we
find has been the practice of the Saints of God in the like cases, Psalm. 27.
13. David had been in a great straight, not only in regard of his Exclusion
from Ordinances, but even in the sad conclusions which he drew thence, to the
distempering of his spirit. See how he closes all; I had fainted (says he)
except I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
living. Job speaks bigger words, Though he kill me, I will trust in him. Job
13. 15. q. d. Satan tells me, (and my own misgiving heart many times seconds
him) that these troubles will make an end of me, I shall never come alive out
of them. Well (says Job) be it so, lot him kill me if he will; if I were now a
dying, and dropping into Hell, yet I will hold fast for all that: he shall not
be rid of me so. If I go to hell, I Will pull him after. Our Savior Christ also
in his Agony, cries, My God, though he were a forsaking God. This is a sweet
frame of Spirit, when God seems to hold loose, and man holds the faster for
it; God spurns at a poor soul, and he lays hold of his foot; God says,
Jacob, let me go; and Jacob says, no, I will not let thee go* except thou
bless me. Genesis 32. 26. The advice is plain, Isa. 50. 10. I urged this place
before in the directions for procuring Assurance, and there told you that there
is a parity of cases, and so a proportion in the means which are to be used for
recovery, in the soul that never had, and the soul that has lost assurance.

This must needs be a special way: For,

1. This frame of Spirit speaks strength of faith. A small strength will serve
to hold one that is willing to stay, but when a strong man puts out all his
strength to wrest himself out of a friends importunate embraces, it had need
be more strength then ordinary that holds him, or fetches him back then. This
is that by which the strength of Abraham's faith is discovered (in another
case:) he was (says the Apostle) strong in faith, [he was mightily enabled by
faith] what to (...).
do? to believe he should have a Son when he was past all probable hopes of
one. Romans 4. 18, 19, 20. And thus it is in thee, it is an evidence of strong
faith, when thou can say, let my heart tell me never so much, God has cast
me off, and there is no help for me in God; yet I will not let go my
confidence, and the hold that thereby I have upon him; here is strong faith.
See Mat. 15. 24, 25, 26. The woman's faith was admired by Christ upon this
account, that she would play the dog, and fall at his feet, when he rated her
away. O woman (says he) great is thy Faith. Persons are apt to think that
Assurance of Gods love, when a soul walks in the clear light of Gods
countenance, and lives high thereupon, is a strong faith. But, I tell thee
friend, there is more strength by far in that faith that depends upon God in
darkness and desertion, that trusts when a man can see no light. The truth is,
the life of Assurance is (in a sort) a life of sense and feeling, and it is
rather a life above faith, a life of enjoyment. Faith is the evidence of things
not seen, says the author to the Hebrews, Heb. 11 1. Assurance (in proper
speech) is the first fruits of heaven, and it is life is a life of sense and
fruition, not of faith. As the Apostle says of hope, in this Chapter, Hope
that is seen, is not hope, ver. 24. So say I of faith; faith that is seen, is
not faith. Faith is a friend made especially for a time of distance between the
soul and its comforts; and is appointed as a means to derive the benefit of
them to the soul, during that state of distance.

2 Besides, it is no wonder if God be taken with the actings of faith in such a
season, seeing strength of faith gives glory to God. Romans 4. 20. And he cannot
long withdraw from a soul that so much glorifies him upon so little
encouragement. I may say to thee as Christ to Thomas, Hold this course and thou
art a blessed man. Others see, and believe. But blessed are they that have not
seen, and yet believe. Joh. 20. 20.

3. Besides, (lastly) this frame of spirit must needs keep down many of those
murmuring, despairing, and (in a sort) blasphemous misapprehensions concerning
God and his promises, which length of soul-troubles is apt to plunge a man
into. And certainly, the less iniquity there is breaking forth in our
desertions, the sooner they will be over. Now faith, in such a season,
maintains good thoughts of God, and defends him, and takes his part against
the calumnies of Satan. And God that sees and knows this, (therefore) how can
he but take this kindly? If an husband absent himself a while from a wife, and
she be ready, upon every whisper of slanderous gossips, to suspect her husbands
fidelity in his absence, and give out speeches tending that way, can it be
expected that any husband should take pleasure in such a wife? Will he not
rather choose to stay away still, and be suspected for something (as we say)
rather then live under constant suspicions for no cause? But when the heart of
an husband may be secure of this, that his wife is confident of his
faithfulness, and her heart quietly rests in him, absent as well as present,
let suspicion suggest what it will, surely, he cannot but be exceeding tender
of such a wife, and much taken with her company. God sees your jealousies of
him in darkness, and observes how apt you are to censure him in his absence.
Do not think this is the way to bring him back again. He will make you
entertain better thoughts of him, ere he return.

Quest. But how shall I exercise faith in desertions? What shall I believe?

A. Believe (in general) most things that seem most contrary to thy present
sense, and moral probabilities. For in soul-troubles, the fancy is the
principal part possessed by distrustful imaginations, and Satan in that,
fortifies himself against all the power of those truths that might be means of
consolation to the soul. And therefore the way to get out of them, is to
believe the quite contrary to those apprehensions which we are most apt to
close with.

More particularly.

(1) Believe this condition is good for thee; yea, so good, that thou might
be much the worse, if it were not for it. This is an hard matter to persuade
souls in such a condition to believe. But the Scripture affirms it Romans 8. 28.

(2) Believe that God loves thee never the worse for this dealing with thee;
that when he thrusts forth his foot to kick thee, he puts forth his hand to
embrace thee; that when he calls thee dog, he owns thee for a ch^ld never the
less for that. This is an hard lesson too, but take it from Heb. 12. 6.

(3) Believe, that if God could tell what other course to take to do thee good,
he would not afflict thee this way. For (surely) as he does not afflict
willingly, Lam. 3. 33. and therefore forbears the rod altogether, till he
cannot tell what to do more to do his people good, Jer. 9 7. So he never
chooses one affliction before another, but upon the same exigency and
necessity. And therefore believe this is the most proper Physic for thy
constitution of all other, because so wise and indulgent a Physician chooses it
for thee.

(4) Believe that he will not hide himself from the always. I cannot tell how
to commend to thee (absolutely) a belief that he will return to thee in this
life, as formerly. Thou may perhaps guess whether he will or no, by the
present strong prejudices that Satan casts into thee against it; a distempered
spirit, as thine is, is seldom strongly possessed or haunted with a true fear;
and therefore (as I said before) cujus contrarium verum est, is a good rule for
thee most commonly to judge by. That which Satan and thy own mis-giving heart
most strongly endeavor to fasten upon thee, (if the Word do not clearly back
it) it is safest to believe the contrary thereunto.

Thou may guess at it (also) by thy ends why thou desire the light of Gods
countenance here, which the more spiritual they are, and remote from self, the
more confident thou may be of re-enjoying it here. Are thy ends these, that
thou may glorify God more on this side the grave; strengthen others by thy
experiences, draw others to God by the discovery of the satisfactions that thou
find in his ways? These were David's ends, and David recovered out of such a
condition as thou art in, by pressing Gods return to him, upon these grounds,
Psalm. 51. 12, 13, 14. And Hezekiah, Isai. 38. 18, 19.

Thou may guess at it, by the judgments that carnal men make of thy
condition: By the use that they are apt to make of thy troubles, to reproach
Religion, or the like.

Bp thy freedom from notorious scandalous sins since conversion.

By the stream of the prayers and desires of the people of God for thee; God
does not usually gratify his enemies, or deny his friends in such things as
they put much weight on.

By the considerablenesse of thy condition toward the furtherance of the peace
or disquiet of other Saints of God, who look upon thee as a blazing Star,
portending some great thing or other toward them and their condition, and
resolve to judge of themselves by thy case, etc.

But these things I look on as no sufficient grounds of a particular faith in
this thing. Neither do I know any Scripture that will bear the weight of such a
particular confidence, except with these limitations.

That if God see and judge that thy comfortable condition will be more for Gods
glory, thy own good, and the spiritual benefit of others, it will return
again; otherwise thou have no ground to expect it, whatever grounds thou thy
self have to think so. And this I affirm, because it is a thing not absolutely
necessary to thy salvation, or Gods glory, or the good of others: he can carry
thee to heaven in the dark, and work holy ends of his own upon others, out of
it also, though thou die without comfort.

And yet I must add, that diverse of Gods Saints have been confident of this; as
David Psalm. 27. 13. and 42. 5, 11. and 43. 5. I shall yet praise him who is the
health of my countenance and my God. And the Church, Micah 7. 8, 9. When I fall
I shall arise, he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness. Though (as to the grounds of that confidence) I confess I am
ignorant.

And (let me add once more that) there are Promises even in this thing, which
(although we must interpret with the forementioned limitations, yet) may be
great encouragements to us to ask in faith, and grounds upon which we may
comfort our selves even in the present exigency with some intimations of an
hope of release. Isai. 57. 16. is an excellent place, and has relation to this
life, because of the reason that is annexed, I will not contend for ever, lest
the spirit should fail before me, etc.

And lastly, (let me add) Few of Gods Saints surely, have dyed without sensible
returns of Gods love and favor to their souls, in some competent measure,
enough to bear up their souls against desolating tentations.

But (however) suppose thou have no certain ground to believe a return of
comfort here; yet believe that thou shall see his face in glory hereafter, and
that no troubles shall be able to separate from Gods love, though they may from
the sense of his love, Romans 8. 35, 38, 39. And eternity of enjoyment is a
duration large enough to make up the want of God here.

(5) Believe, that the likeliest time of reenjoyment of his countenance, is,
when thou art most in danger of being swallowed up of despair. And truly; when
the violence of temptation does most importunately put the soul upon desperate
thoughts, against all the strength of Meditation, prayer, resolutions to the
contrary, then is deliverance at hand. Cum duplicantur lateres, venit Moses,
say the Rabbis; Moses, the Deliverer, comes when the Israelites bricks are
doubled. Man's extremity fits God with the best opportunity, to advance his own
glory in his deliverance. In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen, Genesis 22.
14.

Object. True (may a soul say) a man that can yet lay claim to God, may believe
all these things, and rely upon them: but how shall a soul act faith in such a
condition, that questions his interest, as much as ever he did; such an one as
is beaten off from daring to lay any claim to God at all?

Ans. This is a weighty Question, and therefore I must not let it go without an
answer. And the Answer is briefly this, Suppose that thou art Godless (as yet)
in all thy soul troubles; (take (for once) the devils suggestion, and thy own
hearts deceitful collusion for true) and what then? Are there no encouragements
given to persons that want a present interest in God? How comes any (then) to
get an interest in God? Is it not by laying hold on him under some Scripture
encouragement? The absolute promises (as we usually call them) of the first
grace and acceptance in Christ, belong to any that can lay hold of them.
Friend, begin again, and lay hold upon such Promises as thou did at first
fasten upon, and do not let them go. And never dispute whether thou have an
interest or no: But if thou think thou have not, labor to get an Interest by
laying hold on them. Tell Satan and thy deceitful heart, that God never says,
I will give a new heart to you, provided you be in Christ; or I will give you
Christ, upon condition you be first in Christ. Were not this an absurd
condition? Were it not a contradiction? Does Christ say, Whoever comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out; (that is) if he be in me before he comes?

Object. Yea, but thou will say, All these Promises are conditioned by Gods
Decree of Election; and if I be not in Christ (by Election at least) none of
them belong to me.

Answ. True; that is, thou shall never have the

1. Real and actual benefit of them. None can have grace, but whom God has
given to Christ. As many (and as many only) as the Father has given to Christ,
shall come to him, Joh. 6. 37. But yet thou have a Legal Right, such a right as
will ground a plea in the Court of Heaven, from the general Terms in which
they are delivered; and thou can not exclude thy self, nor can the Devil or
thy own misgiving heart exclude thee justly, except thou or he could see Gods
book of Life and Death. Plead then the Plea God has put into thy mouth, and in
so doing God will show thee thy interest in them from eternity, by giving thee
assurance of thy present actual title to them, in his own time and way.

2. The decree of Election is the Devils usual common place, whence he draws
his most effectual Arguments of trouble and disquiet to the Saints of God. And
thou may (if by no other mark) discover the roaring Lion by his paw, in this
common beaten path, and haunt of his. And so much the more palpably is he to be
discovered, by the peremptoriness of his suggestions in this kind: when ever
you find your selves under a strong and preremptory persuasion of your
non-election you may be assured, the Devil has an hand in it. Because the
Spirit of God never peremptorily discovers to any man his reprobation. For if
he should, he would defeat his own ordinances and motions upon the hearts of
such men, and by consequence be the proper Author of all such sin, as is the
proper issue of such a desperate conclusion.

7. Cease disputing over thy evidences, and turn disputing into praying. The
longer thou disputest in this case the more thou will entangle thy self. Hardly
ever did a soul in desertion, recover his assurance, by disputing over his
evidences. Satan is so subtle a Disputant, that he will perplex an Argument,
when it is clearest. He is a juggler, that can cast a mist before the eyes of
Saints many times, even by clear daylight, much more can he do it by
candlelight or starlight. But of this more hereafter.

8. Set upon a serious endeavor of advancing in holiness. If thou can not
enjoy the face of God, yet, in his absence, make much of his picture; follow
the work of mortifying corruptions, and growing in grace. It is true, it is an
hard matter to make any considerable progress in holiness, as to the practice
and exercise thereof, in a day of desertion: but a man may grow in the
principles and grounds from whence holiness is derived into the practice.

A man may fortify his resolutions, and lay new engagements upon his heart to
the practice of holiness, when God shall give him enlargement.

A man can do little work in the night, yet he may contrive and methodize his
work, and consider, and resolve what to do, when the day appears. And God will
the sooner come again, when he finds there is so much preparation made for him.
When David had set his heart and house in readiness, Psalm 101. he expects a
visit from God. O when will thou come to me! ver. 2.

Gods promise herein may be our encouragement. To him that orders his
conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. Ps. 50. ult.

9. (And lastly) be industrious in comforting others. In discourses with others
under soul-troubles, labor always to defend Gods cause against Satan's. See
what thou can ^ay to others, on Gods behalf; how thou can answer their
objections, satisfy their doubts, encounter their tentations. As he that
teache^h another, teaches himself; so he that supporteth, comfort another,
may find himself supported with his supports, and comforted with his comforts
ere he is aware.

Those doubts and objections, which are seemingly unanswerable, when a man
deals with them in his own heart, will appear many times very slight and
inconsiderable, when urged by another. We are all apt to admire that in our
selves which we slightly esteem in others, from self-love: and are no less apt
to terrify our selves with those fancies which we easily see to be ridiculous
in others, through the confusion of our spirits, and the mist that Satan casts
before our eyes. Now when a soul finds that pleading for God against his own
doubts in another, He is able to deal with them succesfully; he will see cause
to reflect upon himself; and say, Why should not I yield to the evidence of
that Truth, which I expect should satisfy another? Why should not I follow mine
own counsel? Why should I not conquer Satan in mine own, as well as another
behalf? If I expect the cordialls I administer to another, should cure mine own
distemper in him, why should I not try their efficacy upon my self, in the
same case? These directions being duly followed, will (in Gods time) recover
thee that Assurance, which Satan, or thine own corruption, and Gods just
displeasure have deprived thee of. And thus much for the second Thesis.

CHAP. XXXIII. The third Thesis laid down and explained.
Thesis 3.
NOw come we to the third Thesis of this part of the Treatise, and that is,
That When Gods holy Spirit has once been a Spirit of Adoption to any soul, he
never more becomes a Spirit of Bondage to that soul. For (says the Apostle) ye
have not [again] received the Spirit of Bondage.

For the explaination of this point, know that this Doctrine holds true of all
the works of the Spirit of Adoption mentioned in the first Thesisof this part.
Any work of true grace or peace in the soul, for ever discharges the soul out
of the prison of the Holy Spirit.

But I shall handle this principally in reference to the witnessing work of the
Spirit, which has hitherto been drawn through the whole web of this discourse.
Only (in the beginning) I must give this short hint for the sakes of those who
else might occasion some trouble to themselves hereby, as conceiving themselves
excluded from the comfort of the Doctrine, because (though they have other
works of the Spirit that accompany salvation, yet) they have not had experience
of this assuring act. For their sakes therefore, let it suffice once for all to
tell them, that if the Spirit of God have wrought in them any work that
accompanies salvation, all that which shall hereafter be said concerning the
privilege of Assured souls, is no less proper to them. R. 1.
For if there be but the least spark of grace in the soul, the Spirit that
works it, will not undoubtedly go so ready a way to quench it, as this (in all
likelihood) would be. 2.
Besides, if the Spirit should do so, it would testify contrary to the
Scripture, which says that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, etc. Romans 8. 1. Besides it were a flat counteracting of himself. 3.
For he would divide peace from grace, when that is the fruit of this.

To understand the point in the sense propounded, farther take notice (by way
of explication.)

1. That this Doctrine denies not, but the best Saints of God after assurance,
may be under troubles of conscience again. I told you upon the last Doctrine
that a Saint may lose the actual Assurance of Gods love; and there is nothing
more frequent in Scripture then the sad complaints of precious people of God,
under such darkness. The Lord to take off all ground of expecting such an
exemption from his people, was pleased to hide his face from his own natural
son, and to withdraw from him the sensible comfort of his divine nature, upon
the cross, and (before that) left him to grievous temptations from Satan
himself. True there is difference in our Saviors case and thine; for Christ
under his desertion, was under part of that satisfactory punishment which Gods
justice inflicted upon him for sin. Thy after troubles are not of that
nature. But herein the parallel holds; that height of enjoyment of God, and
height of communion with God are no sufficient security to a soul of never
losing the sense and comfort of them. A prisoner many times may be detained,
even by the keeper, after the Judge acquits him, till he pay his fees. And it
may be the holiest man may be unthankful, and so be clapped up again in the
house of Bondage.

2. That the dearest Saints of God, after Assurance, may fall not only into
trouble of spirit again; but into bondage of spirit also. They may fall so low
out of the assurance of Gods love, that they may conclude him an Enemy, and
feel all the Terrors of GOD, in the same kind as they did under the Spirit of
Bondage at the first. They may come to question all again, and their
Consciences may be as full of horror and blackness, and as full of the hell of
anguish and confusion, as ever before. I am persuaded David after his great
falls was under as great fears of Hell, as ever he was in his first conversion.
The answer of Nathan to him, implies so much, The Lord has put away thy sin,
thou shall not dye. If David had not been afraid of death eternal. (which is
the proper wages of unpardoned sin) 2 Samuel 12. 13.
why does Nathan add that promise from God to encourage him! Beside, when he
speaks of the horrible pit out of which God pulled him, where he stuckfast in
mire and Psalm 40. 2.
clay, and could not lift a foot to relieve himself, certainly we can
rationally understand no other then the dungeon of Terror, of which we are
speaking. A man whom the Judge and Jury acquits at the Assise, may be arrested
at another suit, and laid up again. And so may a child of God after a
discharge from the suit of conscience in his first conversion, be arrested
again, and as much fear the Law as ever.

3. Nay (possibly) his after-terrors may be greater and longer then the former.
He may have a far more hideous dungeon and heavier chains then ever he was in
before, and lie longer by it.

For it may be,

(1.) God intended (providentially) such a condition to him before, but saw his
weakness at the first conversion for the under-going of so heavy a burden,
and therefore (in pity) forbear that rigor then, til by the warm influence of
some glances of love from his countenance, he had fitted him with a proportion
of strength to glorify him in greater trials. In measure (says he) when it
shoots forth, will he debate with it. He stays his rough wind in the day of
his east wind. Isa. 27. 8. He spares a tender bud when it first buds forth,
that he may exercise it with more hardship afterward when it is able to bear
more. He will not put new wine into old bottels, Matthew. 9. 17.
i. e. proportion our work and strength.

(2.) Such souls, come out of light into darkness, and so their last
enjoyments make their present troubles more intolerable. Bitterness upon our
peace is mar, mar, Bitter bitterness. Isa. 38. 17. Had they continued in a
dungeon of horror still after conscience had first committed them, their
continued experience of that condition by long acquaintance might have made it
lighter. But to be taken out of prison, and cherished with some flashes of
liberty, and then shut up again, is an addition to their present Torment, from
(the most grievous torture, of all others, in such a case) the fresh
remembrance of the comforts last parted withal. Eclipses of the Sun, because
they come but seldom, appear more terrible.

(3.) Conscience (in such a case) is apt to take all former experiences for
mere dreams and delusions, and is more difficultly brought to accept of any
comfort now then formerly, for fear of being so deluded again; and so bolts
the door of the prison faster upon the soul, then formerly. Aprisoner that has
once had his prison-door set open to him, and been permitted quietly to depart,
if after he has enjoyed a shadow of liberty, an Hue and cry fetch him back
again, will scarce adventure to go forth again when the doors are set open
to him a second time: for says he, I had better stay whiles I am here, then
go forth, and be fetched back again; So says a poor soul in such a case.
Surely it is better for me not to receive any comfort, then to take it and lose
it again, as I have done once already. I was deluded then with a fallacious
liberty and peace, and I may be so again.

(4) Sins which trouble the conscience in such a second bondage, are aggravated
by the evidences of Gods love formerly enjoyed, and so terrify the soul more
under their guilt. Then, every sin loo^ like a blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost, an unpardonable sin. A man can tell what to plead before, but now his
mouth is stopped. Ezr. 9. 10. Psalm. 51. 15. and 40. 12

(5) Then, supports from God are less sensible. Because God permitts this
darkness in design, for some special ends of his own. Now the person a man
puts on upon design, commonly he uses to over-act, even beyond what he would,
if he were real. So, although when God was really an enemy (as before
conversion) he carried himself (by secret supports, and encouragements of the
soul) as one that was not utterly irreconcilable: yet when he merely intends
to appear so, he carries himself so strangely, that the soul really believes
he is in earnest, and intends its ruin irrecoverably. Lam. 3. 5. 7, 8, 9. The
church aggravates her sad condition from extraordinary appearances of Gods
dealing with her. God in such a case leaves the soul alone like a sparrow on
the house. Psalm. 102. 7. And woe to him that is alone, Eccles. 4. 40.

4 And thus fourthly. The grounds of the horrid troubles that Gods Saints fall
into after assurance, may be, and are, occasionally from the Spirit of God:
though immediately, and by way of an efficient cause they are not from that
spirit. Thus the Spirit led Christ into the wilderness Mat. 4. 1.

(1) By an active suggesting to the soul such considerations as may start a
soul-trouble. As when it makes a fresh dis^overy of New committed sins, and
stirs up the soul to renew repentance for them. Such motions may be the
occasion of farther enquiries into a man's own heart, and so of questions
concerning his estate. And thus by degrees, they may grow into as palpable
Legal Terrors as any ever the soul groaned under.

2 By withdrawing that assistance from the soul which should maintain the soul
in peace, and joy of the Holy Ghost. When the Sun hides behind a cloud, or is
under an Eclipse, it must needs be dark. If the Father let go the little
child's hand, in a dark and dangerous place, he will surely fall. And thus is
the Spirit the negative cause (if I may so express my self) of the saddest
bondage that comes on the people of God after Assurance.

5 But (Lastly) the Spirit (to be sure) does never cause and work a fear of
bondage in the soul, after Assurance; as it did before, and that may be seen in
these differences.

1. Before, there was a time when he convinced the sinner of a state of sin,
and enmity to God. After, it never does tell a man so any more.

2. Before, there was a time when he convinced the soul of a state of wrath and
condemnation arising from that enmity; but having once effectually converted,
and assured the soul of reconciliation, he never presents hell and wrath any
more to the soul as its portion.

3. Besides, He sometimes presented every act of sin as unpardoned. Now he
never does so any more, (in that sense wherein he did so formerly:) That is,
(that I may not be mistaken) He never presents Gods vindictive or avenging
Justice unto the soul as unsatisfied for such a sin; though he may present Gods
fatherly Justice as displeased at it.

4. Before, he sometime presented every suffering of this life to the soul as
a part of the curse of the Law, and the earnest-penny of Hell; Now he never
leads the soul to the view of sufferings under that notion; but only as
fatherly corrections and chastisements, by which God endeavors to quicken the
soul into a speedy return unto him by renewed repentance and humiliation.

CHAP. XXXIV. The proof of the Thesis, from 1. Scripture. 2. Reason.
THe truth of this point is abundantly clear Proof.
from the Scripture, and Reason.

For Scripture. Take notice of the names by which the Spirit is set out to us
in the Word.

(1) He is called the Comforter, John 14. 16. And this in his peculiar Office
to the Saints. Now he would fail in the discharge of it, if ever he should
bring Gods adopted children into bondage again. Therefore when our Savior
promises the Comforter, he also engages that he shall abide with the Saints,
John 14 16. It Is true, their comforts are many times fleeting comforts; But the
Spirit of God is not to be blamed for that. Ordinarily it is their own fault,
and oftentimes Satan's temptations eclipse the comforts and refreshments of the
Spirit to the soul: Though their comforts be fleeting, the Comforter is not.
To debase himself from being the Comforter, to the Devils employment, the
Accuser of the Brethren, is dishonorable to the Holy Spirit.

2 Besides, he is called our Seal: and how long does he continue so? unto the
day of redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. He will not to day scale an evidence of heaven
to the soul, and tomorrow seal its Mittimus to hell.

3 Moreover, he is called our Earnest: and can we think that God will give us
an earnest of heaven one day, and revoke it again the next; or ever deny the
bargain which that Earnest secures unto us? An honest man will not do so; far
be it from God to do what common honesty will keep man from. Romans 11. 29.

4 He is the Spirit of Adoption, testifying to us that we are the children of
God, ver. 16. of the chapter in hand. And can it be imagined, that he will ever
tell a child of God, that he is become a child of the Devil?

There is no less Reason: For,

Reas. 1. (I have showed before, that) The Spirit and the Word never cross
each others Testimony. Now the Word never pronounces bondage to any one that
has received the Witness of the Spirit; nay, not to any one that has the
least grace of the Spirit. The Word every where speaks comfort to such: Isa.
40. 1, 2. Romans 8. 1, 34.

Reas. 2. That which is the badge of a false Prophet, and which God dislikes in
such. cannot, without blasphemy, be attributed to the holy Spirit of God: But
to make the heart of the righteous sad, is a badge and sin of false Prophets,
Ezekiel 13. 22.

Reas. 3. That ought not to be supposed to be wrought by Gods Spirit, which (as
often as it is on our spirits) is our sin and infirmity: but to doubt of the
saving love of God, after enjoyment of the manifestation and feeling of it, is
our sin and infirmity, Psalm. 77. 20. And therefore the Spirit cannot be the
Author thereof: because the Holy Spirit cannot be the Author of sin.

Reas. 4. That which hinders the most proper and peculiar work of the Spirit of
Adoption, cannot be the work of the Spirit (except we suppose the Spirit so
indiscreet, as to counteract himself.) But if the Holy Spirit ever become a
Spirit of bondage to the soul after tastes of Gods love communicated
thereunto, the Spirit would be guilty of counter-acting its most proper and
peculiar work; which (as the next Doctrine from the last words of the Text
shows you) is to embolden and enliven the heart in Prayer. For how can he call
God Father with confidence, to whom the Spirit witnesses that God is an enemy?

Reas. 5. The Spirits Testimony (if it could ever become a Spirit of Bondage
again to an assured soul) would not be a sure and infallible Testimony,
contrary to the truth of the preceding Doctrine. When a man is found in two
contrary tales, we know not which of them we may believe. A man could never,
(this supposed) have solid comfort from the Testimony of the Spirit, seeing he
knows not how soon he may recant it, and testify the quite contrary.

CHAP. XXXV. The causes of Legal Terrors in Saints.
Quest. WHat then is the cause of those Legal terrors which after Conversion
and Assurance many times surprise the hearts of Gods people?

Answ. The main and principal cause is Satan, who combining with our own
suspicious, and distrustful, or melancholy spirits, or by divine permission, or
(lastly) by taking the work of Gods Spirit out of his hand, brings us into this
darkness, Psalm. 143. 3. The enemy has persecuted my soul, he has made me to
dwell in darkness like those that have been long dead. I have long ago buried
all my comforts, and they are almost quite out of remembrance. And the great
cause of all this is the enemy of my soul; called [the enemy] by a special
Emphasis, because the most deadly malicious enemy the Saints have. He sowes all
manner of Tares of corruptions, tentations, doubts in Gods field, the hearts of
Saints. Now this he does (as but now I hinted)

(1) Partly, by combining with our own suspicious hearts, and increasing
jealousies when there is no cause of sadness, as many times he does. The heart
that knows its own wickedness and deceitfulness, many times rejects sound
and solid joy in the Holy Ghost as a delusion, merely upon suspicion and
wariness, occasioned by its former experienced liablenesse to self-deception.
Now here Satan strikes in, and increases the jealousy that the heart has of
it self. As a malicious talebearer, that finds suspicions ready to break out
ever and anon between friends, is at hand perpetually to blow the coals, and
hinting to them both severally, such and such presumptions of each other, till
at last he have weakened all mutual confidence, and made an irreparable breach
between them. Fie, fie, (says the old Serpent) will thou believe these
comforts and joys are real, and from the Holy Ghost? Do thou know thy own
heart no better? Do thou not remember how it spoke peace to thee heretofore,
and all the Ministers in the Country could not persuade thee that thy
condition was not safe then? and since, do thou not remember how when thou
wentest to examine and search thy self, it hid sins by pretenses, and excuses,
and Apologies? And why should it not deceive thee now, as well as then? Now
here, many times the soul gives up, and yields to Satan's suggestions, and damns
all its comforts for mere fantasies and dreams, and all its Assurance for an
imposture. Nay, it may be, if the soul plead the marks and tokens of the
Spirits concurrence in that Testimony, then Satan begins to take the matter
upon himself. Alas, (says he) and do thou not know that Satan can turn
himself into an Angel of Light, and by 2 Cor. 11. 14.
consequence easily cheat a credulous heart into a belief that his delusions
are the testimonies of the Spirit of God? etc. -- Sic not us Ulysses? Art thou
so unacquainted with that subtle enemy, that thou can take every fair
pretense of his for Gospel, and adventure thy soul upon it?

(2) Partly, by combining with a mere melancholy distemper. Melancholy is
musing and thoughtful. It Is a temper of body which is the Devils Anvil, whereon
he hammereth all manner of temptations, all manner of deadly weapons to wound
the soul. He has a mighty power upon the fantasy, and can suggest things to
it, as he pleases. The fantasy or imagination, is the Looking-glass of the
soul, in which all things by reflection, are first discovered to it. Now it is
easy for Satan to represent in this glass what bugbear shapes he pleases to
affright the soul withal, and by a kind of fixed entertainment of the thoughts
with such objects of terror and affrightment, to make such strong impressions
upon the whole soul, abused by mere fantasies, as no reasonings or persuasions
whatsoever can remove. That strange affection of the fantasy, which (some
say) persuaded Nebuchadnezzar that he was a real beast, Dan. 4.
(and the frequent parallels to this in Wierus de praestigiis. Virg. Eclog. 8.
humane Writings, render such an Interpretation not incredible) many times is
the infirmity of good souls, that dwell (as was said of Galba's wit) in the
bodies of the most Ingenium Galbae male habitat
dreggy part of living earth, of a melancholy constitution. So that it is no
wonder, if Satan, acting the fantasy many times, the soul really be persuaded
into horrid apprehensions of its own condition. And to strengthen the belief
of the soul in such delusions, he can present strange spectra, images and
representations of terror to the very outward senses, by which such inward
apprehensions are oftentimes fortified and increased. He does (like a cunning
Fisher) mud the water, that his nets may be less discerned. And thence (in
such cases) persons under such a condition, are

1 Many times to believe others more then themselves, as suspecting such
delusions of their own fancies.

2 To labor after means of removing bodily distempers, that the soul may be
more it self, being less clogged with a distempered body; the body in such a
case is the souls prison

3 To admit of lawful avocations from the continued meditation of such
subjects, as by their fixing on the fantasy are hard to be removed. The very
humor of melancholy is a dull, heavy humor, that must be stirred as much by
exercise as Physic. And so must the fantasies that it begets be cured by
avocations.

(3) Partly, by the permission and allowance of God, (God giving the soul over
in some cases into his hands (as he did Job once) to do with him what he will,
only sparing his Job 2. 6.
life) for some notorious affronts offered to his Spirit, and abuses of his
favor to some bold intrenchments upon his Majesty and Authority, or some other
like cause. And in such a case (God withdrawing) it is no hard matter for Satan
to improve such a sensible defect and decay of influence, to infer a souls
utter rejection by God. The truth is, we live much by sense as well as
fantasy, not only in humane affairs but even in Divine. And when faith is at
low water (as ordinarily it is upon Gods with-drawings) then is sense most
predominant. Now the Devil can make strange conclusions appear undeniable in
such cases, if you will allow him to argue from what you feel. Do not
perceive (will he say to the soul) that God casts out all thy prayers, regards
not the voice of thy groanings, how he will not be persuaded to give thee one
smile, though thou woo him never so much? And will thou (contrary to all sense
and experience) still believe that he loves thee? Did he ever crush any soul
under his feet, that he did not kick into hell at last? And no wonder if Satan
when he has the command of all the Ports and Advenues of the soul, will let it
receive no intelligence but what he pleases, and use it to such daily objects
as augment its Terrors, if he raise such mists as hinder it from discerning any
thing distinctly.

(4) Partly, by taking the work out of the Spirits hand, as sometimes he does
(the Lord permitting it also for secret Reasons of his own.)

And hereof I shall show you some instances by which you may judge of his dealing
in other the like cases.

1 Many times the Spirit stirrs up the soul to examine its growth in, and
improvement of grace (possibly upon occasion of some late notable delays) and
to endeavor a recovery of lost strength, a quickening of what is ready to dye.
This motion being from the Spirit thus far; now Satan takes it up, and from
felt barrenness and deadness, stirs up the soul farther to enquire afresh
whether ever that were true grace that is now so barren; whether such a tree
had ever any life, that manifests so little growth?

2 Many times the Spirit sets home the consideration of some affliction, and
puts the soul upon enquiry why the Lord thus contends with it. Now comes in
Satan and alters the Question, and puts the soul upon the enquiry, Whether such
afflictions may stand with Gods love or no?

3 Many times the Spirit stirs up to repentance, and recovery from grievous
falls. Satan takes up this work, and puts the soul upon questioning, whether
ever it had any grace, seeing there is yet in the heart a liableness to such
great corruptions? This I touched before.

Thus you see whence the terrors that surprise Saints after conversion and
Assurance do arise; and so the Thesis cleared from mistakes. Proceed we now to
the Application of it.

CHAP. XXXVI. Saints convinced of folly, in giving way to troubling thoughts
after conversion and Assurance.
I. THerefore (for Application)*

(1) Hence the Saints of God may see how little Reason or Warrant they have to
justify themselves in admission of s^ulfetters after conversion, but
especially after Assurance.

1 Will a man think it were a discreet act in himself, to be afraid of every
leaf that stirs, and startle at every reed that shakes? A wise man when he is
in quiet possession of what he enjoyes, will see good Authority ere he will be
dispossessed upon any pretense whatsoever. The Devil never brings a true
Authority for the disturbance of any Saints peace. I am bound to take notice of
no Authority in matter of inward trouble and peace but that of Gods Spirit. My
Conscience is his Throne; and I cannot answer it unto God if I permit Satan to
usurp it. I ought to be able to discover that counterfeit, and oppose him,
though he come as an Angel of light; how much more when he comes like a Prince
of darkness?

2 What account can I give to the Spirit of God, the Comforter, for resigning,
so slightly, the Garrisons of strength, the grounds of gracious Assurance which
he has put into my hands? Saints must make as much conscience of parting with
their comforts without sufficient cause, as of embezelling any thing else, with
which God intrusts them. Friends, we are accountable for our Comforts, and
therefore it will concern us not to be easily cheated of them. They are
precious things. The joy of the Lord is our strength. Nehem. 8. 10.
If we betray our strength by losing our comforts, how shall we answer the
robbing God of so much service as he may lose from us thereby?

3 How shall we answer the mischief that may accrue to others, who used in
troubles and distempers of mind to have recourse to our counsels and
experiences? See Job 4. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. If I must not prodigally throw away my
estate, nay, if I must labor with my hands that I may have to give the bodily
food to him that needs. Certainly, I must (even in mere charity to others)
endeavor to maintain that spiritual joy which is their refreshment.

CHAP. XXXVII. The way how to discard them.
THis also gives a standing Rule to us concerning the entertainment of
soul-terrours after Conversion and Assurance. If they have no warrant from the
Spirit of God, then why will thou entertain so much as a conference with them?
I think, uncomfortable thoughts ought to be cast out without dispute, as
blasphemous and atheistical suggestions in some cases.

Q. But how far, and in what cases may it be be lawful to reject such thoughts
as tend to the questioning of Assurance formerly received, without dispute? For
it seems, the case of blasphemous and atheistical suggestions, and these we are
now speaking of, differs very much. Those being at first blush (by any soul
competently enlightened) to be discerned to be contrary to the express word of
God, and so matters out of all dispute: these (it may be) pretending ground
from the Word; and being in their own nature such as I am allowed to dispute.

A. It is true, there is some difference between the matter of the suggestions
themselves: but yet as to me and my case, they may be (in effect) the same.
For I may by a preceding Assurance from the Spirit of God, be as much
ascertained that I am a child of God, as I am, that there is a God, or
concerning any other fundamental point of Faith: So that I may be very well
allowed the same way of proceeding in the one case, which I am prescribed in
the other.

And I conceive I may do so in these cases.

1. When the present Doubts or Disputes concerning my condition, are not handed
to me in the way and method of divine motions. Gods usual way of putting the
soul upon enquiry concerning its own condition (to such as enjoy Ordinances)
being under the administration of them. If therefore without any such ground,
whether from the private working of my own thoughts, or from such injections,
as I can give no account of, I begin, after assurance, to fall a questioning
mine own condition; I may well fear the hand of Satan is in this, and I may
silence them for the present, as coming to trouble my peace without a warrant.
As if an Arrest should be laid upon me, out of the ordinary way of Law, I may
defend my self by force, or escape by sleight, and the Law will judge me in so
doing to have done no more then what I might lawfully do.

2 When the present Dispute concerning my state and condition is imposed upon
me under such circumstances as render it unlikely to be managed heartily,
clearly, and impartially; so that there is no likelihood but it should rather
end in confusion, and further disturbance, then peace and solid satisfaction.

If I should be provoked to dispute with an adversary concerning such or such a
point, at a time when I am not furnished with such helps as a disputant in that
case may lawfully require, at such a time when my mind, by reason of some great
oppression, or other business is not at liberty to recollect its strength, or
before such Judges as are already prepossessed by him, and strongly engaged on
his side, etc. I may very justifiably decline it, and answer his challenges
with silence, and provocations with slighting, seeing so disingenuous a
carriage on his part deserves no other: So, when I am solicited to put my
evidences for salvation in dispute, at such a time when I want my wonted
influences from the Spirit of God, when (as the Church Psalm 74. 9.
complains in another case) I see not my tokens, when my spirits are
overwhelmed, and swallowed up with the oppression of soul-troubles; when
lastly, I perceive, I must plead my cause before sense and reason, who are
already prepossessed, and fee'd on the adversaries side, I may very justly
refuse to enter the lists upon such terms, and reflect the disgrace of so
dishonorable a challenge upon my adversary, before God and conscience.

3. When I find such doubts concerning my condition injected, or suggested upon
Design, to hinder and disturb me in some present service* wherein I have
special use of Assurance. To put them off, at least, till a more convenient
time (in such a case) is a special part of spiritual wisdom. It is found by
the usual experience of Gods Saints, that when they have most to do for their
Assurance, they shall have it most to seek. Suppose when they go to pray,
especially upon any extraordinary occasion, when they address themselves to
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when they are under some heavy affliction,
it may be when they are in some sort called forth to suffer for God. Now it is
plain, that when our doubts and troubles of spirit (in our observation) usually
return upon us at such seasons; they are then injected upon a special design
to hinder us in the present services. Wherefore, seeing by admitting so much as
a dispute upon them, at such a time, I yield the Devil his known design, I
may very safely reject them; except I think it a course more eligible, to
gratify the enemy of Gods glory, and mine own good, with the neglect, or
heartlesse performance of a duty, then to break through a bug bear impediment
purposely laid in my way, and set about it with that furniture which God has
graciously vouchsafed to enable me thereunto.

And so much shall suffice for the Answer of this case concerning the way of
turning a troublesome incruder out of doors.

But it may be farther objected.

Object. But they pretend still they come from the Spirit, and (seeing you tell
me the beginnings of them, and occasional grounds of them may be from the
Spirit of God, and I find withal that they have grown out of such works of the
spirit as you have but now described) how shall I know how far the Spirit of
God leads me, and where Satan's work begins, that I may submit to the one, and
resist the other?

Ans. In general (seeing I have before given you some non-ultra's beyond which
the Spirit cannot go, and therefore must refer you to those for particulars)
(I say, in general.)

That whiles nothing is pressed upon you, but what may stand with the supposal
of a renewed estate; what ever motions yield you your title to God and grace,
and (neither in their nature or in their grounds) tend to weaken your
evidences, must be obeyed as the motions of Gods Spirit, though never so harsh
or unpleasing, as far as they have any command or allowed example in the
word. You must not take it for a motion of Satan, that bids you repent of,
confess, mourn for renewed sins, that bids you examine your heart and ways,
and turn to the Lord under afflictions, etc. But if such motions be improved to
the questioning of the whole work of God upon the soul, this is suspicious, and
so far you must not go along with it.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Some grounds upon which Satan uses to reduce converted, and
once assured souls into trouble, answered. Wherein also are some cases
concerning falling into sin, after these mercies received.
Object. YEa, but the grounds (methinks) upon which these thoughts are pressed
and urged upon my soul, are such as seem to come from the Spirit of God; and
therefore, (although the Spirit of God never become a Spirit of Bondage again,
where he has been a Spirit of Adoption, yet) he may, by such grounds as
these, convince me of my former mistakes in apprehending him to have been a
spirit of Adoption when he was not. And it is good to lay a sure foundation.

Answ. It Is good to lay a sure foundation, but if (upon every slight suggestion,
that it is amiss) I must be bound to remove it, and new-lay it, I shall
neither ever lay a foundation to the purpose, nor build upon it as I ought to
do. Suppose thy foundation rather to be good, and strive to build holiness
upon it, and thou will thereby be satisfied in the truth of the foundation.

But what are those grounds upon which thou conceivest Gods Spirit tells thee
thou have been formerly mistaken in thy condition.

Object. 1. I am told, that a child of God, (especially after sound assurance
had of his salvation) cannot commit such sins as I have done since the time
of my supposed Assurance.

A. I answer.

1. No child of God is either by converting or assuring grace, secured from the
acts of any sin, while he lives here below, but from the love, custom and
trade of sin.

That in many things we sin all, (the Apostle James tells us, and puts
himself in the number, though certainly he was a Saint of the highest
seize in point of assurance and comfort, James 3. 2.) I need not tell you
of the dangerous fall of Peter afer conversion, nor of the fowl falls of Noah,
Lot, and David; It is strange that mere pretenders to Religion, should be able
to urge their examples to harden themselves, and you cannot make any use of
them to support your selves.

2. It may make for Gods greater glory and your greater good, that you have
fallen so fowly, if (in stead of drawing discouraging conclusions from thence)
you make your repentance as visible and eminent as your falls; if you learn
hereby* and show hereafter a professed distrust of your own heart, carefully
watch against temptations and occasions of the like sins, and renew your
addresses to God for fresh assistance of strength to fortify your renewed
resolutions against them. A Saint gets ground by stumbling, whiles he hastens
to recover his pace the more for it.

3 You can never bring either of those blessed fruits (Gods glory or your own
good) out of your present condition, in the way wherein you now are. For God is
not glorified in your unbelief (supposing you the greatest sinners in the
world) but rather in this that you dare adventure an hideous guilt upon his
mercy; that notwithstanding so deep an Engagement in the way of sin and Satan,
you are so persuaded of the beauty of his ways, as to come off to his col^urs
with an heart willing to take up his yoke, etc. And as for the good which your
self may possibly reap by aggravating sins to the loss of your peace, I cannot
possibly conceive. If you think it will humble you more, work repentance in you
more kindly, etc. you deceive your selves. Those gracious streams never run so
full* and never over flow their banks so abundantly, as when they spring from a
fountain of fullest Assurance; Zech. 12 10.

4 But what are these sins? Do thou not aggravate them beyond measure?
Before grace the soul uses to diminish and extenuate sins, and so deceive it
self that way; After grace, it is as apt to aggravate them beyond measure. Such
a soul thinks he can scarce sin under a Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and
thence affrights it self not only into darkness, but despair. I have spoken
enough before to satisfy in this particular, to which I refer you; only take
notice of it as an usual weakness in the Saints, that out of a desire to do
God right, they make little conscience of doing themselves wrong.

Object. But (Sir) is it possible for a child of God to fall often into the
same sin after conversion, or comfort soundly wrought?

Answ. Oh friend, how shall I answer thee this Question, and not put a plea
into the mouth of hardened sinners? How shall I fortify against their
usurpations and encroachments, and yet give thee thy due comfort and
encouragement? Well, the Lord see to it. I cannot avoid such Doctrines when
they come clearly in my way. Sinners, if they harden you, I cannot help it.
Only I warn you before hand, Gospel Cordials to a fowl heart are the deadliest
poison. (But (for Zions sake) I cannot hold my peace,) He may. But

(1) First, He cannot with so full and free a consent, as before conversion.
For before, all the stream of nature carried him that way. Good actions went
(before) against the hair with him, and though he many times performed them,
yet it was like swimming against the stream. Now the principle is altered, and
that which then was the condition of good actions, now is the condition of
sinful ones; they go as much against the grain of a renewed spirit as evil ones
did before, Yet you must know withal, that there is not the like violent
opposition always against sin in a gracious heart, as against good in a
natural heart; because the stream of corruption in a natural heart, is broken
by no opposition, but is whole and entire, Nature is wholly corrupted. But (on
the other side) the stream of grace in a gracious heart, is much abated by
damms of natural corruption. We are gracious but in part; yet this know, a
natural heart commits and recommits sin with greediness, as a Glutton eats at
a Feast, cuts, and cuts again, and is not satisfied. A godly man may commit and
recommit sin, but with imperfect consent at the time; and regret and
displicency afterward. As a sick man tastes of a forbidden dish, and so cannot
take a full comfort in the sins he acts, as he gives not a full consent to them.

Ob. But so (will you say) a natural man may (from conviction of conscience)
eat sins delicates with regret and fear, and that may hinder him from taking a
full content in them; may he not?

Answ. Yes; but herein is a second and farther difference.

(2) The regret and displicency that is in a natural heart, is a burden to
him, and he would fain persuade his conscience to be quiet, and let him feed
heartily upon his sinful sweetmeats. A godly man's sin displeases him, as far
as he knows it to be so; and his tenderness and fear is so far from wearying
him, that he loves it, and wishes more of it, and cherishes that which he
has already.

(3) As a wicked man (sutably to what has been said) is displeased more at the
terrors of his conscience for sin, so is he angry at the sins for the terrors
sake, when he is displeased at sin at all. But a godly man's displeasure against
sin, which imbittered such sinful acts to him, is against the sin principally;
which appears in that he is many times displeased at it (and never more
displeased at it then) when he is most assured of freedom from those terrors.

Object. Yea, but the Law may be the principle in such a stirring of spirit by
which a full consent to sin is hindered. And so it may in a wicked man.

Answ. The Law is either Regula or Judex, either a Rule or Judge The ruling
power of the Law discovers sin, the judging power of the Law condemns sin. The
wicked man mostly looks on it in the latter act, the godly man in the former.
If the wicked man ever consider the rule of the Law, it is to wish it away: the
godly man to approve it, Romans 7. 16

CHAP. XXXIX. The Case of afflictions as it influenceth upon the Doubts of a
gracious soul concerning his Estate, answered.
Object. BUt I am under sad afflictions, and I am haunted with fearful and
horrid temptations, such afflictions as (I am told) no child of God can be
under; and such temptations as never assaulted any Saint.

Answ. 1. What afflictions are those that any child of God may not fall under?

1 Is not the rod part of the child's portion, whiles under nonage, whiles in
the School? Heb. 12. 6, 7, 8. And who art thou, that wilt argue thy self a
bastard, from that which is not only the lot, but the happiness of sons? Psalm.
94. 12.

2 Does God make any bargain with his sons, wherein he makes a difference of
rods? Is there any place in the Word of God, that says, I will use this or
that rod only to my sons?

3 Can thou name any affliction which God did not lay upon his own natural
Son? And who art thou who desire gentler usage from the hands of God then
Christ himself?

Obj. Will thou say, Christ stood as an enemy under the sins and curses of Gods
Elect, and his wounds therefore were the wounds of a cruel one, and his
chastisements the chastisements of our peace? But all Gods children are Isai.
53.
privileged from all such sufferings as Christ underwent, because he underwent
them: so that it is no Argument that any ones afflictions are not beyond the
line of fatherly chastisements, that Christ underwent the same? It will rather
follow that they may be the strokes of an enemy, because Gods strokes upon
Christ, standing in our stead, were such.

Answ. Christ's sufferings (it is true) as to the causes, were different from
those of all Saints. But as to the substance of them, they are common to all
others of Gods children: Thence we are said to fill up the sufferings of
Christ, Col. 1. 24. To be conformable to his death, Phil. 3. 10. To drink of
the cup of which he drank, and to be baptized with the Baptism wherewith he was
baptized. Mat. 20. 22, 23. Besides, some of the causes of Christ's sufferings
are the same with those of his members, although in all there be not a parity.
For our Savior Christ was under the Discipline of the rod, and a learner by
it. God opened his ear with a rod, as he does the Saints, Isai. 50. 5. He was
made perfect by sufferings. Christ's graces had an additional perfection of
degrees, Luke 2. 52. and in them he grew (as other Saints) under the
Ordinances, and among other Ordinances under the rod, Heb. 2. 10. 17, 18. He
learned obedience by the things which he suffered.

2 As for Temptations; consider

1. The Policy of Satan, who first disturbs thy peace, by unlawful and
vexatious clamours, and then persuades thee thou have no right to it, because
he has unjustly rendered it litigious; which is, as if a vexatious Lawyer
should call my Freehold in question unjustly, and then endeavor to persuade
me to quit my Title to him, because he has made it disputable.

2 Is it reasonable for me to conclude that God is not my friend, because the
Devil is my enemy? Or rather, is not the Argument more true on the contrary
side, because [God is my friend, therefore Satan will be my enemy? What is
Temptation, but a malicious persecution of the soul by Satan, tending either to
foil or defile the soul, and in both to work its discomfort? And shall Satan's
malice be a ground sufficient for me to dispute Gods love upon? If Satan could
by temptations render such a dispute rational, what child of God should ever
sit quiet in the possession of Gods favor or countenance, whom he has either
malice or power enough to tempt?

3 Is not Christ's example in this case of sufficient weight to carry this
conclusion in it, that no child of God is free from the worst of temptations in
this life? seeing our Savior himself had the most monstrous black ^uggestions
that hell could yield, presented to him, such as Idolatry, the worst of
Idolatryes, worshipping the Devil himself, Infidelity and distrust of Gods
providence, and the use of unlawful means for necessary supplies: and lastly,
self-murder, though not in the forehead, yet in the bosom and inside of that
temptation, Cast thy self down* etc Mat. 43, 6, 9

4 The way to be free from temptation, is not to yield them the victory in the
cause they contest for, but to resist them steadfastly in the faith. If they
weaken thy faith in the Assurance of Gods love, they will quickly lay thee on
thy back in more foul failings and miscariages. When Satan is winnowing, then
a Saints faith should be most weighty, that it may not easily be blown away. No
temptation ever got the field till faith qui^ted its ground. Faith is the
Bulwark of all other graces: if Satan batter down or blow up that, or any way
can but make a breach in it, he will quickly enter with Legions.

CHAP. XL. The Case of not hearing Prayers, and ability to pray, as it
occasions the like Questionings, stated.
Obj. BUt what if I have long cried to God, and he will not bear me, nor
vouchsafe me an answer? I am told, that God hears not sinners; and it is because
I am such, that God will not hear me.

A. Surely God hears sinners, (in a sense) or else he hears not Saints: or
(which is more absurd) Saints are not sinners. The truth is God hears not men
in a sinful state, under the guilt and power of sin; but he hears men guilty
of sinful acts; otherwise it were sad with all the best men on earth. If thou
doubt thou art in a sinful estate, because God hears thee not, then I enquire,

1. Did God ever hear thee formerly in the days of thy peace? If he did, then
either thou werst not a sinner, or else God did hear sinners. And if he hear
thee not now, then either Satan must prove that thou art now a sinner otherwise
then thou werst then, or else (if thou be as formerly) that is not the cause
why God hears thee not now, as he did then [because God hears not sinners.]

2 But (the truth is) the Argument is fallacious; God hears not sinners, the
Tempter says, and therefore seeing he hears not thee, thou art a sinner. The
consequence is invalid: He should have framed it thus; God refuses to hear
none but sinners; therefore (if he hear not thee) thou art a sinner. But
whereas he says merely, God hears not sinners: This Proposition may be
granted: and so may this also, God hears not some that are not sinners: and so
it will not follow more, that thou art a sinner, then that thou art not a
sinner, from Gods not hearing thee.

3 How many Saints have complained of this usage from God, That he covers
himself with a thick cloud, that their prayers cannot pass through? That he
fortifies against them, and when they cry and groan, he shuts out their
prayer, Lam. 3. 8, 44. That he is far from helping them, and from the words
of their roaring? Psalm. 22. 2.

4 Gods delays, are not denyals. Except we could set down the time, how long
God may delay the suit of a child of his, we can never draw conclusions of
enmity from that delay.

5 Are the things thou ask necessary to thy being here in grace, and
hereafter in glory? or are they but things additional, and convenient? In such
things as are not necessary to the being of a Christian, many times delays are
mercies, and denyals more. Hasty grants (even in very useful and necessary
things) might lose God much in point of honor, and thee in point of patience,
faith, humility, etc. How much more then in unnecessaries?

Besides, sometimes thy petitions may be improper to thy condition, and good
things ill applied, and not administered with due respect to the patients
particular case, may be poison. In such a case denyals are acts of tenderest
love and affection. No man but accounts it an act of truest love to deny a
friend a knife when he is mad.

Object. But now in comes another objector, and he may plead thus, Indeed, were
my case such as the last you answered I could from those answers rest
satisfied. But my condition is yet worse: For I cannot pray, nor be heard,
because I cannot pray. And I know Gods Spirit is a Spirit of supplication.

Ans. Thou can not pray. Could thou ever pray? A child of God may be
smitten dumb, who was able to speak [Father] plain, and tell large stories of
his own condition. And, in such a case it is evidence enough that thou had
once the Spirit of Adoption, that thou once could pray, though now thou can
not.

2. Thou can not pray: Nor ever wilt again as thou have, so long as thou will own no relation to God. If Satan can make thee question thy relation from
thy impotency in this particular, he has thee sure enough (for one while) for
recovering either thy evidence of that, or thy ability in this. For thou shall
never want lets to prayer, if those will make thee doubt thy sonship; and thou
shall never but doubt thy sonship, if thou will take those lets for a
sufficient confutation of thy relation, and wilt thereby be kept from prayer
again, which is Satan's aim, to lead thee in a ring of mistakes everlastingly.

3. Thou can not pray. But can thou not groan neither? If thou can, the
Spirit of Adoption may be in a groan, as well as in a prayer, Romans 8. 26. I
shall have occasion to add more concerning this on the last point.

CHAP. XLI. The Case of decays in spiritual affections, deadness,
burthensomnesse of duty, and several others, occasionally (thus far also)
stated.
Object. BUt if it were well with me, I should love, and delight in holy things
more then I do. I find it a burden to me, to draw nigh to God in any
Ordinance: my affections, that should be lively, are dead, and I know not how
it is with me: but I find I am an unprofitable lump of clay, and there is little
difference between a mere block and me.

Answ. This case, I confess, has much discomfort in it. But (as
discomfortable as it is, yet) it is not unsafe. Indeeed, were a Saints
foundation of his own laying, there could nothing more weighty and considerable
be objected, to shake it. But our foundation is the foundation of God, and that
stands sure, under our greatest deficiencies and uncertainties. But to answer
that which occasions thy present trouble.

1. Troubled spirits have not so much distinct, and undisturbed reason in them,
as to find fanlt with the Devils Logic, else I could tell them it is a mere
inconsequence that, such or such a soul is now dead, and lumpish, therefore it
was never truly assured of the love of God. For the allowance of this
cons^quence, affirms this falsehood [that it is impossible for one that has
had true assurance, to be afterward in a spiritual swound as to the exercise
of grace or gifts in duty] which, that it is a falsehood, as black as Satan
himself that suggests it, the Saints of God from their own experiences
abundantly testify: and the Scriptures in the exhortations that they give to
the Saints to blow up the gifts of God that (...)
are in them, suppose they may be like fi^e covered with ashes, and may look as
if their fire were quite out: 2 Timothy 1. 6. And when they bid us quicken the
things that are ready Apoc. 3. ^.
to dye, they suppose some life, even where graces are most languishing. Apoc.
3. 2.


Object. Yea Sir, could I be assured it were but a swound, I should take
comfort: but I fear I am quite dead, dead and buried, and a great stone upon
the graves mouth, that will never be removed, and Gods seal upon it too, that
it may not be so.

Answ. If thou werst quite dead, thou would be past fearing it. But the
present fear demonstrates that yet there is life. Fear is a passion, that
arises from apprehension of an imminent danger. If a tower be tumbling upon a
dead corpse he fears it not, because he apprehends it not, and apprehends it not
because he is dead. Nay, thy fear discovers that it is not so much as a
complete swound, that thou art in; but a palsy rather, seizing upon thy
outmost parts, whiles thy heart is still sound and sensible. It Is such an
halfsleep as the Churches, when her heart was awake all the while, Cant. 5. 2.
Methinks there are certain pretty contradictions in the apprehensions of a
troubled spirit. You shall hear him complain he is not humbled, when the very
visible brokennesse of heart in his complaints, confutes him: and he is dead,
when he gives evidence against his conceit, by his passionate sense of his
condition. I shall as soon believe a child when he lays his head in his
mothers lap, and says I am asleep as thee when thou say I am dead, and yet
complainest.

Object. But my complaints signify nothing, and my fears just as much as my
complaints. I complain out of form, because I know not what else to say, when
I am examined concerning my condition; I must maintain discourse: and I am a
notorious hypocrite in all this, therefore I pray you think not better of me
then I am, for any thing you hear from me.

A. 1. Yet more contradictions! Thou art afraid men should think too well of
thee, and thou endeavourest to make thy self as vile as may be, lest they
should do so: and is this a sign of an Hypocrite?

2. Besides, friend, let me ask you (and let your conscience deal, faithfully
with your self and me) do you not come unwillingly to make these complaints to
any body. Is it not the mere sense of such burdens, as, if you should
smother, would oppress you utterly, that drives you to speak these things of
your self; and which (also) had not they been drawn from you by discourse, you
rather resolved to have kept to your self? And call you this hypocrsie, for a
poor slave under an intolerable burden to groan to save his heart from
breaking, by giving it some vent?

3. Take heed of hypocrisy rather in this evasion, and others of the like
kind. If it be hypocrisy, to endeavor to seem what we are not, then I fear
complaints of hypocrisy many times are not altogether free from it. It may be
it is not intended by thee to deceive Gods Ministers and people, into a worse
conceit of thee, but it is materially no less then I tell thee. Beware of it.

4. Tell me, do thou not tell God the same stories, as well as thou can,
which thou tellest thy Minister or fellow-Christian?

Object. Yea, But may I not play the hypocrite with God too?

Ans. Take heed of hearing false witness against thy self, and tell me again,
Do thou not complain to God with an hearty and earnest desire of being
relieved of the burden of deadness that oppresses thee? Would thou not
purchase deliverance from it (if God would put thee to it upon those terms) at
any rate?

Ob. Yea but it is but form still: it is but a discourse for want of another
subject to speak of. And so it is in prayer to God, I must say something, and I
know not what else to say.

Answer, But why should such discourse be more frequent in thy mouth then any
other, both to God and man; were it not, that the matter of it is much in thy
heart? out ^f the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Mat. 12. 34.

2. Discourses that are of mere form, are most commonly formed discourses.
But thy complaints, both to God and man, are rough-hewed, confused, distracted,
misshapen things; it appears there is no Art in them, by the discomposure of
them, no form, by their confusion.

3. Either there is really in thee, that evil which is the matter of thy
complaint, or it is not. If not, then it is worse then a matter of form, to
complain against thy self. It is a sin, disparaging to Gods free grace, and
injurious to thy self, and may be prejudicial to thy brethren.
Soul-complaints are contagious.

If the root of the matter be ^in thee, it is well thou discoverest it, though
in such a way. God may have a plot upon thee, to force thee upon such a
discourse, as may tend to thy ease, and satisfaction. It may be Gods hand on
thy spirit, not formality in thee, which produces it now. It may be, he
restrained thy spirit, and straightned it to other discourses, that he might
draw this from thee.

CHAP. XLII. A Case, concerning the trial of spiritual life or deadness under
such supposed decays. And another (occasionally) concerning an hypocrites
delight in tidings of comfort from God.
Quest. BUt do you (indeed) think I am not quite dead? How shall I know whether
I am or no?

Answ. Well then, I will adventure to be thy Physician, and examine the state
of thy soul: first then, put this looking-glass to thy mouth, and let me see,
do thou breath, or no? Friend, tell me, what do you wish for? Are your
heavenly desires all dead? Is there no hungring, and thirsting after God? is
there no longing after his presence and Image? No pantings after holiness, and
the total mortification of sin? I believe, many a Saint is often at that
pass, in desertion, that he dares say no more, then, Lord, thou know the
desire of my soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee Isaiah 26-8.
And (with Nehemiah) Lord hearken, and be attentive to the prayer of thy servant
who desires to fear thy name, Nehem. 1. 11. And yet in these desires are the
breathings of a quickened and quickening Spirit, even the breathings of Gods
Holy Spirit in thine. Thou drawest in the breath of heaven, or else thou
could not breath it out.

2 Let me see thy tongue, how is thy palate affected? Thou say thou tastest
no sweetness in the ways of God; why do thou not leave them then? Do thou
find any thing sweeter? It may be thy mouth is out of taste to every thing
else, as thou think it is to them. But, tell me, is it not the dressing of a
Duty that makes thee dis-relish it, and not any thing in the Duty it self? It
is because thou art dead in duty, that thou art not delighted with it. It may
be (if the Duty or Ordinance be public*) thou may upon this account not be
affected, because it may not be managed with life and power, or it may not be
managed sutably to thy condition, and thou dis-relishest all things that do not
meet thy particular case. Herein (it is true) there is a failing, but it seems
still hereby, that thy disaffection is not to the Duties and Ordinances
themselves, but only to the dressing of them. And this appears, in that thou
waitest on them still, and expectest when God will make a match between thy
heart and the Ordinance, by directing himself more particularly to do thee
good. Thou art not of the temper of them who leave the use of all Ordinances
because they disrelish them in such and such a way of Administration.

3 Let me feel thy pulse, how beats it toward the world, how toward sin? that
will tell how it is with the heart: if thy heart be alive, there is no fear.
What thoughts are those that stir when a temptation to sin is presented, when a
temptation is offered to re-enter upon the enjoyments of the present world?
Does the heart beat then, and does the pulse beat quick by way of anger and
indignation? It is a true sign of life, when minus grata, things that are
against nature, cause an alteration in the body. One that will start at a
pinch, or show any other alteration on the apprehension of an unpleasing
Object, is alive. For (as I showed you before) fear is a living affection, and
such abhorrences arise from fear. I never knew any soul in the case of the
complainer, but if sin were presented to him, his very hair and heart would
rise against it. And surely, the Antipathies of such a soul show a life suitable
to them Surely, it is the divine Nature that stirs up a loathing of sin. It Is
the love of God that inclines to the hatred of evil.

4 Let me pinch thee a little. Friend, if you be quite dead, as you say you
are; then surely, if God be dishonored never so much, if his Church and people
be trodden under foot, if his Gospel be carried away to another people, if sin
be committed round about the place of your residence with never so high an
hand, and with never so public approbation, it is likely you are sensible of
none of this. Let me try, are you so? Come hither Julian, and blaspheme God and
Christ. Come Bonner, and make havoc of the Saints. Come Swearer, Drunkard,
unclean person, and act over your horrid impieties before this person freely:
surely, if he be dead* there are no reproofs in his mouth: Mortui non mordent,
Dead men bite not. How like you these things? Oh Sir, do you startle, do rivers
of tears run down your eyes, because men keep not Gods law? Psalm. 119. 136. Do
the reproaches of them that reproach God fall upon you? Psalm. 69. 9. Is it as a
sword in your bones to hear men blaspheme God, and dispute down Psalm 42. 10.
truth, and profess horrid iniquities under the name of perfection? etc.
Surely, here is life; pinch a dead man whiles you will, and you cannot make him
start.

5 You say you are dead, if you be dead, then what make you among living
company? Do the dead use to converse with the living? Get thee hence from the
society and communion of Gods Saints, from the exercises and employments of
living men* and converse with the men of the world, the men of this generation,
and put in thy lot among them, discourse of Oxen, and Farms, and Merchandise;
but as for the things of God, and persons that converse with him, spiritually
dead persons do not use to have much to do with these. Is this harsh to thee?
Do thou disrelish this exilement from God and Saints? Is all thy delight in
the Saints that are upon earth, and in them that excel in virtue? Psalm. 16. 3.
Do thou desie the wicked, and chase them from thee? Psalm. 6. 8. Surely, there
is life in thee. A dead man is fit company for none but those in the same
condition. They that are dead are free from the relations, company, and
employments of living men.

6 Thou say thou art dead; I will try thee once with good news, Comfort ye,
comfort ye, my people, says the Lord: tell them that their warfare is
accomplished. Isai. 40. 1, 2. My salvation is ^eer to come, Isa. 56. 1. Yet a
little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry, Heb. 10.
37. Suppose I could say to thee by a certain Revelation from heaven, The next
moment (O sad soul) the Lord will smile upon thee, and sorrow and sighing:
shall fly away. How would this affect thee? Would not this make a sudden
alteration in thee? Would not faith, joy, and love, and thankfulness strive
which sold break out first? surely they would. But if thou werst quite dead,
this would not affect thee. A natural man takes no pleasure in the approaches
of God, he had rather have him farther off, They say to God, depart from us,
Job 21. 14.

If the Sun be never so near the earth, yet the dead tree is not sensible of
its influence: it causes no alteration therein, no leaves, no buds, no fruits
testify its approach.

Object. But may not a wicked man delight in the approaches of Gods comforting
and refreshing presence, especially under troubles of conscience, although
there be no spiritual life in him at all?

Ans. He may delight in the removal of his present terrors, by application of
comfort. But it is not God, in comfort, that he looks after. Let him have
comfort or peace any way, he is well pleased, whether God draw nigh to him or
no. If the Devil will conjure down his troubles, if the world will choke them,
if music will fiddle them away, if the cup will drown them, it is all one to
him, shall I say? nay, it is more then if God spoke them away. But a living
soul says, If God will not let me out of this pit, this dungeon, I will never
go out; it is less to me to be free, then to be freed by him; that he is the
Author of my liberty, endears it to me. To enjoy a quiet conscience, and not
enjoy God in that quiet of conscience, is a worse hell to me then my former
terrors. Lord, restore my fetters and chains te me, give me my horri^l^ pit, my
mire and clay, my watered bed, my broken bones, my distracted spirit again. I
had rather choose them all, then not receive my liberty from thy single hand.
Any chains are easy if they be compared with a godless liberty.

2 But grant that a wicked man may (possibly) desire the comforting presence of
God too, yet he cannot delight in the approaches of Gods sanctifying presence.
Friend, could I tell thee, that God is approaching to thee as a Refiners fire,
to purge out all thy dross, and take away all thy tin, Isai. 1. 25. that the
comfortable presence of God, will be the death of thy dearest lusts: Surely
thou would say, Yea (Sir) let him come and welcome. It Is a day I have prayed
for, longed for, wept for, waited for. O I will not accept of the Monarchy of
the whole world for my share in this tidings. I would not take heaven upon
terms of reconciliation with my lusts. Is it thus with thee? My life for thine,
thou art not dead.

CHAP. XLIII. A Case, Whether (instead of growing) a real Saint may not decay
in the actings of some graces, and yet either the universal habit of the new
Creature, or the same very graces grow more habitually strong in him?
Obj. BUt I was once more quick and lively then I am now, and therefore I find
sensible decays of what good I once thought I had. Now true grace, where ever
it is, will be ever growing. The path of the Just is like the morning light,
which shines more and more until perfect day, Prove. 4. 18.

Ans. I shall satisfy this Doubt by answering two Questions.

Quest. 1. Whether a Saint may not decay (in stead of growing) in the actings
of some grace which appeared more visibly in him before? whiles yet he grows
in the habit?

Quest. 2. How a man may know that he grows in grace, when he is under such
sensible decays?

Answ. To the first I answer.

1 The graces of Gods Saints in the actings and operations of them, are not
always alike high. So we see in the holy men of God throughout the whole
current of the Word. The faith of Abraham, how high was it upon the Mount, when
he would have Sacrificed his Son? but how low, Genesis 22. 1. etc. Heb. 11. 17. 1 Samuel 20. 2
when he cowardly denies his wife? David one while dares fight with a Goliath,
and another, throws his Gauntlet, and challenges a whole Army; another while
he quakes and 1 Samuel 16. Psalm. 27. 3
trembles through distrust, and cries out, I shall one day perish by the hand
of Saul. One while 1 Samuel 27. 1.
Peter is so valiant that he draws a sword in Christ's defense, and that
against a whole Band of men, and follows him into the High Priests Hall; a
little after, a silly maid dasheth his faith out of countenance.

(1) The truth is, the continued high actings of some graces are not fit for a
mortal condition, and those that wish them such, Job 4. 19.
are unmindful that they dwell in Tabernacles of clay, and that their foundation
is laid in the dust.

Such is holy joy, which if kept up perpetually to the height of ecstasie, must
needs overspread the spirits, and dissolve nature.

(2) Some Graces are of a mighty uniting nature, and bind the soul to the
Object so, that it can mind nothing else during their impressions. Such are
faith and love. Now God has other graces to be acted; and works to be done by
us, wherein we may glorify him; and therefore allows them their time also.
Nay, a godly man is described by this, that he is a tree that brings forth
fruit in the season proper to it, Ps. 1. 4.

3. All the graces of Gods Saints, are, now and then, assaulted with stronger
temptations, and powerfuller corruptions then at other times. And grace that
will act high, when it is free from opposition, or under slender opposition,
will not act so under greater. That strength that will bear a hundred weight,
will appear little or none at all when it comes to lift a thousand.

4. It may be thy condition is altered, and thy grace is yet unacquainted with
the way of managing a new condition. As an able scholar put out of his way of
study, may be out-gone by a meaner, because those studies to which he is
disused must needs be entertained strangely, and 'twill be some time ere he
can get their familiar acquaintance. Here the fault is not in the abilities of
the man, but in the newness of the employment: so in point of grace; a very
gracious man, and one who in some conditions and employments, is excellent; in
others is to seek, not for a tool to work with, but for skill to manage it. As
a tradesman when he changes his trade, loses not his skill of dealing in the
world; but is unacquainted with the mystery of putting it forth to present
service.

5. Many times God suffers decays, and not only so, but inflicts them as
chastisements, upon his dearest people, that he may make them,

1. Humble. So he uses sicknesses of body to mind us that we are men, and
our breath is in his hand, and his only. So in our graces, we are apt to be
lifted up with high actings of grace, and in such elevations we despise our
weak brethren, and censure them, if they walk not up even with us, or if they
fail, especially in any grosser way, we forget (against the rule) that we
also may be tempted. Gal. 6. 1.


2. Dependent, not only upon public ordinances (where God has promised his
especial quickening p^esence, and where the Saints have used to find recovering
remedies under spiritual decaies:) but also, on private communion, even with
weaker brethren, and principally upon himself in the use of both, Psalm. 30. 6.

3. Wathfull: lest the strength, and luster, and glory of our graces be lost
through our default; lest the Devil throw in diversions from unnecessary
things, to cool and abate our zeal in those that are more necessary, and
momentous, lest the world and its allurements inveigle us into its embraces,
and (like Sampson in Delilahs lap) we lose our strength by our dalliances:
Lastly, lest by the misemploying gracious opportunies we suffer our graces to
starve for want of that food that should sustain them, our strength is
maintained by watchfulness, Rev. 3. 2.

(6.) Oftentimes a contemptible temptation foyls a strong grace, for want of
preparation and managing it in a regular way, drawing st^ength in from God,
etc. Soldiers say, it is not good to despise an enemy, be he never so small, and
contemptible; such many times do much mischief by being neglected.

(7) Many times decays may not be the abatements of the actings of grace, but
of our own over-actings. It may be, I may have had more seeming zeal formerly
then now I seem to have. But was not my zeal more rash, heady* and
inconsiderate, more mixed with self etc. and so heightened by its
imperfections and blemishes? If so, to continue it so, were to grow in sin,
rather then grace. So my faith in some of its preceding actings might possibly
make too bold with God, depending on him besides the rule of his word, and (it
may be) occasioned by a neglect of means, etc. there might be much of
presumption in it. Now (it may be) I trust God, and am as zealous for him as
formerly, but those graces act more regularly, and not with so much disorder
and distemper as formerly. So in repentance, and godly sorrow for sin, many
times worldly and selfish considerations mix with it, to heighten it; many
times the shame and disgrace that accompanies sin, the afflictions and
crosses that attend it, may be some of those things, whose influence may
heighten it. etc.

2. The habits of grace may not only stand at their former pitch, their bow may
not only abide in strength, but may grow more radicated, and be more
strengthened and disposed for more operations under the most sensible decays of
the actings and operations of them. As many times in the winter, a man's hands
and feet may be benumbed with cold, when his stomach and intrals are most hot.
Now to understand this, you must know,

1. That there is an universal habit of grace (allow me the expression) which
is called the new man, the new creature, etc. And this universal habit of grace
is like the habitual life and heat that is in the heart of a living body.
There are also special habits of such and such particular graces, which
symbolize with the heat and life which is in the particular members of the body.

2. Now, as in the natural body, if the heart be strengthened in a disease,
though the out most members languish, the patient is in a hopeful way of
recovery, and never the nearer death for losing the flesh off his ribs and
face: so if the heart of grace, the main frame of grace in the soul, be
strengthened, the decays in some actings of particula graces matter not much.

3. The increase of any one particular grace strengthens, and so far
improveth (in a sort) the general habit of grace, though other particular
graces increase not. As the addition of a bucket of water to the Thames, makes
the whole body and bulk of waters so much the bigger. And the tree is greater
by the growth of one branch. A man is more gracious by the growth of humility,
meekness, though (it may be) he is not more believing, etc.

4. There are particular habits of grace, and they (in themselves) never decay,
but they may be obstructed and clogged as to their operations. Indeed, no
gracious habit can properly be said to grow or decay, but only with respect to
the acts that flow from it. For the nature of these divine qualities is not as
that of moral habits, which are gotten by acts, and lost by the disuse of them:
these, being infused of God, and never to be lost, cannot decay, for then were
they to be lost also; all corruptiblenesse tending to corruption. That
Soldier, that may be beaten from his first ground, if the assault be
followed, may be routed, and utterly beaten out of the field. Now that these
things are so, appears; because do but remove the obstructions, and grace in
such persons will act as vigorously as ever it did. Samsons strength appeared
not to be abated by his binding; for when he was loose, he laid the
Philistines heaps upon heaps, as ever he did before.

5. Thou may be strongest many times in that particular grace where thou
think thou art weakest. As that part of a garrison may be best lined with
men, where the bulwark is lowest. So the poor man that cried out, Lord, help my
unbelief, had then a greater faith, then he was aware of. And the poor woman of
Canaan, when she dared not claim a child's portion, but ranks her self with the
dogs, yet relying still on Christ for an answer of grace, was so eminent in
faith, that Christ himself admires her for it, Mat. 15. 28. O woman, great is
thy faith.

There is a mystery of godliness in this which is not easily understood but by
those that have their spiritual senses exercised, by frequent combats and
conflicts.

CHAP. XLIV. A Case, how a Saint may in the midst of the most sensible, actual
decays know whether the Habits of grace grow or no.
Quest. I come now to the second Question last propounded. How a man may know
whether he grow in grace, notwithstanding his present, supposed sensible Decays?

Answ. I answer,

1. In some general rules for the managery of this examination. Those are,

1. Take heed you enquire not too rigorously after a too sudden improvement.
If a man cast his grain into the ground, it were unreasonable, he should
complain it is dead, because it appears not above ground the next day: or if he
should (walking in his field) every day, complain to day that it is grown
nothing since yesterday, because he cannot discern it. Had the man patience to
look on it, at convenient distances of time, experience would confute him: many
a man compares his inward frame to day with his frame yesterday, and if he be
not sensibly advanced in spiritual growth every day; he presently cries, I grow
not, but decay. Man, if thou will compare thy self with what thou wast, (to try
thy growth) thou must not examine it, but by convenient distances of time. A
man will be conceited, a child grows nothing, that measures his height every
day. Grace grows pedetentim, by little and little, by small and undiscernable
accessions. An elegant discourse upon this subject you have, Mark 4. 26. 27.
The Kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed into the ground, and should
sleep, and rise night and day, to wit, to examine its growth, but it grows, he
knows not how: i. e. insensibly. So when grace is sown, and wrought in the
heart, set a man compare himself with what he was (allowing such a competent
distance of time as may render his growth discernable) he shall find it grows,
though he know not how, that is, can give no account of every particular days
improvement. A man would be too ripe for earth too soon, if he could
sensibly recount his daily improvements.

2 Compare not your selves too much with others, no not of the same standing in
the School of Christ with your selves, except it be now and then to shame your
sloth, and quicken your industry. But if you examine your growth by that rule,
you may deceive your selves very easily. Rye and Wheat are sown near the same
time, yet the one is but in the blade while the other is in the ear, and
(notwithstanding) both may be ripe together. Some children shoot up mightily at
first, and overtop all their contemporaries; but a while after a fit of
sickness pulls them down; and they fall as much behind them, so that those
that they once outstripped, again come to outstrip them, and may be at full
growth as soon or sooner. It may be thy sicknesses keep thee down at present,
whiles others out-grow thee: labor to recover them, and thou will quickly top
them again. The truth is, [slow, and sure] is a good rule in this case, as in
diverse others, praecox ingenium, an over-ripe Infancy, many times is attended
with a sottish old age. Slow parts, followed with industry, hold out longer.

Besides, thou would want the spur of holy emulation to quicken thee, if none
should out-go thee; thy being cast behind, may win thee the Goal. That horse
(in a long Race) that is cast a mile behind by the hot metal of a fiery
Competitor, many times out-runs him at long running, when his metal has a
little beaten him off his legs. Lastly, it may be that thou have no less
grace, but thou art not cast upon the same exercise with others. Now it is
exercise which makes gifts, and parts, and graces also, to be more ready, and
vigorous too.

3 Examine not your growth in winter, which is not the growing season. The
state of spiritual darkness and soul troubles, is a very improper condition to
examine ones growth in. It Is enough for grass, and corn, and trees, to keep
life in their roots in an hard winter; it is growth enough that they are not
dead. So whiles thy soul-troubles last, it is well thou maintainest any spark of
spiritual life, that thou art not quite killed with the extremity of the
season. In such a time spread the roots of faith about the Rock Christ, by acts
of reliance in all Duties, and stand fast, be not blown down by temptation:
this is growth enough in such a time. A more warm season will come, and then
the Sun will draw forth the sap from the root into leaves and fruit too.

4 Examine not your growth or decay of graces, by the growth or decay of your
Gifts. This were as if I should examine a man's growth and improvement in a
temporal estate by the finenesse or plainness of his habit and outward
garments. Gifts are but the garments of a Christian. That man's purse may be
full of gold, that goes in plain russet, when another may have less in his
pocket then on his cloak. It is too frequently our fault, we judge our graces
grow not, because we cannot pray so fluently as we could, are straightened in
meditation, etc. A dram of grace is worth a pound of gifts. Many a man is like
that Cardinal in the Book of Martyrs, that would needs (for state) march
through London, with so many mules laden. But by accident one of his beasts
flung off his burden, and discovered his Masters affected pomp to be a mere
pageantry, by the lumber that was scattered about the streets. So many a man
makes a great show with gifts, but at last death comes, and knocks the trunk to
pieces, and then he discovers, that how gaudy soever the outside was, the
inside is as bare. A Christian is like a Preacher. A young Scholar from the
University preaches higher strains, but afterward sounder Divinity.

5 Judge not of your growth or decay in grace, by your frequent and strong
temptations, the assaults of strong corruptions, or your sometimes falling
under them.

I put these together, because they are handled more at large in an excellent
practical piece of a late early ripe labourer, who knew how to judge of growth
by his own experience, being so exceeding tall at so young an age, Mr.
Christopher Love of Grace and its different degrees.
as makes many of his reverend Fathers aemulate him. You have (if you will
needs judge by this rule) more ground to conclude your graces strong and
thriving; Because God does not use to lay great burdens upon weak shoulders,
nor call forth a Pigmee to encounter with a Giant.

6 Judge not of your growth and decays in grace by your ability or disability
to present service. Nay, though you find it short of what it was formerly. For
present abilities many times run low in the most highflowne Saints that are.
The men of might (says David) could not find their hands, Psa. 76 5. A Saint
may be unable to find his hands when he is put upon a work; not that he wants
them, but that he is by distemper disabled from using them. A man of one and
twenty years old, in sickness and distemper, may not be able to do what he
could at thirteen, and yet is grown for all that.

2 In special, I answer

1 A growth of self-denial and humility, discovers an universal growth. Do
not thou daily grow more and more out of conceit with thy own righteousness?
Art not thou daily more and more ashamed of thy self in the presence of God?
Do not thou see daily more and more vileness and selfe-abhorrency in thy
self? The nearest approaches to God use to breed this frame. Isai. 6. 5. The
more a man improves in knowledge, the more he sees that he does not know. And
so the more any one grows in grace, the more grace he sees he wants.

2 A growth of alienation of the heart from sin. How do thy old garments fit
thee? Do thou more and more grow out of love with sin, and more and more put
it off (at least in the love of it?) This growth the Apostle saw, when he could
see none else, Rom 7. 20. This is most discernable in the combats between the
heart and Original sin; when a man clubs it down in its first motions, it is a
good token of growth.

A moral man may forbear those sins in act, which a godly man may fall into:
but a Saint labors more at the root of sin, when moral men pare off the
branches.

3 A growth of heavenly mindedness. These toys and trifles of the world, how
do they take with thee? That which the Apostle says of childish knowledge. etc.
I may say of childish desires, 1 Cor. 13. 11. A Saint then grows a man, when
he throws away childish things. Do thou grow more liberal and open hearted?
The more a man's heart is loosed from the earth, the nearer it grows to heaven.
Grace here is glory in the cradle; and it daily grows heavenward.

4. A growth of aims and desires. What do thou purpose to thy self? Will
not small things content thee? then thy appetite is grown. The more manly we
grow, the more manly our aims are. See how the Apostle calls this growth of
aims, perfection, Phil. 3. 15.

So that thy trouble that thou growest not, and thy aims at farther
improvement, discover that thou art improving.

Use 3.
This Thesis (also) is three ways for Consolation to Saints, For

1. This confirms us in the Doctrine of the Perseverance of the Saints. For if
a true Saint might fall away from grace, the Spirit might justly again become a
Spirit of Bondage to him. For he that falls from grace, falls under the Law:
and he that falls under the Law, is liable to all its terrors as his proper
portion. For all that the Law speaks, it speaks to them that are under the Law,
Romans 3. 19. If a child of God to day might prove a child of the Devil to
morrow, surely, the Spirit might safely tell him so.

2 This scatters and dispells the greatest venom that imbitters Saints second
troubles. When a man looks on God as leading him into temptation, it is far
more bitter then when a man falls into it by his own neglect or Satan's malice.
When a man apprehends the Spirit of God, whom he expects as a Comforter, to
become his Tormentor, this is a double torment. Now against this, the Lord
gives us this cordial assurance, once for all, that to a Saint no such thing
ever can be the work of the Spirit.

3 This shows Saints a ground upon which (if it be not their own fault) they
may live in constant peace; to wit, by maintaining continual correspondence,
and un-interrupted amity with the Spirit of Adoption.

Surely, he that never speaks Bondage after he has spoken peace, may be heard
speaking peace always, were it not our own fault: Did we heed what he says,
and acquaint our selves more with his voice, we should find him a Comforter
still. But we are apt to give more ear to our own carnal reason, and Satan's
tentations, then to his gracious and comfortable tidings. Few Saints, should
they put their souls to David's question. Psalm 42. were able to answer it
satisfactorily, except there be reason why men should trouble and distract
their own spirits, whether God will or no.

And thus much shall suffice for this third point.

CHAP. XLV. A fourth Thesis, with its explication.
NOw come we to the last Thesis from the Text, which is the fourth in this
Treatise.

Doct. That one principal work of the Spirit of Adoption in the soul that has
received it, is to enliven and embolden it in prayer.

That we may not mistake in the sense of the Proposition, observe with me
first a few things tending to the Explication of it.

When I say, a principal work, I mean not to compare the assistance he gives to
prayer, with his work of uniting the soul to Christ in justification, of
quickening the soul with habitual grace in Sanctification, or the work of
Assurance it self. For no stream can rationally be admitted into comparison
with its fountain. Now the Spirit of prayer is but an emanation of grace and
Adoption, first a Spirit of grace, and then a Spirit of supplication, Zech. 12.
10. And therefore this must be understood of those operations which flow from
habitual grace and Assurance, that of them there is no nobler act of the Spirit
of Grace and Adoption (enabling us to, and in them) then this.

Qu. 1. What act of the Spirit of Adoption, thus works?

Answ. When I speak of this particular boldness as the work of the Spirit of
Adoption, I would be understood, of the Spirit of Adoption, chiefly in his
witnessing Act (of which we have hitherto principal treated) though I shall
not here (more then in the former point) exclude him in his other acts: only I
shall show from which work of the Spirit of Adoption this which we treat of
does more immediately arise. For whereas, I before told you twice, of four works
of the Spirit of Adoption, to unite, to witness, to intercede, to direct:
whereof the uniting act is the most noble, and the fountain of all the rest,
union with Christ being the source of all communion: you must farther know,
that the rest of these Acts do not alike primarily flow from the first, but by
the meditation and interposition of one another. The spirit intercedes in us,
but by the help of his assuring work he produces its most fervent, and
confident petitions. And (the last work) his guiding work, he performs by both
the former; viz. persuading the soul upon assurance of success to fetch
direction, and assistance from God in all its ways by faith in the promises
and prayer.

Q. 2. Does the Spirit work thus in all Saints?

Answ. 1. When I say, it is the work of the Spirit of Adoption, I must not be
understood to affirm a constant and perpetual assistance of the witnessing
Spirit in all the Saints, to the performance of this Duty, in a like high,
spiritfull, and confident way. For the dearest Saints of God, whiles they enjoy
the Spirit of Adoption, may be under strange deadness, distraction, and
indosposednesse in Duty; and under no less doubting, suspiciousnesse, and
jealousy of God, and his affectons to them, which must needs hinder their
boldness in calling him [Father.]

2 Thus (accordingly) as we must distinguish times, so we must distinguish
between degrees of liveliness and boldness in praying. Between praying to God
as to a [Father,] and calling him [Father] aloud in Prayer; or (as in the words
of the Text) crying, Abba, Father.

For the Spirit, as He unites the soul to Christ, is a Spirit of Supplication,
helps us to pray, and that with life and boldness. But because he may
(possibly) not always act in his witnessing way, (although even then, the soul
is enabled to pray acceptably) it may not always be the condition of a Saint
to call God [Father,] with alike confidence; whiles yet he may pray with
abundance of holy importunity.

(3) Distinguish therefore between that liveliness and boldness of the soul
in prayer, which flows from the actual witness of the Spirit, and that which
arises merely from the gracious influence of the same Spirit, as he unites us
to Christ.

(1) As for liveliness in prayer, it may in a godly man proceed not only from
the Spirits witness, but sometimes from

1 Conscience of Duty. When a man quickens up his desires and other affections,
upon this consideration, that he is in the presence of a living God, and
therefore it becomes him not to offer dead services to such a God.

2 Or from sense of want. That is it which usually adds life and activity to
our endeavors. Beggars, when ready to starve, are importunate.

3. Or thirdly from hope to speed. Now this hope to speed is either positive
and particular, which I receive from a paricular assurance of Gods engagements
to me; or more general and negative, taking away all discouragements which I
may fancy to my self. Now the former hope, a man under the witnessing act of
the Spirit prays by, the latter quickens every godly Christian, whether he
have actually, or ever had the testimony of the Spirit, or no.

Now the hopes of a Saint are grounded either on certainties, or probabilities:
probabilities remove discouragements, certainties only give a positive and
particular, well grounded hope. And yet probabilities may enliven, though
certainties do far more. A soul may come upon the general encouragements upon
which God inviteth sinners to come to him, and may thereby be much enlivened in
prayer, although not with so great life and vigor as a man that can plead a
particular right and title to God.

(2.) So concerning boldness of the soul in Duty: A soul that walks in
darkness, may be bold, in some sort.

1. Upon sense of want, which dispells all shamefastness. A man in necessity,
though he dared not open his mouth before to ask relief of a great personage,
through shame, keeping him back from it; yet when there is no help, he will put
a good face upon it (as we say) and embolden himself to adventure to solicit
supplies. So the soul says in such a case, I must beg my life or perish, ask
or starve for want of supply; I will adventure into the presence of God (as
Hester into the presence of the King) and if I perish, I perish.

2. Upon the discoveries that the Scripture makes of the nature of God, that he
is a God of infinite mercies, that wayts to be gracious, and expects
opportunities to manifest it. A man will (when he is in want) more boldly
adventure to ask of a man who is reported to be propense to acts of bounty,
and ready upon all occasions to manifest it, then of another, whose disposition
is not so known. Thou art a God that hear prayer, unto thee shall all flesh
come, Psalm 65. 2.

3. Upon encouragements of invitations, promises, examples. Such as, Call upon
me in the day of trouble, and I will answer thee, Psalm. 50. 15. And that, Psalm.
32. 6. Although a man have no particular ground to conclude, that he shall be
heard, yet upon these general grounds, he can many times urge God very
confidently.

But a soul under the actual Testimony of the Spirit of God may embolden
himself from a particular interest, as David does, Ps. 119. 94. Lord, I am
thine, save me. And the Church, Isa. 63. 19. and Psalm. 86. 2. Preserve my soul,
for I am holy, or one whom thou favourest. And can urge his own experiences; As
the Church, Lord thou have been our habitation, etc. Ps. 90. 1. etc. Thou have
been favorable to thy Land, Psalm 85. 1.

The point, therefore, is to be understood thus, where the Spirit of God is
actu^lly a witnessing Spirit of Adoption, there he mainly discovers himself,
by enlivening and emboldening the soul unto special importunity, to a
particular claim, and especial confidence in prayer.

CHAP. XLVI. Some Proofs thereof.
THat this is a principal work of the witnissing Spirit of Adoption, to raise
the fervencie and boldness of the soul in prayer, may be evidenced to us by the
parallel place of Scripture, Gal. 4. 6. Because ye are sons God has sent
the Spirit of his son into your hearts. It is to be understood of the
witnessing acts of the Spirit, because this gift follows upon sonship,
[because ye are sons:] He says not, [that you might be sons:] then (indeed) it
must have been understood of the sanctifying and uniting grace of the Spirit,
which makes sons; but [because ye are sons] which supposes their present
standing as children, to be the ground of this gift, and therefore it is
understood of the witnessing act of the Spirit. And what follows from it? What
get they by this Spirit of Christ administered in this way? what does the Spirit
there? He cries, not [enables them to cry] (though that be true;) but he cries
(in them) Abba, Father: cries, (with earnestness) Father, (with confidence;)
and Father, Father, (with holy importunity.)

And this appears farther,

1. From the nature of the witnessing Acts of the Spirit of Grace. The Spirit
is a witness to all Gods promises and obligations to us: and he puts Gods seal
to all the Covenant of grace. Now to the vigorous and confident putting a bond
in suit, an express witness to the sealing and delivery is a great
encouragement. By prayer the soul puts Gods bonds in suit. The Spirit comes
into Court at the same time whiles the bond is pleading, and says, Lord, I
witness this bond to be true, I did put thy seal to it by thy own appointment.
And to the soul he says, Soul, do not be nonsuited, do not let thy suit fall;
I will witness for thee, plead thy bond ^ the utmost, I will justify it; what
an encouragement is this?

2. From the comparative straightness and flatness of spirit, and that
cowardliness and dauntedness of spirit, which possesses the Saints when the
Spirit is withdrawn from them. David when he had lost the joy of Gods
Salvation, his mouth was shut, his heart was straightened, and he is fain to go
to God for enlargement by his free Spirit. He complains of casting away from
Gods presence, etc. Psalm. 51. 11, 12. Uphold me (says he) with thy free
Spirit, that is, prop up my zeal and confidence, which is even falling to the
ground without such a support.

3. From the removal of all discouragements to a fervent and confident address
to God. The great discouragement of the soul is either a distance conceived
between God and the soul, or the guilt of sin that makes it.

The Spirit assures us, that sin is pardoned, and that breach made up, and
that we may come when we will, and be as bold with God as if there had never
been any occasion of breach on our part, or act of displeasure on Gods.

4. From the manifestation of our relation to Christ. Christ's name being the
only ground of all gracious boldness and fervency in prayer, Heb 4. 15, 16.
and 10. 20. The Spirit shows us Christ, as our mediator at the right hand of
God, assures us we have a mighty powerful advocate, the Fathers favorite, at
his right hand, one who has his ear (as we say) at command, and his heart too,
who pleads strongly on our behalf, and therefore under the wing of such a
mediator, we may come (...), with assuming a liberty to speak any thing we will
(keeping within the bounds of reverence) in the ear of God the Father: As the
Author to the Hebrews affirms in the place but now quoted.

Before the application of this point, it is needful to answer a question or
two, hinted at before, but now particularly to be handled.

CHAP. XLVII. Two Cases stated; whether Saints are at all times alike
heightened in their spirits in prayer. And if not, whence the difference that
is in them at several times, proceeds?
Que.1 ARe all that have received the witness of the Spirit, at all times
alike bold in prayer?

Que.2. If not, how comes it to pass, that there is such an alteration in the
spirits of Gods people? That at one time they are more bold, and fervent in
prayer, then at another?

Answ. For answer to the first of these; you are to know.

(1.) That the boldness of Gods people in prayer depends not upon the
reception of the witness in themselves, but upon the actual improvement of that
testimony. If a man have never so good an evidence lying by him, and he have it
not ready to produce in Court, when he is pleading his cause, he cannot be so
confident in his plea, as at another time when he has it in his hand. And
therefore,

(2) The best of Gods Saints (as I have showed you before) may not at all times
have his Evidences at hand to plead. Many a Saint dares not sometimes to own
his relation to God, and their Assurance admits of actual ebbings and flowings.

(3) Thereupon (no doubt) there must needs be less life and confidence in
drawing nigh to God. For at such a time

1 All the Promises are like a Book sealed to the soul. In all the word of God,
it cannot find one Promise that it can urge with confidence.

For the Spirits Testimony is the only light in which we can challenge and lay
claim to any Promise.

Now the Promises are the very spirits and life of prayer. Because they are the
only obligations upon which the Soul can claim any thing from God.

2. In such a season, the relations between God and the soul are clouded. The
soul thinks God an enemy oftentimes, and always (in such a condition)
questions (at least) whether he be a friend, or rather whether he be not a mere
stranger.

Now surely a man will have little heart or face, to prefer a petition to one
whose love he suspects; much less, to one whom by all probabilities he judges
to be an enemy.

3 In such a season all graces (that are the very lungs whence prayer is
breathed) are very low and flat in their actings. The absence of the Sun in
winter makes the plants cast their leaves, and pluck in their blossoms; and the
absence of the Spirit must needs make graces look dead, and withered, and
saplesse. True, there is life in the root, but little appears; graces are
benumbed in such a season, and cannot act so freely as at other times. As
Samson, when his spirit of strength from thr Lord had left him, thought to have
gone forth and shaken himself as at other times, but he could not. A man thinks
under spiritual with-drawings of God, Now I will rub up my graces, and bestir
my self in prayer as at other times, but he is deceived, the Spirit of God is
withdrawn from him.

Quest. 2. But show more particularly from whence this variety of tempers in
prayer proceeds.

Answ. What ever clouds the testimony of the Spirit (and I have spoken much to
that Head before) must needs cause this difference in the frame of Gods people
in prayer.

But to answer more particularly.

1 It may be neglect of our frequent applications to God in that way. A friend
that a man converseth with every day, he can speak more boldly and familiarly
to, then one that he sees but now and then. When a soul visits God but now and
then, there grow strangenesses and jealousies between God and him; and a man
is to seek whether he be the same to him as he was in times past, and so speaks
to him with more faintness and flatnesse of spirit.

2 It may be a fresh guilt of sin admitted into the conscience. This, as it
weakens Assurance, so it faints prayer. A child scarce dares come to ask a
favor from a displeased Father. And how unwilling we are under such
consciousnesse of guilt to come to God in prayer, see in two examples. Of
David, Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about, mine iniquities
have taken hold upon me, so that I cannot look up. In former times, I could
have looked up with life and confidence in prayer, but now they force me to
hang down my head: yea, they are more then the hairs of my head, therefore my
heart fails me. I have neither the face, nor the heart to come to God which I
have had.

The other example is, that of the Prodigal, when he had been sowing his wild
oats, and began to return toward his Father: see how low he speaks, Father, I
am not worthy to be called thy Son, etc. and yet he still had the comfort of
his relation in some measure: he could say, Father still. How much lower must a
soul speak, that has sinned away the remembrance, or (at least) present sense
of that dear relation?

3 Many times the stream of life and confidence in prayer runs low, for want of
an endeavor to quicken our graces; and this even under the sense of Assurance.
For a man may live in the light of Gods countenance, and that may prove a
temptation to him to walk more slightly, and not make such preparations for
communion with God in a Duty as formerly. When a friend grows a daily guest,
we do not feast him as when he comes but seldom; we then entertain him with
household fare; whereas if he visited us but now and then, we would (as we say)
make a stranger of him, and provide for him of the best. So when God grows a
daily guest to a soul, he is apt to grow bold, to address himse^f to him with
an ordinary frame and temper of Spirit; to make no extraordinary preparations,
by trimming up his graces, and laying out his strength in Duty: and when God
sees this, he frowns, and we hang down our heads when we come to him
afterward.

CHAP. XLVIII. A third Case, Whether the Spirit furnishes the Saints at all
times with like life and vigor of expressions; and other Cases occasioned
hereby, stated.
Quest. 3. Does the Spirit of Adoption use to furnish the soul alike at all
times with life and vigor in expressions.

Answ. 1. Undoubtedly, he does not. And of this we have a very remarkable proof
in this very Chapter, verse. 26. The Spirit helps sometimes in words at large,
but sometimes he supplies us with groans only. Nor is it need he should. For

1 These are but the outward gayety, pomp, and hangings of Devotion. Now
garments themselves are no part of the man, nor things absolutely necessary to
the life of man; much less are the state and magnificence of trimming and
fashions necessary. The outward garb of the body, and the outward garb of duty,
prevail alike with God, that is, just nothing at all.

Yet let me not hereby occasion in any one a lazy, and supine neglect of
expressions. Though utterance be not a grace, (and God accepts and delights in
nothing but grace,) yet it is a gift, and God will not have gifts slighted, or
wilfully neglected, and so suffered to decay for want of blowing up. But
however, if (by no neglect of mine own) I am shut up, that I cannot express my
self, I must not presently conclude, that my prayers that I offer up with
broken sighs and groans, have not all things necessary to their acceptance.

2 These are many times the fuel of our corruption, the matter of our pride,
vainglory, and self-advancement in the presence of God, and it is oftentimes a
very great mercy, that Gods Spirit with-drawes the actual exercise of that gift
from us, which we are apt to abuse so much to his dishonor, and our own
disadvantage. How many persons are there, especially in these days, that make
elegancy and fluency of expressions in prayer, a matter of emulation?

3 These are many times the excellencies of unsanctified men. No real friend
uses to be so liberal in words of Ceremony and formality, as a complementing
Courtier, that intends not a word of what he says. The Pharisees could make
long prayers, Mat. 13 14. but the Publican that was more in earnest, is quickly
at an end of his Devotion, for want of expressions or boldness to speak more.
'Twas short and sweet, (as we say.) I am persuaded the Devil may be a false
Spirit of prayer in the mouths of many Heretics and Seducers in these days,
as well as a false Spirit of prophecy (of old) in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets,
1 King 22. 22. Men shall never want tools, that do the devils work. Some men
pray like Angels, as Parots speak like men, and yet both say least of what they
say.

4 These may be an occasion of greatest formality in prayer; if continued. We
ordinarily account a form of words to be a form of prayer. I tell you friends,
there may be as much formality, in an unstinted fluency of expressions. That is
the form of any Grace or Duty which most resembles it, and yet is not what it
resembles. Assuredly, fluent and fervent expressions in prayer, carry the most
glorious appearance, and form of a spiritual Duty that can be. Many a man
therefore sits down in them, as other persons do in an external Leiturgy, and
places all Religion in a few spiritual Complements with God.

Yet would I not have these expressions of mine any way abused to the
justification of the stinted formalists Devotions, in which usually persons of
that strain place their whole Religion. Undoubtedly, we may lawfully use a
crutch when we are lame, and a go-cart whiles we are children. Young beginners
may find help in the matter, method, and language of prayer from a good form;
and I know not but under extraordinary deliquies and swoundings of spiriti, n
which the soul cannot put forth its operations as before; a godly man may (as
Christ did in his Agony) go, and repeat to God thrice and more the same Mat.
26. 44.
form of words. But to keep the fashion, or the size of garments when I am one
and twenty, which I used when I was a child; or to use the crutches when I am
whole, which supported me when I was lame; or crawle about by chaires and
stools when I am a man, is a piece of ridiculous absurdity.

A. 2 Add moreover that Elegancy and fluency of expressions, though sometimes
they are, yet are not always the work of the Spirit of God. I dare not say the
Spirit does not many times suggest the very language of prayer; as well as he
suggested the very words of the strange tongues with which the Apostles spoke,
Act. 2. 1, 2, 3. etc.

Yet I know also, that much of the life and vigor of expression in prayer is
from our own parts. There is much Art in expression, and (so) much of our own;
flourishes of studied or elaborate Oratory, Rhetorical terms, a natural heat
of affection, from the affectionatenesse of our own expressions. Some things
of this nature may appear in prayer, which would be the same, if I were making
a serious speech about a matter of concernment before a mortal man.

Now you may distinguish supplies received from the Spirit in this kind, from
others, by these probable signs.

1 Supplies of language from the Spirit, are more natural, and less strained
for. That that a man speaks from a principle within, is ordinarily delivered
in a kind of natural eloquence. But what is merely lip-labor, is over-done;
expressions are more forced, and there is more of invention in them: And so it
is in prayer; the Spirit is the most inward principle of prayer to a gracious
man. He follows in nothing so freely, as when he is led by the Spirit; his own
natural and moral actions are not freer and more unforced then gracious actions
are. The more study there is for terms to express a man's self; the more of
the head there is in prayer, most commonly, the less there is of the heart.

2 The more humble acknowledgement of your own impotency to pray, you enter
upon the duty withal, the more of the Spirit is in your after enlargements. A
soul that goes to duty in its own strength, is not acquainted with such
self-abasing thoughts, but out of the experience of former abilities, thinks as
Samson, I will go out now and shake my self as at other times, Judge. 16 20.
Such an one goes to prayer, as a Scholar to study a speech, out of the strength
of his reading and invention.

3. The enlargements of expression which proceed from the Spirit, are not a
constant supply. When men pray always with the same fluency of expression, it is
a sad token there is much of nature and art in such prayers. The Spirit (I
confess) may give ordinary supplies, but yet the soul shall observe, now and
then, the stream runs more low and still, especially upon some such occasion,
as (I have before shown) may make the Spirit withdraw his influences that
enable in duty.

4. There is as great an height in affections, when the Spirit suggests matter
of prayer, as in expressions. Without all question, the Spirit, when he
supplies, will not supply the less material part of prayer, and not the more
principal and momentous. A man of a nimble invention, and a fluent tongue, may
be able to speak high strains of Rhetoric in prayer; but is the heart warmed
sutably to the expressions? If the stream run only from the teeth outward (as
we say) it is not supplied from a divine spring.

5. If the heart be warmed also, yet, I ask, does its warmth produce the
language of prayer; or rather, the language, it? Some good natures (as we call
them) will weep at a passionate discourse, either of their own or another man's.
The heart is first hot, where the expressions are from the Spirit. It may be,
expressions may add to the quantity of heart-affection in duty: as (on the
other side) dull expressions will much take off from the edge of a good
affection. But whence was the rise of thy heat, in the substance of it? from
without, or from within? A natural man's expressions in prayer, are the spring
of his affections: a godly man's affections, are the spring of his expressions.

3. Add also, that the failing of expression in prayer, is much our own fault.

1. Sometimes, we over-prize it; In desiring it too sollicitously when absent;
in rejoicing and pleasing our selves too fondly, when present; discomforting
our selves when we want it, as if we wanted the Spirit, because we have not a
wished supply of the gift: and laying the foundation of our hopes of acceptance
upon that when present, which we may be accepted without.

2 Studying more to pray, then praying that we may pray. Spiritual abilities
for prayer (of whatever kind they be) are usually fetched in by prayer, Luke
11. 13. as water in the well is fetched up by putting water into the pump
Whiles we are asking, God hears, and that he may, enables us to ask. He gives
the Spirit to them that ask him.

3. Want of meditation, I mean, not of expressions, but things. Well studied
matter yields plentiful expressions, the Poet observes.

Verbaque praevisam rem non invita sequuntur. Horat. art. Poet.


Well-conceived matter is never stifled in the birth for want of the midwifery
of apt expressions.

4 Want of acquaintance with the Word of God. Many people complain they have a
great dearth of expressions in prayer; but the cause of it is in themselves.
They do not study the Word of God, which as it is a complete magazene of
matter, so it is the best, and most genuine spring of expression in prayer. The
language of confession, petition, thanksgiving which the Saints of God use in
the Scripture, is (in a sort) a supply from the Spirit, fetched in by industry.
For it is (all of it) indicted by the Spirit to our hands. Those are surely
(therefore) the most acceptable, and meet expressions to send up to heaven,
which first descended from heaven. There is a strange vein of expression in
prayer that conceited persons affect in these days; which a man, if he compare
with Scripture, will easily conclude to be a gibberish of a wanton age, unknown
to the Saints of God in former times. The Spirit of God loves to indite your
prayers, (when he does supply your defects that way) in his own familiar
expressions, which are those of the Scripture.

CHAP. XLIX. Saints are informed what deadens them in prayer. Where also, a
case, what to be done when a Saint cannot call God Father, and in case some
sin streighten him. As also how to maintain boldness and fervency in prayer.
NOw to apply this useful point.

1. In the first place, this lets many poor souls, under darkness, know whence
that deadness and flatnesse of spirit which they are ever complaing of in
prayer, does proceed. They do what they can, to darken their evidences, and
take delight in finding matter of charge against themselves, to the shaking of
them, and yet take it ill, that they cannot have that freedom, and liberty,
and livelynesse in prayer, which they desire. This is as if they should cut off
their own legs, and then complain that they cannot go. They clip the very wings
upon which prayer should raise it self heavenward, and then they complain they
cannot fly so high in duty as they would.

Qu. But what shall I do if by reason of this darkness I cannot call God
Father, with confidence?

Answ. 1. Acknowledge, with sense and feeling, that unworthiness of thine
which discourageth thee. Say, Lord, I confess, I am unworthy to be called thy
son (as the Prodigal does) and endeavor (as much as thou can) to fill thy
face with shame and confusion in the sense hereof.

2. Acquaint him with thy particular straightness of spirit, and the cause of
it; tell him what ties thy tongue, that thou would pray, but thou dare not
own any relation to him; desire him, for his own glory, to discover that
relation to thee, that may embolden thee to his service.

3. Maintain (notwithstanding this) thy claim to God, as thy Father, upon those
promises upon which at first thou did believe. God warrants every soul to
call him Father, that is brought to a desire to become his child. None ever
called God Father, out of a sincere desire to that relation, and the duties of
it, from whom God refused to accept of the title. We never find God quarrel
with any, upon this account, for calling him Father, except they were such as
denied him filial duty, and reverence. Supposing then that thou can not call
God Father, upon evidence of particular faith, yet do it upon grounds of
relyance, such as his offers, invitations, promises: plead that promise of
Relation, 2 Corinthians. 6. 18.

4 Ask spiritual good things of him under the obligation of that relation. And
urge him with his Fatherly bowels in Jesus Christ, to all poor souls that come
unto God through him. Call him Father at adventure, upon Christ's score, and see
whether he can disclaim the name. The advantage of this will be the hearing and
granting of thy petitions; and the Answer of prayer, will be an evidence of
thine Interest. No greater foundation of Assurance, then the Answer of our
Prayers, Psalm 66. 19. See what a kind of Argument the holy man draws Assurance
from in that place, If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my
prayer. But verily God has heard me: That is, the Minor Proposition; the
Conclusion is natural; therefore, I do not regard iniquity in my heart So in
this Case, the Argument will be undeniable. God hears none but sons. But God
hears me: Therefore, I am a Son.


Quest. But suppose some Sin of a deeper dye then ordinary, straighten me, and
weaken my confidence in approaching to God.

Answ. (1) Then sensibly confess and bewail that sin before God. Acknowledge
that thou do not only deserve the darkning of thine own faith, but also the
darkning of his face, and that not only here, but hereafter for ever. That thou
can not tell with what face to call him Father, having so mis-behaved thy
self toward him.

(2) Apply thy self to his Throne of Grace, for renewed pardon, and that the
sense of that pardon may open thy mouth again, Psalm. 51 12, 13, 15.

(3) Consider, thy acceptance depends not on thine own worthiness, but on his
mere mercy and goodness in Jesus Christ, who is an Advocate for sinners, and a
Propitiation for sins, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

(4) Put a bold face upon it, (as we say) and adventure (as before) upon the
claim of that relation, and use it in order to the obtaining of all necessary
grace from God; resolving in case thou ever see his face again in love, (yea,
though thou should never see it again) to watch against thy corruptions for
time to come, and walk more carefully under the Obligation of that relation
then ever before. Follow on this course though against the grain of thy own
jealous heart, and thou will find thy heart grow warm, and thy pulse more quick
by a sensible recovery of lost spirits and life to thy prayers.

II. This lets us know how we may maintain, when we have; and recover when we
have lost, the heat of our affections, and confidence of our hearts in Prayer;
to wit, by maintaining our Assurance of Gods love, 1 John 5. 14, 15. The
Apostle writes to them whom he endeavors by several tokens to assure that they
are the children of God, and then draws up the advantage of that Assurance.
And this is the confidence that we have in, (or concerning) him* that if we ask
any thing according to his will, he hears us, etc.

The way then to keep present, and renew lost boldness, is to keep and renew
assurance of Gods love by the Spirit: How you may do that, I have shown before
at large, and so shall spare repetition here.

CHAP. L. Three Duties pressed on all Assured Saints. The first, to be much
improving the supply of the Spirit in approaching to God frequently-Urged with
eight Motives.
III. THis stirs up all who have the witness of the Spirit, to three Duties.

(1) To be much in Prayer.

(1 Those that have it not, are not to neglect it, nor are they excusable for
slighting it over, who walk in darkness. Now, if they must drive on in this
rode, who (because the wheels of their Chariots are taken off,) must needs
drive heavily: how are you bound who have wheels, and those oyled too, that you
may go on the more cheerfully?

(2. If God should withdraw (what you neglect) the comfortable refreshments of
his Spirit, and make you howl after him under spiritual darkness, in a wide
and howling wilderness of desertions and temptations, you will find a
difference between sailing in a clear day and a calm sea; and steering the same
vessel in a dark night and stormy sea, when neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Star
appears to direct the course. And then you will wish you had used days of
spiritual peace for maintaining Trade with God. Troublesome times are bad times
to trade in* The uncertainty of Adventures and returns, must needs cool the
Merchants endeavors.

(3 Others may, but you must prevail with God. I mean, the arrows of prayer,
which by souls in darkness are shot at adventure are not altogether without
hope of acceptance; but yours are beyond possibility of miscarrying, and that
not only in themselves* but to you also, you being in the light of Gods
countenance, are particularly assured, that whatever you ask according to his
Word, he hears you, 1 John 5. 14, 15.

(4 Hopes to speed are the wings of prayer. Assurance (as I before have showed)
will be maintained by prayer, and weakened by the neglect of it. Let a man be
never so intimately acquainted with a friend, and never so certainly assured of
his love, yet disuse of intercourse will occasion jealousy and distrust, or at
least shynesse and fear of being too bold with each other.

(5 You wrong many others. You are the Favorites of heaven; how many Petitions
of poor dark Saints in corners, are put into your hands for dispatch to the
Throne of Grace? How many occasions wherein you may serve the Church, come
athwart you (as we say) daily? And can you betray all these by your negligence
of improving your interest at the Throne of God? No man may do more good, if he
attend with diligence and watchfulness, then an honest Favorite to an earthly
Prince. You must not pray for your selves only, but for them that cannot pray
too. You that are Gods Favorites may do much good if you bestir your selves.

(6 Know this also, that God delights in the Music of your Prayers. Other men
always find matter of complaint, but you are more fitted for Sacrifices of
praise. And he that offers praise glorifieth God, and so it is no wonder if
God delight most in such a Petitioner. I must not be understood, as if God did
not also delight in the saddest complaints of a troubled spirit, as they are
offered up to him in a way of Petition. But yet surely, (I think I may say) God
loves that Prayer most that most carries man out of himself to him, and praises
of assured souls are such giving Duties, (if I may so speak) as do not only
receive from God, but (in a sort) bestow upon him.

(7 Add to this, that the very present comfort of communion with God (if there
were no other advantage) to a gracious soul, were encouragement enough to Duty.
How are the Saints of God wont to rejoice, if God give them now and then a
glance of his countenance? How, when they have not had communion with him for a
while, do they complain, as if every day were a year, every year an Age? And is
the refreshment of that communion so slight unto thee, that thou can now
pass many days, it may be weeks, without any sensible affection of grief and
trouble, at the slenderness of intercourse between thy soul and him?
especially when it is not through his strangeness, but through thine own.

(8 Consider what this liberty of approaching to God cost Christ for thee. He
laid down his dearest blood to bring thee so nigh* Ephesians. 2. 13. and Heb. 10.
20. He has consecrated a new and living way through the vail, i, e. his flesh.

CHAP. LI. A second Duty pressed upon them; viz. stirring up all their graces
to pray with life and fervency: upon six Motives.
(2) STir up the grace of God that is in you; pray with life and fervency. When
we are bid not to quench the Spirit, that prohibition stands between two
verses, wherein the proper means of preserving the Spirit alive in the soul are
prescribed, Pray without ceasing, and in every thing give thanks 1 Thessalonians. 5.
17, 18, 19, 20
goes before; and Despise not prophesying, comes after. Implying, if our
affections be indifferent to prayer and preaching, we need use no other means
to quench the Spirit. Fire will be extinguished by neglect of blowing up the
coals, as well as by throwing water upon them.

To move you hereunto, consider,

1 There is little difference (as to the comfort of grace) between grace lying
dead, and no grace at all. A man that has riches, and God gives him not an
heart to enjoy them; wherein is he better, (as to the comfort of his life) then
a man that has not a penny in the world? This is an evil thing under the Sun,
says Solomon, Eccles. 6. 1, 2.

A man that has no grace, enjoyes no communion with God, sits dull and
unprofitable under all Ordinances, makes no spiritual advantage of any
enjoyment; and so does the man that has grace un-improved.

2 The less you stir up your graces, the less you will be able to use them,
when you have need. If a man's faith, humility, sorrow for sin be away in one
Duty or two, he will not find them readily at hand when he would make use of
them again. A tool a man uses at every turn, will not be so often out of the
way, as one he uses but now and then. Besides, suppose them constantly at
hand* yet if not employed, they will be rusty and unfit for use; except they be
rubbed up by constant employment.

3 Corruptions will be stirring daily; and Satan will be perpetually blowing
them up, especially in the Duty of Prayer. There is no Duty in which the people
of God complain Ut jugulent homines surgunt de nocte latrones; Vt teipsum
serves, non expergisceris? -- Horat.
more of distempers and distractions, then that Duty. The thief is abroad
active and vigilant, and shall the Traveller ride on carelessly and not look
about him, to keep his weapon in a readiness for every assault. There is no
rode more infested with Thieves then the rode between earth and heaven; the
Traffic is precious, and therefore a man had need stir up and quicken himself
to all the cautiousnesse that may be, and muster up all his strength for a
convoy to secure the passage. Now there is no convoy that more secures all our
duties in that traffic, and all our returns, then a convoy of active graces.

4. The Saints of God have used to do so, to call upon themselves, and to
quicken themselves unto a spiritual and lively performance of duties to God.
David is frequent herein, Psalm. 103. 1. All that is within me praise his holy
name. Arise faith, humility, self-denial, joy, hope, and be stirring; I am
about a duty of importance, and that to a God to whom I stand deeply obliged;
do your best therefore to help me to praise his holy name. So Psalm. 57 7, 8. My
heart is fixed, (or prepared, or ready.) Awake, my glory. Tongue, See you do
your duty lively and vigorously, awake my Psaltery, and I my self will awake
early; i. e. I will stir up all my graces to bear you company. And the whole
Church complains of the want hereof, Isai. 64. 7.

5 God in all his grants takes special notice of the activity of our graces in
approaching to him. Jer. 30. 21. Who is this that engaged his heart to approach
to me, says the Lord? q. d. There are many that approach to me, but who is
that (among all the rest) that engaged his heart to approach to me? Of all the
rest, I take notice of him, he quickened all his graces, and stirred up all his
soul on purpose that he might approach to me. As if a great man come to a Town,
and public entertainment be made him; if any one among the rest, be more
active then ordinary, he takes especial notice of him; Who is this that makes
so much ado above all the rest, I must take special notice of him, and gratify
him with some extraordinary favor. God lets pass an hundred lazy Petitioners,
and seeks out a fervent one in a throng of Christians.

6 If you do not stir up your graces to seek God, God will stir them up for
you. If an horse that has metal enough grow dull, the rider puts to the spur
to quicken him. If you grow dull and careless in Duty, God will spur up your
graces, and quicken you to your pain, and cost too. Indeed (says God) is it
so? Can such a man afford me no better services then so? is every slight
slovenly performance good enough for me? Well, I will be served with that that
costs him something before I have done with him. Withdraw thy comforts from
him (Spirit,) smite him (sickness,) vex him (Satan,) persecute him (enemies:) I
will warrant it I shall hear from him shortly in another guise manner. Hos. 5.
15. In their affliction they will seek me early, Take this for an usual rule;
Ordinarily, after a continued deadness and formality of Spirit upon a Saint in
Duty, comes some sharp affliction or other.

CHAP LII. A Question, how Saints may recover out of deadness in prayer
answered; something about forms.
Quest. BUt how shall I stir up my self to seek the Lord? How shall I
recover out of this strange deadness and formality of spirit which I am fallen
into?

Answ. (1) Use not to set upon the duties in which you approach to God, without
meditation. David says of himself, whiles I was musing the fire kindled, Psalm.
39. 3. Meditate principally upon the most proper moving objects of every grace.
Faith acts upon Gods (faithfulness) in his promises; to stir up faith
(therefore) meditate upon God in his faithfulness, and that, as declared in
some special promise, that concerns thy case, and condition. Love and
thankfulness, are exercised upon the goodness of God; Meditate upon the
goodness of God to thee in particular, to stir up those graces; humility is
most affected with a man's own vileness and Gods glory compared together; here
then, set out God in his majesty, as gloriously as thou can, in thy
meditations; then view thy self, and thy own vileness, especially reflecting
upon those sins of thine, which have had most vileness and loathsomeness of
circumstances, and are attended with the most abominable aggravations. And so
in other graces.

2. Choose the most free and lively seasons for duty. The morning, before
worldly business has deadned and flatted the spirit, is of special use for
prayer. 'Twas not for nothing that David so often made choice of that time,
Psalm 5. 3. and 59. 16. and 88. 13. and 119. 147. and 63. 1. 108. 2. etc. If a
man will attend any business without distraction or disturbance, that is the
time to be beforehand with the disturbances of daily businesses, and occasions.
When we slip out of every worldly employment into prayer, or at night when we
are half asleep, mix nods with petitions, no wonder if we complain of
deadness, and dullness and distraction.

3. Watch to prayer, Col. 4. 2. Continue in prayer, and watch thereunto, etc. 1
Pet. 4. 7. Be sober and watch unto prayer. Watch against Satan, who will then
be busy to disturb you, it may be with Atheistical and blasphemous thoughts
and other such distracting suggestions; and you then watch against him, when
you set your heart against them, and turn your prayers edge against them, till
you have cast them out, and then return to your duty again. Watch against your
usual carelessness, and when you find it growing upon you, do likewise. Watch
against vain wandering thoughts, and throw them out by a speedy laying hold upon
some more weighty Meditation, if any such be at hand: if not (but thou find
thy self wholly possessed with such fancies) do as before I advised, turn the
edge of thy prayer for that while against them. Watch the kindlings of the
Spirit, and where thou find but one little spark of fervency and zeal,
glowing, ply that Meditation, that Subject hard that kindles it. Follow the
Vein, and thou will be Master of the Mine at last.

4 Be much in begging the Spirit of prayer, and calling him in to constant
assistance in the Duty. Urge his Office upon him, he is a Spirit of Grace and
Supplication. And to enliven and embolden the Saints is his principal work.

5 Rest not in forms of Prayer. I do no way doubt but that a godly person
newly brought in to the exercises of Religion, may be sometimes to seek in
expressing himself, before others, and in such a case (if a public person or
Master of a Family) I am not so severe as to forbid him the use of a good form,
either of his own or others framing: and in the closet it may be good to read
now and then for example and pattern, the forms of others, but especially the
prayers of the Saints recorded in Scripture (and among them the Psalms, which
are (most of them) made up of matter of prayer, either in way of Confession,
Petition, or Thanksgiving) that they may suggest to us quickening matter of
prayer. Nay, whiles I read another form, wherein I meet with passages suitable
to my condition, I know not why I may not say Amen to such Petitions: But yet I
know not by what warrant any one in private, or constantly before others, binds
himself to the very same series and frame of words. Nay, I think it is an
Argument either of much laziness, in not improving the utmost of a man's own
abilities and interests in the Spirit to enable him, or at least it proceeds
from a fond and erroneous conceit of God, as if he minded more an exact
composure of Petitions, then the real (although immethodical, and less
quaintly dressed) desires of a man's heart. The truth is, no man uses a form of
prayer much, but finds it (if he know his own heart) a great deadning, to his
Spirit. If a Preacher should twenty times in a year preach over the same
Sermon, would not the veryest Formalists of his Congregation (and indeed all
others) sleep and grow weary under such preaching? And do we not see the same
effects generally under a form of Prayer? or (at least) is there not the same
reason, why we should expect them? A perpetual use of the same form, is a more
tedious tautology, then that which such persons often blame in conceived
Prayer; viz. the repeating again and again the same Petitions in the same
prayer. For this may proceed from fervency. See Psalm 124. 4, 5. and 116. 14,
18. and 80. 3, 7, 19. The other imports, or begets laziness; at least it gives
suspicion of it (and that not altogether causeless) to others, which has much
of the appearance of evil in it.

Object. But (Sir) will you have us always adventure upon an extemporary way
of prayer? Shall I offer to God that that cost me nothing?

Ans. No, by no means. But you must know that conceived Prayers, upon the
variation of a man's condition, or other occasions, are not the same with
extempore prayers.

1 A man may pray extempore in a form; if he come unprepared, and rush upon
it, as too many do, as the horse into the battle, he offers up the Sacrifice of
fools, and is rash with his lips before the Lord, which is forbidden, Eccl. 5.
1, 2.

2 And (on the other side) a man may always very as occasions vary, and yet
not pray extempore, having before meditated upon the matter of his Petitions,
and laid up store of furniture for prayer, though he trust much to present
gifts for expressions; I cannot call this extemporary praying.

3. Neither yet is it unlawful (upon some occasions, and in some cases) to
adventure upon this Duty extempore, both for matter and form. As in daily and
hourly occasional Ejaculations, in case of a sudden call unto the Duty by any
unexpected providence, etc. in which cases, Christian prudence being the Judge,
and judging rightly, the petitions are nevertheless welcome to God for their
extemporarinesse.

4 (And lastly) yet must we use this liberty very tenderly and suspiciously,
lest our hearts persuade us that there is a greater frequency of such occasions
then there is, and so it prove a snare to us (when we find (it may be) more
then ordinary abilityes, without ordinary endeavors; as sometimes when God calls
to sudden service, he gives in sudden supplies) we may be tempted to expect the
same abilities in the same way, without the same call. We must not tempt the
Lord our God. And that is done (one way) when we expect extraordinary supplies
from him in the neglect of the ordinary way appointed by Mat. 4. 7.
him for the attainment of them.

CHAP. LIII. A third Duty, to come boldly to the Throne of Grace, pressed.
(3) COme boldly to the Throne of Grace; as Children to a Father.

1 Under the Assurance of Gods love; this is easy. This will make a man talk
with God face to face, as a man talks with his friend, as it is said of the
familiarities that passed between God and Moses. Exodus 33. 11. to commune with
God, and draw nigh to plead with him, when others stand at a distance, as
Abraham, Genesis 18. 22, 33.

2 We may, under that assurance, claim it as our privilege. A Princes Son, when
others are kept out by Officers and Guards, is admitted at all times, if any
Guard stop him, he pleads the privilege of his Relation, So though there be
never so much darkness, and fire, and terror round about God, that seems to
guard his presence from a Creatures approach, an assured Saint can say, Make
way there, and let me come to my Father; guards are appointed to exclude
strangers, not sons.

3. God expects and requires we should come with boldness to his Throne, Hebr.
4. 16. Let us come boldly, (...), taking liberty to speak any thing; so the
word signifies in the Original. Not simply, any thing, quicquid in buccam, for
Solomon cautions us against that, Eccles. 5 1. (as is abovesaid) but any thing
that becomes the reverential duty and honor that we owe to God as to a Father.
A child may say any thing to a father, that is, that becomes a child to speak,
or a Father to hear. Besides, he may speak without fear of being made an
Offender for a misplaced word, for a fault of circumstance, as other strangers
are.

Nay, when God does not hear the Saints voice (as many times when they are
under some pressures that over-burthen them, he may not.) How he calls for
them, and invites them to speak, Cant. 2. 14. O my Dove, let me hear thy voice,
for thy voice is sweet; q. d. I wonder I hear not from such or such a child of
mine. It may be my little child thinks I cannot away with broken language, the
language of a troubled spirit. O, yes, the broken and stammering tongue of a
child is sweet. It is a mighty encouragement to boldness; that a man cannot be
more bold then he is welcome.

4 This is the purchase of Christ's blood. We have (...), this bold liberty of
speech, through the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10. 19. We may draw nigh (which is an
action importing confidence, when we have to do with our betters) but upon what
account? Upon the account of Christ's blood, when strangers must stand off, and
keep distance. Ephesians. 2. 13. And it is the fruit of his Intercession. Therefore
Heb. 10. 22. we are bid to draw near in full Assurance of faith, that God will
not bid us depart his presence, or stand further off, and the ground of this
boldness is the purchase, and intercession of Christ, v. 20, 21.

He that has made his way by an acceptable present, or has the protection of
some honorable and acceptable Courtier, will draw nigh and present a Petition
to an earthly Prince, with confidence. God never received a present that he was
more delighted with, then the active and passive obedience of his Son, nor can
we come to God under the wing of a more powerful Advocate. On this last Head I
could enlarge abundantly. As by representing to you,

The dearnesse of this Son to God. He is his beloved Son, Mat. 3. ult. in whom
his heart is at rest.

The infinite value of his obedience; which we plead; in proportion whereunto,
the things we ask are less then nothing. He offered that to God, which by the
merit of its worth, might have sufficed to purchase infinitely beyond what it is
possible for us to enjoy.

The earnestness, sensibleness, importunity authority, (if I may so speak with
reverence, of his Intercession.

See the former, Hebr. 4. 14, 15. and 2. 17, 18.

The latter, John 17. 24. There are, in a sort, Verba Imperatoria, words of
command (shall I say?) Father I will, that those whom thou have given me, be
where I am.

5 The Spirit of God is the Framer of our Petitions, and we may then be bold to
present them, because he makes Intercession according to the will of God

If a skilful Lawyer frame a Petition for a man, and put every word in its
place, a man will be more emboldned to present it, then if it were his own
composure. Romans 8. 26* 27

6 It Is for Gods dishonor when his children come sneakingly and
pusillanimously to the Throne of Grace. If a man should see a Father, that his
children did scarce dare to speak to, but in a mumbling, tremulous manner,
would he not have cause to look upon him, as a cruel tyrannical father,
unreasonably severe to his children?

CHAP LIVE. A Question answered, How a man may procure this boldness; both
those that have never had it, (though under Assurance) and those that have, and
have lost it, are directed.
Quest. BUt suppose I cannot come to God in this manner with an holy boldness,
how shall I procure it?

Answ. I answer, either

1 Thou have never had this actual boldness and confidence in prayer, though
thou have had a just right to it. Or else

2 Thou have had it, and have now lost it.

1 If thou have, notwithstanding thy Assurance of Gods love, or at least, some
comfortable whispers thereof in thy heart, never had this boldness in Gods
presence (as it is possible it may be the case of many a child of God. Some
children, even of earthly parents, though they be assured of their fathers
love, yet cannot, for their hearts put on a bold face to speak to them, as some
others can: and so it is often, according to the different tempers of Gods
children to be seen in their addresses to God.)

I say in this case.

[1.] Thou must look upon it as a duty, so grounded, as before, and such a duty
as God is exceedingly delighted withal: and so strive to break the bonds of
sinful modesty. There is a sinful modesty, which the very Philosophers
condemn as a vice in morality, and call it (...), which is nothing but a
rustic, and foolish weakness of countenance, by which a man is hindered from
just and honorable actions, because he cannot look discouragements, and
oppositions in the face, as he ought to do.

This is an infirmity, even in Gods people. They come to God many times in
Duty, as if they were doing that that they are ashamed to be seen in, and are
afraid of being taken in the fact.

This they must labor exceedingly against as an infirmity, and often remember
that they offend against an expressly commanded Duty, if they come not boldly to
the Throne of grace.

[2.] Labor to fortify thy self against all such things, as may weaken thy
confidence. Such as,

(1) The consideration of Gods greatness and majesty, with thine own vileness
and unworthiness. In which case, consider,

(1. True, this should stir up a fear of reverence, and caution, that thou do
nothing unworthy so great a presence, Eccles. 5. 1. But thou must take heed of
a fear of diffidence, a fainting, discouraging fear: and to this end consider,

(2 That though God be a great God, and a great King, above all gods, yet he is
thy Father; and Royal dignityes, though they require a reverence suitable to the
distance that ought to be between a Prince and a subject, and that, even from a
son; yet they stoop themselves exceedingly to relations. Ahasuerus, though
none be dispensed with for intruding into his presence without a solemn call
by the holding forth of the golden Scepter, yet remitts of the rigor of that
ceremonious distance to Hester his wife: and Solomon Hest.
when his mother Bathsheba comes to him upon the throne, he arises and commands
a seat to be set for her on his right hand. 1 Kings 2. 19.

(3. That that great God has promised to stoop and condescend to a way of
communion and familiar converse with such vile creatures, under the sense and
apprehension of their own vileness, Isa. 66. 2 and 57. 15. Psalm. 138. 6.
Though the Lord be high, yet has he respect to the lowly. So that no man has
more right to boldness in the presence of God, then he that is most sensible
of his own vileness. God will not upbraid such a petitioner with his vileness,
Jam. 1. 5.

(4. That the Saints of God have married these two together, a serse of their
own vileness, and a gracious boldness in the presence of the Lord. David never
prays more boldly, then when he acknowledges his own unworthiness, 2 Chronicles.
29.

And it is remarkable, how bold Abraham was, and yet how much humility he
manifested in one chapter, Genesis 18. 27, 30, 32.

5. That the worthiness, in which we are to expect acceptance from the Lord, is
not in our selves, but in the Lord Jesus, so that although in our selves, we
have cause to hang down our heads, yet in him we may lift them up with
confidence. We cannot plead, we are worthy; but we may plead, Father, though we
are not worthy, yet he is worthy for whom thou should do this. Father, thou
can not be just (I confess) to me, if thou do not punish my sins; but thou
can not be just to Christ, if thou do not pardon them. Thou art not just to
me if thou do not reject my person and prayers, but thou art not just to Christ
if thou do not accept them. It Is no wonder the Priesthood of Christ is every 1
John 1. 9. Romans 3. 25. 26.
where made the ground upon which we are pressed to this boldness. As, in the
places before quoted, Heb. 4. 15, 16. and 10. 20* 21, 22.

(2) Against the present unfitness and indisposedness of thy heart in prayer,
and the unsutablenesse (upon that account of thy prayers) to his greatness,
majesty, and holiness, (another hindrance) fortify thy self, by considering

(1. That (although it be thy duty to strive against, and grieve for, and
labor by all possible means to quicken thy self from that dead and dull frame
of spirit; yet) thy Father knows how to pity and pardon invincible distempers
of spirit, and defects in prayer, especially when thou groanest under them.
Psalm. 103. 13. As the Father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them
that fear him. Now a Father will look upon the good will of a child that offers
at the performance of a service to him beyond his strength, and accept it with
pity to, and compassion upon his weakness. God accepts in this case the will
for the deed, and according to what a man has, not according to what he has
not.

(2. That our boldness and confidence in prayer is injurious to Christ, if we
lay any of the weight or stresse of it, upon our own performances. Because our
prayers were never intended for such means as procure acceptance by their own
efficacy, but mreely as means sanctified by God to conveigh to us what God
gives upon the account of Christ's purchase. So that if I put any prevalency
upon mine own prayers, when never so excellent, or make the imperfections of
them a ground of distrust, I wrong Christ.

(3. That Jesus Christ is an High Priest consecrated by God for this very
purpose, to take away the iniquity of my holy things Exodus 28. 38. This was
typified in Aarons plate of pure gold upon his forehead, wherein was written,
Holiness to the Lord; which he always wore before the Lord, to signify, that
he was to bear the iniquity of their holy things, whose offerings he presented:
And thus Jesus Christ stands before the Lord with a plate of pure gold, even
the perfection of his own righteousness and merits upon his forehead, and in
them is written Holiness to the Lord, upon the account whereof the Saints may
be assured of the acceptance of all their services as holy. Compare this with
Apoc. 8. 3 The Angel of the Covenant, is there represented standing at the
Altar, with a golden censer and much incense; a golden, holy nature, in which
there was no sin, and much incense of merit, which he offers with the
prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar of his divinity before the Throne.

3 Against the guilt of sin (another hinderance) consider,

(1 Forgiven sins are no sins in the account of God. Therefore, says God,
I will blot out your iniquities as a thick cloud, Isai. 44. 22. The cloud when
it is scattered by the wind and Sun, hinders no influences from the heaven upon
the earth. Neither do the sins of Gods people hinder any intercourse between
God and the soul, when God is once reconciled unto them again. The Lord is
said also, to put away the sins of his people, as far as the East is from the
West, Psalm. 103. 12. to cast them into the depths of the Sea, Micah. 7. 19. to
blot them out, so as to remember them no more, Isai. 43. 25. So that though
sin should be sought for, yet there shall be none, Jer. 50. 20.

(2. That we have an Advocate to plead with God, that has satisfied for them,
and therefore can answer all objections in that behalf, 1 John 2. 1, 2.

3. The neglect of prayer, under the guilt of sin, will harden the heart, and
alienate thee the more from God. The longer a child keeps out of the fathers
sight after a fault, the more he dreads it.

[3] Study promises. Those are the great charter of a Christian; what God has
promised I may boldly ask. O never be beaten from that plea. All thy present
discouragements are but Satan's tricks and querkes, by which he endeavors to
baffle thee out of thy pleas and claims, to make thee urge promises faintly and
doubtingly: and if he can do that, be gets an imcomparable advantage upon thee.
When I have an honest man's promise, if he seem to act contrary thereunto, I
will never leave urging his promise till I have obtained what I desire: come to
God and say, Lord, I confess, had thou not promised, I should not have dared
(considering mine own unworthiness) to have opened my mouth before thee: but
seeing I have a promise, I will never hold my peace, I will not be daunted out
of my suit, by any possible discouragements. If thou can not shake off thine
own promises and merciful engagements, I am resolved thou shall not shake off
me.

[4.] Be frequent in thy converses, and familiarity with him. Acquaint thy self
with God. A man that is shy of asking of a friend at first sight, grows more
acquainted by use and custom of acquaintance. It Is Eliphaz his good counsel,
Job 22. 21. Acquaint now thy self with God; i. e. by familiar converse, and it
follows, Thou shall lift up thy face to God, ver. ^6. This will make thee bold
to come to God in prayer.

[5] Study God in Christ more, and take heed how at any time thou viewest God
out of him. I have given you some light touches before of the improvement of
Christ's name in prayer for the attainment of spiritual boldness.

I shall here enlarge in some few things more, which do not so properly relate
to the particulars which occasioned those touches, and so require a distinct
consideration.

1 Study God in his Engagements to Christ in thy behalf.

That he shall have the full power of all the Treasures of God, whence any
particular souls wants may be supplied. Treasures of Grace, Isai. 11. 2. and
these for his people. The Ointment on his head reaches his garments, Psalm
133. 2. Joh. 1. 16. And strength. I have laid help (says he) upon one that is
mighty. Help? What help? surely sufficient supplies, and means of relief for
all his people, in all their wants and exigencies, Psalm. 89. 19. Suitable to
this is that Phil. 4. 13. And for all supplies. See Col. 1. 19. It pleased the
Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. Why so? see verse 18. Because
he was to have plenitudinem capitis, the fullness of an head. He is the head
of the Body. So that whatever I want, it is for security (if I may so say)
already made over to that friend in trust, so as God to eternity can never
revoke it.

2. Study God in his performances to Christ. He never asked any thing, no, not
in the days of his humiliation, in which he did not prevail; Father, I thank
thee (says he) that thou have heard me, and I know thou hear me always,
John 11. 41, 42. Many thousands have made use of his name from the beginning of
the World, and never any one failed of acceptance to this day.

3. Consider the near union between the divine nature and the humane in
Christ. That it is not only an union of relation as between friend and friend,
father and son, nay, nor husband and wife; (and yet this last is so near an
union, that the Scripture calls them two, one flesh.) But a real, personal
union, in which God and man make up the same one person, Christ. Now surely
this nearness of union between God and our nature, cannot but infer the most
entire friendship, and by consequence the most full communion that can be. And
as by the relation that we have to his humane nature, now married to the
divine, we are emboldened by the relation of our flesh to come to Christ, and
he by the relation of his flesh bound to sympathize with us; so by the relation
that his flesh in this union has to God the Father, we may come to God the
Father too, with assurance that this marriage into our kindred, must needs
derive some more particular respect unto his family, and humane relations. And
to encourage thee to this, I add, that no natural relation, that he had in the
World, (as such) would be more prevalent with him, then thou, if thou be of his
family by faith. No, not his very mother according to the flesh; so that were I
of the Papists mind, for praying to Saints to intercede for me to Christ, I
should as boldly use any of the glorified Saints as her mediation; and if she
were on earth, if she prayed in her sons name, she had no more advantage by
the relation of a mother to his natural body, then another Saint by the
relation of a member of his mystical body. For as Christ received not his
person from the virgin, but his nature, so he cannot be affected with any such
personal respects as we are: but whoever does the Will of his Father, (as
himself says, when his mother and brethren came upon the account of relation
to call him off from a work that concerned the spiritual good of other Saints)
is his brother, his sister, and his mother, Mar. 3. 34, 35. i. e. As dear as
any of those Relations: And for this reason (I doubt not) when his mother, (it
is likely upon the account of her relation) spoke to him to work a miracle in
turning water into wine; (that she and others might not think that upon that
ground he would do more for her then for other Saints) he answers her by the
common term of woman, and takes her up so short, Joh. 2. 4. It may be, you may
conceive if you had a natural relation to Christ, you might be more bold with
his name to the attainment of any thing from God. I tell you again, the meanest
woman here, upon Christ's account may ask as boldly, as the Virgin Mary might:
because the union between God and man in Christ is not such an union in which
he assumed a humane person, but only an humane nature.

[6] (And lastly) pray not (ordinarily) but upon a due preconsideration of the
wants you are under, with the exigency and necessity of your condition. This (I
have before told you) will cause boldness. He that is in want, strains no
complements. This consideration made Hester bold, Hest. 4. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
she and her people were like to perish by Hamans plot, and if she went not in,
there was no preventing it, therefore (says she) I will go in boldly, not
straining at legal formalities. I can but perish by going in, and I shall
perish if I go not in; therefore I will go in, though not according to Law, and
if I perish, I perish.

Ans. 2. If thou be one that has had this boldness in the presence of God,
and have lost it, my advice to thee for the recovery of it, is,

(1. Enquire how thou have lost it, whether

1 By some renewed sin. This is a thing that will make a Saint hang down his
head in the presence of God, Psalm. 40. 12. David under the guilt of sin
complains, Mine iniquities take such hold of me, that I cannot lock up. And
Ezra coming to God in relation to others under a great sin, Lord (says he) I
am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee Ezra 9, 6. Ever since sin came
into the world, shame came in with it. Adam, when he had sinned, hid himself
from God; he could not endure the presence of God as before, Genesis 3. 8.

But of this, as of the following Hindrances of boldness, I have spoken
before, and therefore shall but touch them now.

2. By some gross neglect of keeping constant communion with God in Duty. It
may be, thou art grown a greater stranger to God then before, God has not
been visited by thee as frequently as he was wont to be.

3 By some sinful neglect of stirring up the Graces of God in Prayer. Thou have
prayed (it may be) but in a cold, formal, superficial way. If any of these be
the cause of it, my advice to thee in the next place is (as formerly.)

(2 Remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works. Remove
the obstacle (as was directed above in the case of lost Assurance) and then
thou may renew thy confidence.

(3 Practice all the Helps to the recovering of this holy confidence when it is
lost, which are above prescribed to the attainment of it at the first. Look on
it as a Duty, fortify against the forementioned discouragements, study
Promises, renew thy apprehensions of God in Christ, come with a due
pre-consideration of thy wants, and the exigencies of them.

(4 To these add,

1 An holy expostulation with God concerning former familiarities. Mind the
Lord of the acquaintance that has been between him and thy soul, entreat him
to continue it; Lord, where are thy ancient loving kindnesses? How many hours
have I spent in familiar intercourse of love between thee and my soul I but
Lord, now thou art a stranger to me, and there passes little of common
courtesy between us. Lord, why do thou make thy self strange to me? Cause
thy countenance to shine upon me as in the days of old. So we use to recover
familiarity with friends, call old passages to mind, and this occasions
discovery of the reasons of that alteration of countenance and carriage, and
produces new mutual engagements.

2 A renovation of that Covenant of friendship between thy soul and God. Assure
him in the strength of Jesus Christ, that thou will omit no office of kindness
and respect for time to come; but wilt every way to thy utmost ability walk
worthy of a renewed acquaintance, if he will re-admit thee to such an intimacy.
Such a condition (I am persuaded) David was in, Psalm 101. O when will thou
come to me! ver. 2. And then he vows what he will do to maintain familiarity
with him, if he will receive him to the same intimacy as formerly, I will walk
in my house with a perfect heart. etc.

CHAP. LV. A Case, How boldness and holy fear may be joined in prayer? This
boldness and fear, wherein each of them consists, explained.
Quest. BUt I may possibly be too bold, and I hear the Saints of God in
Scripture described by a trembling, fearful frame of spirit* in the presence of
God. How may I bring both these together; this boldness and that fear.

Ans. To answer this, I will show you

First. Wherein the boldness that becomes a Saint in the presence of God,
consists; and so how far I may be bold.

2 And then, What this fear and trembling is, that should be joined with it?

3 That and how these may be joined.

1. Boldness.
(1) A Saints boldness before God consists in

1 The liberty of the exercise of prayer it self; that a Saint may at any time,
in any place, upon any occasion address himself to God, and expect visits from
him. A man is bold with a friend to whom he is admitted at any hour, whom he
visits perpetually, and is visited by him without any exception of times, or
observance of seasons; which yet were proper for a stranger. O the invitations
and entertainments that an holy soul gives God, and God gives to it back again!
Come my people (says God) enter into thy chambers, Isai.
etc. and hide thee. I have gathered my mirrhe with my spice, etc. Eat O
friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O my Beloved. Cant. 5. 1. And (on the
Churches part) O when will thou come to me! Psalm. 101. 2. Why stand thou
afar off, O Lord? Psalm 10. 1. etc. When I awake, I am still with thee, Psalm.
139. 8.

2. In the matter of prayer: wherein,

1) A soul communicates to God all its counsel; and so lays all its burdens
upon the Lord, as we use to do upon a friend, that we may make most bold
withal; yea, even those things that he would be ashamed, and afraid to utter to
the most familiar friend in the world, 1 Pet 5. 7. Casting all his care upon
the Lord; and that confidently, tumbling Cum pondere curarum nostrarum non
debemus diu luctari, sed statim eo nos levare, and in Dominum illud conjicere
in Gerh. 1 Pet. 5. 7.
it upon him, [(...),] and that by and by; as soon as it troubles a Saint, he
heaves it off presently from his own shoulders upon Gods. So Hezekiah spreads
Rabshakehs paper before the Lord, Isai. 37. 14.

2) A soul begs of God any thing he wants. A man makes bold with a friend, when
he fetches every thing he wants from him, comes now for money, anon for
raiment, another time for food and other necessaries, and all that his friend
has he makes bold to ask for, and has it for asking: and Christ emboldens us
to this, Joh. 15. 7. Ask what you will, and it shall be done to you; that is,
whatever is in Gods power to give, whatever he has not bound himself from
bestowing, whatever may be for his true glory, and our true good. God says as
one friend does to another, If any thing I have will do you a pleasure, make
bold to ask it, and it is at your service. As we say to a welcome Ghost; Sir,
Make as bold in my house as if you were at home. So says God, Soul, make as
bold in heaven, my house, as in thine own, nothing shall be denied thee that
heaven will yield. I have read, that Luther made bold upon this encouragement,
Domine (said he) fiat voluntas mea. Lord, let my will be done. A bold speech,
but (in a clear case, falling under a plain Promise) implying a clear truth. A
Saint may expect the performance of his own will when his will is Gods will.
Both these are in one verse of David, Psalm. 38. 9. Lord, all my desire is
before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Thou know my secrets and
my wants.

3 In the manner of prayer.

1 A Saint may speak to God in downright plain language, as to a friend. A man
need not study complements when he deals with such an one: If he were to deal
with an earthly great man, (especially to whom he is a stranger) he must place
every word in order, and scare dare utter any thing but in Court language. God
looks not after fine expressions, but warm affections.

2 God accepts of imperfect and broken expressions, when we can speak no
better; lispings and stutterings of children are welcome to a Father, when
(through infirmity) the child is able to speak no better. David's groaning,
Psalm. 38. 9. Hezekiahs chattering, Isai. 38. 14.

3 A Saint may use fervency, urgency, and importunity of petitions. So Jacob,
Lord, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me Genesis 32. 26. As a man who
may be bold with his friend, takes him by the coat when he is departing, and
holds him fast, and tells him in a way of familiar power and jurisdiction, (as
it were) Sir, you shall not go hence to night, etc. So in the case of Moses,
God is fain, as a friend detained by such an importunate inviter, (as is before
mentioned) to entreat Moses to let him go, Exodus 32. 10. This is expressed by our
Savior by an elegant similitude, Luke 11. 5, 6, 7. 8. of one friends
importunity with another at midnight, an unseasonable hour, and when the friend
is in bed at rest, etc. So the Saints use to knock, and if knocks will not make
God hear, they call, Where is the God of Eliah? 2 Kings 2. 14. if God seem to
sleep, they awaken him, Psalm. 44. 23. Give the Lord no rest, Isai. 62. 7.

4 A Saint may have confidence of audience and acceptance. Hebr. 10. 22. Let us
draw nigh, (...), in full Assurance of faith.

(1 This appears in the Saints besetting of God with promises, that God cannot
any way get off, if he would seem to deny them. See in David abundant proof of
this. Psalm 119. 25 Quicken me. ver. 28 Strengthen me. ver. 58. Be merciful to
me. ver. 65. Let it be well with me: ver. 76 Let thy kindness be for my
comfort: ver. 116. Uphold me: ver. 169 Give me understanding; (and all)
according to thy Word.

(2 In their challenges of Gods Justice, Truth and faithfulness, and all his
Attributes to make them good. So David, Psalm. 31. 1. Deliver me in thy
righteousness. And Psalm 35. 24. Judge me according to thy righteousness.
Psalm 119. 40 Quicken me according to thy righteousness, Ps. 143. 1. In thy
faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

So Abraham appeals to Gods justice: Shall not the Judge of all the World do
right? Genesis 18. 25.

And they press sometimes upon the very glory of God, and challenge their
petitions upon the forfeiture of his glory, Josh. 5. 7. What will thou do for
thy great name?

2. Fear.
(2) A Saints fear of God in prayer, consists,

1. In that conscience of Duty that brings him into the presence of God, if
there were nothing else to move him thereunto; though he had no need, though
there were no threatenings to the neglect of it, no promises to the performance
of it, yet because God requires it, he dares not neglect it. This is that fear
that God requires as a master, of all his people as servants. Now we must know
that all fear of God as a master, that is, all obedience out of conscience of
duty, is not servile fear; but then it is servile, when it is not so much out of
conscience of duty, as out of conscience of wrath or punishment upon neglect. A
child is a Fathers servant, and obeyes him as such; yet obeys not servilely.
Therefore God calls for this fear, upon this account. If I be a master, where
is my fear? that is, dutiful obedience to my commands? Mal. 1. 6.

2. In the matter of our performances, it is a diligent care of what we offer
to God, keeping the soul from offering stange fire, bounding a man's desires
with the will of God. A fear, lest any thing should slip from a man's mouth or
heart, that is displeasing to God. As a child, though he may make bold with his
Father, yet is careful not to ask any thing of his Father, that he knows will
displease him: so in this, a Saint takes care that all his petitions be
warranted by a rule, and encouraged by a promise, and beyond these he dares not
wish, much less, come into the presence of God to ask any thing. He dares not
tempt God, by depending on him for, or desiring at his hands what his word does
not warrant.

But it is not such a fear as discourageth the soul in asking such things as a
man has warrant to desire. So far as the promise goes, a soul dares ask,
else it is not a childlike, but a childish fear; not the fear of a Courtier, but
the fear of a clown.

3. In the manner of performing such duties: it is a deportment of the soul
with that reverence as becomes the greatness and glory of God compared with
our own baseness, and unworthiness and jealousy of our own hearts, lest we
should do any thing unbeseeming such a God or such a duty.

1. No soul has more reverend and high thoughts of God, then such a soul as
has most right to holy confidence in his presence. The more acquaintance with
God, the more of this fear. None waits upon a Prince with more reverence and
observance, then the greatest favorites, the ordinary and standing Courtiers:
A man that comes out of the Country, and is not acquainted with Majesty, and
State, is not so observant of every punctilio of ceremony, as those that are
perpetually about the Prince. This it is, that David speaks of (Ps. 89. 7.) God
is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, and to be had in
reverence of all that are round about him. Gods greatest Courtiers, are most
observant of him. The more we converse with God, the more we know what becomes
his glory, and majesty; and all irreverence proceeds from ignorance, and
ignorance from want of converse with God. A country man reverences a Prince, no
otherwise then he does his landlord, because he is not conversant in the Court,
and observes not the state, and ceremony, kept and used there. The Seraphims
that are the constant Courtiers of heaven, they cover their faces with a fear
of awe and reverence, Isai. 6. 2.

2. None is more watchful over his own heart in the manner of a performance,
then a Saint, that has most grounds of boldness and confidence in the
presence of God. He dares not run rashly into Gods presence, and if but a low,
mean thought of God arise, how does his heart rise against it? If but a
straggling thought carry him off from his business, how does he send out post
after it, and call it in again? This is a fear of jealousy, This is called
watching to prayer (of which above,) Carnis enim ingenium est, ut exultando
dissolvatur, Musc. in Ps. 2.
and watchfulness proceeds from a fear of wariness, though not from fear of
dastardlinesse. Thus you see what fear a Saint is bound to bring to God in
every performance. A dutiful fear, A careful fear, A reverend fear, A jealous
fear.


3. Mixed.
That, and how, both these will stand together, we shall show in the next
place, in a word. For I have in a sort prevented my self herein already. Only,

1. That it is so, see one or two places for it, Psalm. 2. 11. Even in those
services that require highest expressions of joy; rejoice before him (says the
Psalmist) with trembling. A more remarkable place is that, Psalm. 147. 11. The
Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope in his mercy.
Hope (which in the old Testament is often taken for, and always implies faith)
is here joined with fear: one would think, doubting, and fear, might have been
better matched: but see, God joins hope or faith, (the mother of boldness) and
fear together So Psalm 5. 7.

2. Concerning the manner how these are conjoined; it is,

1. By a joint premeditation, and collation, of

1. Gods greatness and goodness; majesty and mercy.

2. Our own meannesse, with our great relations.

3. Our own unworthiness and Christ's worthiness.

4. Our own inabilty, and the Spirits supplies.

These, as they jointly affect our hearts in meditation, so they leave suitable
joynt-impressions in prayer.

2. By a diligent observance of our spirits in the extravagancies of them both
ways in duty, and checking them with contrary meditations: as when we find a
petulant wantonness of spirit, apt to break out, whereby we are endangered to
make too bold with God; a Saint may correct that with apprehensions of Gods
majesty, Isai. 6. 6. If carelessenesse and slightness of spirit, a Saint
quickens it, with thoughts of Gods holiness, and glory, such as Mal. 1. 8. and
that of David, 2 Samuel 24. 24.

So on the other side, if childish bashfulnesse, come in in stead of childlike
reverence, or servile fear in stead of filial awfulnesse, he considers Gods
mercy, bounty, truth, Christ's merits, and mediation, his own relations through
him, etc. And so balanceth that scale when it weighs too low. Such counter
considerations as these the soul has at hand, to balast it self even in all
the parts of Duty. And this shall suffice for the clearing of these cases.

CHAP. LVI. Some comfortable informations from this Thesis and (for an upshot)
a Case how I shall know whether my actual fervency and boldness be from Gods
Spirit, or Satan, or any natural principle, etc.
THis affords matter of abundant comfort to all who have this boldness and
fervency, from the operation of this witnessing Spirit in prayer.

1. In the work it self. Certainly it is a sweet thing to be able in all things
to make a man's requests known to God, with confidence. How incomparable an ease
is it to a man to have a bosome-friend, and him such a one, as is able not only
to hear, but hear, and help to make of ones counsel in the weightiest, and
most important businesses, in the greatest, and most unsupportable burdens!
especially, to a child to have such a father. This is the happiness ascribed
to the Jews above all other nations, merely upon the account of an outward
propriety, a visible, Church propriety, and liberty of approach. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. to
have God so nigh to them in all that they called upon him for.

2. In the rise of it. This is a main work of the Spirit of Adoption. You are
arrived as high in point of communion with God, as you can possibly in this
state of distance. The witness of the Spirit is our most comfortable
enjoyment, and the prayers and praises that proceed from it, our most
comfortable employment that we are capable of here below. And the comfort of it
lies in this, that it is an act of influence from the Spirit of the most noble,
and heavenly nature of any other; it is an evidence of a large and abundant
measure of the Spirit.

3. In the Issue of it, what may not such an one do with God? But that the
cause of miraculous works is ceased, and so it is a tempting God to put him
needlessely to extraordinary expenses, surely (I may say) such an one might (as
our Savior says) say to this or that mountain, be thou plucked up by the
roots, and cast into the depth of the Sea, and that with assurance of success,
Mat. 17. 20. and 21. 22. Now if this be true of the least degree and measure of
faith (though but reliance) as it is, much more undoubtedly of acts of
assurance, and such an one is this spiritual boldness and confidence in prayer.

Qu. But how shall I know whether my fervency and boldness of spirit in
prayer, come from Gods Spirit of Adoption, or mine own spirit, or (possibly)
Satan's spirit of delusion.

Answ. This question is weighty, and I must answer distinctly to both parts.

(1.) For fervency, it is true,

1. Sometime it is but natural. Great wants produce earnest entreaties. Beggars
ready to starve beg in earnest. Terrors of God and frights of conscience
many times make fervent.

2. Sometimes it may also be the work of a deluding and prestigious spirit, who
I know not why he may not counterfeit the Spirit of prayer in this operation,
as well as the Spirit of grace in many others.

But 3. The discovery of the difference lies in these particulars.

(1.) In the nature of this fervency, and that consists in these things.

1. In the lively actings of all our graces in prayer. This I have showed you
before, is the course of Gods Saints to stir up all within them to the
performance of the duty. The bow that is serviceable must be bent in all parts
alike, else it will fail the expectation of the Archer. A counterfeit fervency
or a mere natural fervency is partial. Desire, may seem to be fervent in
prayer, but humility, and sorrow for sin, and thankfulness, are cold. Many a
man asks what he wants with great earnestness, but confesses sin, and
gives thanks for mercies received, superficially. This puts a great suspicion
upon the Duty.

2. In a zealous watchfulness over a man's heart against all those things that
may cool, deaden or distract it. And thus a gracious soul is not only then
fervent, when (it may be) a landfloud of affections drownes (for the present)
the actings of formality, wandering thoughts: etc. but even when these are most
stirring, it shows its fervency by laboring, and wrestling against them:
Another may be fervent now and then, upon such or such a particular impression
of spirit, (as suppose in the sense of some imminent danger, some extraordinary
conviction) but he does not keep his watch, or stand so upon his guard, as to
preserve himself in that temper, but suffers himself to decline into
formality, and deadness again as soon as that impression is a little laid by
the vent it finds in a Duty.

(2.) In the matter wherein one is fervent. A man may be fervent in such things
as concern his own present necessity, Isai. 26. 16. They powered out a prayer,
when thy chastening (...)
was upon them, [effuderunt or liquefecerunt orationem] they seemed to be
meltingly fluent, as metal when it runs by the force of fire; but that is a
fervency that holds no longer then the fire lasts. In those things that
concern the glory of God, and are more remote from a man's private concernment,
there is more coldness and indifferency. In petitions for pardon of sin, much
heat; little in petitions for grace etc.

(3) In the concomitants of this fervency. It does beget a suitable frame of
spirit,

1. In all places. Many an one is very appearingly fervent when he prays
before others. But is there the same heat in private, or rather, are our
private closet prayers cold and formal? Satan's spirit, a spirit of vainglory,
etc. may make a man fervent before others; but the Spirit of God only supplies
a private fervency; to wrestle with God in private (as Jacob did by night) and
alone, is likely to be gracious fervency.

2. In all duties. A man that has a kindly heat of affections in prayer will
not be without some impressions of it in other duties. In the hearing of the
word, a man's heart will burn, Luke 24. 32. In his place and calling there will
be a zealous endeavor to do good, a zealous anger against sin, a zealous
grief for sin. This is seen in David, Ps. 119. 32. 139. and 102 Ps. throughout:
a zealous and fervent love to all the Saints, 1 Pet. 1. 22.

4. In the rise of it.

(1.) It is gotten in the Saints by industry, kindled by meditation, and most
commonly they know how they come by it, how much ado it costs them to raise
their heart to such a pitch. When fervency of spirit comes in, with a gross
neglect of quickening endeavors, its suspicious. Not that a child of God may
not now and then find an heat kindled in prayer, which he can give no account
of. But he constantly seeks and labors for it in the regular way.

(2.) It is grounded on a promise. A natural man seldom eyes a promise, but
his wants.

Ob. Yea, but I can draw no comfort from this, because all this concerns such
as have the Spirit of Adoption in its witnessing work. In me that have it not,
it may be still a fervency of a natural impression, from mere necessity, or
sense of want.

Answ. It Is true, that this work eminently proceeds from the Spirit of Adoption
in its witnessing Act: but it also proceeds from the Spirit of Adoption in its
renewing Act. The Spirit is a Spirit of Supplication, not only as a Spirit of
consolation, but also as a Spirit of grace Ze. 12. 10. And therefore although
such persons, who have the witness of the Spirit may take comfort in seeing
this fruit of it; yet we must not think that there is no such fruit, where
there is not such a witness. And therefore if thou find this fervency that is
above described in thy heart (if it do not proceed from the Testimony of the
Spirit (as possibly it may, from its more obscure and remiss Testimony (of
which I have spoken before) although thou do not know, or at least not for
the present observe it;) yet) it always proceeds from that Spirit that is in
all the children of God, the Spirit of grace and supplication, if so qualified
as is said. Indeed that that is most sensible in the fervency of an unassured
soul is sense of want. But they may also observe in themselves, that they are
not fervent only in such things; (at least) that they labor for it in other
things.

(2.) As for boldness in duty, 1. I have before showed you wherein. it
consists, and how it joins with fear. And that which is not of the right stamp
commonly fails in one of the forementioned particulars; it is a boldness that
allows a man as much to neglect, as perform duty; that tempts God by
petitioning and expecting what is not according to his will, or at least not in
his way, etc.

And here I shall shut up this Treatise, earnestly desiring that God will give
all that read it experience of these works, that they may be able to seal to
the truth of it. Amen.

FINIS.
A SAINTS DIRECTION IN AN AFFLICTED CONDITION.

By SIMON FORD B. D. and Minister of the Gospel in Reading.

London, Printed for Sa. Gellibrand at the Ball in Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the noble and worthily honored, Ladies and Gentlewomen, The Lady CECILIA
KNOLLYS, the Lady LETICE VACHELL, the Lady ANN PIE, Mrs. LETICE HAMPDEN, Mrs.
ELIZABETH, MARGARET, and MARY HAMMONDS, Mrs. TREVOR; and all the rest of the
noble Families, concerned in that late sad stroke of providence, the death of
that much bewailed Gentleman, Colonel ROBERT HAMMOND.
TO you (much honored and beloved in the Lord) I make bold to present my
Meditations upon this Subject, not long since delivered in the hearing of most
of you, upon a double account. Partly, that I may testify the sense I have of
those many obligations which you have laid upon me, since Gods providence cast
me into these parts; and partly, that I might add a few mites of advice and
direction to your store, concerning the improvement of the late sad stroke upon
your noble Families, and these Nations, in the decease of that great prop of
all his Relations, and eminent Instrument of the public good; whom both you,
and I, and this poor Town, and all the Country hereabout have abundant cause to
mourn for. This I am sure is an affliction to us all of an high nature, and so
much the greater, because befalling us in a juncture of time wherein our hopes
from him, by reason of his public employments newly entered on (being called
but immediately before, to an eminent civil, and military Trust in Ireland, and
chosen High-Steward and Burgess in Parliament for this Corporation) were as
the highest. I know you are not ignorant what use to make of such a blow. But
give me leave upon this occasion, to leave this monument in your Cabinets, to
be your Remembrancer of, and Direction in a Duty, which although you always
conscionably practice, yet you may as well as others, through the oppression of
your spirits under this heavy burden, possibly find some additional
excitations and directions not altogether unuseful or unnecessary thereunto.
The Lord (if it seem good in his eyes) find our some way, how the great gap,
which the fall of such an Oak has made in our hedge, may be filled up, by some
or other of those young plants who are related to him, and are concerned to
imitate him in those things which have rendered him a public loss; and support
you under this grievous stroke. This is, and (by Gods assistance) shall be the
prayer of him, who is

Your Servant in the Gospel of Christ, SIMON FORD.
Reading, December. 5 1654.
JAM. 5. 13. former part. Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray.


The PREFACE.
WHat one said of Books, Procaptis Lectoris, habent sua fata libelli; that
their entertainment is suitable to the capacity, temper, or distemper of the
Reader; may with a little variation be affirmed of Sermons (especially such as
seem to upbraid the times with those Diseases which they labor under) they are
liked or disliked, as people understand, or are affected toward the matter
they deliver, or the occurrences that occasion it. Thence is there such a
general disrelish of suffering Doctrines in these days, wherein diverse persons
see nothing but visions of peace and glory and triumph, to the Saints; that a
man that handles such a Subject as this in diverse places, is thought to be as
absurd, as he that preaches a Funeral Sermon at a Wedding, or mars the
Solemnity of a Feast with some sad story. In all ages, the judgment that the
most of men have made of the goodness or badnesse of the times has been
sensual; thence so much difference of opinion appears even among those that
undertake to be skilful Physicians, because every one pronounces according to
what he feels. There was never any time so black and dismal to the Church of
Christ as that all persons would confess it such. The Papists then, and
ignorant Protestants since agreed in magnifying the days of our forefathers
under Hen. 8. and Q. Mary. when as we all know there were never days more sad
to the Truth, and the sincere profession thereof. When Israel was in Babylon
under a grievous captivity, robbed at once of all Civil and Church liberty,
when they hung up their Harps upon the willowes, the cruel persecuters would
fain persuade them they had as much cause to keep rejoicing Festivals as ever;
and presume they are, or at least insultingly require them to be, in a singing
tune as well as they, Psalm. 137.

This (now) being the temper of the world that few will own the truth of any
complaint against the times, but they that suffer by them. I cannot but expect
that those who (because they feel little themselves that is afflicting) will
see nothing but causes of Triumph in these days, and the providence of them;
should say, Ad quid perditio hoec? Wherefore this waste? Why a Sermon of
affliction, and the duty belonging to that condition in such a time?

1 But friends, let me tell you, there are those of Gods precious Saints whom
these Truths nearly concern. The same providence that occasions the
rejoicings of some, drencheth others in blood and tears; and certainly then,
what is the case of some of Gods Saints only by passion, ought to be made the
case of all by compassion.

Let me add (secondly) public joys may be accompanied with private
sufferings, and none can tell where the shoe rings but he that wears it.

Lastly, What others do any where suffer, you may* Lay up this Treatise by you,
though now it be fair to your seeming; you have seen many a fair morning end in
a rainy afternoon; 'twill be no burden to carry a cloak on a man's back, or an
hood in his pocket, if he travel, because he knows not how soon it may do him
service.

The SERMON.
(...), Does any suffer ill? No matter how, nor from whom, nor what, nor how
long, nor wherefore, whether in mind or in body, or estate, whether from God
immediately, or from men or devils, from open enemies or professed friends,
whether the suffeing be greater or lesser, shorter or longer, for evil doing or
well doing, whether the sufferer be a Martyr or a Malefactor; this is an
universal Duty, a Panacaea, a Receipt for every Disease, and a Sovereign one
too. Bring the party upon his knees, or upon his face, and let him kindly pour
out his soul before God; it is present ease, and future health.

Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray. [Is any man afflicted? Let [him]
pray.] Why? is not a man to pray aelwayes, as the Apostle expresses it? 1
These. 5. 17.

Yes doubtless, prayer is a Duty that is never out of season. Yet as in the
performance of the Duty of Thanksgiving (which (according to the rule also, is
to be in all things) there are special seasons in which it is more solemn and
proper: So in the other sister-duty of Invocation, there is a time when more of
our spirits and strength then ordinary is to be laid out upon it; and that is
the season in the Text, that of affliction, Psa. 50. 15.

The sense of the words is clear, and so is the Observation which I shall raise
from them, which is this,

Doct. A suffering season (of all seasons) is a praying season.

The truth of this Doctrine will be cleared by these few considerations.

(1) If we look upon God. And on him

1 As the first cause (whoever or what ever be the second) of every affliction
that befalls us, the Author of all the evil of suffering that is in the City,
in the family, in the soul, in the body, Amos 3. 6. If the Lord bid Shimei
curse David, 2 Samuel 16. 11. If the Lord strip Job by the Caldeans and Sabaeans,
and slay his children in the whirlewind, Job 1. 21 If the Lord stir up an
Hadad, Rezon and Jereboam against Solomon and his seed, to rend the Kingdom
from them, 1 King. 11. 11, 14, 23. Nay, if in the horridst act that was ever
done by men, the crucifying of the Lord of glory, and the killing of the Prince
of life (as it was a mere act, considered without the sinfulness of it on the
part of the Actors, and as it was a suffering unto Christ under the guilt of
man's imputed sin) the Instruments acted nothing but what was before determined
in the counsel of God, and in what he underwent, the Fathers hand bruised him,
Acts 2. 24. and Isai. 53. 10. I say, if all these and the like dispensations of
providence be laid out for men, by the hand and counsel of God; no wonder if it
so much concern the Saints to make their principal addresses to him in prayer.
Job 5. 6, 7, 8. See Eliphaz his counsel to Job, (who in a fit of impatient
frenzy, chap. 3. had forgotten what in a more calm temper he before
acknowledged, chap. 1. and 2.) Although affliction comes not forth out of the
dust, etc. yet man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward; q d. A man may
seem to partake of nothing but the common lot of mortality in sufferings here
below, because it is as ordinary a thing to him, as for the sparks to fly
upward: and possibly this may abate the vigor of those apprehensions which it
becomes him to have concerning the Sovereign hand of God in those common
evils. But (says he) Job, recall to thy mind what thou have said, and know
well enough, that afflictions depend not merely upon natural causes, as those
things seem to do which grow out of the ground: but there is a special hand of
God in all thy sufferings, and the sufferings of all other men. And what does
he hence advise? I would (says he) seek to God, and to God would I commit my
cause, ver. 8.

[2.] Look on God as one who (only) can sanctify afflictions to us, support
us under them, deliver us from them. It is a duty of great concernment, (in
time of affliction especially) to pray. It Is necessary, affliction should be
sanctified; for the more strong our physic is, the more dangerous, if it do
not work kindly; and if God do not open the ear, and seal instruction, and hide
pride from man, 'twil not be done Job 33. 15, 16, 17 etc. Every little
affliction is intolerable to flesh and blood, Heb. 12. 11. Every affliction is
a matter of such grief to a man, that it will make a man's hands weak, and bring
a palsy into his knees, as the word is v. 12. of that Chapter, [(...)] except
God strengthen them, 1 Cor. 10. 13. And if God should always strive, the
spirit would fail before him, and the souls which he has made, Isa. 57. 16.
Perpetual suffering must needs break the back of a creature. Now to God only
belong the periods, and full points, as well as the comma's and smaller stops
of affliction. To God, the Lord belong the Issues to, and from Death, Ps. 68
20. the word signifies [the bounds and confines] of death; he lays out to men
the utmost border, and bound of every affliction. Now all these good things,
they grow (it is true) upon the tree of mercy, but they are to be plucked by
the hand of prayer. God gives wisdom (the radical grace, enabling a man to act
all the rest to advantage, in a suffering time) liberally; but then it must be
asked of God, Isa. 1. 5. If a man want support and security in a suffering
time; it is true, God is a refuge, and strength, and a very present help in time
of trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. But to whom is he so? to them that call upon him, Ps.
105. 18. Lastly, he delivers the righteous out of all his afflictions, Psalm.
34. 19. But upon what terms? Call on me and I will deliver thee, Psalm 50. 15.
God has delivered me, and does deliver, and will deliver, (says the Apostle)
but in what way, (...), you Corinthians conferring mutual help by your prayers,
2 Cor. 1. 11.

[3.] Look on God as,

1. Prescribing this duty in affliction, as Psalm 50. 15. and in my Text, and
many other places.

2. Expecting it, as one who often afflicts to that end, that he may make our
proud hearts to stoop to duty. Hosea 5. 15.

3. Making promises to this duty rightly performed in such a season. See at
large, 2 Chronicles. 7. 13, 14, and Psalm 50. 15.

4. Sealing them with plentiful performances. See a threefold cord of
experiences in one Psalm, 34. 4, 5, 6.

Now God calls not for, expects not, encourages not, prospers not an
unseasonable duty: and therefore from all this it follows, that to one that
looks on God in affliction, the seasonablenesse of prayer is strongly
concluded, by all these particulars.

(2) Look on our selves under affliction, and prayer will seem exceeding
seasonable at such a time, from these following considerations, arising from
the condition it self which we are under; which has these advantages in its
nature, and usual attendants to further us in the duty.

1. Sense of pain or present danger. It Is natural to cry under the rod, qui
nescit orare, etc. (says the proverb,) send a man to Sea, if you will teach him
to pray. Jonah 1. 6. Even heathen Mariners can find some God or other to go to
in a storm, Jon. 1. 6. I know, it is not always gracious prayer that comes
from a sense of suffering. A dog will howl when you strike him; and God can
give some men's devotions in such a condition no better term, Hos. 7. 14. But I
know also that even a child will cry, and beg heartily under the rod. And all
prayers that are extorted from men by smart, are not carnal and natural
prayers, though sometimes (and in wicked men always) they be so. The prayer
may be spiritual, though the motive be natural. We fast, and the Jews and
others of old, wore sackcloth upon their flesh, to provoke by the hunger and
pain of the body the spirits to devotion. When the spirit is overwhelmed, the
natural man seeks vent sometimes this way, but a godly man always.

2. Affliction usually begets lowly and humble thoughts in men. For as it is
natural to man to be proud and lofty under a prosperous condition, Psalm. 73. 5,
6. So is it also to begin to know himself when he is laid low by affliction,
Ps. 9. 20. Put them in fear O Lord, that the nations may know themselves to be
but men. Before they scarce thought they were men, as others are, Lam. 3. 27,
28, 29. Long afflictions (such as the Prophet describes there) make men sit
alone, and keep silence, lay their very mouths in the very dust, and take
patiently any thing from God or men. I know that a man may be humbled, that is
not humble. No afflictions, though they plow long furrows, and deep ones too,
can of themselves tear up the root of pride out of the heart; but they may
tear and mangle it so, that it may be checked for the present in its growth,
whiles better seeds are sown in the heart by grace, that in time will wafte it
quite out of the field. Wicked men will never pray, till affliction bring them
upon their knees. And the Saints of God sometimes are too proud to be beholden
to God till bare need force them to it. The prodigal, whiles he had but husks
(though a son) yet thinks not of his duty. And it is said of our Savior
Christ himself, that (as man) he learned obedience by the things that he
suffered. Heb. 5. 8. and being a man of sorrows, in his state of humiliation,
he powered out strong cries and groans, v. 7. Now that which (grace cooperating
with it) humbles and lays the soul low before God, puts a man into the fittest
temper for prayer.

3. Afflictions (ordinarily) are, the chafingdish that warmes, and recovers the
remembrance of sin unto men.

They recovered the remembrance of the Patriarchs sin (as Divines observe)
twenty years after, Genesis 42. 21. Now verily (say they) now we are in bonds, are
we guilty concerning our Brother, (i. e.) now our consciences tell us we are
guilty. So Hos. 5. 15. I will return to my place, till they be guilty, i. e.
till the sense of guilt forgotten, afresh seize their consciences: therefore
Job calls plagues, Gods witnesses, and renewed plagues, renewed witnesses, Job
10 17. because they testify sin, and oftentimes (when they are repeated
plagues) wilfulness, and obstinacy in sin. And this property of affliction
makes it very much conduce to prayer. A burden: ed spirit under sense of sin,
vents its sorrows and oppressions that way. Prayer to such a soul, is like
lightening the ship in a storm like letting out the impostumed matter out of a
sore. As shall be shown more hereafter.

4. A man in an afflicted condition has many promises to urge God withal,
which are peculiar to such a condition. Concerning sanctification of
affliction, Ezekiel. 20. 37. 38. Isa. 27. 9. moderation in afflicting, v. 8, 9,
that, and support under suffering together, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Psalm 23. 2, 3, 4.
bettering and improving us by it, Heb. 12. 11. deliverance in it, Job 5. 19.
Isai. 43. 2. Psalm 34. 20 and 112, 4. from it, Psa. 125 3 and 91. 14, 15. and
37. 40, and many places more, Now that season is a proper season for prayer,
(of all others) which the Lord chooses as a proper season of granting As the
time to ask and receive a dole, is then when it is to be distributed. If a
beggar be out of the way then, he miss^th his Alms See Ps. 32. 6. Godly men
pray in a time when God will be found.

5 A man in an afflicted condition has more especial need of supply in many
graces, then at another time. As in 1 Faith, Luke 21. 31 Hab. 21 23. 2
Humility, 1 Pet. 5. 6. 3 Patience, Heb. 10. 36. Jam. 1. 4. 4 Repentance, Lam.
3. 40. 1 Chr. 7. 13, 14.


Now all supplies of the Spirit must be fetched in by prayer, Phil. 1. 19, 20.
If a man were never so sure of supplies from a friend at all turns, yet it is
requisite that he send him intelligence of his wants. Indeed, God needs not any
intelligence of our condition, who knows our estate better then we do; knows
what part of the wall needs most strengthening, though we never tell him; but
God will take no notice of our wants, except we make them known in prayer,
Phil. 4. 6. All my springs are in thee, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 87 ult. i. e.
in God, conveyed in the way of Ordinances and Duties; for he speaks there of
the glory of the Church in its Ordinances. So Jam. 1. 5. (which I have quoted
above) If any lack wisdom; i. e. special wisdom for an afflicted condition, let
him ask it of God. If we be too proud to ask, God is too wise to give.

6. A man under affliction is liable to many sins more then he is subject to
in another condition. As,

1. Unbelief, Psalm 116. 11. Isai. 38. 11. Unbelieving forecasts.

2. Impatience, as may be seen in Job himself the pattern of patience, as he
is recorded Jam. 5. 11. yet in the third Chapter of his book, what a fit of
passionate fervency is he in! so great that he talks idly.

3. Putting forth our hands to iniquity, and indirect means. Thus in affliction
oftentimes, an Abraham shuffles and equivocates, Genesis 20, 2. A David
dissembles, 1 Samuel 21. 13. A Peter denies his Master, Mat. 26. 69.

Now against all these temptations (next the word) the readiest help is prayer.
whence the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. after the enumeration of all the pieces of the
Armor of God, to be put on in a day of trial, that a man may be able to stand,
v. 13. to 17. will have them buckle on all those arms, and handle them by
prayer, v. 18. Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit,
etc. [All prayer] ejaculations, and set duties, public and private, alone and
in company, etc.

7 An afflicted Saint has then special arguments which he may urge in prayer,
which no other condition yields. As,

1. Gods bowels of fatherly pity and compassion. Gods eyes, and Gods hand, and
Gods heart are parts attributed to him, in relation to all the ordinary
affairs that concern his people; but the bowels of God are peculiar to the
suffering and afflicted condition of his people only, and mercy and pity
(affections which are most proper to an afflicted condition) are set forth by
bowels in the Scripture: therefore when the Prophet expresses great
compassion, and a grief suitable to it, he cries out, O my bowels, my bowels!
Jer. 4. 19. And toward Ephraim in affliction, see what part of God is most
affected, Jer. 31. 20. My [bowels] are troubled for him. Therefore the Church
in affliction is expert in this Argument. Where is thy zeal, and thy strength,
the sounding of thy [bowels] and of thy mercies toward me? Isai. 63. 15.

And God delights exceedingly to show his pity, and his tender mercies to his
people in such a time; he is a God that delights in mercy. Micah. 7. 18. and
therefore delights to be urged with it, and to have it pleaded in a time of
misery. And for this very reason, he makes our greatest misery and most
forlorn condition, a time of love and mercy. Ezekiel. 16. 4, 5, 6. Ps. 136. 23.
Luke 1. 48. And no wonder he takes such a time, seeing he has most glory from
his people, for remembering them in a low estate.

2. Add to this another (which indeed is the occasional motive to it,) our own
misery the proper object of mercy, and the correlative of it. This is a good
argument to plead with God, Lord, now I am a fit object of mercy: thou art a
God of tender mercies, and thy compassions fail not. If ever any soul needed
tender mercies, I am that soul: Behold, Lord, my affliction; see Lord, and
consider, behold Lord and consider, remember O Lord what is come upon us, etc.
says the Church often in the Lamentations, Lam. 1. 9, 20. and 2. 20. and 3. 1.
Thence the people of God in Scripture use to make such large descriptions of
their sad condition, as Psalm 38. throughout, Psalm 41. 5, 6, 7. and 69,
throughout, Isai. 37. 14, 15. A beggar that has a maim, a soldier that has
the scarres of his dangerous wounds to show, has a great advantage in begging,
above those ordinary beggars that can show no such arguments and inducements to
pity. Misery speaks aloud, when he that suffers it, it may be, has not a
tongue to utter it.

3. The seasonablenesse of relief, in such a time, may be a prevailing motive.
Gods season of mercy and pity, is our depth of want and misery: relief in such
a condition diverse times is double relief: When God helps an Abraham upon the
mount, when he steps in between a man and the very brink of danger, this
endears a mercy. Now when a man can plead with God thus, Lord, thou have made
me hear much of thy mercy, pity, and bounty; Lord, if ever thou will give me an
experiment of it, now is a fit time to do it, now I am at a loss every way
else, now I am at the very brink of despair. O what a season may thou now
take to engage my heart unto thee! As it is prevalent with a friend to urge,
Sir You have often bid me make use of you, you have promised me many times what
you would do for me; now Sir, if you will ever relieve me, now is the time when
you may do me a most engaging kindness. Thus David prays Psalm 69. 13. My
prayer is unto thee O Lord, in an acceptable time, save me; now deliverance
will be welcome, So Psalm 143. 7.

4. The present hindrance that a man finds in the service of God, by an
affliction, is of much importance (by way of Argument) in such a season. For
Gods main inducement in all that he does, is his own glory. And it is a great
discovery of a gracious spirit, when a man desires not his own ease so much as
Gods glory; nor his own ease, but for, and in subservience unto Gods glory; in
such petitions there is much self-denial, and therefore such petitions please
God most* These kinds of pleas are very usual in the Saints and servants of
God through all the Scripture. In death (says David) there is no remembrance
of thee, in the grave who shall give thee thanks? Psalm 6. 5, And what profit
is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? shall the dust praise thee?
Psalm 30. 9. And Heman, Psalm 88. 10, 11, 12. Will thou show wonders to the
dead, etc. shall thy wonders be known in the dark, and thy righteousness in
the land of forgetfulness? In the same tune is Hezekiah, Isai. 38. 18, 19 The
living, the living, they shall praise thee: the grave cannot praise thee; Lord
(say they:) this sickness, this danger of life hazards the the loss of many
opportunities to do thee service in the World; therefore grant life and health.
When a man can go to God, and say in sickness, Lord, thou know I would live
to glorify th^e. I have done thee little service, I would fain do thee more
ere I go hence and be no more seen: cut me not off in the midst of my days,
etc. Psalm 102. 24. When I can ask competency of estate, not to spend on my
lusts, but to glorify God, benefit the Church, refresh the bowels of the
Saints; and that in poverty grieves us most, that we cannot do so; to tell God
so in prayer, how successful is it likely to be? When in spiritual desertion
I can say, Lord, I want a frame of spirit fit to glorify thee, I cannot pray,
read, hear, meditate, without woeful distractions; I dishonor religion by
drooping, etc. therefore lift up the light of thy countenance upon me, that I
may speak great things of thy name, that I may glorify thee, Psalm 51. 12. 13,
14, 15. and 142. 7. This Argument also affliction suppeditates.

5. The advantage which a man in such a condition may make, of an experience of
Gods goodness in hearing prayer, in such a needful time. If a man can plead
as David. Psalm 142. 7. Bring my soul out of prison (i. e.) of spiritual
troubles, and the righteous shall compass me about; and Psalm 51. 13. Deliver
me from blood guiltiness, O Lord, then will I teach transgressors thy ways,
and sinners (upon the report of thy mercy to me encouraging them) shall be
converted unto thee. So Psalm 32. 5, 6. For this, shall every one that is godly
pray unto thee in a time wherein thou may be found. If he can plead thus,
Lord, give me and others of thy people, an experiment upon which to trust thee
with the more boldness for time to come. It Is true, thy faithfulness needs
no such avouchers; but my faith, and that of others, needs such props: many of
thy people will be much refreshed by what thou shall do for me; I will tell
them what God has done for my soul. Set me up as a pattern of mercy, and
tender compassions to them that after shall believe: 1 Timothy 1. 16. And this
Argument also an afflicted condition principally administers; because
experience of God in an afflicted condition, is a double experience; it is more
notable, more encouraging then at any other time.

Now, it is true (in the last place) none of these arguments work any
alteration of God, (who is the same before we ask as when we ask; and because
he intends to give, fits and frames our hearts to ask) but it is much to us,
when in prayer we can urge such arguments, as may support our faith in
expectation of an answer: God is not the more disposed to give by such
arguments, but we are made more inclinable to believe we shall receive upon
such considerations; and by so believing, more disposed and qualified for the
mercies we beg at his hands. Arguments urged in prayer, stir up our faith,
and the more faith we pray withal, the nearer are we to an answer.

Use. I shall make but this one Use of the po^nt, to exhort all that hear me
this day, in stead of those many useless, improper and sinful ways, which
they are apt (as most people are) to take in a time of affliction, to resolve
upon this course. This let me press upon you from these few motives.

Mot. 1. It Is a course that will very much lighten the burden. Strangulat
inclusus dolor. -- Can a man (in this sense) carry fire in his bosom, and not
be burnt? Prove. 6. 27. Every passion (like the heat of the stomach, when it
has no food) feeds on the heart, and burns up the soul, that imprisons it. The
wind imprisoned in the earth, causes earthquakes, and fire pent up in a watery
cloud, thunder. No wonder, if grief, whiles it wants that kindly vent, torture
a man, raise heart*quakes.

Whereas (on the other side) when burdens of spirit have vent, that a man can
discharge them freely in prayer, they are much allayed. Prayer is an exercise
that warmes a man into an holy sweat, by which he sweetly breaths out the
malady that vexed him. If a man have but a faithful friend, that will suffer
him (under any pressure) to sit down by his side, and patiently tell him the
sad stories of his pressures, what a refreshment is it? But to see how a child
that has gotten a grievous fall, if he can but go to the father and show him
the wound, and complain of the mischance; if the father will take up the child
in his arms, and blow upon the part, it is well presently! How much more will
prayer ease an oppressed spirt by recourse to God, who is more friendly then a
thousand friends, and more fatherly then a thousand Fathers? His bowels are
beyond those of the tenderer sex, whose pity and compassion is commonly most
abundant, (as Jonathans) beyond the love of women, 2 Samuel 1. 26. and those of
the tenderest relation in that Sex. Can a woman, a mother, forget her sucking
child? etc. Yet will I not forget thee, Isai. 49. 15.

2 It Is a course that will mightily lay the distempers of our own spirits,
which (ordinarily) are the bellows that blow every suffering into a flame, and
make it a devouring fire, that should be but a refining one. A man's heart in an
affliction, is like the sea in a tempest, and (as that) disturbs it self, and
tosseth it self up and down in unquiet motions, one thought (as so many waves)
dashing in pieces another; it spares no body, falls out with men, quarrels with
mere senseless instruments, occasions and providence, takes pet at God
himself, and how many thousands more mad pranks of passion and discontent does
it play in such a condition? What a frantic, bedlam-frame (for the while) was
that of Jobs spirit, in his fit of impatience? To curse the day of his birth,
Alas, that day was past many years before, and never to return again, a mere
nonentity; he might with as much discretion have cursed latter Lammas (as we
use to say) a day that shall never be; as the day that is past, and can be
recalled no more. Then he falls out with the knees that dandled him, and the
breasts that nourished him, his mother, or (if we can imagine that the fashion
of putting out children to nurse was then brought into the world) his Nurse.
This was a worse distemper, an unnatural rage against those to whom he owed
most love. And a while after he falls out with God, and will needs reason the
case with him. Like a mad man in a throng, he deals blows about him, and cares
not (or at least considers not) where they light, on friend or foe. But when
God once brings us down upon our knees, O what a calm is there? How soon does
the Sovereignty of God, the holiness, justice, wisdom of God, compared with
our dependent condition, our baseness, guilt, folly, etc. (set before the eyes
of the soul when it is powered out in prayer) make us tame and meek* and
self-resigning and reconciled to Instruments, even blessing them that curse us,
and praying for them that despitefully use us, and laying our mouths in the
dust, that God may be glorified in our abasement.

And it is a special mercy of God, and excellency in prayer, that we become
thereby, so far Masters of our selves. And so much the greater, because it is
the greatest misery in the world to be torn to pieces (as Actoeon in the Poet)
by a man's own kennel of unmortified passions; to be condemned to eat up and
devour a man's self, because he cannot better his own condition, or hurt others;
to gnaw a flint, whence a man can get nothing but broken teeth; and (in a word)
to add affliction to a man's affliction, by acting (...), in vexing himself;
and tire a man's self (like a skittish Jade) more with flinging then with his
burden.

3 It is a comfortable evidence of, and help unto, the 1 Present
Sanctification, 2 Future good issue
of our afflictions.

1 Present sanctification of afflictions is both discovered and promoted, by
the kindly temper of the soul toward, and in the duty of prayer.

1 Discovered, because it actually fulfils one of those gracious ends which God
aims at in affliction, the bringing us upon our knees. Physic then does most
good, when it opens proper passages to vent noxious humors. Then the rod does
a child good, when it brings down his stubborn heart to his knees. Therefore we
leave not whipping till a child begs forgiveness.

And (on the other side) take this for a certain Rule. A prayerlesse affliction
is always an unsanctified affliction. It was then grievousest charge that Jobs
friends gave in against him, that in his affliction he restrained prayer, Job
15 4.

2 Promoted because it fetches a power from heaven to improve the rod. As
every other creature of God, so the rod is sanctified by the word and prayer.
But much of this has been touched upon before. Wherefore I pass it here.

2. The future good issue of an affliction may be concluded, and is promoted by
the prayer fullness of the Spirit in trouble And this issue is,

1. Partly the glory and honor of our graces, arising from such a trial: it is
in prayer that a suffering Saint most acts faith, patience, humility, sorrow
for sin, etc. The honor of our graces (as the honor of Knighthood in
England) is usually received upon the knee. And no wonder, for Prayer is the
paloestra, the arena, the theater, the artilleryyard of all our graces, in
which they show their activity.

2. Partly the removal of trouble it self, God (like a good Physician) till
we sweat kindly, lays on more clothes, and applies more heat: but when we do
so, he withdraws them as fast, in such a method and proportion as our necessity
will permit. I will not (says he) contend for ever, nor will I be always
wroth, lest the spirit should fail before me, and the soul which I have made.
Let God march never so much like an enemy toward a poor creature, yet he is so
generous an enemy, that he never puts to the sword a submitting supplicating
foe. As it is said of the Lion, -- Satis est prostrasse, etc.

Ira suum finem, cum jacet hostis, habet.

That prostration abates his rage, and he never preyes upon a man that he finds
fallen flat upon the ground. Sure the Lord will not be so cruel, as to give no
quarter to a poor creature begging it at his hands. You know how Benhadad
escaped, by casting himself upon the mercy of the King of Israel. Coe t^ou,
and do likewise. For the Lord delights not to grieve or vex the children of
men, Lam. 3. 33. He looks on men, and if any say, I have finned and perverted
that which is right, and it profited me not; He will deliver his soul from
going down into the pit, and his life shall see the light, Job 33. 27, 28.

I might add diverse other motives, but the reasons may all be revived here as
inducements: and I hasten.

Object. But here lies the sadness of my condition, I am under grievous
afflictions, and when I set my self to complain of them to God, I cannot pray,
my tongue is strangely tied, that I have scarce a word to say: what shall I
think of my felf? What shall I do in such a case?

Answ. Thou that thus complainest art either

1. An utter stranger to the duty of prayer at other times; or,

2. One that at other times have been well acquainted with God, and that duty,
but now art in an unwonted deliquy, or swound of spirit, that thy wonted
spirits fail thee to perform it. And according to this difference of persons,
must my Answer to this Case be different.

(1) Thou that art a stranger to all acquaintance with God in this way,

1. Look on this as a just band of God upon thee, (and that which is intended
by him, and should be received by thee as an heavy aggravation of his present
judgment upon thy soul) that thou, who when thou wast free, would not pray,
and did neglect to get acquaintance with God, should now be so shut up as
not to be able to speak a word for thy self in so needful a time. God deals
with thee as justly as may be. You would not pray, says God, and now you shall
not pray. And it is a sad symptom that (at least for the present) God intends
little good to such a soul, that he leaves at this pass. For if, when God
intends no good to a people, he forbids his servants to pray for them, and
stops the mouths of his Prophets, as Jer. 7. 16. and 11. 14. and 14. 11. Much
more, when he restrains a man in misery from speaking in his own condition. For
when God intends to hear, he prepares the heart to pray, Psalm 10. 17.

2. Be humbled and afflicted greatly before the Lord for the former neglect of
acquaintance with him, and know, that God intends this straightening of thy
spirit in so needful a time of trouble, as thy greatest affliction. Take it
then as such, and account it thy greatest burden, that God should be so far
displeased with thee* as that he will not only not hear thee when thou
speak, but also shut up thy mouth that thou can not so much as speak to
him: As when a Prince bids stop the mouth of a Petitioner. As hardening the
heart judicially, is the greatest judgment that can befall a man on this side
Hell* because it shuts a double door on a man to exclude him from mercy; both
a door of mercy and admittance on Gods part (during that condition;) and a
door of repentance and penitent addresses, on his own: So does this judicial
shutting up the heart against prayer, put a carnal man in the inner prison of
judgment and wrath, and puts his feet in the stocks, so that the soul, which
ordinarily goes to God on the feet of prayer, cannot now stir so much as one
step toward relief. Now therefore acknowledge and bewail thy former neglect
of calling upon God, whiles he was near. God is farther off from unconverted
sinners in adversity then in prosperity, because then it is a time of judgment;
and it is part of their plague, that God will laugh at their destruction, Prove.
1. 26. 27. Be-fool thy self, and be-beast thy self before God, that thou
should be so improvident, as to neglect the providing of any materials to
build thee a shed against a storm, or to think that thou should never see a
time in which thou should have need of God. Say, Lord, thou art just, but I
am wicked. It is righteous with thee to stamp my punishment with the very image
of my sin. Thou art righteous, though thou should never open my lips or my
heart, though thou should seal my condemnation to my soul, by sealing up
both my heart and mouth and not suffering me so much as to open my mouth to
petition for a pardon.

3. Earnestly g^oan and sigh hefore the Lord (as thou can) desiring him that
he will not take against thee the advantage which thy provocations have given
him, that he will enlarge thy heart, and bestow upon thee the Spirit of
supplication. And who knows whether in praying that thou may pray, God may
not teach thee to pray? It Is not for nothing that God bids even carnal men to
pray, Act. 8. ^. Though they cannot pray acceptably without the Spirit, sure,
it is because (in his ordinary way of dispensation) the Spirit of prayer is
given in praying, as the spirit of faith is given in hearing, though we cannot
hear acceptably, without faith. Me thinks the words hold forth no less, Luke
11. 13. He gives the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. We cannot ask the
Spirit as we ought, without the Spirit: yet we get the Spirit in asking.

4. Think not thy present estate utterly irremediable. For (though there be a
time when God will not be found of sinners, though they seek the blessing with
tears, Heb. 12. 17. yet) know that there is no time, in which he excludes a
penitent and sincere hearted petitioner. And the reason why many a profane
Esau fails in finding, is because he fails in seeking.

If thy heart be now so affected, as is before described, know, God has in
part heard thee, in giving thee an heart so seriously affected with its own
barrenness, deadness, and impenitency: and know farther, that barrenness
felt, and complained of, and groaned under, is no more barren, but
(occasionally) fruitful in many sweet affections, though yet thou be
straightened in expressions. And there may be more prayers in one groan from
an heart that is sensible of its own inability to pray, then in many large
discourses and ^rations to God from a formal and customary devotion.

5. Should thou dye in this condition, with thy face toward heaven, yet thou
may dye with hope, that thy present seed time of tears shall end in an
harvest of joy; that though thy mouth be shut on earth, yet (seeing God has
opened thy heart) it shall also be opened in heaven. The Thiefs prayer on the
Cross was an effectual prayer, though but a short one. Let that keep thee from
despair; but let it not encourage thee to presume* He that made but one prayer
in his life, and that at the hour of death, yet that one prayer prevailed to
open Paradise. I fear his example has occasionally shut it to thousands of
presuming sinners, that have presumed upon the same admittance; yet, as to
thee, whose heart God has opened, I dare present it as an encouragement. Tell
me not, God opens not thy mouth; if the heart be open, it is far more then if
the mouth were never so enlarged. One sigh in secret of a broken heart, is more
then many loud howlings of frighted Formalists and Hypocrites. That key that
opens the heart, will open heaven too.

6 (And lastly) Now resolve (in the strength of Christ and the Covenant of
Grace, which has laid help upon him for thee) that if ever thou get out of the
present trouble, if ever thou be enabled to break these bars of indisposition
and streightnednesse of spirit, thou will never be so neglectful of maintaining
the acquaintance thou have gotten with God, as thou have been in getting it.
And take heed for time to come, that thou perform thy resolutions in that
kind. Take heed, prove not so ungrateful or ill-natured, as to look no more
after God when once the present turn is served, and thou think thou can go
alone. Let God see that thou seek his acquaintance for his own worth and
excellency, not merely for mercenary ends, and thy own necessities* Lest God
deal with thee for time to come, as men use to deal with those that haunt them
only when they have need of them; lest he resolve not to be at home when thou
knockest for him henceforward, and avoid all occasions of being spoken withal;
walk on the other side of the street, that he may not meet thee, and be
occasioned to take notice of thee, and know thee afar off, look high, Psalm
138. 6.
and keep distance: and either in judgment shut up thy mouth and heart to
prayer again (which he may easily do, it is but withholding the supply of the
Spirit) and thou art as dead as a doornaile (as we use to say) or else open it
in a greater judgment, to let thee tire and weary out thy self with such cries
and howlings as he is resolved to turn the deaf ear unto. And that is an
heavy judgment to have the mouth opened in prayer, and heaven shut against it,
Lam. 3. 8.

(2) If thou be one of that holy generation of Seekers (not above duty, but
under it) Psalm 24. 6. Have by a constant intercourse with God, entered an holy
acquaintance with him in former times, and therefore take it ill that thou
can neither send to him, nor hear from him now; that, at so needful a time
thou have lost thy wonted correspondence, and can not (because all thy wonted
posts of holy and flaming affections and importunate expressions, are stopped)
give him intelligence of thy condition.

1 Do not judge over harshly of thy self because thereof. For it is a thing
under the greatness of trouble, incident to the best of Gods Saints; and is
not so much to be imputed to them, as to the burdens that oppress them.
Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent. Little troubles are loud, but great
ones dumb. 'Twas Hezekiahs case, Isaiah 38. 14. Lord, I am oppressed: The
Hebrew word, (...), being a Verb of the third Person, and Feminine Gender,
(says one of the Rabbis) has relation ^o (...), ver. 12. which we translate
a pining sickness; and it is as much as if he had said, My wasting Disease has
so spent my very spirits, that I am grown a mere stock, so dull and stupid that
I cannot perform any duty of Religion as I would. And it is the usual complaint
of most of Gods people, that the weakness of their bodies in such a condition
much deadneth the vigor and activity of their spirits. 'Twas Jobs case chap.
6. 3. My grief is heavier then the sand of the sea, therefore my words are
swallowed up. Verba mea semesa sunt, (so some render the word (...)) fract a
sunt, corrupta sunt; therefore my words are broken, mangled words. Broken
expressions are the very gobbets of a broken heart. Others read it as we, Verba
mea absorbentur, my words are devoured or swallowed up. My sorrow feeds so upon
my spirits, that it devours my very words, and does not leave me so much as the
slender ease of a complaint. A metaphor taken from the quicksands in the sea,
that swallow up a ship, hulk, and masts, and sails, and passengers, and all,
at a morsel (as it were) to which he alludes, as appears in that he compares
his grief to the sands in the former part.

This heart-oppression, like a known melancholy disease in the night, with
which some persons are troubled, so oppresses the breast, that a man cannot
speak. This was Hemans disease (an holy man too) Psalm. 77. 4. I am so troubled
that I cannot speak. Nay, (farther) a Saint may be so low under hatches in
affliction, especially in soultroubles, under the Spirit of Bondage, or
spiritual desertion, that his very eyes are shut as well as his mouth. Mine
iniquities (says David) have taken hold on me, so that I cannot look up, Psalm.
40. 12.

If this be thy case, then be sure, God pities thee the more, by how much the
less thou art able to speak for thy self. As we use to pity little children and
persons that are dumb, and are sensible of the injuries done to them more then
to others. Alas, poor souls (we use to say) they cannot speak for themselves.
Nay, we pity an horse, and such other unreasonable creatures, when misused upon
the same account. Alas, poor dumb thing, who would use a dumb creature so? Sure
then God must needs be more tenderly pitiful to a soul in such a condition. And
our Mediator, our Advocate in heaven, must needs be the more eloquent in
pleading for the Saints his Clyents, when they are under such a tongue-tyed
condition. Alas, (says Christ) poor soul? Father hear me for him, he cannot
speak for himself. His condition speaks aloud for him, because it hinders him
from speaking.

2 Know, there be secret ways of acquainting God with thy straights and
pressures, when the more visible and sensible outlets and avenues of the soul
are all blocked up. They that are skilled in the Military Art, have sometimes
shot intelligence in a bullet, in the head of an Arrow, when the City or Castle
has been besieged on all parts, so closely that no ordinary way of
correspondence with their friends has been left open. And this intelligence,
though it be short, and small in bulk, yet may be as pithy, and as much in
substance and use, as a whole sheet of paper written all over, We starve; or,
We want Ammunition, or men to man our works; so, A few days, and (without
relief) we can hold out no longer; is as good intelligence as can be in such a
case. It may be thou can not tell God a large story how it is with thee, nor
limne out thy sad case in lively colors, can not paint thy present death to
the life, or give light enough by thine expressions to discover the darkness of
thy afflictions, as David and Hezekiah have done when they recovered their
tongues again, but yet thou can say, Lord I want, Lord I am sick, Lord I
faint, Lord I dye, etc. Thou can, (with the Publican) say, Lord, be merciful
to me a sinner. Luke 18. 13. With David in his troubled condition, But thou,
Lord, how long? Psalm. 6. 3. With Hezekiah under his fainting fit, thou can
chatter, Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me, or ease me, Isai. 38. 14. And
if thou can not do so much, yet thou can set thy self as in the presence
of God, and even out of the mouth of hell look toward his holy Temple; cast a
begging look, (as children do toward some Sweet meats they dare not ask for)
toward the Throne of Grace; so Jonah did, Jonah 2. 4. Thou can sigh and
groan. Now this is sufficient intelligence to God, whose blessed Spirit speaks
in these groans, and he understands, (...), the general bent, inclination, and
affection of the Spirit; and from it can pick out his meaning, because he
searches the heart, Rom 8. 27. As a Nurse can make english of the stammering
and broken speech of the child, nay, the mother sometimes knows by the looks
of the child what its mouth waters for; and a skilful Antiquary can write an
History out of the broken Inscriptions of old coins and Monuments of
Antiquity, because he is acquainted, and uses to commune with those kind of
fragments. And take this for a certain rule, a man may have much of the spirit
of prayer, who has very little of the Gift of prayer, and so may be
straightened very much in this, when his heart runs over with the abundance of
that.

3 Yet is not this condition to be rested in (it being that that keeps the soul
in a famishing estate) but the Saints of God ought by all means to endeavor
the recovery of their freedom and liberty of spirit and expression in duty; as
knowing, that much of the comfort, support and strength of their spirits is
abated whiles they are thus tongue-tyed.

And therefore (for recovery out of this spiritual distemper) I would prescribe
these Helps

[1] Examine carefully what it is that streightens the spirit, and shuts the
mouth: which may be

(1) The greatness of your burden (as before) And that you shall know by these
two Marks

1 If it indispose you to all other employments as well as to prayer. Thus
'twas with the Author of Ps. 102, the Title of the Psalm tells you his
condition; he was one whose spirit was overwhelmed; and how does that appear?
My heart (says he) is smitten like grass, and withered: (a metaphor taken from
frosts that nip the grass, and intercept the juice that should come from the
root to the blades, and so it becomes withered) so (says he) the extremity of
my trouble withers and shrivels up my very heart; so that I am like a dead
saplesse thing. But it may be he was only so in the matters of God, and then it
might possibly be his sin. No, he was so in all humane affairs too. I forget
(says he) to eat my bread, verse 4. No wonder (says he) if I be withered in
the affairs of my mind, when I grow even careless of my very body, [I forget
to eat my bread.]

2. If it shut up the heart in complaining to man, as well as in complaints to
God. A troubled soul goes to a godly Minister, it may be, and thinks to utter
to him all that is in the heart, and fain would unloade it self in his ears;
but finds it self so straightened, it can scarce say a word, that it came for
(and that not merely through fear, or temptation (as at other times) moving it
to conceal the Devils counsel, but) out of distraction and oppression of
spirit. Now if this same soul find it self in the same condition before God
when it sets to prayer, it may lay the blame hereof on the greatness of its
burden, and content it self in the assurance of as kind an acceptance of its
sighs and groans, as if they were drawn out in long prayers. But if the
straightness be not toward men or other employments, but only in duties to
Godward; then enquire after farther causes, whereof take these following.

(2.) The admission of some late grievous sin, that yet is unrepented of.
Guilt is a tongue-tying thing. When the man in the Gospel, was taken without a
wedding garment, the Text says, (...), he was speechless, Mat. 22. 12. his
mouth was stopped with a gagge. Great sins are great gaggs. And it is not only
so with the unregenerate, but with the Saints also. See it in David's example,
Psalm 51. 14, 15. Deliver me (says he) from bloods O Lord; then my tongue
shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. Open my mouth, etc. David's lips had a
padlock upon them, guilt had locked them up: He dared not speak to God, whom he
had so grievously offended. And no wonder, if Saints dare not speak where they
are sure not to speed; if they be dumb when they know God is deaf. David knew
well enough, that sins make Gods ear heavy, as he informs us, Psalm 66. 18.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer? and the Prophet
Isaiah tells us no less, Isai. 59. 1, 2. The Spirit of prayer also will be
grieved, and depart from us, if we defile his lodging; he is a pure, an holy
Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30.

In this case, the counsel of Zophar to Job, 11. 13, 14. is very good. If thou
prepare thine heart, and stretch out thy hands toward God, If iniquity be in
thy hand, put it far away, etc. So shall thou lift up thy face [confidently]
etc.

Search out the sin and remove it by renewed repentance, and the fresh
application of the blood of Christ by faith (which is the fountain of
Evangelical repentance) and then try again; the Spirit of Grace that enables
thee to mourn, will be a Spirit of Supplication too, Zech. 12. 10.

(3.) Sometimes Gods glory is the cause of thy restaints of spirit, God
intending to teach thee that all thy enlargements are from him alone: We often
pray in the strength of natural parts, or gifts, at the best; and it may be we
idolize these last in our selves and others. Now God may (in his wisdom)
leave us to straightenednesse of spirit in prayer, to make us less depending
upon those helps And this he will do (to choose) at such a time, when
afflictions are heavy upon us; because that is a time (if any be) when it may
be supposed, necessity will enlarge parts and gifts to the utmost. Afflictions
are usually incitements, and occasions of enlargement in prayer. God makes
account, that at that time he shall hear from his people, Hos. 5. 15. and in
our straits commonly we give God many fair words, are rhetorical more then
ordinary, flatter with our lips, Psalm 78. 36. A Scholar at the University,
that seldom writes, and it may be (if he do oftener then ordinary, yet) writes
curtell'd letters to his friends at other times; yet against Quarter-day, when
he needs his pension, will be sure not to fail of a large letter, and a bill
of expenses annexed. Hence oftentimes the people of God are very fondly
conceited of afflictions; and under deadness of spirit, are too apt to wish
them, out of a conceit that when they come they are able to make great use of
them to quicken their hearts to prayer. But the Lord chasteneth their foolish
expectations diverse times, by stopping their mouths under those very troubles
whence they hoped for great improvements and enlargements: hereby teaching
them, that the Spirit of supplication as well as the Spirit of sanctification,
blows where and when he lists, John 3. 8.

This case whenever it befalls any (as we may guess when it does so by our
former valuation of gifts, and conceits of improving afflictions, etc.) calls
upon such persons to give God the glory of his own peculiar attribute, the
preparer of the heart; and the Spirit, of its own office, the Spirit of
Supplication; and call for, and rely on divine assistance merely in that work.

4. Sometimes, misapprehensions of God, may be the cause of straightness in
duty. Thoughts that God is our enemy, etc. And then we deal with God as we do
with our best friends many times in an humor; we have a conceit that they have
done us a discourtesie, or are fallen out with us, (it may be upon slight
reports, or other as slender evidence) and then our stomachs presently swell so
big, that we cannot so much as speak to them. Pride and discontent will so
swell a man's stomach (like spleen winds) up to a man's mouth, that he cannot
speak, except to belch out the language of discontent and passion.

Sometimes we conceive God so offended at us, that he casts away our prayer,
Lam. 3. 8. And where a man has little hope to speed, he will have very little
heart to speak; whereas hope to prevail is the most fluent fountain of
Rhetoric that can be; thus want of Faith makes the voice of prayer, stick in
the teeth, as we use to say. The Spirit of Adoption only, is the Spirit of
Supplication; and a man cannot pray so much to the purpose, as when he can call
God Father. Then we cry, it is (...), Rom 8. 15. When David was in that grievous
trouble, Psalm 116. What lets his tongue loose in prayer? I believed, says he,
therefore, I spoke, v. 10. Friends; prayer is the child of Faith, not Fancy;
not the voice of Invention, but Affection; begotten not in the brain of an
Orator, but in the heart of a child. A child is very copious and fluent in
expression commonly when he complains to a Father; but will lie still, and cry
it out in a sullen mood, and say never a word, if a stranger ask, what ails
it?

The cure in this case is. Look over all your evidences, remember days past,
and the years of the right hand of the most high; thy songs in the night, and
his mercy and lovingkindnesse in the day. Call to mind promises of everlasting
love, in, and notwithstanding the heaviest afflictions; apply them and labor to
urge them. Challenge God upon old acquaintance, as Christ, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. 46. O Lord, how comes it to pass now, that I
have lost my acquaintance with thee? Lord, return and visit me with thy ancient
loving kindnesses, Psalm. 25. 6.

[2] After discovery and removal of the impediments and obstructions aforesaid,
Study your own case distinctly and clearly. A man that has but confused
notions of a thing, is not able to make a clear and distinct relation of it.
Sometimes we cannot pray because we know not what to ask, Romans 8. 26. We know
not what to ask, because we know not distinctly what ails us; troubled we are,
but we cannot tell why. As a man diverse times in distemper of body; let a
Physician come to him, ask him how he does? he will tell him, Sick Sir, very
sick. But ask him, where the seat of his distemper most lies? he cannot tell, he
is very ill, and that is all that he can say. Thus many a man is troubled in
mind indistinctly and confusedly. Now such a man cannot but be shut up in
prayer. The head is clouded, and that cloudeth the heart. And as in a mist, a
man sees Objects at a distance that fright him, but (because he sees them in a
mist) he can give no distinct intelligence of them: So here. And oftentimes
melancholy of body concurs to hinder, by darkning the judgment, and distracting
the fancy.

[3] Study Gods Promises, and let them dwell in you plentifully. And especially
such Promises as most concern your condition, so discovered. When David has a
Promise, he never wants a Prayer. How often, Psalm 119. does he urge God upon
his Word, ver, 25, 28, 58, 116, 169. The Word is the quiver of all those holy
Arrows, by which a straightened soul shoots intelligence to Heaven. Prayer is
nothing but the Echo of a Promise [I will ease thee says Christ, Matthew. 11.
28. [O ease me,] says the soul. [Wait, and God shall strengthen thy heart,]
says the Word; Psalm. 27. ult. [Strengthen my heart,] says the soul. [My grace
is sufficient for thee,] says the Lord, 2 Cor. 12. 9, [Let thy grace be
sufficient for me,] says the soul of a praying Christian. Get a Promise, and
thou have a great deal of cloth for prayer it lacks but cutting out.

[4.] Stir up the grace of God that is in thee.

1 By Meditation. Meditation is the bellows that sets grace a flaming.
Meditate upon the forementioned Subjects, thy own present condition, Gods love
and Promises; add to them thy frequent past experiences, the nature, use,
necessity of maintaining intelligence with God in thy condition; the nature,
use, ends of an afflicted estate; the Duties that God expects from thee in it,
and many more subjects of this or a like nature. And thou will find it with
thee as with David Psalm 39. 3. My heart was hot, I mused, the fire kindled,
then I spoke with my tongue. He was dumb before, but the heart grows so full
now, it must needs out, or 'twill break for want of vent. Set before thee (as
matters of Meditation) the chapters and places of Scripture that have been
penned by the Saints in thy condition.

2 By frequent essays. Thou can not pray. How often have thou tried? It may
be once or twice, and then grown weary. Try again, man, and again, and again,
till thou can. Some never work well till they are warm.

Obj. But I can say nothing.

Answ. Then go and complain, Lord, I would pray, but I can say nothing. Then
look out a Promise, and turn it into a Prayer, and if thou can do no more,
rise again, and anon fall to it again. Thus children learn to spell, read, and
write. What if thou go three, four, twenty times together, and be able to say
but a few words, and those still the same, Christ did so in his Agony. In such a
case, if thou have a good form by thee of another man's, I know not why (at
least) the viewing (if not use) of it may not quicken the Spirit of Prayer in
thee. C^u^ches may help us when we are lame, that hinder us when we are sound.

3 If thou caust get a godly experienced friend to pray with thee, discover thy
case to him as well as thou can, and let him spread it before the Lord, and
labor thou to join with him. Iron sharpneth iron, so does the face of a man
his friend. In such holy communion one prayer begets another. Two lying
together grow both warm. Or get such friends to pray for thee, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
Paul acknowledges a great deal of help from the Corinthians prayers.

A diligent use of these means, and frequent application of thy self to the use
of them* will by degrees recover thy lost acquaintance with God again.

FINIS.
The Contents.
THe first Treatise concerning the Spirit of Bondage lays down these two
Theses. 1. That the convictions, concussions and terrors which bring a sinner
before conversion under a spiritual bondage to the sad apprehensions of the
curse, and wrath of God, due to him by the Law, because of the guilt of sin,
are ordinarily the works of Gods blessed Spirit. 2. That, In order to the
conversion of sinners, it is the ordinary, and usual way of the Holy Spirit of
God, to become thus a Spirit of Bondage before he becomes a Spirit of Adoption.


To the first of these, way is made by a preface, containing a brief
explication, and vindication of the meaning of the Apostle Paul, Romans 8. 15.
where he makes mention of this Spirit of Bondage, wherein I state this Question.

Quest. What the Spirit of Bondage is in the Apostles sense, and the fear that
proceeds from it? Chap. 1.

The Thesis cleared. 1. By showing how this work, as it is managed by the
Spirit of God, differs from a like work of Satan. And (in the close thereof,)
2. By enquiring whether this work always ends in conversion? Chap. 2.


A few words are added to prove it, Chap. 3.

Practical Corollaries from the Premises. 1. By way of support, Chap. 4. 2. By
way of Caution in several branches. 0 1. Not to harden the heart against the
Spirits soft voice. 2. Not to mis-apprehend our own case, under bondage. 3. Not
to judge others in that case. 4. Not to break the Spirits bonds, but by his
leave, whether it be, 1. By profane, or vain diversions and avocations of our
hearts from being serious and through therein, Chap. 5. 2. Or by over-greedy
grasping after peace and comfort, ere we are prepared for it, Whence arises,




A Practical Question, concerning the measures of humiliation necessarily
required to conversion, and comfort; and concerning fitness of the soul for
comfort, Chap. 6.

The 3. 4, 5, 6. Corolaries. Viz. By way of exhortation. By way of conviction
of the true use of the ministry of the Law. By way of plea for the frequent
seeming peevishness of poor souls refusing comfort. By way of humiliation, to
such as herein have formerly, it may be frequently stifled convictions and
fears* c. 7.


The second Thesis explained. 1. By enquiring into the nature of the work of
the Spirit of Bondage, where conviction is described, chapter 8. 2. By assigning
the means of this work, chapter 9. Evidence given of the Spirits usual working this
way, c. 10.


Qu. Upon what designs the Spirit most commonly works in this method.
Discovered in twelve particulars, c. 11.

A Question concerning the measure of this work, chapter 12.

Another concerning the state of a soul under this work, whether gracious or
not. c. 13.

An objection answered from Christ's invitation of sinners to him, without
requiring such conditions as necessary to their acceptance, c. 14.

Improvement of the Thesis. 1. Early converts are encouraged, c. 15. 2. Touchy
hearers are reproved and the public ministerial application of the Law to the
consciences of men vindicated from mistaken inconveniences, as 1. That it is a
doctrine not proper for Saints who are the chiefest part of an auditory, 2.
That it may occasion the grieving of many, whom God would not have grieved, c.
16.
3. Converts examined, whether real or pretended; and abundance of our days
found suspicious, and seriously dealt withal, c. 17. 4. Persons under a Spirit
of Bondage supported from the nature of the work under which they lie, it being
designed by the Holy Spirit to a further end. Satisfied in a doubt or two. 1.
Concerning the possibility of losing those impressions without a good issue. 2.
Concerning the present symptoms by which the issue of present trouble of
conscience may be ghessed at, c. 18.
5. Persons that have past through the pikes, and are gotten out of the
wilderness, cheered in the remembrance of their past experiences. c. 19. 6.
Convinced souls under the hammer, and in the fire, cautioned to take heed how
they defeat the Spirits designs, and frustrate his attempts upon them in order
unto a through conversion. In seven particulars, c. 20. 7. Four sorts of
persons are exhorted. (1.) Those that have gone through this work with fruit
and benefit. Whose main duties, four. chapter 21. (2.) Those that have gone through
it fruitlesly, without a sound and effectual conversion. Whose duties are 1.
Deep humiliation upon several moving considerations from the sadness of that
condition. chap. 22. 2 A serious endeavor to recover those lost impressions
again.
A practical Question hence arising, discussed. Objections against this course,
answered, 1 From present joy. 2 From esteem of high seize with others. 3
From possibility of salvation without it chap. 23.
Objections of another nature answered. From hazard of Gods not owning such an
Apostate; which hazard seems to be heightened by a fear of having sinned the sin
against the Holy Ghost. chap. 24. (3) Those that are under this condition also
exhorted. 1 To be patient under Gods hammer, till he reduce them to the shape
he intends. 2 To keep up hope; where is (by the way) enquired, what kind of
hope precedes faith. 3 To wait in hope; where (by the way) how. 4 To lie under
Means; and what means most proper; where a Question, Whether an unconverted man
may pray. 5 To seek conversion in them rather then comfort 6. To choose some
means more then other; and which, 7. To observe every improvement with
thankfulness. 8. To meditate on most rowzing, affecting truths. A scheme of
some such truths 9. To take heed of a double snare in particular callings. 10.
To pick company. 11. To be open hearted to choice friends. 12. To take special
care, that how little progress soever they make, it be sincere. 13. To be
humble under improvements. c. 25. 26.
(4.) Those that are altogether unacquainted with this work. Where a practical
Question, What a natural man can do toward his own conviction, in order to
conversion. Answered in 10 particulars, c. 27.
The intendment of the Answers cleared in some particulars. And some farther
Objections answered, c. 28.


THe Second Treatise concerning the Spirit of Adoption has four general Theses
or Propositions.

Thesis I. That the Spirit of Bondage to Gods Elect ends in a Spirit of
Adoption.
Adoption described, chap. 1.

The work of the Spirit of Adoption explained in particulars. chap. 2.

Two practical Queries concerning the extent of the Thesis.

Qu. 1. Whether the Spirit of Adoption perform all those works in and upon
every Elect person or no?

Quest. 2. Whether all those works be wrought on every one of the Elect that
has gone through a Spirit of Bondage, chap. 3.

Four heads of Arguments to prove the Thesis in the sense so explained. chap. 4.

Six Reasons of Gods so doing. chapter 5.

A Question, De modo, How the Spirit of God testifies our Adoption. Whether
Immediately Mediately.


1 Immediate testimony of the Spirit allowed, with limitations. 2 Mediate
preferred, and that twofold. chapter 6
Another Question tending to the distinct discovery of the way of the Spirits
working in his mediate and argumentative evidence. chap. 7

And a third Question.

Quest. Whether the ground of this testimony of the Spirit be from absolute
promises, and general offers of the Gospel, or conditional promises and special
Marks? chapter 8.

Improvement of the Thesis: Where 1 How this should render the thoughts of
souls under Bondage reconciled to their present condition. Where a Question or
Case concerning Election, as the Doctrine thereof is made use of by Satan in
discouraging tentations. chap. 9. 2 Encouragement to all converted, by way of a
Spirit of Bondage, to endeavor after the witness of the Spirit of Adoption.
With Motives to quicken them. chap. 10.


Directions concerning the means how to obtain a Spirit of Adoption in its
witnessing act; where is premised something of Removing Hindrances, and what
those are: The five first, chap. 11. Five more, chap. 12. The last Hindrance:
and some Cases of Conscience concerning scrupulousness of Conscience, how far
to be attended. chap. 13.


The Directions are: 1 Exercising frequent acts of Relyance. Where a Question
answered, Whether, and How a man can rely without assurance Faith in four noble
acts. The order of them. chap. 14. 2 Seeking Gods face in Ordinances The Word.
Prayer; with particulars concerning it. chap. 15. Sacraments: where a practical
Question. Quest. Whether our Baptism administered in Infancy be any (or (at
least) so lively an) help to Assurance, as at riper years: And how it may be
thus improved. Chap. 16.

Some practical cases concerning the Lords Supper. Quest. How it can be used as
a means to this assuring testimony, seeing it is supposed necessary to have
that to fit a man for a worthy participation of it. Qu. 2. How far the
examination required before that Sacrament favors the Doctrine of that supposed
necessity. Chap. 17.

3 Taking notice of light at the least cranny. 4 Endeavoring after more of the
work of the Spirit of Sanctification. 5 Following the guidance of the Spirit
universally. Where a Case of Conscience, how the motions of the Spirit
especially in this affair, may be discerned from tentations, and the motions of
a deluded heart. Chap. 18.


A closing Case.

What is to be thought of a man that as to his own sense and others, lives and
dies in darkness, without any experience of this testimony? chap. 19.

Thesis II. That a Spirit of Adoption is a certain evidence of a state of
Adoption.
Cleared by Scripture Reasons.


The first of which yields occasion to state this Question.

Qu. Whether a man may be assured of his Sonship a priori, from the first acts
of faith and repentance in conversion. ch 20

A Case Whether this evidence be so certain as to exclude all doubting? chap.
21.

Popish Doctrine concerning doubting and uncertainty, confuted.

Our own certainty, and assurance of salvation, examined. Where several Cases.

Case 1. How to distinguish the testimony of the Spirit from Satanical or self
delusion.

Under which Head it is again enquired. 1 How far Satan may go in giving
assurance, Immediately. Where, a test of revelations, and comfort arising
hence. Mediately, from the Word. And
2 How far we to our selves, from Reason only. chap. 22.


This Case branched into particulars.

Quest. 1. How to know a false assurance when it is collected from Scripture,
by the collusions of Satan, and a man's own heart, to be false. chap. 23.

Quest. How to know whether the true assurance that a man has of his own good
condition, be from the collections of his own reason merely, or from the
witness of the Spirit? With Cautions about it. chap. 24.

The Duty of keeping these Evidences of the Spirit once attained, pressed with
several Motives. chap. 25.

Quest. How this may be done? Where 1 The Records of these Evidences. chap. 26
2 The means to maintain them, chap. 27 3 The Moths that eat them out, chapter 28 4
The use of them in a livelihood of Love, Thankfulness Obedience, chapter 29



The Duty of improving them urged.

Quest. How? Answered in two particulars, 1 By living on them, a life of
Sanctification Consolation.
2 By pleading them. chap. 30


The Duty of recovering lost Assurance added, wherein also

Quest. How? Answered 1 Rest not in its absence. 2 Enquire how it was lost, and
how that enquiry is to be made Several tokens to furnish an Hue and Cry after
that sin, that has robbed a soul of such a Jewel, chap. 31 3 What to be done
in case some sin have stolen it away 4 5 6. What to be done in case no
appearing sin occasion it


A Case, How faith may be exercised in desertion: Several things proper to be
believed then. As also three other Directions, chap: 32

Thesis III Gods Holy Spirit after he has once been a Spirit of Adoption,
never again becomes a Spirit of Bondage to the same soul;
Explained.

Saints after conversion and assurance, subject To troubles of consciences: yea
To Bondage: Yea, and that longer and greater then ever before, upon sive
Reasons.


How far the Spirit causes them, and how far not, chap. 33

Scripture Reason
Proof of the Thesis, chap. 34

A Question stated; viz. What then is the cause of legal terrors in the Saints
after conversion and assurance, c. 35 And how they befall them


Saints convinced of folly in giving way to such after terrors, chap: 36

And that such troublesome thoughts, may be cast out without disputing; as
blasphemous and Atheistical thoughts (by the common advise of Divines) should
be.

Case. How far I may safely do this.

Case. How to know the Work of Satan, undermining assurance, from the work of
the holy Spirit, putting a man upon a warrantable and wary self-examination.
chap. 37

Grounds upon which Satan endeavors to weaken assurance, answered.

Case. How far a soul soundly converted, and (possibly) assured, may fall into
sin? Whether into gross sins? Whether into the same sins as before? What regret
and reluctance in a renewed conscience against sin; and how differenced from
that of a natural conscience terrified. chapter 38


Case of afflictions and tentations stated, as they may be laid for grounds of
questioning a renewed state, chapter 39

Case of not hearing prayers (so far also) stated.

Case of inability to pray, thus far also stated, chap. 40

Case of decays in spiritual affections, deadness, burthensomnesse of Duty,
etc. (thus far also) stated

Well meaning contradictions of good souls

Complaints, whether hypocritical or no, chap, 41

Case, How in a supposed decay of spiritual affections, a saint may know
whether he be dead or no?

A farther case, whether, and how far an hypocrite may delight in the tidings
of comfort from God, c. 42.

Case. Whether (in stead of growing) a Saint may not decay in the actings of
some graces, and yet those very graces grow more habitually and radically
strong in him. c. 43.

Case. How a Saint may in the midst of his most sensible actual decays, know
whether the habits of grace grow or no?

Saints comforted, by an inference of Saints incapacity of total and final
Apostasy from the premises. c. 44.

Thesis IV. One principal work of the Spirit of Adoption, is to enliven and
embolden the soul in prayer.
Qu. How, and in what sense this work is the main or chief work?

Qu. What act of this Spirit produces it?

Qu. Whether the Spirit thus work in all Saints?

Saints in darkness, how far capable of being lively and bold in duty? c. 45.

Some evidences of the Thesis. c. 46.

Three cases stated

Case 1. Whether in all Saints that have once been assured, there be always
the same measure of boldness, and fervency?

Case 2. If not, whence proceeds the difference that is in them at times, from
what they were formerly, c. 47.

Case 3. Whether the Spirit furnishes the soul at all times, with like life,
and vigor of expressions?

Facility and fluency of expressions in prayer, what evils it often occasions.

A touch of Forms, pro, and con.

A Case. Language of prayer when from strength of parts, and when from the
supply of the Spirit. How we lose our ability of expression in prayer, c. 48.

Saints Informed, that darkening evidences of Gods love, deadneth prayer.

Case. What to be done, when a soul cannot call God Father? Especially in case
some sin streighten the spirit.

As also how to maintain heat and boldness in prayer, c. 49.

Three duties pressed upon all assured Saints. 1 To be much in prayer, upon
eight motives. c. 50. To stir up the grace of God that is in them to a due
proportion of life and fervency upon six motives c. 51, Qu. How the deadness
and formality of Saints in prayer may be recovered? Where more largely of
forms and extemporary prayer c. 52. 3. To come boldly to the Throne of grace
upon six motives c. 53.


Case. How shall I procure this boldness, if I cannot come to God in this
manner; where those are directed who (notwithstanding assurance) never had it.

And those who have had and lost it c. 54.

Case. How to mix boldness and godly fear together in prayer?

Stating 1. This boldness what it is, and wherein it consists. 2. This fear
also, and its nature c. 55.


Saints have some comfortable meditations suggested from this truth, that the
boldness and fervency of Saints in prayer is from the Spirit of Adoption

Case. How shall I know whether my actual fervency and boldness be not from my
own spirit or Satan, rather then Gods Spirit? c. 56.

Reader, these Books are lately published and sold at the Ball in Paul's Church
yard.
Dr. Kendals Answer to Mr. John Goodwin, ^n two Volumes, fol. viz. Concerning
the Death of Christ, and the Perseverance of the Saints. Mr. Sheffeild, a
Treatise of Christ the Sun of Righteousness. 8o. Mr. Rob. Bailie, a learned
Treatise against Anabaptism. 4o Catechesis Elenctica Errorum qui hodie vexant
Ecclesiam, 12o. His Vindication of his Disswasive from the Exceptions of Mr.
Cotton and Mr. Tombs, 4o Mr Cawdrey and Mr. Palmer on the Sab^ath in four
Parts, 4o Dr. Tuckneies Sermons on these Texts, viz. Jer. 8. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 55:
Acts 4. 12. 12o. Mr Jenkyns Exposition of the whole Epistle of Jude, 4o. Jus
Divinum Ministerii. 4o Mella Patrum, per prima nascentis^ and pa^ientis
Ecclesiae; tria secula; Per Fran. Rous, Preposit. Etonens: 8o.
January 5. 1655.

