Five PROPOSALS PRESENTED To the General COUNCIL of the OFFICERS of the ARMIES
Of ENGLAND, SCOTLAND and IRELAND.
Friends and Gentlemen:
THe wise man tells us, that Hope deferred, makes the heart sick: as our hands
are weakened by your delays, so our hearts would faint, except something
satisfactory be speedily done by you. For the common safety of the Good Old
Cause, and the Assertors of it, are in eminent danger to be swallowed up by the
Common Enemy; and great Reason we have to fear, that while you thus slowly
proceed to purge your Army, our destruction, and yours also, (designed by the
friends to the first Monarchique Family) will like an overflowing scourge,
break in upon us; except he that neither slumbers nor sleeps, by no less then
a Miracle prevent it. Our Apostacies having rid Post, and our Repentance scarce
going a Foot-pace, gives small ground of hope that his special presence will
so Eminently appear for us. If you only were imbarqued in the bottom, and that
the Cause were not common, we should be silent; but since our blood, Prayers
and Purses challenge and claim a Share in the Purchase, and since we must
breathe under that bondage or freedom you are now bringing forth, we humbly
propose,

1. That you vigorously and unpartially proceed in the speedy and total Purging
of the Army; remembering that Right stands in a direct opposition to Wrong, in
all Persons and all Cases; and let no Allegations or pretenses sway your
judgment to the contrary.

2. That the Old Parliament may have the Door opened unto them, and that by you
they be invited to re-possess that place where they in some measure honorably
Asserted our Rights, both as Men and Christians.

3. That you would no longer tamper with the Petition and Advice; but cast it
aside as abominable, dangerous, and destructive to the common safety of the
Nation.

4. That you would lay aside the thoughts of a Government by a single Person,
in any sense whatsoever; as being repugnant to your own Engagements, and the
Public Liberty.

5. That some faithful Persons, and Friends to the Good Old Cause, be added to
your Councils and Conventions, that these things may be effected, that so our
Fears and Jealousies may be removed.

In performance of these things, you will encourage us to assist you in our
Prayers unto the most High, and with our Persons and Purses also, in any
Exigent or Straits you may be brought unto: But by your temporizing, and
denying to follow God fully; you will meet with his rebukes in your way, and
Reproach and Infamy from all good men in the end.

From many thousands Well-affected to the Good Old Cause in and about the City
of London.

London, Printed by J. C. for L. Chapman. 1659.


