A DECLARATION FROM HIS EXCELLENCY Sr. Thomas Fairfax, And his Council of
War.

Concerning their proceeding in the Proposalls, prepared and agreed on by the
Council of the Army, to be tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament,
residing in the Army, and with them to be treated on by the Commissioners of
the Army.

TOGETHER WITH The Heads of the said Proposalls, containing the particulars of
their desires, in pursuance of their former Declarations and Papers, in order
to the clearing, and securing of the Rights, and Liberties of the Kingdom, and
the settling of a just and lasting Peace.

TO WHICH ARE ADDED Some further particular desires, for the removing, and
redressing of diverse present pressing grievances, being also comprised in, or
in necessary pursuance of their former Representations and Papers appointed to
be treated upon.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1647.

A Declaration FROM HIS EXCELLENCY Sir THO: FAIRFAX, And his Council of War.
Concerning the Proposalls of the Army for settling of a peace, and the grounds
of publishing the Heads thereof.
SInce our drawing back to Reading, we have applied our selves with all
diligence to frame, and hasten an entire body of all the particular Proposalls,
which we would tender to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with the
Army, to be treated on in pursuance of those general desires, expressed in our
former Declarations and Papers, for the securing of the Common Rights, and
Liberties, and a present settling of the peace of the Kingdom. In which
business, (notwithstanding the many interruptions and disturbances, with daily
advertisements of the indirect and treacherous practices and preparations of
the Committee of Militia, and others in and about the City of London, and
elsewhere, tending to a new War have occasioned, to the diverting or
retarding of our proceeding therein, yet,) we have made a progress as speedy
as the nature and weight of such a work would admit, and having finished the
same, we have delivered in, ^n abstract of the Heads thereof unto the said
Commissioners of Parliament to be treated upon.

But the late pernicious Engagement set on foot in the City, and (much more,)
that prodigious violence done to both Houses of Parliament on Monday last,
having wholly taken us off for present, and rendered all proceeding in the way
of Treaty thereupon merely vain and hopeless, until it shall please God,
the Parliament be righted and vindicated against that violation done to it, and
restored into a Condition of freedom, so as the unquestioned Members of it may
repair together with safety, and proceed according to their just freedom.
We have thought good in the mean time to make this public tender of the
Heads of the Proposalls to the Consideration of the whole Kingdom, wherein
though all circumstances requisite to be determined in an actual settlement,
be not so fully and perfectly expressed, as upon the Treaty intended (if not
interrupted, as before,) they might speedily have been, yet all men may see and
understand in these the effect and bottom of our desires, whereupon we have
sincerely studied, that a present peace might be settled; which same thing,
(with and after such vindication of the Parliament, a^ may again render it
into a capacity to establish the same,) we shall still faithfully endeavor
to the utmost of our powers, and accordingly shall expect the cheerful and
hearty concurrence of all those who are or shall be satisfied, concerning the
integrity of our intentions to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom in these
Proposalls, or who shall (for the maine) desire or approve of the same things
with us in order to a settlement.

And to these Proposalls which we here first tender as necessary to a Peace,
and upon which we desire the seal of peace, (in the restitution of his
Majesty and others to their Rights, and in an Act of Oblivion to be past,) we
cannot but add the further expression of our desires in some other
particulars, which (though not so essential to peace, as necessarily to
precede the settling of it, yet) being matters of very public, and (most of
them) of general grievance to the Kingdom (which we every where find the
Outcries of,) and being contained in, or pursuance of the same things
expressed in our former Representations, and Papers: We shall desire, That
(the Parliament being set free) no time may be lost for a speedy Consideration
of them, so as the former things for the present settling of peace be not
delayed thereby.

Signed by the Appointment of his EXCELLENCY Sir THO: FAIRFAX, and the Council
of War. Jo: Rushworth, Secretary.
Colebrooke August 2. 1647.
The Heads of the PROPOSALLS agreed upon by his Excie Sir THO: FAIRFAX, and the
Council of the Army, to be tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament,
residing with the Army, and with them to be treated on by the Commissioners of
the Army.
CONTAINING The particulars of their desires in pursuance of their former
Declarations and Papers: In order to the clearing and securing of the Rights
and liberties of the Kingdom, and the settling a just and lasting peace.
To which are added some further particular desires (for the removing and
redressing of diverse present pressing grievances) being also comprised in, or
necessary pursuance of their former Representations and Papers appointed to be
Treated upon.
1. THat (the things hereafter proposed, being provided for by this Parliament)
a certain period may, by Act of Parliament) be set for the ending of this
Parliament, (such period to be within a year at most,) and in the same Act
provision to be made for the succession and constitution of Parliaments in
future as follows.

1. THat Parliaments may B^ennially be called, and meet at a certain day, with
such provision for the certainty thereof, as in the late Act was made for
Trienniall Parliaments, and what further or other provision shall be found
needful by the Parliament, to reduce it to more certainty; and upon the
passing of this, the said Act for Trienniall-Parliaments to be repealed.

2. Each Bienniall Parliament to fit 120. days certain (unless adjourned, or
dissolved sooner by their own consent) afterward to be adjournable or
dissolveable by the King; and no Parliament to sit past 240. days, from their
first meeting or some other limited number of days now to be agreed on: upon
the expiration whereof, each Parliament to dissolve of course, if not otherwise
dissolved sooner.

3. The King upon advice of the Council of State in the intervalls bewixt
Bienniall-Parliaments, to call a Parliament extraordinary, provided it meet
above seventie days before the next Bienniall day, and be dissolved at least
sixty days before the same, so as the course of Bienniall-elections may never
be interrupted.

4. That this Parliament and each succeeding Bienniall-Parliament, at, or
before adjournment, or dissolution thereof, may appoint Committees to continue
during the intervall, for such purposes as are in any of these Proposalls
refe^r'd to such Committees.

5. That the Elections of the Commons for succeeding Parliaments, may be
distributed to all Counties, or other parts or divisions of the Kingdom,
according to some rule of equality or proportion, so as all Counties may have a
number of Parliament Members allowed to their choice, proportionable to the
respective Rates they bear in the common charges, and burdens of the
Kingdom, according to some other rule of equallity or proportion, to render
the House of Commons, (as near as may be) an equal Representative of the
whole, and in order thereunto, that a present consideration be had to take off
the Elections of Burgesses, for poor decayed, or inconsiderable Towns, and to
give some present addition to the number of Parliament Members for great
Counties, that have now less then their due proportion, to bring all (at
present) as near as may be, to such a rule of proportion, as aforesaid.

6. That effectual provision be made for future freedom of Elections, and
certainty of due returns.

7. That the House of Commons alone have the power from time to time, to set
down further orders and rules for the ends expressed in the two last preceding
Articles, so as to reduce the Elections of Members for that House, to more and
more perfection of equallity in the distribution, freedom in the Election,
Order in the proceeding thereto, and certainty in the Returns, which orders
and rules (in that case) to be as Laws.

8. That there be a liberty for entering dissents in the House of Commons with
provision, that no Member be censurable for ought said or voted in the House,
further then to exclusion from that trust, and that only by the judgment of
the House it self.

9. That the judicial power, or power of final Judgment in the Lords and
Commons (and their power of Exposition and Application of Law) (without further
appeal) may be cleared: And that no Officer of Justice, Minister of State, or
other person adjudged by them, may be capable of Protection, or pardon from the
King, without their advice and consent.

10. That the Right and liberty of the Commons of England, may be cleared and
vindicated, as to a due Exemption from any Judgment, Trial, or other
proceeding against them by the House of Peers, without the concurring
Judgment of the House of Commons. As also from any other judgment, sentence,
or proceeding against them, other then by their equals, or according to the
Law of the Land.

11 The same Act to provide, that grand Jurymen may be chosen by, and for
several parts or divisions of each County respectively, In some equal way (and
not remain as now at the discretion of an under-Sheriffe to be put on or off,)
And that such Grand Jurymen for their respo^^^ ^^^ties may at each Assize
present the names of p^^^ to be made Justices of Peace, from time to time, as
the ^o^nty has need for any to be added to the Commission, and at the summer
Assize to present the names of three persons out of whom the King may prick
one to be Sheriff for the next year.

II. For the future security to Parliaments and the Militia in general in
order thereunto, that it be provided by Act of Parliament.

1 That the power of the Militia by Sea and Land during the space of ten years
next ensuing shall be ordered and disposed by the Lords and Commons Assembled,
and to be Assembled in the Parliament or Parliaments of England, or by such
persons as they shall nominate and appoint for that purpose from time to time
during the said space.

2 That the said power shall not be ordered, disposed, or exercised by the
Kings Majesty that now is, or by any person or persons by any Authority derived
from him, during the said space, or at any time hereafter by his said Majesty,
without the advice and consent of the said Lords and Comm^^ of such Committees,
or Council in the intervals of Parliament as they shall appoint.

3 That during the same space of ten years, the said Lords and Commons way by
Bill or Ordinance raise and dispose of what moneys, and for what Forces they
shall from time to time find necessary, as also for payment of the public
debts and damages; and for all other the public uses of the Kingdom.

4 And to the end the temporary security intended by the three particulars last
precedent way be the better assured it may therefore be provided,

That no Subjects that have been in Hostility against the Parliament in the
late war shall be capable of bearing any ^^ffice of power or public trust in
the Commonwealth during the space of five years without consent of Parliament
or of the Council of State, or to sit as Members or assistants of either House
of Parliament until the second Biennial Parliament be past.

III. For the present form of disposing the Militia in order to the ^^^ce^ and
safety of this Kingdom and the service of Ireland.

1 That there be Commissioners for the admiralty with a Vice Admiral and
Rere-Admirall, now to be agreed on, with power for the forming, regulating,
appointing of Officers, and providing for the Navy, and for ordering the same,
to and in the ordinary service of the Kingdom. And that there be a sufficient
provision and establishment for pay and mayntenance thereof.

2 That there be a General for command of the Land Forces that are to be in
pay both in England, Ireland, and Wales, both for Field and Garrison.

3 That there be Commissioners in the several Counties, for the standing
Militia of the respective Counties (consisting of Trained Bands and Auxiliaries
not in pay,) with power for the proportioning, forming, regulating, trayning,
and disciplyning of them.

4 That there be a Council of State with power to superintend and direct the
several, and particular powers of the Militia last mentioned for the peace and
safety of this Kingdom, and of Ireland.

5 That the same Council may have power as the Kings privy Council, for and in
all foreign negotiations; provided, That the making of war or peace with
any other Kingdom or State shall not be without ^he advice and consent of
Parliament.

6 That the said power of the Council of State be put into the hands of
trusty and able persons now to be agreed on, and the same persons to continue
in that power (si been se gesserint,) for a certain Term not exceeding seven
years.

7 That there be a sufficient establishment now provided for the salary Forces
both in England and Ireland, the establishment to continue until two Months
after the meeting of the first Bienniall Parliament.

IV. That an Act be passed for disposing the great Offices f^^ ten years by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, or by such Committees as they shall appoint
for that purpose in the intervalls, (with submission to the approbation of the
next Parliament) and after ten years, they to nominate three, and the King out
of that number to appoint one for the succession, upon any vacancy.

V. That an Act be passed for restraining of any (...) made since the 21 day of
May 1642. or to be hereafter (...), from having any power to sit or Vote in
Parliament, without consent of both Houses.

VI. That an Act be passed, for recalling and making void all Declarations and
other proceedings against the Parliament, or against any that have acted by, or
under their authority in the late War, or in relation to it. And that the
Ordinances for indemnity may be confirmed.

VII. That an Act be passed for making void all Grants, etc. under the Great
Seal, that was conveyed away from the Parliament, since the time that it was so
conveyed away (except as in the Parliaments Propositions) and for making those
^adid that have been or shall be passed under the ^^eat Seal made by the
authority of both Houses of Parliament

VIII. (...) an Act be passed for ^^^^^^mation of the Treaties between the two
Kingdoms (...) and Scotland, and for appointing Conservators of the peace
betwixt them.

IX. That the Ordinance for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries be
confirmed by Act of Parliament; Provided his Majesty's Revenue be (...)
damnified therein, nor those that last held Offices in the (...) without
reparation some other way.

X. An Act to declare void the C^^ation of Ireland, etc. and to leave the
prosecution of that War^^ to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England.

XI An Act to be (...) to take a^y all (...) power, authority and jurisdiction
of Bishops and all other Ecclesiastical Officers whatsoever, extending to any
Civil penalties upon any; and to repeal (...) Laws, whereby the Civil
Magistracy has been or is boun^ upon any Ecclesiastical censure to proceed
(ex officio) unto any civil penalties against any persons to censured.

XII. That there be a repeal of all Acts, or C^^sses in any Act, enjoining the
use of the Book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties, for neglect
thereof, as also of all Acts or Clauses in any Act, imposing any penalty for
not coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere, for prayer, or other
religious duties, exercises or Ordinances, and some other provision to be made
for discovering of Papists, and Popish Recusants, and for disabling of them,
and of all Jesuits, or Priests, from disturbing the State.

XIII. That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, nor any
penalties imposed upon the Refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take
it against their judgments, or consciences, but all Orders or Ordinances
tending to that purpose to be repealed.

XIV. That (the things here before proposed, being provided, for settling and
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the Kingdom,) his
Majesty's person, his Queen, and Royal issue, may be restored to a condition
of safety, Honor, and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their
personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of the Regal power
then according to the particulars aforegoing.

XV. For the matter of Compositions.

1. That a less number out of the persons excepted in the t^^ first
qualifications, (not exceeding five for the English,) being nominated
particularly by the Parliament, who (together with the persons in the Irish
Rebellion, included in the third qualification,) ^^y be reserved to the further
judgment of the Parliament, as they shall find cause, All other excepted
persons may be remitted from the exception, and admitted to Composition.

2. That the rates for all future Co^^^sitions may be lessened and limited,
not to exceed the several proportions hereafter expressed respectively: That is
to say.

1. For all p^r souls formerly excepted, not above (...) part.

2. For the ^a^e Members of Parliament, under the first branch of the fourth
qualification in the Proposition, a fourth part.

3, For other Members of Parliament, in the second and (...) branches of the
same qualification, a sixth part.

4. For the persons nominated in the said fourth qualification, and those
included in the tenth qualification, an eight part.

5. For all others in (...) the s^^th qualification, a tenth part.

And that real Debts, either upon Record, or proved by witnesses, be
considered and abated in the (...) their estates in all the cases aforesaid.

3. That those who shall hereafter (...) compound, (...) not ^^ve the Covenant
(...) without which (...) not compound, but in case they shall (...) willingly
take it, they may pass their Compositions without (...).

4. That the persons and (...) of all English, not (...) two hundred pounds in
La^^ o^ Goods, ^e at liberty and discharged: And that the Kings (...) Servants
that (...) took (...) Alms, his ^^^ly attended his Person according to (...)
Office^ may be fr^ed from Composition, or to pay (at most) but the proportion
of one ^^^ges (...).

5. That is Order ^o the making and perf^cti^^ ^f Compositions (...) aforesaid,
(...) Profit of all sequestered (...) the Estates of such person wh^ shall be
(...)) ^ee from henceforth suspended and (...) the hand^ of the ^^spective
tenants, occupants, and other^ from them they are due, for the space of (...)
following.

6. That the Faith (...) ^^^lia^^nt, (...) to have been made, full reparation
and satisfaction may (...) to the (...), and the persons (...) may be (...).

XV. Th^^ (...) to extend unto all (except (...) ^^ception as before) (...)
^^anour^, etc. (...) from all trouble or prejudice for (...) their compositions
past) and to restore them to all pri^iledges etc. belonging to other Subjects,
provided as in the (...) particular under the second general head ^for^ (...)
security.

And whereas there have been of late strong endeavors and practices of a
fa^tio^s and desperate party, to imbroyle this Kingdom in a new war, ^^d for
that purpose to induce the King the Queen, and Prince, to declare for the said
party and also to excite and stir up all those of the Kings late party to
appear and engage for the same, which attempts and designs, many of the Kings
party, (out of their desires to avoid further m^s^ry (...) the ^ingdome,) have
contributed their in devours to prevent, (as for diverse of them we have had
particular assurance,) we do therefore desire, that such of the Kings party
who shall appear to have ^^pressed, and shall (...) express that way their
good affections to the pence and welfare of the Kingdoms, and to hinder the a
broyling of the some in a new war, may be freed and co^^^pted from
compositions, (...) to pay but one years Rev^^^ o^ a twen^^^^^ part.

These particulars aforegoing are the (...) proposal as we have agreed (...)
to ^^^d in order (...) of the peace of (...) leaving the Terms or (...) the
Kingdom of Scot^^^^ to stand as in the proposi^^^^ of both Kingdoms until
that Kingdom shall agree to any o^^^^tion.

Next to the proposals aforesaid for the pre^^^^ (...) of a p^^ce, we shall
desire, than (...) may be lo^^ by the Par^^^^ent for dispa^^^ of other things
tending to the (...), (...) and just in (...) of the Kingdom, and (...).

T^^^ (...) just and necess^^y liberty of the p^op^^ to (...) their grievances
and desires by way of Petition, may be (...) (...) or Declaration of the Army
sent from S^. Albans.

^. ( Th^^ (...)) the common grieva^^^ by the people, may be speed^ly con^^^^^
of, and effectually red^ssed, and in particular.

^. Th^^ the Excise ^ay be taken off from such Commodities (...) people of the
^and do ordinarily free and a certain (...) for taking off the whole.

2. That the oppressions and incroachm^^ts of ^ound Laws may be prevented for
future.

3. All Monopolies (old or ne^) and restraines to the freedom of trade to
(...).

4. That (...) to remedy and rectify the (...) ^^ties, and several parts of
each County, in respect of others, and to settle the proportions for L^^^^^ are
to more equally throughout the Kingdom, in order to which we shall offer some
further particular^, which we hope may be useful.

5. The present unequal troublesome and contentions way of Ministers
maintenance by T^t^^^, to be considered of, and some remedy applied.

6. That the rules and course of (...), and the affirm of is, ^ay be so
reduced and reformed, as that all (...) and questions (...) Rights may be more
clear and certain in the issues, and not so tedious nor chargeable in the
proceeding as now, in order to which we shall offer some further particulars
hereafter.

7. That Prisoners for D^bt, or other (...) have Estates to disc^^^^ go them
may not (...) other ways (...) but that the Estates of all (...) may be some
(...) mo^e liable to their Debts, (as well as Tradesmen are by Commissions of
Bankrupt) whether they be imprisoned for it, or (...). And thee such prisoners
for Debt, who have not (...) have to their Cre^^^ors, may b^ (...)
impris^^^ent, or some may provided for, so as neither they or the^^ Families
^ay perish by their imprisonments.

8. (...) to the (...) of themselves, or their nearest Relations i^ criminal
causes, (...) no man's life take taken away under (...) witnesses.

9. That (...) or (...), or else to quallifie and pr^^^^^e against (...) extend
(...) or ensnaring of religious and peaceable people, merely for nonconformity
in Religion.

3. That according to the sixth Head in the Declaration of the Army, the large
powers given to Committees or Deputy Lieutenants during the late times of war
and distraction, may be speedily taken into confu^^^tion, to be recalled ^^d
made void and th^^ such powers of that nature as shall appears necessary to be
continued, may be put into a regulated way, and left to as little
Arbitrarinesse as the nature and necessity of the things (wherein they are
conversant) will bear.

4. That (according to the seventh Head in the sai^^ Declaration an effectual
course may be taken, t^^^ the kingdom may be righted and satisfied in point of
Accounts for the vast sums that have been levied.

5. That provision may be made for payment of Arrears to the Army, and the rest
of the Soldiers of the kingdom, who have concurred with the Ar^^^^ in the
late desires and proceedings thereof: And in the near place, for payments of
the public debts and da^mages of the kingdom, and that to be performed,
first to such persons whose debts or damages (...) the public Account are
great, and their estates shall so as they are thereby reduced to a difficulty
of subsistence; In order to all which, and to the fourth particular last
proceeding, we shall speedily offer see^^^ further (...) the nature of rule
(...) hope will be of good (...) toward public (...) ^^on.

Signed by the (...) Fair^ax, and the (...) of War. Jo. Rushworth, Secre^.
August 1. 1647.
FINIS,

