THE FRENCH LUCIAN MADE ENGLISH
Sold by R* Bentley in Covent Garden, 1693.



THE French Lucian, MADE ENGLISH; By J. D. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post House in Russel Street, in
Covent Garden, 1693.

To Lucian in Elysium.
Illustrious Deceased,
I Should injure Justice if that after I have assumed an Idea which is properly
Yours, I did not thereupon render you some kind of Homage. The Author that
supports us most in our Writings, is the true Hero of the Dedicatory; his
Praises we ought to publish with sincerity, and choose him for our Protector. It
may perhaps be ^hought, that I have been very ^old in daring to work upon your
Ground-plat; but it seems to me that I should have been far bolder, if I had
wrought upon ^ Ground of my own Imagination. I flatter my self with some hopes
that the desig^ being Yours, it will mak^ way for what is mine, and thu^ much I
dare tell you, that if b^ chance my Dialogues had an^ so little success, they
would gain You more Honor the^ your own have, since it would appear that this
Idea is so taking that it matters not whether it b^ duly executed or no. I
depen^ so fully upon it, that I thought ^ part of it only would serve m^ turn.
I have taken no notice of Pluto, Caron, Cerberus, nor of no one of the infernal
Crew. How concerned am I that you have drained all those rare matters of the
equality of the Dead, of their trouble at Life, of the false constancy which
Philosophers affect to make appear at their dying hour, of the ridiculous
misfortune of those young people, that dye before the oldmen of whom they
thought to inherit, and whom they so much courted. But when all is done, since
you had invented this design, it was but just and reasonable that you should
pick and choose what was best in it. I have at least endeavored to imitate you
in the end you had proposed to your self. All your Dialogues include their
Moral, and I make all my Dead moralize, otherwise it had not been worth while
to make them speak; some of the living would have served well enough to te^l
frivolous things. Moreover, there is this convenience in it, that a Man may
suppose the Dead to be persons of great Reflection, as well for their
experience-sake, as because of their vacant time; and one ought to believe,
that they think a little more then is usual whilst alive. They discourse of
things here above better than we, because they behold them with greater
indifferency and more tranquillity, and they are willing enough to discourse of
them, because they still pretend to some interest in them. You have made the
most part of their Dialogues so short, that it is apparent you did not believe
them to be great Talkers, and in this I can easily agree with you. As the Dead
are very witty, they ought to make a quick discovery of the ending of all
matters. I could believe too, that they might be easily enlightened as to agree
with one another about every thing, and consequently that they should scarce
ever speak; for I fancy that it belongs to us Ignorants only to dispute, who do
not discover the Truth; even as it is the property only of the Blind, who see
not the place they are going to, to jostle one another as they go along. But
here we cannot be persuaded that the Dead should have changed their qualities,
so far as not to be any longer of contrary Judgments. When we have once
conceived an opinion of Persons in this World, we cannot alter it. Thus I have
made it my business to make the Dead known again, at least such as are most
eminent. You made no difficulty to suppose some, and some of the Adventures too
perhaps which you allot them; but I stood in no need of that Privilege.
History did supply me with plenty enough of real Dead, and real Adventures, to
dispense with my borrowing any assistance from Fiction. You will not be
surprised, that the Dead do speak of what did happen a long time after them,
you that do see them entertain themselves every day with the affairs of each
other. I am sure that at this very moment you know France, upon a multitude of
Reports that have been made you, and that you know that she is at this day in
point of Learning, what Greece was formerly. Above all, your famous Translator,
who has made you speak our Language so well, will not have failed to tell you,
that Paris has had the same esteem for your Works as had Rome and Athens. Happy
the Man that could follow your Style as that great Man did, and in his
Expressions lay hold of that fine simplicity, and that natural pleasantness,
which are so proper for Dialogues! For my part, it is far from my Thoughts, to
pretend to the glory of having imitated you well; I desire none but that of
having well known, that a Man cannot imitate a more excellent Model than your
Self.

The Titles and Subjects of the Dialogues contained in this Volume.
The Dialogues of the Ancient Dead.
I. ALexander, Phrinea. What Characters noise it most. Page 1. II. Milo,
Smindirides. Upon Niceness. p. 9. III. Dido, Stratonice. Upon the Intrigue
which Virgil does wrongfully attribute to Dido. p. 15. IV. Anacreon, Aristotle.
Upon Philosophy. p. 21. V. Homer, Aesop. Upon the Mysteries of Homer 's Works.
p. 29. VI. Athenais, Icasia. Upon the Fantasticalness of Fortunes. p. 34.
Dialogues of the Ancient Dead, with the Modern Dead.
I. AUgustus, Peter Aretine. Upon Praises. p. 40. II. Sapho, Laura. Whether it
has been well ordered, that Men should attack, and the Women desend themselves.
p. 51. III. Socrates, Montaigne. Whether the Ancients have had more Virtue than
We. p. 57. IV. The Emperor Adrian, Margarite of Austria. What Deaths are the
most Generous. p. 66. V. Erasistrates, Herveus. Of what use are the
Discoveries, the Modern have made in Natural Causes, and in Physic. p. 78. VI.
Berenice, Cosmus Medicis the Second. Upon the Immortality of Name. p. 85.
Dialogues of the Modern Dead.
I. ANne of Britanny, Mary of England. A Comparison betwixt Ambition and Love.
p. 92. II. Charles V. Erasmus. If there is any thing wherein Man may glory. p.
102. III. Elizabeth of England, The Duke of Alenzon. Upon the little Solidity
of Pleasures. p. 110. IV. William Cabestan, Albert Frederick of Brandebourg.
Upon Folly. p. 116. V. Agnes Sorel, Roxelana. Upon the Power of Women. p. 123.
VI. Jane I. of Naples, Anselm. Upon Disquiet for Time to come. p. 132.
NEW DIALOGUES OF THE DEAD.
The First Dialogue.
Alexander. Phrinea. Phrinea. YOU may know it of all the Thebanes that lived in
in my time. They will tell you that I offered them to rebuild at my own charges
the Walls of Thebes; which you had beaten down, upon condition they would put
this Inscription upon them. Alexander the Great did beat down these Walls, but
Phrinea the Courtisan has raised them up again.


Alex. You were afraid then that future Ages should not know what Trade you had
driven?


Phrin. I tell you I had been excellent at it; and all persons that are
extraordinary in any Profession whatever, are possessed with this folly of
Monuments and Inscriptions.


Alex. It Is true that Rhodopea had this humor before you. Her Beauty gained
her so much money, that with it she built one of those famous Pyramids in Egypt
which are standing to this day; and I remember that as she was speaking of it
the other day to some dead French Ladies, who pretended to have been very
lovely, these Shadows began to weep, saying, that in the Age and Country where
they had lately lived, Beauties did not now make advantages whereby to raise
Pyramids.


Phrin. But for my part, I had that advantage above Rhodopea, that in raising
up again the Walls of Thebes, I made my self equal to you, who had been the
greatest Conqueror in the World, and made it appear that my Beauty was able to
repair what your Valor had destroyed.


Alex. These are two things which certainly did never enter into comparison
with one another. You are pleased with your self then, that you have been so
Gallanted.


Phrin. And you, you are very well satisfied that you have made desolate the
better part of the World? Why was there not a Phrinea in each Town which you
destroyed! There should have remained no signs of your furies.


Alex. Were I to live again, I would again be a famous Conqueror.


Phrin. And I would be a lovely Conqueror. Beauty has a natural right to
command Men, and Valor has but a right gained by force. Beauties have a right
in all Countries, so have not Kings nor Conquerours. But yet the better to
convince you, Philip your Father was a very valiant man, so were you too,
however you would neither of you work any fear into Demosthenes the Orator,
who, whilst he lived, did nothing but inveigh against you both; and another
Phrinea, far beyond me (for the name is lucky) being likely to lose a Suit in
Law of consequence, her Lawyer, who in vain had spoken his best for her,
bethought himself of putting by a great Veil, which partly covered her, and
presently upon the sight of her beauty, the Judges who were just going to cast
her, changed their minds. So the noise of your Arms could not in a long run of
years silence an Orator, and the attractives of a fair Creature did, in a
moment, corrupt all Areopagus with its severity.


Alex. Though you have called another Phrinea to your assistanc, I do not
believe that Alexanders Party is at all the weaker. It would be very sad if.....


Phrin. I know what you are going to say to me. Graecia, Asia, Persia, the
Indies, all these make a fine show: Yet, if I should withdraw from your glory,
what does not belong to you upon that score; if I did give to your Soldiers,
to your Captains, to Chance it self, the share belonging to them, don't you
think you would be a loser by it? But a Fair Lady never shares with any one the
honor of her Conquests, all is her own. Believe me, the condition of a pretty
Woman is a pretty condition.


Alex. It has appeared that you have been so persuaded. But do you think this
part reaches so far as you have pushed it?


Phrin. No, no, for I am easy of belief. I confess I have, in an high degree,
injured the Character of a pretty Woman, but you hove done as much by that of a
Great Man. You and I have conquered too much. If I had been contented with two
or three Gallantries at the most, I had not been irregular, and no exceptions
could have been taken; but to have been galanted to that degree as to have had
wherewithal to rebuild the Walls of Thebes, that was indeed too too much. On
the other side, if you had conquered Greece only, the neighboring Islands, and
some little part too perhaps of the Lesser Asia, and made up a State of them
for your self, nothing had been more reasonable; but to run on still without
knowing whither, and be always taking of Towns, and know not why, and always
upon execution, without design, it is that that was not approved of by many
judicious persons.


Alex. Let those judicious persons say what they will. If I had made use of my
valor and good fortune with so much discretion, there would scarce have been
any talk of me.


Phrin. Nor of me neither, if I had been too discreet in the management of my
Beauty. When one will make a noise only, those qualities which seem most
reasonable are not the fittest for that purpose.


The Second Dialogue.
Milo. Smindirides. Smindirides. THou art very proud then, Milo, of having
carried an Ox on thy shoulders, at the Olimpick Games.


Milo. For certain it was a very brave action. All Greece did applaud it, and
the honor of it reached as far as the City of Crotona my native Country, which
has afforded an infinite number of stout lusty men. On the contrary, thy City
of Sibaris will be cried down to eternity because of the effeminacy of her
Inhabitants, who banished all Cocks from their Town, lest they should be
wakened by them; and when they made any invitation to persons, they invited
them a year beforehand, that they might have the more leisure to make their
Treat with as much daintiness as they would themselves.


Smin. Thou jeerest the Sibarists; but thou gross Crotonian, do not thou
think that in boasting to have carried an Ox is not to be very like them?


Milo. And thou, do thou believe to have behaved thy self Man-like, when thou
made thy complaint that thou had passed a night without sleeping, because
one of the Roses wherewith thy Bed was strewed, lay folded in two under thee?


Smin. It Is true, I was so nice as that comes to; but why do thou think it so
strange?


Milo. And how can it be but I must think it so?


Smin. What did thou never see a Lover, who being loaded with the favors of
a Mistress, to whom he had rendered some remarkable services, was troubled in
the possession of his happiness, for fear that grateful acknowledgment should
work more in the heart of the Beauty, than her inclination?


Milo. No, I never saw any such. But what if such a thing should be?


Smin. And did thou never hear talk of some Conqueror, who, at his return
from a glorious Expedition, should not be altogether satisfied with his
Triumphs, because Fortune might have had a greater share than either his Valor
or his Conduct, and that his designs might have taken upon false and ill
grounded Measures?


Milo. No, I never heard speak of any such. But once again, what do thou
infer hereupon?


Smin. That this same Lover, and this Conqueror, and generally all men,
although they should lie upon Flowers, could not sleep if one single Leaf only
were foulded in two. A little thing spoils a pleasure. Pleasures are Beds of
Roses, where it is very hard to have every Leaf remain spread out, and not one
to lie double; yet the foulding of one alone is enough to cause a great
uneasiness.


Milo. I am not very much versed in these affairs; but methinks, that thou, and
the Lover, and thy supposed Conqueror, and all of you together, are extremely
too blame. Why do you make your selves so nice?


Smin. Ah Milo! your Wits are not Crotonians, as thou art; but they are
Sibarists, more refined yet than I was.


Milo. I see well enough what the matter is. Your Wits, assuredly, enjoy more
pleasures than they need, and they let their niceness retrench what they have
too much. They are willing to have some feeling of the least dislikes, because
there are other ways delights enough for them; and upon that account I find
they are in the right.


Smin. There Is nothing at all of that. Your Wits enjoy no more pleasures than
they need.


Milo. They are fools then to make themselves so nice.


Smin. There is the mischief of it. Niceness does become men very well: it
arises from the good qualities, both of the mind, and heart: Man takes a
delight to have them, and he that wants them endeavors for them; in the mean
time, niceness does lessen the number of pleasures, and one is not overloaded
with them. It makes them less sensible; and pleasures, of themselves, are not
over lively. How men are to be pitied! Their natural condition supplies them
with few pleasing things, and their reason teaches them to delight yet less in
them.


The Third Dialogue,
Dido. Stratonice. Dido. ALas! how wretched am I, my poor Strationice! you know
how I have lived. I was so exact in my fidelity to my first Husband, that I
burnt my self alive rather than I would take a second. However, I could not
preserve my self from being ill spoken of. A Poet, Virgil by name, has been
pleased to change a wise Woman, so strict as my self, into a young Gossip, that
lets her self be taken with the handsomeness of a Stranger the very first day
she sees him. My whole story is quite contrary. To tell the truth, as to the
pile of Wood wherein I was consumed, I had right done me. But guess why I cast
my self into it? It is not out of any farther fear of being obliged to marry a
second time, but because I am grown desperate upon this stranger's leaving of
me.


Stratonice. Indeed, the consequences of this may be very dangerous. There will
hardly be any more Women that will burn themselves out of a conjugal fidelity,
if, after their death, a Poet may have the liberty to say what he will of them.
May be too, your Virgil was not so much in the wrong. Has he not cleared some
intrigues in your life, which you hoped would not have been known? Who knows? I
would not answer for you, upon the faith of your Pile.


Dido. If the Gallantry which Virgil does lay to me had any truth in it, I
would be content to be suspected; but he allots me to be a Lover of Aeneas, a
man that was in his Grave three hundred years before I came into the world.


Strat. You say something now. Nevertheless, Aeneas and you, you seemed much to
be a fit match for one another: You both of you had been forced to leave your
Country; you both of you seeked a fortune in stranger Countries; he was a
Widower, you a Widow: these points agree well together. It is true, you were
born three hundred years after him; but Virgil saw so many reasons to match you
together, that he thought three hundred years difference betwixt you were of no
consequence.


Dido. What an Argument there is? How three hundred years are not three hundred
years, and in spite of that obstacle, two persons may meet together, and love
one another?


Strat. Oh! It Is in that point Virgil did mean some Cunning: Sure he was a man
of the times: He would make it appear, that in matter of Love Concerns, we must
not judge upon Appearances; and that those that have the least, are many times
the truest.


Dido. What had he to do to call my Reputation in question, by inserting this
sine Mystery in his Works?


Strat. But what? has he turned you into ridicule? has he made you speak
impertinencies?


Dido. No, not at all. Here he has recited his Poem to me; and the whole piece
where he makes me appear, is indeed divine, Cousin Germain to detraction. In it
I am all Beauty, there I speak rare things upon my pretended Passion; and if
Virgil were obliged to own me for an honest Woman in his Aeneid, the Aeneid
would be the worse for it.


Strat. What do you complain of then? you have a Gallantry put upon you which
you did not enjoy; a great mischance indeed! But, to make you amends again, you
are set out for a Beauty and a Wit, which you were not.


Dido. What a comfort!


Strat. I know not what humor you are of; but most Women, if I am not
mistaken, had rather have their Virtue a little questioned, than either their
Wit or their Beauty: for my part, that was my humor. A Painter at the Court of
the King of Syria, my Husband, was dissatisfied with me; and out of revenge, he
drew me as in the Arms of a Soldier. He exposed his Picture to view, and took
his heels. My Subjects, zealous of my Glory, would have burnt this Picture
publicly; but I being drawn admirably well, and full of Beauty, though the
postures allotted me therein were not advantageous to my Virtue, I forbad the
burning of it, and recalled the Painter, whom I pardoned. If you will believe me,
you will do the same by Virgil.


Dido. That would do well, if the first degree of Merit in a Woman did consist
in being handsome, or in being witty.


Stratonice. I do not take upon me to decide what that first merit is; but
commonly, the first question one asks of a Woman one knows not, is, Is she
handsome? next, has she any Wit? a third is seldom asked.


The Fourth Dialogue.
Anacreon, Aristotle. Aristotle. I Could never have thought that a petty
Ballad-maker would have dared to compare himself with a Philosopher of so great
repute as I am.


Anacreon. You make the name of Philosopher sound very loud; but, I wish my
petty Songs, have notwithstanding been called the wise Anacreon, and methinks
the Title of Philosopher is not so good as that of Wise.


Arist. Those who ascribed you that quality, did not very well mind what they
said. What had you ever done to deserve it?


Anacr. I had done nothing but drink, sing, and fall in love; and the wonder
is, that I had this name of Wise given me for doing thus, whereas you had only
that of Philosopher given you, which cost you a world of labors: For how many
Nights have you spent in sifting the intricate Questions of the Dialectick? How
many great Volumes have you writ upon obscure matters, which perhaps you did
not very well understand your self.


Arist. I confess you have taken a more easy way to attain to Wisdom, and you
must needs have been an able man to find out a way to purchase more glory with
your Lute and your Bottle, then the greatest men have gained with their
watchings and toyls.


Anacr. You think to jeer, but I will maintain that it is harder to drink and
sing, as I have sung, and as I have drunk, than to philosophize as you have
done; to sing and to drink as I have, a man's Soul should be freed from all
violent passions, should aim no more at what does not depend upon us, should
always be in a disposition to take time as it should come. In fine, there would
be many little Affairs to regulate about him; and though there be no great
matter of Philosophy in all this, one has trouble enough for all that to
compass it. But a man may philosophize as you have done upon more reasonable
terms. One is not obliged to cure ones self neither of Ambition, nor of
Covetousness; a man may have a favorable access to Alexander's Court; he may
purchase Pre^ents of five hundred thousand Crowns, which he does not altogether
apply in experiments of Nature, according to the intention of the Donor; and in
a word, this kind of Philosophy leads to things that are opposite enough to
Philosophy.


Arist. Some body here below must needs have spoken ill of me to you; but when
all is done, Man is not Man, but upon the account of Reason, and nothing is
more excellent than to teach others what use they should make of studying
Nature, and clearing all those Intricacies which he proposes unto us.


Anacr. Thus men pervert the use of every thing: Philosophy in it self is an
admirable thing, and may be very serviceable to them; but because she would be
uneasy to them, if she did meddle with their Concerns, and settle her self
among them to regulate their ^assions, they have dispatched ^er away into the
Heavens to set ^he Planets in order, and measure their motions, or else they
pace ^er up and down the Earth, to make her examine all they see upon it. In
short, they always ^mploy her as far off themselves ^s it is possible. In the
mean time, ^s they will be Philosophers at an ^asie rate, they have the art how
^o extend and set out this Title, and they give it for the most part ^o those
that dive into natural Causes.


Arist. And how can one give them a fitter Title?


Anacreon. Philosophy concerns ^er self with Men only, and not ^t all with the
rest of the World. The Astronomer muses on the ^tars and Planets, the
Naturalist ^onsiders Nature, and the Philosopher thinks of himself. But wh^
would have been one upon suc^ hard Conditions? Alas! scarc^ any body.
Philosophers then ar^ dispensed withal from being Philosophers, and men are
contente^ they should be Astronomers, o^ Naturalists. For my part, I wa^ not of
a temper to engage myself into Speculations; but I'^ sure, that there is less
Philosophy i^ many Books, that make profession of treating of it, then in some
o^ those petty Songs which you so much undervalue; for exampl^ in this.

If Gold length of life did bestow,
Farther my ambition should not go*
Then greedily to heap up treasure.
When Death to me a visit made,
Quickly return would I bid her to her shade,
In giving her, what I had, without measure.
But if Atropos and her Sisters severe do not of this allow,
Gold shall no more be my care,
Women, Wine, and good Cheer
Shall my diversions make I vow.

Arist. If you will call that Philosophy only which looks into Manners, there
is in my Morals that which is as good as your Song; for that obscurity which
I Am taxed of, and which is perhaps in some of my Books, is not to be found in
my Writings upon that matter; and the whole World has owned that there was
nothing finer nor more clear than what I have said concerning Passions.


Anacr. What an abuse! The question is not to define Passions methodically, as
it is said you have done, but to master them. Men willingly deliver up their
Evils to Philosophy for her to consider them, but not to cure them; and they
have found the secret of framing a Moral which reaches them no nearer than
Astronomy does Can a man forbear laughing, to see some, that for money, preach
up the contempt of riches, and Cowards that fall together by the ears about the
definition of Magnanimous?


The Fifth Dialogue.
Homer. Aesop. Homer. ALL those Fables which you have now related to me,
cannot, indeed, be admired enough: You must needs have been endued with a great
deal of art, that you could thus disguise ^n little Tales, the most important
^nstructions of Morality, and cover your thoughts under these Representations
which are so proper and so familiar.


Aesop, It Is very pleasing to me that I am applauded by you for an Art, wherein
you were so careful.


Homer, I? I did never pretend to it.


Aesop, How, did you not make it your business to hide great mysteries in your
works?


Hom. Alas! not at all.


Aes. Nevertheless all the Learned of my time did say as much; there was not a
word in the Iliads, nor in the Odissea, but they gave it the finest Allegories
in the World. They did maintain, that all the Secrets of Divinity, of Natural
and Moral Philosophy, and of the Mathematics, were enclosed in your Writings.
Truly 'twas somewhat difficult to disclose them, and where one found out a
Moral sense, another found out a Natural sense; but they agreed that you knew
all, and had said all to him that rightly understood it.


Hom. Without lying, I did mistrust that some sort of people would conceive I
had some cunning meaning, where I intended none. As there is nothing like
Prophesying things afar off in expectation of the event; so there is nothing
like putting off Fables, in expectation of the Allegory.


Aesop, You must needs have been a bold man, to entrust your Readers with the
care of putting Allegories in your Poems. Whereabouts would you have been, if
they had been taken literally?


Homer, Well then, the harm would not have been so great.


Aes. What? those Gods who maim one another; that Thundering Jove, who in a
Convention of Deities threatens to beat Majestical Juno; That Mars, who being
wounded by Diomedes, bawls, you say, like nine or ten thousand men, and does
not act like one alone; (for instead of routing all the Greeks, he goes and
complains of his Wound to Jupiter) all this would have been well without an
Allegory?


Hom. Why not? You fancy that the Minds of men seek for Truth altogether?
Disabuse your self. Man's mind and falsehood sympathize most strangely. If you
have a truth to speak, you will do very well to fold it up in Fables, 'twill be
far more pleasing. If you will relate Fables, they may take without having the
least color of truth in them. Thus Truth has need to borrow the shape of
Falsehood to be kindly received in the mind of man; but Falsehood creeps into it
well enough in its own proper shape, for that is the place of its birth, and
its usual place of abode, and Truth is there a mere stranger. Nay, I will tell
you more than this comes to. If I should have killed my self to fancy
allegorical Fables, it might very well have happened that most people would
have taken the Fable, as a thing likely enough to ^ave had been so, and would
have ^et the Allegory alone; and in^eed, you ought to know that my Gods, such
as they are (and ^ll Mysteries laid aside) have not ^een thought ridiculous.


Aes. This makes me quake again: I am terribly afraid that it will be thought
that Beasts might have spoken as they do in my Apologies.


Hom. A pretty fear indeed.


Aesop, Why what? If people have believed that the Gods could have held those
Discourses you made them hold; why will they not believe that Beasts did speak
in the manner as I made them speak?


Hom. Ah! the Case is not the same; Men are willing enoug^ that the Gods should
be as great great Fools as they; but the are not willing that Beasts shou^^ be
so wise.


The Sixth Dialogue*
Athenais. Icasia. Icasia. SInce you will know my Fo^tune, I will tell it you:
T^^ Emperor under whom I live had a mind to marry; and th^^ he might the
better choose ^^ Empress, he caused it to be published, That all Women th^^
thought themselves handsome an^ taking enough to pretend to the Throne, should
come to Constantinople. God only knows what ^^ world of people there was. I
went thither, and I made no doubt but with my youth, my brisk eyes, and my way,
which was pleasant and curious enough, I might not put in for the Empire. The
day of the meeting together of so many pretty Pretenders, we all of us ran over
in a distracted manner the faces of each other; and I took notice with
satisfaction, that my Rivals did look but with an ill eye upon me. The Emperor
appeared; at first he passed by several rows of Beauties without saying a word;
but when he came at me, my eyes were very serviceable to me, and they stayed
him. Indeed, quoth he, looking upon me with a countenance such as I could wish,
Women are very dangerous; they may do a great deal of harm: I thought* there
was only a little wit to be used in the case, and then I was Empress: and in
the trouble I was in, what with hope, what with joy, I strove to make an
answer. In recompense of that, Lord, Women may do, and sometimes have done much
good. This Answer spoiled all; the Emperor thought it so godly, that he durst
not marry me.


Athenais, Sure this Emperor was of a strange humor, to be so afraid of Wit,
and it is to be presumed he had but little judgment in it, to believe that your
Answer did argue much; for to be free with you, it is no very good one, and you
have no great matter to lay to your own charge.


Icasia, Thus go Fortunes; Wit alone made you an Empress, and an appearance
only of Wit hindered me from being one. You were versed to in Philosophy, which
is far worse than to be witty; and notwithstanding all this, you married the
young Theodosius.


Athen. If I should have had such an example as yours before me, it would have
frighted me. After my Father had made me a very learned, and a very godly Lass,
he did disinherit me; so sure did he make himself, that with my learning and my
fine wit, I could not miss of making my Fortune; and to say the truth, I
believed it as well as he. But now I see I ran a great hazard, and that it was
not impossible but I might remain without any means, and have Philosophy alone
for my Portion.


Icas. No sure, but as good luck would have it for you, my adventure had not
yet happened. It would be pleasant enough that upon the like occasion as that
which befell me, some other that knew my Story, and would draw an advantage from
it, were so crafty as to make no show of wit, and that people would laugh at
her.


Athen. I would not be answerable for her success herein, in case she were upon
design; but many times one does by chance commit the happiest Follies in the
world. Have you not heard talk of a Painter who had so well drawn some Bunches
of Grapes, that some Birds were deceived in them, and came and nibled at them?
Do you judge what a Repute this gave him. But the Grapes were born in the
Picture by a little Country Boy; and the Painter was told, That truly they must
needs be well done, since they intised the Birds to them; but that the little
Country Boy must needs be very ill done, since the Birds were not afraid of
him. They were in the right; Yet if the Painter had not over-seen himself in
the little Peasant, the Grapes would not have had that prodigious success as
they had.


Icas. Truly, let a man do what he will in the world, he does not know what he
does; and after the adventure of this Painter, we ought to tremble even in
those Affairs, where we behave our selves well, and fear lest we have done no
fault that might have been necessary; all is uncertain. It looks as though
Fortune took care to give different Successes to one and the same thing, to the
end she may always laugh at humane Reason, which is uncaple of any certain Rule.


DIALOGUES OF THE Ancient Dead WITH THE Modern Dead.
The First Dialogue.
Augustus. Peter Aretine. Peter Aretine. YES, I was a fine Wit in my time, and
I made a pretty considerable Fortune with Princes.


Augustus, You writ then many Books for them.


P. Aretine, None at all; I had a Pension from all the Princes of Europe, and
that could not have been if I should have sat writing of Praises. They had
Wars with one another; when one had the better of the Day, the other had the
better of it: it was not possible to give them all their Praises.


Augustus, What did you then?


P. Aret. I made Verses against them: They could not be admitted into a
Panegyric, but into a Satyr they might. I had so well spread abroad the
Terrous of my Name, that they allowed me Tribute to enable me to commit Follies
in safety.

The Emperor Charles the Fifth, who you must needs have heard speak of here
below, being gone very unadvisedly toward the Coasts of Africa, to receive an
Overthrow, did immediately send me a Chain of Gold. I received it; and looking
sadly upon it, Ah! said I aloud, this is but a small matter, for so great a
folly as he has committed.


Aug. You had found a new kind of way to get money of Princes.


P. Aret. Had not I cause to conceive some hopes of a wonderful Fortune, in
settling my self a Revenue upon the follies of others? It is a good foundation,
and does yield well.


Aug. Whatever you can say of it, the praising Trade is surest, and by
consequence the best.


P. Aret. What would you have? I was not impudent enough to praise.


Aug. Why? You were impudent enough to make Satyrs upon Crowned Heads.


P. Aret. It is not the same thing to make Satyrs: it is not always necessary
to undervalue those they are made of; but to give some certain unrelishing
praises, I fancy a man must in some kind contemn those very persons he praises,
and think them great Cullies. With what face could Virgil tell you, that it was
unknown in what quality you would rank your self among the Gods; and that it
was uncertain, whether you would take upon you the care of the concerns of the
Earth, or whether you would make your self a God of the Sea, by taking to Wife
a Daughter of Thetis, who would willingly have purchased the honor of your
Alliance, though it had cost her all her Waters; or, in fine, whether you would
quarter your self in the Heavens, near Scorpio, who held the place of two
Signs, and who, upon your account, would have straightened himself more?


Aug. Be not surprised at Virgil's boldness. When a man is praised* he does not
take take those praises in the strictest sense; he helps out the Letter, and
the Writer's bashfulness receives great ease from the self-love of them to whom
he applies them. Many times we imagine we deserve praises which we have not;
and how shall we believe that we did not deserve those we have?


P. Aret. You did hope then, upon Virgil's word, that you should marry a
Sea-Nymph, or that you should have an Apartment in the Zodiac?


Aug. No, no. There is something to be deducted from those kind of praises, to
reduce them to some reasonable measure; but, to speak the truth, the abatement
we make is very little, and we take them at our own rates. In short, let a man
be praised in what manner you will, he will always take the advantage of
believing that he is above all common praises, and that his merit did reduce
the praiser to go beyond all bounds. Vanity has diversity of Shapes.


P. Aret. I see well enough, there must be no difficulty made to push praises
to the height of excess; but, at least, as to such as are contrary to one
another, how can one have the impudence to allow them to Princes? I will lay a
wager, for example, that when you did revenge your self of your Enemies without
any show of mercy, nothing was thought more glorious by all your Court, than to
thunder out your fury upon every thing that had the Temerity to oppose you; but
so soon as you had done any action that was mild, the face of things changed,
and nothing was found in revenge, but a barbarous and inhumane Glory: one part
of your life was praised to the prejudice of the other. For my part, I should
have been afraid lest you would have given your self the recreation to take me
at my own words, and would have said to me; Choose either Severity, or Clemency,
to make the Character of an Hero: but when this is done, stick to your own
choice.


Aug. Why, will you have one look so narrowly to it? It Is for the advantage of
great persons, that all matters should be problematical for flattery. Do what
they will, they cannot fail to be praised; if it be for things that are
opposite, it is because they have more than one kind of merit.


P. Aret. But what? Had you never no scruple upon you about all those Elegies
which were heaped upon you? was there any need of straining a man's wit, to
perceive that they were intended to you? Praises do not distinguish Princes;
Heroes have no more than others: but Posterity does distinguish the praises
which have been given to different Princes. Some she confirms, and others she
declares to be base flatteries.


Aug. You will then, at least, yield, that I did deserve the praises given me,
since it is certain that Posterity has ratified them by her Judgment. Nay, in
this case, I have some cause to complain of her; for she has so used her self
to look upon me as the Model of Princes, that it is usual to praise them, by
comparing them to me, and oftentimes the comparison does injure me.


P. Aret. Comfort your self: you will be no farther troubled with this cause of
complaint. To hear how all the Dead that come hither do speak of Lewis the
Fourteenth now reigning in France, it is he that will be looked upon hereafter
as the Model of Princes; and I foresee, that henceforwards it will be thought
that greater praises cannot be given them, than by allotting them some
resemblance with this great King.


Aug. Well then? Do not you believe that those to whom so great an exaggeration
shall be addressed, will hearken to it with pleasure?


P. Aret. That may be. People are so desirous of Praises, that Equality and
Truth are dispensed withal; and so are all requisite Properties.


Aug. It Is clear enough to be seen that your aim is to exterminate all praises.
If none but good ones should be given, who would trouble himself to give them?


P. Aret. All that should bestow them without Interest, it is their right alone
to praise. How happens it that your Virgil did praise Cato so much, when he
said that he did preside in the Assembly of the ^etter sort of persons, who are
separated from the others in the Eli^ian Shades? It Is because he was dead; and
Virgil, that expected nothing from him, nor from his Family, bestowed but one
Verse upon him, and made a reasonable ^hought the bounds of his Elogy. How
comes it that he spoke so ill of you in so many words, at the ^eginning of the
Georgicks? You ^llowed him a Pension.


Aug. I have then flung away ^ great deal of money in praises?


P. Aret. I am sorry for it. Why did not you do as one of your Successors has
done; who, as soon a^ he had attained the Empire, did by a Declaration,
expressly forbi^ the making of Verses for him a any time?


Aug. Alas! He had greater reason than I. Those praises which present
themselves to us are not the true ones, but those are which w^ snatch up by the
by.


The Second Dialogue.
Sapho. Laura. Laura. IT is true, the Muses had a share in the Passions which
we two have had, and they rendered them very pleasant: But this difference there
is, you writ the Praises of your Lovers, whereas my Gallants did all they could
to extol mine.


Sapho. What then? the meaning is, that I loved as much as I was beloved.


Laura. This does not surprise me, for I know that Women commonly are more
tender hearted than Men. That which does surprise me is, that you should let
your Lovers know your inclinations for them, and that you should in some manner
work upon their heart by your Poesies. A Woman's part is but to defend her self.


Sapho. Betwixt you and I, ^ was a little troubled at it; it is an injustice
that Men have done us: They have taken the assailing part, which is far more
easy than the defensive.


Laura. Let us not complain, we have our advantages. We that defend our selves,
we yield when we please; but they that attack us, they do not always overcome,
though they would never so fain.


Sapho. But you do not consider that if these Men do attack us, they follow the
inclination they have to attack us: but when we defend our selves, we are not
very much inclined to make a defense.


Laura. Do you make nothing of the pleasure in seeing by so many sweet Assaults
of so long continuance, and so often redoubled, how they value the Conquest of
your heart?


Sapho. And do you reckon as nothing the difficulty to resist these sweet
Attacks? they see with delight the success of them in all their proceedings
with us.


Laura. But in fine, though after all their diligences, they become Victors in
a fair way, you do them a favor in acknowledging them to be so. You can no
longer make a defense, and they cease not to let you see the value they have
for you, because you make no farther defense.


Sapho. Ah! this does not hinder, but that that which is a Victory for them, is
always a kind of defeat on our side. In being loved, they have no other delight
tha^ that of triumphing over the person who loves them; and happy Lovers are
not happy but because they are Conquerors.


Laura. What? would you have had it ordered that Women should attack the Men?


Sapho. And what necessity is there, that the one should attack, and the others
defend themselves? Let both sides love one another as much as the heart will
allow.


Laura. Oh! things would run too fast; and Love is such a pretty pleasing kind
of Trade, that it was very well done to give it time to last as long as it was
possible. What would it be if one should be entertained upon the first offers?
What would become of all those cares to please, of all that restlesness, when
we tax our selves of some neglect to give satisfaction, of all that earnestness
wherewith we endeavored for one happy moment? to conclude, all that delightful
mixture of pleasure and pain, which is called Love? Nothing would be more
insipid, if we did only exchange love for love.


Sapho. Well then, if Love must needs be, as it were, a Fight, I could rather
wish that Men had been obliged to stand upon the defensive. And have not you
told me too, that Women were more inclined to be tender hearted than they? Upon
that score Women would attack them the better.


Laura. Ay, but they would defend themselves too well. When it is designed that
one Sex should resist, it is intended the resistance should be no more than
would make the Victory better pleasing to the Victor, but not strong enough to
gain it. It ought not to be so weak as to yield upon the first Assault, nor so
vigorous as not to yield at all. Here is our Character, and it is likely it
would not be the Men's. Believe me, when we have well argued the case of Love,
or of any other matter whatever, it is found in the end, that things are well
as they are, and that the pretended Reformation would spoil all.


The Third Dialogue.
Socrates. Montaigne. Montaigne. IT is you then, Divine Socrates! How glad am I
to see you! I am just now arrived in this Country, and I was no sooner come
hither, but I looked up and down for you. In fine, after having filled up my
Book with your Name, and with your Elogies, I can now entertain my self with
you, and learn how you came by that Virtue, so Montaigne's Terms in French,
downright, which had such natural goings, and which could not be fitted with
any example, even in that happy Age you lived in.


Socrates. I am glad to see a dead person that seems to me to have been a
Philosopher; but you being lately come from above, and I not having seen any
body here of a long time (for I am left lonely enough, and there is no great
striving for my Conversation) will you not be disgusted if I ask you some News?
How goes the World? Is it not hugely changed?


Mont. Extremely: You would not know it again.


Socrat. I am glad of it at my heart. I did ever suspect that it would of
necessity become better and wiser than it was in my days.


Mont. What is your meaning? It is grown more foolish, and more corrupted than
ever. That is the change I meant, and I expected to know of you the story of
the time you saw, and wherein reigned so much goodness and righteousness.


Socrat. And I, on the contrary, did expect to hear wonders of the Age in which
you have lately lived. What? Have not the Men of these times corrected
themselves of the follies of Antiquity?


Mont. I believe it is because you are ancient your self, that you speak so
familiarly of Antiquity; but know that there is cause enough to lament its
Manners, and that daily every thing grows worse.


Socrat. Can that be? Methinks all went very cross in my days. I thought that
in the end they would take a more reasonable course, and that Men would better
themselves by the experience of so many years.


Mont. And do Men try Experiences? They are just like Birds, who let themselves
be caught in the same Net, in which an hundred thousand Birds had been already
taken. There is not a Man that does not enter into Life all raw, and the
follies of Fathers are of no advantage to Children.


Socrat. But why do not they make some Experiences? I should think that the
World ought to be wiser, and more regular in its old days, than it had been in
its youth.


Mont. Men in all Ages have the self same Inclinations, over which Reason has
no power at all. So in all places where there are Men, there are follies, and
the same follies.


Socrat. And upon that score, how would you have had the Ages of Antiquity been
better than this Age is?


Mont. Ah Socrates! I knew well enough you had a singular way of arguing, and
drawing so dexterously those you had to deal with into Arguments whereof they
did not foresee the Conclusion, that you lead them whither you had a mind; and
it was that which you called to be the Midwife of their thoughts, and bring
them to Bed. I confess here I am brought to Bed of a Proposition quite contrary
to that which I proposed; for all that, I cannot yield yet. Sure it is, there
are no more any of those vigorous and sturdy Souls of Antiquity, no Aristides,
no Phocions, no Pericles, nor, in short, no Socrates.


Socrat. Where does it stick? Is it that Nature has exhausted her self, and has
no farther strength to produce those great Souls? And why should she have
wasted her self in nothing but in rational Men? None of her Works did
degenerate yet; why should men only degenerate?


Mont. That is a point indeed; they do degenerate. Nature seems to have showed
us heretofore some patterns of great men, thereby to persuade us, that she
could have made some if she had had a mind to it, and that afterward she had
made all the rest with neglect enough.


Socrat. One thing mind. Antiquity is an object of a particular kind, a far
off, does add to it. Had you known Aristides, Phocion, Pericles, and my self,
since you will put me in that number, you would have found in your Age some
persons that were like us. That which does usually cause this prevention in
people for Antiquity, is, because they are out of humor with their Age, and
Antiquity takes advantage thereof. Men exalt the Ancients, to pull down their
Contemporaries. When we lived, we esteemed our Ancestors more than they
deserved; and now, our Posterity esteem us more than is our desert: but our
Ancestors, and we, and our Posterity, all this is equal enough; and I believe
the Spectacle of the World would be very tedious to him that should look upon
it with an eye of Certitude, for it is always the same.


Mont. I should have believed that every thing was in motion, that all did
change, and that the different Ages had their different Characters, as men had.
And indeed, Are not some Ages learned, and are not others ignorant? Are not
some plain and downright, and others again subtle and crafty? Some are serious,
and some are toyish: some again are fine and quaint, and others are gross and
dull.


Socrat. It Is true.


Mont. Why shall there not be then some Ages more virtuous, and others more
wicked?


Socrat. That is no consequence. Clothes change; but by that it is not meant
that the Bodies change their form too: The neatness or the grossness, the
knowledge or the ignorance, the more or less of a certain kind of
downrightness, the serious or the toyish Genius; these make but the outside of
Man, and all this does change; but the heart does not change, and whole Man
consists in the heart. People are ignorant in one Age, but the mode to be
learned may come: People are interested, but the mode to be dis-interested will
never come. Of the prodigious number of Men unreasonable enough that are born
in an hundred years, Nature, may be, has two or three dozen of them that are
reasonable, which she must disperse over the whole Earth; and you judge well
enough, that there are never in no place so many as may make a mode there of
Virtue and of Righteousness.


Mont. Is this distribution of rational men equally made? There might have been
some Ages that might have had a better share than others.


Socrat. Nature does ever act very regularly, but we do not judge as she acts.


The Fourth Dialogue.
Adrian the Emperor. Margaret of Austria. M. of Austria. WHat ail's you? I see
you are all in an heat.


Adrian. I have just now had a strong Contest with Cato of Vtica, about the
manner how we both died. I pretended that in this last action I had showed my
self more a Philosopher than he had.


M. of Austria. I think you very bold, that you dare question so famous a death
as his. Was there any thing more glorious, than to take care that all was well
settled in Vtica, secure his Friends, and kill himself, that he might end with
the Liberty of his Country, and avoid falling into the hands of a Vanquisher,
who would, however have spared him?


Adrian. Oh! if you did narrowly examine that death, you would find there were
several things to question in it. In the first place, he had been so long in
preparing himself for it, and he did prepare himself with such visible strifes,
that no body in Vtica made any question, but that Cato would kill himself.
Secondly, Before he gave himself the blow, he was fain to read often the
Dialogue where Plato treats of the Immortality of the Soul. Thirdly, The design
he had laid put him so out of humor, that, going to Bed, and not finding his
Sword under his Beds-head, (for, as people rightly guessed what he had a mind
to do they had taken it away) he called one of his Slaves to ask him for it,
and gave him so great a blow with his fist upon the face, that with it he
struck out his teeth: this is so true, that he drew back his hand all bloody.


M. of Austria. I confess, this blow with the fist does very much spoil this
Philosophical death.


Adrian. You cannot believe what a stir he made about this Sword taken away,
and how he railed at his Son and at his Servants; saying, that they had a mind
to deliver him up to Caesar, hands and feet tied together. In fine, he scolded
them all in such a manner, that they were fain to go out of his Chamber, and
let him kill himself.


M. of Austria. Indeed, indeed, things might have gone on a little more mildly.
He needed but have peaceably stayed till the next day to give himself his
death. Nothing is more easy than to die when one is bent upon it. But in all
likelihood, the measures he had taken upon the account of his constancy, were
so exact, that he could stay no longer; and he had not, perhaps, killed
himself, had he delayed a day longer.


Adrian. You say right; and I see that you have skill in generous deaths.


M. of Austria. Yet some say, that after they had carried this Sword to Cato,
and had withdrawn themselves, he fell asleep, and snored. That would be brave
enough.


Adrian. And do you believe this? He had but done scolding every body, and
beating his Servants: a man does not so easily fall asleep after such an
exercise. Moreover, his hand he had struck his Slave with did pain him too much
to let him fall asleep, for he was not able to bear the pain he felt: and he
made it be bound up by a Physician, though he was just going to kill himself.
In short, from the time his Sword was brought, till Midnight, he read Plato's
Dialogues twice over. Then I could prove easily by a great Supper he made for
all his friends, by a walk he took afterward, and by all passages that
happened till he was left alone in his Chamber, that it must be very late when
that Sword was brought him: Moreover, the Dialogue he read twice over is very
long; and by consequence, if he slept, he slept but a little while. Truly, I am
much afraid he did but make as if he snored, that he might have the honor of
it from those that hearkened at his Chamber door.


M. of Austria. You do not play the Critic amiss upon his death; which,
however, does carry in the bottom something that is very heroical. But which
way can you pretend that yours has the better of it? For as much as I can
remember, you died in your Bed, in a plain and unremarkable manner.


Adrian. What? Are not those Verses remarkable at all, which I made as I was
just giving up the Ghost? My little Soul, my dear Darling, Thou;
Going thou art, Girl; and whither, God does know.
Alone thou go, naked, and all over quaking. Alas!
What'll become of thy pretty fooling humor, Lass?
What'll become of so many pleasant frolicks, I cannot guess.
Cato treated Death like a business that was too serious, but you see, I
drolled with it: and herein it is that I pretend that my Philosophy went far
beyond Cato's. It is not so difficult haughtily to out-brave Death, as it is to
joak her in a careless manner; nor is it so hard a thing to receive her kindly
when we call her to our aid, as when she comes when we have no need of her.


M. of Austria. Yes, I grant, Cato's death is not so brave as yours; but, as
ill luck would have it, I had not observed that you had made these small
Verses, in which the bravery of yours does consist.


Adrian. This is the way of all the world. Cato may tear out his Bowels, rather
than fall into the hands of his Enemy: it is, perhaps, no such great matter, if
it be thoroughly examined; yet such a feat as that makes a vast show in History,
and there is not one but is taken with it. Another may die fair and quietly, and
be in a capacity to make drolling Verses upon his death, it is more than Cato
has done; but this has nothing in it that is taking. and History does scarce
take notice of it.


M. of Austria. Alas! nothing is truer than what you say; And I my self that
now speak to you, I have a death that I pretend is far before yours, and yet
it is less taken notice of. It Is not, however, a downright death; but such as
it is, it exceeds yours, that does exceed Cato's.


Adrian. How? what do you mean?


M. of Austria. I was an Emperor's Daughter. I was contracted to a King's Son;
and this Prince, after his father's death, sent me back to mine,
notwithstanding the solemn promise he had mad^ to marry me. After this, the
contracted me to the Son of another King; and as I was going b^ Sea to this
Husband, my Ship w^^ beaten with a terrible Tempe^^ which cast my life into
evide^^ danger. Then it was that I mad^ my self this Epitaph:

Megg, that pretty Damsel does h^^^ lie;
Has two Husbands, and yet a M^^^ does die.
The truth is, I did not die (...), but 'twas not my fault. Co^ceive well this
kind of death, yo^ be satisfied with it. Cato's Co^stancy is injured in one
kind, yo^ in another, mine is natural. H^ too high, you are too drolling am
reasonable.


Adrian. What? You tax me of having had too little fear of death.


M. of Austria. I do. It is not likely that a man should be in no disorder at
his dying hour; and I am confident you did force your self then to droll, as
much as Cato did to tear out his Entrails. I am every moment in expectation of
Shipwreck without frightning my my self, and I make my Epitaph in cold blood;
this is very extraordinary, and if there were nothing to moderate this History,
there would be some reason not to believe it, or to believe that I did act only
by way of Rhodomantado. But in the mean while, I am a poor Girl, twice
contracted, and yet have been so unlucky, as to die a Maid: I show my Concern
for it, and that gives my History all requisite appearance of truth. Your
Verses, mind them well, carry no meaning with them; there is nothing but a
Gibbrish, made up of ^ few Childish Terms; but min^ have a very clear Sense,
and giv^ content at the very first: which i^ a sign that Nature speaks in them
much more than in yours.


Adrian. Truly, I should never have believed, that the trouble to die a Virgin
ought to have been so much ^o your Glory.


M. of Austria. Make your sel^ as pleasant with this as you please but my
death, if it may be terme^ so, has another especial advantag^ over Cato's, and
over yours. Yo^ had both of you played the Philosophers so much whilst you
lived that you had engaged your selve upon Honor, not to be afraid o^ death:
and if you had had the liberty to fear it, I cannot tell wha^ would have come
on it. But I, a^ long as the storm lasted, I had a Right to tremble, and make
my ^ries reach Heaven, without any ^ody's taking exception at it, or ^aving a
less esteem for me. Ne^ertheless, I remained quiet enough ^o make my Epitaph.


Adrian. Betwixt you and I, Was ^ot the Epitaph made on Shore?


M. of Astria. Ah! this wrangling ^^us is ill-becoming: I did not so ^y you,
about your Verses.


Adrian. I yield then, in good ^arnest; and I grant, that when ^ertue does not
go beyond the ^ounds of Nature, she is very ^reat.


The Fifth Dialogue.
Erasistrates. Herveus. Erasistrates. YOU tell me wonders. What the Blood
circulates in the Body? the Veins carry it from the Extremities of the Heart,
and go^ from the Heart into the Artery which convey it back again toward the
Extremities?


Herveus. I have showed so many Experiences of this, that n^body makes any
further question of it.


Arasist. We deceived our selve^ very much then, we Physicians o^ Antiquity,
who took the Blood t^ have but one slow motion from the Heart, toward the
Extrem^ties of the Body; and people are highly obliged to you, for having
^bolished this ancient Error.


Herv. So I pretend. And people ^ught too to be so much the more obliged to me,
in that I was the first that set them in the way to make all those fine
Discoveries, as are now made in Anatomy. Since I once found out the Circulation
of the Blood, it is now, who shall find a new Conduit out, to convey the Blood
into all parts of the Body; a new Reservatory? It ^ooks as though whole Man
were melted down again. Behold the advantages our Modern Physic ought to have
above yours. You made it your business to cure the Body of Man, and his Body
was altogether unknown to you.


Erasist. I own that your modern Physicians are better Naturalists than we;
they understand Nature better, but they are not better Physicians; we cured the
Sick as well as they cure them. I could wish all these modern ones, and you the
very first of all, had had Prince Antiochus in hand to cure of his Quartern
Ague. You know how I went about it, and how ^ discovered by the more than
ordinary beating of his Pulse in the presence of Stratonice, that he was
enamoured with that beautiful Queen, and that his whole Disease did proceed
from his violent striving to hide his Passion^ And yet I made so difficult and
so considerable a Cure as that was without knowing that the blood did
circulate; and I am of opinion, that notwithstanding the help you might have
received from this knowledge, you would have been very much puzzled had you been
in my place. The Point then in agitation was not about new Conduits, nor new
Reservatories, what was most considerable to be known in the Patient, was the
heart.


Herv. The heart is not always the Point in question, and all sick people are
not in love with their Mother-in-law, as Antiochus was. I make no doubt but for
want of knowing that the blood does circulate, you have let a great many people
die under your hands.


Eras. What? you take your new discoveries to be very useful?


Herv. Sure enough.


Eras. Answer then, if you please a little question, which I shall put to you:
What Is the reason we daily see as many Dead come hither as ever did come?


Herv. Oh! if they die, it is their own fault; the Physicians are now no more in
fault.


Eras. But this circulation of the blood, these Conduits, these Pipes of
Conveyance, these Reservatories; all these then are of no use to cure?


Herv. Perhaps men have not had pleasure as yet, to make any use of all they
have learnt of late but it is impossible but in time they will fee great effects
thereof.


Eras. Upon my word no hin^ will change. See you? There is ^ certain measure of
useful knowledges, which came early to men whereunto they have made little
addition, and they will no^ go far beyond it, if at all. The^ are thus much
obliged to Nature that she did very speedily inspir^ them with what knowledge
they stood in need of; for they ha^ been undone, if she had left it to the
slowness of their reason to find out. As for other things which are not so
necessary, they are discovered by little and little, and in a long run of years.


Herv. It would be strange that having a better knowledge of man; man cannot
cure him better: At that rate, why should one go about to perfectionate the
knowledge of the body of man? It would be better to let all alone.


Eras. There would be a loss of very pleasant knowledges; but as for the
utility, I think that to discover a new Conduit in man's body, or a new Star in
the Sky, would come to one and the same thing. Nature will have men at some
certain times succeed one another by the means of death; they have the liberty
to defend selves against her till such an appointed instant; but past that, it
will be to no purpose to make new discoveries in Anatomy, in vain will it be to
penetrate further and further into the Secrets of the frame of man's Body;
Nature will not be baffled, People will die after the usual manner.


The Sixth Dialogue.
Berenice, Cosmus Medicis the Second. Cosmus of Medicis. SOme learned Persons
lately deceased have just now told me some News that troubles me very much. You
must understand that Galileus, who was my Mathematician, had made a discovery
of certain Planets that turn round about Jupiter, which, in honor of me, he
called the Stars of Medicis. But I am told that they are scarce known now by
that Name, and that they are but plainly called Jupiter's Satellits. The World
must needs be very wicked now, and very envious of another glory.


Berenice, No doubt of it, I seldom knew more remarkable effects of its
malignity.


C. Medicis, You speak of it with little concern, after the good luck you have
had. You had made a Vow that you would cut off your hair if your Husband
Ptolom^ came back victorious from I can not tell -- what War. He returned
having defeated his Enemies; you Consecrated your hai^ in the Temple of Venus,
and the next day a Mathematician made i^ disappear, and publicly declared,
that they had been change^ into a Constellation, which h^ called Berenices
Locks. To mak^ Stars pass for a Woman's hair, tha^ was far worse than to give
Prince his Name to new Planet^ however your hair has had success, and those
poor Stars called Medicis, could not have the like Fortune.


Berenice, If I could give you my Celestial hair, I would give it to comfort
you; and I should withal be so generous as not to pretend that you should be
much obliged to me for that present.


C. Medicis, It would be considerable though, and I wish my Name were as sure
to live as yours is.


Berenice, Alas! in case all the Constellations should bear my Name, should I
be the better for it? It would be above in the Heavens, and I my self, I should
be still here below. Men are pleasant, they cannot steal away from Death
themselves, and they strive to rob her of two or three Syllables that belongs
to them. This is a pretty Cheat they think to put upon her. Were it not better
they would in an handsome way consent to die, they and their Names too?


C. Med. I am not of your mind: People die, but as little as is possible, and
as dead as they are, they endeavor to fasten upon life still, either in a
piece of Marble which represents them, by stones raised up the one upon the
other; ay, by ones one Tomb. A man drowns himself, and hangs on all these Hooks.


Berenice, Ay, but those things which should preserve our Names from death, die
themselves after their way. To what will you fix your immortality? A Town, an
Empire it self, can hardly be responsible to you for it.


C. Medicis, The invention of giving ones Name to Stars, is not bad; they last
forever.


Berenice, Yet after the manner as I hear people talk, the Stars too are liable
to fail: They say new ones come, and ancient ones go away; and you will see
that at length I shall not have one single hair perhaps remaining in the Sky.
At least that which cannot be wanting to our Names, is as I may say, a
Grammatical death; some changes in the Letters does put them in a condition to
be of no farther use than to entangle the Learned. It is not long since I saw
here below two dead persons, who had a very hot Contest with one another. I
drew near, I asked who they were; and I was told that the one was the great
Constantine, and the other a Barbarian Emperor. Their Dispute was about the
preference of their past Greatness. Constantine said, he had been Emperor of
Constantinople; and the Barbarian that he had been so of Stambole. The first
said, to set out his Constantinople, that it was seated upon three Seas, upon
the Euxin, upon the Bosphorus of Thracia, and upon the Propontides. The other
replied, that Stambole did also command three Seas, The black Sea, the
straight, and the Sea Marmara. This relation of Constantinople and Stambole did
put Constantine into a maze; but after he had exactly informed himself of the
situation of Stambole, he was yet more amazed, to find that it was
Constantinople, which he could not know again, because of the change of Names.
Alas! said he aloud, I should have done as well to have left Constantinople her
first Name of Bizantium. Who Will find out the Name of Constantine in Stambole? He
will indeed find there what he looks for.


C. Medicis, In earnest, you comfort me a little, and I am resolved to have
patience. When all is done, since we could not choose but die, it is pretty
reasonable that our Names should die too; they are of no better quality then we.


DIALOGUES OF SOME Modern Dead.
The First Dialogue.
Anne of Britany. Mary of England. Anne of Britany. FOR certain, my death did
you a great kindness: you, immediately upon it, crossed the Sea to go and marry
Lewis XII. and seize upon the Throne which I left empty for you. But you
enjoyed it but a while, and I was revenged of you by means of your youth and
beauty, which rendered you too too lovely in the King's eye; and, with overmuch
facility, did comfort him in his loss of me; for they hastened his death, and
hindered you from being Queen long.


Mary of England, Truly, Royalty did but just show it self to me, and presently
disappeared.


Anne of Brit. And after this, you became Duchess of Suffolk. A fair fall. For
my part, Heaven be thanked, I have had another destiny. When Charles VIII.
died, I did not lose my place by his death, and I married his Successor; which
is an example of a very singular happiness.


Mary of Engl. Would you believe me, if I did tell you, that I never bore you
any grudge for that happiness.


Anne of Brit. No. I apprehend too well what it is to be Duchess of Suffolk,
having first been Queen of France.


Mary of Engl. But I loved the Duke of Suffolk.


Anne of Brit. That Is nothing After one has once tasted the sweetness of
Royalty, is it possible to relish any other?


Mary of Engl. It is, provided they be of love. I do assure you that you ought
not to wish me il^ for having succeeded you. If, al^ along, I could have
disposed o^ my self, I should have been but ^ Duchess; and I made a speed^
return into England, to take upon me that Title, so soon as ever I wa^
discharged of that of Queen.


Anne of Brit. Were you so lo^ minded?


Mary of Engl. Ambition, I mus^ confess, was of no concern to me Nature has
made some plain pleasures for men, such as are easy and quiet, and their
imagination makes them some that are intricate, uncertain, and hard to come by:
but Nature is more dexterous in creating them pleasures, than they are
themselves. Why do not they commit that charge to her? She invented Love, which
is very pleasing; and they have invented Ambition, which was needless.


Anne of Brit. Who tells you that men did invent Ambition? Nature is no less
busy in inspiring desires of elevation and commanding, than she is in working
an inclination in men to love.


Mary of Engl. Ambition may be easily known to be a work of the imagination;
she is the very form of it: she is restless, full of chymerical projects; she
has no sooner attained her desires, but she out-goes them again. She aims still
at a mark she never hits.


Anne of Brit. And unluckily, Love has a mark which he hits but too soon.


Mary of Engl. That which ensues hereupon is, that one may oftentimes be happy
through Love, and one can be so but once through Ambition; or, if it be
possible to be s^, at least, those kind of pleasures are made for no great
number of persons; and consequently, Nature does not propose them to Men, for
her favors are always very general. Consider Love; it is made for every one.
None but such as do seek out their happiness in a state too elevated, do think
that Nature has grudged them the sweet delights of Love. A King who can make
himself sure of an hundred thousand Arms, cannot, perhaps, make himself sure of
one heart. He knows not whether that which a man does for another person, be
not done out of a point of Honor. His Royalty deprives him of the sincerest
and the sweetest pleasures.


Anne of Brit. You do not render Kings much the more unhappy by this
inconvenience you find out in their condition. When a man sees his Will not
only fulfilled, but prevented an infinite number of Fortunes depending upon a
word, which he may utter when he pleases; so many cares, such a multitude of
designs, so much eagerness, such an application to please, whereof he is the
only object; truly it is a comfort to a man, not to know exactly, whether he be
loved for his degrees sake, or for his person's sake. The pleasures of
Ambition, say you, are designed for too few: what you charge them with, as a
fault, is their greatest charm. In point of good luck Exception flatters; and
such as reign are excepted with so much advantage from the condition of other
men, that though they should lose something of the pleasures which are common
to all the world, they would still have more than they would desire.


Mary of Engl. Ah! judge of their loss by the sensibility wherewith they
receive those sincere and common pleasures, when any present themselves. Hear
what a Princess of my own Blood told me here, the other day, who has reigned in
England, both very long, and very happily, and without an Husband too. She gave
her first Audience to some Dutch Ambassadors, who had in their Retinue an
handsome young man. So soon as he saw the Queen, he turned himself toward some
that were near him, and spoke something to them softly, but with a Countenance
that made her guess pretty well what he said; for Women are endued with an
admirable instinct. Those three or four words of this young Dutchman, whieh
she had not heard, remained more in her mind, than the whole speech of the
Am^assadors: and, as soon as they were gone, she would needs satisfy her self
in what she had imagi^ed. She asked those to whom this ^oung man had spoken,
what he had said to them? They made her ^nswer, with great respect, that it was
what they did not dare to tell ^gain to so great a Queen; and ^orbore telling
it a long time. In ^ine, when she made use of her ^bsolute Authority, she was
told, that the Dutchman had said in a low voice: Ah! this is an handsome
Woman; and had added some grosser expression, but brisk, to show that he liked
her. They made the relation hereof with great apprehension; however, nothing
happened upon it, saving only, that when she dismissed the Ambassadors, she
made a considerable Present to the young Dutchman. See how, among all these
pleasures of Greatness and Royalty, this of being thought handsom^ did touch
her to the quick.


Anne of Brit. But, in fine, she would not have purchased it with the loss of
the other. Any thing that is too downright, is not for Man's turn. It is not
sufficient the pleasures do take with sweetness* they must agitate and
transport ^ man. How comes it to pass, tha^ the Pastoral life, such as the
Poet^ describe it, had never any Being but in their works, and would not be
liked of, if put in practice? It is too sweet, and too too plain.


Mary of Engl. I confess, men have spoiled all. But how happens it, that the
sight of the most Majestical and most pompous Court in the World has not the
power to allure them, so much as the Ideas do which sometimes they propose to
themselves of this same Pastoral Life? merely because they were made for it.


Anne of Brit. In like manner, the sharing in your plain and undisturbed
pleasures, is but to enter into those Chymera's which men frame to themselves.


Mary of Engl. Not at all. If it be true that there are but few persons that
can make such a distinction as to begin with those kind of pleasures, people
are willing, at least, to end with them when they can. The Imagination has run
over all false objects, and she comes back to the true ones.


The Second Dialogue.
Charles V. Erasmus. Erasmus. MAke no question of it: i^ there was any such
thing a^ place among the Dead, I would not yield you the precedence.


Charles V. What? A Grammarian, one of Learning; and what is yet more, a man of
Wit, would pretend to be better than a Prince that has been Master of the
better part of Europe?


Erasmus. Put America to it also, and I shall not fear you a jot the more. All
this greatness was, as one may say, but a composition of many hazards; and if
one should dis-unite all the parts that make it up, you would see plainly that
it was so. If Ferdinando, your Grandfather, had been a man of his word, little
would have remained to you in Italy. If any other Princes but he had the wit to
believe that there were Antipodes, Christopher Columbus would not have applied
himself to him, and America had not been in the number of your States. If,
after the death of the last Duke of Burgundy, Lewis XI. had minded what he did,
Maximilian had not had the Heiress of Burgundy, nor you had not had the
Low Countries. If Henry of Castyle, Brother to your Grandmother Isabella, had
not had an ill Reputation among Women, or if his Wifes Honesty had not been
something questionable, Henry's Daughter had passed for her Daughter, and you
would have missed the Kingdom of Castille.


Charles V. You make me tremble. I fancy now at this very moment, that I am
losing either Castille, or the Low Countries, America or Italy.


Erasmus. Mock not. You would find it a task to make the one a little more
solid, and the other somewhat more faithful. Take all, to the very impotency of
you^ Great Uncle, or the pertness of your Great A^nt, and you will find, that
it will be but necessary for you. See what a brittle building that is, which is
founded upon so many things depending upon hazard.


Charles V. Indeed it is not possible to withstand so strict an Examination as
is yours. I must needs confess, that all my Greatness, and all my Titles do
disappear in your presence.


Erasmus. These are the qualities though you pretended to adorn your self with
all; I have stripped you of them without any trouble. Do not you remember you
have heard say, that Cimon the Athenian, having taken several Persians
Prisoners, did expose to Sale, on one side the Clothes, and their Bodies quite
naked on the other; and that whereas the Clothes were extraordinarily rich,
there was great crowding to buy them; but as to the men, no body would meddle
with them. In good earnest, I am apt to believe, that what did happen to these
Persians, would be the lot of many an one, if there should be a separation made
of the personal Merit from that which Fortune has bestowed upon them.


Charles V. But what is this same personal Merit?


Erasmus. Is that a Question to be asked? All that is within us. The Mind, for
example, Sciences.


Charles V. And one may lawfully glory in them?


Erasmus. No doubt of it, the benefits of Fortune, as Gentility or Riches, are
not it.


Charles V. What you say, surprises me. Does not Sciences come to the Learned,
as Riches do to the most part of such as are rich? Is it not by way of
Succession? You learned men, you inherit of the Ancients, as we do of our
Fathers. If all we enjoy was bequeathed unto us, all that you know was
bequeathed to you also. And it is that which makes many learned men look upon
what they have received from the Ancients, with the same respect as some
persons do upon the Lands and the Houses of their Ancestors, wherein they would
be loath to make any alteration.


Erasmus. But the Great Ones are born^ Heirs to their Fathers Greatness, and
the Learned were not born Heirs to the Knowledge of the Ancients. Learning is
not a Succession that Man receives, it is a new Acquisition which he undertakes
to make; or if it be a Succession, it is hard enough to come by, though it be
very honorable.


Charles V. Well then; set the labor there is to gain the Goods of the mind,
against that a man meets with to preserve the Goods of Fortune, then all is
equal; for, in fine, if you regard difficulty alone, it is certain the concerns
of the World have more in them, than the speculations of the Cabinet have.


Erasmus. But let us not talk of Learning, let us stick to the mind; that
advantage does no ways depend upon hazard.


Charles V. It does not depend upon hazard? What, does not the mind consist in
a certain Conformation of the Brain? And is Hazard the less to be made of, for
taking Birth of a well disposed Brain, than if it were born of a Father that
were a King? You were a great Wit; but ask all the Philosophers, what did
hinder that you were not a stupefied Block-head? Almost nothing, some little
disposition of a Muscle-string; something, in fine, that the exactest Anatomy
could never discover. And will these Gentlemen, your Wits, dare to maintain,
now, that they alone do enjoy Goods which are independent of Hazard; and they
will think then, they have a Right to contemn all other men?


Erasmus. At your rate, to be rich, and to have Wit, is the same Merit.


Charles V. To have Wit is the more happy hazard; but, at the bottom, it is
still an hazard.


Erasmus. All is hazard then?


Charles V. It is so, provided you will give that name to an unknown quality. I
leave it to you to judge, if I have not stripped men better yet than you did: you
only took from them some advantages of Birth, and I do not so much as leave
them those of the mind. If before they took a vanity in any thing, they did
make themselves sure, whether they had any Right to that same thing, there
would be but little vanity in the World.


The Third Dialogue,
Elizabeth of England. The Duke of Alencon. The Duke. BUT why have you
flattered me so long with the hopes of marrying you, since, in your soul, you
were resolved to come to no conclusion?


Q. Elizabeth. I have deceived many an one else, that was not inferior to you.
I was the Penelope of my Age. You, the Duke of Anjou, your Brother, the
Archduke, the King of Swede, you were all my Suitors, that aimed at an Island
far beyond that of Ithaca, I kept you in hand several years, and in the end I
laughed at you.


Duke. Here are in this place some certain Dead, that would not yield that you
were altogether like Penelope: but there are no comparisons that are not
defective in some kind or other.


Q. Eliz. If you were not as great a Buzzard still as ever, and that you could
mind what you say --


Duke. That is well; be serious now, I advise you. Thus you have ever made your
Bravado's of -- Witness that great Country of America, which you made be called
Virginia, in memory of a very doubtful quality. If, by good luck, that place
were not in another World, the name it bears would be very improper: but it is
no matter, this is not the business in question. Do so much as give me a reason
for your mysterious Conduct, and for all those projects of Marriage, which came
to nothing. Is it that the six Marriages of Henry VIII. your Father, did teach
you not to marry; as the continual Courses of Charles V. taught Philip II. to
stay constantly in Madrid?


Q. Eliz. I might keep to the reason which you supply me with. Indeed my Father
spent his whole life in marrying himself, and unmarrying again; in repudiating
some of his Wives, and causing others to be beheaded. But the true secret of my
Conduct is, that I found nothing more pretty than to frame Designs, make
Preparatives, and execute nothing. Enjoyment of what a man does ardently
desire, abates of the esteem of it; and things do not pass from our
imagination, to reality, without some loss. You come into England to marry me;
then nothing but Balls, Feasting, Rejoycings; nay, I go so far as to give you a
Ring. Hitherto every thing smiles as much as possible; all consists but in
Preparatives, and in Ideas: Besides, that which does perfect the delight of
Marriage, is already exhausted. Here I stick, and dismiss you.


Duke. To be free with you, your Maxims would not have suited with me; I should
have desired something more than Chymeras.


Q. Eliz. Ah! if men were debarred of Chymeras, what pleasures would they have
left them? I see well enough that you have had no sense of all the pleasures
which attended your life; but you are very unhappy indeed, that you did lose
them.


Duke. How? What delights were there in my life? I never sped in any thing. I
was like to be King four several times: first of all Poland was the place in
agitation, then England, and the Low Countries; at last, France, in all
appearance, was likely to fall to me: yet, for all this, I am come hither
without Reigning.


Q. Eliz. And this is the happiness you were not aware of. Always imaginations,
hopes; and never any reality. You did nothing but prepare your self for Royalty
all your lifetime, as I did all along prepare my self for Marriage.


Duke. But as I believe that a real Marriage might have fitted you, I tell you
truly, that a real Royalty would have pleased me well enough.


Q. Eliz. Pleasures are not solid enough to bear a search into their depth;
they must be but just smelled unto. They are like those boggy Grounds, which a
man is obliged to run lightly over, without ever settling his foot upon them.


The Fourth Dialogue.
William of Cabestan. Albertus Frederick of Brandebourg. A. F. of Bradebourg. I
Love you the better for having been a fool as well as my self. Tell me a little
what your folly was.


Cabestan. I was a Poet of Provence, much set by in my Age; which caused my
ruin. I fell in love with a Lady, whom I had rendered famous by my Writings. But
she took such a liking to my Verses, that she began to fear lest I should, some
time or other, apply them to some other person; and, the better to secure her
self of the constancy of my Muse, she gave me a cursed Drink that turned my
Wits, and made me incapable of writing any more.


Brand. How long have you been dead?


Cab. Near upon four hundred years.


Brand. Sure, Poets were ever scarce in your Age, since people had so much
esteem for them, as to poison them in this manner. I am sorry you were not born
in my time; you might have made Verses for all kind of handsome Women, without
any fear of Poison.


Cab. I know it. I see none of all those great Wits that come hither, make
their complaints of having had my destiny. But you, in what manner became you a
fool?


Brand. After a very reasonable manner. A King turned fool, after having had
something appear to him in a Forest. But what I saw was far more terrible.


Cab. And what did you see?


Brand. In what manner my Wedding was to be kept. I did marry Mary Eleonora of
Cleve; and all along this great day of rejoicing, I made such judicious
reflections upon Marriage, that they put me out of my Wits.


Cab. Had you any good intervals in your sickness?


Brand. Yes.


Cab. So much the worse: and I, for my part, I was yet more unfortunate: I
recovered my Wits again.


Brand. I should never have believed that that was a misfor^une.


Cab. When a man turns Fool, he must be an absolute one, and continue such an
one. These Alternatives of Reason and Folly, and these Returns again of perfect
Reason is the property of your petty Fools only, that are so but by accident,
and which are but inconsiderable in number. But behold those which Nature does
daily produce in her natural course, and wherewith the World ^s filled; they
are always Fools ^n an equal manner, and are never cured.


Brand. For my part, I should have imagined, that it were best ^o be as little
Fool as one could.


Cab. Ah! do you not know the ^se of folly. Folly hinders a man from knowing
himself; for the ^^ght of his own self is a sad one: and, as it is never time to
know ^nes self, so folly must not forsake ^ man one single moment.


Brand. You may say what you will; you shall not persuade me that there be any
other fools, than those that are so, as both of us have been. The rest of men
have all Reason; else the loss of a man's Wits would be no loss, and one could
not distinguish the Frantic from such as were in their right Senses.


Cab. The Frantic are only fools of another kind. The follies of all men,
being of one same nature, have agreed together with so much ease, that they
have been instrumental to the making up of the strongest ties of Humane
Society: witness that desire of Immortality, that false Glory, and several
other Principles, which give a motion to all that is done in the World. And
none are called fools now, but some certain fools that are, as one may say, out
of employment, and whose folly could not suit with that of the rest, nor enter
into the common dealings of life.


Brand. Those that are frantic, are such great fools, that, for the most part,
they call one another fool; but your other men call themselves wise persons.


Cab. Ah! What is it you say? All men point at one another with their finger,
and Nature has very judiciously settled that Order. The Solitary Man laughs at
the Courtier; but to be even with him, he goes not to trouble him at Court. The
Courtier laughs at the Solitary Man, but he lets him alone in quiet in his
retirement. If there were ever a side to be taken, that were known to be the
only reasonable side, every one would embrace that side, and there would be too
much crowding: it is better to be divided into several little Troops* that
embroil not one another, because some laugh at what the other do.


Brand. As dead as you are, I find you are a great fool with a^^ your
Arguments: you are not well recovered yet of the Drenc^ was given you.


Cab. And this is the Idea which a fool must always conceive of another. True
Wisdom would too much singularize those enjo^ed her: but the Opinion of Wi^dom
renders all men equal, a^^ does no less satisfy them.


The Fifth Dialogue.
Agnes Sorel. Roxelana. Agnes Sorel. TO tell you the truth, I do not understand
your Turkish Gallantry. The Beauties of the Seraglio have a Lover that need
only say, My Will is so; they never taste of the pleasure of Resistance, and
they never afford him the pleasure of Victory: that is to say, that the Sultans
and their Sultanesses do never enjoy the delights of Love.


Roxelana. What will you have? the Turkish Emperors, who are strangely jealous
of their Authority, have, upon Reasons of Policy, neglected those so refined
delights of Love. They were afraid that such Beauties as did not absolutely
depend upon them, would assume too great a power over their mind, and meddle
too much with Affairs.


Agnes Sorel. Why, well, How know they whether it would be a misfortune? Love
is often good for many things: and I that speak to you, if I had not been
Mistress to a King of France; and if I had not had a great power over him, I
know not whereabouts France would have been by this time. Have you heard in
what a desperate condition our Affairs were in under Charles the Seventh, and
into what a plight the whole Kingdom was reduced; the English being almost
Masters of it all?


Roxelana. I have, as this History has made a great noise. I know that a
certain Maid did preserve France: You are then the Maid? And how were you, the
same time, Mistress to the King?


Agnes Sorel. You mistake your self; I have no concern with the Maid you have
been told of. The King, of whom I was beloved, had a mind to leave his Kingdom
to Strangers that were Usurpers, and go and hide himself in a Country full of
Mountains, whither I should not have been very well contented to follow him. I
bethought my self of a Stratagem to divert him from this design. I sent for an
Astronomer, whom I dealt withal underhand; and after he had made a show of
studying my Nativity, he told me one day, in presence of Charles the Seventh,
that all the Planets were Cheats, or I should inspire a passion of long
continuance into a great King. I presently said to Charles; You will not take
it ill then, Sir, that I go over to the Court of England; for you will be no
longer King, and you have not loved me long enough to fulfill my destiny. His
fear of losing me made him resolve to be King of the French; and he began, at
that very time, to re-establish himself. Behold how much France is obliged to
Love, and how gallant that Kingdom ough^ to be, though it were but by way of
acknowledgment.


Roxelana. It Is true. But ^ must to my Maid again: Wha^ did she do then? Could
History be so much mistaken* as to attribute to a young Country Mai^ that which
did belong to a Cour^ Lady, the King's Mistress?


Agnes Sorel. If History should ^e so far mistaken, it would be ^o great
wonder. Yet it is most certain, that the Maid did highly encourage the Soldiers;
but I had ^efore-hand animated the King. She was a great help to this Prince,
whom she found ready to engage with the English: but, had it not been for me,
she would not have found him in that posture. In short, you will no farther
question the share I have in that great Affair, when you shall know the
testimony which was given in my behalf in this, by one of Charles the Seventh's
Successors, in this Quatrine. Gentle Agnes, more Honor is thy due,
The Cause being France, for to rescue.
Then what, in a Cloister, can be done
By devout Hermit, or enclosed Nun.
What say you to it Roxelana? You will own, that if I had been a Sultanness;
like you, and had not had a Right to threaten Charles the Seventh as I did, he
had been undone.


Roxelana. I wonder at the vanity you take in this petty Action. You had no
difficulty to gain very much upon the mind of a Lover, you that were free, and
your own Mistress: but I, as much a Slave as I was; I did, for all that, make
the Sultan submit unto me. You made Charles the Seventh King, almost against
his Will; and I made Soliman my Husband, in spite of himself.


Agnes Sorel. But how? They say, the Sultans never marry.


Roxelana. I grant it: However, I was resolved to marry Soliman, though I could
not bring him to it out of hopes of an happiness which he had not, as yet,
obtained. I will tell you a stratagem that goes beyond yours. I began to build
Temples, and to do several other works of Piety; after which, I made show of a
deep Melancholy. The Sultan asked me the reason of it a thousand and a thousand
times: and when I had made as much a do as was necessary, I told him, that the
cause of my trouble was, because all my good Actions, as our Doctors had told
me, did me no good; and that, as I was a Slave, I did but labor sor Soliman,
my Lord. Hereupon Soliman made me free, to the end, that the Merit of my good
Actions might redound to my own self. But when he had a mind to live with me as
formerly, and treat me like a Beauty of the Seraglio, I made as if I were much
surprised; and represented unto him, in a very serious manner, that he had no
Right over the Person of a free Woman. Soliman had a tender Conscience: he went
to a Doctor of the Law, with whom I did deal underhand, to consult about this
Case. His Answer was, that Soliman should beware of pretending any thing over
me, who was no more his Slave; and that, unless he did marry me, I could be no
longer his. Now he is more in Love than ever. He had but one Choice to make,
but a very extraordinary one, and dangerous to boot for a Sultan: However, he
made it, and married me.


Agnes Sorel. I must confess, it is a brave thing to make those submit, who do
so fore-arm themselves against our Power.


Roxelana. Men may do as much as in them lies: when they are laid hold on by
their Passions, one may lead them where one please. Let me return to life
again, and let me have the most domineering man in the world; I will handle him
as I will my self, so I have a great deal of Wit, Beauty enough, and but little
Love.


The Sixth Dialogue.
Jane the First of Naples. Anselme. Jane of Naples. HOW? Can you tell me
nothing that is to come? You have not forgot all your former Astrology?


Anselme. And how is it possible to put it in practice? We have neither Sky nor
Stars here.


Jane of Naples. It Is no matter. I will dispense with you, for observing the
Rules so exactly.


Anselme. It would be pretty, that a dead man should prophecy. But yet, upon
what?


Jane of Naples, Upon me, upon what concerns me.


Anselme. That is a good one: You are dead, and will be so still: This is all I
have to foretell of you. Is our Condition such, that our Concerns may change?


Jane of Naples. No. But yet, that is it which does cruelly trouble me: And
though I know nothing will happen to me, if you would; for all that, foretell
me something; it would employ me. You cannot imagine what a sad thing it is, to
have no time to come to look upon. Come; some little Prophecy, pray you, such
as you will.


Anselme. To behold your restlesness, one would think you were yet living. Thus
one is too above. One cannot be what one is there, with patience: we anticipate
always what we shall be; but here we must be more wise.


Jane of Naples. Ah! Have not men reason to do as they do? The time present is
but an instant, and it would be a pitiful case, they should be reduced to limit
their foresight there: Is it not better they should extend it as far as it is
possible, and gain something upon time to come? They possess themselves,
however, of so much beforehand.


Anselme. But they borrow so much upon time to come, by their imaginations, and
by their hopes, that, when it is present, they find that it is quite spent, and
make no use of it. In the mean time, they do not break themselves of their
impatience, nor of their restless humor. Men's great Lure is, Time to come
still; and we Astrologers know it better than any. We boldly tell them, that
there are cold Signs and hot Signs; that some are Male, and some are Female;
that some Planets are good, and some bad; and that there are others that, in
themselves, are neither good nor bad; but they take upon them either of the two
Qualities, according as they fall or light in company. And all these flames are
very well accepted of, because it is believed they lead to the knowledge of
time to come.


Jane of Naples. Why, do they not truly? I would have you that have been my
Astronomer, tell me something that is ill of Astrology.


Anselme. Hear me. A dead man would not tell a lie: I did deceive you with this
Astrology that you value so.


Jane of Naples. Oh! Herein I do not believe you your own self. How could you
have foretold me, that I should be married four times? Was there the least
appearance, that a person that was any whit rational, would engage in Matrimony
four times one after the other? You must needs have read it in the Heavens.


Anselme. I consulted them far less than I did your inclinations: but, after
all, some Prophesies that fall out right, prove nothing. Shall I carry you to a
dead person, who will tell you a pretty pleasant story? He was an Astronomer,
and gave no more credit to Astrology than I did. Nevertheless, to try whether
there was any thing of certainty in his Art, he did apply his whole care, one
day, to observe the Rules exactly; and did foretell some particular Events in
one person, harder by much to guess at, than your four Marriages. All he
foretold did come to pass: Never was he more surprised. He presently looked
over his Astrological Calculations, which had been the Ground of his
Predictions, know you what he found? He had made a mistake; and, if his
Supputations had been right, he should have foretold the quite contrary of
what he did foretell.


Jane of Naples. If I did believe this were true, I should be much concerned it
should not be known in the World, that they might undeceive themselves in
Astronomers.


Anselme. There are other-guise stories than this known, and more to their
disadvantage; and yet their Trade holds good. People will never be dis-abused
in any thing that concerns Time to come; it has too powerful a Charm. Men, for
example, sacrifice all they have to one Hope; and all they had, and what they
have lately purchased, they still sacrifice it to another Hope: and this seems
to be a malicious Order, established in Nature, to bereave them still of what
they possess. Men do little care to be happy in the moment then present, they
put off being so to a Time to come, as though that time should be of another
Make, than this that is already come.


Jane of Naples. No, it is not of another Make; but it is good to fancy it so.


Anselme. And what is the Effect of this fine Opinion? I know a little Fable
that will inform you. I did formerly learn it at the Court of Love, it was a
kind of Academy, which was held in your Country of Provence. A man was thirsty,
and was sat down by a Fountain. He would not drink of the Water that was
running before him, because he hoped, that in some short time better would
come. This time being past; This is still the same Water, said he, this is not
that which I will drink of; I had rather tarry a little longer yet. At length;
as the Water was still the same, he stayed so, that the Spring happened to dry
up, and he drank not at all.


Jane of Naples. As much as happened to me. And I believe that, of all the Dead
that are here, there is not one who was not deprived of Life sooner than he had
made the use of it, he did intend. But what matters it? I reckon, the pleasure
of foreseeing, hoping, of fearing too, and of having before one a Time to
come, to be great things. A wise man, in your Opinion, would be like we Dead,
^^ whom the Present, and the Time to come are perfectly alike: and this wise
man would, by conquence, find it as irksome as I do.


Anselme. Alas! Man's Condition is pretty, if it be such as you believe it is.
He is born to aim at all, and so enjoy nothing; to be always going, and arrive
at no place.


THE END.

