JULIJ 8vo. 1687.

Libellus cui Titulus, PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines, etc.

Imprimatur.

Tho. Witherley, Praeses Coll. Med. Land.

Censores. Jo. Betts, Edw. Brown, Guil. Briggs, Guil. Dawkins,


PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR THE Touchstone of Medicines.

Discovering the VIRTUES Of VEGETABLES, MINERALS, and ANIMALS,
BY THEIR TASTES and SMELLS.

In Two Volumes.

By Sir JOHN FLOYER, of the City of Litchfield, Knight. M. D. of Queens-College,
Oxford.

Saporum Speculatio plurima jucunda, and non minus utilia in se continet.
Willis de Anima Brutorum. LONDON, Printed for Michael Johnson, Bookseller: And
are to be Sold at his Shops at Litchfield and Vttoxiter, in Staffordshire; and
Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leichestershire. 1687.

PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines.

VOL. I. Containing Three PARTS.

Part the First. OF TASTES and ODORS In general.

Part the Second. A Phytological Essay, How to Discover the Virtues of PLANTS,
whether Spontaneous in England, or found in Gardens and Shops, by their TASTES
and SMELLS.

Part the Third. OF THE Tastes and Smells of the Products of VEGETABLES; viz.
Gums, Resins, Turpentines, etc.

The Second Volume will be Published next Michaelmas-Term.

To the Right Honorable, George Lord Dartmouth, Master of the Horse to His
Majesty, General of all His Majesty's Ordnance and Armories, Chief Governor of
His Majesty's Tower of London, Lord Lieutenant of the Tower-Hamlets, and One of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
I Question not, but This Essay will be more kindly Received, for having Your
Name prefixed to It; since That is so much honored for Your great Services to
the Public, and signal Loyalty to His present Majesty: And all Persons must
needs therefore greatly esteem Your Merit, Courage, and Experience in Military
Affairs; since the KING has manifested His Approbation of Them, by the Great
and Honorable Trusts conferred upon You.

My Lord, I will give You a few Instances of the Design and Usefulness of these
Papers; that I may obtain Your Protection against those morose Men, who
endeavor to oppose this New Undertaking, though they cannot but acknowledge,
that they approve of It.

The Design of This Essay, is, To vindicate the Art of Curing Diseases, from
the common Scandal of being Conjectural, by Describing the Tastes and Odors of
Medicines, and also of Animal Humors: For by These, Medicines were first
discovered, and the Humors of the Body examined; and from the Observation of
the Agreement and Contrarieties betwixt the Taste of Humors in the Body, and
the Medicine, it was easy for Physicians to infer, That by a Medicine of the
same Taste, the Humors of the Body are Preserved; and by the contrary Taste in
the Medicine, they are Altered and Corrected.

These are the true Fundamental Rules of Physic, built on the Testimony of our
Senses, and not on the Whims of Chemists, or the Fanaticisms of Occult
Qualities; by which Medicines work, like Charms, insensibly.

Hence Quacks give to their Medicines very many, and too unreasonable
Commendations: They also pretend to an Experience of a particular Medicine, as
well as the best Physician. But it is only the Taste and Smell of the Medicine,
by which its Virtue must be tried betwixt the Physician, and the Quack: By
these the true Physician knows its Virtue, the Manner of its Preparation, the
Suitableness of it to the Humor to be Corrected, and to the Constitution of
the Patient: Of all which the Quack is ignorant.

When the several Compositions of Tastes, and sometimes Odors, in the same
Plant, are well considered by those who shall read the Descriptions I have
given of them, I question not, but that the Artificial Jumbles of many
Medicines together, will be Rejected; and every Ingenuous Practicer will
chiefly make use of Simple Medicines; by which his Patient will be more
suddenly, safely, and pleasantly Cured.

I have further proposed some Notions about Tastes in general, for the easier
discovering of the Nature of such Plants, as grow common in England. I have
mentioned Those I have met with near Litchfield: And I have added Exoticks;
that by comparing the Tastes and Virtues of both, we might the better
understand Those of Our own. It is a great Shame to our Profession, that the
Ignorant Indians should know more of Plants in their Native Country, and do
greater Cures by Them, than our Artists can by Ours.

I thought it absurd to write a Latin Discourse about English Plants; which is
designed for the Use of English Men, who are further to try and examine the
Tastes and Virtues that I have mentioned. Hippocrates and Galen wrote their
Physical Books in the Language of the Country where they Practiced: And the
Learned Mr. Boil has both Honored and Improved our Language, by his Physical
Discourses in English. I have therefore wrote in English, that I might the more
encourage our Countrymen to enquire into the Virtue of our Native Plants; we
being hitherto obliged to our Old English Herbals, for a Collection of the
Virtues of many Plants from the Countrymen; to whose Sagacity and Experiments
the greatest Physicians are hitherto obliged. And since there have been so many
false Commedations given of Medicines, and mistaken Notions of Physic, I
thought it reasonable to give my Countrymen some Advertisements of these
Abuses, and to enable them to a better Judgment of the right Nature of Physic.

By the Instances I have given, I hope I have convinced Your Lordship of the
great Usefulness of this Essay; and presume, All who have a generous Love for
their Country, will pardon the Fault (if it be One) of Writing in English.

I here Present Your Lordship with the first Fruits of my Studies, as an humble
Acknowledgment of Your great Favors to Me; and that I might make this Public
Declaration of My being,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Faithful Humble Servant, JOHN FLOYER.

TO THE READER.
THE famous Effects of the Cortex Peruvianus, in Curing of Agues, gave Me the
first Occasion of inquiring into the Tastes of the Barks of Trees in our own
Country; that I might find, which were like it: And from thence I proceeded to
enquire into the Tastes of Herbs, for these Three or Four Years last past.

I had then no other Herbal by Me, but Mr. Ray's Catalogue of English Plants:
From whence I took the Names of Plants, and the Method of placing Them in an
Alphabetical Order by Themselves: But because I could not meet with all He
mentions, I resolved to supply that Defect from our Country-Gardens, and
Apothecaries Shops, where I tasted some Plants that were Dry and Old.

The Virtues of Those in the Shops being more experimented and known, I thought
by Them the better to understand our Country-Herbs: And when I had tasted, and
set down the Tastes and Odors of those Plants, I perceived it was easy for Me
to give an Account of their Virtues Collected by Dioscorides, Scroder,
Etmuller, Mr. Ray, and Others. By the Reading of Hippocrates, Dioscorides, and
Galen, I found that the Ancients had the same Way of finding out the Virtues of
Plants by their Taste and Smell: Wbich is most evident in Galen's Books of the
Nature of Simple Medicines; where I found the Tastes and Odors of many Plants
Described, as I have done; which gave Me a great Satisfaction, when I found my
Taste to agree with Theirs of former Ages; which I had not read till I had
finished my Descriptions of Tastes and Odors.

This Summer I visited the Famous Physick-Garden at Chelsey, in which I found a
great Number of curious Plants; but have not given the Tastes of above Forty or
Fifty, my Affairs not permitting Me to go above twice. I was pleased with many
Curiosities There, which the Ingenuous and obliging Mr. Watts showed Me;
especially the Tree which bears the Jesuits Bark. We observed a Turpentine in
it; and not the Laurel-Bitter Taste, evident in ordinary Bark. I have since
observed a Turpentine-Smell in the fresh Young Leaves of Laurel and Walnut; and
also of Black Currains, and some Others. The Leaves of the Tree mentioned, were
then very Young; and the Taste could not then be so certainly described, as it
may be in the midst of Summer: But the Taste of the Bark would best discover
the Specific Taste and Juice of that Tree. I very much admire Mr. Watts's
Ingenuity, in ordering his Plants into a Method for Learners; and in his
Artificial Heats for the more early Ripening of Fruit. His Taste and Smell did
very much agree with Mine; and did readily acknowledge my right Classing of
many Plants. I was also obliged to the Company of Dr. Baynard, and Dr. Betts,
Junior; who tasted some Plants at Chelsey with Me, and concurred also in the
Description of their Tastes and Smells.

I have not wholly trusted to my own Taste, in the Description of our Country
Herbs, but have consulted the Tastes of all sorts of Persons; and for that am
obliged to diverse Divines, Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, Gentlewomen, and Young
Persons, who have been my Patients; whose Judgments, as Galen says, is
Vncorrupt and Vnprejudic'd. I must needs acknowledge, that the Palats of Women
are more Critical than Men's, who generally dull it by Intemperance and Tobacco.

I shall readily Retract any Error I have committed; but advise the Reader, not
too confidently to conclude my Mistake on the sudden: For it did require a long
Experience in Tastes, before I could distinguish many Compositions, and how to
express Them; and I took notice, that by tasting many Things together, I could
distinguish nothing.

When I had Collected my Tastes and Smells,I found it necessary to Collect the
known Virtues out of Dioscorides, Mr. Ray, and other Authors; that I might give
an Account of those Virtues by their Taste and Smell: All which are mentioned
in the Second Part of this Essay, which was first wrote; and out of which I
made the Notions about Tastes and Smells in general. So that if any Assertion
be obscure, for want of Instances, in the First Part, you may find Them in the
Second; and if the Reason of the Virtue does not appear clearly in the Taste
given in the Second Part, consult the Taste in general in the First.

I added the Tastes of Resins, Gums, and Turpentines in the Third Part; because
they are the Oily Specific Juyces of Plants.

Because Plants grow amongst Minerals, and are at last turned into an Animal
Substance, I thought fit to add what I knew of their Tastes; that thence the
Tastes, Nature, and Virtues of Vegetables might be better explained. The Tastes
of Animal Humors were long since observed by Hippocrates:

(...). Hip. de Prisca Medicina.

For there is in Man, a Bitter, a Salt, a Sweet, a Tart, an Acerb, an Insipid,
and a Thousand more; which have all manner of Faculties.

I have reduced, in the Fourth Part, Medicines into Specific Classes; and
distinguished the several Specificks by their Tastes, that Physicians might more
readily find what Taste is necessary for the Correcting of particular Humors.

In the Fifth Part I have reduced Plants into the Summa Genera, by these Eight
Tastes, being All, but the First, the Tastes of the Specific Juyces of Plants;
(viz.) Earthy, Mucilaginous, Sweet, Bitter, Aromatic, Fetid, Acrid, Corrosive;
(Acids will not make a Class different from Astringents, neither of them being
the Taste of any Specific Juice.) These Summa Genera are sub-divided into
Species, by their several Compositions of Tastes, or a particular
distinguishing Smell.

I might have added some particular External Accidents of either Seed, Leaf,
Root, or Flower, for the Distinction of the Individuals in each Species: But
for That I shall referr the Reader to Mr. Ray's Catalogus Plantarum nova, or
his History of Plants; where he may read a full Collection of all the Accidents
of Plants, and find a great many Tastes collected by him. Which excellent Book
came not to my Hands, till the greatest Part of my Book was transcribed; and
since, I have read it, and given some Account of the Virtues There mentioned by
him.

I hope, I shall make it manifest, in the ensuing Discourse, that there is no
Virtue yet known in Plants, but what depends on the Taste and Smell, and may be
known by them.

This was, certainly, the Foundation, on which the old Physicians raised the
Art of Physic; but they were strangely led from it by Aristotle's Philosophy,
which taught them to express the Virtues of Medicines, by Hot, Cold, Moist, and
Dry; to which, and to Occult Qualities, they attributed all Effects, neglecting
the Information of their Senses. But We have now more Advantages, than the
former Ages. By Chemistry we distinguish the Principles which produce each
Taste: And the Learned Mr. Boil has given us a clear and satisfactory Account
of Qualities. The Famous Malpighius, and Ingenious Dr. Grew, have discovered
the several Vessels of Plants; and the Last has given us his Curious
Reflections upon Tastes. From the Famous Anatomists of our Age, Harvey, Willis,
Lower, Needham, Glisson, etc. we have a clearer Description of the Vessels,
Viscera, and Humors of Animals, than was known to former Ages. All which
Improvements I found very useful to Me, in the Explication of the Virtues of
Medicines by their Tastes: And therefore I ought, here, to acknowledge it, not
having leisure to make particular Quotations.

I hope, the Reader will hereby be excited to promote the further Descriptions
of Tastes; without which, the Nature of a Medicine, nor the Manner of its
Operation, cannot be understood: And let us not confine our selves to Five
Empirical Medicines, since there are such Varieties of Tastes; and every Taste
has as certain an Effect, as the Laurel-Bitter in the Jesuits Powder, if we
use it in its due Time, Place, and Quantity. The chief Business of a Physician,
being to choose, and apply Tastes, and not to compound Medicines; for That is
done by Nature it self: For in those Medicines We call Simple, there are diverse
Compounded Tastes.

I suppose, there is some Fear upon Physians, that they should do Themselves
some Injury; and therefore have been discouraged from Tasting: But, I hope, it
will be considered, how disingenuous it is in some Physicians, who cause their
Patients to Swallow, what they dare not Taste Themselves.

The Corrosive and Narcotick Plants may be warily Tasted; and though some of
Them will, by being Tasted, get into the Stomach, yet a little can do no Harm.
It is true, that Gesner Poisoned himself; but it was by taking Two Drachms of
Doronicum-Root, and not by tasting of it only. I cannot believe, I have
received any Prejudice by Tasting, though I have often blister'd my Mouth, and
disordered my Stomach.

I hope* the Candid Reader will pardon those Faults which have happened in
these Papers, by my Distance from the Press, and the many long and frequent
Interruptions* I have had by a Country-Practice, and ill Health; which have
hindered the making of some Corrections, that should have been made both in the
Style and Method of the following Book.

In Opus Elaboratissimum eruditi admodum Viri Joannis Floyeri, Equitis, Aurati,
and Doctoris Medici.
MYstica Naturae panduntur multa fapore,
Detergens virtus, discutiensque patent.
Tincturam Roseam, Lapathumque, Sisymbria, Myrtum,
Communi sensu Styptica Lingua sapit.
Sparsus Odor vere referens Arcana Medendi
Quidni tantus erit quantus and ipse sapor?
Quale Rosae spirant inter sua Lilia mixtae;
Thus, Aloe, Muscus, Galbana tale docent.
Hoc lege, quod crebro tibi fert Floyerus ab usu,
Cum dulci miscens utile; puncta tulit.
Niltulit insipidum, si Sal sapit omnia; Odori
Nil tulit ingratum, spirat ubique Rosas.
J. GROENEVELT, M. D.

NAturam solitis Medicina aggressa querelis,
Dic, ait, o Genitrix, quae tua Nata rogat.
Ignotae valiant Plantae quid mill per oras;
Ac Animal quantum prosit in Art mea.
Quid juvet, ac noceat, caecis Minerale Latebris
Pulsum, quaeque tuo nunc geris ima sinu.
An miris variata modis nisi ludis in Orb,
Si solum casus deteget ista modo?
Respondet Natura; Meo deprompta recessu
Cuncta patent, debitis excutienda modis:
Praestet quanta Frutex, Animal, Minerale, docebit
Vel sapor, ac nares quae ferit aura levis.
Excolit ecce tuam Floyer Industrius Artem:
It qua ad summa via, quo fuit orta modo.
Haec Sagacissimo Authori gratulabundus accinit

Christophorus Crelle, M. D.
Medicorum Londin. Collega.
A Phytological Essay, etc.
The First Part. Of Tastes in general.
CHAP. I. The Division of Tastes into Simple and Compound.
THE Organ of Taste is curiously described by Malpighius, to be certain Nervous
Papillae, placed upon the Tongue, and about the Mouth and Throat; which are
affected differently in every sort of Taste.

Dr. Willis affirms, That Gustatus is Quaedam quasi tactus species, depending
on the different Figures of Bodies; which, by the different Texture and Motion,
produce diverse Affections, Alterations, or Modes of Tastes on the Organ: As
Soft, Hard, Moist, Dry, Smooth and Rough; Grateful, as Sweetness; Ungrateful,
as Bitterness Greetiness, and Unctuousness; Cool, Hot, or Temperate; Sharp,
Corroding; Salt, Slimy, or Astringent; Contracting the Lips, and Choking;
Vesicating, Exuleerating; Pungent, Penetrant; Aromatic, Fetid, or Abominable;
Nauseous, Detergent; Burning in the Throat, Pricking in the Mouth by rough
Leaves: And diverse other Modes might be added to these.

According to this Consideration, no Plant has any Simple Taste; but produces
different Modes: Neither have the most Simple Principles of Plants one Simple
Mode or Affection, but two or more depending on their Motion and Texture.

Acids have a different and less Agitation of Parts, than the Organ; and
therefore they taste Cool; and by their Angular Figure or Edges, they are
Pungent.

Water cools and moistens by the Globular Figure of its Particles; and by their
less Agitation, than the Organ of an Animal.

Oil of Plants is of a congruous Temper or Heat; and by the ramose or viscous
Parts, is slimy, and of a smooth Taste.

Earthy Plants are greety, hard and dry in Taste, from the Solidity and unequal
Particles of Earth.

In distinguishing of Simple and Compounded Tastes of Plants, I do chiefly
consider the different Textures and Motion of the Original Principles, as
producing Simple Tastes; and not the different Modes of Taste. Therefore,
because these Four, Earth, Water, Acid, and Oil, are the Original Principles of
Plants, out of which some other Compositions are immediately made; as Salts,
Gums, Turpentines and Mucilages, etc. and because these have a determinate
Texture and Motion, whereby they produce some certain Modes of Taste; I think
fit to call these Four Tastes, (viz.) Watery, Earthy, Oily, and Acid, The only
Simple Tastes in Plants. And where any Taste depends on diverse Principles,
that Taste is justly esteemed Compound; having a certain Texture, and Motion,
resulting from the Composition of the different Textures, and Agitation of the
Principles; which produce a different Taste in Composition, from the Taste of
any Principle.

Compound Tastes (considered as particular Plants) arising from some of the
Four Principles of Plants, are,

1. Bitter, which is compounded of Oil, Acid and Earth; having an unequal
Texture; detergent, unpleasant: Compared by Dr. Willis, to the Head of a Teasle
or Brush.

2. Astringents are compounded of Acid and Earth; having a roughness in
Texture, contracting and exasperating.

3. Mucilaginous is compounded chiefly of Oil, Acid and Water; and of a smooth
Texture, cooling and moistening.

4. Tungent is compounded of an Oyly-Acid, and with some Earth, united, by
Fermentation, into Volatile Salts; or, by Fusion in the Fire, into Fixed Salts;
both of which taste Salt, Pungent, Penetrant, Drying, from their long
sharp-pointed Figures.

5. Sweet is compounded of a Rarefy'd, and well-digested Oil, and Acid; whereby
it is of a smooth Texture, grateful, and easily convertible into Bitter; having
the same Principles, by the Alteration of the Texture only.

Note, I do not find any Saltness naturally and considerable in Plants; but
only externally, from the Seawater: And therefore, do not reckon That a Taste
amongst Plants, because the Natural Salt of Plants tastes only Pungent.

Diverse Tastes are compounded of a Simple Taste, and a Compound: As,

1. Acrid is compounded of a little Oil, and a great deal of Salt; being Hot,
Pungent, and Burning.

2. Acerbs are compounded of Acid and Astringent; being partly of Angular, and
partly of a rough Figure.

Tastes arising from Compounded Tastes

1. Nauseous, which is compounded of Bitter-sweet, or Bitter-slimy; and of a
Texture deterging and smoothing.

2. Austeres are compounded of Bitterish and Astringent; and are of a very
rough Texture.

3. Nitrose is compounded of Cool and Bitter: Plants of this Taste are Watery,
Slimy, and Bitterish; as Beets.

Tastes compounded of other Compound Tastes, and a particular Smell, are,

1. Aromaticks, which are compounded of Acrids, Bitterish or Sweet, with a
Fragrant Smell.

2. Fetid Tastes are compounded of Bitter, Acrid or Mucilaginous Tastes; with a
Fetid Smell.

3. Cress-Tastes are compounded of a Bitterish and Acrid Taste, and a quick
Pungent Smell, which flies from the Tongue into the Nose; as Mustard Seed, etc.
And we find many Plants Tasting as they Smell.

To describe the different Affections of the Organ by Taste, I think
unnecessary: For the Eyes know particular Colors, without discerning and
distinguishing the manner of their Impression; and by the Feeling, we know many
Things, though we distinguish not all the Qualities we feel: So the Taste,
whose Sense is like the touching of an Object, knows (Watery, Earthy, Acid,
Greety, Astringent, Mucilaginous, Oily, Bitter, Sweet, Resinous, Gummy,
Terebinthinate, Aromatic, Abominable, Pungent, Corrosive, Hot and Cool, Crude,
Mellowy, Nauseous Tastes, and Pea-Tastes) immediately, without considering the
particular Mode by which they affect. And because these are the common known
Tastes, out of which other Tastes are made; therefore these respectively may be
called Simple Tastes, because the Compound Tastes of Plants are produced by a
Mixture of these. And these Compound Tastes are observable, either in the same
Liquor; as in Turpentine, Bitter, Slimy and Acrid may be Tasted; and in many
Milks of Plants, Bitter, Acrid and Gumminess: Or else the Compounded Tastes are
lodg*d in different Vessels and Liquors; as in the Lymphaticks, is a sweet
Lympha; in the Muciducts, a Mucilage; in the Lactiferous Vessels, a Milk, which
is either Bitter-Acrid, or Bitter-Smoaky, or Sweet; in the Balsam Vessels, a
Turpentine; in the Parenchymous Parts of Plants, a crude Juice; in the Ligneous
Parts, a Lympha; in the Skins of Fruits, and the Stones and Seed, a different
Taste from the Juice of the Pulpy Part. The Roots, Stalks, Leaves, and Fruit of
some Plants, have their different Tastes from the different Digestion, Mixture,
Texture and Colature of the Juyces of those Plants* in their several Parts.

CHAP. II. Of the Virtues of Tastes, and the Principles by which they are
produced.
IF we use the Testimony of our Senses for the discovery of the Principles or
Ingredients, out of which the Juyces of Plants, by different Mixtures, are
produced; they will inform us of Earthy, Watery, Oily, and Acid Principles; and
a Pungency, which is a Salt.

Earthy Parts are in Mosses and Woods; Tastes.

Water in all Plants; which is sufficiently Watery Part is supplied by Rain and
Dew; whose great quantity this Year, (1685.) has made many Plants prodigiously
great: But in the two last dry Years, the want of them either dwarft them in
their Growth, or hindered their Production, or preserved them not sufficiently
from the scorching Heat. This is the Vehicle of the other Principles, in which
the Acid swims readily, as also the Pungent Particles, and combine together; as
Acid and Alcali: In this the Oils are mixed, by means of the Acid and Earth.

From these Two Principles of Plants, these following Tastes arise:

From much Earth in Plants arise, First, Taste, as in Mosses; Secondly, A Woody
Taste, as in Trees and Barks.

From much Water mixed with Earth and Acid, arises a crude or raw Taste, as in
Spinach, Chick-weed, etc.

From much Water mixed with Acid and Oil, or from smooth Oyly-Earthy Parts, like
Marle, or Bole diluted, and some Acid, arises a Mucilaginous Taste; which I
refer to the Watery Tastes, because Water most abounds in it.

CHAP. III. Concerning Mucilages.
THat Mucilages in Plants depend on the Oil much diluted, is manifest from the
following Instances.

Linseed affords an Oil by Expression, and a Mucilage in Decoction.

Almonds afford an Oil by Expression, and a slimy Mucilaginous Milk in
Emulsions.

Poppies are very Mucilaginous, and contain an Oil, as appears by a Milky
Juice; and an Oil is pressed out of Poppy-seeds.

Henbane smells Oily, and is Mucilaginous, and feels Oily, and Clammy; and the
Seed yields an Oil by Expression.

These Plants that smell of a rank Oil, as Goss-Flowers, and most of the
Pea-Taste, are Mucilaginous: So that from these Instances, I may infer, that a
crude Oil diluted well with Water, makes a Mucilage; which may be farther
proved by the effects of a Mucilage, compared with the effects of Oil.

Mucilages cause a smoothness in the Palate, and outwardly are Emollients, as
Oils be, and ripen Imposthumes; inwardly they are more cool than Oil, though of
a congruous Nature: They defend the Throat from the sharpness of Rheums; the
Stomach from corrosive Humors or Medicines; the Ureters from sharp Choleric
or Acid Urine; and smooth the passages for the Stony Gravel; they cool the hot
scorbutic Blood, by their crude and ropy Parts, stop its violent Motion, and
inviscate its Acrid Saline Particles. Oils have a Mucilage joined with them.

I distilled some Gum-Arabick in an open Fire, and in an Earthen Retort, and
found an Acid Spirit of a smoaky Smell, and a good quantity of Oil; but the
Earthy parts exceeded all, Gum-Arabick being a clammy Mucilage.

But I cannot but think the Mucilage in Comphrey, which tastes as if Meal and
Water were mixed together, depends upon a mixture of some Farinaceous Parts,
which are the immediate Causes of Mucilages, (which Farinaceous Particles are
resolvible into Oil and Water chiefly, and have the same Principles as other
Mucilages) and which are proper nourishment for the Parenchymous Parts of
Plants: These being in plenty mixed with Water, cause a slimy Slipperiness,
observable by rubbing in the Fingers, as well as by the Taste: Such is the
Mucilage in Althaea, Mallows, Typha, etc. which also being dried to Powder,
produce a sort of Mealy Powder. All the Farinaceous Plants, as Barley, Oats,
Wheat, do yield an Oil. And Bonetus gives us an Instance of Roots of Althaea,
which applied in the form of a Pultis, raised Blisters; and Comphrey-Roots
discuss Gouty Tumors: So that these crude Mucilages have more Volatile parts
frequently mixed with them.

Those diversities of Taste that arise from Mucilage Compounded, are either
Cool or Hot.

. I. Cool Mucilages,
With much Water, called the Watery Mucilages, as in Purslain, etc. these have
the effects above described, being the most Simple Mucilages.

The Earthy Mucilages, such as in Mushrooms;

If the Water be little, the Mucilage is Comphrey, and Watery Gums: They stop
Fluxes, and correct sharp Humors.

. II. Hot Mucilages.
Mucilages with a rank Oily Smell, as in Goss-Flowers, and the Pea-Taste, are
proper for Anodyne Ointments.

Mucilages with an Aromatic Smell, either Erigerum, and the Lily-kind: These
Mealy Mucilages, with a Lily-Smell, digest, ripen and suppurate Tumors.

The Bitter Mucilages outwardly soften, Plants.

Mucilages with Pungency Acrid, as in Lysimachia; and these are properly
Diuretics: By the Mucilage, they smooth the passages of Urine; and by their
Acrid Salt, they dissolve Acid Tartareous Concretions in the Kidneys.

Mucilages with a Narcotick Smell, by Mucilages, they soften and are Arodyne.

Mucilages with Astringency, have their Taste from the different parts of
Plants; as in Plantane-Seeds, the Husk is Astringent, the Pulpy part of the
Seed Mucilaginous.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Acid in Plants.
THE Third Principle our Senses discover in Plants, is Acid; perceivable by
Taste and Smell, in Sorrel, etc. This seems to affect the Taste with a cool
Sharpness, not unlike the Spirit of Sulphur; and is probably supplied Vide
Sulph.
from the Mineral Kingdom: This Acid has not the Bitterishness of Nitre, nor
the Saltness of common Salt, nor a Vitriolate Relish from any Mineral; but is
pure cool Acid.

The Crystals of Tartar are sour. Vide Tartar amongst Salts.


Crystals of Wood Sorrel are also sour, like Tartar: The Essential Salts of
Plants differ not from Tartar. Vinegar is more Spirituous than the former,
being a Winy Subacid Liquor.

The Acid is obvious in the most bitter Plants, as in Extracts of Wormwood and
Horehound, and in all Extracts: In the Plant they are not perceived, because of
the Strength of the Bitterness that affects the Palate most; though the Acids
temper the Bitter, and the Bitter the Acid.

Acids are never altered in the Plant, so as to lose their Nature, though they
undergo diverse Mixtures; but when they are reduced into Volatile Salts, by
being compounded with Oil and Earth.

Acids mixed with much Water, are the Acids.

Acids mixed with a little Water, and much Earth, produce an Astringent Taste.

Acids with Water and Earth more loosly Taste; as in Sloes, which is a greater
degree of Astringency: And in this Taste the Acid and Earth are in equal
quantity.

The Fourth Acid Composition is Acid Oleose, as in Terebinthinates; and these
always have an Astringency joined to the Bitterness, which arises from the Oil
and Acid in Turpentine.

Dr. Grew asserts, That many stillatitious Oils, digested with any strong Acid,
will acquire a bitter Taste: And therefore, Myrrh, Gentian, and all bitter
Gums distilled, yield Acid Liquors. I shall hereafter deduce the Bitterness of
Plants immediately from Turpentine; but remotely from the mixture of Oil and
Acid.

Acid-Acrid, as in Rosa Solis; In these Volatile and Acid combine. And since
Rosa Solis is accounted a Caustic, it is probable, other Caustic Plants may
have the same mixture. These are proper for Treacle-Water to cool by their
Acid, and sweat with their hot Parts, or to provoke Urine. Mixed Salts, and hot
Herbs, tempered by the mixture of Acid, are profitable in Fevers.

Acid sweet, such as in all Ripe Fruits, as Cherries, ripe Grapes; these make
the Acid more easy to the Stomach, and less fretting, as in Spiritus Salis
Dulcis: These excite Appetite, and cool the Blood.

Acid and Bitter; these promote Urine, Alkakengi-berries, and Quicky-berries,
and have an Anti-Febrile virtue from Acid and Bitter; as in Bezoardick
mixtures, which are Bitter-Acid.

The Effects of Acids in the Body are to coagulate, and fix Choler, and the
Volatile Salts in the Blood, by uniting with the Salt, and rendering them like
common Sal Ammoniack; and so Acids become Diuretic; as also, by dissolving the
gritty Matter of the Stone, and mixing with it, by coagulating the Serum of the
Blood; as Serum Sanguinis turns white by the mixture of the Spirit of Nitre,
and by thickning its Consistence, which is a less degree of Coagulation. Acids
hinder the rarefaction of the Blood, and its Extravasation; as also, all Heats
and Sweats, Choleric Loosenesses, and Thirsts: Rough Astringents do the same
thing, but more weakly, having the Acid obtunded by the Earthy Parts; but by
that they are more proper for Loosenesses and Fevers.

Acids do also excite the Appetite, by stimulating, and hinder the over-quick
Fermentation of the Chyle, and separation of its Spirituous parts, in Windy
Exhalations: And for that reason we mix Vinegar with Hot Meats and Herbs, and
eat cool Fruits after Meat. Vinegar is the best Antidote against any Poison,
from Acrid Herbs.

CHAP. V. Concerning Astringents.
ASTRINGENTS are,

Either Watry-Astringents, in which Water Plantane, Knot-Grass.

I distilled the Roots of Flaggs in an open Fire, and had a great deal of Acid,
and very little Fetid Oil, and much Caput mortuum: This was like the distilled
Liquor of Woods.

Bitter-Astringents; where the Astringency Turpentine: These, by their
Bitterness, make the Astringent Faculty more agreeable to the Stomach and
Blood: By their Bitterness they help and preserve the mixture of the Blood; and
by their Astringency, which is an Acid in potentia, precipitate some Feverish
parts, which are separated from the mixture of the Blood; so Jesuits Powder
works; and Tormentil-Roots have been used for the same purpose; and so may the
Barks of That taste. It Is manifest, that upon giving the Jesuits Powder, a
sharpness of Urine is sometimes observable; and when it succeeds, the Water,
which at first looked like Strong Beer, high colored, and reddish, turns after
a while muddy; the separable Feverish Sediment is precipitated, and the top of
the Urine is thin and clear, by the separation of Parts: So that, after the use
of the Jesuits Powder, whose Virtues are evident to the Taste, being bitter
Astringent, the prevailing Bitterness preserves the mixture of the Blood, and
the Astringency separates some easily-separable Parts; which not continuing in
their right equal Mixture with the rest of the Blood, cause the Fever, as being
Heterogeneous, and raise a Fermentative Commotion for their Segregation. And it
is usual with Practisers, to guess and assert the Alterations in the Blood, to
correspond to those observable in the Water. It may be, our Country cannot
afford such an exact Mixture of Bitter and Astringent, as in the Jesuits Bark;
but I believe it does.

It may be, we cannot mix Bitter and Astringent Tastes, in the same Proportion,
as Nature has done in the Cortex: However, it is evident, that these Qualities
of Bitter-Astringent are in the Cortex; and we cannot imagine any other so
probable to work those Effects which it does; for Tormentil-Root and Cinquefoyl
have been tried and approved in putting off Agues.

Sweetish Astringents, or the Fern-Tastes, Ferns are good Vulneraries, stop
Fluxes, and abate the Fermentation of the Blood in Hypochondriack Scurveys, by
their Crudity and Astringency: So Chalybeats, as Vitriol of Mars, taste sweet
Astringent; the Sweetness is most perceptible in the Polypody-Root. In the
Female Fern the Mucilage is great; the Astringency is evident in the Male, and
in Lonchitis; but in the Leaves of Osmunda, the Mucilage; in the Root, the
Astringency, Bitterness, and Orris Smell. Maidenhair is Sweet-Astringent,
which seems to me the true Character of a Fern-Taste; though some Varieties are
observable, as I have noted.

The Aromatick-Astringent must be considered Aromaticks.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Bitterness in Plants.
THe Fourth Principle our Senses discover in Plants, is Oil, which produces
Bitterness, and Aromatic Tastes, plain Turpentine, and Fetid Smells, with a
Taste contrary to an Aromatic.

The most crude state of Oil Vegetable, is in Mucilages and Sweetness; the next
is in Bitters, which have their Taste from a Turpentine mixed with much Earth,
and fixed by an Acid; as the following Instances will convince.

Hypericon Leaves, the Roots of Valerian, Herb Robert, and especially the
Leaves of Chamaepitys, or Groundpine, taste Bitter, and smell of Turpentine:
The Taste of Turpentine it self, is Bitter; and so is the Taste of most Gums,
which are the product of Turpentine Trees, and Plants; as Myrrh, Ammoniacum,
etc.

If we consider how many Plants are Aromatic, arising from Turpentine, how
many are Resinous, and the constant Greenness of many Trees and Plants, which
depends on Turpentine (which did not Freeze in the hard Winters); It will seem
more probable that Bitterness depends on Turpentine, which is Compounded of
Oil, Acid and Gumminess.

Bitters yield a great deal of Oil by Distillation, as Wormwood, Centaury,
Bitter Almonds; Olives have also a Bitterness.

The Milk of Bitter Plants, as Sonchus, Jacea, and Celandine, is exceeding
Bitter; and it must needs be allowed, that the Milk is Oil, diluted by much
Water. Bitters have generally some Fetid Smell, or Aromatic Odor: which shows
us, that Bitter Plants abound in Oil, from whence Odors chiefly arise. The
Flowers of Orange and Elders, are Bitter; and so are the Fragrant Flowers of
other Trees, as Sloe-Trees, Jessamy, Roses, Hawthorne, Lilies of the Valley.

The Turpentine in Bitters, is fixed by an Acid, which readily coagulates the
Oleous Parts, if it be a strong Acid; but a mild Acid only detains Oleous
Particles in their mixture with Water; as it appears by Milk; for in the making
of Butter, the Oil is visibly separated in the form of Butter; and the Acid,
which kept it fluid, is apparently in the Butter-milk. This Acid by dividing
the viscous Oleous parts of the Butter, rendered it fluid in the Milk; and from
thence its Whiteness depends.

In Distillation of Fats and Oils, an Acid appears; as also in the Distillation
of Gums, which may artificially be produced, by the mixing of Oil and Acid.

On this Acid in Bitters, joined with much Earth, an Astringent Faculty
depends, which is eminent in many Bitters. That much of Earth concurs to the
production of Bitters, and fixing of Turpentine, appears, in that all Bitters
produce much Salt, which we call Fixed (this being nothing probably, but the
Union of Acid and Earth by calcination) but the Oil in which the Bitterness
resides, is easily driven away by the Fire, and remains not in the Salt or
Earth; whence it is also proved to be an Oil, fixed by its crude Associates,
Acid and Earth.

I distilled half a pound of Gentian Roots, in an Earthen Retort, in an open
Fire; from it was 'stilled an Acid Liquor, with the Water, and a Bitter Oil,
without any Volatile Salt; which confirms my Hypothesis, of Bitterness being an
Oil fixed by Acid: and the Caput Mortuum exceeded all the Liquor in the
Receiver.

CHAP. VII. The Table of the Varieties of Bitter Tastes, Compounded, and their
Virtue.
They are either,

. I. Cool Bitters.
BItterish Astringent in the Dock kind, Hydro-Lapathum, Sorrel, Tormentil, etc.

These cool Inflammations inwardly and outwardly; they check the Paroxysms of
Agues, by their Astringency, (which is a latent Acid, Associated with Earth):
By their Bitterness adjoined, they cleanse the Stomach, excite Appetite: By
their Astriction, and their Bitterness, they preserve the Blood from
Putrefaction: In short, they imitate the effects of Bezoartick mixtures,
consisting of Bitter and Acid.

Watry-Bitter; when the Bitter is much Water, as in Fumitory, Succory, etc.
which cool the Blood, and dilute it by their Waterishness; and by their
Bitterness amend the Acidities, and cleanse the Choler, by taking off the
coagulating Acid, which coagulates its Lymphatick Vehicle; therefore these
Tastes are Cholagogues, and Diuretic, cooling also in Fevers.

Bitter-Acid, which works stronger than Bitter-Astringent; they are Diuretic,
and Antifebrifick, by their Acid Bitterness.

Bitter-Sweet, as in the Pea-Taste; by the Stomach, Kidneys, and Lungs.

. II. Or Hot Bitters.
A middle state of Vegetable Oil, is observable Turpentine Plants, as in
Hypericon; and their Smell and Taste will evince them to be pure Turpentine;
their Taste is Bitterish and Astringent, and their Smell Terebinthinate: in
these the Acid fixes much on the Earthy Parts, and produces an Astringency;
whereby the Oil is more loosned from it. It Is well known, that all Vide Sulph*
Turpentine and Gums have a latent Acid, whence they are more easily distilled
by additions of Absorbents; and their true Virtues best Extracted by Tinctura
Satis Tartari. The Virtues of Turpentine Plants depending on the Oil, are
Pectoral, Cleansing, and Diuretic; and by their Astringent Faculty stopping;
but by both Vulnerary: for what better Vulnerary can there be, than that which
is Cleansing, and Astringent, and smells Balsamic, as Turpentine Plants? These
Plants do bear the name of Balsamic, which are Terebinthinate and Aromatic;
as Botrys, Mecha-Balsam, Juniper, Ladanum segetum; and these are more agreeable
to the Stomach, than ordinary Turpentine; and besides, their Vulnerary Faculty
may be Cordial, they being also Aromatic.

To these I must add another Class of Balsamicks, which having Turpentine in
their Smell, give a Smell like dead Nettle; so in red Lamium there is a
Turpentine flavor, but another Smell is perceived also. In Panax coloni, and
Sideritis, there is the same Dead-Nettle Smell; and in Galeopsis both Smells
are perceivable.

A third degree of Balsamicks is in the Geranium Moschatum, and Geranium
Columbinum, which taste Astringent, and smell of Musk; and since other
Geraniums smell of Turpentine, but these of Musk, I do suppose that the highest
state of the Oil Vegetable, is a rarefied Turpentine, which thereby becomes
Odoriferous: Hence Terebinthinates taken inwardly, after a farther separation
from their Acid, by the Salts of the Blood, cause a Violet Smell in the Urine,
because Aromaticks produce the same effects in the Urine; therefore Aromatic
Odors, and Turpentine, are of an agreeable nature. Many Turpentine Balsams are
of an Aromatic Smell, as Balsam de Tolu, Balsam Mechae, Balsam Peruvian,
Benjamin, Storax; and many Herbs, as Ladanum segetum, and Botrys, which have a
Fragrant Terebinthinate Smell; and so has Juniper, Cedar, and Sassafras;
besides Oil of Turpentine will easily extract these Fragrant Oils from
Vegetables, and is frequently mixed with them by Sophistications; whence I may
argue, that they differ only as Turpentine is mixed with a latent Acid; and as
the other are more pure from Acid; and therefore more Ethereal or Odoriferous:
The Roots of Valerian smell like Turpentine, and the Flowers like Jessamy a
little dried.

Strong Bitters, with a Fetid Odor, as Ballote; these by their Bitterness
correct Acids in the Stomach and Blood, and by their Fetidness amend the Acid
in the Nervous Juice, and cause an equal expansive motion of the Spirits, and
prevent their unequal distribution into some Nerves, as in Fits of Convulsion.

Strong Bitters, with a Pungency, or Acrid Bitters, as in Celandine; these
correct Acids, and open Obstructions also, by giving a quick motion to the
Blood, which is done by their Volatile Bitter Oil, and Volatile Pungent Salt,
on which their Taste and Virtue depend.

Strong Bitters Aromatic, as in Wormwood Eupatorium Cannabinum, they work by
their Volatile Oil and Salt on the Blood, and Stomach; whence they are
accounted Antidotes against Coagulations, Venoms, and Pestilential Infections.

Strong Bitters only, or pure Bitters, without Aromatic or Fetid Odor, or
Pungency; such is the Bitterness in Bitter Almonds, and Centaury, their parts
are more fixed than any of the other Strong Bitters: These cleanse the Stomach
from Acid Phlegm; open the Liver, by correcting the coagulating Acids in the
Blood; they mix with Acids, and pass by Urine; they preserve the Blood from
coagulation, and help the office of the crude Bile in Hydropical Cachexies;
they have an Astriction by their Acid and Earthy Parts, which abounding in
Bitters, help the Oil in correcting Acids. The Principles of Bitters united by
the Fire, produce fixed Salts, which correct Acids better than Bitters; which
also act as fixed Salts in all their effects.

Elder-Bitters and Smells, as in Scorphularia; Fetidness and Bitterness.

Nauseous Tastes, which are,

1. Nauseous-Bitter, which depends on a composition of Mucilage and Bitter, as
in Bryony-Roots, Squills, Berries of Spina Cervina, and Fox-Gloves; the
Mucilage in the Stomach relaxes the Fibers, and causes the Bitter to stick
longer on them; and so to act more strongly in Vomiting and Purging; the same
Taste is in Polygala and Sena.

2. A Nauseous Taste depends on a sweet Bitter, mixed with Mucilage and
Pungency, as in Aloes, Agarick, Rubarb: And Docks want only the Sweetness; but
have Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Astringency.

3. Too much Sweetness is Nauseous; so is Manna, Honey, Polypody-Root; a
Sliminess or Gumminess is in Honey and Manna.

4. Too much Bitter is Nauseous: Thus, in sweet Gall, the overmuch Sweet or
Bitter, over-impregnates the Papillae in the Mouth and Stomach, and cause an
aversion in the Stomach; as too much Light offends the Eyes, and makes them
Water.

5. An ill Smell gives a Nauseousness; as in Aron Pouches, whose Smell will
make any one vomit: And such have been the Smells of many Herbs which I bottled
with warm Water, as Henbane and Spurge.

In Tastes depending on a Volatile Oil of Vegetables, (with which is mixed a
Pungent Volatile Salt) this Oily Salt produces either an Aromatic or Fetid
Smell, and a pleasant Aromatic or Offensive Taste. The Taste is Aromatic,
when the Sense is briskly affected, and a pleasing Agitation of Spirits
produced.

Aromaticks affect both the Smell and Taste gratefully; they have a motion of
Particles and Texture, agreeable to the Motion and Texture of Spirits: Spirits
of Vegetables differ nothing from their Oily Salts* but by their being largely
diffused in a Vehicle; and an Oily Salt is a Spirit contracted, and without a
Vehicle.

The effects of Aromaticks on the Body, Stomach, and discuss Wind; and these
constitute the Class of the Sweet Aromaticks, or Fennil-Tastes: These are
accounted Carminatives, because they rarefie the flatuous exhalations from the
Chyle, in the primae viae, and so discuss them. These by their Sweetness allay
the sharpness of Rheums, and lenifie their Acrimony: They are full of an Oily
Salt, by which they open the Passages of the Lungs and Kidneys: They
extraordinarily discuss Tumors outwardly, by opening the Pores, and attenuating
the matter included: The same Taste is spread through all the parts of the
Plant, by the Oily Salt: These Plants are umbelliferous.

An Oil may be distilled from these Plants, which has the Taste, Smell, and
Virtue of these Plants: Whence I conclude, the Taste and Smell to proceed from
the Oil and Volatile Salt associated.

The Second Class of Aromaticks, is the Aromaticks, as Rosemary, Marjoram,
Basil, Calamint, and Pennyroyal: By their Bitterness adjoined to their
Volatile Oil and Salt, they correct Acids in the Stomach, cleanse the Lungs,
and open Obstructions in the Glands, caused by coagulate Serum. The same effect
is produced by the Saline Pungent Oil, in altering the Acids in the Glands of
the Brain, in correcting and attenuating its Lympha, and Succus Nervosus;
which, as all other Glandulous Humors, are prone to Stagnation, and Acidity:
These Aromaticks by exciting their Motion, correcting Acidities, and thereby
rendering the Succus Nervosus more Volatile, deserve the name of Cephalicks; and
it is not improbable, that the Volatile parts dispose the Medicine to circulate
toward the Brain, as Windy Liquors disturb the Head, and no other part. These
Medicines evacuate Serum from the Blood, promote its circulation, and attenuate
all the Humors of Chyle, Serum, Lympha, and Succus Nervosus; these agree in
Virtue with the Fennil Class, except that these work more by their Bitterness,
as well as by the Pungent Oil.

The same Taste in these is spread through the whole Plant; only the Bitterness
depends on a fixed Oil or Terebinth; but the Aromatic on the Oily Salt.

Aromatick-Acrids, as Pepper, Ginger; these have a very Acrid Volatile Salt and
Oil. All Aromaticks are Cordial, by rarefying the Blood by their Volatile
Parts; but the Acrid-Aromatick is the highest, having most Volatile Salt in it;
whereas the former have more Oil than Salt. These Acrid-Aromaticks have either
a Sweetness, or Bitterness; and may be referred to the former Classes.

Aromatick-Astringents: As Aromaticks, Astringency, they strengthen the Fibers
of the Stomach and Membranes, and all Nervous Parts; and by an Acid evident in
their Astringency, they hinder the greater Rarefaction of the Blood by their
fragrant pungent Oil.

CHAP. VIII. Of Tastes joined to Fetid Smells, making them contrary to
Aromatic.
WHEN the Oil and Salt of Plants are in very great Proportion in any Plant, so
as to emit violent Steams, offending the Organ of Smelling, but chiefly
(forcibly) repelling the Spirits toward the Brain, (which creates an Aversion
to it) a Fetid Smell is perceived.

That a Fetor proceeds from Oils, appears by the Smell of Rancid Oil, and all
distilled Oily Substances; as Fat, Butter, and Oyl-Olive distilled.

That a Fetor, in the highest Degree, has also a Volatile Salt admixt, is
proved by the Excrements of Animals, putrefied Flesh, Urine, Blood, and
putrefied Vegetables; which yield a Volatile Salt. It does appear by diverse
Herbs bottled with Water for two Months, that a Fetor is produced; from the
Mucilaginous, as Mallow-Leaves; from the Bitter, as Artichoak-Leaves; from the
Narcotick, an exceeding Fetidness, as Henbane-Leaves; from the Excoriators, as
Spurge: These smelling like the Excrements of Animals. Horseradish smelt like
Garlic; Sorrel like Horse-dung. Putrefaction concurrs to produce these Fetors,
by Separation of a Volatile Oil and Salt, from the Acids and Earthy Parts of
the Plants: So Spirit of Soot has an Oily Salt; and the Fetid Oily Salt is
easily separated from Urine and Blood, after Putrefaction. Many Acrid Plants
are Fetid; so Sophia Chirurgorum, and the Pouches of Aron, are abominable.
Cotula Faetida, Nettles, Garlic, and Onyons, have an Acrid Taste, and are very
Fetid:. So is Galbanum, Assa Faetida, and Sagapenum. Diverse Bitters are Fetid,
as stinking Horehound; and all Elder-Smells, as Scrophularia, are Bitter-Fetid:
So the stinking Gums are Bitter, as well as Acrid and Fetid.

The Mucilaginous are also Fetid, as in Atriplex olida. That there is but a
Difference in degree betwixt Aromatic, and Fetid Plants, appears by many
Instances; as Galeopsis smells Fetid at first handling, afterward Aromatic.
The Flowers of Valerian are very strong, and offensive at first getting; after
a little drying, they are Aromatic: So in the Preparations of Musk and Civet,
if in a great quantity, or while fresh, they stink; afterward, in a small
quantity, they are more grateful: So the Leaves of Coriander stink; but the
Seed is Aromatic. Elder-Leaves are Fetid, yet the Flowers are very Fragrant;
so are the Flowers of Saponaria, though the Leaves resemble Elder. The Blossoms
of most Trees are Fragrant, though the Leaves smell Crude.

From the afore-mentioned Instances,

Fetids are 1. Bitter. 2. Acrid. 3. Mucilaginous, which are generally
Narcoticks.

From the afore-mentioned it may be inferred, that Fetids inwardly are of a
very hot Nature, discussing Tumors outwardly, and opening the Pores. Inwardly,
Fetids, by their Volatile Parts, do pierce the Channels of the Nerves, mend the
Crudity of their Nervous Juice; and by their Faetor, they excite a different
Motion from that in Hysteric Fits, and in Convulsions; and do remove the Cause
of that tumultuous Motion in the Spirits, by correcting Acidities, and
Stagnation in the Succus Nervosus, which is disposed to them, as all other
Glandulous Liquors be.

Narcoticks have all of them an heavy offensive Smell, like Poppies, or
Solanum; or have a sweet heady Smell, like Roots of Bears-Ears.

Milky-Narcoticks taste Mucilaginous, Bitter, Poppies, and Lettice: The Milky
Juice is an Argument of an Oil, and the Acrid of a Volatile Salt adjoined.
Opium is a Bitter-Acrid, has a Resin, and Gum inflammable: Though it is easily
extracted by the Spirit of Wine, yet the Bitterness and Acrid, in which its
Virtue is founded, is most corrected by Spirit of Vinegar, Juice of Lemons,
Juice of Quinces, or any other Acid, as well as by drying it, and evaporating
some Part of the Narcotick Fume.

The Second Class may be of Bitterish, Narcoticks; as Solanum Lethale,
Bacciferum, Stramonium, Cynoglossum: Besides the Pungency, Solanum Lignosum has
a Bitterness: The Roots of Cynogloss boiled, smell like Spirit of Hartshorn.

Fresh Tabaco smells Narcotick about the Flowers, and is Bitter, Mucilaginous,
and Acrid: It much resembles Henbane by its Figure, Oil and Clamminess to the
Touch; but by its Bitterness and Pungency, Solanum Lignosum.

The Third Class of Opiates, is Sweetish, Poppy smell, as Cicutaria, Napellus.
The Roots of Henbane are very sweet.

These produce Giddiness, with a stupor; and their best Antidote are Acids, as
Vinegar.

The Fourth Class has a Bitterish Acrid Taste, as Cowslips; and these have also
a Fragrancy very heady, being of a low degree amongst Opiates: The Roots of
Cowslips are very Acrid and Bitterish.

By the aforementioned Instances it appears, that Opiates have very hot
Effluviums, which offend the Smell. By the same, Opiates inwardly produce Sweat
in so small a quantity as one or two grains; and are very Fetid by their Oily
Acrid Salt, which runs through all the Classes of Opiates. The Bitterness and
Sweetness in some Opiates, no way conduce to increase their Soporifick quality,
but are different in many Opiates.

Narcoticks taken inwardly, immediately affect the Nerves in the Stomach, and
produce an heaviness there; which I have been sensible of, in tasting the
Solanum, and Poppies; and they cannot pass a Digestion and Separation, nor by a
circulation arrive at the Brain, so soon as their effects are produced therein:
Therefore Narcotick Fumes must pass through the Pores of the Nerves, and begin
to fix the Spirits in the Membranes and Nerves of the Stomach; by which a
stupor is communicated to the rest. Something of the Opiates passes a
Digestion, and afterward a Circulation through the Blood; where it makes no
alteration by its Narcotick quality; but being Bitter and Acrid, it produces a
Diaphoresis, as others of that Taste do. In the Nerves these Narcotick Fumes
weaken the brisk expansion of the Spirits, (which causes waking) and their too
great Agitation, (which causes pain) and likewise stops their Tumultuous motion
in Convulsions, and the violent motion of the Heart and Pulse, as well as any
Flux of Humors whatsoever, by abating the violent contractions of the irritated
Fibers. Humors that are Acid are corrected by the Acrid Taste and Bitterness;
but Choler can no other ways be helped, but by abating the Acid combined with
it, and making it corrosive, as well as by stopping the motion, and evacuation
of it. From the Symptoms allayed by Narcoticks, I argue, That they work not as
Oils and Volatile Salts, though they have them; for they rather produce an
expansion, agitation, and tumult in the Spirits: And I also conjecture, that
the Narcotick Faculty is best deducible from such a combination of the Volatile
Oil and Salt, with a Mucilage, as to gain thereby a particular Figure, Motion,
or Texture; by reason of which, it weakens the motion of the Spirits, and in
too great a quantity destroys their fluidity.

Burnt Alum mixed with Gunpowder, destroys its Elastick force, and weakens the
burst of a Gun. Water loses its fluidity by the small Particles of Cold: And
Mercury is made Solid, by the Fumes of Lead. Nothing can be more easily fixed,
by diverse additions of other things, though in it self it has a greater
Agitation of parts than other fluids, which being stopped in their internal
motion, become Solids; and if Opiates do weaken or deprive the Nervous Juice of
its Internal Agitation, from thence all their Phenomenon may be explained.

All Narcoticks have offensive Smells, by which we are taught by Nature to
avoid them; and this Antipathy can proceed from nothing, but the disagreeable
Texture and Motion of the Narcotick Fumes to our Spirits: Opiates cause not
Sleep, unless in great quantity, in Consumptive Bodies; for in them, a little
quantity troubles the Head, and disturbs the Spirits with Giddiness, because
their Spirits are very hot and fiery, and their motion, for want of a serose
Vehicle, very violent; but it seems not probable, as some conjecture, that one
grain of Opium should force so much Serum to flow to the glandules of the
Brain, as to fill them, and produce Sleep, by too much diluting the Spirits:
Whereas we frequently drink a full Gallon of Water, or other Liquors, which
supply a greater quantity of Serum, without causing Sleep. Opiates by their
sharp Acrid Salt stimulate, as Venereals; and by their Bitter Sliminess and
Acrimony, they purge.

A slimy Mucilage attends Opiates, which outwardly has a good effect to temper
Heat in Inflammations; whilst the Effluviums that are Narcotick, abate the
Agitation of Spirits.

By their Mucilage; Opiates may repel, and also inwardly given, by the same
they allay sharpness of Coughs, and corrosive Salts; whilst their Narcotick
Fumes fix the motion of Humors, by robbing the Spirits of their Activity; by
their Bitter-Acrid they discuss; and by their Mucilages mollify Tumors; as
inwardly, their Bitter-Acrid corrects the Acid; the Mucilage tempers the
Choler; and for this end the Poppy-Syrups and Waters, are the best; having more
Mucilage than Acrid or Bitter. But Opium more Bitter and Acrid, than Mucilage;
wherefore it is more convenient in Acid Humors.

CHAP. IX. Of Volatile Salts, and the Tastes and Virtues depending on them.
IN many Plants, there is a Volatile Salt, discernable by the Acrid Pungency,
produced on the Tongue; as in Aron-Roots. That this Pungency is a Volatile
Salt, though it has no Saltish Taste, appears by the following Experiment. I
distilled some Mustard Seed in a Retort, which afforded both Oil and Spirit;
which being rectified, turned Syrup of Violets green; though this Salt, in its
natural state, will not so readily turn Syrup of Violets, as Animal Salts do.
The Infusion of Aron-Roots in Water, did a little green the Syrup of Violets,
after some time. Spirit of Scurvy Grass, or Aqua Raphani composita, would not
turn Syrup of Violets; nor Horse-Radish-Roots, infused in Water; though the
leaves bottled with Water, turned the Syrup after some time.

Juice of Aron-Roots would not turn it; the Leek-Roots sliced into Water, mixed
with Syrup of Violets, turned it after a long time.

The mixture of other Principles with the Salt, hinder its greenning of the
Syrup of Violets: So a Decoction of Hartshorn for the same reason, will not do
what the Spirit does in turning the Color. It Is well known that Vinegar, and
other Acids, as Lemmon, Citron, Sorrel, do best correct the Pungent Acrimony of
the Vegetable Salts; and therefore Vinegar is used in Sallets; Oil is used for
the securing of the Stomach from their corrosive Acrimony: Yet the Acrid Salt
of Vegetables will not ferment with Acids, as the Animal Salts do. Juice of
Aron-Roots, and Spirit of Scurvy Grass, will not ferment with Oil of Vitriol.

These different Classes, I have observed in the Volatile Salts of Plants.

The Watry-Acrid having a pungent Smell, Mustard or Scurvy Grass, and the
Cresses: These have a tolerable Pungency, and but a little Oil with their
pungent Salt. The Virtue of these Cress-tasted Plants, is first from their
Salts, which excite Appetite, and volatilize the Acid Ferment in the Stomach,
and therefore are Stomachicks: In the Blood they amend the coagulating Acids,
open Obstructions in the Spleen and Brain, and all the Glandules; and therefore
are Antiscorbutick, Splenetick, Diuretic, and Sudorifick; outwardly they
discuss, and have the Virtues of Volatile Salts, in Pains, and Scald-Heads, and
Scorbutic Spots.

By the Watery crude Parts adjoined, they temper their own Acrimony, and make it
more agreeable to hot Bloods; as in Brooklime. I distilled Colewort-Roots,
which tasted like Horseradish; and had an Acid mixed with Pungency, which would
not turn Syrup of Violets; this distillation was in Sand, in a glass Retort.
There are many degrees of Pungency in this Class; so that choice may be made
for particular Constitutions.

There is a Bitterness in many of this Class, which helps the Operation of the
Acrid: if the Acrid prevails, they belong to this Class; if the Bitter, they
are referrible to the Bitters with Acrimony.

The second Class of Volatile Salts, is in rank Tastes, and smells like
Garlic* and Onyons, whose Smells are rank Fetid, and their Tastes very pungent
Hot. From Horseradish Leaves, bottled up with Water two Months; and from their
smelling like Garlic, as well as from their pungent Taste, and quick flying up
the Nose and Eyes, like Sal-Ammoniack, I conclude, that the Cepaceous kind,
would very properly constitute a second degree of Volatile Salts, and a much
stronger than the former. They correct Acids, and Phlegm in the Stomach; and
excite Appetite by their Pungency: they attenuate the Phlegm in the Lungs, and
open Obstructions there, by their Volatile Salt; and therefore are good
Pectorals and Stomachicks: They alter the Blood, as Volatile Salts; and are
good against Infection, and the Scurvy; and as Diuretics, by their Salts they
are good for the Dropsy: outwardly they discuss more than the former Class;
and their Mucilaginous Roots are emollient, and ripen Apostumes; and by their
Salt they draw forcibly, and discuss and attenuate. Thlaspi tastes like
Horseradish, and smells like Garlic.

The third, and highest degree of Vegetable Acrid-Salt, is in the Exulcerators,
Vesicatories, or Corrosive Tastes: These have an Acrimony that destroys the
Organ of Tasting; as among Animals a fierce Volatile Salt is in Cantharides,
which is Vesicatory: And strong Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack blisters the Tongue. So
in the first Class of Exulcerators, there is a very Acrid Taste, and quick
pungent Scent, depending on the Salt only; the Plant being Watery, having no
strong Oily Smell: and these may be called Watery Exulcerators; as the
Ranunculus, Anemone, Aron, Dragons, Ranunculus flammeus: Vesicatories pierce
the Pores, and by their pungent Acrimony irritate the Glandules in the Cutis,
to send forth their Serum, and separate the Cuticula into a Blister.

The Corrosives have a higher degree of Acrimony; they pierce the Cuticula and
Cutis, with Pain; they alter and tear their Pores, drive out their Serum, and
thereby induce an Ulcer, and corrosion of the Cutis.

Note, That the first Class is Vesicatory, Corrosive Watery.

The second Class is where the Volatile Salt is mixed with a hot fiery Oil; as
in Euphorbium, Ivy-Gum; and these Plants have a strong Smell, with an Acrid
Taste.

The Milky or Resinous Exulcerators, have an Oil more fixed, joined to an
Acid-Acrid Salt; as Tithymalus, and Esula; and these smell Acid, rather than of
any hot Scent. Mezereon, and Laureola, have a faint Lily-Smell; in these the
Oil is not much conducing to any Corrosiveness: But that depends on the
Volatile Salt alone, made more Volatile by addition of some Oil.

The third Class of Corrosives, is in the Acrid-Acid; as Rosa Solis, which is
accounted Vesicatory, but very mild, the Acid being contrary to Volatility.

Acids mixed with Minerals, as in Crystals of Silver, and Aqua Regia, become
Corrosive; and diverse other Minerals, which are not in themselves very sharp,
by their mixture, become Corrosive; as appears by Sublimate. Lime has a mixed
Salt. This sort of Corrosiveness happens in the fixed Salt of some Plants; as in
the Salt of Ash-Tree.

Acids become Corrosive in the Fire, by their separation from Earthy Parts; as
in Saltpeter Spirit; Oil of Vitriol, Aqua Fortis, and Spirit of Vinegar; but
this way I know no Plants Corrosive: The Acid of Plants cannot be so attenuated
by Digestion in the Plant, as that of Minerals is in the Fire.

Fixed Salts in Soap-Ashes, by being united in a solid form, act all together,
and so corrode. So a Vesicatory is made out of Ashes of Ash-Tree; but this way
cannot happen in Plants, because there is naturally no fixed Salt in them, but
what is made by Fire.

Oils of themselves cannot be Corrosive; they pierce by their tenuity, but
cannot corrode; their Pungency is from the Salt only, though their Heat and
Smell is from the Oil; but generally the Corrosives have no Smell, or
inconsiderable; where it would not happen, if the Oil were Corrosive: whence I
conclude, that such a Taste depends on the Volatile Salt diluted with Water, or
sharpened by the addition of Oil, though crude, as in Tithymalus; but especially
by a Volatile Oil, as in Euphorbium.

CHAP. X. Of Sweet Tastes.
THIS Taste depends on an equal Mixture of the Principles of Plants: The Acerb,
Austere, Woody Fruits become Sweet, Fragrant, and Spirituous, when ripened by
the Heat of the Sun, like a Chemical Digestion, that separates the Principles,
and produces a looser Mixture; and the Sweet Fruits, by Distillation, afford a
Spirit; so that, an Acid from the Crudity, and Spirituous Oil and Salt from the
Ripeness, are evident in Sweet Tastes. A Mucilage appears in Liquorish, and an
Oily Smell in the Flowers of the Pea-Taste. Sugar has both Oil and Acid: So
that from different Sweet Tastes, you will find all the Principles of Plants to
be latent in a Sweet Taste; which will appear from the Classes of Sweet Tastes:

1. Sweet-Watry-Crude, in Grass and Corn. 2. Sweet-Aromaticks, in Carrotts and
Parsneps. 3. Sweet-Acrid, in Rapunculus. 4. Sweet-Mucilaginous, in Figgs; or
Oleose, as in Nuts. 5. Sweet-Subacid, in Strawberries and Grapes. 6.
Bitter-Sweet, in Aloes. 7. The Pea-Taste, in Fitches, etc.
Pea-Tastes are either 1. Sweet and Rough, 2. Sweet and Bitterish, or 3. Sweet,
and compounded with a Bitter-Acrid, and sometimes a Mucilage.

The Watry-Crude are Cooling, in distilled Waters and Decoctions.

The Sweet-Aromaticks are Nourishing, and very grateful to the Stomach.

Sweet-Acrid are also Esculent and Diuretic; by their Acrimony and Sweetness
they are Pectoral, lenifying sharp Rheums, and opening the Breast.
Sweet-Mucilaginous are both Pectorals and Diuretics, defending the Membranes
both by their Sweetness and Mucilage, and making them more slippy for Phlegm
and Gravel, as well as allaying the Sharpness of Saline Humors by the Mucilage.

Sweet-Subacid are cooling Cordials.

Bitter-Sweets are Nauseous Purgers.

Pea-Tastes are of a crude Juice, hindering the Fermentation of the Blood,
dulling its Salts; especially if a Mucilage be adjoined.

If Astringency, they bind also.

If Bitter, or Acrid, or Both, they are opening, and outwardly discussing; as
in Melilot.

CHAP. XI. Concerning the Smells of Vegetables, their Differences, and the
Virtues depending upon them.
THE Smells of Plants are either Cool, Temperate, or Hot.

. I. Of Cool Smells in Plants.
Earthy, which smell of Earth; with Mucilage, as in Mushromes: Or else they are
dry Plants, as Mosses. And this Smell of Earth must needs argue a Crude Plant.

Sorrel-Smells, or Acid, or Sour: These show the Acid to abound in a Plant,
and the Virtues depending thereon; as in Sorrel, etc.

A Crude or Grassy-Smell, resulting from III.
an indigested Mixture of Acid, and Earth, and Water; as in Plantane. A Crude
Smell indicates a cooling Quality, fit for inflamed Blood, and over-fermented
Humors: And outwardly these Plants are repelling, and of a cooling Quality.

In the Plants which have the Smells abovementioned, there is not so great a
Digestion of their Juice, as to attenuate it, and rarefie it, so far as to emit
brisk Particles to affect the Senses, like Oil or Volatile Salts of Plants.

. II. Of Temperate Smells.
Temperate Smells of Plants are mixed of Hot and Cold, being Mellowy-Sweet; such
as is in Ripe Fruits, as in Apples, etc.

This Smell arises from an higher Digestion of the Crude Juice in Fruits, by
the Heat of the Sun; which produces that equal Mixture of Principles, which is
most agreeable to the Body of Animals, for their Food; and by this Smell, and
the Aromatic, they choose it naturally. Most Fruits may, by a farther
Fermentation, be prepared to yield an inflammable Spirit; and therefore, Fruits
fermented in the Stomach, yield a brisk Spirit to the Blood.

And by their Acid, (which appears to the Taste and Smell after Fermentation)
they cool the Blood and Choler, and excite Appetite. A grateful Acid may be
smelt in the Stomachs of Birds, which feed on Hips; from which I have made a
very grateful Spirit, by Fermentation. In Surfeits of Fruits, the Fermentation
of them is carried on to a Putrefaction; which happens frequently, when Fruit
is eaten by any Person when he is very hot; or else the Fruit lies in the
Stomach crude, and unfermented, very Acid, and Griping, as it happens to cold
Stomachs.

. III. Of Hot Smells.
Hot Smells are either Agreeable, or Offensive.

Agreeable Hot Smells are

1. Terebinthinates; in which the Oil of Plants is more rarefy'd, than in any
other of the former Smells; but yet it is mixed with, and fixed by an Acid: And
this Smell indicates a Vulnerary Quality, by resembling the Smell of
Turpentine. A Balsamic Smell depends on a State of the Oil of Plants, betwixt
a Turpentine and Aromatic Smell; as in Botrys, Ladanum segetum, etc.

2. Aromaticks; in which the Oil is less fixed than in the former, there being
less Acid mixed with it, (which appears in the Aromatic Astringent:) In
Aromaticks, there is a Bitterness, or Sweetness, with an Acrimony. All
Aromaticks are Cordial.

3. Fragrant Smells; in which the Sense of Smelling is highly pleased, by the
Odor depending on the highest rarefy'd Oil of Plants; and therefore very little
affects the Taste, the Oil not being fixed in the Juice of the Plant so much as
in the former, by an Acid, as in Jassemin-Flowers, Orange-Flowers, etc.

These Plants afford the best Cordial-Water; and are only an higher Degree of
Aromaticks.

Hot Offensive Smells are

1. A Quick Pungent Smell; which is in Horseradish, or Mustard Seed, or
Ranunculus: These Plants have a Volatile Salt, and the Virtues depending on it.
The proper Smell of Vegetable Salts, is a quick Pungency. Animal Salts have
also a Smoaky or Urinous Smell, by which they differ.

2. Fetid Smells; which arise from a Salt and Oil very Volatile; and therefore
have outwardly a most discussive Quality, and inwardly an Anti-Hysterick
Quality.

1. Fetid, like Elder; and those Plants have the same Virtue; as Scrophularia.
2. Rank, like Garlic, as Onions and Leeks; and these have the same Virtue as
Garlic. 3. A Rancid Oily Smell, which many of the Pea-Taste have; as
Goss-Flowers, etc. and these are fit for Oils, and Ointments. 4. Narcotick
Smells, like Poppy; and all these Plants have an Opiate Faculty. 5. Nauseous
Smells, such as is in Aron-Pouches; which Smell is most Abominable.
In Bryony-Berries the Nauseous Smell intimates a Vomitory Faculty.

Those Smells which do resemble other Plants, have the same Virtue; but not
always, when they resemble other Things.

Rocket, have a Mustard Seed Smell.
Scurvy Grass, Horseradish, Watercresses, etc.
St. John's -Wort, have a Turpentine-Smell.
Herb-Robert, Firr, Pine, Juniper, etc.
Germander, smell like Hopps.
Wood-Sage,
Scordium, like Garlic.

Leaves of Primroses, smell like Marmalet of Quinces.

Pansies, smell like Orange-Flowers.
Milkwort,
Siliquose-Willow-herb, like Codlings.

Ballote, have all of them a dead Nettle-Smell.
Ironwort, Galeopsis, Chickweed, with Ivy-Leaves, Ground-Ivy-Leaves,
Clowns-All-heal, Cardiaca, etc.
Hare-Bells, smell all like Lily-Flowers.
Daffadills, Dog-stones, Marsh-Marygolds, Violets, etc.
Solanum Bacciferum, have all a Poppy, or heavy, strong, Fetid, Opiate Smell.
Lignosum, Lethale, Circaea, Tobaco, Papaver album, Papaver rhaeas, Mirabile
Peruvian. Lactuca Sylvest. Opium, Argemone, Stramonium,
Primroses, have a strong, fragrant, heady Smell
Bears-Ears, Love-Apples,
Anemone, affect the Eyes like Sal-Ammoniack.
Onyons rubbed, and put to the Nose.
Calamint, like Pennyroyal.
Dictamnus, Cat-mint,
Gromwell and smell like the Excrements of Mice.
Hounds-tongues,
Vlmaria, have a Pea-Taste and Smell.
Trefoile, Rest-harrow, etc.
Vlmaria, smell like Walnut-Peels.
Fresh Peony-Roots, Filipendula, etc.
Mugwort, smell like Wormwood.
Yarrow, Sneezwort, Southernwood, Lavender-Cotten, etc.
From the 'fore-mention'd Instances, it appears,

First, How much the Virtues of Plants may be known, and how easily
distinguished by their Smell: Which will appear more clearly, in my New Method
of Plants.

Secondly, I may infer, That the Smell of Hot Plants depends on their Oil,
though the Volatile Salt gives it a quick Pungency.

Thirdly, That the Acid and Earthy Parts, are smelt as well as the Volatile.

Fourthly, That Fetids, and Aromaticks, differ only in Degree,; the Fetids
being strongest; both of them being produced by an Oily Volatile Salt, which
separates the Oil from the fixing Acid.

In the Sense of Feeling, (by which the Impressions on the Tongue are
explained) Pleasure arises, a blando and molli affrictu, by which the Spirits
are drawn into the Part. In Pain there is impulsus fibras convellens and
corrugans, by which the Spirits are distracted and dissipated: So in
Aromaticks, the Papillae are gratefully and gently rubbed; in Fetid Tastes,
more violently, and the Sense of Smelling is also offended by a violent
Impression, but pleased with a gentler.

CHAP. XII. Of Occult Qualities.
THat there are many Textures in Plants, which we shall never be able to
describe; and some Internal Agitations of Particles, which we can never
explain, is undeniably true; though we observe the Tastes and Smells produced
by each particular Texture; and the Qualities of Hot and Cold, depending on the
motion of Particles. So in Narcoticks we taste Mucilage and Acrimony, and smell
a Foetor; which sensible Qualities we find in Narcoticks; though we know not
their particular Texture and Motion, by which these particular Compositions of
Tastes act, nor the manner by which they stupefie.

Purgers have their particular Composition of Tastes, resulting from a
particular Texture, on which their Irritation depends; their Textures being not
describable other ways, than by their several Tastes depending on them, and the
Nature of the Principles, which produce their several Tastes; and are the
Ingredients constituting that Particular sort of Texture. Seeing therefore,
that the particular Compound Tastes of each Plant, are the Effects of
particular Textures; where we find the same Combinations of Tastes, the same
Textures must needs be inferred. Therefore, we know also the Textures of
Plants, by their several Tastes and Principles, though not directly, and
immediately by our Senses.

The Figures of minute Particles, are too small to be visible; and the manner
of their Internal Motion does not affect our Feeling, or other Senses; and
therefore the Textures of all Plants, and all other Bodies, will ever be Occult
Qualities as well as the Effluviums of all Bodies, not affecting our Senses.

The same Occult Qualities are in the most known and evident things; as Fire,
whose Heat we feel, but cannot describe the Figure and Motion of its Particles;
neither can we describe the Texture of Mucilages, Bitters or Turpentines, etc.
yet we can distinguish the Tastes and Smells, and Principles, which constitute
each particular Texture: Therefore, I conclude, that the Texture and insensible
Effluviums, are alike obscure in all Bodies, as well as Vegetables; and nothing
is more Occult in one Vegetable, than in another; but because we know not the
Nature of Animals, on which Plants produce their Effects; we cannot so clearly
give an Account of the Operation of some Tastes and Smells, as of others. So in
Opium, we cannot explain the manner of its Stupefaction, because we know not
the Nature of Animal Spirits, on which it acts; yet we perceive the Gumminess,
the Acrimony, the Bitterness, and Fetidness, by which it acts; and by which its
manner of stupefying will be explained, when the Nature and Motion of Animal
Spirits is sufficiently understood.

Not only the Nature of Spirits, but also the Nature of some Humors in the
Body, are yet unknown; and the Use of some Parts too; as the Spleen, and diverse
Glandules, which may make the manner of the Operation of many Medicines less
evident to us: For since the discovery of the Muscular Fabric, and use of the
Heart, by Dr. Lower; and the Circulation of the Blood, by Harvey; and the
Insertion of Nerves into the Muscles of the Heart, by Dr. Willis: a more
rational and evident Account may be given of the Operation of Cordials, by
their particular Tastes and Smells; as in Aromaticks, which abound with a
Volatile Oil and Salt; whereby they quicken the Circulation of the Blood, and
excite a brisker Motion in the Animal Spirits, by which the Muscles of the
Heart are moved.

It is not only the unknown Nature of Humors, and the undiscovered Use of some
Parts of the Body, which makes the manner of the Operations of some Medicines
obscure; but also the want of examining the Nature of the Medicine it self, and
the particular Compositions of Tastes which are in it.

I hope, I may give a further light to the Ingenious Enquirers into the manner
of the Operations of Vegetables, by observing these two things:

That Plants have Compounded Tastes, Rubarb purges by a Bitter, Slimy,
Sub-acrid Astringent Taste. St. John's wort is a Vulnerary, by being Bitterish,
Astringent, and having a Turpentine Smell. Liver-wort is Hepatick and
Diuretic, by being Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Mucilaginous, and having a Turpentine
Smell, (as in the Second part of the Book, you will find all the Plants after
this manner described.) And therefore I infer, That though each particular
Taste has a Virtue, as considered by it self; yet diverse Tastes being
Compounded in one Plant, every Plant has a particular Effect depending on the
Action of all the Qualities together; from all which the Virtue of a Plant is
deduced, and not from one only Taste: But we shall better apprehend the Effects
of Vegetables produced on Animals, if we consider

That every Animal contains diverse Tastes, Natures, Digestions, and particular
Motions given them by the Mechanical Structure of an Animal Body; and that the
Organical Parts have such an agreeable contrivance, as by the acting on One
Part, the Whole may be disturbed and variously moved; which appears in Smells
that are offensive to Hysteric Persons.

CHAP. XIII. Of Specificks.
THat Notion of Specificks, I think most rational, differs much from what is
usually described by Authors, by whom Medicines are called Specificks; because
they act principally upon the account of some Property or peculiar Virtue,
which is unknown, and not by any manifest Qualities of Bitter, Acrid, Acid,
etc. But I will not dispute those Author's Notions, but propose my own to the
Ingenuous and Candid, to be examined by them. I therefore define a Specific
Medicine to have a particular Taste, or Composition of Tastes or Smells,
whereby it acts on some Humors of an Animal, more peculiarly and effectually
than other Medicines.

There are three sorts of Specificks; First, Specific Purgers. Secondly,
Specific Alterers, which are of a contrary Taste to the Humors corrected.
Thirdly, Specific Alterers, which are of the same Nature, and of the same
Taste, as the Humors they correct.

First, Specific Purgers: Purgers are called Specific, because they evacuate
a particular Humor; and if they be considered as Alterers, they have the same
Taste as the Humors they Purge; by which Taste they dispose that Humor to a
separation from the Blood: And Purgers are also most peculiarly suited to the
nature of the Humor they Purge, by the different degree of Acrimony, which
irritates. So Cholagogues, as Dock-Roots, and Rubarb, are Bitter and Slimy,
like Choler; and also Sub-acrid, which is the lowest Degree of Irritation.
Phlegmagogues are also Cholagogues; as Aloes, and Agarick, which have a
Bitter-sweet, like Choler; and have a Mucilage or Gumminess, like Phlegm; and
also a greater Degree of Acrimony than the former Cholagogues; which seems
necessary for Phlegmatic Humors, the Choler being more fluid. Hydrogogues are
also Phlegmagogues; for Phlegm is but an inspissate Glandulous Lympha; and the
Resinous Purgers have the Gumminess of Phlegm, and a greater Degree of Acrimony
to mix with the Serum of the Blood, and also to stimulate the Glandules of the
Guts and Stomach: This strong Acrimony in Resins, resembles the Saltness in the
Blood, it being also a Salt. Melanagogues differ not from Phlegmagogues, and
the mild Hydrogogues; as Sena, which is Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid.

Note, That black Hellebore is very Acrid, by which it is of a contrary Taste
to Melancholic Humors; and corrects Acids, as well as purges Phlegm and Choler.

Secondly, Specificks, which are of a contrary Taste to the quality of the
Humors, to be corrected. So Acid-Medicines are contrary to Bitter Choler, and
Acrid Salts, and destroy their Tastes. Earthy-Salt and Bitter Medicines, are
contrary to Acidity and Acerbity in the Lympha, Serum, and Chyle: as also
Sulphurs and Oils are. Watery Mucilages, and Crude Juyces, are contrary to the
inspissate Serum of the Blood, by diluting it. Astringents are contrary to the
Laxity of the Fibers, and Oily Medicines are contrary to their roughness and
dryness. These Contrarieties of Qualities, and also the Specific Purgers, are
mentioned in the Specific Class, to which I refer the Reader.

Thirdly, Specific Alterers (which are appropriated, and called Friendly to
some part) by being of the same Taste and Nature, as the Humors that are
prepared and separated by that particular Part; the Nature of which will more
plainly appear by the following Comparison, betwixt the Tastes of Animal
Humors, and the Tastes of those Medicines which respect particular Parts.

The Natural Taste of Choler, is Sweet, Bitter, Slimy; in Birds Acrid: from
this Taste of Choler, it is natural for us to argue, That a Medicine of the
same Taste, will act like Choler in the Body, and supply the defect of it when
wanting, and restore it to its natural Taste and state, when weakened, dulled,
or coagulated by Acids; or wants a perfect Digestion and Separation from the
Blood: Therefore, by reason of a Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Taste, in Choler;
Gentian-Root, which has that Taste, is accounted an Hepatick; and also
Carduus, with all others of the same Taste; upon the account of a Bitter
Sub-acrid in Choler, Celandine and Turmerick-Roots are Hepaticks also. Upon the
account of Bitterness only, all Bitters are Hepatick, as Succory. Upon the
account of Sub-acrid only in Choler, all Acrids may be accounted Hepaticks, on
the account that Choler has a sweet Oyliness in the Taste, and that Sweets
become easily Bitter. Therefore all sweet Spices and Aromaticks, are Hepatick:
Choler is also Fetid; and therefore the Fetid Gums, which are Bitter, Acrid,
and Fetid, are good Hepaticks: And all Plants abounding with an Oily Pungency,
and their distilled Oils, are Hepatick, because the same Principles are in
Choler.

Sweat and Urine have the same Salt Taste; and therefore the same Salt
Medicines are both Diuretic and Diaphoretick. This Salt in the Serum of the
Blood, is of the nature of Sal-Ammoniack; therefore mixed Salts are the best
Diuretics and Diaphoreticks. All Medicines of a Salt Taste, as fixed Salts,
pure Volatile Salts, or Vegetable Oily Salts, in Aromaticks, Fetids, and
Acrids, and many Salso-Acids, promote both Sweat and Urine; and all Volatile
Salts smell Vrinous.

Note, That Testaceous Medicines become Diuretic, by getting a Salt Taste in
the Stomach, by reason of the mixing of its Acid with them.

The Saltness of the Blood preserves its Mixture, and prevents Putrefaction;
and so do all the Salts abovementioned; and therefore they are Antifebrifick,
and Alexipharmliick.

The Lympha of the Conglobate Glandules, is also Salt, like the Serum of the
Blood; and therefore in Arthritick pains, requires the same Salt Medicines,
which move Sweat and Urine, with a cool Watery Vehicle: for the use of this
Lympha is not only to mix the Chyle and Blood, but to dilute both; the defect
of which Lympha is best supplied from the Watery Sub-acrid Plants.

The Lympha of the Conglomerate Glandules, is Watery, Slimy, Sub-acid; this
constitutes the Ferment of the Stomach, and is separated into the primae viae,
not only by the Salival Glandules, but by these also of the Stomach, Pancreas,
and Guts. This Lympha is supplied by spirituous Acids, and Slimy, Watery
Sub-acids, as Lemmons, Oranges, and dulcified Spirit of Salt; these excite
Appetite, and help the Fermentation of Meats. So Leaven, which ferments Dough,
is Sub-acid and Salt. Salt Tastes are also pleasing to the Stomach, because
they are Sub-acids.

The Lympha, which moistens the Cavity of the Lungs and Windpipe, is Slimy,
Sweet, and Milky; in Hecticks this is deficient, and is therefore supplied with
Milks, and Watery Sweet Mucilages.

The use of the Spleen is yet unknown, but it certainly separates a Glandulous
Humor, whose Taste is probably Sub-acid; and therefore many Astringents, which
are produced from Acids, as Vitriolum Martis, and the Fern-Astringents, help
the preparation, and supply the defect of the Splenetick Liquor: All Medicines
altering the Depravation of it, must be contrary to Acids.

The Menses have a particular Smell, not unlike Flowers of Marigolds, or
Saffron, which are Fetids; and so is Atriplex Olida, and therefore esteemed an
Vterine; and for their agreement in Smell, all other Fetids, though they have
not the same sort of Faetor, are accounted Vterines; as Volatile Oils, Salts,
and Fetid Gums.

Aromatic Smells are grateful and pleasing to the Spirits, and therefore are
used as Cordials and Cephalicks; we cannot Taste the Spirits, though we could
meet with the Succus Nervosus, because they are the Instruments of Taste; but
there seems nothing fitter than Smells to explain their Natures, which work
much on the Spirits, they being subtle and invisible Effluviums, like them.

Narcoticks have a Fetid Smell, by which they stupefie the Spirits, by stopping
their Motion and Elasticity, and the Fluidity of their Glandulous Vehicle.

Amongst Plants, those are esteemed fittest for Food, which have a sweet Taste;
and such has been accounted the Taste of Chyle: Sweet things breeding the
greatest quantity of it, and most nourishing; for Chyle, like sweet Tastes,
contains an Oil and Acidity, well digested and diluted with Water. Therefore,
all Medicines of a sweet Taste are agreeable in Taste, Temper, and Digestion to
Animal Bodies; and all those Plants, which are of a lower Digestion than
Sweets, are, in respect of the Humors of an Animal, crude and cooling; as
Earthy, Watery, Acid, and Mucilaginous Tastes; which are therefore used in the
too high Fermentation of the Blood. Those Plants which have a higher Digestion
than Sweet, are also of a higher Digestion than the Natural Temper of Animal
Humors, and are therefore Heating, Opening, Cordial, as Bitter, Acrid,
Aromatic Tastes; and Causticks, which have the highest excess above sweet
Tastes, and consequently above Animal Humors, are therefore Corrosive and
Poisonous to them.

Plants do not only consist of some certain Principles, but they receive also a
different Digestion and Fermentation in each Plant; which is very manifest in
the Fruits of Plants; which at the first taste Acerb, and afterward become
Sweet and Sub-acid: and in those Seeds, which whilst unripe taste Austere, but
afterward become Sweet Oily. This particular Digestion in Plants, may be
observed by their several Tastes, and predominant Principles, which produce
them.

CHAP. XIV. Of the different Ways of knowing the Virtues of Plants; but most
particularly, of the Natural Method of deducing them from the several Modes of
Taste, and from Experiments.
ALL the Knowledge we have of Nature, is grounded on our Senses; they first
inform us of certain Qualities produced by their Objects; into whose Natures we
afterward enquire, by trying Experiments about those sensible Qualities; and
also, by examining the Principles which produce them.

I have mentioned the Principles on which Tastes depend; and those Virtues
which all Authors allow them upon the Account of that Dependence.

This Knowledge of the Virtues of Plants, by their Taste, is much improved by
diverse Experiments made about particular Tastes; which I will mention; and
also, those Virtues which are known by the Modes of Tastes. But I will first
take notice of some other more general Hints of the Virtues of Plants, we have
from other Senses. Nature seems to have been very much sollicitous for our
Knowledge of the Virtues of Plants, by exposing them to so many of our Senses.

By the Touch we feel Mucilages, and the Gumminess of Turpentine Plants, and
the Waterishness of all Juyces, and the Acrimony of the Vesicatory. By the Eye
we observe the Signatures of Plants; in which Nature has given us an Hint of
enquiring farther into their Natures, for Remedies in particular Distempers;
and therefore, the Character of some Diseases is fixed on the Plant: Pulmonaria
has the Marks of corrupted Lungs, Scrophularia, Chelidonium minus, and Fabaria,
have knobbed Roots like the Piles. Spots are observed in Aron, and
Dragon-Leaves, like those in Scorbutic Persons.

Other Plants resemble the External Cause of a Distemper; as the Stalks of
Dragons do the Skin of a Serpent; the Roots of Doronicum, and the Tops of
Echium, resemble a Scorpion; against whose Venom they are used.

Where Distempers have no outward Figure, there the Plant bears the Figure of
the Part affected. So Nutmegs, Walnuts, Poppy-heads, and Peony, have some
Resemblance of the Head of Animals, and are useful in different Distempers of
it.

The Eye also observes the Likeness of the Yellow Color in Saffron, Turmerick,
Celandine-Roots, and the Gall of an Animal. The Likeness of slimy Mucilages to
many Glandulous Humors, is obvious; and the Color and Smell of Urine in
Lixiviums, is manifest.

I have already described the Similitude betwixt the Tastes of Medicines, and
Animal Humors; by which the Friendly Specificks may be known.

I have also given an Account of the different Smells of Plants, and the
Virtues intimated by them.

I will now consider the different Modes of Tastes; from whence we learn what
sort of Affections Plants will produce in our Bodies; and also those which are
produced externally: For as the Tongue is affected by the Taste, so are the
Parts and Humors of an Animal, by the same Plant, when used for a Medicine.
But, besides these Virtues known by the Modes of Taste, other Virtues are
proved by Experiments; which we could never have inferred to have belonged to a
particular Taste, by any Modes of it: And therefore, though we know the
particular Tastes of Plants, and the Composition of them; yet we cannot know
what Virtues may belong to them by that Taste, until we thoroughly have tried
and examined the Nature and Effects of each particular Taste; and also, what
Tastes may produce in Composition, more than Simple Tastes.

Acids taste Cool, Sour, and Pungent, or Sharp, and a little Rough: From the
Coolness on the Tongue we infer, that Acids will cool the Blood, Choler, hot
Salts, and the Stomach, and Thirst; and that outwardly they will repel and
cool Inflammations.

From their Pungency we believe them Aperitive, Penetrating, and also cutting
Phlegm.

From their Roughness we conclude they may stop Loosnesses and Haemorrhages, as
Astringents do, but more weakly.

The Experiments which have further illustrated the Efficacy of Acids, are
these.

The Coagulation of Milk, Choler, and the Serum of the Blood, shows their
cooling Virtue more efficaciously.

Acids are contrary to Volatile Salts, and combine with them into a Mixed Salt;
by which Acids are Diuretic.

Acids joined with Minerals, produce Vitriolate Tastes; and the same Taste
observable in Scorbutic Spittings of Blood from the Gums: The Blood tastes
like Vitriolum Martis, as I have often found ^t.

A particular Acid, with a Volatile Salt, (which the Honorable Mr. Boil
mentions) produces a cool Effervescence; from whence Shivering may be explained.

Acids commonly produce hot Effervecences; from whence flushing Heats may be
explained, upon the Use of Vinegar, in ^ome Persons.

Acids are contrary to Oils, and make a ^asting Effervescence with them; as Oil
of Turpentine, and Oil of Vitriol mixed: From whence we shall hereafter deduce
the Natural Heat and Effervescence of the Blood, and the Color of it, and the
Separation of the Fat from it.

Acids are contrary to Melancholic Constitutions, because they abound with
Acids.

They are contrary to Cephalic Distempers, because these require Volatile
Salts to cure them.

They corrode the Teeth, make the Urine sharp, cause all Obstructions; and
therefore, there is no pure Acid found in any Humors of Animals: For the Acids
are either joined to the Salts, or Oils of Animals. Of these I shall say more
in the Account of the Original of Animal Humors, and their Tastes.

To those, many other Experiments may be added out of Chemical Authors, to show
many yet-unknown Properties of Acids as their Concurrence in the Production of
Volatile and Fixed Salts, and the Part they have in Aurum Fulminans, and
Gunpowder: All which Experiments are applicable to some Alterations made by
Acids in Animals.

Astringents taste Rough, Cool, and contract the Lips; and they have the same
Effect on the other Parts.

The Roughness stops Loosnesses, fastens Loose Teeth, heals Wounds, and
cicatrizes Ulcers; repels outwardly; and, by contracting the Fibers,
strengthens them both outwardly and inwardly.

By the same Roughness, and cool Taste, the Humors are contracted, thickened,
and cooled; and therefore, Astringents stop Loosnesses, and Haemorrhages, as
well by the Contraction of fermenting Humors, as by strengthening the Fibers.

The other Effects of Astringents, may be deduced from this Roughness, though
at first they were discovered by Experiments. So Fevers have been cured by
Astringents, by reason of the Qualities abovementioned: And because we find
that Galls, which have a rough Taste, will alter the Texture of Chalybeat
Liquors, we believe by this Effect we may illustrate the Operation of
Stypticks, in curing of Fevers; which Effect we could not clearly deduce from
the contracting Taste.

Earthy Tastes are dry and gritty. They affect the Taste but little; so that,
from thence we cannot learn much of their Virtues, more than to dry and imbibe
Humidity, and thicken the Blood, and outwardly to dry Ulcers.

But by Experiments we learn, that Earthy Particles absorbe Acids; and both
compound either a Salt of an Aluminous, Nitrous, or Vitriol Taste, or Corrosive
Sulphurs; as shall hereafter be particularly mentioned.

Watery Tastes are cool, and moisten the Tongue; for which Qualities we use them
in Medicines.

Mucilage tastes Smooth, Cool, Slimy, and Watery. It therefore smooths the
Roughness and Dryness of the Throat in Catarrhs, abates the Sharpness of Urine,
cools and thickens all sharp Humors, and outwardly allays Heat, Roughness, and
all Inflammations in any Part, and the hot Rheums in the Eyes.

Oil differs from Mucilage, by being more hot; and therefore digesting, and
Anodyne, by the gentle Heat outwardly.

Oil lenifies sharp Humors, and inwardly defends the Gutts by a Sliminess, from
the Acrimony of Poisons.

The Sharpness to the Eyes, the Nauseousness to the Stomach, the not Mixing
with Water, and Coagulation by Acids, and the yielding some Acid in
Distillation, are Effects which (with many others) are only known by
Experiment, though applicable to Animals.

Bitters are unpleasant to the Taste, and inclining to an Acrimony; whence they
are accounted hot: Their other Affections of the Palate are not very evident;
but because they deterge Ulcers outwardly, they are esteemed of a deterging
Taste: For Galen says, Bitters are the same as Nitrose Tastes, but stronger;
and from the cleansing Nature of Nitre, Bitters are said to deterge the Palate,
and cleanse the Stomach and Liver.

Because an Astringent Taste is joined with Bitter, therefore Bitters are of an
Exasperating Taste; and by this Roughness, strengthen the Viscera and Fibers.

The Virtues of Bitters in killing Worms, preventing Putrefaction in Fevers and
Ulcers, their Diuretic and Sudorifick Virtue, and their Contrariety to Acids,
are the Consequences of known Experiments, and not deducible from the Modes of
Taste.

Nauseous Tastes immediately indicate a Purging or Vomiting Quality; and are
generally Bitter-Sweet or Bitter-Slimy, by which we perceive when the Tongue is
contrarily affected; and by the same Object an unpleasant Taste is produced.

Acrid Tastes are Penetrant and Pungent, and bite and heat the Mouth: They
therefore heat and rarefie thick Humors, and the Blood and Chyle, and open
Obstructions; outwardly they discuss Tumors, and draw in Plasters.

By Experience these are known to correct Acids, and coagulate with them into a
Mixed Salt, which is Diuretic and Sudorifick; and, by correcting the Acids of
the Spleen and Nerves, become Antiscorbutick and Cephalic.

Caustic Tastes vesicate both the Tongue, and outward Skin, and Vomit and
Purge.

Sweet Tastes have a grateful Oily Smoothness, by which they lenifie Coughs;
and are outwardly digesting, by their Moderate Heat. They are no less grateful
to the Stomach, than pleasing to the Palate.

That Sweet will become Bitter, we know only by Experiment; and by the same we
know, that all very Sweet Things are hot, and that they are Laxative.

Aromatic Tastes are Acrid, and Pleasing to the Taste and Smell; therefore by
their Acrimony they rarefie the Blood, open Obstructions, please the Stomach
and Spirits; and therefore are Cordial, Stomachick, and Cephalic; and, also,
outwardly comfort and strengthen Weak Parts, by their agreeable Heat.

I have set down these known Modes of each Taste; and shown, that by their
means we know, that Earthy, Watery, Acid, and Mucilaginous, are cool Tastes, and
cool the Animal Humors; and have also other Effects, which depend not on
Coolness: And I have also demonstrated, that Bitters, Aromaticks, Acrids, and
Causticks, are hot Tastes, and have hot Effects on Animals.

From the same Modes of Tastes, and from Experiments made on Particular Tastes,
we may examine all Compound Tastes: But we must consider; as Colors mixed are a
different Color from the Simple Colors; so it is in Tastes Compound, as
appears in Bitter-Sweet, and Bitter-Slimy; neither of which, alone, are
Nauseous.

CHAP. XV. Of the Degrees of Taste.
GALEN makes Four Degrees of the Virtues of Plants, reducing them to Hot, Cold,
Moist, and Dry.

1. That is Hot in the First Degree, which does not evidently heat, but we find
it by some Reason about the Nature of it. 2. Those that manifestly heat, are of
the Second Order. 3. Those which vehemently heat, are of the Third Order. 4.
Those which burn, or induce an Eschar, are of the Fourth Degree.
But seeing the Virtues of Plants are so evidently deduced from their Tastes,
and those Tastes so well experimented by many Chemical Distillations and
Mixtures; and since the Nature of the Humors of the Body, and all Diseases,
have been better observed than in Galen's Time; I have not confined my self, in
describing the Natures of Plants to Hot, Cold, Dry, or Moist; but have added
all the Compositions of Tastes, and sensible Effects of their Modes; whereby I
might particularly express the Nature of each Plant: And according to the
experimented Virtues of Tastes, I have added those which belong to each
Particular; and, I think, I need add no more, but the several Degrees of Taste;
which may most easily be understood, and which may have a different Degree of
Virtue. I therefore have observed Three Degrees in Tastes: As for Instance;

In Bitters the First Degree is a little Bitter or Bitterish; which does but
just sensibly affect the Taste; and therefore have the lowest Degree of Virtue,
as Bitter.

The Second Degree is Bitter absolutely; which considerably affects the Taste,
and is of a Moderate Bitterness.

The Third Degree is very Bitter; which much offends the Taste, and has the
highest Degree of Bitters.

The same Degrees are observable in Acid, Sweet, Mucilaginous, Acrid,
Aromatic, Watery, and Earthy Tastes.

By these Degrees of Tastes, we express that a little of a Taste, or a moderate
Degree of Taste, or else a greater Quantity of each Taste, is to be found in
each particular Compound Taste of a Plant.

Note, That Acrid is the Cause of Biting and Heat; and therefore, I have used
them in the SECOND PART, as Aequivalent Terms.

The End of the First Part.
A Phytological Essay, etc. The Second Part.
THE Tastes and Virtues OF Spontaneous English Plants.
A.
Firr-Tree. The Bark and Abies.
Leaves are Bitterish, Rough, and have a Turpentine Taste and Smell. It is a
good Vulnerary; and therefore works, as Turpentine, by Urine in the Stone and
Scurvy.

The Leaves are most Rough in Taste, and therefore most Vulnerary. This is to
be referred to the Turpentine Class. The Young Leaves of Firr and Pine are
Sourish and Rough.

Southernwood is of a very Bitter, Acrid, Abrotanum.
Hot Taste, and Strong Smell. Outwardly it is good against Convulsions and
Palsies. In its Bitter, Acrid Taste, and Fetidness, it seems to resemble
Sea-Wormwood, and to belong to the same kind. It has something Aromatic in
the Smell, like Chamaemel.

Common Wormwood is very Bitter, Acrid, Absinthium Commune.
and Hot in Taste, with a grateful Smell. As it has a Bitter and Acrid Taste,
it cleanses the Stomach, and excites Appetite, provokes Urine, and opens the
Liver; therefore it is good in the Jaundice and Dropsy. By the afore-mentioned
Qualities, it outwardly discusses Tumors, inwardly kills Worms, and is good in
long Tertians, by rectifying the Acidities in the Choleric Blood.

The Roots are not Bitter, but Sweet, Aromatic, and Hot, like Chervil; and are
Diuretic, Carminative, and Stomachick. Dr. Grew says, There is a Turpentine in
Wormwood-Roots, and also an Astringency in Wormwood, and in all strong Bitters.

Sea-Wormwood has a less Bitterness, Absinthium Seriphium.
but more unpleasant; of the same Virtue as the former, but weaker.

The Sycomore-Tree: The Bark is a Acer majus, Sycamorus.
little Mucilaginous, Bitter, and Rough; the Juice which runs upon Tapping, is
Sweet, Nauseous, and Astringent; the Leaves taste very Rough; the Virtue lies
in the Astringency, with a little Bitterness.

Common Maple: Its Bark is very Rough Acer minus.
and Bitterish; the Virtue depends upon the Astringency.

Common Sorrel: Its Leaves are Acid Acetosa vulgaris.
and Astringent; by which it cools in Fevers, excites Appetite, and is
Diuretic.

The Root is Bitter, Astringent, and Nauseous: There is an Anti-febrile Virtue
in it, by purging Choler from the Blood. The Root is Yellow without, and has a
Dock-Bitterness; to which I refer it.

Wood Sorrel is the same: If the Juice Acetosella.
be thickened, the Crystals that settle in the Bottom, taste like Cream of
Tartar, Gritty and Sour.

The Sheep-Sorrel, and Acetosa Rotundifolia, Acetosa Lanceolata
have the same Taste and Virtue.

Wild Basil tastes Bitterish and Subacrid, Acinos.
with an Aromatic Smell: It is a Cephalic, by that Taste and Smell.

The Aromatic Reed: The Root tastes Acorus verus, seu Calamus Aromaticus.
Bitterish, with an Aromatic Taste and Smell, by which it discusses Wind. It
is Cordial, and provokes Urine, and works as an Aromatic. It savours something
of a Balsamic Turpentine.

Wall-Rue is Sweet-Astringent, like the Adianthum album.
Ferns; by which it is a Splenetick, checking the Fermentation of the Blood;
and it is a Vulnerary for the Lungs and Kidneys.

Golden Maidenhair is Astringent, like Adianthum aureum minus.
the Ferns; with an Earthy Smell, by which Mosses and Ferns differ most, being
of a very like Nature.

Holly-Tree: The Bark tastes Mucilaginous, Agrifolium
a little Biting, and Bitterish: The Leaves are Bitterish; by which it does
good in the Colic, if boiled in Posset Drink. Holly has an Acrid in it,
joined with Bitterish, and a Mucilage; therefore, the distilled Water may help
the Stone.

Red Berries of Holly-Tree taste Sweet, Agrifolii Baccae.
Bitterish, Acrid, and Mucilaginous; by which they are Purgative.

Agrimony is moderately Bitter, Subacrid, Agrimonia vulgar.
and Astringent, with an Aromatic Smell: By its Bitterness, it is good for the
Stomach, and Obstructions of the Liver; by its Astringency, it is Vulnerary;
and by its Aromatic Smell, is Cordial: Its Astringency makes it good for
stopping involuntary Pissing; and its Bitterness corrects the Acidity of the
Urine, which stimulates too much.

Vervain-Mallow is Mucilaginous, like Alcea vulgar.
Common Mallows, and of the same Virtues.

Ladies Mantle is moderately Astringent, Alchimilla vulgar.
without any Heat; by which Quality it is good in all Fluxes of Blood, and in
Wounds.

Jack by the Hedge: Its Smell is Rank, Alliaria.
like Garlic; and it is Bitterish and Acrid in its Taste: Its Virtues are like
those of Garlic, and are good for the Cough. It is Diuretic, and resists
Infection; and is good in Sawces. It is outwardly used in Gangreens, and fordid
Ulcers, in the form of an Ointment.

Ramsons: They smell like Leeks, and Allium Ursinum.
their Taste is the same: The Roots resemble Leeks. They are very Mucilaginous
and Acrid, with a Garlic Smell, and of the same Virtue as Leeks.

Common-Alder: The Bark is Astringent, Alnus vulgar.
and a little Bitter: The Leaves are of the same Taste, but less strong, and
feel Gummy.

Black-Elder: The Bark is Bitter and Alnus Nigra Baccifera.
Slimy; the Berries Sweet, Bitter, and Mucilaginous; the Leaves are
Mucilaginous, and Bitterish: They all Purge and Vomit. Outwardly the Bark is
good for the Itch in Ointments, by its Mucilaginous Bitterness.

Chickweed: Its Taste is Watery, Crude, Alsine Tenuifolia.
and feels Mucilaginous: It therefore cools Inflammations.

Speedwell-Chickweed is Bitterish-Astringent; Alsine Foliis Veronicae.
and therefore no Chickweed; but, by its Taste, is a Vulnerary.

Marsh-Mallow Roots, Leaves, Flowers, Althaea vulgar.
and Seeds are very Mucilaginous: Whence it is good in Decoctions for the Stone
and Cough; as also is the Syrup. Outwardly it mollifies and allays Pains: It is
put into Baths and Cataplasms; and is an Emollient. The Mucilage is good for
Chops in the Breast, and Pains by Vesicatories.

Brook-lime is a little Acrid, with much Anagallis Aqu. seu Becabunga.
Waterishness, and great Astringency: By which Tastes it stops Bleeding, cools
the Inflammations of the Blood; and is good for the Scurvy, by its pungent
Parts.

Male-Pimpernell: It tastes like Sorrel; Anagallis mas flore Phoeniceo.
and afterward it heats and bites, by its Acrimony. This Acrid-Acid is good in
Pestilential Waters; by its Acrimony it provokes Sweat, and by its Acidity,
Urine.

Pimpernell with Yellow Flowers, smells Anagallis Lutea.
like Sorrel when rubbed, and tastes Rough and Astringent; therefore a good
Vulnerary.

Tutsan, or Park-Leaves, has a strong Androsaemum vulgar.
Turpentine Smell; the Taste is a little Sowre-Astringent, and Bitterish:
Therefore it is an excellent Vulnerary, and Diuretic; and though the
Turpentine is in the Smell very much, yet it tastes but a little Bitter.

Wood-Crowfoot is very Acrid, or Caustic; Anemone Nemorum.
flies up into the Nose, if rubbed: Is a sort of Ranunculus, and Bitterish.

The Root of the Garden-Anemone tastes Watery, Sweet-Acrid, and a little Slimy.

Angelica the Lesser, or Gout-wort, smells Angelica minor seu Podagraria
like Angelica, and tastes like it, but nothing so strong: It has the same
Virtues in a lower Degree. It is called Podagraria, from its knobbed Joints on
the Roots, rather than from any Virtue for the Gout.

Wild Angelica is Sweet, Bitterish, and Angelica Sylvestris.
Aromatic; like the Garden sort in Taste and Virtue; but not so strong.

Common Rest-Harrow, with Purplish Anonis Spinosa flo. Purpureo.
Flowers: The Roots and Leaves have a Pea-Taste, Sweet and Mucilaginous; the
Leaves feel clammy, and smell strong. The Virtues are from the Mucilage, good
for the Stone; and from its strong Smell, Diuretic and Aperitive.

Kidney-Vetch has a sweet Pea-Taste, Anthyllis Leguminosa.
and a little Bitter; being rubbed, it smells rank Oily; and therefore is
accounted Vulnerary.

Snap-Dragon tastes Bitterish and Mucilaginous, Antirrhinum.
with an Elder-Smell: So that it is Discutient, Anodyne, and Emollient, like
Linaria, and of the same Virtues.

Clivers has a Hot, Acrid, Bitterish and Aparine Vulgaris.
Sub-Astringent Taste; and therefore is a good Diuretic, either boiled in
White Wind, or its Juice, or Powder, or distilled Water. Outwardly applied with
Hoggs-grease, it may discuss Scrophulous Tumors. It is a Madder.

Wild-Smallage is like the Garden sort, Apium.
in Taste and Virtue; Bitterish, Sweet, Hot, and Aromatic in the Root, Seeds
and Leaves: It is therefore Carminative, Diuretic, and a good Aperitive.
Smallage has a Bitterishness in the Leaves and Roots, which makes it ungrateful.

Columbines: The Leaves and Flowers Aquilegia Sylvestris.
taste Bitterish-Sweet; the Roots are Waterish, and a little Bitter, and
Sub-acrid. It is therefore a temperate Plant, rather Hot than Cold. The Roots
are Diuretic; the Leaves are used in Gargles for Sore-Mouths. Columbine is of
the Pea-Tribe.

Bastard-Poppy is of an Opiate Smell; in Argemone.
Taste, Mucilaginous: It is Opiate, as Papaver Rhoeas.

Wild-Tansie: The Leaves are Rough-Astringent, Argentina.
and dry; the Roots Bitter-Astringent, like Cinquefoyl. It stops Fluxes, and
Hemorrhages; and is Vulnerary and Antifebrile, by the Bitterish Roughness.

Deptford-Pink: If rubbed, it smells Armeria Sylvestris.
Sweet, tastes Sweet-Bitter, and is nauseously Bitter-Astringent, like
Garden-Pinks in Taste.

Meadow-Pink, or Wild-Williams, is Armerius Pratensis.
Waterish and crude like the Lychnis.

Mugwort tastes Bitterish and Aromatic, Artemisia Vulg.
with an Aromatic Smell: It is Cephalic and Uterine. It is inwardly used in
Syrup of the Juice, in Water for Fits of the Mother, and driving out the
Menses, but it does that weakly. Outwardly it is used in warm Baths: The Smell
resembles Wormwood, and is of that kind.

Wake-Robin: It is strongly Acrid, Pungent, Arum vulgar.
and Vesicating the Palate and Tongue, by its Volatile Salt; it is not
perceived till after some time. By that Salt, it is good for the Scurvy; it is
Diuretic, Antisplenetick, Pectoral, and Cephalic; the Salt flies away being
long Powdered. The Red-Berries are Biting and Slimy. The Leaves rubbed have no
considerable Smell, in respect of their Acrimony: Vinegar corrects the
Acrimony, and therefore the Acrimony is Saline, and not Oleous: But the Pouches
stink very nauseously, which stink depends upon an Oil and Salt.

St. Peters-wort smells and tastes (like Ascyrum vulgar.
St. John's Wort) of Turpentine, and is Bitterish and Astringent; and therefore
is Vulnerary.

Asparagus: The Roots have a Pea-taste, Asparagus.
Bitterish, Watery, and Acrid; which, as in other Diuretics, affects the
Throat, and therefore it is a great Diuretic, and Opener of Obstructions. The
Grassie Leaves of Asparagus, have a Pea-taste, and if rubbed, they smell like
Peascods: The Faetor they give to the Urine, proceeds from an Oyliness; which
is observable in many of the Pea-tastes: to which Faetor also the Acrid hot
parts of the Asparagus, which are perceptible in eating of green Sparagrass, by
burning the Throat, do much conduce: The Berries have a sweet Taste.

Woodroof is Bitter and Acrid, with a Asperula.
Fragrant Smell: It Is therefore a good opening Hepatick; and by its Taste and
Smell, appears to be a Madder. The Fragrancy of it argues a Cordial Virtue. It
is usually infused in Beer, or distilled.

Ceterach is sweet and rough like other Asplenium.
Ferns, good against Fluxes, and Bleeding, and Splenetick Fermentations of the
Blood, by its rough Astringency. There is an obscure Acrimony in all Ferns, by
which they are Aperitive.

Wild Orach: The Root, Leaves, and Atriplex Sylvestris.
Seeds are Mucilaginous, and of a crude Fetid Scent. Outwardly in Fomentations
and in Clysters, it is Emollient, Cooling, and Anodyne: It seems not proper for
inward use by its ungrateful Smell, and nauseous Mucilage.

Stinking Orach tastes Mucilaginous, Atriplex Olida.
and is Fetid in Smell, by which it is Antihysterical.

Oats: The Green-Corn tastes sweet and Avena.
crude; the Oats are Mucilaginous-sweet.

Mouse-Ear is Bitterish and Astringent, Auricula Muris seu Pilosella.
therefore good in Fits of Agues, and in Fluxes; and is a Vulnerary: It may be
referred to the Hawk-weeds. Outwardly, by the Astringency, it cures the Herpes.
It Tastes of an ill Fusty Taste toward Winter, by lying near the Ground.

B.
STinking Horehound is of a Dead-Nettle, Ballote.
strong, stinking Smell, and very Bitter in Taste; by which it is
Antihysterick, and Antihypocondriack; and outwardly cleansing in Ulcers. It is
a little Acrid, and belongs to the Lamium-Class.

Winter-Cresses is of a Cress-Taste and Barbarea lutea Latifolia.
Virtue: It cleanses Ulcers outwardly, by its Cress-Pungency.

Great Burdock: The Root tastes Watery, Bardana major.
Slimy, Bitterish, and Smoaky; by which it is Diuretic, and good in the Gout,
Stone, and Cough. The Seed is Bitter, and of the same Virtue with the Root: The
Leaves are very Bitter, like Carduus Benedictus, and may be used for Sweating
and Vomiting, instead of it. This Plant, by its Prickly head, and Purple
Flower, is like to the Carduus kind, as well as by the smoaky Taste, and
Bitterish Slime.

Spatling Poppy has a crude Taste and Behen Album.
Smell, like other Lychnis's; and is of the same Virtue.

Great Dasie: The whole Plant is sweet Bellis major.
like Liquorish, and therefore of the same Virtue in Coughs; it is also a
little Pungent (discernible most in the Stalk.) This Acrid makes it useful in
an Orthopnoea. I use it as Thea, and sweeten it with Syrup of the Juice of
Horehound. The sweet Smell of it is Fragrant, like Erigerum, and the Leaves
resemble it; but in Taste it is most like Rampions.

Little Dasie: The Leaves and Roots Bellis minor.
are Acid; and therefore are Cooling and Diuretic, when boiled in Broth for
Children. I took three spoonfuls of the Juice of the Leaves, for diverse
Mornings, and found no Purging quality in it. I judge it is of the
Sorrel-Species and Virtue; and I think the Juice is proper for Spitting of
Blood; but do not think it properly Vulnerary, though Authors call it Consolida
minor. The taste of the Root is Bitterish and Pungent-acid; wherefore the
Acidity in Dasies is like the Pungent Acidity of Vinegar; and then it may be
accounted a Sorrel: Or else it has an Acrimony joined with the Acid, like Rosa
Solis; for it does a little blister, though without Heat.

Water-Betony is nauseously Bitter, and Betonica Aquatica.
of an Elder. Smell; it has the Taste and Virtues of Scrophularia: It is most
used in Ointments, for Tumors, Burns, and Ulcers.

Wood-Betony is Bitterish, and a little Betonica vulgaris.
Hot, with an Aromatic Smell, but somewhat resembling the Lamiums. By the
Taste and Smell it is Cephalic, Diuretic, Pectoral and Vulnerary. It is used
in Powder, Juice, and Conserve of the Flowers. The Roots are very Bitter, like
Peach-Kernels, and may cause Vomiting or Purging. It seems to belong to the
Lamium-Class, the Root tasting like Veravin-Root.

The Birch-Tree: The Bark is very Betula.
Rough and Bitter, and so may be Vulnerary; and as such, will act inwardly: It
will make a good Extract. The Leaves are Mealy, Mucilaginous, and a little
Bitter, and so may be good in Baths for the Itch. They smell a little Sweet;
the fresh Juice of the wounded Tree is Sweet, which will turn Sour: It will
make a good Wine for the Stone with Spices. The crude Juice is too raw for the
Stomach: If it be Distilled or Brewed with Malt, it may be good for Hecticks.

Tway-Blade: The Taste is Sweet, Mucilaginous, Bisolium Slyvestre.
and a little Acrid or Biting. It is probably of the Orchis kind: Its Virtue
lies in the Mucilage, or Acrid Biting; by both which it may be outwardly
Emollient, and inwardly Diuretic.

Bistort: The Root is rough, and bitterish Bistorta vulgaris.
like Sorrel; and therefore stops Fluxes, abates Praeternatural Fermentations,
and so is Alexipharmack, and not Sudorifick; but it abates too much Sweating,
as well as Acids: The Leaves are Crude and Mucilaginous. It seems a kind of
Sorrel.

Blite is Mucilaginous, and Crude in Blitum minus album.
Taste; therefore its Virtue is Cooling and Mucilaginous; of the nature of
Beets or Atriplex.

English Mercury: It Is Sorrel-tasted in Bonus Henricus.
the Roots, Leaves and Seeds, exasperating or corroding the Throat: The Leaves
are also Mucilaginous, and of a Grassy Smell: It is therefore accounted
Emollient; and its Acid outwardly cools Inflammations. It has Sandy, Globular
parts on the backside of the Leaves; which may work as Testaceous Powders, and
be Diuretic. The exasperating Quality may irritate in a Pessus, and make it
Laxative in Clysters, as well as its Mucilage; from the same also is its
Diuretic Quality. I think it like Atriplex or Beets: It is good for Warts
outwardly; and discusses in Cataplasms, as appears by the burning Quality in
the Throat.

Mr. Ray says, The Root is Acrid and Bitter.

White-Bryony: The Root tastes Subacrid, Bryonia Alba.
very Bitter, and Mucilaginous; and therefore Vomits and Purges, as other
Bitter Mucilages do. Outwardly, by the same Qualities, it cures Warts,
Struma's, Pains of the Hips, Bruises, Pains of the Sides, and Gout-Pains; and
is laid to the Feet in Cataplasms, for Distempers of the Head.

If the Root be dried, and the Mucilage afterward drawn out by Infusing in
Wine, and then again dried, it Purges and Vomits much less. Mr. Ray.

The Leaves of Bryony have the same Taste and Virtue; and some have used the
Decoction of them for the Stone; but ten spoonfuls thereof Purged and Vomited a
Dog strongly. The Red Berries have a most abominable Taste and Smell;
Countrymen give them for the Host to the Cows. The Faeculae of the Root are
Purgative; and, as Fetids and Bitters, they work in Hysteric Cases. The
Sprouts boiled like young Asparagus, I found most nauseous, and not fit to Eat.

The Roots are pounded into a Conserve for Fits; but I cannot believe any
Stomach can hold them.

Black-Bryony: The Leaves are Mucilaginous, Bryonia Nigra.
Bitterish, and a little Biting, and therefore Diuretic; the Root is Acrid,
and (as a Physician told me) blisters the Hands. It is as Diuretic, but not so
Purgative as the White-Bryony.

Small Wild-Bugloss: The Leaves and Buglossum Sylvestre minus.
Roots are Cool, Watery, and Mucilaginous; in Juice and in Decoction it cools
Hecticks, Inflammations, Heats, and Thirst, and stops Rheums: The Flowers have
a little Cordial Heat in them, besides their Watery Mucilage.

Bugle is Bitter and Rough in Taste, Bugula Caerulea.
and therefore Vulnerary: I suppose it may be a Veronica or Lamium. Bugle,
Scabiose, and Sanicle, make a good Ointment, with Bores-grease, for Wounds.

Earth-Nuts are Sweet, Hot, and Aromatic, Bulbo castanum.
and belong to the Fenil-kind, by Taste and Virtue: The Roots are Sweet and
Mucilaginous; the sweet Acrimony and Mucilage makes them Diuretic and Venereal.

Shepherds-Purse is of a Cress-Smell and Bursa Pastoris.
Taste, though in a low degree: The Astringency is but small, and deserves not
the Character of an excellent Astringent.

Box-Tree: The Leaves and Bark are Buxus.
very Bitter and Rough, therein resembling Guaiacum by its Taste; and therefore
used in its stead, in drying Decoctions. I cannot perceive any Narcotick
quality in it. It is given to Horses for the Botts. Some account it
Antiscorbutick.

C.
CALAMINT is of a Bitterish and Calamintha vulgaris.
very Acrid, Aromatic Taste, and of a strong Aromatic Mint Smell; and
therefore is an hot Cephalic, Uterine, Pectoral, and Stomachick, by its
Bitterness and Acrimony; thereby giving a quick motion to the Spirits, and also
heating the Nervous Fibers.

Marsh-Marigold: The Flowers smell Caltha Palustris.
like Lilies; the Leaves are Mucilaginous, and a little warm or pungent. By its
Acrimony it is a Marigold, or rather a Crow-foot.

Bell-flowers; The Leaves are Biting, Campanula rotundifolia.
and sweet like Rampions.

Bastard-Hemp is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Cannabis spuria.
and of an Aromatic smell: It is accounted a Lamium.

Hemp is Bitter and Acrid, of a sweet Cannabis Sativa.
Aromatic Smell, like Agrimony, but more strong: It is not fit to be taken
inwardly; for by that Smell it produces Giddiness; and probably kills Fish: It
has a more offensive Smell after it is gathered and dried. By its bitter
Acrimony it is most fit for outward use in discussing and dissolving Kernels,
and easing Pains. The Seeds have a Mucilage, and are used in Emulsions, as
Diuretics and Openers in the Jaundice, by the bitter Acrimony and strong
Smell. No Diuretic can be an Antivenereal, as Hemp has been accounted; unless
it destroys the Animalcula in Semine, as it does Worms, and other Insects, and
Fishes in the River.

An Oil may be expressed from the Seed for Burns.

Ladies Smock is a Biting-Acrid, like Cardamine
the Nasturtiums, and of a Cress-Smell and Virtue.

Mother-wort is very Biting and Bitter, Cardiaca.
therefore good in Hypochondriack Faintings, and Fits of the Mother, to provoke
Urine, and the Menses, and to Expectorate: And it is also a Cephalic in
Convulsions and Palsies; but is chiefly an Hepatick, as Bitter-Acrids are.

The Smell of it is like Dead-Nettle, and belongs to that Tribe. It is also
reckoned amongst Bezoardicks, for its Bitter-Acrimony.

Thistles: They taste Watery, Mucilaginous, Carduus vulgaris Lanceolatus.
Bitterish, and Smoaky, by which they are Diuretics; but also very nauseous.

Ladies-Thistle: The Leaves are Bitterish Carduus Mariae.
and Slimy, and may be Eaten boiled. The Root is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and
Smoaky; by which it is Diuretic, but very offensive; as any other Carduus is
to the Stomach; and therefore may be Vomitory, as Carduus Benedictus is.

Carline-Thistle: The Roots taste Bitterish, Carlina.
and a little Acrid, of a Mithridate flavor. It may be therefore used as an
Alexipharmack, and Hepatick, and Diuretic, because of its Bitterish Acrimony.
It is Sub-acrid, and a little Aromatic, mixed with an unpleasant Smell.

Avens: The Leaves are Astringent, Caryophyllata vulgaris.
and therefore given before the Fits of a ^ertian Ague. The Roots smell and
taste ^ke Cloves; and are therefore Cordial, Ce^alick, Stomachick, and
Alexipharmack. The Root has also an Astringent Taste; and therefore good in
Fluxes of the Belly, and Weakness of the Stomach; given in ^owder, or Infusion
in Wine: the Virtue ^es in being an Aromatic Astringent, ^itterish and Acrid.
By the Taste and ^mell it is a Clove-Gilliflower.

Chesnut-Tree: The Bark is very Rough, Castanea.
and a little Bitter. The Leaves are a lit^e Sour, Slimy, and Hot; they smell
^moaky. The Bark is used as an Astrin^ent in Loosenesses, and the Whites. The
^ruit is Sweet-tasted, fit for Food, with ^n Astringency, which lies in the
Skin ^s the Fruit.

Hedge-Parsley: The Leaves, Root, and Caucalis.
^owers are Hot, Sweet, and Aromatic and its Taste and Smell is like Daucus
and therefore is Diuretic and Carmina^ve.

Lesser-Centaury has a very strong Bitter Centaurium minus.
Taste, like a Peach-Kernel, with an evident Astringency, but no Acrimony or
Pungent Heat; therefore it may be used as a good Hepatick, Vterine, and
Antifebrifick, in Extract, Decoction, or Powder, in the Jaundice, Gout, and
Fevers. Outwardly, it is a cleansing Vulnerary and Cicatrises. It is not unlike
a Bitter Lychnis. Quaere, Whether there be any Sweetness in Centaury, besides
the Bitter?

Birds-Cherry: The Bark is nauseously Cerasus Avium racemosa.
Bitter and Astringent, and of a Peach-Kernel-Taste. The Leaves are of the same
Taste and Smell, resembling the Leaf of a Cherry-Tree. The Flowers smell very
Fragrant.

Cherry-Tree: The Bark is very Bitter Cerasus vulgaris.
and Astringent; but it makes a whiter Powder than Jesuits Powder: The Bark may
be given for the Fits of Convulsion, as well as Black-Cherry-Water, which has
the Virtue from its Bitterishness.

Acid-Cherries cool and excite Appetite.

The Sweet nourish, and may loosen the Belly.

The Black are Bitterish; their Water, Spirit, and Wine are good for
Convulsions.

Cherry-Tree Gum is good for Hoarsnesses, and Vlcerations of the Kidneys, by
its Mucilage.

Black-Cherry-Tree-Leaves are Bitterish and Mucilaginous.

Chervil: The Roots, Leaves, and Seeds Cerefolium Sylvestre and Hortense.
are Sweet, and sensibly Hot, Aromatic and Diuretic, Carminative and
Pectoral. Outwardly it is used in Fomentations for the Stone, Colic, and
Swelling of the Breasts: The distilled Water and Juice are most used; the Juice
is good for Vertigoes.

Germander tastes very Bitter and Acrid, Chamaedrys Sylvestris and Hortensis.
and smells like Hops; it is accounted a Diuretic, Splenetick, Hepatick,
Vterine, Antifebrifick, and Arthritick. It seems referible to the Lamiums by
the Smell; and is Sub-aromatick like Betony; and so are some of the Lamiums.
Outwardly it is good in Gangreens and sordid Ulcers.

Chamomile tastes Bitterish and Acrid; Chamaemelum vulgar.
and is Aromatic in smell; therefore it is chiefly Cephalic, Diuretic,
Sudorifick, and Vterine. Outwardly it is discussing* the Juice is given before
Fits of the Ague, and for pains of the Stomach. The Flowers Infused in
White Wind, taste Saltish, and are used for the Stone. Mr. Ray.

Groundpine tastes very Bitter, and has Chamaepitys vulgaris.
a Terebinthinate taste and smell: It is good in Arthritick cases, by its
Bitterness and Turpentine; and also for cleansing of the Womb by the same
quality; and is very Diuretic.

The Greater-Celandine is extremely Chelidonium majus.
Bitter and Acrid; by which it is accounted good in the Jaundice, and
Obstructions of the Liver: The Juice is outwardly used to the Eyes, but chiefly
the Water. By the same Quality it is Diuretic and Alexipharmack. Outwardly it
is good for the Herpes; and is a cleansing Vulnerary.

Lesser-Celandine tastes Waterish, Crude, and a little Pungent, resembling
Scurvy Grass; Chelidonium minus.
good for Hot Scorbutic Blood, and Inflamed Piles. The Stalk tastes Acrid like
Ranunculus, rather than Scurvy Grass. The Roots have knobs like Piles; it may
be a Ranunculus. Though the Pungency be very weak, the distilled Water is
Sub-acrid. Lesser-Celandine outwardly discusses Scrophula's.

Corn-Marygold: The Leaves are Slimy, Chrysanthenum Segetum.
Bitterish, a little Biting, and of a strong Scent, like common Marygolds. It
is a nauseous Plant, not fit for inward use.

Succory is Watrish, Bitter, and Smoaky; Cichoreum Sylvestre.
by which it cools the Blood, opens the Liver in the Jaundice, and Choleric
Cachexies; and is Diuretic. It is like the Hieraceum-kind.

Hemlock is of a Fetid Opiate, and virose Cicuta.
Smell; it tastes very Acrid and Sweetish, like the Parsly-kind, but especially
Cicuta fatua. Hemlock-Root causes Frenzy and Stupidness, as if the Persons who
take it were Drunk; and also a Giddiness; which happened to my Man, who grew
Sleepy, and Giddy after his chewing of the Root, and swallowing some of it. I
gave a Glassful of the Juice of the Leaves and Roots to my Dog, which made him
very Sick, without any other alteration. Vomiting is necessary after the taking
of Hemlock. It may be outwardly used in Anodyne, and Discussing Emplasters for
Tumors, or for the Spleen.

Water-Hemlock: The Root smells most Cicutaria Palustris alba.
offensively Fetid, when broken.

Wild-Cicely, or Madneps, have a Sweet, Cicutaria vulgaris.
Sub-acrid, Aromatic Parsnip Taste and Smell in the Leaves and Roots: They
cause a Stupidity and Frenzy. Give a Vomit after them, and aftewards
Alexipharmacks.

Inchanters Nightshade, tastes a little Circaea Lutetiana.
Acrid, Sweet and Astringent, and has a Solanum smell. The Leaves may be
outwardly used as an Anodyne, and repelling Medicine: It is a Solanum by its
smell.

Periwincle has a Laurel Bitter, and a little Clematis Daphnoides.
Acrid without any considerable smell: It is accounted a Vulnerary, and may be
referred to the Laurel Bitters, and is not so proper a Styptick as Authors
write. The Roots are like the Leaves, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent.

Scurvy Grass; The Flowers, Leaves and Cochlearia
Roots are extremely Acrid. By its Volatile Salt, it is good against the
Scurvy, in Spirit, Juice, and Aqua Raph. composit. The Seeds yield most Oil,
being most Bitter. The Juice is used to the Gums, with Burnt Alum for the
Putridness of them.

Crowsilk is of a cool Taste. Conserva Palustris.


Bacchar, or Plowmans Spikenard, is Bitterish, Conyza major Matthioli.
Acrid, of a little Aromatick-Scent, like Spikenard; and is a Cephalic Herb,
and has a Resinous, Fragrant, and Terebinthinate Smell.

Common-Fleabane is very Bitter and Conyza media.
Biting, of a strong, and somewhat Fetid Smell, like Marygolds; and probably an
Hysteric and Uterine; outwardly discussing in Medicines for the Eyes; and good
in Ointments for the Itch: It feels clammy, and smells like Soaped Clothes.

Sweet Purple-Fleabane is Aromatic, Conyza caerulea acris.
very Acrid and Bitterish.

Comphrey is Clammy, Mealy, and Consolida major.
Mucilaginous; by which it is good in Sharp Rheums, and Ulcers of the Lungs and
Kidneys, and in Fluxes of Blood. Outwardly it lenifies the Pains of the Gout,
especially the Roots Pounded, and applied. It comes near the Virtue of Bugloss.

Bind-weed Greater and Less: The Convolvulus major and minor.
Leaves are Mealy, Mucilaginous, and Bitterish; and the Root a little Acrid,
Slimy, Bitter, and Milky, as all the Bindweeds are: By its Taste it appears to
be a Purger or Vomitory. The Decoction of the Leaves have a nauseous sick
Smell; but it purged not my Dog. It is a sort of Bryony.

Note, The Bind-weeds are Milky, like Scammony.

Sea-Coralline tastes Gritty; by its sharp Corallina.
Grittiness, it frets the Worms; as Spar powdered does, which is also given for
them. It has also a strong Earthy-Smell, like Moss: And Authors say, That it
has a Salt-Taste; but I could not perceive it. Many Sea-Plants have that
External Saltness from the washing of the Seawater, and not from a Saltness in
their Juice: From this accidental Saltness, fresh Coraline is good for the
Worms.

Bucks-Horn Plantane is like ordinary Coronopus vulgaris.
Plantane, Watery and Astringent.

Swines-Cresses is Biting, and of a Cress-Taste Coronopus Ruellii.
and Virtue.

Hasel-Tree: The Catkins, Leaves and Corylus Sylvestris.
Bark are very Rough; and therefore are great Astringents. The Nuts are Sweet
and Oleous; and loosen the Belly, while fresh.

Stinking May-weed is very Biting, Bitter, Cotula foetida.
and Fetid; of the same Virtue as Chammomile, but stronger; and fitter to make
Oils and Ointments of, for Pains, Tumors, and Scrophulae. Inwardly it is good
for Hysteric Fits in distilled Water.

Marsh-Pennywort: The Leaves are Cotyledon aquatica.
Sweet, Hot, and Sub-aromatick, and smell like Water-Parsnip. I found it in
Dorstil-Moores.

Eye-bright-Cow-Wheat is moderately Crataeogonon Euphrasynes facie.
Bitter and Astringent, and Sub-acrid. It is accounted to be of the nature of
common Eyebright, but Hotter.

Samphire is Sweet, Acrid, and Aromatic; Crithmum.
the Leaves have their Saltness from the Salt Water; and it is only External;
for the Roots have it not, but taste as is above described; by which it is
referible to the Fennil-Class.

Wild-Saffron-Flower: The Flower is Crocus Sylvestris.
of a strong Fetid Smell; and of an Hot, Biting, and Mucilaginous Taste: By its
Acrid, it is Cordial and Aperitive in the Jaundice, and good in Pestilential
Fevers. By its strong Odor, it is good in Diseases of the Womb, and Hysteric
Passions. Outwardly, by the Mucilage and Acrid Fetor, it is Anodyne; and
inwardly good for Asthmas. The Root is Sweet and Slimy; the Green Leaves are
Sweet and Acrid, like Saffron-Flowers.

Cross-wort is a little Hot, Bitterish, and Cruciata.
Astringent; it is a Vulnerary, and of the Nature of Gallium Luteum, or Madder.
The Roots are Yellow, Bitter, and Acrid.

Dodder is Bitter and Astringent, and Cuscuta.
good against the Itch, Black-Jaundice, and Obstructions of the Liver and
Spleen.

Blue-Bottle tastes Bitterish, Smoaky, Cyanus.
Sub-acrid* and Mucilaginous; It is of the Nature of Jacea, by its Taste. The
Water of the Flowers is good for Inflammations of the Eyes; lenifying by the
Mucilage, and discussing by its Sub-acrid-Taste.

Dogs-Mercury has a dry Taste, and is a Cynocrambe mas and foemina.
little hot: It is vulgarly boiled in Cream for an Erysipelas. It has an
Elder-Smell, and is a crude Plant: By the Elder-Smell it may be Purging; and
has a nauseous Bitter-Taste.

Great Hounds-Tongue: The Taste is Bitterish Cynoglossum vulgar.
and Mucilaginous in the Root, Leaves and Seed; they smell strong like the
Excrements of Mice; being boiled, they smell like Spirit of Hartshorn. It is
used as an Opiate inwardly; and outwardly applied as an Anodyne, it discusses
all Tumors, and the Scrophulae. An Ointment made therewith, and Hoggsgrease,
heals Wounds like Tabaco-Oyntment; and is good for the Pains of the Piles: It
is used most for Cataplasms, in Scrophulous Tumors outwardly. A strong
Decoction of the Leaves and Roots being given to a Dog, made no sensible
alteration: It is good in Scaldings.

In Pills, the Seeds are used for Catarrhs, Fluxes, and Spitting of Blood. The
Roots, by their Odor, hung about the Neck, kill Lice.

Dr. Grew says, The Root is sweet.

D.
WIld Carrot tastes Sweet, Hot, and Daucus.
Aromatic in the Seeds, Leaves, and Roots: Therefore it is of the
Sweet-Aromatick Fennel-Class; and has the same Virtues, being Diuretic in the
Stone and Strangury, in the Carminative Colic externally and internally; good
in Hysteric Fits: All which Effects it has from its Aromatic Oil, and Sweet
Tastes.

Dandelyon: The Roots, Leaves, and Dens Leonis.
Milk taste Waterish, Bitter, and Smoaky. It is good in great Quantities of
Choler in the Blood, and in putrid Fevers: By its Bitterishness it cleanses
Choler, by Urine and the Choleduct; by its Waterishness it cools the Blood. It
is for the same reason good in Consumptions.

Fox-Gloves: The Flowers, Seeds, and Digitalis Purpurea.
Green-Leaves are Mucilaginous and Bitter, with Astringency; the Roots are
Rough, and Nauseously Bitter; the Seeds are Bitter-slimy and Astringent. It
Vomits and Purges strongly: The Green-Leaves or Roots are boiled in Ale, for
the Falling Sickness. The Flowers are good in the King's Evil Sores: They are
Anodyne, by their Slime; and Cleansing and Healing, by their
Bitter-Astringency. The Green-Leaves have a strong Smell, like Elder; which
intimates their Purging Faculty.

Teasle is Bitter and Smoaky, like other Dipsacus.
Thistles, both in Leaves and Roots. The Flowery Heads of it show it to be a
Carduus.

Oak-Fern is of the Taste and Virtue of Dryopteris.
Common Male-Fern; Sweetish, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent.

E.
DWarf-Elder: The Leaves are very Bitter and Slimy, and of a strong
Elder-Smell; the Roots are Bitter, Rough, and Roapy, and of an Elder-Smell. It
is of the same Virtue and Taste as Common Elder. The Bark and Seeds are great
Water-Purgers in the Dropsy and Gout. The Juice of the Root makes a good
purging Syrup, and works as Buck-thorn Syrup: The Leaves are used in Diet-Drink
for the Dropsy; and outwardly in Fomentations and Ointments, for Tumors,
Scalds, Burns, Gout, and Ulcers.

Vipers-Bugloss is Cool and Mucilaginous, Echium vulgar.
with a little Waterish Bitterness, like Bugloss. It is equal in Goodness with
Bugloss, in Inflammations of the Blood, and may be profitable against the
Bitings of Serpents.

Quaere, Whether it has any warm Parts in it, which may be Cordial and
Alexipharmack, as Bugloss. It causes Milk by tempering the hot Blood, and by
its Waterishness:

Sweet Gaul is very Nauseously Bitter, Elaeagnus Cordi.
and a little Astringent, with a strong Aromatic Smell. In Baths it is good
for the Itch, and for Worms in Ointments. It will Vomit by its Nauseous
Bitterness, as Carduus, being Bitter like Gall.

Wild-Parsnip differs but little from the Elaphoboscum.
Garden-Parsnip in Taste and Virtue.

Fluellin is Bitter, Sub-acrid, and Astringent: Elatine Folio subrotundo.
Therefore a good Vulnerary.

Elecampane-Roots and Leaves are very Enula Campana.
Acrid and Bitterish, and smell somewhat like Angelica. The Roots are good in
Ointments, and Baths for the Itch; as also for the Lungs, Stomach, and Liver,
as a Bitterish Acrid. It is a good Cephalic, Vterine, and Diuretic, by its
Volatile Salt; and by the same, it is outwardly useful for the Sciatica and
Palsy; and is a good Antidote against Infectious Air. This by its Taste,
strong Smell, and Shape of the Flowers, is referible to the same Class as Flos
Solis and Marygolds; but is more Aromatic.

Horse-Tail is a little Astringent; and Equisetum.
therefore good in all Fluxes. Galen says, It is Bitterish. It seems referible
to the Grasses, or else to Polygonum.

Common-Heath is very Rough, and Bitterish; Erica vulgaris.
the Flowers have a Sweet Honey-Suckle Smell; by which they are discussing in
Oils, and Diuretic; and by the Astringency, repelling in Inflamed Eyes, and
the Herpes. Boiled in Drink, it is good for all Fluxes, and over-fermented
Blood. It is like Tamarisk.

Water-Rocket is of a Cress-Taste and Eruca Aquatica vulgaris.
Virtue; and is Bitterish and Acrid.

Hedge-Mustard is of a Cress-Taste and Erysimum vulgar.
Virtue. In Syrup it is good for the Asthma and Hoarseness, by its Bitterish
and Acrid Taste.

Common-Sea-Holly, or Eryngo: The Eryngium vulgar.
Leaves taste Sweet, Aromatic, and Hot; and smell something like Chervil:
Therefore it is Diuretic, Pectoral, Carminative, and Venereal.

Spurge is of a burning and exulcerating Esula.
Taste and Virtue, like Tithymals; and is inwardly Vomitory, and Purgative of
Watery Humors by the Acrid Salt.

Prickwood: The Seeds are Nauseously Euonymus vulgaris.
Bitter and Astringent; therefore may Purge. The Bark is Slimy and Bitterish.
My Dog eat Ten of the Seeds in Butter, and drank the Decoction of the Leaves
in Broth after them; and yet was bound Two Days after. It has an Elder-Smell in
the Leaves; and the Wood is like Elder: The Leaves are Sub-acid, of a Bitter
Elder-Taste. The Leaves and Berries look Red, as many Acid Plants do.

Common Hemp-Agrimony: The Flowers Eupatorium Cannabinum.
and Leaves are very Bitter, and a little Acrid. The Roots taste like Hemp: The
Flowers and Leaves smell Strong and Aromatic. The Roots may Vomit by their
Bitter and Acrid Sliminess. The Leaves are Hepatick.

Eyebright is Bitterish-Astringent, a Euphrasia vulgaris.
good Vulnerary, and Eye-Medicine.

F.
BEANS: The Leaves have a Bitter-Sweet Faba vulgaris.
Pea-Taste. The Bean has the same Taste; but the Skin of it is Astringent. The
Flowers smell Sweet, and the distilled Water takes away Freckles. Old Beans in
Flower or Meal are very discussing in Tumors of the Breasts, and Testicles. A
Water is distilled from Bean-Stalks for the Stone, which, by its Sweetness and
Bitterness, lenifies and cleanses the Kidneys.

The Beach-Tree: The Bark which I tasted Fagus.
in September, was Bitterish-Astringent, and the Leaves Rough. The Virtue of it
is the same with the Oak, viz. Astringent. The Fruit I could not find this
Year; but I am told, That it is Sweet and Rough.

Buck-Wheat: The Seeds taste Mealy, Fegopyrum.
and the Leaves Mucilaginous. It Is good for Food, and Pultisses.

Common-Dropwort: The Root is Bitterish, Filipendula.
( Quaere, Whether Sweetish?) Astringent, Warm, and very Aromatic; of a
Burnet-Smell, or like Meadow-Sweet. It is good in all Fluxes, and in the Stone,
by its Bitterish and Sub-acrid Astringency.

Female-Fern: The Root and Leaves Filix Faemina.
are Bitterish, and Mucilaginous; and good for Burns, by their Mucilage: And
therefore, are of a different Nature from the Male, and other Ferns.

Male-Fern: The Leaves taste Rough, Filix Mas and Osmunda.
the Roots Bitterish and Rough; and smell like Orris. The Leaves of all Ferns
rubbed, smell like Tallow. The Roots, by their Bitterish-Roughness, are
Splenetick, and good Vulneraries, and Openers of Obstructions by their
Aromatic Bitterness, in Rickets, Worms, and in the Stone.

Strawberries: The Leaves are Mucilaginous, Fragaria.
and very little Bitter; the Roots are Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent.
The Leaves are good in Mouth-Waters, and in the Stone: The Roots are also
Vulnerary, like Cinquefoyl; and of the same Class. The Fruit is Sweet,
Subacid-Vinous, and Fragrant in its Flavor; therefore Cooling and Cordial: and
a distilled Water is made of it.

Note, That the Leaves of Astringent Plants, which bear a Pulpy Fruit, have a
Slime in them.

The Ash-Tree: The Bark is Bitter, Astringent, Fraxinus.
and of a Laurel-Bitter Taste: The Seeds are Bitter, Astringent, and Acrid; and
so are the Flowers and Buds, when made into Conserve for opening the Spleen and
Liver, and for the Scurvy and Dropsy.

The Bark is a good Vulnerary, and Antifebrifick by its Bitter Astringency. The
Seeds are a good Diuretic in the Stone; and I think, they much resemble the
Taste of Jesuits Powder. They sweat in Quartanes, in which I have used them.
The Wood of Ash, by its Taste, may be used instead of Guaiacum; it has a Bitter
and Acrid, to cause Sweat.

Fumitory is Bitterish, Watery, and Smoaky: Fumaria vulgaris.
It is good against Choleric Blood in Juice and Syrup; is Diuretic; and in
distilled Water cleanses the Face. It belongs to the Pea-Tribe. It is good for
the Itch in Ointments.

Climbing-Fumitory: This has a Watery Fumaria cum Capreolis.
Bitterness, and is also Acrid. This is of the same Tribe and Virtue with
common Fumitory; but more manifestly Acrid.

The Common-Mushrome: The whole Fungus Esculentus.
Substance is Mucilaginous. The Smell is very Earthy; therefore outwardly a
very cooling Anodyne.

Quaere, Whether Mushromes do not spring from the putrefied Mucilaginous
Parenchyma of other Plants, and the Fibrous Parts growing into Length?

The noxious Mushromes cause a Strangulation in the Throat, for which Oil and
Vomiting are necessary; or else a Cholera Morbus, in which case Hens-Dung may
be good.

Wood-Mushrome: This smells like Rotten Fungus Arborum putrescentium.
Wood, and is Slimy and Mucilaginous; and evidently arises from Rotten Wood,
whose putrefied Bladders, with some Fibrous Parts, spring into a Mushrome.

Jews-Ears are very Mucilaginous; by Fungus Sambucinus.
which they relax and cool Inflammations in the Throat; and they have a strong
Earthy-Smell; by which they may discuss Glandulous Tumors. It is not good to
swallow any of the Decoction of them.

G.
HEdge-Nettle: The Taste of the Galeopsis.
Leaves is Bitterish and Aromatic. It stinks at first like Dead-Nettle, in the
Leaves; but has an Aromatic Turpentine in the Flowers; by which it is a
Vulnerary, as well as by its Bitterish-Astringency. It is a great Discusser, by
its strong Smell. It is good in the Scrophula, and other Tumors. Inwardly it is
an excellent Vulnerary; and outwardly good in Ointments. By the Smell it is a
Dead-Nettle or Lamium.

Common Ladies-Bedstraw: The Taste Gallium Luteum.
is Bitterish and Astringent: The Flowers are of a Fragrant Sweetish Smell. It
is plainly, by the yellow Root, a Madder; being Bitter, Acrid, and a little
Astringent: and therefore it is an error to think it can coagulate Milk; but it
is rather mixed with the Rennet, to preserve the Cheese from Corruption, or to
give it a Flavor. Gentian yields an Acid, as well as Gallium, in Distillation:
and yet none will think it fit to coagulate Milk: Which Mr. Ray intimates to be
the effect of Gallium.

Common-Broom: The Leaves and Stalks Genista.
have a Sweet-Bitter Pea-taste: The Seeds are like Pease, a little Bitter. All
the parts of it are good in the Scurvey, Jaundice, and Dropsy: They keep the
Body Soluble. The Flowers and Leaves resemble Pease: so that Broom belongs to
that Class. A distilled Water of the Flowers, is good in the Stone, by their
Mucilage and Bitterness; by which Taste the Flowers vomit.

Furze: The Flowers smell like Rancid Genista Spinosa.
Oil, and are Mucilaginous: The Root and Bark have a Sweet, Bitterish Pea-taste.

Yellows has a Bitterish, Mucilaginous Genistella Tinctoria.
Pea-taste. The Flowers smell like Oil of Linseed, as most of the Pea-taste do.
The Root is strong tasted, like Rancid Oil: It is fit for Ointments.

Petty-whin has a Bitter Pea-taste. Genistella Aculeata.


Centaury-leav'd Gentian tastes in the Gentianella fugax minor.
Leaves Mucilaginous and Bitter; and smells strong like Elder.

Herb-Robert tastes Bitterish and Astringent; Geranium Robertianum.
and smells strong of Turpentine: It is an excellent Vulnerary inwardly and
outwardly.

The Juice of it is mixed with Honey, for Cankers of the Mouth, which it cures
very well.

Crow-foot Cranes-Bill smells of Turpentine, Geranium Batrachoides.
like Herb-Robert. The Root tastes Bitterish and Rough, and feels Clammy.

Musk Cranes-Bill smells of Musk; feels Geranium Moschatum.
clammy, as other Turpentine Plants do: and is also Bitterish and Rough.

Dove-foot Cranes-Bill smells of Musk; Geranium Columbinum.
and is Rough in Taste.

It may be observed, that all the Cranes-Bills are Astringent; the Musky are
least Bitter, the Turpentine most; on which the Bitterness depends. And from
hence it may be conjectured, that a small degree of Turpentine produces the
Musky-Smell; for the Geraniums are all of a kind and Virtue, though the Smell
distinguishes them into the Musky, or Turpentine Plants: And there are other
Geraniums, which want either Smell; as Geranium inodorum, which is Astringent.

The Turpentine Crane-Bills are Diuretic and Pectoral: and by the Bitterness
and Astringency, they are the most exact Vulneraries; Cleansing and Healing in
Wounds and Ulcers.

Water-Flagg, or Water Flower-de-luce: Gladiolus luteus Palustris, sive Iris
lutea Palustris.
The Roots and Flaggs are Rough, Astringent, and very Burning, like Orris. The
Root is successfully used inwardly, to prevent an Hydrophobia, with the Root of
Devils-Bit. And they are boiled in Milk, and given for a Week to them that are
Bitten by a Mad Dog.

The Yellow-Flowers are Mucilaginous, and burn the Mouth; and therefore are an
Orris. The Astringency of the Root hinders the Fermentative Virtue of the
Animal Venom from producing a Fever in the Blood, and probably dulls the
Activity of the Venom, which consists in a Volatile Salt; and the Acrimony
preserves the Blood from Coagulation.

Woad is Astringent, Bitterish and Acrid. Glastum Sativum.
Indigo is of the same Taste and Virtue. Woad abounds in a Volatile Salt, and
is a good Hepatick in the Jaundice. Wedelius makes a Volatile Salt of it
without Fire. It belongs to the Cress-Tastes, by its Cods and Taste; and may be
placed with Chelidonium majus Luteola. The Yellow-Flowers smell like Cresses.

Wild Liquorish-Vetch is much more Glaux Vulgaris.
sweet in the Leaf than common Liquorish.

Common Liquorish: The Leaves are Glycyrrhiza vulgaris
Bitterish and Rough; and feel clammy, like Oily Mucilaginous Plants. The Roots
have a very sweet Taste, and a little Mucilaginous. This belongs to the Sweet
Pea-Taste. It is a Lenient, Nephritick, and Pulmonick; good in Acrimony of
Urine. The Juice Inspissate is good in the same Diseases. It is the Mucilage in
the Liquorish, that stops the violent motion of the Corrosive Salts in
Catarrhs, and covers the Membranes of the Throat with a Slime. And also the
sensible Membranes are saturated by its Lusciousness: So that the Corrosive
Rheum is not perceived.

Cud-weed smells somewhat Aromatic, Gnaphalium.
like Wormwood: It tastes Bitterish, Dry, Astringent, and a little Hot. It is
Vulnerary, and good in all Fluxes. It is Stomachick. It renews the Cud, being
given to Beasts, because it is like Wormwood in Effects and Taste.

Quich, or Couch-Grass: The Root is Gramen Caninum.
Watrish and Sweetish: It cools by the Taste, and lenifies the sharpness of
Urine; but where the Excellency therein for Worms lies, I know not, nor wherein
its opening Faculty resides.

Parnassus-Grass is Rough and Bitterish, Gramen Parnassi.
a Vulnerary and Diuretic, like white and yellow Saxifrage.

Small Hedge-Hyssop is nauseously Sweet, Gratiola angustifolia.
Bitter and Acrid: It is therefore a strong Purger.

H.
IVY-Tree: The Bark has a Rancid Hedera Arborea.
Oily taste, Biting, and of a strong Scent. It may be used in Baths; but it is
improper for the Rickets, being not fit for inward Use. The Gum has an
unpleasant Offensive Smell, therefore an Enemy to the Nerves: It is of a
Burning Caustic Taste. The Leaves are Bitter, and of an unpleasant
Balsam-Smell; by which they draw Issues, and Slime out of Gouty Feet. The
Leaves boiled yield a good Mucilage; which being boiled with Diapalma, makes a
good Plaster for Issues. The Leaves may be used in Balsams outwardly: and are
good for Burns, by the Mucilage. The ripe Ivy-Berries are Sweet, Bitterish,
Aromatic, Slimy, and very Acrid.

I refer the Ivy-Tree to the Fetid Turpentine-Class.

Ground Ivy is Rough, Bitterish, of a Hedera Terrestris.
strong Balsamic, and Resinous, but more plainly of a Dead-Nettle Smell; which
is very apparent by its Infusion in Ale. Gill-Drinks are Famous for the Scurvy,
and Rheums and Ulcers in the Kidneys; for which it is also used in Syrup, Juice,
Powder, and distilled Water. The Juice is outwardly used for the Pin and Web in
the Eyes. It is put into Ointments for Burns, as a good Vulnerary by its
Bitter-Astringency. The Juice is good for the Worms, and used as an Errhine in
Cephalic Distempers.

Water-Ivy is of a burning Taste, like Hederula Aquatica.
other Ranunculus's.

Black-Hellebore: The Root is Bitterish, Helleborus niger.
and very Acrid, of an ill Smell, and is a strong Purgative: It caused a Pain
in my Tongue to the Throat; the same it may cause in the Stomach. In the Shops,
the black Root tasted Bitter, Sweet, and Acrid. The Smell of the Root is very
Offensive. The Acrimony is an useful Corrector of the Acid in Melancholic
Constitutions. An Acrid joined with Bitter heats more than a simple strong
Acrid; and the Taste lasts longer on the Pallat.

Bears-foot; the Leaves taste nauseously Helleboraster maximus.
Bitter and Acrid, and smell like Elder. The Black Root smells strong, and is
of the same taste.

Three spoonfuls of the Juice of the Leaves pounded with White Wind, Vomits and
Purges strongly: It is used for the Worms.

Herb-Paris, or One Berry: The Leaves Herba Paris.
have a Solanum Smell; the Berries are sweet and nauseous; and therefore is a
Narcotick, like the Night-Shades.

Hawk-weed is very Bitter, like Scabious Hieracium
or Dandelion, but more strong; it cleanses the Stomach, is Diuretic, and an
opening Hepatick. It is of the same kind with the Smoaky Bitters. By its
Bitter-Astringency it is accounted a Vulnerary.

Alisanders is like the Parsly-kind, in Hipp^^elinum.
Taste and Virtue: It is Sweet, Hot, Aromatic and Bitterish.

Stitch-wort: The Smell of the Leaves Holosteum, sive Caryophyllus Holosteus.
rubbed is crude: Its Taste is Sweet and Grassy; and is of the Lychnis-Tribe.

Barley tastes Sweet and Slimy, as all Hordeum.
Esculents do; the Meal is used in ripening Pultesses.

Malt has a Sweet Taste, which it gives to new Drink.

Wild-Clary is of a like Taste and Smell Horminum Sylvestre.
with the Garden -Clary: The Seeds are Mucilaginous; and by that means they
take the Dust out of the Eyes. It is referible to the Class of Lamiums.

Hare-Bells are Mucilaginous in the Hyacinthus Anglicus.
Roots and Leaves, and have a Lily-Smell in the Flowers: They are of that
Tribe; and have the same Virtue. The Garden Hyacinths have the same Taste and
Virtue.

Henbane: The Roots are sweet like Hyoscyamus albus.
Parsnips: The Leaves smell Offensively, Oily, Strong, and Narcotick. Outwardly
the Leaves are Anodyne, and Emollient in all Pains and Inflammations. The Seed
is used in Spitting of Blood; it is Mucilaginous, and Narcotick in Smell: It is
used in Epilepsies, to the quantity of a Scruple, for many Nights together; and
in the Morning give a Dram of Rue powdered for a Month. Out of the Seed is
made an Oil by Expression.

I gave to a Greyhound half an ounce of Solanum Lethale Root powdered, betwixt
two pieces of Bread and Butter; and at least an Ounce more boiled, to which I
put an equal quantity of Milk, to make him take it; which produced no sign of
Sleepiness, nor any Evacuation. The next day I gave him a large quantity of
Henbane-Leaves and Roots in Broth, without any alteration. The third day after,
I gave him a great quantity of Hemlock boiled; and repeated a second Dose,
without any considerable alteration. Two days afterward I gave him a Cake of
Nux Vomica, which made him dosie, and gave him Convulsions, and shortness of
Breath; but he recovered well again. The Nux Vomica smells like Opium, and has
the same Effect. Afterward I gave him a great quantity of Hounds-Tongue-Leaves
and Roots boiled; but without any alteration: So strong are the Spirits of
Dogs, in resisting Opiates.

I Vomited these Opiates off by Bryony-Juyce, given to him: and some days
after, I gave him Thirty Berries of Solanum Lignosum, with which he presently
run Mad and Dyed; and I found the same in his Stomach.

Saint John's-wort: The Leaves taste Hypericum.
Bitter and Astringent; and are of a Turpentine-Smell: It is therefore
Vulnerary and Diuretic, as Turpentine. The Flowers color the Fingers Purple,
and yield a Balsamic Tincture, with Spirit of Wine. It is given in Melancholy;
but is fitter for the Stone. The Roots taste Bitter and Astringent. An Oily
Balsam is made of the Flowers, by Infusion in Oil.

In St. John's-wort Powdered there remains only the Bitter-Astringency, and the
Turpentine is lost. By the Bitter-Astringency it is good for Agues. This, and
Ascyrum, and Androsemum, have a Laxative Quality by their Turpentine: and as
Diuretics, are good for the Sciatica.

An excellent Balsamic Oil may be drawn from the Seeds by Expression.

I.
KNap-weed is very Bitter, Astringent, Jacea.
and Smoaky: It has the Virtues of Scabious, and is of the same Class.
Outwardly it is Vulnerary, and good for Scabs, Itch, and Ulcers; the Root is
Milky.

Ragwort tastes a little Bitter, Rough, Jacobea.
and Hot: It smells Sub-acid, and a little like Erigerum; and belongs to the
same Class, or rather to the Hawk-weeds.

The Walnut-Tree: The Bark of the Juglans.
Walnut-Tree is Bitter, Biting, and Rough. When it is dry, it looks black
within; and for that reason, and its Purgative Faculty, it is not like
Jesuits-Bark. The Green Husk of the Walnuts taste very Bitter, and very Acrid;
by which, in distilled Water, it is good for the Head and Worms: The tender
first Sprouts of the Leaves are kept dry, and boiled in Milk, to Purge Children
for the Worms. And the Green Walnuts preserved, Purge. The Bark and Iuli Vomit.
The Infusion of Walnut-Leaves drives Worms out of the Ground, if sprinkled
thereon. The Walnut-Kernel is of an Oily Nut Sweet-Taste. The Oil is good for
the Stone.

Rushes: The Roots taste Rough Juncus vulgaris.
and Brackish, like Steel, from the Boggs they grow in. The Leaves are Rough,
Raw, and Moorish, and smell Raw.

The Flowering-Rush has the same Taste Juncus floridus, seu gladiolus
palustris. Juniperus.
and Virtue.

Juniper-Tree: The Wood, Leaves and Berries, smell of an Aromatic -Turpentine,
and taste Bitterish and Astringent; are Diuretic, Vulnerary, Carminative,
Uterine, and Antiscorbutick. The Berries are used in Diet-Drink; the Spirit and
Oil of the Berries are good in the Stone. The Wood may be used instead of
Sassaphras-Wood. The Ashes are good for the Dropsy in Lixiviums.
Juniper Berries have a Sweet, Bitterish, and Aromatic Taste; and are therefore
Pectoral and Diuretic, as Sassaphras.

Instead of the Bark, which is but small in the Juniper-Tree, add the Berries
with the Wood, in drying Drinks, for Catarrhs.

L.
LAmbs-Lettuce: The Leaves taste Lactuca Agnina.
Cool, Bitterish, and Slimy, like ordinary Lettuce. It Is fit for Sallets.

Wild-Lettuce smells strong, like Opium; Lactuca Sylvestris.
tastes Mucilaginous and Bitter: It is of a Narcotick Virtue. It Purges, as an
Opiate; and makes a good Ointment for Burns and Inflammations.

Narrow-Leav'd All-heal: It smells very Ladanum Segetum, sive side-ritis flore
rubro.
Fragrant, like a sweet Gum: It tastes a little Mucilaginous, Rough, and
Bitterish. It is an excellent Vulnerary. It belongs to the Species of
Sideritis, by the Figure; but this has more plainly Turpentine in it.

Hares-Foot tastes a little Dry and Astringent; Lagopus vulgaris.
and in that lies its Virtue for stopping Fluxes, repelling, and of being
Antifebrifick.

Archangel, or Dead-Nettle: The Flowers Lamium Flore Albo.
and Leaves are Bitterish, Mucilaginous, and Sub-Astringent; with a strong
Fetid smell.

Red Archangel smells plainly of Turpentine; Flore Rubro.
and tastes Bitterish, Sub-Astringent, and a little Slimy.

Lamium, with a Yellow-Flower has the Flore Flavo.
same Taste and Smell as Lamium flore albo. All Lamiums are Vulneraries, and
discussing Kings-Evil-Tumors, by their strong Smell.

Henbit smells and tastes like GroundIvy; Lamium folio caulem ambiente.
which is a Lamium: as is also Betony, by its Smell.

Nipple-wort: The Leaves are a little Lampsana.
Bitter and Astringent; and therefore it is used in Ointments for the Nipples.
The Root is Bitterish, Rough, and Acrid, like the Cresses; and it is eaten
boiled. It has a Bitter Milk; and by that, and the Flowers and Seeds, it should
be a Hawk-weed.

Sharp-pointed Dock: The Roots look Lapathum acutum.
Yellow, like Rhubarb, and taste Nauseously Bitter and Astringent, with a
little Heat and Sliminess. It is used in Diet-drinks, as Antiscorbutick,
Laxative, and Hepatick.

Common Dock is of the same Virtue Lapathum vulgar fol. obtuso.
as the former, but seems stronger: It is Bitter, Slimy, Astringent, and more
Acrid; by which it is Purgative; and therefore the best for use.

English Rhubarb tastes of a Dock-Bitterness, and is very Rough and Acrid, like
common Dock-Root.

Water-Dock: The Root is very Rough, Hydro-Lapathum.
and but little Bitter, and not Acrid. It is used, by mistake, for the other.
This is best outwardly for the Itch, as an Astringent; and in Spitting of
Blood. The Root is more Red than other Docks, and seems to be a Sorrel.

Red-Dock: The Leaves taste Rough; Lapathum Rubrum.
and the Red Stalks, Acid; the Root, Bitterish, Rough, and Nauseous, like other
Docks. The Seeds of the Docks are Astringent, and good for Loosnesses, and
Fluxes of Blood. The Leaves of Docks also taste Acid and Astringent, or Rough:
They are used in Baths for the Itch, and smell Crude and Acid.

The Red Dock-Root is (like the Yellow Roots of other Docks) of a purging
Faculty.

Pease-Everlasting has a rough Pea-Taste. Lathyrus major perennis.


Spurge-Lawrel has the burning Taste of Laureola.
Spurge; and purges Hydropical Humors violently. The Leaves are also Slimy.

Ducks-meat is Crude and Watery, and Lens Palustris.
good for outward Inflammations: Inwardly it may cure inflamed Choleric Blood;
but not the Jaundice proceeding from Obstruction; as Authors affirm.

Dittander tastes very Acrid, Exulcerating, Lepidium latifolium, seu Piperitis.
and Bitterish, like Radish, but stronger: The Roots therefore provoke the
Birth, and the Plant is Antiscorbutick. It is used for Pains of the Teeth and
Hips.

It belongs to the Cresses, by its Taste and Smell; which is thought to
resemble Pepper, as the Name imports.

Wall-Gilliflowers are Mucilaginous and Leucoium Luteum sive Cheiri.
Biting; therefore an Ointment of the Flowers is used for the Gout. The Flowers
are also used in Cordial Waters. Leucoium, by its Face and Seeds, belongs to
the Cress-Class. The Seeds are Bitterish, and very Acrid. The Conserve of the
Flowers is a good Antiscorbutick and Cephalic.

Ground-Liverwort, being rubbed, smells Lichen sive Hepatica vulgaris.
of Turpentine, and tastes Mucilaginous, and a little Biting, like Turpentine:
It is therefore a good Diuretic in the Stone and Dropsy, and Antiscorbutick.
Outwardly it is good for Tetters, Ulcers, Wounds, and Itch; being Bitterish and
Sub-Astringent, as other Turpentine Plants.

Tree-Lungwort is Bitterish and Astringent; Lichen arborum Pulmonarius.
good in Fluxes, and to stop Coughs, in Syrup. Boil one handful in a Pint of
Beer to half.

Ash-colored Ground-Liverwort tastes Lichen cinereus terrestris.
Sweetish and Rough, smells Earthy like Mosses; and is used for Coughs.

Privet: The Leaves smell like Laurel Ligustrum.
when bruised, and the Virtue of it seems to be the same as of Laurel; which
may be an outward Vulnerary, for that the Leaves taste Bitter and Astringent.
The White Flowers smell Sweet. The black Berries have a purplish Juice within
them. The Leaves may be good for Ulcers of the Mouth.

Lily of the Valley: The Flowers taste Lilium Convallium.
very Bitter and Biting; the Roots are Mucilaginous. The Flowers smell very
Fragrant, and are therefore Cordial; and by being Bitterish, Acrid, and
Aromatic, are Cephalic in Apoplexies, Palsies, Vertigoes, and Epilepsies: And
the Flowers powdered, make a grateful strong Sneezing-Powder.

The distilled Water, and a Conserve of the Flowers are most used. The Roots
are very Mucilaginous; and by them it is of the Lily-kind.

Toad-Flax: The Green-Leaves are Bitterish, Linaria lutea vulgaris.
Mucilaginous, and Sub-acrid, and of an Elder-Smell; the Flowers are like
Snap-Dragon, Sweet, Bitterish, and Mucilaginous. It is an Anodyne for the
Hemorrhoids, in Ointment of the Flowers.

It is not fit for inward Use; but fit outwardly for Cataplasms. The Water may
cool the Redness of the Eyes.

Common-Flax: The Seed is very Oily Linum Sativum.
and Mucilaginous, and of a Rancid Smell. The Expressed Oil is Anodyne and
Emollient in Clysters, and in Pleuretick Coughs. Outwardly it discusses and
mollifies Tumors. Green Flax is Bitterish and Mucilaginous.

Gromwell: The Root and Seeds taste Lithospermum sive Milium Solis.
Sweet and Mucilaginous. The Seed-Cases are Stony, by which they are
Lithontriptick. The Leaves and Roots of Gromwell smell like Hounds-Tongue.
There is a little Heat in the Taste; but I cannot find the Sudorifick Quality.
It seems to be an Opiate, like Hounds-Tongue.

Rough Spleenwort: The Roots and Leaves Lonchitis aspera.
taste Rough and Sweet, like the Ferns; and are of the same Virtue. It has no
Sliminess. It is Splenetick, Astringent, and Vulnerary.

Hops: They are very Bitter and Acrid, Lupulus.
and of a strong Lamium-Smell. They are Diuretic, Hepatick, and Sudorifick.
Outwardly they discuss Tumors, and cure the Itch. The Root has a Thick, Rough,
and a little Acrid, and Bitterish Bark; by which it seems to be Splenetick,
Diuretic, and Sudorifick. Take a Pound of Roots, and boil them in a Gallon of
Water to half or three Parts, adding Parsley-Roots and Raisins; give half a
Pint of it to Sweat, as you give Sarsaparilla, in the Itch, and Lues Venerea.

Diers-Weed: The Root and Leaves Luteola.
are Mucilaginous, and very hot on the Tongue: It is of a strong offensive
Smell. Outwardly it is Anodyne and Emollient: If inwardly used, it is
Diuretic. It may be of the Cress-Taste.

Wild White and Red Campians are of a Lychnis Sylvestris flore Albo, Rubro.
crude Taste, Watrish, and smell crude; therefore are good for Inflammations,
or Hemorrhages outwardly. There is also a Sweetness in the Taste of
Lychnis-Root.

Purple-Spiked Willow-Herb is Watrish, Lysimachia Purpurea Spicata.
Mucilaginous, and a little Hot; but of a crude Smell. Quaere, Whether it be a
Lamium?

Codded-Willow-Herb is Mucilaginous, Lysimachia Siliquosa.
Hot, and Acrid; therefore it is a good Diuretic. It seems to be a Leucoium,
by the Cods, Mucilage, and Acrimony, and by the Flower. It is a little
Bitterish; and of the Virtue of Leucoiums, Diuretic.

Hooded-Willow-Herb is very Bitter and Lysimachia Galericulata.
Acrid, and a kind of Gratiola; and therefore may be Purging.

Yellow-Willow-Herb is Mucilaginous, Lysimachia lutea vulgaris and Hortensis.
and a little Biting; and of the Virtue of the Codded.

M.
ORdinary Mallows: The Leaves, Malva vulgaris.
Flowers, and Roots are Watery and Mucilaginous; and therefore Emollient and
Anodyne externally: Inwardly the Conserve of the Flowers, and distilled Water
with Syrup of Violets, are good for the Stone and Cough. The Seeds are useful;
and the Stalks, cooked like Asparagus, are scarce distinguishable from it.

Out of Mallow-Root, Barley-Meal, and Oil boiled in Water, is made a good
Pultess for Inflammations.

The Crab-Tree: The Bark is Sweetish, Malus Sylvestris.
Bitter, and Styptick. The Juice of the Crab is Bitterish, Sour, and very
Rough. It cools outward Inflammations with Barm. Verjuice is inwardly good in
Fevers, and Choleric Loosnesses, with Sugar or Milk. The Crab-Bark is less
Sweet than the Apple.

White Horehound is very Bitter, and of Marrubium Album.
a strong Lamium-Smell, and a little Pleasant. It is a good opening Hepatick in
the Jaundice, and a Cleansing Pectoral in Water, and Syrup of the Juice;
especially in an Asthma: And in Juice I have used it. It is outwardly good in
Ointments for sordid Ulcers, and in Baths. By the Foetor it may be a good
Hysteric.

Water-Horehound is moderately Bitter Marrubium Aquaticum.
and Astringent: The Smell is neither strong, nor unpleasant; but like
Sideritis, and therefore Vulnerary.

Common Melilote tastes Slimy, Bitter, Melilotus vulgaris.
and Biting, or Acrid; and is therefore Anodyne, and discussing by its
Acrimony. In the Emplaster it is most used. It smells, when rubbed, like the
Pea-kind. By the Taste it should be Purgative; which is not yet tried.

Water-Mint is of a Bitterish, Hot, Pungent, Mentha Aquatica sive Sisymbrium.
and Aromatic Taste, and smells like Calamint or Pennyroyal. It is a good
Diuretic, Antiscorbutick, and Carminative. It has some Astringency; by which
it strengthens the Stomach.

Horse-Mint has a Bitterish, Biting, Mint-Taste, Mentastrum Aquaticum.
with a strong Mint-Smell. It is of the same Virtue as common Mint.

Common Millefoile or Yarrow: The Millefolium vulgar.
Roots are very Acrid, and Blistering the Mouth. The Flowers and Leaves are
Bitterish and Hot, without any considerable Astringency; and therefore
improperly given for Hemorrhages. It smells like Southern-wood in the Flowery
Part, or like Chamemel-Flowers: And therefore is to be reckoned amongst
Cephalicks, by the Bitterish Acrimony, and Aromatic Smell. The first Sprouts
of Millefoile are very Acrid.

Small Mountain Bastard-Madder is Bitter Mollugo Montana.
and Acrid, like Madder.

Devils-Bit: The Leaves are very Bitter, Morsus Diaboli.
like Scabious; the Root is Bitterish, Biting, and Burning in the Throat; and
therefore accounted Alexipharmack, and may be used instead of Contrayerva; for
it is accounted good against the Bitings of Mad Dogs, with Flagg-Root boiled
in Milk. The Leaves are of the same Virtue as Scabious, Cleansing, Vulnerary,
Pectoral, and Hepatick.

The Moss of an Oak-Pale smells Strong Muscus ex ligno Quercino.
and Earthy, flies quick up into the Nose, and causes Sneezing, like Volatile
Salts; and has somewhat of an Orris-Smell, like the Ferns. It tastes Bitterish,
Sweet, and Rough, and a little Hot; by which it is Pectoral, and expectorating
the thick Phlegm, and strengthening the Glandules: By the Astringency it
hinders the Defluxion of thin Rheum. This is the Basis of sweet
Pulville-Powders, vid. Zwelfer. Of Tabaco, Primrose-Roots, and this Moss, I
made a Sneezing-Powder.

St. Winifred's Moss, (brought me from Muscus Odoratus.
Holy-Well) if rubbed, it smells like Orris, as some Ferns do; and tastes like
Orris, Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatic: But by the Stalks in it, it is rather a
Fern, than a Moss.

The Moss of Trees differs according to Muscus Arboreus Ramosus.
the Taste of Trees: The Oak-Moss tastes Rough and Bitterish, and smells
Strong, Earthy, and Acrid; especially being powdered. Boil it in Beer for
Coughs, or in Thea.

The Moss of Alder has a Bitterness and Muscus Alni.
Roughness, like Alder, with the Scent abovementioned: It tastes a little
Brackish, like Steel.

Pear Tree Moss has a Rough, Steely-Taste; Muscus ex Pyro.
and smells Strong, Earthy, and Acrid. I tasted these Mosses in the Winter,
when the Rain might lodge in the Moss; but how they come to taste like Steel, I
know not.

I cannot but take notice, that the Misle-Toe has the like Taste as Mosses,
Bitterish, Acrid, and Astringent; and branches like Tree-Mosses; and therefore
is bred out of a like Juice of the Tree.

Apple-Tree-Moss tastes Rough, Bitterish, Muscus ex Malo.
and Sub-acrid; and is of the same pungent Scent.

Moss of a Man's Skull is like common Muscus ex Cranio.
Moss, of an Earthy-Smell, and of a Rough Earthy-Taste. It is much commended
for stopping of Hemorrhages: Applied to the Nose, it may help the Congealing of
the Blood, and work as an Astringent, and offend the Spirits by the
Earthy-Smell: And it may disturb the Fanciful, by holding it in the Hand; and
by occasioning some Terror, may stop Bleeding.

Firr-Tree-Moss tastes and smells like Muscus ex Abiete.
the Oak-Moss.

Cup-Moss is not very Rough; it seems Muscus Pyxidatus.
a little Slimy. I tasted it in the Shops, and expected an Acrimony in it. It
is of the Virtue of the Lichen Hepatica facie. It is used for an Astringent in
Coughs: And I believe, the Fresh is Sweet and Astringent.

The Ground-Mosses and Tree-Mosses are Muscus Terrestris.
of different Tastes and Natures; the common Green Ground-Moss, most Astringent
and Earthy; used in Stopping of Blood.

Mouse-Ear Scorpion-Grass is Mucilaginous, Myosotis Scorpioides.
and a little Acrid; by which it is inwardly and outwardly good in Bitings of
Venomous Beasts* And is referible to the Class of Echium* (...) Bugloss.

Mouse-Tail is Cooling and Astringent, Myosuros.
as Plantane; and therefore of the same Virtue.

Hemlock-Chervil smells of Hemlock, and Myrrhis Sylvestris Seminibus Asperis.
is also Strong and Terebinthinate, with an Hot, Pungent, Sweet, and Bitterish
Taste; a good outward Discusser and Vulnerary; smelling like an Ointment, as
the Name imports. It may be placed amongst the Fetid Vmbels, being Sweet,
Acrid, and Fetid; or else refer it to the Terebinthinate-Fetids.

N.
YEllow Daffadil: The Flowers smell Narcissus.
Strong, and are Mucilaginous: The Roots are Mealy and Mucilaginous, like
Lilies. They Vomit, as Bulbous-Roots do, very violently. Outwardly they are
good for Burns, and hard Tumors; to break Imposthumes, to agglutinate Wounds,
and cleanse Ulcers.

Watercresses: The Leaves and Seeds Nasturtium Aquaticum.
are Acrid, like ^^vy-Grass, and other Cresses; and sme^^ (...) Scurvy Grass,
but milder. It is Diuretic and Antiscorbutick, by the Volatile Salt. Outwardly
it is good in Scald-Heads, if infused in Hoggs-grease; and it is put into
Pultesses, to ripen Swelled Breasts, and discuss Ischiadick Pains, and those of
the Spleen: And it is put in Medicines Antihydropick, with Liverwort.

Catmint is of a Strong, Aromatic, Nepeta.
Mint-burnt-Scent; and of an Hot, Acrid, and Bitterish Taste: The Scent is mixed
of Aromatic and Fetid, and a little like Pennyroyal; which is also an
Hysteric. It has quick Parts to pierce into the Nerves, and rectify the
Motion of the Spirits, by a very Volatile Oily Salt.

By these mixed Scents it is evident, that Aromaticks and Fetids differ only in
Degree.

Money-wort has a Terebinthinate Smell, Nummularia.
and a Bitterish and Astringent Taste; by which it is an excellent Vulnerary in
Ulcers of the Lungs, and an Antiscorbutick; and good in all Fluxes, used as an
Astringent.

Yellow Water-Lily: The Flower smells Nymphaea flore Luteo
like Mustard Seed; the Leaf tastes Watery and Rough: the Root smells like
Walnut-Peel; and tastes Bitterish and Acrid, like the same Peel.

White Water-Lily: The Leaves of the Nymphaea flore Albo.
Flowers are Mucilaginous, and a little Hot; by which they are Diuretic. They
are most used in Conserves.

The dried Roots smell like Mustard, and taste a little Acrid and Mucilaginous,
with an Astringency. How it is useful in the Diabetes, and in all Fluxes, and
in Syrup to act as an Hypnotick, I cannot clearly apprehend; but rather think
it to be an excellent Diuretic. I cannot perceive any Poppy or Opiate-Smell.
The Acrimony provokes Urine, as much as the Slime and Roughness can stop it.

O.
WAter-Dropwort tastes Sweetish, Oenanthe Aquatica.
Bitterish, and Hot of the Fennil-kind; and smells like Water-Parsnip,
Aromatic; and therefore is a good Diuretic.

Adders-Tongue: The Taste is Mucilaginous, Ophioglossum.
ginous, Bitterish, and a little Biting; the Smell is Strong, Oily, and
Unpleasant. Infused in Oil, it makes the Oil green. It cures green Wounds,
Burns, and Ulcers. It is not fit for inward Use, being very Nauseous, and not
Astringent.

Quaere, Whether it be not, by its Smell and Taste, and coloring Oil green,
referible to Luteola?

The Male Fools-Stones: The Leaves Orchis Morio Mas, fol. Maculatis.
taste nauseously Bitter, and, rubbed with the Stalk, smell a little Rank: The
Flowers smell Sweet, like Lilies. The Root tastes Sweet, Mealy, and
Mucilaginous; and is of the Virtue and Class of Lilies. It is hard to believe
the Venereal Virtue, because this Bulbous-Root will Vomit, and seems most
proper outwardly for Pultesses; as Lily-Roots: Yet the Rank Smell shows some
Venereal Virtue.

English Wild-Marjoram is Bitterish, Hot, Origanum vulgar.
and Aromatic, like Marjoram. It is a good Cephalic.

Broom-Rape tastes extremely Rough and Orobanche
Bitterish: It almost choaks the Taster by the Roughness; and therefore too
much a Styptick for inward Use; but is rather a good external Vulnerary. It
grows fast in the Root of Broom; of which the Ingenious Walter Chetwynd, of
Ingestry, informed me: and I found it to grow out of that Root. In Figure and
Virtue it is like Hypocistis.

Barberies: The Bark is Bitter, Astringent, Oxyacantha.
and a little Slimy, Pungent, and Acrid; by which it purges Choler, if the Bark
be steeped in Beer; as I tried it in a Choleric Person. The Berries are Acid,
Astringent, and good in Fevers and Fluxes from Choler: And they excite Appetite.

Hawthorne: The Leaves are Mucilaginous; Oxyacanthus.
the Fruit is Pulpy and Mucilaginous; and therefore good for the Stone. The
Stones joining with the Animal Acids, become Diuretic. The Bark is Rough and
Bitterish; and the Flowers smell Sweet and Faint. Pyracantha has the same Taste
and Virtue.

P.
COrn-Red-Poppy: The Flowers have Papaver Rhoeas.
a heavy Narcotick Smell; and taste Mucilaginous, Sweet, and a little Warm: The
Syrup and Water are most used; which last has a Narcotick, Offensive Smell, and
carries much of the Virtue. The Root and Milk are Bitter, and extreme Acrid.
The Syrup and Water are mild Opiates. A stronger Preparation may be made out of
the Roots. The Leaves are outwardly Opiate; and cool Inflammations. The Seeds
are said to loosen the Belly (which Opiates do) in great quantiy.

Pellitory of the Wall: The Taste is Parietaria.
Watrish, Cool and Bitterish, like Bugloss; and therefore is accounted Nitrous.
It is used inwardly to cool Heats in Hectical Coughs. It is but a Cool, Watery
Diuretic, used in Clysters as an Emollient: Externally it is cooling in
Erysipela's, Inflammations, Burnings, and Tumors.

Quaere, Whether the Diuretic Virtue depends not much on the Sandiness, of the
Leaves? The Virtue of the Herb is best in Syrup for Coughs. I refer it to
Bugloss.

Common Whitlow-Grass is of an Acrid Paronychia vulgaris; Rutaceo folio.
Cress-Taste and Virtue.

Rue Whitlow-Grass is Bitterish, and of an Astringent Rough Taste, and a little
Sweetish; by which it checks the Putrefaction in the King's Evil. I tasted it
decaying, and not fresh.

Common Garden-Parsnep: The Root is Pastinaca latifolia sativa.
Sweet, Mucilaginous, and Aromatic; very Nutritive and Diuretic.

Carrot: The Roots are very Sweet and Pastinaca sativa tenuifolia.
Aromatic; and the Seeds are the same; being like Daucus-Seed, Carminative and
Diuretic.

Water-Parsnep is of an Aromatic Pastinaca aquatica.
Smell, and pleasant Parsnep-Taste. The Distilled Water is Diuretic, and a
little Hot, as the Leaf tastes.

Venus-Comb is Sweet, Hot, and Aromatic; Pecten Veneris.
like Chervil, in Taste and Smell; and of a Diuretic Virtue.

Red-Rattle seems to be of the nature of Pedicularis Rubra vulgaris.
the Pea-tribe, tasting Sweet; and smelling like Green Peascods. It is as good
for the Scurvy as Fitches, and is Diuretic.

Great Red-Rattle has the same sweet Pedicularis Rubra palustris elatior.
Taste, and is a little warm; therefore it is a good Diuretic.

Yellow-Rattle is Sweet, Mucilaginous, Pedicularis fl. flavo.
very Biting and Acrid. I rather believe this Plant would kill Lice, as Staphis
agria does, by its Acrimony, than produce them. And for that reason Staphis
agria is called Pedicularis. It seems to be a notable Diuretic, by the
Mucilage and Acrimony.

Cinquefoyl: The Leaves taste Rough; Pentaphyllum.
the Roots Bitterish and Rough, like Tormentil. The Roots of either are
usefully put into the Bitter Draught, without Sena, and given before Ague-Fits.
It Is good in all Fluxes of Blood, and other Humors; being a good inward
Vulnerary.

The Roots of Cinquefoyl are Sub-acrid; by which they are Diaphoretick in
Fevers.

Petty-Spurge is of a burning Taste, and Peplus sive Esula rotunda.
of a Purgative Faculty, as all the Spurges are.

Honey-Suckle: The Berries are Sweet Periclymenum.
and Slimy. Ten or Twelve squeezed into Beer, purge. The Leaves have a
Bitterish, Grassy, a little Mucilaginous, and Biting-Taste: This is a great
Diuretic in the Flowers, of which a Conserve is used in an Asthma. The Flowers
are Mucilaginous, Biting, Burning, and of an Aromatic Smell. An Oil for
Palsies is made of the Flowers. The Juice of the Leaves is Diuretic.

Quaere, Whether the Wood may not be used, instead of Lignum Nephriticum?

By the Figure of the Flower, and the Bitterish, Slimy, Acrid Taste, I refer
this to the Pea-tastes. The Green-Leaves rubbed, smell like Green-Pease. And
the Flower is like a Bean-Flower.

Spotted-Arsmart: The Roots taste Persicaria Maculosa.
Rough; the Leaves Acrid, Rough, or Acerb: Good in all Fluxes, and Cooling.

Biting-Arsmart: The Taste is very Hot Persicaria Acris.
and Burning. The Distilled Water is good in the Stone. Outwardly in
Cataplasms, it discusses and dissolves hard Tumors. By the strong Acrid, it is
a Ranunculus.

Butter-bur: The Root and Leaves Petasites.
taste much like Angelica, Sweet, Bitterish, and very Acrid, but more
unpleasant, and smells like it; with a Headiness or Foetor; of a
Mithridate-Flavor; and therefore used as a Sudorifick in Pestilential Fevers,
and in the Cough.

Hart's-tongue has a Rough Taste, like Phyllitis.
Fern; and therefore useful for Ulcers, Fluxes, Splenetick Fermentations of the
Blood, and Disorderly Motions of Spirits, in Fits of the Mother, and in Hot
Constitutions. It has a Fragrancy which is Cordial, when it is Infused in
Drink. A Fern-Smell is in the Green-Leaves, like Tallow. But the Orris-Smell is
more evident in the dried Leaves.

Common-Burnet, Great and Little, have Pimpinella vulgaris, Sanguisorba.
an Aromatic Cordial Smell, infused in Wine. The Root is very Rough and
Bitterish; and therefore good in Fevers before the Fits. The Green-Leaves are
very Slimy, and Rough after that Taste is over: The whole is a good Styptick
and Vulnerary; and is good for Spittings of Blood.

Burnet-Saxifrage: The Roots, Seeds, Pimpinella Saxifraga major and minor.
and Leaves, are of a Sweet, Aromatic, Hot, Parsley-Taste, and Diuretic
Virtue; but much more Hot and Pungent than Parsley.

Butter-wort: The Leaves are very Pinguicula
Mucilaginous, Bitterish, and Acrid. The Flowers have a Fragrant Smell; by
which they may purge; and outwardly make an Oil like Adders-Tongue: It seems to
be a sort of Violet. The Mucilage makes it fit for Chops in the Breasts and
Hands, and colors Yellow.

Field-Pease: The Leaves have a Sweet, Pisum Arvense.
Slimy, Raw Taste. It will make a cool distilled Water, and is Diuretic. The
Juice cools Hot Bloods. And Scorbutic Persons, who have Lived on Salt Meats at
Sea, eat Green-Pease, and other Raw Fruit.

Water-Plantane is of an Astringent and Plantago aquatica.
Cooling Taste, and used as such.

Common-Plantane: The Leaves are Plantago vulgaris.
Acid and Astringent. Outwardly they cool Inflammations and Burns. Inwardly the
Juice is Cooling, Astringent, and Diuretic. The Seeds are Mucilaginous, but
the Husks are Astringent. In Powder it is used for Fluxes. The Juice is good
outwardly in Ulcers of the Legs.

Quaere, The Bitterness of Plantane.

Plantane-Rib-wort is boiled in Posset Drink, Plantago quinquenervia.
and given before Agues, which it cures by the crude Astringency.

Milk-wort is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Polygala.
a little Pungent; and smells Fragrant, like Pansies; and is Purging. Violets,
Pansies, Butter-wort, and Milk-wort are of an agreeable Smell, and all Purging
more or less; being Bitterish, Mucilaginous, and a little Acrid.

Solomons-Seal: The Roots and Leaves Polygonatum vulgar.
are Mucilaginous, and a little Biting or Pungent, without Astringency. It is
used boiled in Wine, or Powdered for Ruptures. Outwardly it is Agglutinative,
and Cosmetick; the Berries are Vomitive.

I did not observe the Bitterishness nor Astringency (as Galen did) which
joined to a Mucilage and Acrimony, will certainly render it Purgative.

Quaere, Whether the Berries be Sweet, Bitterish, and Nauseous?

The Flowers and Leaves are like Lilies.

Knawell: The Taste is Bitterish and Astringent. Polygonum Germanicum.
It is of the same Virtue as the ordinary Polygonum.

Parkinson says, The Seeds are Acrid, as Herniaria is, and Diuretic.

Common Knot-Grass tastes Acid and Astringent: Polygonum vulgar.
It is therefore good in all hot Fluxes inwardly; and outwardly for
Inflammations.

Polypody: The Roots are lusciously Polypodium.
Sweet and Astringent; of the Fern-Taste and Class; but by the great Sweetness
it is Laxative. The Leaves are Bitterish, Sweet, and Astringent. It is
accounted a Lenient Purger; but is most fit for Splenetick Distempers, in
Powder or Decoction.

White-Poplar: The Bark is Bitter, Astringent, Populus alba.
and of a Laurel-Taste.

Abele: The Bark is Bitter, Astringent, Populus alba fol. minoribus.
and of a Laurel-Taste.

The Aspen-Bark is very Bitter, and of Populus Lybica.
a Laurel, Bitter and Astringent Taste.

Black-Poplar: The Bark is Bitter and Populus nigra.
Astringent. These Poplars come the nearest to the Jesuits-Bark of any English
Trees.

Narrow-Leaved Pond-weed is of the Potamogeiton Persicariae folio.
same Taste as Spotted Arsmart, Acid and Astringent; and both have the Nature
and Virtue of Polygonum.

Cowslips: The Flowers smell Fragrant. Primula veris major.
The Roots are Bitterish, very Hot, and Biting. The Leaves Sweet and
Mucilaginous. The Syrup and the Water are a little inclining to Sleep; but they
have no Narcotick Foetor; therefore act little as such, by their Smell
refreshing the Spirits more than Stupefying; or rather by a sweet headiness,
overcoming the Spirits.

Common Primrose: The Leaves smell Primula veris vulgaris.
like fresh Marmalade. The Roots taste Bitterish and Acrid; and smell of the
Plant in Powder; which I use for Snush: and it works as much as Hellebore.

The Roots may be put into Waters for the Head. The Leaves are Sweet and
Mucilaginous. The Juice of them is Snuffed into the Nose with Milk. The Juice
of the Root, with equal quantity of the Juice of Marjoram, put into the Nose
with a Thimble, purges the Head strongly; and by Irritation in the Throat,
Salivates and helps the King's Evil.

Primrose has a Mucilaginous and Acrid Taste; and a strong though pleasing Smell;
by which it operates, in causing Sleep.

Self-Heal: The Leaves taste Watery Prunella.
and Mucilaginous; by which it cools the Mouth in Gargarisms.

Quaere, Whether Lysimachia Purpurea be of the same kind, and both be Lamiums?
It is Bitterish, Sub-astringent, Slimy, and good in Hecticks: It is also
Vulnerary.

Sloe-Tree: The Leaves and Bark are Prunus Sylvestris.
very Rough and Bitter, by which they stop Fluxes. The Syrup is most used, made
of the Sloes, to stop any Evacuation, and for Gargarisms. The Flowers smell
like Orange-Flowers, and taste Bitterish. They will make a Purging Syrup, and
yield an Aromatic Water very Cordial.

Cockle: It is a little Biting, and of the Pseudomelanthium, lychnis segetum.
Ptarmica.
Virtues of Nigella.

Sneezewort is Bitterish, very Acrid, and Aromatic, like Millefoile in the
Scent; and therefore a good Cephalic. It promotes Sneesing; and chewed, it
draws forth Rheums like Pellitory.

Pennyroyal is Bitterish, Hot, Acrid, Pulegium.
and Aromatic; flying quick into the Nose; having in it a Volatile Oily Salt,
as all Cephalicks have; by which it is good in Hysterick-Fits, Obstructions of
the Womb, and Convulsive Coughs, in Syrup; and in Hoarseness, made as Thea. The
Smell of it is mixed of Aromatic and Fetid, as many other Hysteric Medicines
be; as Matricaria, etc.

Spotted Lung-wort is Watery and Mucilaginous, Pulmonaria macu-losa.
like Burrage or Bugloss; and is a little Bitterish, like them. It cools
Hectical Heats, and Thirst; and supplies a cool Lympha.

Pasque-Flower is Burning like other Pulsatilla.
Crow-foots. The Root is said to be Sweet.

Pear Tree: The Bark and Leaves are Pyrus.
very Rough; therefore great Astringents. Burgamo-Pears are Sweet, Sub-acid,
and Slimy; and the outward Rind Styptick.

R.
CRowfoot: The greatest part of Ranunculus.
Crowfeet are Exulcerating and Blistering the Tongue. I boiled the
Common-Crowfoot in Hoggs-Grease; but it would not blister without Cantharides.
The dried Roots promote Sneezing. It cures Marks of the Skin, and Warts, by
raising a Blister, and afterward a Crust; and therefore has a Caustic
virtue. The round Root of Crowfoot rubbed, flies quick up into the Nose, like
Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack, which shows the Corrosiveness to be in Volatile Salt:
And the Crowfeet smell a little like Scurvy Grass.

Quaere, Whether any Sweetness be in Ranunculus, besides the Acrimony, because
the Root of Ranunculus Bulbosus tastes Sweet after drying? And there is a kind
of Ranunculus, called, Pratensis erectus dulcis, which may be eaten.

Spear-wort is very Caustic, if bruised Ranunculus Flammeus.
and put upon the Skin with a Walnut-shell, where the pain of the Gout is, or
where any pain of the Head lies in a small compass, by letting out some of the
Stagnating Serum.

Quaere, Whether any Bitterness be in it? I did not taste any Bitter.

Horseradish: The Leaves, Seeds, Raphanuss Rusticanu
and Roots, are of a very Biting Cress-Taste and Virtue; and therefore
Diuretic, Antiscorbutick, Stomachick, Splenetick, and Antihydropick. The
Leaves may be used in Medicines, as well as the Roots or Seeds, being Bitterish
and very Acrid. The Lymphaeducts have a Sweet Juice; Dr. Grew. And a Sweetness
may be tasted as well as a Bitterish-Acrid, in the dried Root, when used in
Diet.

Chadlock is of a Cress-Taste and Virtue, Rapistrum
like Mustard.

Turnep: The Seeds and Leaves taste Rapum sativum.
Acrid. The Root boiled is Sweet and Mucilaginous: The old Root is Bitterish.
It is of the same kind as Sinapi or Cresses, and therefore has a Volatile Salt
in it, which makes it Diuretic, Pectoral, and Antiscorbutick. But it is Windy,
from the Mucilage and Volatile Salt combined together; as in Garlic, Leeks,
etc.

The Roots being roasted, are used in drawing Pultesses for Scorbutic Tumors,
the Scrophulae, Swelled Breasts, and Gout. The Green-Leaves smell, when rubbed,
Acrid, like Horseradish, or Cresses. The Seeds of the Wild-Turnep yield
Rape-Oyl, which with Sugar cures the Aphthae in Children. Syrup of Turnips is
very Sweet, and has a strong Smell; by which it is an excellent Pectoral in
Pleurisies. The Broth of Turnips sweetened with Sugar, is a pleasanter Medicine
than Rape-Oyl, for the Aphthae.

Rampions: It is a Milky Plant, Sweet Rapunculus.
and Sub-acrid. It is good for Diet: And, as Physical, it is Pectoral and
Diuretic, by the Acrimony.

Sheeps-Scabious: The Taste is Sweet Rapunculus Scabiosae capitulo
and Hot, both in Leaves and Root: It has a Smell a little Mellowy.

Buckthorn: The Berries taste Sweet at Rhamnus catharticus
first; then Mucilaginous, Bitter and Rough. The unripe Berries in Alumwater
color Yellow; when ripe, Green. The Syrup made in B. M. so that the Color and
Virtue in the Skin may be Extracted, looks of a Red color, and purges very
strongly, from one Spoonful to four. The new Syrup purges violently, and loses
of the strength after two Months. It gripes least, if made of Ripe Berries: The
Berries are taken from Fifteen to Twenty-Five, to Purge. The Bark of the Tree
is a little Rough, Bitter, and Mucilaginous; and may be put into Diet-Drinks,
with Dwarf-Elder Roots and Orris, to purge; to which add Daucus,
Juniper Berries, and Wormwood. The Bark smells something Fragrant. The Syrup is
proper for Hydropical Persons.

Sun-Dew: The Taste is Rough, Acid, Ros Solis.
and Acrid, and has a Sorrel-Smell: The Acrid is not tasted till after a while.
If applied outwardly, it exulcerates like Ranunculus. It is put into
Cordial-Waters, gives a Yellow color, and has an Anti-Pestilential Virtue. The
dried Ros Solis tastes very Acid, like Sorrel, and Rough; for which reason,
some may give it in Spitting of Blood; but the latent Acrimony is to be
suspected; which makes it to be a Crowfoot.

Eglantine-Rose tastes as the Dogg-Rose, Rosa Sylvestris odora.
but smells more Sweet and Fainty.

Dogg-Rose: The Flowers are Bitterish, Rosa Sylvestris canina.
Slimy, and Astringent: If they be boiled in Whey, they will purge as
Damask-Roses. The Fruit tastes Acid, and so does the Conserve; which therefore
will quench Thirst, and cool the Choleric Blood. I have distilled a very
Fragrant Spirit from the Fruit, after Fermentation. The Dogg-Rose transplanted
into Gardens, loses the Smell. The Fruit must lie and putrefie, before the
Conserve be made: The boiling in Water takes away the Acid from it. The taste
of the Spongy Excrescency is Bitterish and Astringent; it smells like the Rose,
is Pungent or Warm, and is given in Spitting of Blood. The Root is very Bitter
and Astringent, and may cure the Biting of Mad-Doggs, by those qualities. All
the Rose-Roots are Bitterish and Astringent, but the White seems the most
Astringent. I did not perceive any Acrimony in them. The Leaves are Slimy,
Mealy, Bitterish and Rough.

Madder-Roots are Yellow at first getting, Rubia tinctoria.
and then turn Red. They Taste Bitter, Astringent and Acrid; and therefore are
a good Hepatick by both Tastes: When dry, they are most Astringent and
Vulnerary. They are Styptick in all Fluxes, and Dye Red. The Flowers smell
pleasant, as Gallium Flowers do.

Rasberry: The Berries have a Fragrant, Rubus Idaeus.
Violet or Orris-Smell; and a Sweet, Subacid and grateful Taste. They make a
pleasant Cordial Wine, Syrup, and distilled Water; which are all Cordial and
Cooling. The Leaves are Astringent.

Bramble: The Leaves and Flowers are Rubus vulgaris.
Bitterish and Astringent. The Ripe Berries are Sweet, Sub-acid, Slimy, and a
little Rough. They are good for Sore-Mouths, and used in Dysuries, and for the
Scurvey. A grateful Wine is made out of the Juice of the Berries. The Root
tastes Bitterish, a little Acrid, and very Rough, by which it may be Diuretic.
The Sprouts from the Roots taste sensibly Hot, and very Rough. The distilled
Water from the Leaves and Flowers of the Bramble is Fragrant.

S.
ARrow-Head is Sweetish, and a little Sagittaria major.
warm, like Water-Parsnep; and therefore may be Diuretic. It is accounted like
Water-Plantane and Sparganium: If so, Water-Plantane and Sagittaria may be
placed in the same Class of crude Plants.

Sallow and Willow: The Leaves are Salix latifolia and angustifolia.
Mucilaginous, and of a Sorrel Smell.

Osier: The Bark, Leaves, and Juice Salix folio longissimo.
of all them are Bitterish, Rough, and good for all Fluxes.

Sweet-Willow tastes very Bitter and Salix Odorata.
Rough; and smells Fragrant, if rubbed.

The Bay-leaved Willow is very Bitter Salix folio utrinque glabro virente, sive
laureo, sive amygdalino Salvia agrestis.
and Rough, and tastes and smells like Laurel; and therefore fit to be tried,
instead of the Cortex Peruvianus.

Wood-Sage smells strong like Hops, tastes very Bitter, and is of the Virtue of
Scordium, viz. Diaphoretick, Diuretic, Splenetick, Vulnerary and Cleansing. It
may be used in Drink like Hops, which has been tried by my self, and others. A
double quantity is to be put into the Drink, viz. as much again as the usual
quantity of Hops. It is to be referred to the Lamium-Class.

Water-Elder: The Bark tastes nauseously Sambucus aquatica.
Bitter, and is fit to vomit. The Berries are Bitter, Acid, and Mucilaginous. I
made a Syrup of them very nauseous. The Leaves are also nauseously Bitter; and
smell like Currain-Leaves. I gave my Dog of the Juice of the Berries, three or
four Spoonfuls; and of the Leaves and Stalks Decocted, one handful: but they
neither purged nor vomited him. The Flowers smell Sweet.

Common-Elder: The Bark is Mucilaginous Sambucus vulgaris.
and Bitter; and is used for a Vomit. Three handfuls of the Inner-Bark, boiled
in Two Pound of Milk and Water, to One Pound; give half of it in the Morning,
and the rest at Night, to vomit and purge: ( Sydenham of the Dropsy.) The
Leaves are Slimy, Bitter, and Nauseous; and are not good inwardly, but
outwardly in Baths, for Inflammations; in Pultesses, and in Oils and Ointments
for the Piles and Gout. They discuss much, and are good for Burns. They have a
strong stinking Smell.

The Flowers put into Ale, make a good Drink for the Scurvy and Dropsy, as
well as the Berries.

A Spirit made of Elder-Berries or Flowers, is good in the Scurvy: The Berries
are Mucilaginous, Sweet, and Subacid. The Syrup is best made of them in a Jugg
set in Water; by which Infusion, the Virtue is taken out of the Skins and
Stones, and looks more Red, and tastes less Nauseous than the Apothecaries
Syrup, made by Expression. The Syrup made by Baking is more Heady and
Spirituous. The Flowers make a pleasant Fragrant Water, like Orange-Flowers,
Bitterish, Acrid, and Aromatic; whereby they are Cephalic, Diuretic, and
Carminative.

The Water is good for Freckles of the Face; for which the Infusion of the
Green-Leaves is also good.

The Syrup is good in Hot Scurvies, Sore-Mouths, and Hot Dropsical Cachexies.

Sanicle is Bitterish, Astringent, Subacrid, Sanicula.
and like Turpentine in Taste; and smells of Balsam, and is a Resinous
Turpentine Plant; and therefore Vulnerary, externally and internally; and it is
used as a Styptick.

Common Soapwort is Mucilaginous, Bitter, Saponaria vulgaris.
and a little Acrid: and therefore may be Diuretic and Sudorifick. The Leaves
may be laid on Issues: It may be good for Ulcers, as it is Healing and
Cleansing, by the Mucilage and Bitter. Outwardly it discusses strongly like
Elder, and is like in Virtue to it. The Flowers smell Sweet, and very Strong,
by which it seems to be a Lychnis.

White-Saxifrage is Bitterish, Astringent, Saxifraga alba.
and a good Vulnerary: It has also a little Heat, by which it is Diuretic.

Golden-Saxifrage is Bitterish, Hot, and Saxifraga aurea.
Astringent, with a Relish like Meadow-Saxifrage; of the Virtue of the former.

Meadow-Saxifrage: The whole Plant Saxifraga Anglicana.
tastes Sweet and Hot; is Aromatic both in Taste and Smell, and strongly
Diuretic. It is of the Fennil-Class.

Scabious is very Strong, Bitter, and Scabiosa.
Astringent; and in the Flowers a little Acrid. The Syrup and Decoction of the
Juice cleanse the Breast, are Sudorifick and Alexipharmack. Outwardly it is
good for the Itch, Tetters, and Dandriff of the Head. Inwardly it is good in
Jaundice, and helps Digestion.

Water-Germander is very Bitter, Astringent, Scordium.
Hot, and Acrid; and therefore Sudorifick and Alexipharmack in the Plague, and
Pestilential Fevers, in distilled Waters. Externally it cleanses Ulcers, and is
good for Gangreens in Fomentations. Scordium smells like Garlic, and is
therefore Diuretic, good for Worms, and a strong Pectoral. Scordium is good in
Sordid Ulcers, and is Vulnerary. The Acrimony of it is like a Garlic Pungency.
By the Taste and Figure it is referible to the Lamium-Class.

Fig-wort: The Leaves taste very Bitter, Scrophularia.
and smell like Elder. The Roots are Rough, and less Bitter, and have Knobs
like Kernels or Piles; for which they are used in Ointments, discussing them,
as the Elder-Smell shows. The same Ointment is good in a Malignant Scab, and in
Cancrous Ulcers.

Rye Tastes Sweet, as other Corn does: Secale.
It is more Mucilaginous than Wheat; and therefore less easy for Concoction:
And the Meal is more moistening than Wheat-Meal in Pultesses.

Great-Housleek tastes Waterish, very Sedum majus vulgar
Rough, and Astringent. The Syrup of it and the Water are very Cooling and
Astringent in Fevers, especially in Hecticks, and in all Fluxes. The Ointment
cools all Inflammations, Cancers, and Erysipelas's; and cures Tetters, and
Burns. If the bruised Leaves be applied, they cure Corns.

Prick-madam, or Stone-crop, tastes Waterish, Sedum minus Vermicular.
Acid, and Rough. The Root Bitterish and Astringent. It is of the nature of the
former, Cooling and Astringent.

Wall-Pepper: The Taste is burning Sedum parvum acre fl. luteo.
Hot, and Exulcerating. Outwardly it blisters: Taken inwardly it vomits
strongly. By the great Acrimony, the distilled Water is Diuretic; and if it be
made into an Ointment, it discusses Tumors, and the Scrophulae. The Decoction
of it with Alum and Honey, cures putrid Flesh, growing in Scorbutic Gums.

Groundsel: The Leaves taste Bitterish, Senecio vulgaris.
Sweet, Hot, and Mucilaginous; and smell Sweet, like Parsnep. The Root tastes
Nauseously Bitterish and Acrid. The Juice or Decoction vomits. The Syrup of the
Juice purges Sucking Children. Outwardly it is of a discussing Faculty, and
emollient in Inflammations, Tumors, Itch, Gout, and Wind. It Is given Horses for
the Botts.

The Greater Erigerum smells Strongest Senecio major odoratus viscidus.
and Pleasantest, and is of a Bitterish, Hot, and Slimy Taste; the Smell
resembles Angelica or Parsnep. It is very Discussing and Emollient.

Mother of Thyme is Bitterish, Hot, Acrid, Serpyllum.
and Aromatic; and therefore Cephalic, Stomachick, Carminative and Vterine.

Smooth Broad-Leaved Ironwort tastes Sideritis arvensis latifolia.
Bitterish, Slimy, and Sub-astringent; and smells like Dead-Nettle or Betony.
Outwardly and inwardly it is Vulnerary, by the Mucilage and Bitter-Astringency.

Clowns All-heal is Bitterish and Rough, Sideritis Anglica strumosa radice.
like Betony; smells like Dead-Nettle; and the Taste is the same. It is
accounted a Vulnerary.

Common-Mustard is a great Diuretic Sinapi vulgar.
in Dropsies. If three spoonfuls of the powdered Seed be put into a Bottle of
Ale, it will sometimes put by a Fit of a Quartane Ague in the declination. It
is also a great Antiscorbutick. The Taste is Bitterish, very Hot and Acrid;
yielding a Volatile Salt in Distillation. Outwardly it is good for Scorbutic
Pains, and Foul Ulcers; and inwardly it is a cleansing Pectoral, and fit for a
Gargle in the Lethargy. It is Sternutatory; it excites an Appetite, and helps
Digestion. All which it does by the Acrid, Volatile Salt, which will blister a
little.

Water-Parsnep has the taste and smell of Sium aquaticum.
Parsnep, and is of the same Virtue; Diuretic in the distilled Water, and good
in Tumors of the Breasts, that are Scrophulous.

Common Nightshade: The Leaves Solanum vulgar.
taste Waterish and Slimy, with a little Biting or Heat, and a little Rough;
when pounded they smell like Green-Sauce; which shows their crudeness. The
Berries taste Sweet and Mucilaginous. The Leaves pressed in the Hand, have a
strong Smell, not unlike Chocolate.

I gave a Dog twelve Spoonfuls of the Juice of the Leaves, he was Sick after
it, and Dull; but not Stupid, as by a Narcotick. An Ointment may be made of the
Leaves, like Stramonium Ointment; Cooling Inflammations and Erysipelas, and
Healing Tetters and Scalds. The Root is Mucilaginous, Strong, and Offensive,
like other Solanums. The Berries are Green within, and taste Nauseous.

Deadly Nightshade: The Leaves are Solanum lethale.
of a strong Narcotick Smell, and are Mealy, Slimy, and Hot, ( Parkinson says,
Bitter. Quaere.) The Root is Mealy, Mucilaginous, and of a strong Offensive
Opiate Smell. An Ointment is made of the Leaves for Cancerous Pains; and the
Leaves are applied whole to Cancers.

The Berries have a Purplish-Juyce, and are accounted Poisonous to Children.

Dr. Grew says, The Root is Sweet. Quaere.

Bitter-Sweet, or Woody Nightshade: Solanum lignosum.
It has a Smell like other Solanums; and therefore is Narcotick. The Bark is
very Hot, Bitter, and Slimy. The Leaves have the same Taste, and therefore may
be Purgative. The Bark is used for Hydropical Persons, to purge and provoke
Urine: It works churlishly. The Leaves are outwardly used in Inflammations, and
Itching Tumors of the Hands and Feet. The Berries are Sweet, very Nauseously
Bitter and Slimy; and therefore are Purgative and Vomiting, very violently. The
Roots smell like Hounds-Tongue. And the other Solanums seem to me to resemble
that Smell rather than Poppies.

The Dog to whom I gave Thirty of the Berries, neither vomited, purged, nor
slept, but dyed Mad, within three hours.

Sea Bind-weed: I tasted it in the Soldanella marina.
Shops, and it was Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Acrid; and therefore as other
Bind-weeds, very Purgative in Hydropical Persons. The Plant has a Milk as other
Bind-weeds have.

Sow-Thistle is in the Root and Milk Sonchus.
Bitterer than in the Leaves. It is of the nature of Dandelion. The Leaves are
most Cool and Bitterish; and the Root most Aperitive. The Leaves are good for
Hot Tumors: And boiled, it is good to give Nurses to increase Milk. The
distilled Water is good for Freckles, and the Root is a good Diuretic.

Flix-weed has a Cress-Smell, when Sophia Chirurgorum.
rubbed, but stinks at first. It has a Cress-Taste, and a Diuretic Virtue. It
is erroneously recommended as Astringent; but may be a good Discutient and
Antihysterick by the Foetor, and Diuretic by the Acrid Salt. It is good to
cleanse Ulcers.

The Sorbe-Tree is Bitterish, and Astringent Sorbus sylvestris torminalis.
in Bark and Leaf. The Fruit is Acid and Rough; and both are good for Fluxes:
For which a Rob may be made out of the immature Fruit.

Quicken-Tree: The Bark is Bitter and Sorbus Sylvestris aucuparia, sive
Fraxinus Bubula
Astringent, like Laurel-Bitters. The Berries are Bitter and Acid. They are
good in the Dropsy in Diet-Drinks, as they are Purging. This is rather an Ash,
by the strong-Bitter.

Burr-reed is Astringent. Sparganium ramosum. Speculum Veneris.


Codded Corn-Violet has a crude slimy Taste and Smell. I tasted it in a Garden,
it being the great Venus Looking-Glass. It is Milky, like Rampions.

Spurry is of a crude Juice, like Chick-weed; Spergula.
and is referible to the Chick-weeds.

Cow-Parsnep: The Root is Sweet, Biting, Sphondylium.
and of a Parsnep-Taste. The Seeds are Hot and Acrid, and of a strong Smoaky
Smell, but very little Aromatic; and therefore accounted an Hysteric.

Bladder-Nut: The Leaves taste Rough, Staphylodendrum.
and the Nuts Sweet and Nauseous.

T.
TAnsie tastes Strong, Bitter, and Tanacetum.
Acrid, and is of an Aromatic Smell, like Feaver-few. The Juice is given for
the Worms. The Conserve is Hepatick in Dropsies, and good in Colicks. The Seed
is given for the Worms, and is Bitter, Acrid and Diuretic.

Yew-Tree: The Berries are Mucilaginous Taxus.
and Sweet, and are eaten Innocently; but the Seed in them is very Bitter and
Nauseous; and therefore causes a Diarrhoea. The Leaves have a bitterish, crude
Taste, without any Narcotick Smell. It is like the Turpentine-Trees by the
Greenness; but the most crude and fixed of all that kind. The Wood has no
offensive Taste, but seemed a little Hot on my Tongue. The Leaves are not
unlike Firr.

A poor Woman at Elford in Staffordshire, gathered up the cuttings of the Bows
of the Yew-Tree, in the dry Year, and gave them to her Cow; upon the eating of
which she dyed. But it may be the dryness of the Leaves made them offensive to
the Stomach or Windpipe.

Orpin is Mucilaginous and Watery, like Telephium.
Purslain. A Syrup of it cools and heals the Exulcerate Guts, in a Dysentery.
Roasted in the Embers, and pounded with Swines-Grease, it cures White-Flaws. It
is outwardly good for Inflammations, Burns and Scalds. The Leaf bruised may be
laid to any Green Wound. The Roots are knobbed like the Piles. And a cooling
Ointment of them is better than an Amulet for the Piles.

Meadow-Rue is of a Dry, Bitterish, and Thalictrum
Sweet Taste, and of a strong Scent. It may loosen the Belly, and seems to be
like Columbine of the Pea-Class. Galen makes it a Vulnerary.

Treacle-Mustard is of the same Acrimony Thlapsi.
as Common-Mustard, but more Bitter, and smells like Garlic. It is Diuretic
and Pectoral. Outwardly it is good for the Sciatica, and Foul Ulcers. The Seed
is very Acrid.

Lime-Tree: The Bark is Mucilaginous, Tilia.
and good for Burns, and Sore-Mouths; There is an Acrimony, and also a
Bitterishness in it. The Flowers are of the same Taste, and very Fragrant,
Cordial, and Antepileptick; for which we use the distilled Water. The Berries
are accounted Astringent.

Spurge: All Spurges have a Milk of a Tithymalus.
Bitterish and Exulcerating Taste. They are Purging and Vomiting; and by the
Acrimony they blister the Skin. Twenty Seeds given in Bread and Butter to a
Dog purged him but little. This that I gave him was of the Wood-Spurge; but
Thirty Seeds of Sun-Spurge, and afterward a handful of Leaves steeped in Milk
and Water, purged nothing. The Milk is good for Warts. The Milk dropped into
Water diffused it self immediately, like Tincture of Benjamin. The Milk mixed
with Vinegar huft a little; with Spirit of Hartshorn it mixed readily, but
turned of a brown color. The pounded Herb smells Acid, and not of any strong
Scent.

Drop three or four drops of the Milk into a Figg, and dry it, give two or
three Figgs. The Juice takes off the Hair: mixed with Oil it cures Warts; and
removes the Callus of Fistula's.

The Milk is strongest, the Leaves and Seeds next, and the Root least.

The Lixivium of Spurge has a Caustic Quality. There being but little Smell in
Spurge. The Volatile Acrid is coagulated into a Gum, with the Oil, by an Acid;
and this Gum mixed with Water, gives a Milk as other Gums do. The Acrimony
depends not on an Acid, because Vinegar corrects the Acrimony: And another
Argument, of the Gummosity is from the Purging Faculty in all Spurges.

Tormentil: The Root is Rough, Bitterish Tormentilla.
and Sub-acrid: It stops all Fluxes by the Astringency. It stops the violent
Fermentation of the Blood in Malignant Fevers, joined with Fluxes. It is a good
Styptick in Vulnerary Potions; and a good Antefebrifick, resembling the Taste
of the Jesuits Powder.

Throat-wort has a Bitterish Milk, thick Trachelium majus.
like Curds; and is called Throat-wort, because the Decoction is good in
Sore-Throats, and Vlcerated Mouths. It tastes Mucilaginous and Sweet, and is a
Rapunculus.

Goats-Beard is Sweet, Waterish, and Tragopogon.
Milky: and is good to eat, being dressed like Parsneps; or the crude Root in
Sallets.

Black Maidenhair has a Ferne-Taste; Trichomanes.
and is good for Vlcerations in the Lungs and Kidneys, by the Astringency,
Sweetness, and Bitterness.

Wood Sorrel tastes very Acid. The Trifolium acetosum.
Syrup, Conserve, Juice, and distilled Water, cool Thirsts in Fevers. Vide
Acetosella.

Honey-Suckle-Trefoyl: The Roots and Trifolium pratense purpureum.
Leaves are Bitter and Hot, with a Pea-Taste.

White Honey-Suckle-Trefoyl is of a Pea-Taste, Trifolium flore albo.
and Rough. The Flowers are sweet as Honey-Suckles in Smell.

Clover-Grass is like the Honey-SuckleTrefoyl. Trifolium purpureum majus
sativum.
The Leaves have a sweet Pea-Taste, and are very Biting and Acrid. The Root is
Sweet and Acrid.

Yellow-Trefoyl tastes Rough in the Trifolium luteum.
Leaves, but resembles Pea-Tastes in the Flower and Root; and tastes Hot or
Acrid at the last.

Hop-Trefoyl has a sweet Pea-Taste, Trifolium lupulinum.
and is Rough.

Yellowish Meadow-Trefoyl is very Rough in Taste, with a Pea-Smell. Trifolium
hirsutum lago poides. Trifolium siliquosum.


Small Codded Trefoyl has a very Rough Taste, and is of the Pea-kind.

Purple-wort has a sweet Pea-Taste, and Trifolium fol. purpureo.
is very Rough. It is good in the Bleedings of the Purple Fever. The Acrid
Trefoyls are Diuretic.

Buck-Bean: The Leaves are very Bitter, Trifolium palustre.
and taste like a Peach-Kernel. It is good in Diet-Drinks for the Scurvy; and
for Arthritick Pains. And I have heard them commended for a Cure of the
Dropsy. There is no Acrimony in the Taste, yet it is much commended in the
Scurvy.

Wheat tastes Sweet and Slimy, and is Triticum.
of good nourishment. The Flower is good in Small-Beer, to stop Overflowings of
the Blood, and other Hemorrhages and Fluxes. Mace or Indian-Wheat is as sweet
as Sugar.

Tower-Mustard is of the same Taste and Turritis.
Virtue as ordinary Mustard.

Coltsfoot tastes Watery, Bitterish, Tussilago.
Rough, and a little Hot; and therefore is a good Pectoral and Vulnerary. It
smells somewhat like Enula campana. Outwardly it cools Inflammations. The
Flowers smell and look like Groundsel. By which it may be of the same Class.

Cats-Tayl: The Root is very Clammy, Typha.
Mucilaginous, and Cooling. The Mucilage may be good in Plasters, but not
inwardly; it being thick like Bird-lime.

V.
BIlberries are Sweet and Sour; Vaccinia nigra.
the Quiddany is used for Loosenesses. The Leaves taste Sour and Rough. The
Root Bitterish and Rough. The Berries are boiled with Alum and Galls, for a
Blue Color.

Red-Whorts are Acid and Astringent Vaccinia Rubra.
in Taste, and Astringent in Fluxes; Vaccinia and Rubus, are of the like nature.

Valerian: The Root is of a Turpentine Valeriana silvestris major, minor,
hortensis.
Smell, like Balm of Gilead; and tastes Bitter, Acrid, Slimy, and of
Turpentine. The Leaves are Bitterish and Mucilaginous. And the same is the
Taste of all sorts of Valerian. The Root is an excellent Pectoral and
Diuretic: And the Leaves are Cleansing and Agglutinating in Wounds and Ulcers
of the Mouth. Valerian Flowers at first smell Fetid; after their lying a while
to spend their Foetor, they smell like Jasmin. Wild Valerian Flowers have a
Strange, Fainty Lily-Smell. The Root is so like Serpentaria Virginiana, that I
believe it a Substitute. It is used in Convulsious and Epilepsies.

Dioscorides describes the smell of the Root to be Fragrant, like Nardus, with
some Foetor: By which it may be Antepileptick and Purgative like Asarum, in the
quantity of an Ounce and half.

White Mullein: The Leaves are Watery, Verbascum flore luteo vulgar.
Bitterish and Cool. The Flowers are Mucilaginous and Bitterish, and Anodyne in
Ointments for the Haemorrhoids, or in Pultesses with Yolks of Eggs, white
Bread, and Leeks juyced. The Root is Waterish, Bitterish, and Astringent.
Mullein is used in Coughs, as Bugloss. The Flowers smell a little Fragrant,
which argues a little Heat with the Waterishness. But because of the
Astringency and Pectoral Virtue, I refer it to the Lamiums.

Vervain is very Bitter, Astringent, and Verbena.
Sub-acrid, like the Lawrel-Bitters; and therefore Vulnerary. It is good in
Obstructions, Jaundice, Coughs, and Nephritick Pains; and good against Tertians
and Arthriticks. Outwardly it is Vulnerary, and a Cleanser in Putrid Ulcers,
and Gargarisms. It is also Splenetick and Cephalic, having the same Bitterness
as Black Cherry-Trees; by which, Pains of the Head, depending on Fevers, are
stopped.

Tree-Stone-Crop, (I found it in Sir Richard Vermicularis Frutex.
Nudigate's curious Garden, to whom I am obliged for most of my Rarities:) The
Taste is Watrish and Crude; and it is of a crude Smell, and of a cooling Virtue.

Speedwell, or Fluellin, is Bitterish, Subacrid, Veronica pratensis minor.
and Astringent inwardly and outwardly. It is a Vulnerary, and good against
Fevers, Ulcers of the Lungs and Kidneys. Outwardly it cures Wounds, Ulcers, and
Scabs: And seems to be of the Dead-Nettle-Class, having the same Virtue.

Common Vetch, or Tare, is of a Pea-Taste, Vicia.
and Rough: The Juice is given in the Scurvy, to hinder the great Fermentation
of the Blood.

Purple-flower'd Vetch has a very sweet Vicia flore Purpureo.
Pea-Taste.

Yellow-flower'd Vetch is very Astringent, Vicia flore Flavo.
and has a little sweet Pea-Taste.

Purple-Violets: The Green Leaves are Viola Martia Purpurea.
Mucilaginous; and therefore Cooling and emollient in Pultesses for
Inflammations. The Flowers are Mucilaginous, and a little Acrid, and of a
Fragrant Smell. The Syrup purges a little, cools and lenifies Coughs, and is
Diuretic. The Seeds are Mucilaginous, Acrid, and Diuretic in Emulsions; and
sometimes purge and vomit. The Cordial Faculty lies in the Fragrancy.

Pansies: The Leaves are Hot, Acrid, Viola Tricolor.
Mucilaginous, and Mealy; and therefore Emollient: The Smell is strong, like
Orange-Flowers; the distilled Water smells like them, and is Antepileptick.
Outwardly the Leaves mollify, discuss, agglutinate, and cure the Itch in
Baths. The Mucilage helps Gripes, by the Purging Quality; and helps
Expectoration, by the Mucilage and Acrimony.

The Great Wild-Climber: The Seeds, Viorna sive Clematitis Sylvestris latifolia.
Bark, and Root, and also the Flowers, have a burning Taste: The Flowers smell
Sweet.

Golden Rod tastes Sweet, Bitterish, and Virga Aurea.
Aromatic (like Juniper Berries) in the Leaves and Roots; by which it is a
good Diuretic, and Carminative.

Misletoe grows on the Maple, Crab, Viscum.
Apple, and Hawthorn: Mr. Ray says, On the Nut, Elm, Willow, Buckthorn,
Lime-Tree, and Service. I could find no Difference in Taste in Misletoe growing
on the Four first; these Barks having a Bitterness like Misltoe, and also being
Astringent; but no ways Acrid. But it grows on the Mucilaginous Trees,
mentioned by Mr. Ray. The Virtues of the Tree and Mislletoe so much differ,
that it cannot be better on one Tree, than another. I have tasted That on the
Oak dry, but could find no Excellency in it above others. The Leaves and Wood
taste Bitter, Astringent, Hot, and Acrid; by which it is good for the
Epilepsie: It must be given for Forty Days. It may cause Sweating in a
Pleurisy. The Bitter-Astringency makes it good before Ague-Fits. The Green
Roots of the Misletoe go into the Bough a good way. Mr. Placston, of
Sheriff-Holes in Shrop-shire, told me, That Misletoe-Berries laid on the
rubb'd-Bark of a Tree, will grow there. The Mucilage of the Berries put into
Plasters, mollifies with Rosin and Wax, and ripens and draws much.

Meadow-Sweet: The Flowers, Leaves, Ulmaria.
and Roots, are Bitterish and Astringent; with a strong Fragrant Smell. By the
Astringency, it is Styptick in all Fluxes; by the Fragrancy, Cordial in Wine
and distilled Waters; and by the Bitterish Roughness, it is Antifebrifick, much
of the Virtue of Burnet, and tastes like it. Filipendula, Burnet, and Vlmaria,
are all of a like Nature.

Elm: The Bark and Leaves are Mucilaginous, Ulmus.
and Healing in Mouth-Waters; and in Burns, Anodyne and Cooling. There is a
little Bitterish Astringency in Elm.

Navel-wort is Watrish, Slimy, and Biting; Umbilicus Veneris.
by which it is Diuretic, cures and discusses Inflammations, Erysipelas, and
Strumas. There is also in the Flowery Heads a Bitterish Astringency.

Nettle: The Yellow Roots are Sweet, Urtica Urens.
Watrish, and Biting, and good Diuretics; the Seed is Slimy, a little Hot, and
Pectoral. The Leaves juyced, are good in Haemorrhages, carrying off by Urine a
great deal of Serum; and, by the Acrimony, opening Obstructions, which are the
Causes of Haemorrhages. Outwardly Nettles cure Tumors, sordid Ulcers, and
Gangrenes.

THE Tastes and Virtues OF Plants in Gardens and Shops.
A.
LAVANDER-COTTON tastes Bitter-Acrid, Abrotanum Foemina.
with a Sea-Wormwood Smell; therefore it has the Virtues of a Wormwood, and is
of the same Tribe. It Is accounted good for the Stomach and for Worms.

Roman-Wormwood is of the same Taste, Absinthium Romanum.
Smell, and Virtue, as the Common-Wormwood; but more Pleasant, and less Earthy
or Crude.

Tree-Wormwood: The Smell and Taste Absinthium Arborescens.
are like Common-Wormwood.

Acacia is Bitterish, Styptick, and good Acacia.
in Fluxes. It is the Juice of a Siliquose Plant.

Bastard-Acorus is Hot, like Ginger: It is Radix Acori.
an Acrid-Aromatick.

Agarick tastes Sweet-Bitter and Mucilaginous; Agaricus.
it is piercing, by a little Acrid. It yields a Resin; and is gently Purgative
of Choler, by its Bitterness; and of Water or Viscous Phlegm, by its Resin.
Agarick* is the Fungus of a Turpentine-Tree; but differs much from the Taste of
Turpentine.

Maudlin is Bitterish, Aromatic, and Ageratum.
Astringent; and therefore Cephalic and Vulnerary.

The Chast-Tree is Bitterish, Rough, Aromatic, Agnus Castus.
Acrid, and of an Agrimony Smell. It is Aperitive, Diuretic, and Vulnerary.

Ladies-Mantle: The Root tastes Bitterish Alchimilla.
and Astringent, like Potentilla; and looks of the same Color.

Winter-Cherries: The Leaves taste Bitter, Alkakengi.
Mucilaginous, and Biting; and therefore are an excellent Diuretic. The
Berries are Acid and Bitter, and infused in Wine, or in Powder, are very
Diuretic. The Leaves and Berries resemble Solanum Lignosum; the Bladders taste
most Bitter. Opiates are Diuretic, by their Acrimony and Sliminess. The Smell
in this Plant is not much.

Garlic is of a strong rank Smell, very Allium.
Acrid in Taste, and abounds with a Volatile Salt; by which it is Diuretic,
Pectoral, Stomachick, and good against Infection of the Plague. It blisters the
Soals of the Feet, if laid next to the Skin; and cures the Dropsy, infused in
Beer. It is laid to the Soals of the Feet in Chin-Coughs and Smallpox.

Aloes is Bitter, Sweet, and Mucilaginous Aloes.
or Gummy. Its Bitterness is like the Bitterness of a Peach-Kernel: By this it
purges Choler, and opens Obstructions of the Viscera; cleanses away Viscid
Phlegm from the Intestines, and corrects Acidity: For Purgers both stimulate,
and act as Alterers. Outwardly Aloes cleanses by its Bitterness; and by its
Gumminess, stops Bleeding. The Green Leaves of Aloes taste Acid. Aloes smells
like Myrrh.

Flower-Gentle: The Seeds and Leaves Amaranthus.
are Astringent, and a little Acid. This seems to me a Dock-Taste.

I observed an Acrimony in Amaranthus, (in all the kinds thereof:) Which makes
me infer, That it may be of the Nettle-kind, rather than of Blites or Atriplex:
But it is like English Mercury. It is very ungrateful to the Stomach.

Bishops-Weed: The Seeds are Sweet, Ammi.
Bitter, Hot, Aromatic, Carminative, Diuretic, and Cephalic. It belongs to
the Fennil-Class.

The Bitter-Almond-Tree: The Bark Amygdalus Amara.
tastes very much like the Jesuits-Bark, Bitter and Rough; and has a Gum in it.
The Leaves are Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Rough, like the Peach-Tree. It is
probably of the same Purgative Faculty, or gently Laxative. Bitter Almonds have
the same Taste, and an Oyliness: The Oil is good for Ulcers, cleansing and
killing Worms. It Is also good in Pains of the Ears, and Sun-Spots.

The Sweet-Almond-Blanch'd tastes Sweet Amygdalus Dulcis.
and Oily; and yields an Oil, which is good in the Stoppage of Urine, for
Expectoration of Phlegm, and in Pains of the Belly, with Juice of Limon.

Bean-Trefoile: The Leaves taste Mucilaginous, Anagyris.
Bitterish, and a little Biting. The Country People use it as Sena; and it
tastes like it. This has a Pea-Taste, and smells Oily, as a Bastard -Sena does;
which therefore Vomits much.

Alkanet: The Red Roots are Bitterish, Anchusa.
Astringent, and a little Warm; by which, and by its thin coloring Parts, it
is Diuretic and Aperitive; and by its Astringency, it is Vulnerary. It is a
Madder, rather than a Bugloss.

Dill: The Leaves and Seeds are Bitterish, Anethum.
Sweet, Hot, Aromatic, and (like Fennil in Taste, Smell, and Virtue)
Carminative, and Diuretic: The Seeds are the same.

Tree-Angelica neither tastes nor smells Angelica Arborescens.
so strong as Ordinary Angelica.

Garden-Angelica: It Is Sweet, Bitterish, Angelica Hortensis.
and Aromatic in Taste and Smell; therefore Cephalic, Carminative, Cordial,
Pneumonick, and Sudorifick. The Root, Leaves, and Seeds have the same Taste and
Smell.

Aniseed: The Seed is Sweet, Hot, Bitterish, Anisum.
and Aromatic in Taste and Smell; therefore Pectoral and Carminative; the
Powder of the Seed being given to Children for the Colic, or the Decoction of
it in Posset Drink.

Smalledge is Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, Aromatic, Apium Hortense.
Diuretic, Pectoral, and Aperitive. It is of the Fennil-Class. Smalledge is
stronger than Parsley: The Seeds and Roots are most used, and of the same Taste.

Arba Venenosa Indica: This Tree smells Arba venenosa Indica.
Fetid, as most Poisons do.

Birthwort: The Root tastes nauseously Aristolochia rotunda and longa.
Bitter, and Mucilaginous: It smells like Bryony; and is of the same Virtue,
Hysteric. Outwardly it is good for the Itch, cleanses Wounds and Ulcers; and
is used in a Pessary. The Round is the hottest.

Double-Sweet-Williams are Sweet and Armerius Hortensis.
Bitter.

Asarabacca: The Leaves are Hot, and Asarum.
very Acrid on the Tongue. The Powder of the Leaves makes a strong
Sternutatory. If Nine Leaves be infused in Wine, and the Juice squeezed out,
they Vomit strongly, and irritate the Mouth of the Stomach, as the Powder does
the Nose. The Root is Bitterish, very Acrid, Terebinthinate, and Aromatic. One
Dram of it Vomits very well; a lesser Quantity is used, as a Diuretic;
because Asarum-Roots smell of Turpentine, and have also something Fetid, like
Hellebore: By This they Purge. The Leaves are like Cyclamen.

Swallow-Wort: The Leaves smell a little Asclepias.
like Solanum.

Asphodel: The Leaves taste Sweet and Asphodelus
Slimy.

Star-wort is in the Leaves Mucilaginous. Aster Atticus.


Blue-Starwort, tastes Slimy, Bitterish, and Aster Serotinus Fruticescens
Caeruleus.
Acrid; and smells Fragrant.

Bacciferous-Orach tastes Mucilaginous, Atriplex Baccifera.
and, like Sorrel, sour in the Red Buttons: That Color of Red will fail,
though Alum be added in the Decoction. The Ripe Berries taste very Sweet.

Garden-Orach tastes somewhat like Sorrel, Atriplex Hortensis.
and smells like it.

Note, That Redness in the Leaves or Stalks of any Plants, is a Sign of Acidity
in the Plant.

Bears-Ears: The Flower smells Sweet, Auricula Ursi.
as Cowslips: The Green Leaves are Mucilaginous: The Roots are Hot and Acrid,
like Cowslips, and Bitterish; with an Aromatic, Heady, and Opiate Smell.

Oranges: The Flowers are of a very Aurantia Malus.
Fragrant Smell, somewhat like the Lily in Flower and Smell. They taste
Bitterish, Pungent, and Sub-acrid; and therefore are Cordial and Cephalic. The
Green Leaves are Bitterish and Astringent, with an Aromatic hot Taste and
Smell; and are good strengthening Stomachicks.

B.
COst-Mary has a Bitterish-biting Balsamita major.
Taste, with an Aromatick-Balsam Smell; from whence it is accounted Vulnerary.
It is used in distilled Waters. By its Taste it is Cephalic, being Bitterish,
and a little Acrid. It is used in outward Balsams.

Jupiter's Beard tastes Rough, and a little Barba Jovis.
Hot; and seems to be of the Vetch-kind, by the Leaves, Flowers, and Taste.

Basil is Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatic Basilicum.
in Taste and Smell; which last is very strong, and therefore it is a very hot
Cephalic. The Smell is compared to Citrons, or Clovegilly-Flowers; but very
Heady; and is accounted hurtful, producing a Frenzy.

Jerusalem-Artichoak: The Root is Bastatus de Cinada.
Sweet, Astringent, and Watrish; the Leaves are Watery and Mucilaginous: By
which Sweetness it is Esculent.

Pomegranate-Flowers are Bitterish, Styptick, Balaustiorum Flores
and very great Astringents: The Flowers will color Red. They are boiled in
Claret with Myrrh, for putrid Gums, and loose Teeth in the Scurvy.

Spatling-Poppy: I tasted it at Chelsey, Behen Album.
being Sweetish and Crude, like Lychnis.

White Beets have a Crude Juice, Slimy, Beta Alba vel Rubra.
and a little Astringent: The Red is most Astringent. I suppose that it is
accounted Nitrous by its Bitterish Coolness, which is the Taste of Nitre. Both
sort of Beets are Cooling, by their Crude Mucilage, and their Watrish Parts;
and Deterging, by the Bitterish Nitrous Coolness. I have put the Root into my
Nose, without Sneezing, or any Irritation. Beets, Blites, Atriplex, and Bonus
Henricus, seem to agree in kind: And these are by Authors called, Saporis fatui
vel oleracei.

Cotton-Seeds: They are Mucilaginous, Bombacis Semina.
and chiefly used for their Mucilage.

Borrage: The Leaves, Flowers, and Borrago.
Roots are Cool, Watery, and Mucilaginous. The Root is a little Bitter, and so
comes near the Taste of Nitre: But I cannot think that to be in any Plant
called Nitrous; because it resembles Nitre, which is Cool, Bitterish, and Acid.
There is, besides the former Tastes, a little grateful Acrid in Borrage; by
which it is Cordial. The Mucilage is good for Heats and Thirsts in Hecticks, as
Bugloss is. It is used in Decoction, and Juice. But the Cordial Virtue is in
the Flowers, and in their Conserve.

Oak of Jerusalem: The Leaves are Bitterish, Botrys.
Aromatic, and Watrish. The Seeds are most Balsamic, smelling like Balsam of
Tolu; and therefore Cleansing, Aromatic, Terebinthinate, and Vulnerary in
Syrup of the Juice, and in distilled Waters, for Coughs and Consumptions.

Bear's-Breech is a Thistle; and for the Brancha Ursina.
bitter Slime, is used in Clysters; and may be used outwardly for the same, in
Plasters against the Gout, and Burnings. There is a bitter Smoakiness in all
Thistles; which inwardly makes them Nauseous and Purgative, and outwardly
Discussing and Cleansing.

Cabbage: The Roots of the Cabbage-Plants Brassica vulgaris.
are Acrid, and bite like Horseradish. The Leaves of the Plants bite less,
when full grown; and by this latent Acrid, they stimulate when applied to
Blisters. The full-grown Leaves are also Cool, Watrish, and a little Bitterish;
by which Tastes it is Laxative; and for these it is also accounted a Nitrous
Plant. The Ashes are very Caustic: The Seed is Bitter and Acrid. The Juice
cures Warts.

Colli-Flowers have the Flowery Part and Brassica Multi-flora.
Leaves very Acrid; and therefore are Antiscorbutick, as Mustard Seed, and
Horseradish.

Satin-Flower smells and tastes like the Bolbonach sive viola Lunaria.
Cress-Plants, and is of the same Virtue. The Seeds are most Acrid and Bitter.

Butchers-Broom: The Root is Sweet, Bruscus.
Bitterish, and Acrid; by which it is Diuretic, Pectoral, and Aperitive. It
belongs to the Pea-Class; and is like Asparagus. The Berries are sweet, and the
new Sprouts are a little Aromatic.

Ox-Eye is Bitterish and Sub-acrid, like Buphthalmum.
Chamaemel; and is of the same Virtue.

C.
MArygold: The Flowers are Slimy, Calendula.
and very Hot and Burning in the Throat; by which they are Cordial, and expel
Measles and Smallpox, and cure Fits of the Mother, and Obstructions of the
Menses. They smell strong and unpleasant. The Green-Leaves are Mucilaginous and
Acrid; and the Root Bitterish.

Gum-Cambogia is an Inspissate Juice, Cambogia.
more Gummy than Resinous: It Purges and Vomits Watery Serum violently. I cannot
discern the Taste; but in the Stomach the latent Acrimony of it immediately
appears, because it works in so small a Dose; and is corrected by Acids. It is
generally thought to be a sort of Tithymal; and by that Caustic Quality it
purges.

Caper-Bark tastes very Acrid, by which Cortex Radicis Capparis.
it is Diuretic, and outwardly discussing in Tumors of the Abdomen. I cannot
taste the Bitterness and Astringency, by which it is said to have many effects.

Pepper is very Burning and Hot in the Capsicum Indicum.
God, and Acrid and Aromatic when ripe.

Grains of Paradise are Sweet, Hot, Aromatic, Cardamonum majus
Acrid, and Bitterish.

Lesser Cardamoms are Hot Aromaticks. Cardamonum minus


Carduus Benedictus: The Leaves are Carduus Benedictus
of a Smoaky Bitter Taste, like the ordinary Carduus, with some Mucilage; by
which it is fit to produce Vomiting. It cleanses the Stomach, and is good for
Fevers in the Bitter Drink. The Roots have no Bitterness: And that there is a
Bloody Juice in it, is observed in Mr. Ray.

Carpo Balsamum is said to be Acrid and Carpo Balsamum minus.
Aromatic.

Seed of Bastard Saffron is Bitterish, a little Carthami Semen.
Acrid and Mucilaginous; by which it purges a little. It is used in the
Diseases of the Breast, joined with other Purgers.

Carraways: The Roots and Seeds taste Carum.
and smell Sweet and Aromatic, and are Carminative and Diuretic. The
Green-Leaves smell like Parsneps. Carum belongs to the Sweet, Acrid, and
Aromatick-Class.

Clove-Gilly-flowers: The Flowers are Caryophyllus Aromaticus.
Hot and Mucilaginous, and of a grateful Odor: The Flowers taste Bitterish,
Sweet, and Acrid in the Throat; in which the Cordial Virtue consists. The Root
is Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, and Slimy, like the Clove-Flowers.

Cloves are Bitterish, Acrid, Hot, and Caryophylli.
Aromatic in Taste and Smell. They are Cordial and Cephalic. And are the
Fruit of a Tree.

Pinks: They are Bitterish, Sweet-tasted; Caryophyllus Hortensis minor.
and have in the Flower an Aromatic Smell. They are of the nature of
Clove-Gilly-flowers.

The Bark of Cassia Lignea is Acrid and Cassia Lignea.
Aromatic in Taste, like Cinnamon, and of the same Virtue.

Cassia: The Pulp is most used to keep Cassia Fistula.
the Body Laxative. It is very Sweet and Mucilaginous; by which it is good in a
Cough: And is thereby also a Lenient purge in the Stone and Hemorrhoids.

Cedar has a Fragrant Turpentine-Smell; Cedrus Virginiana
and it tastes Bitter, Astringent, and Acrid.

The Greater Centaury: The Stalk tasted Centaureum majus.
Sweetish, Bitter, and Sub-aromatick. The shape of the Leaf, and Taste,
resemble Jacobea.

Onion is Biting, Mucilaginous, Acrid, Cepe.
and of a rank Smell, like Garlic; Fuming up into the Eyes, like the Spirit of
Sal-Ammoniack: therefore it is full of a Volatile Salt, with a rank Oil. Onions
are Roasted for breaking Apostemes; and are Infused and Distilled in
White Wind, for the Stone. Pounded with Salt, they are good for Burns, and the
Biting of a Mad-Dogg. The Juice is good for Pains in the Ears, and for
Shortness of Breath. All these Effects are produced by the Taste and Smell
abovementioned.

China has no considerable Smell in the China.
Root. It is of a dry Taste, a little Warm or Acrid. It is accounted a
Diaphoretick, but is most properly an Astringent and Absorbent of Acids.

In the Decoction, China is a little Aromatic, Astringent, and Bitterish; but
these Qualities are very obscure. It is a climbing Plant, as well as
Sarsaparilla; and Thorny and Bacciferous.

China China: The Stalk of the Peruvian-Tree China China.
has a Terebinthinate-Taste. The Leaves are a little Slimy and Terebinthinate.
This I found in the Physic Garden at Chelsey.

Cicers have a sweet Pea-Taste; and Cicera rubra.
are Diuretic, and Lenifying the Passages by the Mucilage. They are a little
Bitterish.

Artichoak: The Leaves are very Bitter, Cinara.
Slimy, and Smoaky, like the Carduus. The Juice cures Wounds. The Leaves are
good in Ointments for the Worms, and are great Cleansers of Ulcers.

Cinnamon-Bark is Sweet, very Hot, Aromatic, Cinnamonum.
and Astringent. It is a good Stomachick and Cordial.

Gummy-Cistus has a very Rough Taste, Cistus Ledon.
feels Gummy, and has a crude Smell.

Ladaniferous Cistus, or Holy Rose, feels Cistus Ladanifera.
clammy in the Leaves, and smells like Labdanum. It tastes Terebinthinate, and
therefore is an excellent Vulnerary, put in Balsams; and inwardly in Distempers
of the Nerves: It has the same Virtue as Labdanum.

Sage-leaved Cistus is only very Rough Cistus salviae folio.
and Bitterish, without any Gumminess; and is a Vulnerary.

Broad-leaved Cistus feels Clammy, and Cistus folio lato.
tastes Bitterish, Acrid, Aromatic, Resinous and Rough. It smells like
Labdanum; and therefore is inwardly and outwardly a Vulnerary.

Shrub-Trefoyl has a sweet Pea-Taste, Cytisus.
and smells of the Pea-kind. Those Plants which have this sweet Pea-Taste, are
fit for feeding Cattle, and breed most Milk.

Citron: The Leaves are Bitterish, Acrid, Citria malus.
Aromatic, Astringent, and of the same Fragrancy as a Citron; and are good
Stomachicks. The Fruit and Pulp is very Acid and Aromatic. The Peel has the
taste of the Leaf; and is Cordial, if distilled with Sack. The Syrup is a
cooling Cordial, by its grateful Acidity. The Peels are kept Candied.

Citrul-Seeds are Cool and Mucilaginous, Citrullus.
and so are the Leaves and Fruit, which is also Sweet.

Virgins Bower is Bitter and very Acrid. Clematitis.


Coloquintida is extremely Bitter, and Colocynthis.
affects the Mouth with that Taste, when it is pounded; it is also very Acrid:
By these Tastes it purges vehemently. It contains a Resin; and therefore has a
Sliminess, as other Purgers.

Bastard-Sena is Sweet, Bitterish, Slimy, Collutea.
and smells Pea-like, which the Cods and Flowers resemble. By the Oily
rankness, it vomits much, and purges churlishly.

Saracens-Consound: The Leaves smell Consolida Saracenica
like Elder, and are Mucilaginous, Bitterish, a little Acrid, and Astringent;
by which it is Diuretic and Vulnerary in Decoctions and Ointments. This is
mistaken for Virga Aurea, and is very different. This seems to be some sort of
Aster, and not Consolida. It is that which is described in Mr. Ray, Hot and
Aromatic. This is used for Virga Aurea amongst us.

Lark-Spur is Sweet, and a little Acrid. Consolida Regalis.
The Seeds are in Cods, and taste of a Pea- Taste; and may be something like
Columbine, in Virtue.

Contryerva: The Roots have a very Contrayerva.
Acrid, and Bitterish Taste; and smell like Figg-Leaves. It is Alexipharmack
and Sudorifick. The Bitterness is very obscure. Dioscorides mentions the Smell.

Coriander-Seed is Sweet, Hot, Aromatic, Coriandri Semen.
and Carminative. The Odor of the Plant is like the Cimices, Fetid: Mr. Ray.
From the Foetor it is esteemed Malignant, and is corrected by Vinegars.

Buckshorn-Plantane: I tasted it in the Coronopus
Garden at Chelsey, Watrish and Rough, like Plantane.

Jesuits-Bark: Besides a Woody and fusty Cortex Peruvianus.
Taste, it has a Laurel, Bitter, and Styptick Taste, without any sensible
Acrimony. The Taste is very discernible in the Infusion; and it resembles a
Bitter Almond, especially its Peel, and the Bark of that Tree. All other Trees
of a Laurel-Taste, cannot but answer its Virtue; and are Antifebrifick by their
Bitterness, preserving the mixture of the Blood from Putrefactive
Fermentations; which are also considerably checked by the Astringency; which
also causes a separation of those parts that are loose from the mixture of the
Blood, and passes them off by Urine.

Ale-Cost is Sweet, Bitterish, Hot, and Costus dulcis and amara.
Aromatic, and smells like Orris; and is very Acrid, especially the Bitter.

Garden Crocus, Yellow and Purple, have Crocus Hortensis purpureus, and luteus.
Cubebae.
Sweet, Slimy Roots, like Saffron.

Cubebs are very Hot, Acrid, Aromatic, Cordial and Carminative.

Wild-Cucumber is very Bitter, Slimy, Cucumis Asininus.
and Acrid, by which it purges violently. The Leaves and Roots are of the
weakest Virtue. The Juice lasts long, and is Inflammable; by which it is
Resinous.

Ordinary-Cucumber: The Leaves, Flowers, Cucumis Hortensis.
Fruit, and Seeds, are Watrish, Slimy, and Cooling; which is used in Emulsions.

Gourds are Watrish in the Leaves, Slimy Cucurbita.
in the Seeds, and Sweet in the Pulp and Fruit; all Cooling.

Cummin-Seed is Sweet, Bitterish, Aromatic, Cuminum.
and Acrid; with an Aromatic, unpleasant Smell. A good Carminative, Pectoral,
Diuretic and Vterine.

Turmerick is nauseously Bitter and Curcuma.
Acrid, like Ginger; good in the Jaundice, as an opening Hepatick. It colors
Yellow.

Galingal long and round, or sweet Cyprus, Cyperus longus and rotundus.
have a Bitter, Aromatic Taste, like Galanga; and therefore are good for the
Stomach and Nerves: Both of them are Aromatic, like Cedar.

Cypress has an Astringent Bitterish Cypressus.
Taste; and Turpentine Smell in the Leaves and Nutts; by which it is Vulnerary.

D.
DIttany is of an Hot, Biting, Bitterish, Dictamnus Creticus.
and Aromatic Taste; and a strong quick Scent, like Pennyroyal; but stronger,
and therefore is of an opening Cephalic Virtue, like Pennyroyal; and is to be
referred, with Penny- Royal, to the Cephalick-Class of Bitterish
Aromatick-Acrids. It is chiefly used to force Labor, it abounding with
Volatile Oil and Salt.

Tarragon is Sweet, Hot, and Acrid; and Dracunculus Hortensis.
smells like Fennil, and is of the same Class and Virtue; and is eaten in
Sallats.

Dragons: The Leaves taste at first Dracontium.
Sweet; after a while very Acrid, like Aron; therefore it may be accounted
good, as Volatile Salts, in Infectious Distempers. It is most used in distilled
Water. It is like Aron in its Virtues, being Diuretic, Pectoral,
Alexipharmack, and Antiscorbutick; and has Spots in the Leaves; but is more
Acrid than Aron, coming nearer to Ranunculus in its burning Heat. Outwardly it
is good for Fistula's. Its Sharpness is corrected by Vinegar. Galen says, That
it is Bitter and Astringent; and prescribes it for Ulcers.

E.
Juyce-of Wild Cucumber is Elaterium.
extremely Bitter, and burns easily: It purges violently.

Dodder of Thyme tastes Bitterish and Aromatic, Epithymum.
like Thyme; and has the same Virtue.

Garden-Rocket is very Acrid and Bitterish, Eruca Sativa.
and of a Strong, Acrid, Pungent Smell, and a little unpleasant. It is a Cress
in Taste and Virtue, and is useful in Dropsies, and the Scurvy.

F.
FEnnil-Giant: The Plant tastes Bitter, Ferula.
like Gum-Ammoniack, smells a little Fetid, and has the same Virtue. The Sweet
Taste is not very evident in the Fetid Vmbels.

Fennil-Giant is an Vterine by the Foetor, and by the Bitter-Acrimony.

The Fig Tree: The Leaves are of a Ficus. burning hot Taste. The Ashes of the
Fig Tree, of Spurge, and of Ash, are more Caustic than ordinary Ashes of
Plants; therefore there is a great difference in the Lixiviums of Plants, and
in their Salts. It purges by its Caustic Quality. Figgs are Sweet and
Luscious: They are used in the Smallpox, and Diseases of the Lungs; and
outwardly in Pultesses, for their Pulpy sweet Mucilage. The Tree being so
Acrid, the Fruit probably partakes of it; whereby it becomes Diaphoretick,
Diuretic, and Purgative.

French-Marigold is of a strong, heady, Flos Africanus.
Marigold-Smell; and tastes Bitterish, Slimy, Acrid, and stronger than ordinary
Marigolds.

The Sun-Flower smells like a Marigold, Flos Solis.
tastes Bitterish and Acrid, and feels clammy, like Marigolds; and out of the
Stalk and Flowers, a Resin sweats. In Taste, Color, and Smell, it is like
Turpentine; Mr. Ray.

Adonis-Flower tastes very Acrid, as an Flos Adonidis.
Anemone or Ranunculus; and is called Adonis-Flower, or Pheasant's-Eye,

Fennil: The Leaves, Seeds, and Roots Foeniculum.
are of a Sweet, Acrid, Aromatic Taste, and of a strong Aromatic Smell. The
Plant is Diuretic, Pectoral, Carminative, and good for the Eyes inwardly and
outwardly; as also for discussing of Milky Tumors. The Fennil-Taste being most
known of this kind, I call the whole Class by that Name.

Fenugraec: The Seeds are Mucilaginous, Foenum Graecum.
Bitter, and of a Pea-Taste: It smells strong, oily, and loathsome. It mollifies
Scirrhosities, and lenifies and discusses the Inflammations of the Eyes. An Oil
may be pressed out of the Seed, and a Mucilage drawn by Decoction. It is Fetid,
and the Meal of the Seed is used in Cataplasms.

Bastard-Dittany has a Bitterish and very Fraxinella.
Acrid Taste, and strong Aromatic Smell, like Rue.

G.
GAlangale is Biting and Hot, like Galanga major.
Ginger: It is a good Aromatic, Carminative, and Cordial.

Galbanum: The Plant tastes Bitter, like Galbanum.
Gum-Galbanum; smells a little Fetid, and has the same Virtue.

Goats-Rue is Mucilaginous, Bitterish, and Galega.
a little Hot, and tastes of a Pea-Taste, with an oily strong Smell. It is
useful outwardly against Gangreens, and foul Ulcers. It seems to be an Anodyne.
It is improperly used inwardly for Infectious Distempers, being very nauseous
to the Stomach, and by its Taste a Purgative.

Gauls are very Rough and Bitterish: Gallae.
They are given in Drink to stop Blood, and all Fluxes. Outwardly they are good
in Ulcers and Tetters, and are strong Repellers and Driers.

Spanish-Broom has the Taste of Ordinary Genista Hispanica.
Broom: Though the Flowers smell well, yet it is of the Bitterish Pea-Class.

Gentian-Root is very Bitter; it is good Gentiana.
infused in Wine, or in Powder, for the Stomach, and in Obstructions of the
Liver, and Intermitting Fevers, to preserve the Mixture of the Blood, and to
hinder Putrefaction. It is a good Vterine. The Root is also Slimy, and a little
Acrid. It may belong to Aristolochia; and therefore Laxative. By the
Bitter-Acrid, it is Alexipharmack, and good in the Biting of a Mad Dog.

Gentianella: The Leaves are Bitter and Gentianella.
Mucilaginous; by which Taste, and the Flower, it seems to belong to the
Aristolochiae.

Tree-Cranes-bill has a Fragrant Turpentine-Smell, Geranium Arborescens.
like other Cranes-bills.

Spanish-Cudweed is of a Bitterish Astringent Gnaphalium Hispanicum.
Taste, like the Ordinary Gnaphaliums: It smells strong, somewhat like Oil of
Amber; therefore Cephalic, and a good Vulnerary.

The Pomegranate-Tree: The Bark is Granata Malus.
rough-tasted, hot like Orange-Peel, and biting. The Pomegranate-Leaves taste
Rough, and a little Aromatic, with a fusty Savor, resembling Hounds-Tongue:
When rubbed, the Leaves smell Fusty, like Catts-Piss.

Hedge-Hyssop tastes Sweet, Bitterish, Gratiola.
Sub-acrid, and Slimy; and is very Purgative.

Goosberries: The Bark is very Rough, Grossularia.
Bitterish, and Astringent: The Berries are Sweetish and Acid, and the Leaves
Acid and Rough.

Guajacum-Wood: The Bark is Bitter Guajacum.
and Astringent. It is used in Sweating Decoctions for the Pox. Authors say, It
has an Acrimony, by which it produces these Effects; which is probable, because
it is Resinous, and like Ash-Tree in Leaves and Virtue. If the Gum be extracted
by Spirit of Wine, the Wood yields only an Acid Spirit in Distillation.

H.
SPanish Hony-Suckle tastes Rough, of Hedysorum Clypeatum flore Purpureo.
an Oily Pea-Taste. It is a Leguminous Plant.

White-Hellebore: The Root is very Helleborus Albus.
Bitter and Acrid; by which it is Sternutatory, and vomits violently, and
causes a Strangulation, and great Flux of Spittle and Convulsions, and Vomiting
of Blood. It is best given on a full Stomach, to defend the Membranes. It is
given to Mad Men by Quacks, for a strong Vomit. This is bitterer than Black
Hellebore; and the Malignity is best corrected by Vinegar. Both Hellebores are
used outwardly for the Itch, Scald-Heads, and Fistula's.

Noble-Liver-wort: The Leaves are Hepatica Nobilis.
Rough, and a little Sweet. It is rather an Astringent, than an opening
Medicine. It is useful, as a Vulnerary; and may be put into the Pea-Class,
being Sweetish and Rough, like some Trefoils.

Doria's Wound-wort tastes Bitterish, Astringent, Herba Doria.
Terebinthinate, and Aromatic, like Solidago Saracenica; and therefore is
Vulnerary and Diuretic.

Rupture-wort is Bitterish and Astringent, Herniaria.
like Polygonum; and is a Vulnerary in Ruptures. It has some Acrid, by which it
is Diuretic; Mr. Parkinson.

Hermodactyls: The Roots are without Hermodactylus.
Smell, of a mealy Taste, and a little Hot. They purge Phlegm in Diet-Drinks,
and compounded Powders. They are Bulbous Roots; which are generally Mealy and
Mucilaginous, and therefore very Nauseous. It is described to be Milky, and to
be the Syrian Colchicum. That there is an Acrimony in the Milk, it is probable;
for some sort of Colchicums are venenate, and strangulatory: And I suppose this
to have some Heat or Acrimony, like Orris-Root; by which it purges.

Dames-Violets: Their Taste is like Rocket, Hesperis Pannonica.
and the Virtue the same.

Clary: The Leaves are Watrish, and a Horminum Sclaraea dictum.
little Bitter and Hot. The Flowers are also a little Glutinous and Bitterish;
but have a strong, piercing, Aromatic Scent; whose Parts are so thin, and
fine, that they scarce sensibly affect the Taste, unless it be with a Smatch,
like Frankincense. The Seed is slimy. Clary is a very good Cephalic and
Vterine in Fits of the Mother. It is infused in Wine, for Distempers of the
Eyes and Head. It is a Vulnerary, and good for Weakness in the Back.

Hyssop is Bitterish, Aromatic, and Acrid Hyssopus.
in Taste: It is, by the Taste and Smell, of the Cephalick-Class; but is
chiefly used as a Cleansing and Opening Pectoral. It is Diuretic, as most
Pectorals be, evacuating the Lympha.

I.
Jalap taste clammy Jalapium.
in the Teeth. The Resin smells Sub-acid. It purges Water and Phlegm. Vide the
Class of Purgers. This Resin is best ground with Oil, to make it dissolve
better in the Body, and stick less to the Gutts.

Jalap irritates the Throat and Mouth; Dr. Grew.

Jasmine: The White Flowers are Bitter, Jasminum vulgar.
and very Acrid; the Green Leaves are the same, but less Bitter and Hot. The
Flowers have a great Fragrancy. It is of the Pea-Class, by the Taste of the
Root; and the Seeds are said to be like a Lupin.

Indian-Jasmine: The Leaves have a Jasminum Indicum.
Laurel-Taste; but the Yellow Flowers smell very Sweet.

Sciatica-Cresses has a pungent Taste, Iberis.
like Cresses; and is of the same Virtue.

Master-wort is Bitterish, and extremely Imperatoria.
Acrid and hot in Taste. It smells somewhat like Angelica. It is Alexipharmack,
Carminative, Cephalic, and a good Masticatory.

Crown-Imperial: The Leaves have a Imperialis Corona.
little sweetish Taste: It smells like a Fox; and may be referred to the
Lily-kind. It may be put into Nervine Ointments.

Indigo is prepared out of a Plant, which Indigo.
is of the Leguminous kind; and tastes Bitterish, of a Pea-Taste; by which it
is Diuretic, as Dr. Lister has experienced it.

Orris: The fresh Root tastes Sweet, Iris.
Bitterish, and Burning; and smells most Fragrant, when dry; but fresh, like
Liquorish. Powdered, it is Hot, Aromatic, and Bitterish. The Juice has a very
hot Acrimony; half an Ounce is given to purge in the Dropsy. The Powder of the
Root is Pectoral, and Cephalic. Outwardly it is used for the Scaling of Bones.

The Roots of Orris give a Fragrancy to Beer; and the fresh Roots are boiled in
Broth for the Dropsy. Chamaedrys has the same Taste.

Jujubs have a luscious sweet Taste, like Jujubae.
Raisins; and are Pectoral by their sweet Mucilage.

L.
LEttuce: The Root is Milky, Bitter, Lactuca.
and Acrid; the Leaves are Watery, Bitterish, and Mucilaginous. The Root smells
something like Poppies. The whole Plant is Anodyne externally in Inflammations.
The Seeds are good in Spitting of Blood, and Sharpness of Urine. The distilled
Water cools much; it loosens the Belly by the bitter Slime.

Job's -Tears tastes Sweetish, like Grass: Lacryma Jobi.
The Stony-Seeds are Diuretic, like Gromwell-Seeds, by their Stoniness.

Lesser-Burdock tastes Bitter, Acrid, and Lappa minor.
Aromatic, like Elecampane; and is of the same Virtue, Hepatick, Diuretic,
Pectoral, and Sudorifick, by the Bitter-Acrimony.

Laser-wort smells Aromatic, tastes Laserpitium.
Sweet, Acrid, and Aromatic; and has the Virtue of the Fennil-Class.

The Bay Tree: The Berries are very Laurus.
Bitter and Acrid, and of an hot Aromatic Smell and Taste. The Leaves are of
the same; but Milder, Bitterish, and Aromatic. The Leaves are used in Baths,
for Distempers of the Nerves, and in hot Ointments. The Berries are
Carminative, Hepatick, Diuretic, and Vterine. The Bark of the Root is
Bitterish, Astringent, and lesser Acrid; but very Rough. The Bay Tree may be
placed amongst the Aromatick-Turpentines.

The Laurel-Tree: The Bark of the Laurus Cerasus.
Root tastes very Bitter and Astringent, like Bitter-Almonds. The Leaves have
the same Taste. I boiled the Leaves of Laurel, and a great piece of the Root in
Pottage; but it neither purged nor vomited my Dog. A little Heat may be
perceived in the Leaves. The Leaves, when rubbed, smell like a Peach-Kernel.
There are many Trees of this Taste. The Leaves of the Triumphant -Laurel are
Rough, Bitterish, and of a Laurel-Taste and Smell. Laurel is not used in
Physic; but the Leaves seem proper for Wound-Oyntments, by their
Bitter-Astringency.

Lavander tastes very Hot, Bitterish, and Lavandula.
Aromatic in the Flowers and Leaves. The Spirit is most used as a Cephalic;
and the whole Plant outwardly in Baths, for Paralytick Cases. The Seed is used
in Difficulty of Labor.

The Mastich-Tree Wood rubbed, smells Lentiscus.
of Mastich, and tastes Dry and Woody. The Decoction is used in Catarrhs, as
Mastich. It is reputed to be very Astringent, and good in all Fluxes. There is
a Gumminess in Mastich, besides the Resinous Turpentine-Smell.

Snow-Flower: The Root is Bitter, Acrid, Leucoium Bulbosum Praecox minus.
and Slimy; and of an Elder-Smell, in the Leaves.

The Garden-Stock Gilliflower is Bitterish, Leucoium Sativum.
Acrid, and Mucilaginous; and belongs to the Cress-Tastes. It Is a good
Diuretic and Antiscorbutick.

Lovage tastes Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, Levisticum
and Aromatic; especially in the Smell, it is a very strong Aromatic. It is
Diuretic, Pectoral, and Carminative; outwardly in Baths, as an Vterine;
inwardly an Opener of all Obstructions; and used for Cramps, and expelling the
Secundines.

Herb-Frankincense has a Sweet, Bitterish, Libanotis.
Acrid Taste, and Aromatic Smell, as other Vmbells; and has the same Virtue.

Blue-Pipe is very Bitter and Acrid, and Lilac.
of an Aromatic Smell; belonging to the Jasmins, and differing in Taste from
the Syringa.

Common White-Lilies: The Flowers Lilium Commune.
smell Sweet, but Fainty. The Flowers, Roots, and Green Leaves are Mucilaginous
and Bitterish. The Flowers are Anodyne and Mollifying, by the Mucilage; and by
the strong Smell, discussing. The Roots are used in Pultesses, for ripening
Apostems by the Mucilage, and by the strong drawing. It has some strong hot
Parts, discernible in the Smell of the Flowers.

The Limon-Tree: The Leaves are Bitterish, Limonia Malus.
Aromatic, and Acrid, like the Peel. As pleasant a Cordial-Water may be
distilled from them, as from the Peels, with Wine.

Lupines have a Sweet-bitter Taste, like Lupinus.
Pease. The Meal is used in Pultesses and Cataplasms, for the Worms; and in a
Pessary, mixed with Honey and Myrrh. Outwardly by their Bitterness they are
Cosmetick, cure Ulcers and Scabs, and discuss Scrophulous Tumors.

Rose-Campions are very Rough, Astringent, Lychnis Coronaria.
and Vulnerary in the Leaves; the Root is Bitterish, Pungent, and a little
Sweet; by which it may be referred to the Class of the Caryophylli. The Seed is
very Acrid, as Galen observed.

Catch-Fly is of a crude Taste and Smell, Lychnis Viscosa.
Bitterish and Slimy.

M.
MAce is of an Aromatic Smell, Macis.
and of a Bitterish, Aromatic, and Hot Taste; yielding an Oil very Stomachick
and Cordial. It is like Nutmeg, but not so strong.

Marjoram is Bitterish, Hot, and of an Majorana.
Aromatic Taste and Smell. Its Chemical Oil is Stomachick and Cephalic. The
Juice, with the Juice of Primrose-Roots, put into the Nose with a Thimble,
exceedingly evacuates from the Nose and Throat, in the King's Evil, and other
Distempers of the Head.

Holy-Hock: The Flowers are Biting, Malva Arborea.
Mucilaginous, and of a stronger Virtue than Mallows; fit only for outward
Mollifying and Discussing.

The Apple Tree: The Bark is Bitter-Sweet Malus.
and Astringent. The Codling-Bark is more Sweet than Bitter.

Citron has a fragrant and grateful Acidity Malus Citria.
in the Fruit, which is Cooling in Fevers. The Peel is Bitterish, Hot, and
Aromatic; and so are the Leaves. The Syrup of Citron is most used; and the
Spirit distilled with Sack, from the Peel.

Quince-Tree: The Bark and Leaves are Malus Cotonea.
moderately Astringent; the Quince Rough and Acid. It is good, as an
Astringent; and may be used, instead of the Mastich-Tree, for the Astringency.
The Fruit has an Aromatic Astringency, for the Stomach. A Quiddany is made of
the Fruit; and a Wine as pleasant as Canary, of the Juice.

Apricock-Tree: The Bark is Rough Malus Armeniaca.
and Bitter, the Leaves are Rough and Sourish, and the Fruit somewhat Aromatic.

Peach-Tree: The Bark is very Rough Malus Persica.
and Bitter, the Green Leaves are Bitter and Slimy, with Astringency, and the
Flowers Bitter and Slimy. The Syrup of them is used for the Worms; and so are
the Green Leaves, boiled in Milk. Peach is of a Laurel-Bitter, like the Bitter
-Almond-Tree; and has a Gum in it. The Fruit tastes Watrish, Slimy, and
Grateful.

Mastich-Thyme flies up, with an Aromatic Marum Syriacum.
Pungency, into the Nose, like Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack. The Taste is Bitterish,
and very Acrid; and therefore an excellent Cephalic. By the Oily Volatile
Salt, it is a good Sternutatory.

Feaver-few is very Bitter, Biting, and Matricaria
of a strong Aromatic Smell. It is outwardly used in Baths for the Womb, and
for Pessaries. It smells like Camphore; and the distilled Water is used for
Freckles, and Hysterical Women. The Juice is used for the Shingles, and Agues;
and is boiled in Posset Drink, to promote Sweating; and in Pultesses, to hard
Breasts. By its Bitterness, it is Emmenogogue; and by its Acrimony, and being
Aromatic, it is Diuretic and Cephalic; as well as, by its strong Smell,
Hysteric.

Mechoacan is Gummy and Clammy in Mechoacanna.
the Teeth, like Jalap; but of no considerable Taste. The Root looks like
Bryony; but is not Bitter. It purges Phlegm and Water, as Jalap does, by the
latent Acrimony of the Resin, and the clammy Gumminess. The fresh Stalk cut,
yields a Milk; and the Root, a Resin. Margravius.

American Fennil-Flower: I tasted the Melanthium Americanum Pimpinellae folio.
Liquor in the Flower, which had the exact Taste of Honey. This Liquor sweats
from the proper Vessels of the Plant, and is its proper Oily Juice: And from
such Juyces, Bees gather Honey.

Melon: The Seeds are Cool and Mucilaginous; Melo.
the Pulp, Slimy, and somewhat Aromatic, like Musk in Musk-Melons; and of a
sweet Taste. This Crude Nourishment is good for Hectical Bloods, which cannot
bear Acids. These Pulpy Fruits are apt to putrefie in the Stomach, and to
produce a Cholera: An Emulsion of the Seeds is safer in Fevers, Coughs,
Sharpness of Urine, and Hecticks, by the Crude Sliminess and Oyliness tempering
Acrid Salis.

Balm is Bitterish, Acrid, and of an Aromatic Melissa.
Taste and Smell, like Citron: It is therefore Cordial in Spirit, Syrup, Wine,
distilled Water, and Conserve. Drunk like Thea, it is good for Melancholy.

Spear-Mint is Bitterish, Acrid, Aromatic, Mentha Spicata.
Astringent, and a good Stomachick in Juice, Spirit, distilled Water, Wine, and
Conserve. The Hart-Mint smells most Cordial, and tastes most Aromatic; and
yields a pleasant Water. The Oil is extracted in Distillation of the Simple
Water. The Astringency is useful to strengthen the Stomach, and stop
Loosenesses, the Whites, and Vomiting. The Acrid-Aromatick outwardly discusses
coagulate Milk, and inwardly is Cordial.

Garden-Mercury is of a Crude Juice, like Mercurialis.
Blites; by which it is Cooling and Emollient.

Medlar-Tree: The Leaves and Bark Mespilus.
are Astringent and Bitterish: The Fruit is Acid and Astringent, and good in
all Fluxes.

Spignal: The Roots are Bitter, Sweet, Meum Athamanticum.
and Aromatic, with a Mithridate-Flavor, like Petasitis. It is used as an
Alexipharmack, Diuretic, and Hysteric. It Is like Dill in Virtue, Carminative
and Pectoral.

Mezereon-Tree: The Leaves and Bark Mezereon.
are very Hot and Burning; and therefore Purgative. The Flowers have a sweet
Lily-Smell, but the Bark an Elder-Smell. The Heat lasts long in the Mouth.

Marvel of Peru is of a Solanum-Smell Mirabilis Peruviana.
and Virtue. The Root purges as strongly as Jalap; but differs from it, by the
Opiate Faculty. The Root tastes Slimy, Acrid, and Bitterish.

Moly smells strong, and tastes like Garlic; Moly.
and therefore has the same Virtue.

Mulberry-Tree: The Bark is Bitterish, Morus.
Astringent, and Hot; the Leaves Mucilaginous and Bitterish. Mulberries smell
Strong, and taste Sweet, Acid, and Slimy; and are therefore good for Sore
Mouths in Syrup. The Bark of the Root is accounted Purgative. Ripe Mulberries
make a good Wine.

Myrobalanes are Sweet, Bitterish, Styptick, Myrobalani.
and Slimy; by which they purge Choler, as Bitter-Styptick Slimes do.

Myrtle-Tree: The Leaves are Bitterish, Myrtus.
Rough, Aromatic, and Acrid; and of a strong Fragrant Smell. It is Stomachick,
Cordial, and Diuretic; and outwardly Vulnerary. The Astringent Oil is made by
infusion. The Flowers have the same Smell and Taste.

N.
HElmet-flower, or Monks-Hood tastes Napellus.
very Acrid, and burns the Mouth. It is accounted a Poison, causing Straitness
of Breath, Pain at the Stomach, Loss of Sight, with Giddiness, and a Delirium.
I gave an handful of Leaves and Roots boiled to my Dog, which made no sensible
Alteration in him. This is an Aconite; and has Black Roots.

Indian-Cresses: The Leaves are very Nasturtium Indicum.
Biting, like Mustard Seed, and Slimy; and so are the Flowers; which, eaten
with Meat, are Antiscorbutick. The Seeds are pickled, like Capers. An
Antiscorbutick Oil may be made by Infusion of the whole Plant in Oil, for
Scald-Heads, and Scorbutic Pains.

Tobacco: The Leaves are Biting, Acrid, Nicotiana.
Bitter, and Mucilaginous; by which it vomits and purges violently. It cleanses
Ulcers, and heals Wounds and Burns, discusses Tumors, and allays Pains, by the
Solanum-Smell, which I perceived about the Flowers: But it produces Giddiness,
by its Acrimony; by which it causes Sneezing in Powder, and evacuates a Lympha
from the Glandules of the Mouth, if chewed. It Is useful to Hydropical Persons.
An Ointment is made of it. The Infusion of the dry Leaves in Water, cures
Tetters.

Fennil-Flower tastes Sweet and Hot, like Nigella Romana.
Fennil, but of no Aromatic Smell. We call it Ruffling Dick. By the Taste it
is Diuretic.

Nutmeg is of a Fragrant, Oily, Turpentine-Smell; Nux Moschata.
and yields Oil by Expression and Distillation. It has a Biting, Aromatic,
Bitterish Taste; and is Diuretic, Cephalic, and Cordial.

O.
ROse-Bay is of a crude Smell, and Oleander.
very Rough and Bitter, like Laurel. I cannot perceive any Lethiferous Quality
in it.

Rice yields a Nutritive, Slimy, and Sweet Oriza.
Meal. It is used in Diet; and is something Astringent in Fluxes, by the Meal.

P.
CHRIST's -Thorn is like Hawthorn Paliurus.
in Taste, in the Diuretic Virtue of the Berries, and in the Astringency of
the Bark.

The Garden-Poppies Milk is very Bitter Papaver.
and Acrid, and of an Offensive, Fetid, and Heavy Smell; from which Opium is
made. I believe a Tincture of the Poppy-Roots may be useful: And an Oil may be
Expressed from the Seeds.

Pompions are of a Mellowy Smell, and Pepo.
of a Watery, Slimy Taste; which is also the taste of the Seed and Leaves. They
cool Inflammations. A Water may be distilled from them. The Flesh of the Fruit
is Sweet, of a Cool, Crude, and Waterish Nourishment. The Seeds are Diuretic
by the Oylyness.

Thorow-Wax tastes Terebinthinate, Perfoliata.
Rough and Bitterish, feels Clammy, if rubbed; and is of a low Terebinthinate
Smell. The Root tastes Terebinthinate, Bitterish, and Astringent. It is an
excellent Vulnerary; and is most used in Ruptures.

Parsley is Sweet, Hot, Pungent, Bitterish, Petroselinum.
and Aromatic. The Seeds and Leaves have the same Taste. The distilled Water
and Seeds are good for Wind; and are Carminative, Diuretic, and Pectoral.

Macedonian-Parsley: The Seeds are Bitterish, Petroselinum Macedonicum.
Sweet, and Acrid; and of a Parsley-Taste and Virtue.

Sow-Fennil is Pectoral by its Sweetness; Peucedanum.
but by the Acrimony, Bitterness, and Foetor, very Cleansing; and by the same,
it is Hepatick, Vterine, Diuretic, and Nervine. A Conserve is made of the
Roots. Sow-Fennil is outwardly a good Cleanser and Discusser in Ulcers and
Tumors.

Kidney-Beans have a sweet Pea-Taste; Phaseolus.
and are for Nourishment chiefly.

Mock-Privet and Alaternus are of a Laurel-Taste Phlliryea.
and Virtue.

The Pine Tree: The Leaves are of a Pinus.
Terebinthinate-Smell and taste Bitterish, Rough, and Sub-acid. The
Pine-Kernels taste Acid and Terebinthinate; the Nuts are very much Astringent
in Taste, and Terebinthinate in Smell: They are excellent in Spittings of Blood
in Powder, and boiled in Drink.

Pepper is very Acrid, Aromatic, Hot, Piper.
Burning, and Bitterish. A Tincture with Spirit of Wine, heats the Stomach, and
is Vterine. If Fourteen Corns be given before the Quartane Ague, they throw off
the Fits sometimes. It has a very hot Oil in it, and Volatile Salt, by the
Pungency.

Pistache-Kernels are Bitterish, and of Pistacia.
an Aromatic, Turpentine-Taste and Smell: They are good Pectorals and
Diuretics.

The Wing'd-Pea has a Bitterish Pea-Taste. Pisum.


The Sensitive-Plant tastes only Sweet Planta Sensitiva, sive Herba viva
and Rough; so that the Motion of it depends on the Fibrous Contexture of the
Plant, and not on any Spirituous Particles. It contracts it self at any Touch,
and at Sunset.

The Humble-Plant tastes Mucilaginous Planta Humilis.
and Sweet: I tasted It and the Former at the latter End of the Year: They both
are of the Pea-Class; and are said to be Siliquose.

The Plane-Tree: The Leaves and Bark Platanus.
are very Rough, like a Maple, and Bitterish.

Poeony: The Green Leaves are Bitterish Poeonia Mas.
and Astringent: The Fresh Roots are Sweetish, Hot, and Unpleasant in Taste,
and smell like Green Wallnut-Peels; the Dried are Bitterish, with great
Astringency, and somewhat Fetid: By which the Plant is useful in Convulsions,
in Syrup of the Flowers, in which the Foetor is most, and in distilled Water of
them. The Seeds are Bitter and Rough, and of an hot Taste, of some Fetid thin
Parts. The hard Husks may do some good to Acids in Convulsions, as Absorbers. I
cannot think Poeony-Root fit for After-Pains, though it is commended by
Dioscorides, and some Practisers: He makes it Diuretic and Hepatick. An
Emulsion may be made of Poeony-Seeds, for Children.

Mountain-Poley tastes Bitterish and Subacrid; Polium montanum
and smells Aromatic. It is put amongst the Anti-pestilential Antidotes. It
opens all Obstructions of the Spleen, Womb, and Liver; and is chiefly an
Hepatick, as Wormwood. Outwardly it is fit for Ulcers. It is most properly put
into the Class of the Bitter-Sub-acrid -Aromaticks, and not amongst the
Cephalicks.

Love-Apple is of a strong heady Smell; Pomum Amoris.
and a little Grateful, much like French-Marigolds. It was very offensive to my
Head; and, by the Fruit, seems a Solanum. I did not taste it.

Leeks: The Taste and Smell are strong Porrum.
and rank, like Garlic, abounding with a Volatile Salt. The Pottage of Leeks
is good against the Scurvy, and the Quartane-Ague in the Declination of it.
They discuss the Piles, being fried with Butter, or boiled; and so does the
Fume of Garlic, laid upon the Coals. It is a strong Diuretic and Thoracick;
but troubles the Head.

Purslain is Watery and Mucilaginous, Portulaca.
and of a crude Smell. It is good against Spitting of Blood, in Syrup and
distilled Waters, and for Hecticks. It is much used for both.

The Plumb-Tree: The Bark is very Prunus.
Rough, Astringent, and Bitterish. It has a Gum, which is Watrish.

Fleawort: The Seeds are Mucilaginous, Psyllium.
and they are used as such to cool Inflammations. The Plant is said to be
Nauseous, Bitter, and Offensive to the Stomach. It is Purgative and Venomous.
It feels Viscid.

Pellitory of Spain is of a burning Acrid Pyrethrum
Taste; by which it is a good Masticatory: And if it be infused in Oil, it is
very good for Paralytick Lameness and Coldness.

Q.
( Belonging to the Spontaneous Plants.)
Oak Leaves are Crude, Subacid, Quercus.
and Rough: The Bark is very Rough, with little or no Bitterness: The Shells of
the Acorn have the same Roughness: The Kernels of Acorns are Sweet and Rough:
The Acorn-Cups and Bark are good in all Fluxes. Out of the Leaves is distilled
a cooling Water; and out of the Bark is made a Decoction for Vulnerary Baths in
the Stone, and Mouth-Waters. The Bark is boiled in Ale for the Strangury, with
Bloody Water.

Beach, Oak, and Maple, differ little in Taste and Virtue.

R.
RAdix Rhodia: The Leaves of this Radix Rhodia.
Plant are Slimy; and the Stalk is Bitterish and Rough: It resemsembles Orpin.

Monks-Rhubarb: The Roots are Mucilaginous, Rhabarbarum Monachorum.
and Bitter; and the outward Rind is a little Astringent. It is most used in
Diet-Drink for a Cholagogue in the Scurvy; but very gentle.

True Rhubard has a Dock-Taste, is Rhabarbarum.
Bitter and Astringent, with a very little Gumminess, or Resin; in which is a
little Acrimony, which is easily lost by any Heat. It purges Choler gently by
the Bitterness, and Acrid Gumminess, as Docks do. The Leaves are Acerb, as
Docks be. The Root colors the Spittle Yellow, and resembles Choler somewhat in
Taste, as well as Color.

Lignum Rhodium is of an Hot, Bitterish, Lignum Rhodium.
Sub-astringent, Aromatic Taste; and smells like a Rose.

Curriers Sumach is very Rough and Rhus.
Bitterish; on which the Virtue depends in stopping Fluxes.

The Currain-Tree: The Bark is very Ribes.
Astringent, and a little Bitter. The Fruit is very Acid. It is made into
Quiddany, and not a Syrup. A Tart Wine is made of it; which is boiled first, to
take away the Windiness. The Leaves are Rough and Sour.

The Black Currain is like the other; Ribes fructu nigro.
but is of a strong, stinking, and nauseous Smell.

The Red-Rose-Tree: The Flowers are Rosa Rubra.
Bitterish and Astringent, without any considerable Mucilage, and smell
Fragrant. They stop Fluxes, and yield a Cordial Water and Spirit.

Damask-Rose-Tree: The Flowers taste Rosa Damascena.
Mucilaginous, Bitter, and Astringent; and therefore are Purgative. The
Astringency is least in these Flowers. A Syrup is made of them to purge: An
handful of the Flowers boiled in Whey, does the same. The White-Rose has the
same Virtue: Ten Ounces of the distilled Water thereof, purges.

Roses smell either like Musk or Cinnamon; or Fainty, like Lilies; or very
Grateful and Fragrant; or are inodorous; or Fetid, as the Yellow Rose. The
strong Smell of Roses, shows an Acrimony in them; which helps the bitter
Mucilage in purging. Red Roses have the same Acrimony; yet for want of
Mucilage, and a greater degree of Bitter, the Astringency prevails. From whence
it is evident, how much the Virtue of Herbs depends on diverse different
Principles of Plants; and the absence of one, or a difference in Degree, alters
the Virtue considerably; and therefore all Compositions alter the Nature of the
Simples much.

Rosemary: The Green Leaves and Flowers Rosmarinus.
are Bitterish, Acrid, and Aromatic in Taste and Smell. Rosemary was called
Libanotis, from the Smell like Thus: It is therefore an excellent Cephalic in
Palsies and Apoplexies, used in Conserve of the Flowers, Spirit, or Queen of
Hungary's Water; or the distilled Oil, or Decoction of the Wood.

Garden-Rue is Bitter, Acrid, and Hot, Ruta.
and of a strong rank Smell; by which it is accounted an Hysteric Medicine. A
Volatile Salt and Oil may be distilled out of it in Sand; and by that it is
Alexipharmack in Plague-Waters, infused in Vinegar, and eaten with Butter. It
is boiled in Milk for the Worms, and used to the Belly in Oil. The Conserve of
the Leaves, or Powder, is used in Convulsions. Give half a Spoonful of the
Powder for Nine Days in the Morning, in Drink; and at Night take Twenty-four
Grains of the same. Take White Henbane-Seeds Two Ounces; powder it; adding half
an Ounce of Sugar: Take in a Spoonful of Syrup of House-Leek a Scruple, for
Forty Days, at the Full and New Moon. Bathe the Feet in this following
Decoction, and wash the Temples and Forehead. Take Rue, and Roots of Henbane,
of each an Handful; boil them in Spring Water a Quarter of an Hour; then make a
Bathe. Take White Wine Two Pound, Juice of Rue, inward Bark of Elder, and the
Leaves, of each, Two Ounces; boil them in the Wine to half the Quantity, then
take Two or Three Spoonfuls in the Morning fasting. This is accounted Sir
Theodore Mayhern's Receipt; who says, It has cured many. The whole Virtue of it
lies in the Opiate Faculty, and the Rue.

Rue is Diuretic, Emmenagogue, and Cephalic; but exceeding Hot in Taste and
Smell. I have seen it blister the Lips upon chewing. It discusses Wind strongly.

S.
SAvin is of a biting Turpentine-Taste, Sabina.
Strong, Bitter, a little Mucilaginous and Astringent; and of a
Turpentine-Smell, when rubbed; but before, more Fetid: By which it is Vterine,
provoking the Menses, and driving out the Foetus, and Afterbirth. Outwardly it
is a strong Cleansing Vulnerary, and Diuretic inwardly by the
Turpentine-Smell. You may make a Cleansing Ointment of it, with Axungia Porci.

Sage is Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatic Salvia.
in Taste and Smell. It is a Cephalic in Decoction, and Conserve of the
Flowers; and used in Cephalic Waters; and a Chemical Oil drawn from it, is in
use. It provokes Urine, baked in Paste, and put into a Vessel of Beer; and
therefore is used in Dropsies; and is boiled in Posset Drink, for Sweating; and
it is used as Thea. It is Cleansing in Gargles, and in Nervine Baths and
Ointments discussing. The Aromatic Oily Turpentine of Sage, is strained
through the Pores of the Tops of it; and feels Clammy, or Glutinous.

Elder-Rose: The Flowers are Mucilaginous; Sambucus Rosea.
and smell neither considerably, nor like Elder.

Yellow-Saunders is Bitterish, Astringent, Santalum Citrinum.
and Aromatic; and of a Musky, Fragrant Odor; and therefore is Cordial,
Astringent, Aperitive, and Cephalic, by the Bitterish Aromatic Taste.

Prickly-Bindweed is of a Mealy, Dry Sarsaparilla.
Taste: The Decoction soon turns sour. Quaere, Whether there be any Acrimony
in it, by which it sweats?

Tile-Tree is Mealy and Acrid: Quaere, Whether That may not be a Substitute of
it? though no Root, that I know of, is in any Shrub, but Periclymenum-Root,
which has any considerable Acrid. Hop-Roots are like it in Virtue. Quaere,
Whether it be not Bitterish like them.

Sassaphras is a Wood of a Fennil and Sassaphras.
Aromatic Smell; and tastes Sweet, Hot, and Aromatic; and therefore is
Diureretick, Carminative, and Pectoral, like Fennil; and yields an Oil. It is
good in Sweating Decoctions, Catarrhs, and the Gout. It yields a Resin, if
extracted by Spirit of Wine, as Cinnamon does; and both will praecipitate with
Water. The Bark is the strongest.

Savory is very Biting, Hot, and Bitterish; Satureia.
and of a strong Aromatic Scent, flying strongly into the Nose. It is a
Cephalic and Diuretic. When pickled it tastes like Sampire. It is of the
Nature of Hyssop: By their great Acrimony, both of them act like Volatile Salt,
which is evidently in them.

Scammony-Bindweed: It yields a Resin, Scammonia.
like Jalap, is Milky, if wet, and is at first like Milk running out of the cut
Root, as Dioscorides says; and therefore has at first some Acrid,
Tithymal-Taste, by which it purges; though when it is kept in the Shops, it has
no Acrid Taste, but smells somewhat Acid, as Resin of Jalap does. It purges
strongly. It is thought to be a sort of Bindweed. The dried Juice of the Root
is called Scammony. The Resin, dissolved in Spirit of Wine, is put into Syrup
to purge. By the Milk and Acrimony, it may be referred to the Class of the
Tithymalus. It has no Bitterness; and for that Reason, I think it is not a
Convolvulus, though the Figure makes it so.

Chives taste of the same Acrid, as Garlic; Schaenoprassum.
and of the same rank Smell and Virtue, exciting Appetite; and therefore used
in Sauces.

Camels-Hair is Astringent and Aromatic, Schoenanthus.
smelling like a Rose.

Squills is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Acrid; Scilla.
and of a rank Smell: When fresh, if rubbed on the Skin, it will make it smart.
The Wine of Squills is best for Vomiting: But Vinegar corrects the Volatile
Salt in Squills. Oil heals their Stinging of the Hands.

Cater-Pillars, with the Leaves of Bupleurum, Scorpioides bupleurifolia.
are of a Pea-Taste and Flavor.

Vipers-Grass: The Roots, Leaves, and Scorzonera.
Flowers have an Insipid, Watrish, and Sweet Taste. It is Cooling, and fit for
Food: But where the Sudorifick, Cordial Quality lies, I cannot find. The Milk
is Sweet.

Assyrian-Plumbs are Sweetish, Slimy, Sebestens.
and Pectorals.

Tree-House-Leek tastes Watrish and Astringent, Sedum Arborescens.
like the Ordinary House-Leek.

Sena is Mucilaginous, Slimy, Bitterish, Sena.
and a little Hot or Acrid; and of a strong Herby-Smell, like New Hay. It
purges Serum gently in Decoction or Powder; but gripes by the Viscid Slime,
which may be corrected by Tartar.

Sea-Wormwood: I described That I found Seriphium.
in the Garden, under the Letter A, as I have done others. Mr. Ray found it
Wild: But I find by this Instance, that Wild Plants are stronger than those of
the Garden. Sea-Wormwood is less Astringent than the Common, and more Hot. It
has a nauseous Taste, being very Bitter and Acrid; and therefore is very
Diuretic, good for Worms, and less agreeable to the Stomach, than
Common-Wormwood.

Snake-Weed smells of Turpentine strongly, Serpentaria Virginiana.
like Valerian-Roots; and tastes Bitter and Acrid. Half a Dram of the Powder
is given before an Ague-Fit. It is Alexipharmack and Diuretic. I have given it
very successively for driving the Gout from the Stomach.

Seseli-Seed is very Bitter, Sweet, Acrid, Seseli.
and Aromatic in Taste and Smell. It is of the Fennil-Class, being Diuretic
and Pectoral in Asthma's, and Carminative.

Skirrets: The Taste of it is Sweet and Sisarum.
Aromatic, like Parsnep.

Smilax: The Leaf tastes Bitterish and Smilax.
Rough, smells Crude, and looks like an Ivy-Leaf.

Tree-Night-Shade smells strong of a Solanum-Smell, Solanum fruticosum Amomum
Plinii.
like Solanum Lignosum; and therefore is Narcotick.

Quaere, Whether the Solanum-Trees are not stronger Narcoticks, than the Herbs.

Saracen's Consound tastes Bitterish, Astringent, Solidago Saracenica
and Terebinthinate; by which it is a Vulnerary. It is Terebinthinate, and
smells a little like Angelica.

Celtick-Nard is very Bitter, Hot, Aromatic, Spica Celtica.
and Astringent: It resembles Valerian in Taste, Smell, and Virtue; and is a
Turpentine-Plant, being Diuretic.

Spikenard is very Hot, Aromatic, and Spica Indica.
a little Bitter. It is of the Virtue of the former, Diuretic and Cordial.

Spinache is Watery, Mucilaginous, and Spinachia.
Acid; and of a Crude Juice, cooling inwardly and outwardly.

Spiked-Willow of Theophrastus has a Spiraea Theophrasti.
Crude Smell; and is Bitter, Rough, and of a Crude Taste.

Stinking-Gladdon has a strong Smell, Spatula foetida.
like Roast-Beef.

Base-Horehound tastes Bitter and Acrid, Stachys.
is of a Fetid Lamium Smell, and of a Marrubium Virtue. It is Anti-hysterick,
provoking the Menses, and expelling the Afterbirth.

French-Lavander: The Flowers, in the Stoechas Arabica.
Shops, are Sub-Astringent, Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatic, like our Lavander;
and is a Cephalic. The Syrup is in the Shops, and is given in Cephalic
Diseases.

Thorn-Apple: The Smell is Strong, Unpleasant, Stramonium.
and somewhat Narcotick, or like Elder. An Ointment of the Leaves cures Scalds
and Burns; and is a good Anodyne in Cancerous Breasts. The Leaf boiled, and
drunk by mistake, caused a Phrenzy, like Narcoticks. It is a Solanum in Virtue.

The Cork-Tree is Bitterish and Astringent. Suber.


Sumach tastes Bitterish, Astringent, and Sumach.
Acrid; and yields a Milk.

Sycomore: The Bark is Bitterish and Sycomorus
Rough; the inside of the Bark is a little Slimy. It is Astringent, like Maple.

White-Pipe is of a Bitter, Sub-acrid Syringa alba.
Taste.

T.
TAmarinds are Sweet, Slimy, and Tamarindi.
Acid Plumbs; by which they loosen the Belly, correct hot Choler, as Acids, and
abate Thirst.

Tamarisk: The Bark is Bitterish and Tamariscus
Astringent; and therefore accounted a Splenetick, stopping the irregular
Fermentation of the Blood. It is good for Ulcers of the Mouth, and Pain of the
Teeth.

The Turpentine-Tree. The broad Leaves Terebinthus.
smell plainly of Turpentine, and taste Bitterish and Astringent.

Meadow-Rue: I tasted it in the Garden. Thalictrum.
The Yellow-Root is of a Sweetish, Bitter Taste; and so is the Leaf, by which
it may be Nauseous and Purgative. This and Columbine I refer to the Pea-Class,
for their Sweetness.

Meadow-Rue is not of a Rhubarb-Taste; but may purge Choler, as Fumitory does.

Candy-Tufts are Acrid, Bitter, and Slimy Thlaspi Creticum.
in Taste.

Thyme is Bitterish, Hot, Acrid, Aromatic, Thymus citratus mastichinus and
Serpillum.
Carminative, Stomachick, Cephalic, Cordial, and Uterine. It is used in
After-Pains. Thyme has diverse Aromatic Smells, in the different Species; as of
Mastich, or Citron, or Limon; or like Balm, as Serpillum.

Snail-Trefoile is of a Pea-Taste in both Trifolium Cochleatum.
the kinds which I tasted.

Sweet-Trefoile or Balsam: The Herb Trifolium odoratum.
smells Balsamy; but squeezed, smells of a Pea-Smell. The Taste is of a
Mucilaginous Pea-Taste; and very Hot or Acrid, like Melilote. The Flowers
infused in Oil, make a warm Vulnerary Balsam, discussing hard Tumors. The whole
Plant is boiled in Hoggs-Grease. The Flowery Part boiled in Posset Drink,
sweats, given after Bruises, and does not purge.

Tulip-Roots are Sweet, Mealy, Mucilaginous, Tulipa.
and of the Lily-Vertue.

Turbith is Burning and Acrid, like Tithymalus. Turpethum.
See the Specific Classes.

V.
Vine: The Leaves and Tendrils Vitis.
are Acid and Rough; they are good for hot Ulcers in the Mouth, and used boiled
in cooling Broths. The Ripe Grapes are Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy. The Stone
tastes Austere, Bitterish, and Rough. Unripe Grapes taste like the Leaves,
Acerb, Acid, and Rough. The Root of the Vine tastes Bitterish and Rough.

W.
WInters-Bark is very Pungent, Biting, Winteranus Cortex.
Aromatic, and Hot, like Cinnamon: It is good for the Stomach, and Cold
Scurvy, by the Oily and Pungent Salt.

Z.
ZEdoary is Bitter, Hot, and Aromatic, Zedoaria.
like Ginger. It is Carminative, good for the Stomach, and Alexipharmack by the
Bitter-Acrimony.

Quaere, Whether the Smell be like Camphore; as also, the Smell of
Lesser-Cardamoms? as Dr. Grew.

Ginger is very Acrid, Hot, Aromatic, Zinziber.
Bitterish, Carminative, Cordial, and Cephalic, by the Volatile Salt.

The End of the Second Part.
The Third Part. THE Tastes and Virtues OF THE Products of Vegetables, (Viz.)
Gums, Resins, Turpentines, etc.
CHAP. I. Of Watery Gums.
Watery Gums will dissolve in cold Water; but will not melt nor dissolve in Oil.
They burn without Flaming, and taste Slimy and Clammy. They were originally
Mucilages, which dry into Gums.

Gum-Arabick is Clammy and Mucilaginous: Gum Arabicum.
It is the Gum of Acacia. It is observable, That not only this Tree, but all
other Trees yielding a Watery Gum, are Astringent. Whence I do infer, That
Watery Gums are Mucilages coagulated by an Acid, the Astringency depending on an
Acid. Gum-Arabick yields a Fixed Salt. All Gum-Resins, as Myrrh, Aloes, Opium,
and Euphorbium, have a Fixed Salt upon the Account of the Gumminess.

Gum-Dragon is a Clammy Mucilage of Gum Tragacanthi.
a Thorny Plant. Half a Dram thereof is good in Powder in Sharpness of Urine,
and Coughs. All Watery Gums are of an Emplastick Nature, cooling, sticking, and
glewing Parts together. They allay Acrimony, thicken the Humors, and smooth the
Passages; having the Virtue of Mucilages, and of an Acid dulled thereby. The
Plant from whence this Gum is gathered, is described amongst the Leguminous
Plants.

Cherry, Peach, Almond, and Plumb-Tree Gum Cerasorum, Mali Persicae, Amygdalae,
Prunorum.
Gums, are all Watery Gums; and have the same Taste and Virtue with the former.

Dragons-Blood is the Watery Gum of a Sanguis Draconis.
Tree dissolvible in Water, and tastes Gummy and Astringent; and therefore is a
good Agglutinative in Spitting of Blood, and it stops all Fluxes.

White Starch comes near the Nature Amylum.
of Watery Gums; being prepared of Wheat-Flowre, which is Mucilaginous: For by
the Mucilage it smooths the Hands and Face, and allays the Acrimony in Coughs.

Sarcocol has a very sweet Gummy Taste; Sarcocolla.
though the true Sarcocol is said to be Bitterish, like Frankincense, and very
Nauseous and Purging; but without any Smell. It is dissolvible in Water. It is
outwardly used as an Agglutinative, cleansing and allaying any Sharp Defluxion
into the Eyes.

Manna is very nauseously Sweet, and Manna.
Gummy. It is the Gum of a Tree; and by the very sweet Gummosity, it is
Purging. It also contains a very Acid Spirit; by which it is injurious to the
Hypochondriacal, and good for the Choleric. Acids are given with it, to abate
the luscious Sweetness.

Honey: By the Sweetness it is Diuretic Mel.
and Pectoral. It is partly Vegetable, and has an Animal Digestion. In
Distillation it yields an Acid Spirit; by which it is offensive to the
Hypochondriacal. Honey contains also an Oily Spirit, by which it is Vinous in
Liquors, after Fermentation; and, by the Acid, outwardly cleanses Ulcers. It
seems to partake of the Nature both of Watery and Turpentine Gums.

Sugar is a Salt very Sweet and Oleous; Saccharum
and therefore inflammable. It melts without Water at the Fire, mixes with Oil,
and, by Fermentation, yields a burning Brandy Spirit: Therefore the use of it
is very inflaming to the Blood, by the Oily Part; and by the Acid, corrosive;
which it yields in a strong Fire. It is like the Acid of Tartar, as all
Essential Salts be, which are more or less mixed with the Oil of the Vegetable.
From this great Quantity of Oil mixed with the Acid, the Sweetness arises. And
because Sugar is dissolvible in Water, as the Gums be, and may easily be turned
into a Gummy Consistence, as happens in boiling of Sugar with Acids; I think it
fit to place it here amongst Gums, whose Taste it resembles more than the
Tartarous Salt of Vegetables.

CHAP. II. Of Fetid Gums.
FEtid Gums were originally Milky Liquors: They are strongly Bitter, or
Bitter-Acrid; and have a Mucilage, whereby they soften; and a Volatile Oily
Salt, whereby they discuss. By an Acid the Mucilage is coagulated into a Watery
Gum; and the Oily Volatile Salt, which gives the Foetor, is coagulated into
something of a Resin: whence the Gum is dissolvible into a Milky Liquor, by
Water; and the Oily Salt is best extracted by Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd. These
Gums are frequently dissolved in Wine or Vinegar, and put into discussing
Emollient Plasters; but the Vinegar abates their Acrimony.

Opopanax is from the Root of Panax; Opopanax.
and tastes Gummy, very Acrid, and Bitter, and smells like Garlic. It is
Emollient, and discussive outwardly; inwardly it is Carminative, loosening the
Belly, Pectoral, and Diuretic.

Sagapenum smells Rank, and tastes Biting, Sagapenum.
like Garlic; and is of the Nature of Opopanax.

Bdellium is Biting, very Bitter, and Bdellium.
Gummy; and of the same Virtue with the former.

Opium is very Bitter, Acrid, and Gummose; Opium.
and of a Poppy-Smell. It is Inflammable and Resinous; and is the greatest
Opiate. It is Diuretic, Venereal, Diaphoretick; and sometimes it vomits and
purges.

Euphorbium is very Burning and Exulcerating Euphorbium.
in Taste, and of a Fetid piercing Smell; not to be used inwardly, but
externally in drawing Plasters, and for Carious Bones. The Acrimony may be
corrected by Acids. It is said to be a Tithymal; and all Tithymals have the
same Virtue.

Euphorbium is the Gum of a Milky Plant, purging violently, and sneezing
strongly.

Gum-Ivy is of an offensive Smell, and Gum. Hederae.
very Biting and Exulcerating in Taste.

Camphore is a Gum out of a Tree like Camphora.
Poplar: It has a strong Smell, and tastes Bitterish, Acrid, Hot, and Pungent.
It is an Antihysterick inwardly; and outwardly it opens the Pores in
Inflammations, and so cools. It is used as an Alexipharmack. It dissolves in
Spirit of Wine or Oil, having a great deal of Oil and Volatile Salt in it. A
good Tincture is made of it, with the Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd.

Assa Foetida is the most offensive Fetid, Assa Foetida.
like Garlic, and very nauseously Bitter: It is therefore the greatest
Antihysterick.

Galbanum is very Fetid, and smells like Galbanum.
Garlic. It is very Gummy, Bitter, and Sub-Acrid; and therefore very Emollient
and Discussing; and inwardly Antihysterick. It burns like Resin; and is Soft
and Gummy, like Wax.

Gum-Ammoniack is a Gum of a Ferula. Ammoniacum.
It smells strong, and but little like Castor. It is very Gummy and Bitter; by
which it opens all Obstructions, cures the Asthma, and Fits of the Mother; and
by the Gumminess and Bitterness, is Laxative and Carminative. Outwardly, by the
same, it discusses and softens Scirrhous Tumors.

Soot: I place it here, because it has Fuligo.
a Smoaky Fetidness of Burnt Wood, and an Oil and an Acid in it; by which it is
manifestly Bitter and Acrid. It is very Sudorifick inwardly, and seems a State
of Vegetable Principles, betwixt Bitter and Salt. A great Quantity of Earth
rises with the Oily Acid Particles; by a stricter Union whereof, a Volatile
Salt is produced from Soot, in Distillation.

I could not find much Difference in the Taste of Soot of Wood, from that of
Coals. The Last is more Fetid and Saltish, the First more Acid. Wood distilled
yields a Fetid Oil, and Smoaky Acid: The same separated, by a Fire, from Wood,
carries Earthy Ashes with it, and constitutes Soot; which is not very Bitter.
The Soot of Coal and Wood being almost the same, I suppose the Oil and Acid in
the Principles of Vegetables and Minerals are nearly related.

CHAP. III. Of Turpentine Gum-Resins.
REsins melt with Heat, burn with a Flame, and will be easily dried to Powder:
They dissolve in Oil, or Spirit of Wine. They generally taste Brittle, and
smell of Turpentine; or else are more Aromatic, or Fetid: And some have a Gum
joined to the Resin, and are called Gum Resins.

Resins are Oils, and Volatile Salts, coagulated by an Acid, which all Resins
yield in Distillation: They are Acid-Oleous Liquors at first, being originally
Turpentines; Dr. Grew.

Fine Frankincense tastes Gummy, Hot, Olibanum.
and Bitterish; and smells of Turpentine. It stops Rheums by the Gumminess, and
is Diuretic by the Turpentine-Smell; and by the Heat dries much; and provokes
Sweat in a Peripneumonia.

Mastich has a Turpentine-Smell, and Mastiche.
tastes Hot, Gummy, and Brittle. It is used as an Astringent: By the Gumminess
it stops Rheums. The Mastich-Wood is Bitterish and Styptick. This is a
Terebinthinate-Tree.

Common Resin tastes Brittle, and is of a Resina.
Turpentine-Smell. Resin, Mastich, and Olibanum have no quantity of a Fixed
Salt; but yield a Salso-Acrid Spirit or Salt, as Succinum.

Colophonia is Resin of the Firr-Tree boiled. Colophonia.
Resins digest by their moderate Heat, and agglutinate by their Gumminess.

Gum-Juniper is a Gum-Resin, of a sort Gum Juniperi.
of Cedar, and smells strong of Turpentine.

Pitch is of the Nature of Resin. Pix.


CHAP. IV. Of Gum-Resins.
MYrrh is of a very bitter Taste, Myrrha.
Gummy and Resinous. It dissolves best in Spirit of Wine. It agglutinates and
cleanses in Ulcers. Inwardly it is an Vterine, Pectoral, and Antifebrifick. It
is the best cleansing Vterine, given to half a Scruple.

Amber tastes Brittle and Resinous, and Succinum.
has a Fetid, Turpentine-Scent, as other Bitumens have. The Tincture of it,
with Spirit of Wine, and the Volatile Salt and Oil, are good Antibystericks, by
their Foetor.

Lacca is a Brittle Resin, without Smell Gum Laccae.
or Taste, and is dissolvible in Spirit of Wine. It is not of that opening
Virtue Authors give it, unless because it colors the Spittle. It is accounted
good for the Jaundice. It is the Gum of a sort of Plumb-Tree.

Boiled Turpentine becomes of a Resinous Terebinthina Cocta.
Nature, by losing the Spirituous Oil in boiling: And so Resins differ from
Turpentines, and Natural Balsams, by having less Oil than they; but more of an
Acid and Gumminess.

Wax tastes Gummy, Oily and Hot, and is Cera.
of a very grateful Smell; by which it is Mollifying, Digestive, and
Emplastick. It is the Gummy Terebinth of Plants gathered and prepared by Bees;
and differs from Honey, as Turpentines do from Gum-Resins. It yields an Oil,
which is discussive in Tumors, if distilled by an open Fire.

CHAP. V. Of Sweet-scented Gum-Resins.
LAbdanum is of an Hot and Resinous Labdanum
Taste, and of a Fragrant Scent: It is dissolvible in Oil; and is the Gum of
Cistus, which easily grows soft. It is used outwardly in Perfumes, and Plasters
for Nervous Distempers, heating and mollifying them; and inwardly is used for
Coughs, and Cephalic Distempers; which are the general Effects of all
Sweetscented Gum-Resins.

Gum-Animi is of a grateful Turpentine-Smell, Gum. Animi.
and dissolvible in the Spirit of Wine. It is accounted Nervine.

Benzoin is of a grateful Smell, resembling Benzoin.
Xylo-Aloes. This Resin dissolves in the Spirit of Wine, into a Tincture; and
the Flowers of it are good opening Pectorals.

Gum-Caranna is Resinous, and smells like Caranna.
Tacamahacca: It is used in hot Plasters, to warm the Nerves.

Tacamahacca is an Odoriferous Gum-Resin: Tacamahacca.
Outwardly it is used in cold Distempers of the Nerves; and is very sticking.

Balm of Tolu is Gummy in Taste, and Balsamum de Tolu.
a little Hot and Bitterish. It has an Aromatic Scent, like Limons. It is
dissolved in Barley-Water for Syrup, and in Spirit of Wine for Tincture; and
may be given in Pills or Powder, for stopping Coughs. It is a little Cleansing,
and very grateful to the Stomach, more than any other Turpentine.

Styrax-Calamita is a Gum-Resin of a Styrax Calamita.
sweet Scent, tasting Gummy.

Burgundy-Pitch is Clammy and Gummy, Pix Burgundica.
and of a sweet Turpentine-Scent. It is dissolvible in Oil.

Gum-Elemi is of a sweet Turpentine-Scent, Gum Elemi
Gummy, and Resinous. It dissolves in Oil, and is used in Wounds of the Head.
It is the Resin of Cedar; which has the most Acrid Turpentine.

Gum-Guajacum tastes Brittle, Gummy, and Gum. Guaici.
a little Hot; and smells Sweet and Resinous. It is dissolved in Spirit of
Wine; and is Diaphoretick by the Gumminess.

Resins of Scammony and Jalap are Artificial Resina. Scammonii and Jalapii.
Resins, containing an Acrid Salt, which the Acid of the Plants has coagulated
with the Oil. These Resins work most, when dissolved by an Oil; and then gripe
least. They smell Sub-acid, as Spurge pounded does.

The Tithymaline-Milk is no way different from a Resin, but by being dissolved
with Water. Hence Scammony and Mechoacanna yield a Milk, when fresh.

Resins of Sassaphras and Cinnamon: Such Resina ligni Sassaphras, and Cinnamomi.
warming Resins may be extracted out of Aromaticks. The sweet Aromaticks are
most of them Umbelliferous; in whose Roots Dr. Grew observed Balsam Vessels.

These sorts of Resins do not purge, having neither a violent Acrid, nor a
Fetidness, but an agreeable Texture of both; whereby they please, and do not
irritate our Spirits, and Fibrous Membranes.

These Vegetable altering Resins, act on the Red Part of the Blood, by their
Suitableness of Texture and Principles; supplying their Quantity, raising their
Digestion, and quickening their Motion.

These Resins are the immediate Matter of hotter Effluviums in Vegetables; and
produce Smells.

CHAP. VI. Of Balsams.
BAlsams have a more Liquid Consistence, because of a greater Plenty of Oil;
which is therefore less fixed by the Acid: And also a more diluted Gumminess is
observable in them, with an Acrimony.

Turpentine tastes Bitter, Hot, and Gummy; Terebinthina.
and is of a grateful strong Smell, by the Bitter-Acrid, being Diuretic. It
cleanses the Kidneys; and by the Gummoseness, stops Rheums; and by both, is
Laxative, Cleansing, Agglutinating, and Digesting in Ulcers.

Balm of Gilead has a Turpentine-Taste, Balsamum Mechae.
Bitter, Hot, and Gummy, with an Aromatic Flavor; by which it is more Grateful
to the Stomach; and is good in the Stone, Gout, Cough, Scurvy, and all Ulcers.
It helps the Dissolution of the purging Resins in Pills; and is counterfeited
by mixing Turpentine, and Oil of Juniper.

Balm of Peru is Bitter, Hot, Aromatic, Balsamum Peruvianum.
and of a Fragrant Scent.

Liquid-Amber is an Oily Resinous Liquor: Liquida Ambra.
It is of an excellent sweet Smell, given for Coughs, and outwardly used for
Palsies.

Liquid-Storax is like Liquid-Amber. Storax Liquida.


Tarr is of a Fetid strong Smell, and Pix liquida.
of a Bitter, Hot, Acrid, and Gummy Taste; by which it Cleanses and Heals, and
by the Gumminess Agglutinates. It is an excellent outward Vulnerary; and
inwardly is a Pectoral, given in Pills with Powder of Liquorish, and
Sugar Candy.

Petrolaeum is a Fetid Bitumen, and of a Petrolaeum
strong Turpentine-Smell. It yields an Oil and Colophony in Distillation, and
is used outwardly for Palsies. It is of the Nature of Saccinum; which seems to
be a thickened Petrolaeum.

Amber-Grise is a greasy Bitumen, and Ambra grisea.
of an excellent Scent; whereby it is Cordial, and agreeable to the Spirits. It
is found in the Sea. A Tincture is made of it with Spirit of Citrons. Dos. Gr.
XV. ad XX. in a dry Form. It is powdered with Sugar in a double Quantity; and
some Drops of Oil of Cinnamon are added, for an high Cordial.

Oyl-Olive, or Sallet-Oyl, is smooth, insipid, Oleum Olivarum.
and roapy: It is moderately hot, and mollifying by the Mucilage. It contains
an Acid, offensive to the Eyes. It is Pectoral, and relaxing the Passages, and
defending them against sharp Humors and Poison. Oil procures Vomiting. Much of
it is offensive to the Stomach. But the Oil of unripe Olives is Astringent.

Pickled Olives are Bitterish, and the distilled Oil is Fetid, Penetrating, and
Discussing. The Olive Tree is Bitterish and Styptick.

Outwardly Oil smooths the Skin, and stops the Pores; and thereby hinders
Transpiration, as it stops the Pores of a Filter.

By its Mucilage it mollifies, and is Anodyne.

The Oil and Acid in it make it Inflammable; as Turpentines and Resins be, on
the same Account.

Oil has a Sliminess in it, and Turpentines have a Gum: It is offensive to
Insects, by stopping their Lungs; but it will not kill Earthworms.

I will here give the several Tastes of Oil in Vegetables, which I have
observed, viz.

1. A Slimy Oil, which is expressed from Linseed, and other Mucilaginous Seeds.

2. A Sweet Slimy Oil, such as is observable in Oil of Almonds, Walnuts, and
other Nuts; and is the Product of an higher Digestion.

3. A Bitter Oil, as in Liquid Turpentines; or expressed Oil of Pistache-Nuts,
and Seeds of St. John's -wort; and the Oils of some Kernels, as Bitter-Almonds,
and Peach-Kernels: These differ from the former, by having the Texture of the
Oil and Acid altered; by which Alteration Sweet becomes Bitter through an
higher Digestion.

4. Aromatick-Acrid Oils, such as are expressed out of Nutmeg, Mace, and
Anniseed: In these a Volatile Pungency joins with the Oil, and renders it
Aromatic.

5. A Fetid Oil is expressible from Fetid Seeds; and is evident in Leguminous
Plants.

6. A Coagulated Oil in Resins; or else mixed with a Gumminess, in Gum-Resins.

None can rationally suppose Vegetables to have so many sorts of Oils
essentially different; but only distinguished by the several Mixtures of the
Principles, by Digestion differing in one Plant from another.

Vegetables receive not only their Acid, but also Oil from Minerals.

CHAP. VII. Of Wine and Fermentation.
FRom Water and Earth mixed, and an outward Heat digesting them, no Fermentation
can be produced, but the Water is evaporated, and the Earth powdered: Therefore
we must examine the other Two Principles of Vegetables; and from them we may
deduce all the Phenomenon of Vegetation, Fermentation, and also the particular
Virtues produced by them.

It is a known Experiment, That Oil of Turpentine and Vitriol will effervesce,
and continue the Heat produced by that Ebullition for a long time.

Spirit of Nitre, and Spirit of Wine also produce a great Heat.

From these Experiments, a Contrariety betwixt Oil and Acid is very manifest;
and this is not so soon over, as the Ebullition betwixt Alkalies and Acids.

I shall endeavor to explain all the Effects abovementioned from these Two,
Oil and Acid, and their Effervescence; and I do wholly reject the Effervescence
of Alkalies and Acids, because That soon ceases by an Union of both into a
Salt; which is not found to happen upon Fermentation: And we could never yet
find, that a Spirit or Salt could be separated by any gentle Distillation, from
New Wine, or New Ale, unfermented.

A great Acid put to Fermenting Liquors, hinders the Fermentation of them: And
also a Fixed Salt is found to hinder their Fermentation.

From these Reasons mentioned, I am convinced, that Alkali Volatiles are no
ways the Efficient Causes of Fermentation; but only the Products of it, by a
Composition of Oil, Acid, and Earth.

The Seeds of Plants are very full of an Oil, which differs only from the Oil
in Turpentine, by a different Digestion: For Turpentine has a Mucilage, or
Gumminess in it; which chiefly appears in Mucilaginous Plants.

Those Trees which yield a Watery Gum have a bitterish Bark; which therefore
resemble Turpentines by both Tastes.

The Seeds of Alder have the Figure of Pine-Apples, and the Leaves a Gumminess;
from whence I thought it had a sort of Turpentine.

The bitter Milks of Vegetables are only like dissolved Turpentine; and they
dry into a Gum or Resin.

The Laurel-Bitters, such as Almonds and Peaches, have a Bitterness, and also a
Gumminess, like Turpentine: And those Trees have a lasting Greenness, like
Turpentine-Trees, as Firr and Pine.

The number of plain Turpentine-Trees and Plants are very great.

That Plants of a sweet Taste have their Oil from Turpentine, is not
improbable; because we find a great Sweetness in the Taste of Ripe Ivy-Berries
and Juniper Berries, which are manifestly Turpentine-Trees: And the Roots of
Fennil have a Balsam, and taste Sweet.

That all Aromatic Oils and Resins in Aromaticks are pure Turpentines, I
suppose is evident enough, by comparing them together, and for the Reasons I
have mentioned in the First Part. And for the same Reason, all Fetids are
likewise Turpentines; which are Fetid as well as Aromatic.

I cannot but believe, that all Effluviums in Vegetables, which produce a
Smell, have their Volatility, by which they are carried from the Vegetable, and
act on the Sense of Smelling, from some Oyliness. Hence Earths are smelt by a
Sulphur in them. Acids have also an Oil mixed with them, as in Tartar and
Vinegar. Sweet Tastes smell Mellowy, from an Oil and Acid digested with Water
and Earth. And Terebinthinate-Smells are from Turpentine Particles evaporating:
And all Aromaticks and Fetids, from Resins. For the clearer Proof of which, I
shall mention what Dr. Lister writes: Illustre exemplum de ligno Cedrino
Bermudensi olim dedimus, scilicet id apud me multos annos nec jam desinere
resinam suam tota substantia vaporare. And I cannot believe, that Salts could
give any Smell, but from their Oily Part, which is one of their Ingredients:
Therefore Vegetables affect the Sense of Smelling, by Oil joined with Earth or
Acid, and with Acid and Earth in Salt, or Resins: All which act on the Organ in
the Form of Effluviums. And this Sense is therefore Quaedam tactus species, as
well as Taste.

And from this Likeness of Impression, and also the Likeness of the Object, we
often find Tastes and Smells very much alike; the Plant tasting as it smells.

I did omit this about the Nature of Smells in the First Part; and therefore
have here added it, as not very impertinent; because Smells are the Effects of
Fermentation, and are most observable, and also deducible from Turpentines. And
I also forgot There to observe, That many Smells are compounded; as Bitter and
Sweet Tastes are frequently in the same Plant joined, because Sweet easily
become Bitter. So Fetids and Aromaticks are frequently joined in Smells; as
Galeopsis, Valerian, Pulegium, and Nepeta, have both Fetid and Aromatic
Smells: From whence I argue, That they differ but in Degree, as Sweet and
Bitter do.

I have taken notice in the First Part, That the Acid of Vegetables tastes like
Acids of Sulphur; and from thence it will appear, that it arises, in the
Discourse which I shall annex about Minerals. I shall here only observe, That
Tartar is Inflammable, like Brimstone; and when it is distilled, it is very
Fetid, and an Oil is separated from it: Such is the Composition of Sulphur and
Acid. An Oily Part is closely locked up in it; as in common Tartar. Upon the
Mixture of Oil of Sulphur per Campanam, with Oil of Turpentine, a Redness was
immediately precipitated; as it happened in the Mixture of the same, with Oil
of Vitriol. Spirit of Salt only turned Yellow: Sweet Spirit of Nitre did not
change. From these Instances it appears, That an Oyliness is lodged in Sulphur
and Tartar: So that the Ingredients which compound the Acid of Sulphur and
Tartar, which is the Acid of Plants, are very much alike; as well as the Taste
of both the Pungency of the Acid in Vinegar depends on the Oil of Wine, and the
Pungency in Spirit of Sulphur on the Sulphur latent in the Acid. The Roughness
in Acerb Plants depends on Earthy Parts, mixed with the Acid; and the Roughness
in the Acid of Sulphur, from some Mineral Earth joined with the Acid.

I find it confidently affirmed, That one Acid will correct another; which I
believe a Mistake: For Spirit of Vitriol and Nitre make a stronger Menstruum,
than either of them alone; and so does Spirit of Salt and Nitre mixed, which
make an Aqua Regia: So far are these from correcting one another. But the
ground of this Opinion, I suppose, is from the Effervescence, caused by mixing
of Acid Spirits, which happens by reason of some Earth or Mineral, joined to
every different sort of Acid Spirit; from whence the difference of Acid Spirits
is deducible. Hence some Acid Spirits mixed, dispossess one the other from the
Earths or Minerals joined with their Acid; and from thence comes the Conflict
and Effervescence. For the same reason, Spirit of Vitriol is mixed with
Calcined Salt, to seize on the Earthy part of Salt, and to make the Acid of
Salt loose from it, and fitter for Distillation.

I think I have here said enough to prove, that the Oil of Vegetables is like
Oil of Turpentine; and the Acid of Vegetables like Sulphur, which differs
nothing from Vitriol; but by being Impregnated with a Mineral, it becomes a
vitriolate Acid. So that from the Experiments about the contrariety of Oil and
Acid, abovementioned, I may conclude, that there may happen the same kind of
Effervescence in Vegetables, which we call Fermentation.

When a Seed is placed in the Earth, the Oyliness of it is agitated or moved by
the Acid Watery Juice; soaking into it through its Coats, by the Effervescence of
both, Vegetation is begun; and the Coats burst, and the Vessels of the Plant
enlarged, for receiving new Nourishment. This consists of an Oyliness from the
Bitumen and Sulphur; and also an Acid from the same; and also a Water and Earth
mixed and digested together in the Pores of the Earth: All which concur to
produce a Nutriment for Plants. This is not promiscuously admitted through the
Glandulous Parenchyma of the Root of the Plant: but it is probable, that each
Parenchyma has differently figured Pores, for the admittance of Oily parts
chiefly, or Watery parts, or Earthy parts, or Acid chiefly; which may be very
probable, because Oily parts are thought Ramose, Acid Angular, Watery Round, and
Earthy very Irregular. We may very easily believe, that the Seeds of Plants,
and their Roots, have Pores suited for the admittance of one, two, or more of
these: And these are pressed into the Seed by the force of the Airs Spring,
when a Plant begins to swell by the rarefying of its own Juyces, through the
Effervescence of its own Oil and Acid; which is much promoted by the External
Heat of the Sun, or an hot Bed, and the admittance of an Acid from the Earth.

This Fermentation is very slow, and never highly raised in Earthy, Acid, and
Mucilaginous Plants; and therefore in such, the Oil, Acid, Earth, and Water,
are never much separated; but in sweet Tastes the Fermentation separates a
little, and loosens the Oil and Acid, from the Watery and Earthy Particles. In
Bitters the same are more separated; in Aromaticks the Oil is most rarefied; in
Acrids the Oil and Acid compound a Salt, with an Earthy part: From these
Instances we find, that by Digestion the Principles of Plants are separated,
and now Compounded into Salts, Resins, Gums, and Turpentines. This Digestion
differs not from the Effervescence betwixt Oil and Acid; which differs
according to the several Oils which are contained in the Seeds of Plants. One
Oil ferments with Acid more than another; and each Oil in the Seed produces
that which is most suitable to the nature of the Plant to be produced.

From the Rarefaction of this Juice of Plants, by the Effervescence of Oil and
Acid, the rise of the Sap, and the shootings of Plants, may be deduced. And the
wonderful force mentioned by Mr. Boil, in lifting up a great Weight by
Fermenting Beans; and from hence Wines burst their Vessels: So that the force
of Fermentation equals that of Explosion.

If we consider the many Compound Tastes of Plants, we cannot believe, that
they can rise from the same kind of Fermentation: Some Plants taste Rough, and
very Acrid, as Chelidonium minus. Others Slimy, and Acrid, and Bitter, as
Leucoium. And there is a different Taste in many parts of Plants, which
proceeds from the different Digestion of the Juice, in different parts. So in
Cherries, the Taste of the Bark is Bitter Astringent: The Leaf differs from it
by a Sliminess: In the Fruit there is a Slimy, Sweet, Sub-acid Taste, without
any Bitterness or Astringency. The same difference is observable in the Odors
of Plants. The Leaves of Elder are Fetid; but the Flowers Fragrant; which is a
sign of a different Digestion. There are the same Varieties of Tastes and Odors
in Animals; though Choler be separated by the same sort of Glandules, yet it has
a Bitter, Sweet Sliminess. The Serum of the Blood has serose parts, and
Watriness, and a Saltness: The Semen has a thin, and also a viscid part: The
Liquor Nervosus has an Oily Salt, dissolved in a Lympha.

The diversity of Tastes in Choler does not depend on different Strainers, but
different Digestions of Chyle; and the new supply of it; which flows
continually into the Veins: From hence it will fall out, that one part is
perfectly Digested, and another less; and therefore some part of the Choler
tastes Sweet, and another part Bitter; and a crude Lympha is the Vehicle of
both, to help their separation: these being mixed together, give the Variety of
Tastes, observable in Choler. The same thing happens in Plants; which, during
their growth, receive fresh Nourishment, which is differently Digested; and
therefore gives those Varieties of Tastes, observable in the same Vessels, and
the same Liquor, as in Milks, Turpentines, and Fetid Gums.

But I cannot well understand, how such Particular Liquors as Milk, Gums,
Turpentines, and Lympha's, can be produced and kept in particular Vessels,
which are really different from the crude Juice of the same Plants, without
allowing such parts in Plants, as Glandules in Animals, which separate the
Milk, Semen, Spirits, Choler, and Lympha from the Blood. I therefore cannot
think it improbable, that the Parenchyma of Plants is wholly Glandulous, and
the Woody Fibers are Vessels; some of which are Lacteals, Lymphaticks,
Muciducts, Gums, or Balsam-Vessels. An Animal Body is composed of Vessels and
Glands. The Vessels are branched into the different parts of both alike, and
receive a prepared Juice from the Glandulous Parenchyma: and the same may be
the preparation and distribution of the Juyces in Vegetables, because the same
Tastes and Odors are observable in both Kingdoms. And Vegetables digested by an
Animal, undergo the same Separation and Preparation, as is manifest in Animals.

When one Tree is grafted on another Stock, the Fruit is the same as the
Branch Ingrafted. The Juice in the Glandules of it, giving such a particular
Fermentation to the Juice of the Stock, as to alter it into the nature of the
Graft: and if the Seed be a perfect Plant, there may lodge such an Original
Juice in each part of the Plant, as may change the nature of the same Juice in
the several parts. So in Chelidonium minus, the Acrimony is very manifest in
the Stalk, but neither in the Leaves or Root: but I rather believe, that if the
Juice of a Plant is the same in the whole Plant, different alterations of the
same Juice may happen by a higher degree of Fermentation. So the Roots of
Wormwood are Sweet-Aromatick: The Leaves very Bitter-Aromatick. The Bark of Ash
is Bitter-Rough: The Flowers have also an Acrid. These Alterations happen by a
higher degree of Fermentation in the same Juice. So Fermented Liquors acquire a
Ripeness by long keeping, and by the difference of Vessels, in which they are
kept. Upon this account, the Juice in Roots is kept more cool: But in the
Leaves, the Stalks more exposed to the Agitation of the Air, and Heat of the
Sun; whence will arise a difference of Tastes and Digestion. It is most
probable, that the difference of the Digestion happens not only by Original
different Juyces in Plantula Seminali, but also by the difference of Vessels;
which seems very evident in Seeds and Fruits; where, without an addition of a
Ferment, the same Fruit becomes Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy, which at first was
Acid, and very Rough. And Nuts become Sweet and Oily, which were at first
Austere.

The Root of Vines tastes Bitterish and Rough; The Leaves, Acerb; The Ripe
-Grape, Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy; The Seed, Austere as the Root. So that
these different Tastes show the Alterations which happen in the Juice of the
Vine: From Austere it comes to an Acerbity in the Leaves; and from thence to a
Sweet Sub-acid in Grapes; but the Stone or Seed returns to the Austerity of the
Root.

Wine is made out of the Sweet Sub-Acid Vinum.
Juice of the Grape: And the same is the nature of all the Juyces of Berries of
the same Taste. The Acid is evident to the Sense; and an Oil produces the
Sweetness. This is the Taste of New-Drink, Metheglin, and Sugar dissolved in
Water; and most other Liquors usually Fermented; and this Sweetness is a
certain sign of an Oil and Acid; for these may be distilled out of Honey,
Sugar, New-Wine, and Beer, by a strong Fire. And there is no other eminent
Principles in Sweet Tastes but these. Therefore from them, the Fermentation of
these Liquors must be deduced.

The Acid of Fermenting Liquors cannot produce the heat of the Liquor, by
acting on the Earthy parts, because they are already mixed with the Acid, and
kept fluid by it; otherwise the Earth would wholly precipitate. But this Heat
proceeds from the Effervescence made betwixt the Oil and Acid, which will cause
a considerable Heat; as is manifest by the Artificial mixture mentioned.

All Fluids have an Internal Agitation of parts, which produces their Fluidity;
which being supposed, and also a contrariety of particular Figures betwixt Oil
and Acids, the first being Ramose, and the last Angular: It may easily be
conceived, that a difference of Motion will be natural to these two Principles;
which two Motions meeting, give a disturbance to their natural Tendencies; and
from thence proceeds the Effervescence, which is always promoted by some
external Heat, as of the Sun; or else the Liquors are boiled before
Fermentation; as in Metheglin, Beer, and some Wines.

The effect of a great deal of Acid upon Oil, is to coagulate it; but a smaller
quantity Fermented with it, expands, opens and rarefies the Oil. This is
evidently done in the Butter of Antimony, where the Acids of Sublimate open the
close Texture of the Sulphur, and gives it the form of Butter. The same is the
effect of Fermentation; the Acid acts on the Oil by degrees, and mixes with it;
and because their mixture happens in a Fluid, the Water is also intermixed with
them, and thereby the Oil is dissolved in the Liquor, and produces a Winy
Spirit; which diluted in much Water, is called a Wine; and if it be distilled
from it, a Brandy Spirit, which is Inflammable like Oil: If the greatest
quantity of Oil be evaporated out of Wine, a Vinegar is produced by the
remaining and prevailing Acid, which has its Pungency from some Oily parts,
which are still mixed with the Tartar of Vinegar; and which will yield a burning
Spirit, if Vinegar be distilled from Saccharum Saturni. The Agitation which
happens from the Effervescence of these two Principles in Fermentation, shakes
all the parts of the Liquor Fermenting; whereby the most Feculent parts in
Wine, and the greater Farinaceous parts in Beer subside; but the more light,
rise to the top of the Liquor in an Effervescence. These Heterogeneous parts
being separated, the remaining Liquor is clear, and consists of a Winy Juice,
in which the Oil is most prevalent; and has also an Acid mixed with it. And in
Beer the Farinaceous parts are much rarefied, having their Oil very much
loosened and sharpened by the Acid; and from hence proceeds the quickness and
briskness of Liquors.

Dr. Willis in his Pharmaceutice mentions a way of distilling an Oil from
Spirit of Wine, by means of a strong Spirit of Vitriol: Therefore Acids help
the Separation of Oils, from the mixture in Plants. For this end, we put Tartar
or Salt into the Vesica with Seeds, which are to be distilled; for the
separation of the Oil is thereby promoted.

The Oil of Wines is sufficiently proved by Dr. Willis's Experiment, and the
Acid by Tartar: but it is not improbable, that some Salt is also produced by
this mixture of Oil and Acid, with a little Earth; Which is most clearly proved
by the Salts, which are described by Mr. Lewenhock in many sorts of Wine;
which, as I remember, differ not much from the Salts of Vinegar.

The Oil, Acid, an the Volatile Salt united in Spirit of Wine, are much of the
nature of a dissolved Resin, having the same Principles; and therefore easily
Extract Resins, and Oils of Vegetables, and turn Milky, if put to a Watery
Vehicle.

By the means of an Acid in the Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Sal Ammoniack
coagulates with Spirit of Wine, into an Offa Alba.

A Slimy Oil such as is in the Yelk of an Egg, makes distilled Oils to dissolve
easily in Watery Liquors; and therefore there is found a Mucilage or Gumminess
attending most Vegetable Oils, whereby the Oils are mixed with their Juyces.

Sugar is an Oily Acid, like Tartar; with this a distilled Oil easily mixes,
and is by this means dissolved in Water.

The Spirit of Vegetable Liquors Fermented and Distilled, is nothing but an Oil
rarefied, and loosened from the mixture of the Juice, by means of the Acid; and
by their mixture, also some Volatile Salt is produced; therefore these Spirits
are Inflammable, like Resins; and they are no Simple Principles, but compounded
of others. This Spirit is produced by Fermentation; and therefore can be no
Cause of it, as is ordinarily supposed. Spirit of Wine is, by reason of its
Resinous Composition, agreeable to the Red part of the Blood, and is a familiar
Specific to supply its Defect, and excite its brisk motion; whereby it is
Cordial, Refreshing, and supplying new Spirits by its Similitude of Texture.
The long use of it brings a Phthisis, by too much rarefying the Blood into
Salts, or a Dropsy, thickning the Serum of the Blood; whereby the Viscera are
obstructed, and Sanguification destroyed, by the unaptness for mixture with the
new Chyle.

Spirit of Wine tastes Sweet, very Hot, and Pungent; the Sweetness is from the
Oil, and the hot Pungency from a Volatile Salt.

Leaven smells strong of Dough, and Fermentum panificum.
tastes Salt and Sowrish; by the addition of common Salt to Dough, the Oily
parts of the Meal are loosened from the mixture; for the Acid of Salt is
Pungent, whereby it breaks the Texture of the Farinaceous parts, and sets the
Oil more free, by combining with the Earthy Particles; with which, all Acids
readily mix. When the Oil is loosened from its mixture with Earthy Particles,
by the Acid of the Ferment, it is easily agitated by the Air; and by the
Contrariety of parts, the Oil and Acid act on one another, and cause a Heat,
and make the whole mixture swell; as it happens in Electuaries, in which
Contraries ferment.

Leaven is kept a good while; whereby it is made more Sour, and thereby fitter
to begin a Fermentation in other Dough. The Oil of the Leaven being more
loosened by Fermentation, is moderately Hot, and also Salt and Sour, which
temper the Heat. And Leaven is used outwardly in drawing Plasters.

Wheat and Barley, considered in their perfect State as Vegetables, taste Sweet
and Slimy; when prepared for Bread or Beer, they are reduced into Meal, which
still has the Principles unaltered; which in both were an Oily Acid, with a
Slime, which is a more fixed Oil. When these Plants are fermented, the Mixture
of these Principles must be destroyed, the Oil must be rarefied, and the Acid
freed from Earthy parts; whereby its Pungency may give a quickness to the
Liquor: The Sliminess is attenuated by the Oil and Acids commotion; and by that
the Oil and Acid are dissolved in the Liquor; or else huff the Farinaceous Mass
in the making of Bread.

Barme is the fine part of the Farina Flos Cerevisiae.
decocted, which wants room in the Fermenting Liquor; and therefore by the
Agitation of parts (during the Fermentation) is displaced, and by its lightness
is carried to the top of the Liquor; and it tastes Slimy; without any manifest
Acidity: By the Bubbles it is probable, that some Spirituous parts are mixed
with it, which consist of an Oily Acid; and therefore it is used to excite a
new Fermentation in other Liquors. Such frothy Bubbles are observable in
Bottled Liquors, from a Windy Spirit flying up to the top of the Liquor, which
is enclosed with Froth.

Sugar Ferments all Liquors and Electuaries: Saccharum.
It consists of an Oil and Acid; which being dissolved in Water, ferment
together, and obtain a looser Texture, whereby a Windy Spirit is produced. And
from this Instance it appears, that an Oil and Acid are sufficient to produce a
Fermentation, which must be continued by the same, by which it was produced;
that is, by the Agitation of an Oil and Acid; and the effect of Fermentation is
a looser Texture of the Oil and Acid of the Body, which is Fermented; which Oil
and Acid give the Winy Taste to Liquors Fermented.

The Contrariety of an Oil and Acid may more evidently appear by the mixture of
Sulphur, which contains an Oil and Acid; and for that reason is the immediate
matter of Fire. The Oil and Resins of Vegetables, and Fats of Animals, burn as
readily as Sulphur, and have the same disturbed Flame: From whence, a
Contrariety of parts, and an Agitation depending on that Contrariety, may be
inferred; which is yet more manifest in the detonation made betwixt Sulphur and
Nitre; and the explosion by the mixture of both with an Alkali.

If Oil and Acid produce a Flame by a violent motion given them by Fire, it
seems probable, that the same having a gentler Agitation from the parts of a
Ferment, or the external heat of Fire or the Sun, produce in Vegetable Juyces a
brisk Agitation of parts; which Agitation is promoted by the Contrariety of
parts in Oil and Acid: As Acids help the production of Flame from Oils, and
make it burn with some noise; so in Fermentation, the Oil and Acid of
Vegetables, as soon as the Sliminess natural to Oils, is dissolved in Water,
are set free, and are the chief active Principles, which may easily be agitated
by a Ferment; whose parts have been put into motion by a former Fermentation
(whose effects, viz. an Oil and Acid, it also contains.)

The great force of Vegetation, and the breaking of Bottles and Vessels by
Fermented Liquors, can no way be explained but by some Effervescence, which
comes near the nature of Explosion. Such is the Contrariety of Oil and Acid,
briskly agitated by an External Heat.

The effects of Sulphur and Oil are contrary to Acids, and correct them; and
Acids fix Sulphurs, and coagulate Volatile Oils; and therefore they act one on
the other, and are contrary.

I do not affirm, That all Oils and Acids mixed, will presently ferment; but
there must be an actual-Heat given them by External Fire, or Internal Fiery
Particles lodged in Oil of Vitriol, or by a Ferment in Artificial
Fermentations, or the Sun in Vegetation of Plants; which grow not till an
External Heat excites the Motion of the Oil and Acid, natural to all Plants:
and in the mixtures I have mentioned, the Heat is not immediately perceived,
but after some time; so in Fermentation immediately produced by a Ferment, but
in some space of time.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparation of Vegetables.
SInce the Virtues of Vegetables may be known by their Tastes and Odors, I may
also affirm, That the truest way of judging what Preparations are the fittest
for each Vegetable, is, by the Taste and Smell; and that is the best
Preparation, in which the Taste and Smell is preserved.

Nature it self has Prepared our Medicines by Mixtures, Strainings, and
Digestions; and given to each Plant a particular Composition of Tastes, and
sometimes Compounded Odors, designedly suited and fitted for the particular
vitiated Humors in Animals. For Plants were not only designed for our
Nourishment, but likewise for our Physic; and those that were for Food, are
found out by their pleasant Sweet Taste, and grateful Odor; but those for
Medicine, by the Offensive or Nauseous Taste and Smell.

If we should torture our Nourishment by the same degrees of Fire, as Medicines
are Prepared, we should destroy that natural Sweetness of our Food; which is a
fitter Taste for Aliments, than those of Spirits, Oils, Salts, Tinctures, etc.
So it happens in Medicines, when we distill Oils, Ferment the Juyces into
Spirits, and make Tinctures, we make new Mixtures, and destroy the natural
Tastes and Virtues of Vegetables.

This appears evidently in Gentian and Myrrh, which are strong Bitters, and
correct Acids. If they be distilled in Retorts, they yield a great deal of
Acid, and a Nauseous Oil; neither of which can have the effects of Gentian, nor
the Taste; which is Bitter, Slimy, and Subacrid.

I may instance in Purgers, as Rhubarb, which will yield a fixed Salt by
Calcination, but that will not purge; and the greatest of Vegetable Medicines,
Cortex Peruvianus will not have so good and certain effect in Extract and
Infusion, as in Powder; but its Virtue is perfectly destroyed by Chemistry,
which dissolves its Texture, and alters its Taste.

Acid of Tartar, or Vegetables distilled, yields a Fetid Oil, and becomes of a
Smoaky Taste, less agreeable to the Stomach of an Animal than the Tartness of
Fruits, and the Juyces of Sour Vegetables. The Foetor is inseparable from it,
which is very disagreeable where Acids are necessary. Spirit of Tartar has not
the nature of an Acid, but in mixed of Acid and Volatile; and therefore neither
the Sowreness nor Virtue of Tartar remains in the Spirit; but a new Texture of
its Principles is produced, and new Virtues.

If from Aromatic Plants, as Wormwood or Mint, we distill an Oil; that will
have the Bitterness and Acrimony of the Plant, but will want the Astringency of
it; and besides the Empyreuma, which makes it very Burning inwardly, the Oily
Salt is more Burning and Hot than our Humors, Spirits and Membranes can endure;
therefore when it is thus Prepared, we find it necessary to remix it with
gritty Powders, and take them in a cool Vehicle. These distilled Oils are not
therefore much used, unless for outward Applications.

I cannot deny that some Preparations are necessary for Medicine, as well as
Food; but these must be suited to the nature of each particular, so that
thereby the natural Taste be not destroyed. These Preparations seem rather
necessary, upon the account of being put into a more convenient Form or Dose,
than for the Improvement of the Medicine, or separation of noxious parts from
it.

A Resin is extracted or dissolved out of its Vessels, by a Menstruum; but this
alters not its Nature nor Taste; it has a stronger Irritation if it be a
Purger, than four times the weight of the Plant it is drawn from. In Resin the
Dose is less; but it seems very doubtful, Whether the Virtue of the Resin
equals the Root of Jalap? which tastes Gummy, and not Brittle, as Resin. This
also smells Sour, and the Root Acrid, if fresh. It is certain, that the
Extract of Rhubarb works not so much as the Powder; and the Resin will not work
on some Persons, whom the Powder of Jalap purges very well.

The most natural Preparations, are Decoctions, Infusions, Juyces, Syrups,
Powders, Expressed Oils from the Seeds, Emulsions, and Conserves.

In all these the Taste is preserved, which depends on certain Principles; and
by preserving the Taste, we are sure of that Texture of Principles, on which
the Virtue depends: But if any Preparation separate the Principles, it destroys
the Texture, on which both the Taste and Virtue depend.

Tinctures, Distilled Waters, Chemical Spirits, Oils, Extracts, and Mucilages,
contain but some of the Virtues of Plants, and not the whole Taste and Smell.
Tinctures have the Resins, Distilled-Water the Odoriferous Resins. Spirits have
the Oily Salt diluted in Water. In Oils there is most Oil, and less Salt. In
Extracts a little Oil, and a great quantity of Tartar, and much Earth.

Digestion alters the nature of the Plant a little, but Putrefaction most;
Fermentation in a way betwixt both. Calcination perfectly destroys a Vegetable
Taste and Virtue.

These Preparations are most genuine, in which the whole Composition of Tastes
and Smells is evident.

The next is to be esteemed good, which has one Principle or more, or some
Compound Juice; as Milks, Resins, Tartar, Gums, and Turpentines well Extracted.

Those are of least note, which destroy the nature of a Plant; as Putrefaction,
Calcination; for these do not improve or extract its Virtue, but produce new
mixtures, which may be useful; but they have not the Virtue of the Plant.

A Catalogue of Tastes of Vegetables, which are best Preserved in the
Preparations following:
Gritty Tastes are best preserved in Powder. If any Acid be added, they lose
their Taste and Virtue. Woody Tastes are fittest for Decoctions, and are
destroyed by Distillation in a Retort. And also for Powders. Watery Mucilages
are well Prepared by Decoction, Infusion, Expression of the Juice; and
indifferently by cool Distillation; for Borrage-Water is Slimy. The Mealy
Mucilages may be powdered. Acids yield a good, and most Essential Salt, or
Tartar: They are best used in Juice, Syrup, and Quiddany. Distillation and
Fermentation alters the Taste, and makes it Spirituous. Stypticks are good in
Powder, Decoction, and Syrup. Distillation carries off no Virtue, if it be in
cool Stills; if in an open Fire, it changes them into Acids. Sweet Tastes
appear most in Powder, Juyces, Syrups, and Decoction, and but little in
Distillation. Watery Bitters are fittest for Juice and Decoction, and yield an
insipid Water by Distillation. Strong Bitters are fit for Decoction, Extract,
Infusion, and Powder; but yield little in Distillation. Bitter-Acids and
Bitter-Aromaticks yield their Volatile Acrid and Smell, only in the distilled
Water; but the Bitter by the ways mentioned. Terebinthinates give their
Turpentines in distillation, and their Bitter-Astringency in Powder or
Decoction; but a close Infusion extracts all. Acrids are fittest for
Distillation and Infusion, but are lost by Powdering and Boiling. All Compound
Tastes are to be Prepared according to the several Tastes; but because these
will not admit many times of the same Preparations, we ought to take that
Preparation in which the fewest Tastes are altered; or else mix different
proper Preparations of the same Medicines, which are contrived according to
their several Tastes. Aromaticks are good in Powder, Infusion, and distilled
Water; but lose much by Decoction.
The Odoriferous Smells of Plants is best obtained in Distilled-Water,
Infusions, and in Oils.

The Narcotick Smell of Plants rises in Poppy-Water. And we extracted by Spirit
of Wine, Opium very well.

The Hysteric mixed Fetids yield good Water, and all other Fetids.

By the particular Instances I have given, it does appear necessary, that
before we prepare any Medicine, we ought to taste it; because, if we find the
same Taste in the Medicine when prepared, we may conclude, that it has the
whole Virtues of the Plant: This is therefore, the most rational way, whereby
all our Simple Medicines ought to be examined; and for this reason, Compounds
ought to be rejected; for though we know the Virtues of the Simples, yet the
resulting Taste of Compositions is not certain; and therefore the Virtues of
all great Compositions is very uncertain, and only found out by Experience,
which alone teaches us the Virtues of Mithridate, Treacle, etc. In these
confused Compositions, the Taste of the Simples is altered, and no particular
Taste is discernible; therefore each particular Taste has its Nature and Virtue
altered by the Fermentation, which happens in such Mixtures; and also by the
Contrariety of one Taste to another.

The End of the First Volume.
ADVERTISEMENT By the Publishers.
THus much of the Third Part ( relating more nearly to Vegetables) was thought
proper to go along with the Part that treats of them. The next Volume (now in
the Press, and which will be Published next Michaelmas-Term) shall begin with
the Remainder of the Third Part, which treats of Salts, and the Mineral
Kingdom. The Animal Kingdom will be also considered. Specificks shall be
Classed. Plants shall, according to their Tastes, be reduced to their Summa
genera: and, according to the Compositions of their Tastes, and distinguishing
Smells, they shall be sub-divided into Species. And as to usefulness, What
follows That which is here hinted, will exceed what you have already. The
AUTHOR 's absence from the Press must entitle him to an Excuse from its Errata;
but especially, his late desperate Sickness is his sufficient Apology: In his
Recovery from which, as he himself has reaped the Benefit of his own Art; so
let it be the good Wishes of the Sons of Art, and of all good Men, that he may
long survive his Danger; and live to have the Satisfaction, while the World has
the Advantages of his great Learning, Skill, and Industry.

ADDENDA.
ASphodelus, according to Galen, is Bitter in the Root, like Squills; and
Acrid, like Dragons: But in the Botanicum Monspeliense, it is described to be
Acrid, with a Nauseous Sweetness. I only tasted the Leaf.

I have given the Taste of Veronica, instead of Elatine; which, as Mr. Ray
says, is a Linaria.

Fraxinella is like the True Dittany in Virtue, being Alexipharmack and
Vterine; and not like Rue: The Roots are chiefly used.

Nummularia is not of a Terebinthinate-Smell, as I at first thought it; for
since I could not observe it to be so.

Prunella is Bitterish-Astringent in the Root.

Pseudo-Melanthium is rather a Lychnis, than Nigella; the Black Seeds tasting
Sweet and Acrid.

Radix-Rhodia: The Root smells like a Rose.

Vmbilicus Veneris is not Biting; but may be accounted a Sedum.

ERRATA.
What has been already said, we hope, will oblige the Reader, to Amend or
Excuse these Errors, and all others that shall occurr herein to his Observation.
PAge 13. Line 11. for discuss inwardly; are read discuss; inwardly are. p. 22.
l. 19. f. Trees r. Plants. Ibid. l. 20. dele Lilies of the Valley. p. 27. l. 5.
for Urine, r. Urine; p. 29. l. f. Agarick, Rubarb: And r. Agarick: Rubarb and.
p. 32. l. 16. f. Windy r. Vinous. p. 82. l. 1. del. by. Ib. l. 3. for Object an
r. Object, an. p. 87. l. 5. r. It is therefore a good Vulnerary, and works. p.
92. l. 14. f. Alder r. Elder. p. 120. l. r. f. Carminative Colic r. Colic
Carminative. p. 164. l. 19. f. Acrid r. Acid. p. 178. l. 3. del. and Willow.
Ib. l. 5. r. Osier and Willow. p. 181. l. 17. f. Strong, Bitter r. strong
Bitter. p. 207. l. 19. f. Arba Venenosa r. Arbor Venenosa. p. 222. l. 5. f.
Ale-Cost r. Costus (as the English Name.) p. 235. l. 1. del. Chamadrys has the
same Taste. p. 241. l. 16. f. Mastich-Thyme r. Syrian-Mastich. p. 257. l. 11.
f. the same r. the following Powder. Ib. l. 14. f. a Scruple r. Twenty-four
Grains

An Advertisement of some late Books: Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1687.
GRammatica Anglo-Romana: or, a Syncritical Grammar, Teaching English Youth the
Latin Tongue, by few and easy Rules, comparing English with Latin. With a
Comment for the Use of Riper Years; containing the Elegancies, and explaining
the difficult Phrases and Idioms, which are peculiar to the Latin. Fitted to
the Sense of the Learned Oxford-Commentators upon Lilly's Grammar. By Samuel
Shaw, Master of the Free School in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leichestershire.

A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in Matters of Religion: Being
an Answer to some Papers asserting the Necessity of such a Judge. With an
Address to wavering Protestants; showing what little reason they have to think
of any Change of their Religion. Written for the private Satisfaction of some
Scrupulous Persons: And now Published for Common Use. With a Preface concerning
the Nature of Certainty and Infallibility. By an Eminent Author.

An Historical Description of the Glorious Conquest of the City of Buda, (the
Capital City of the Kingdom of Hungary) by the Victorious Arms of the Thrice
Illustrious and Invincible Emperor, Leopold the First, Under the Conduct of
His most Serene Highness, the Duke of Lorrain. In 9 Sheets.

The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest from Scripture, Answered by an
English Protestant. Seasonable and Useful for all Protestant Families.

The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest, from Antiquity, Answered by the
Author of the Answer to the Plausible Arguments from Scripture.

A plain and familiar Discourse (by way of Dialogue) betwixt a Minister and his
Parishioner, concerning the Catholic Church. In Three Parts. I. Showing what is
the Nature of the Catholic Church. II. That the Church of Rome is not the
Catholic Church. III. That the Scriptures, and not the Church, are the Rule of
Faith. Which may serve as an Answer to some late Tracts upon that Argument. By
a Divine of the Church of England.

A Discourse of DUELS; showing the Sinful Nature, and Mischievous Effects of
them: And Answering the usual Excuses made for them, by Challengers, Acceptors,
and Seconds. By T. Comber, D. D.

Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith: With an Answer to the
Eight Theses, laid down for the Trial of the English Reformation, in the Book
that came lately from Oxford.

The Law and Equity of the Gospel, in two plain Sermons, etc. By Tho. Pierce,
D. D. and Dean of Sarum.

The History of the English Monarchy, showing the benefit of Kingly Government,
and inconvenience of Commonwealths, etc.

An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture,
Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles, and Christians in all
Ages, designed to supply the Omissions, Answer the Objections, and rectify the
Mistakes of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, Part I. A further Vindication of the
Divine Right of Tithes, proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and Illustrated by
the Solemn Consecration, and great Convenience of them; with an Answer to the
Objections of other Authors against them, Part II. To which is added, A
Discourse of Excommunication. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Precentor of York.

-- A Church Catechism, with a brief and casie Explanation thereof, for the
help of the meanest Capacities, and weakest Memories, in order to the
Establishing them in the Religion of the Church of England.

Sir William Dugdales Summons to all Parliaments, since the 49th. Year of King
Henry the Third.

The Dean of Durham's Counsel and Directions (Divine and Moral) in Letters of
Advice to a Young Gentleman, soon after his Admission into a College in Oxford.

Archbishop Stern's Logic.

The Pope's Bull concerning the Damnation, Excommunication, etc. of Queen
Elizaheth, with Observations and Animadversions thereon. By Thomas Lord Bishop
of Lincoln. There is also Printed with it the Popes Bull, for the Damnation and
Excommunication of King Henry the Eighth.

The Catholic Balance, or a Discourse determining the Controversies
concerning, 1. The Catholic Doctrines. 2. The Primacy of St. Peter, and the
Bishop of Rome. 3. The Subjection and Authority of the Church in a Christian
State: According to the Suffrages of the primest Antiquity. Written with most
Impartial Sincerity, at the Request of a Private Gentleman.

PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines, etc.

VOL. II. Containing Four PARTS.

Part the Third, Of the Tastes and Virtues of Minerals, and the similitude of
their Principles, to those of Vegetables.

Part the Fourth, Of the Tastes and Virtues of Animal Medicines, and the
Origin of Animal Humors.

Part the Fifth, Containing the Classes of Specificks, distinguished by their
Tastes, and the Humors which they Correct.

Part the Sixth, Contains a new Method for distinguishing Plants into Classes,
by their Tastes and Smells.

In the Appendix, The Animal Medicines are reduced into a Scheme by their
Tastes. The Minerals are also digested under their several Tastes, and many
Observations are added, which were omitted in the preceding Parts.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord Digby, Baron Digby OF Geashil in IRELAND.
My Lord,
I Designed the subject of this Essay at Coleshil-Hall in Warwickshire, whilst
I attended there as a Physician: And therefore I humbly apply my self to your
Lordship, for the Patronage of it.

The great Favors I have received from your Honorable Family, oblige me to
make this Dedication; but especially your Lordship's curiosity in reading the
Philosophy of this Age, and your Ingenious Studies, which have given your
Lordship the advantage of judging of a greater Subject.

I am much obliged to many Gentlemen of your Country, who have Tasted many
Plants with me; and I desire to make this Tract more acceptable to them, by
this Dedication of it to your Lordship, whom they justly Honor and Esteem, for
your Zealous concern, for the Preservation of our Church and State.

I will give your Lordship this short account of the design of this ensuing
Book.

I shall assert, that Minerals, Animals, and Vegetables, have Water, Earth,
Oil, and Acids, for their Principles: Of these they are compounded, and into
these they are ultimately resolved: Generation being the mixture of Principles,
and Corruption the separation of them.

This Opinion agrees with, and illustrates the Ancient Hypothesis, That all
Bodies are compounded of Moist, Dry, Hot, and Cool Principles.

The Humidity depends on the Water, the dryness on the Earth, the Oil is
Inflammable, and the Matter of Fire in Vegetables: In Minerals, the Oily
Sulphur burns; in Animals, the Oily Fat is Inflammable: The Oils, Fats, and
Sulphurs are the same Oily Principle, but they differ by their several States,
Mixtures, and Digestions.

The Acid Principle produces Coldness in Animal Humors, according to
Hippocrates's Observation, (...): And it is observable, that Nitre, which is
Acid, tastes very Cool; and the Sulphurous Acid, which abounds in the Air, is
esteemed the Principle of Cold.

The Oily Principle is the Hot Principle in Animals, as Hippocrates affirms,
(...).

Because the Ancients observed these Qualities to abound in Earth, Water, Fire,
and Air, they called these Elements, and supposed all Bodies to be compounded
of them. Those Constitutions they called Dry, in which Earth abounds; those
Moist, in which Water prevails; the Oil high digested makes the Constitution
Hot, and a great Acidity renders the Constitution Cold.

Galen describes Choler as Bitter, Acrid, and Detergent; Phlegm, as Crude,
Slimy, and Cool. The Atra bilis is described as Acid, which Galen says, is
evacuated into the Stomach, and there becomes Styptick. Hippocrates affirms the
Atra bilis to be Viscid, (...), so that by Atra bilis the Ancient Physicians
understood the Slimy Acid of the Spleen, which, when the Spleen is obstructed,
is carried by the Arteries of the Stomach into its Cavity; where this Slime and
Acidity abounding, produce the Flatus Hypochondriacus; and this Acidity
descending into the Guts, turns the Choler it there meets into a black Color,
from whence it has the name of Atra bilis.

From the taste of these Humors, Bitter, Acrid, Choler, Acid, Lympha, and
Viscid Slime, the Famous Sylvius deduces his Notions of all Diseases, as the
Ancients did from Choler, Phlegm, and Atra bilis. But I will, in this Treatise,
present your Lordship with a larger Scheme of Animal Humors.

I shall endeavor, in this Tract, to explain the Virtues of Mineral and Animal
Medicines by their Tastes and Smells, as I have done that of Vegetables: Though
Galen did exactly describe the Tastes of Vegetables, yet he was wholly
perplexed about Minerals; and the same is the general fault of the Chemists,
who attribute wonderful Effects to their Gold Medicines, but observe no Taste,
though the sweet Stypticity is evident in Tincture of Gold, from whence it has
its Virtue.

That Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals have the same kind of Taste at first,
may seem strange, but we must consider, that Vegetables receive their Juices
from Minerals; (to prove this, I need only instance in Hepatica Terrestris,
which smells of a Petroleum) and Minerals have their Acid, Sweet, Slimy, and
Bitter Tastes: Out of these the Juices for Vegetables is prepared by
Fermentation, and the dissolving Power of the Sulphur-Acid in the Air: If this
Nourishment be ill prepared, it keeps its Mineral Nature, and petrefies Plants,
hence Stoney parts are observed in Oaks, whilst growing; and Coral smells
Earthy and Sulphurous, like a Flint, if two pieces be rubbed together.

I must farther observe, that Animals have their Sweet, Bitter, Salt, and Acrid
Tastes from Vegetables, which, by Putrefaction acquire an Animal Nature,
yielding Urinous Spirits; and all Vegetables become fit Nourishment for
Animals, by their Fermentation in the Stomach.

Many Marine Plants, such as Sponge, have a middle state of Principles betwixt
Vegetables and Animals, and therefore yield a Volatile Salt, like Animals, and
Fixed, like Vegetables.

I will give one Instance from the greatest of our English Physicians, Dr.
Willis, to show his Opinion of the usefulness of a Rational, from the taste of
an Empyrical Medicine in the Chincough, from whence he framed his Methodical
and Rational Cure of it. He examined the Virtue of Cupmoss by the Taste, and
says, Virtutis astrictoriae est, atque particulas nonnihil acres salis
volatilis copiam redolentes in se continet, unde conjectari licebit usum ejus
esse sanguinem figere, serique fluxiones sedare, ac insuper succum nerveum
volatilizando, diathesin spasmodicam tollere.

The Virtues of Medicines were first known by the Tastes of our Diet, which
vitiates the Humors of our Bodies, by its Bitter, Acrid, Salt, and Aromatic
Tastes (the most natural Diet being of a Sweet Taste): And by these Tastes
also, the preternatural Humors were observed to be rectified.

These Tastes were well known to Mankind, whilst they fed most on Vegetables;
and this Age therefore knows less of them, because they are little used in our
Diet: For which reason, I believe, the Virtues of Plants have been esteemed
occult Qualities, which were discovered by Experience, and not by our Senses.
But this Tract will satisfy the Skeptical, in giving them a sensible Testimony
of the nature of Animal Humors, and the operation of Medicines on them, by
their suitableness to their Tastes, Principles, and Digestions.

This Design will thwart the Opinion of Astrologists, who fetch the Virtue of
Plants from the Planets; and also the Opinion of the Helmontian Archeus, and
the spirituality of occult Qualities in many Minerals and Stones; and all the
sympathetical Conjurations in Amulets, which have no sensible Qualities.

My Lord, I have given you an Account of my Design, and hope you will accept
it, as a Testimony of my being,

My Lord, Your Faithful Humble Servant, John Floyer.

THE PREFACE.
NOT only Aristotle, but most Philosophers since, have compared the Taste to
the feeling of an Object: And since the Taste discerns all its Objects by their
Contact, and the Organ of Feeling has the same Nerveous Papillae covered by a
Membrane, it may not improperly be called so.

I think it necessary (for the distinguishing of Tastes) to observe a diversity
in their Contact of the Organ; for some Tastes only superficially touch the
Membrane of the Tongue, and therefore they chiefly affect the exterior Skin of
it; as those things we Feel, touch only the superficial skin of the Fingers,
the Papillae feeling through the Skin, as we do through our Gloves. Other
Objects we Taste, insinuate their Particles into the Porous skin of the Tongue,
and immediately affect the Papillae Nervosae, which Malpighius describes, as
the Fingers whereby we feel the Figure and motion of some minute Particles we
Taste, and by this we chiefly distinguish the Organs of Feeling and Tasting.

The Taste is properly a more curious and exquisite touching of the minute
Particles of an Object: Hence it is, that we discern those Qualities we Feel,
by the Taste also; but we Taste more than we Feel.

We both Feel and Taste,

1. The hardness in Woods, Stones, Metals, and Bones of Animals. 2. The
softness in Pulps, and the Parenchymous parts of Plants and Animals. 3. The
dryness in Woods, Stones, and Minerals. 4. The humidity in Juices. 5. The
viscidity in Gums, Glews, and Turpentines. 6. The toughness or stringiness in
the Muscular Flesh, and the Wood of Plants. 7. The Friability in Resins. 8. The
Roughness in Astringents and Vitriols. 9. The Smoothness in Slimes and Oils.
In these Tastes the Object chiefly affects the skin of the Tongue, and the
Papillae Nervosae immediately through that: Because we both Feel and Taste
these Qualities, these are most improperly called Tastes; and the Ancients did
not commonly allow them all to be Tastes, but since they allowed of Astringent
Tastes, why not of Hard, Soft, Dry, Humid, etc. and since we discern them by
the Tongue, which is the common Organ of Taste; and that does more certainly
and exquisitely discern these Qualities than the Fingers* I have called them
Tastes, and I find both Hippocrates and Galen speak of some of them, as Tastes
sometimes.

By the Taste only we discern most clearly and perfectly,

1. The Sweetness of an Object, which is only smooth to the Touch. 2. The
Bitterness, and this is only drying and deterging in the Skin of the Fingers.
3. The Aromaticks and Fetids affect the Taste, and are not at all discerned by
the Feeling. 4. Saltness is perceived by the Taste only, but it dries the Skin
of the Fingers, as well as the Tongue. 5. The Acrids and Corrosives, if long
applied, fret the Skin of the Body as well as the Tongue. 6. Sowreness is not
perceived by the Organ of Feeling, but only the Roughness attending it.
These are called most properly Tastes, because they affect the Papillae
Nervosae immediately, and not only through the Skin of the Tongue, as it is in
Feeling, by other Parts.

By these Tastes we perceive the minute Particles of Bodies; but by the former,
we observe only the superficial Textures of them.

I will next give some Instances of the usefulness of Tasting our Medicines;
for by the Tasting of them we observe,

1. Their Consistence, as Hardness, Softness, Dryness, Humidity, Viscidity,
Toughness, Friability, Roughness, and Smoothness of their Superficies.

II. The Figures of their small Particles.

1. The cutting edges in Acids. 2. The sharp Pungency in Acrids. 3. The
pungency and dryness in Salts, being like the Panes of Glass. 4. The pungent,
hot, crooked Particles in Corrosive Tastes.
These stick long on the Tongue, and probably have an Acidity joined to their
Volatile Oils or Salts, whereby their Figures are made irregular, tearing, and
corrosive. So in Minerals, the Acid joined to a Volatile Sulphur produces a
burning Acid Corrosive. And in the Roots of Pellitory in the Shops, we first
observe a burning Pungency, and afterward a sour cool Taste; and these
Tastes, like that of Aron's Pungency, appear not till after some time. Some
fixed Salts have various Figures, and I may suppose that Volatiles have also a
diversity. Acrids have straight, pungent Particles like Needles, but the
Corrosive may be crooked Hooks, tearing and vesicating.

III. We discern the motion of the small Particles of Bodies by the Taste.

1. Hot, from the Pungent, Penetrant, Acrid, or Corrosive Tastes. 2. Coolness
in the sour, slimy, watery, crude Tastes. 3. A pleasing Titillation in the
Aromatic Tastes. 4. Offensive impressions in the fetid nauseous Tastes.
IV. By the Taste we observe the Dose of our Medicines; for if the Heat be
great on our Tongue, we give the less; and if the Taste be not very offensive,
we give the greater Dose.

V. By the taste of the Medicine we observe, what Preparation is most fit for
it, which I have mentioned in the first Volume.

VI. By the Taste we observe the suitableness of the Medicine to particular
Humors in Animals, which have the same, or a contrary Taste.

VII. By the Taste we observe the agreement of one Medicine with another, whose
Virtues we know; and from thence examine the Virtue by this general Touchstone,
viz. Those things which agree in Taste, agree in Virtue. I will therefore
recommend this, as the chief Sagacity in Tasting, to discern the similitude in
Tastes, and when we have given all the sensible Modes of Tastes, we ought, if
possible, to compare it to some known Tastes: So in the Chermes there is a
Bitter Astringency; but besides that, it has a similitude to the Taste of the
Cortex Peruvianus, and they have both the same effects in Fevers. This
similitude must be allowed a great latitude; for one thing may be like another
in Taste, but yet have some difference, but not (...).

VIII. By the Taste we observe the Alterations made by Fire in Chemical
Preparations, and those made in Vegetables, by ripening of Fruits.

Though by Chemistry we extract the Principles of Bodies, yet the Taste only or
chiefly shows their Figures, Motions, and Effects on the Body; and also that
which we can no otherwise observe, the Figures, Motions, and Effects which
depend on the mixtures of the Principles; therefore it is not sufficient to
observe the Acid in Oil of Vitriol or Sulphur, and the hardness in Steel; but
we must observe the Vitriolick Taste produced by their mixture and dissolution:
Therefore Chemists ought, after every Preparation and Mixture, to examine their
new Products by their Tastes and Smells; and from thence, and the Tastes or
Smells of the Ingredients, together with due reflections on the manner and
nature of their Operations, to give their Rationale of the Virtues of their new
Medicine. Whereas, at present, we have too much Hyperbole in the Descriptions
of Chemical Medicines and their Virtues, and no Taste.

IX. I shall affirm, That it is very necessary for the making of an Experiment
on any Medicine; for before we try any thing on the Body of a Man, we ought to
take the best Information our Senses can give us, about the Taste and Smell of
it, by which we shall know the consistence of the Medicine, the Figures and
Motions of its Particles, the quantity of its Dose, the Preparation of the
Medicine, the agreement with other Medicines of the same Taste, the Tastes of
its Chemical Principles, and their alteration by Mixtures, and its suitableness
to the Digestion, Temper, Tastes, and Principles of some particular Humor of
an Animal, which indicate peculiar Tastes for their Preservation in Health, or
alteration in Sickness.

X. By the Tastes we shall more fully understand the Ancient Authors of our
Faculty, as Galen, who quotes the number of Tastes out of Plato: Dioscorides
mentions many Tastes of Plants, and Galen transcribed them from him.
Hippocrates has grounded his Aphorisms on Tastes: And Galen uses them in his
Methodus Medendi, and gives an account of some Medicines from them; so that it
is impossible to understand either Hippocrates, Dioscorides, or Galen, without
a full information about the Tastes of Plants.

Hippocrates gives us these general Rules about Tastes.

(...)

All Hot, Acrid, and Fragrant Herbs, are more Diuretic than Purgative.

(...).

Sweet, Acrid, Salt, Bitter, Austere (such are here meant as the Laurel-Bitter
Astringents) and Fleshy Fruits (such as Oily Nuts) do Heat.

(...).

All Acerb and Austere Plants are Binding.

(...).

Acids extenuate, and are Diuretic.

These Instances from Hippocrates are sufficient to prove, That the Tasting of
Medicines is no novel Design, nor thought unuseful by the best of Physicians in
the purest Ages of Physic, when the knowledge of Medicines and Animal Humors
was deduced from sensible Qualities.

XI. By the Taste we may distinguish Plants into Classes, as I have done; and
also remark some defect in the Classes of our Plant-Anatomists; and also
observe the difference of the Specific Juices in Plants, and the difference
also of their Vessels, in which the different Tastes are lodged.

I. In Vegetables,
1. We taste the Woody part, and that may be called a ligneous, dry, hard Taste.

2. The Juices of Vegetables which taste humid, and these are either the Watery
Juices, which lie in the Bladders of Plants, or else the Juices of Plants,
which are well digested, and I call them the Oily Specific proper Juices,
lodged in the Turpentine Vessels of Plants.

If we describe both the Watery and Oily Juices of Plants, we may easily discern
the Virtues of the Medicines. The Smell very much conduces to the discovery of
the particular degree of Digestion, which each Specific Juice of Vegetables
has, by the Effluviums they emit.

Galen advises us to Taste each particular part of a Plant; for in the Root is
not the most crude Juice of a Plant, as is vulgarly believed: He says, The
Leaves are less Acrid in Aron, Dragons, Squills than the Roots; and that
Althaea-Roots discuss Tumors, by a latent Acrimony which the Leaves do not; and
Garlic, Onion, and Radish-Roots are most Acrid.

We must taste Vegetables in the Soil in which they naturally grow in their
perfect state; some best while fresh, but others dried, juiced, or in
decoction; and observe, not to Taste many at one time: Some Plants are best
smelt when bruised or rubbed; but if they be very Odoriferous, I only draw them
through my Hand.

I believe that all the Criticisms about the Tastes of Vegetables cannot be
settled in the space of half an Age; therefore I hope for Pardon where I have
erred or omitted some Modes; and beg the Assistance of all my Profession in
this useful design; for this design must be undertaken by Physicians, and not
Herbalists, who cannot judge truly of the Virtues, without the assistance of
our Art, and the knowledge of the Humors of our Bodies.

II. In Animals we taste,
1. The toughness or tenderness of the Muscular Fibers and Viscera.

2. The Serose Juice, (which is the Bloody Gravy) with an Animal savor of
Fetid; and also a Smell resembling the same Taste: So in Rabbits Flesh we taste
and smell a strong Rankness.

In the hard Parts of Animals we smell a Foetor, as in Horns and Hoofs, from
whence they have their Virtue, (and this Foetor differs not from the Spirits of
Animals, which being collected in the liquor of the Nervous, it becomes lucid);
hence it is that Fetid Sulphurs, Animals and Vegetables are Nervines; being
strong or fetid, like the Spirits.

I will here only give a Scheme of Animal Humors, that the Taster may observe
what is to be Tasted in Animals.

Chyle is the first and original Humor prepared in Animals.

From Chyle all the other Humors arise, either by Digestion or Percolation,
mediately or immediately.

First, From Chyle is prepared,

I. By Digestion,

1. The Serum of the Blood, and from thence the Fibrous Cake or Part.

II. By Percolation from Chyle.

1. The Fat, which is the Butyrose part of Chyle. 2. The Milky Lympha
glandularum conglomeratarum, like Spittle, and the Pancreatick Juice, and that
of the Stomach and Guts. 3. The Semen, which is also Milky, Slimy, and Fetid.
4. The Milk of the Breasts.
From the Fat returning into the Veins is chiefly produced the red part of the
Blood.

From the red part,

1. Choler. 2. The Spirits of Animals.
From the Serum of the Blood by Percolation,

1. The Sweat. 2. The Urine. 3. The Lympha serosa Glandularum conglomeratarum,
which is observed in the Lymphaticks.
All these I have more fully described in the ensuing Book, together with the
original of Saltness, and Acidity in Animal Humors.

The Taste of Infects is also to be observed, for in Millepedes is an Acrid
Taste; in Chermes a Bitter Astringency, like the Ilex on which they are bred:
So that it is probable that Insects taste of the Plants on which they are bred,
each Plant having its particular Insects and Galls; and I believe the Acid in
Pismires is from some Vegetable on which they feed. And I must here remark,
that Insects have their Acrid, and also the Choler of Animals, which is
pungent, both like the Acrimony of Vegetables, and not of a Salt- Taste.

III. In Minerals we must observe,
1. The dry gritt in Stones and Metals, and their Calces. 2. The saltness in
Mineral Salts of diverse kinds, and in the Salt of Lime. 3. An Acidity in the
Acid Spirits and Sulphurs. 4. A Vitriolick Astringent Taste in all the Vitriols
of Minerals and some Earths, as Bole, etc. 5. A sweetness in Sugar of Lead and
other Vitriols. 6. A bitterness in Nitre, and North-hall-Waters, and the
Crystals of Silver. 7. A burning Corrosive Acid in Arsenick and Calx viva
Tastes, burning with a Saltness, from whence the Corrosiveness depends.
By the Smell we observe the Sulphurs of Minerals, and some Authors mention the
Odoriferous Smells of the Preparations of Antimony, as Ettmuller; and in
Bonetus we find this Arcanum Vitrioli nocte intempesta instar Carbunculi lucet,
cujusque odor omnia alia odorifera antecellit. Tilingius.

The different Pungency of the Sulphur-Smells must be observed; but these are
sometimes so locked up by the preparation and addition of Acids, as not in that
state to give a manifest Taste; but by being in the Stomach, the Acid is taken
off, and the Sulphur becomes Pungent, Vomitive, or Diaphoretick; therefore in
judging of some Antimonial Preparations we consider the Taste and Smell during
the Preparation; and when we find a Sulphur evident in that, we must allow that
some of it sticks to the Calces; and from thence we must deduce part of the
Virtue of the Mineral Calces: So the Oils of lants are not perfectly separated
from the Fixed Salts, from whence they have their different Virtues.

If we reflect on the Actions of our other Senses, they may be imposed on as
well as our Tastes, and not discern that object in one state which they did in
another: so we both See and Feel Salts and Sugar when dry; but if they be
dissolved in Water we shall only perceive them by our Tastes; therefore we use
the testimony of all our other Senses to supply the defect in any one.

We may rationally infer from the sulphurous Smells in the Preparation, as
well as the effects in the Stomach, that Sulphur abounds in Antimonial
Vomitories; and it is enough, that both Taste and Smell can discern the
Antimonial Sulphur (which is not unlike common Sulphur) in more loose
Preparations, wherein it is more separated from the Earthy Particles, (as in
Sulphur Antimonii combustibile, the Clyssus and Tinctures.)

Vegetables and Animals are the most proper objects of Taste; but most of the
Mineral Sulphurs are better Smelt than Tasted: and in the judging of our
Medicines we must consult both Taste and Smell.

It is necessary to prepare some Bodies that they may give their Smells; so
Pearls and other precious Stones must be long ground in a Mortar before they
will give their fragrant smells; which, by D. Olaus Borichius is observed to be
like Violets; he mentions other Stones struck with a Hammer smelling like Musk,
others like burnt Horns, or the Excrements of Animals: And our Flints and
common Stones smell like Sulphur, being struck against one another.

These varieties of Smells in Stones sufficiently evidence, that their Virtues
are no occult qualities.

I must confess that some Medicines acquire new Virtues in the Stomach, from
the Animal Acid; so Boles are made Aluminous, Salts Vitriolated, and the
Testaceous Medicines made Salt and Styptick by it. therefore we must allow
those the same Virtues, as if they had been prepared by an Acid, and thence
deduce them.

Mercury and other Minerals acquire a Vitriolick Taste in the Body, as they do
by Preparation with Acids; without this alteration Mercury crude can have no
considerable Virtue, as other Minerals have not. I have tried Mercury
decoctions in Water, and put Worms into it, but found it not to kill them;
whence I may justly doubt of its Virtue.

Half an Ounce of crude Mercury injected into the Veins, made no alteration in
a Dog, neither by Vomiting, Purging, or Salivation. Bonetus.

Two or three pounds of crude Mercury are given sometimes inwardly, and pass
through the Guts, without Injury. These Instances suffice to show the small
Virtue as well as Taste of crude Mercury; but the Fumes of Mercury taste sweet,
as the Gilders inform me: And Doleus mentions the Stypticity of the Fumes of
Mercury in the Throat.

During the long neglect of the Press in publishing this second Volume, I added
the Appendix, which contains a more exact Method, being a Scheme both of
Minerals and Animals, according to their Tastes; and many particular Tastes
were added, which were omitted in the other Parts.

Many Errata's have been committed; for the Correcting whereof, I have affixed
the Errata's observed by my self, and desire the Reader to consult them.

Errata in Vol. I.
PRef. p. 6. l. 8. r. Ray's Methodus. 57. for Daffadils, r. Pseudonarcissus. p.
276. l. 4. Acid. 282. l. ult. dele of both. 292. l. 23. Sulphur, an Oil and
Acid is closely locked up. 293. l. 7. both. The. 296. l. 6. new. 303. l. 10. an
Efflorescence. 310. l. 7. so neither is it in.

Errata in Vol. II.
Page 4. l. 20. and 125. l. 1. Acid. 17. l. 18. Volatility, it. 24. l. 9. Lapis
bufon. p. 41. l. 1. Nitre inflammable. Spirit. p. 58. l. 14. Sponge distilled.
124. l. 5. Aloes is Bitter. l. 6. dele Aloes. 161. l. 10 Sweet Acrid. 166. l.
15. set Mastiche close to Olibanum. 171. l. 3.. 1. Hot Cephalicks. 176. l. 13.
after juglandium add Faeculae bryoniae, pulvis de gutteta, which dele in l. 20.
190. l. 19. for Corallina r. Carlina. 193. l. 16. dele nummulariae. 195, set
pulv. Cornathin. close to Scammonii. 205. l. 3. dele 6. Bitter-Acrids. 239. l.
25. Animal-bitter. 281. l. 12. Plants Anato. 294. l. 27. and sub-acid. 301.
Fraxinus bubula is omitted before this. 304. l. 21. has an. 316. l. 21.
Ballatis r. Battatos. 317. Opium r. Apium. 343. l. 2. or without. 349. l. 24.
of a Perch. 352. l. 21. These. 353. l. 27. conglomerated. 354. l. 20. r. Colon.
362. l. 13. red; l. ult. it unites readily. 369. l. 10. the Acrid. 373. l. 1.
Spleen-Acid. 378. l. 10. Aluminous. 384. l. 23. ^. wiped. 390. l. 2.
Peat-Turfs. 394. l. 10. r. are not Nitre.

PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines, etc. The Second Volume.
OF THE Tastes and Virtues OF MINERALS. An Appendix to the Third Part of VOL.
I. Of Vegetables, etc.

CHAP. I. Of the Principles of Vegetables, which are deducible from Minerals.
AS the best of Physicians (speaking of Man, the Principal of the Animal
Kingdom) says, We are that very Thing by which we are nourished; so, without a
Paradox, every Vegetable may be said to be a Mineral, as being nourished by
something Mineral: And a Treatise of Minerals may very aptly be joined to One
of Vegetables, without any Fault in Coherence, or Absurdity in Method. For
Vegetables receive their Earth, Oil, and Acid from Minerals. And I must further
observe, That the Soil from which Vegetables receive their immediate Juice, is
a Congeries of Mineral Bodies, viz. Sand, which looks like Gems in a
Microscope; Clay, Marle, Chalk, Flints, Limestone, and diverse other sorts of
Earths, in Distillation, yielding an Acid Spirit; which is the Product of some
Sulphur in them: And the same Sulphur gives an Oily Fatness to many Earths, as
Marle, Clay, Bole, etc. It is observed, that Saltpeter abounds in all Fertile
Earths, and has a Mineral-Acid in it: So that, if it any ways conduce to the
Production of Plants, it must be allowed, that in the Production, Vegetables
receive some Acid from it. Sulphurous Damps are most evident in some
particular Places arising from the Superficies of the Earth; and Boggy Grounds
have always an offensive Air, which is not vitiated by the Water only, but also
by some Sulphurous Effluviums; which, upon standing Water, shoot into a bluish
Cream, like that on standing Vitriolate Waters.

I cannot but mention those Bodies which have a middle State betwixt Minerals
and Vegetables; from whence I infer a great Analogy betwixt their Principles,
and a gradual Transmutation of Mineral Principles into Vegetable Oils, Acids,
and Earths: (Water is a common Vehicle, necessary for the Mixture of those
Principles in both Kingdoms, and it may be, the Earthy Part is the same in
both.) Vegetables are changed toward Minerals sometimes.

Coral grows as a Plant; and afterward has the Hardness of a Stone, when full
grown: to which the Astringent Liquor, observed in it, conduces; for from a
drop of it, new Coral is said to spring.

So in other Vegetables, some Seed-Cases become Stony, which lie in the middle
of an Acid Pulp; as in Cherries, Plumbs, etc.

Gromwel-Seed is Stony, though it have no exterior Acid Pulp; and the Seeds of
Apples and Lemons, which have an exterior Acid Pulp, are not Stony. Pears have
a Stonyness in them. Patrification in Vegetables depends on an Acerb Juice, in
which the Acid and Earth are mixed in a certain Proportion; for all Acids will
not produce it, for want of the due Proportion of Earth to them, and of that
particular Texture of both, which is necessary for Stones. So that, when Coral,
and the Cases of Fruits, become Stones, there is no Change of the Principles;
but the Vegetable Acid and Earth acquire a new Texture.

The Bitumens in the Mineral Kingdom, are in a middle State betwixt Minerals
and Vegetables: They are produced from Mineral Principles, otherwise mixed than
in Minerals, and in a near Disposition to become Vegetable: For the Bitumens in
Minerals, and Turpentines in Vegetables, are very like in Smell and Taste; and
yield the same Chemical Principles in Distillation.

The Soot of Coal is of a smoaky Smell, and tastes Bitter and Acrid; in which
it is like to the Soot of Wood; and also both of them yield the same Volatile
Salt and Oil.

The Narcotick Quality of Sulphur Anodyn. Vitrioli, resembles the Fetid
Narcoticks in Vegetables.

The Ashes of Minerals and Plants may be Vitrified alike by a strong Fire; and
therefore there is no great Difference betwixt them.

The Fixed Salts of Plants have the Nature of Mineral Salts; as appears in
Limewater, which tastes salt; and both are the Product of Fire: for neither
Minerals nor Vegetables have any Natural Fixed Salt. It is not improbable, that
these Fixed Salts of both Kingdoms, agree in the Figure of their Crystals; and
both may be Cubical, as Common Salt; or of some Irregular Figure, near to a
Cube.

The Reason why all Minerals cannot be calcined into Salts, as Plants be, is
the indissolvible Texture of their Parts; which not being perfectly destroyed
by the Fire, they cannot thereby acquire New Mixtures, as it happens in Plants
for the Production of Fixed Salts. But this Dissolution of Principles, and
Re-mixture, happens in Lime, in the Production of the Fixed Salt, evident in
Limewater.

I have mentioned the most known Bodies, which have their Rise from Minerals,
and afterward become Vegetables, as Bitumen; and those which from Vegetables
become Minerals, as Coral, and the Stones of Fruits: And I might here add the
Petrification of Vegetables, by petrifying Waters, which contain a Nitrum
Calcarium, (as the ingenious Dr. Lister has evidently proved) by which Plants
are petrified, having the Nitrous Limestone Particles closely united with
their Earthy Parts. I shall have a further Occasion of comparing the Nitrum
Calcarium with the Tartarous Earth in Plants, by both which Plants are
petrified; by the last, Naturally; and by the former, Artificially and
Externally.

Minerals are produced out of Juyces, like Vegetables; which sometimes grow
into Figures resembling perfect Plants, and have Branches and Joints like them,
as if they had been petrified Plants; but are really Natural Stones. From this
Likeness of Stones and Plants, it is not improbable, that there is a great
Similitude in Principles, and a propensity to change from one to the other. In
the Discourse about Fermentation, I have more fully compared the Oils and Acids
of Minerals with Vegetables. Vide.

CHAP. II. Of the Similitude betwixt Mineral Principles, and those of
Vegetables.
THE Principles of Minerals are of the same Kind and Number, as those of
Vegetables.

Water is distilled from Salts and Mineral Earths; and is necessary for the
mixing of the other Principles: Therefore Liquors are found in Mineral Stones;
and Stones had at first a Liquid Form. Water is the same in all Bodies; but, if
extracted by Distillation, it retains some Tincture from that particular Body
from whence it is distilled.

An Oily Principle is manifest in Sulphurous Bodies, as Antimony, which may be
reduced into a Butyrose Form by Distillation: And all the Mineral Sulphurs may
be easily extracted by Oil of Turpentine, with which they readily mix, because
of the Similitude of Oleous Parts.

The Oyliness of Mineral Sulphurs is more evident in the Distillation of Coal,
which yields a black Oil, Fetid, like Hartshorn, and as black and smoaky.

The Bitumens which have the Nature of Turpentine, do most clearly convince us
of the Oyliness of Mineral Sulphurs: So that I need add no more, to prove this
Principle of Minerals.

The Third Principle of Minerals is an Acid; which is acknowledged by all,
being evident in the Distillation of Sulphur, and the Clyssus of Antimony. This
Acid adheres to the Oily Sulphur in Minerals, and locks it up, thereby making
it appear in a dry Form; and therefore this may be compared to the Tartar in
Vegetables, which has always some Oil in it.

By means of this Acid, the Oily Sulphur, and the Earthy Parts are readily
united in Mineral Bodies; and therefore This is that the Chemists call the
Mercury of Minerals, when they distinguish it from Mercurius Corporum, and
common Quicksilver.

The Fourth Principle of Minerals is an Earthy Part; which in perfect Minerals,
is a Limestone or Spar, which adheres to the Ore of Metals. The Mineral Fumes
coming from the lower Parts of the Earth, fix in such Stones, and are
intimately united with them into the Nature of a Metal: These Mineral Fumes are
Sulphurous and Acid, which readily fix and combine with Earthy Parts; which
the Chemists call the Alkaly of Minerals.

From the number of Principles, I have excluded both Volatile and Fixed Salts,
they being the Products of other Principles combined by Nature or Art.

The Volatile Salts in Vegetables being evident to our Senses, and produced
naturally, I did, in the First Part, call them one of the Principles evident to
our Senses; but because they are compounded of the other Principles, I cannot
think they deserve the name of a Principle.

From the different Proportions, and perfect Mixture of all the former
Principles, all the perfect Metals are produced; and from a different imperfect
Mixture, all other Minerals arise; as Earths, Bitumens, Regular and Irregular
Stones, Gems, Salts, Vitriols, etc.

In Vegetables, Trees have a Mixture of the Principles analogous to Metals;
which their Solidity, Weight, and Aptness to be petrified sooner than Herbs,
sufficiently manifests.

The Texture of Gums, Resins, Turpentines, Mucilages, and Stones of Fruits,
agrees with the imperfect Minerals abovementioned; as will appear by a
particular Analogy observed betwixt the Products of both Kingdoms, which differ
only by their several Digestions and Mixtures: but yet manifestly agree, as the
Chemists speak, in radice; that is, in their Principles.

CHAP. III. Of the Principles, Tastes, and Virtues of Metals, and their
Preparation.
GOLD has the Sulphur and Acid Aurum.
most digested, and intimately mixed with some Stony-Earth, like Flint or Spar;
such as visibly adheres to Gold-Ore. In this the Sulphur-Fumes, which are
Sub-acid, intimately fix themselves with that Stone which is fittest for a
strict Union with them. Some Stones are not moved by Acids, and others very
violently: And hence does happen so small a quantity of Gold, and other Metals,
in a great quantity of Ore.

Fire cannot diminish the Weight, nor separate the Principles of Gold, because
of their perfect Union.

Gold will not rust, nor color the Fingers, unless mixed with other Metals; and
then the Rust is Blue.

The Vapor of Sulphur colors it; and therefore Tartar, Salt, and warm Water
cleanse it.

Aqua Regia dissolves it, which is compounded of Salt and Nitre; whose Spirits
have the greatest Pungency of any Acids, and the least Roughness and Sowreness;
and also a strong Pungent Smell. By the united Pungency of both Spirits, the
Body of Gold is broken or corroded into small Parts; which, joining with the
Menstruum, produces a Vitriol; by the Precipitation of which, Aurum Fulminans
is prepared: which therefore Purges and Vomits, and gives Blackness of Stools,
as other Vitriols do.

The Tincture and Flowers are said to have some Sulphur in them; at least, they
may have somewhat of a Vitriol; which being altered by Addition of Salts, does
not Purge, but sometimes Vomit: And they have the Effects like Tincture of
Steel, in Curing Acids; which is also the Virtue of Crocus Solis; which in the
quantity of a few Grains, may correct a considerable quantity of Acid; since
one Grain of Gold may be extended into above Fifty Inches square in Leaf-Gold.

Gold may be best compared to Aromatic Trees; which have an Oily Salt of the
same Cordial Virtue, that Chemists allot to the pure Sulphur of Gold; of which
Gold has more than other perfect Minerals. So these Aromatic Trees agree with
Gold in their Principles, by having more Oil, and that better digested than
other Trees.

Silver has the Sulphurous Acid in Argentum.
smaller quantity than Gold; and that not so highly digested, as in Gold, yet
so closely united, that the Principles can neither be separated by Fire, nor
Spirit of Nitre, which only breaks the Silver into small Particles, and
therewith constitutes a Bitter-Acrid Vitriol, Purging and Vomiting violently.

The Blue Color of the Tincture of Silver, is from Copper, and vomits; but the
true Tincture is Purple, (as Ettmuller affirms;) and it has some considerable
Virtue, as containing the Sulphurous parts of its Vitriol, or rather of the
Acid Menstruum, which made the Vitriol.

The Crystals of Silver are very Caustic; the Acid becoming more Corrosive, by
being fixed in the Mineral.

Silver may be compared to those Plants which are Purging, abounding with
Earth, Acid, and Oil, united into an Acrid Salt; to which is joined a Bitter
Taste. Such is the Taste of Hellebore, and Colocynthis, which are Bitter-Acrid
Purgers.

Silver is easily mixed with Copper, and is scarce separable from it; to which
its Purging Virtue is much attributed by many Authors.

Copper is called a crude Silver; for in Cuprum.
this the Sulphur and Acid are not so strongly united to the Earthy parts, as
in the former; but are easily dissolvible by Volatile Salts. Spirit of
Sal-Ammoniack, dissolves it into a Green Tincture; Spirit of Sulphur into a
Blue Vitriol, which is the most purging of any Mineral Vitriol, because of its
Sulphurous parts, easily separated, and making it Corrosive. Copper melted,
smells most of Brimstone; and a Preparation of Copper is made by Mr. Boil,
which is inflammable.

The Acrid Purgative Resins of Plants may be best compared to Copper for their
equal Purging Faculty, and their most remarkable Principles, Oils and Acid,
which in Plants produce a Salt; and also in some Preparations of Copper, which
Becher mentions.

Copper has an Acid Sulphur in it, which makes it easily extracted by Spirit of
Sal-Ammoniack; and Copper is easily turned into a Vitriol, which will vomit by
Stimulation of the Membranes, as Aqua Fortis does. From the Nauseous
Brass-savour Taste, the Purging and Vomiting quality proceeds.

Tinn has much Sulphur in it, whence Stannum.
Jovial Medicines have a Purple Color.

It will not so easily dissolve by Acids as Lead, and therefore not so much
used for Medicine; neither have I observed its Taste, nor any Virtue proper to
it.

It is easily melted, and it burns with Nitre; both which argue a Sulphurous
Nature in it.

Lead is something of the Nature of Plumbum.
Silver, for Silver is mixed in all Lead. Tinn differs from Lead, by having more
Sulphur.

Lead-Fumes give Colicks, Palsies, and Shortness of Breath, to the Miners. They
say, The Smoke of melting Lead smells Sweet. The Preparations of Lead do
outwardly cool, because of its Density and Weight. It has the least Internal
Agitation of any Metal, and will vitrifie.

Red-Lead is Calcined Lead to a Red Minium.
Color, very Cooling and Drying in Ulcers.

White-Lead is Prepared by the Fumes Cerussa.
of Vinegar, by which it is made White, and the Cooling quality increased by
the Vinegar.

Burnt-Lead turns Black by the Fumes Plumbum ustum.
of Sulphur; and some Salt is produced by it, which makes it drying.

All these Preparations may be reduced into Lead again; so that it cannot be
reduced into its Principles, no more than Silver, Gold, or Tinn.

Lead may be compared to the Austere Plants, which cool much, and have little
Oil, but much Acid and Earth. So Lead has little Sulphur, but much Acid and
Earth.

Iron abounds with Sulphur, and gives Ferrum.
Fetid Fumes in melting. The Sulphur is extracted by Volatile Salts, where it
is turned into Steel by Horns, with which it is Calcined; but because of that
Sulphur, Iron is preferible to Steel: for by that Sulphur, and the Earthy
parts, Iron cures the Animal Acids, and thereby removes Obstructions.

Salt of Iron is made by the Acid of Sal Martis.
Vitriol, dissolving the Iron. It tastes Sweet and Rough; the Roughness is from
the Mineral mixed with the Acid, as Astringency is produced in Plants; the
Sweetness is from the Sulphur and the Acid Menstruum, as the Oil and an Acid
produce Sweetness in Plants. This Salt may be precipitated into a Crocus
Martis, and that melted into Iron; and therefore this Salt is no Principle of
Iron, but a Composition betwixt an Acid, and the Particles of Iron; and it will
absorb Acids, and also acts as a Salt by its Figure; and by its Roughness
cooling the Blood, and stopping all Fluxes in the same manner, as the Sweet
Astringent Ferns do; and both of them are accounted Splenetick.

The Tincture of Steel tastes Vitriolick Sweet; as also the Preparation with
Tartar and Sulphur.

Ens Veneris smells like Spirit of Salt, and tastes Rough, and not Sweet like
Iron, but is a Composition of Iron and Salt; it has not any Taste of Copper.

The Loadstone has the nature of Iron; and so has Smiris, which is used for
Polishing Gems.

Iron may be compared to the Fetid Plants, by its Sulphur-Smell, and also by
its Vterine Virtue.

Common Quicksilver is very fluid, from Mercurius.
the roundness of its parts, by reason of its Volatility. It contains Sulphur
in it; for it is usually found in Gold and Silver Mines, mixed with Sulphur, in
the form of Cinnabar; from whence it is distilled.

We observe the Acidity of Quicksilver, in corroding the Teeth and Iron, and
by its Salivation. And we prepare it with more Acids, to make it salivate in a
smaller quantity.

Quicksilver seems to be a fluid Amalgama of some Metal, and looks like melted
Lead. The Chemists seem most confident of their Extraction of Quicksilver out
of Lead; and Quicksilver is easily mixed with it, and fixed by it, and equals its
great Weight; and both soften the Metal they are mixed with.

Quicksilver seems compounded of a Metallic Sulphur, Acid, and Lead. The
Sulphur contained in Quicksilver, seems Arsenical, because Quicksilver is found
in Silver Mines, in which Arsenick is found also. Arsenick colors other Metals
White, as well as Quicksilver; both of them are very Corrosive, and of a White
Color, and easily sublimed.

It may be observed in Minerals, and other Bodies, That Nature often
decompounds a Mineral with one of its Principles or two. So Vitriols are
compounded of Acid, and a perfect Metal. Sulphur and Mineral Stones in
Marchasites. And sometimes two Compounds are re-compounded, as in Cinnabar,
which contains Quicksilver and Sulphur.

Quicksilver easily coagulates by Acids, (as Lead is dissolved by them) by
reason of its Sulphur and Earth; but these cannot destroy it, but it revives
again.

All Metals by their Sulphur fix it, Spittle by its Sub-acid Salt kills it; and
so Turpentine and Oils, by their latent Acid, destroy its fluidity.

A Solution of Mercury Precipitated

By Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack, is White. Oil of Tartar, is Red. Limewater, is
Yellow.

Mercurial Medicines have the Nature of Alkaly; but in Preparations are
disguised by Acids, and by them made very Noxious and Corrosive.

The Mercurial Particles, though without an Acid, if only by an Unguent or Fume,
they pierce through the Pores of the Skin into the Blood, there they imbibe the
Acid Salts, and from their Mixture act like Sublimate, coagulating the Serum of
the Blood, and by that means produce Salivation; the thin parts of the
coagulate Serum running off by the Glandules of the Mouth. The Ammoniack Salt
of Animals may dispose the Mercurial Particles into Corrosive pointed Figures,
as the Acid of Common Salt does in the Preparation of Sublimate.

Sublimate has the Acid of Spirit of Mercurius Sublimatus.
Salt, joined with it by Sublimation; and I believe something of a Vitriol
Taste is produced by the Mixture; for Sublimate has a Brass-savour Taste, which
is very Nauseous; and also a Roughness, by which it coagulates the Blood, and
outwardly repels strongly, and resists Putrefaction in Gangrenes and Ulcers.

Sublimate is a kind of Vitriol, produced by the Acids and Mercury: And by its
Brass-savour Taste, purges and vomits violently.

Spirit of Vitriol, distilled from Quicksilver, tastes Aluminous.

Turbith Mineral is a Mercurial Vitriol, produced by Oil of Vitriol; and Vomits
violently, and also Salivates.

Mercurius Vitae, after the use of it, a Vitriolate Mercurius Vitae.
Taste is in the Mouth, like Copper; from whence its Vomitive Virtue arises
from the Quicksilver, as well as Antimony.

Mercury is Precipitated from its Solution by Limewater, and is thereby
rendered Sweet and Innoxious: Therefore Fixed Salts are good, when any Body is
Poisoned by Sublimate.

White Precipitate Purges gently, as well as Mercurius Dulcis; both are of a
mild Vitriolick Nature, having less Acid in them.

Red Precipitate is Corrosive, by the Spirit of Nitre, by which the Quicksilver
is Vitriolated.

CHAP. IV. Of Imperfect Mineral Principles, and their Tastes and Virtues.
THE Principles of Minerals appear most evidently in these following Minerals;
in which one Principle appears more evidently than in others; and sometimes two
Principles are Compounded, as in Sulphur; and sometimes the three Principles
are very loosely mixed, as in Antimony and Marcasites; in others most closely
united by Fire, as in Salts; and the last sort is a Composition of Acid, and a
perfect Mineral, as in Vitriols.

Mineral Earths are Compounded of a Terrae Minerales.
greater quantity of Earthy Parts, Impregnate with Fumes from a particular
Mineral; by which it obtains the Virtue of that Mineral, whose Fumes it
receives, and becomes Astringent by the Acid of the Sulphur joined to the
Earthy Parts; and the Oily Part of the Sulphur gives it a Fat Oyliness, and
also a strong Earthy Smell. Fat Earths, are like the Mucilages of Vegetables,
Cooling and also Astringent. Vid. Bolus Armena, etc.

Gems have their Originals in Mines, Lapides Pretiosi.
and their Color from Minerals.

The Green Color of Smaragdus is from Iron.

Rubines, Granates, and Hyacinths, have their Color from Gold.

The Blue of Lapis Armenus and Lazuli, is from Copper.

Topasius and Chrysolithus have their Tellowness from Iron.

Gems are at first in the form of Liquors, and then shoot into Plates, like
Salts; and of diverse Plates is made the Gem.

This is the Opinion of the Honorable Mr. Boil.

This Salt which Compounds Gems, seems like to Cream of Tartar in Vegetables,
which consists of Acids and Earthy Parts, tasting Gritty, and shooting into
Crystals. So in Minerals, the Sulphur Acid joins with a Stony Grit, and
constitutes the Nitrum Calcarium; which, if Crystalized by it self, constitutes
Transparent Stones; which may (during its Crystallization) receive the Fumes of
some Mineral; or else the Sulphur in the Acid appears, when the Acid is fixed
on an Earth, and gives it a color.

Such is the color of Red Precipitate, from the Red Sulphur in Nitre. Vid.
Lapides pretiosi, Crystallus, etc.

Common Stones have the same Principles Lapides Communes.
as the former; and besides, a great deal of Mineral Earth or Bole with them;
which hinder the regular shooting of the Nitrum Calcarium, and the
Transparency; and from those Mixtures, Stones have their Colors.

Lime, Marble, Alabaster, and Shells of Animals, have a great deal of Earth and
Acid, and not much Sulphur: They are easily Calcined into Salt, by reason of
their dissolvible Texture. So Astringent, Mucilaginous and Bitter Plants have
much Acid and Earth, little Oil, and yield much Salt.

But those Stones which have much Sulphur, and a close Texture, yield little
Salt, like Resins in Vegetables; but by addition of Salt, these Stones are
fusible into Glass; such is the Nature of Osteocolla and Flints.

Those Stones which have an indissolvible Mixture of Oil, Acid, and Earth, and
probably an equal proportion, are very easily fused, as Metals be; as in Spar,
and Mineral Stones. Limestone cannot turn into Glass, because its Sulphur is
separated by the Fire, and the Acid of the Stone joins with some Earthy
Particles, upon the wetting of the Stone; from whence the Effervescence in Lime
proceeds.

Aetites is a Flint, and so is Lapis Bubonius; by which we may be assured no
Virtues can be expected from them.

Vitriols are made by Metalline Bodies, Vitriola.
Compounded with a Sulphurous Acid.

From Copper a Blue Vitriol.

From Iron a Green.

From Silver a White.

From Lead a White Sugar of Lead.

From Mercury an Aluminous Brass-savoured Vitriol.

Quaere, The Color and Taste of the Vitriols of Tinn and Gold?

A Fire Stone or Marcasite: It consists Pyrites.
of a Stone, Mineral Ocher, and Sulphurous Acid. Out of the Marcasite both
Vitriol and Sulphur may be made.

There are as many Marcasites, as sorts of Metals; These they add to the
Metals, to make them more fusible; which Spar, and all other Sulphurous Stones
do.

The Fire-stone which was sent to me from Wedgebury, was black on the outside,
and Silver-coloured within: This I put into a Glass of Fair Water, which after
a little time had a Vitriolate Taste, and the Water turned Purple with Galls;
but, after a long standing, it turned Green again. From such sorts of Stones,
Chalybeat-Waters receive their Imperfect Vitriol.

There appeared a Blue and Yellow Scum on the top of the Water, in which the
Fire-stone was put; as there does in all Chalybeat-Waters, when they stand a
while.

I burnt some Gray Iron-stone, with a Sulphur-role in a Crucible; some edges of
it melted: I put that part of the Iron-stone, which looked black, and was not
melted, into some Fair Water, with Galls; and thence arose a Purple Color, and
a Sulphur Scum. From whence I infer, That Chalybeat-Waters have their Virtue
both from Sulphur and Iron.

The Fetids in Vegetables are of agreeable Principles and Virtues to
Marcasites; being like the Fetid Gums, which are contained in Plants, and, like
them, are used outwardly in Plasters; in which Powdered Pyrites is good for the
Sciatica.

Common Brimstone is a Compounded Sulphur vivum.
body of an Oily part, and an Acid; both which, in the Burning of Brimstone,
strike the Nose with a Pungency, like Volatile Salts. Nothing is Volatile in
Minerals, but Sulphur; and this gives the Volatility to Quicksilver; where I
can compare nothing in Minerals to Pungent Volatile Salts, but Sulphur-Fumes,
which in distillation of Pit-Coal compounds a Volatile Salt. And a Volatile
Salt is made out of Soot, which is a compounded Body of Oil and Acid, as
Brimstone is.

I have tried some Flower of Brimstone gathered from the Fires in Wedgebury
Coal-Pit, which differ not from Ordinary Flowers of Brimstone; for it burns
Blue, and looks and smells like ordinary Sulphur, but something stronger, it
being the Sulphur of Coal.

Common Brimstone, given inwardly with Milk, purges very conveniently in the
Piles, and dryes them.

Vid. fl. Sulph. infra, and Sp. Sulph. per Campanam.

Vid. Antimony infra.

Arsenic is like common Sulphur, the Arsenicum
Soot of Metals, and is compounded like it, of an Oily part (which in Arsenic
is more piercing) and an Acid; and it is naturally joined with a Mineral, from
which it is separated by Sublimation.

The best Orpiment is of a yellow Color, and smells strong of Sulphur; but by
putting it into a Pot over the Fire, it becomes a Sandaraca.

Arsenic sublimes like Sulphur; and may be changed into a Butter by Sublimate,
which shows its Oily part.

Arsenic given inwardly Vomits violently, corrodes the Stomach, causes Thirst,
Heat, Faintings, Convulsions, and at last Death.

The Sulphur in Arsenic may be fixed by Spirit of Nitre; and Salt of Tartar
alters its Corrosiveness, by imbibing its Acid; therefore the Corrosiveness
depends not wholly on either Acid or Sulphur, but on a Proportion and Texture
of both; which makes it a strong Caustic outwardly, for eating Proud Flesh.

Acids have pointed Figures, by which they are Pungent, and corrode; and when
they are Compounded with Sulphur, they are Figured into pointed Particles;
which, by reason of the Activity of Sulphur, tear and corrode stronger, than
when they are compounded with Minerals or Earths.

The Poisonous Acrids of Napellus and Aconite, and the Caustic Milks in
Vegetables, may be compared with Arsenic, for its Poisoning quality, which is
its Corrosiveness. The Principles of Minerals cannot so easily be united into
Volatile Salts as Vegetables are; but the Oil and Acid in Sulphur want only an
Earth to give them the nature of a Salt; and they sometimes may acquire that
Texture, as appears in the Volatile Salt of Coal. The high degree of Acrimony
in Mineral Sulphurs, makes a Poison; though a lower degree makes only a Purger,
as appears in Antimonial Medicines, which have their Stimulus from the like
Texture of Sulphur and Acid; and in many sorts of Vitriols which purge;
especially in Copper-Medicines, in which is manifestly a Sulphur, and an Acid:
and from the mixture of Copper or Arsenic, which is mixed with the Mineral of
Silver, the Preparations of Silver purge so violently.

Common Sulphur is not corrosive, because there is too great a quantity of Acid
mixed with the Oily part in it self; by which means the Oily part is less
Volatile. In Antimony the Acid is less than in Sulphur; and therefore the
Sulphur Oil is more Volatile, and purges. In Arsenic, the Acid is in a lesser
proportion, and more intimately mixed with each Particle of Sulphur; as it
happens in the Butter of Antimony, from which the Corrosion proceeds: So that
Arsenic is corrosive, not only by the Volatility of Sulphur, but also by the
particular Mixture of each Particle of Acid, with a like Particle of
Sulphurous Oil; and therefore the Butter of Arsenic is extremely Corrosive, in
which the Acid is mixed with the Oil; as in Milk, the Butter and Acid are
united, and the Acid opens the Sulphur, and gives it the form of Butter.

The Bitumens of the Earth, arise from Bitumina.
the Sulphur of Minerals, when it is Butyrose, or less Coagulate by the Acid.
If then it be mixed with Clay, or Bole, or Earth, which is fat and soft, like a
Mucilage; it produces a Composition like Turpentine in Taste, Smell, and
Virtue: All Turpentines having an Oil and Acid in them, besides a Mucilage or
Gumminess.

The Mineral Bitumens may be divided, as Turpentines be, into,

Fetid Bitumens, like Resins; as Succinum, Petroleum.

Asphaltus is as hard as Pitch. Gagates is like Succinum; both stink when
burnt, and yield an Oil and an Acid Spirit, like Resins.

Pit-Coal distilled in an Earthen Retort, yielded a Volatile Smoaky Salt, which
made a great Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre, and tasted Pungent; and also a
black Oil Fetid, like Oil of Hartshorn. I thought this a considerable
Experiment, to prove, that a Volatile Salt and Oil may be made from Minerals,
as well as Vegetables; and confirmed my opinion about the Similitude of
Principles. Other Fetid Bitumens are more Liquid, as Naphtha and other Bitumens
Swimming on Water.

There are Bitumens plainly like common Turpentine, as Petroleum, which
distilled, yields an Oil like Oil of Turpentine; and a Colophony remains, which
is a Resin.

The Petroleum swims on Waters, and gives them a Healing Virtue, like Oil of
Turpentine. Petroleum is either White or Red.

Oleum terrae is more Sweet and Fragrant than Petroleum.

Some Bitumens are more Fragrant

Ambra Grysea is a Greasy, Soft Bitumen, of a Fragrant Cordial Smell, found in
the Sea: and it is not improbable, that the Salt of the Sea may render this
Bitumen Fragrant, as the Salts of the Blood give Turpentine a Violet Smell.

From the Similitude of Taste, Smell, and Principles betwixt Bitumens and
Turpentines, I could not but infer the Production of the Vegetable Turpentine
was from the supply of the Mineral Bitumen, which is dissolved, and swims on
many Waters; and in the Springtime may easily be rarefied, and the Fumes of it
lodged in the Surface of the Earth, to give an Oil fit for Vegetables. The Acid
of Vegetables is from Minerals, and therefore the Oil comes thence also; for
the Oil and Acid in both Kingdoms are usually associated, and go together, and
produce the chief effects in both, constituting Salts and Resins in Vegetables,
and Sulphurs in Minerals, etc.

The Oils and Resins of Vegetables are Inflammable, as Sulphur. The Antherae ex
pino, Junipero and Musco terrestri Clavato, are observed to be very
Inflammable; but especially those of Club-Moss, which yield an Oil by
Extraction, with Tincture of Salt of Tartar; and afterward by distillation, as
it is mentioned in Mr. Ray's History of Plants. And the Learned Wedelius says,
That the Lixivium of Woad, being Precipitated by an Acid, yields the same
Sulphurous Smell, as appears in the Preparation of Sulphur auratum Antimonii;
and a yellow Sulphur is Precipitated, which has the Smell, Color, and
Inflammability of Sulphur: Such is the Artificial Sulphur I will mention
hereafter, made by Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Vitriol. Vid. Flores Sulph.

CHAP. V. Of SALTS.
Salts are either Simple, from one Principle; or Compounded of many.

THE Acid of Sulphur is the universal Acid, spread through Minerals, Vegetables,
and Animals, in each Kingdom; varying only by the several Mixtures,
Compositions, and Decompositions which are mentioned hereafter: and there is no
other Simple Salt, but the Acid of Sulphur.

Compounded Salts are either,

First, Artificial, as,

1. Volatile and Fixed Salts, which are made by Distillation or Calcination. But
the Composition, necessary to produce a Volatile Salt, is made Naturally in
Vegetables: and the same is made Artificially out of Vegetables, by putrefying
any Vegetable, and then distilling it.

Fixed and Volatile Salts may be termed Simple Salts, because they may be
Compounded again by an Acid; as,

2. In Vitriolate Salts, Ammoniac Salts, and Nitrose Salts.

Secondly, Compounded Natural Salts are either compounded,

1. Of an Acid and Mineral; as Vitriolate Salts. 2. Of an Acid and Earth; as
Alum, Nitre, Sal-gem, and Sea Salt. 3. Of two Salts; as the Ammoniac Salt in
Animals, evident in Blood and Urine. 4. Of an Oil and Volatile Salt; as in
Aromatic Vegetables, and other Acrids. Or, 5. Of an Oil and Acid; as in
Tartar, and the Sulphurous Acids of Minerals.
Of all these Compositions, I will give diverse Instances; but, first, I will
collect out of Dr. Grew's Anatomy of Plants, what he observed about the
proportion of Fixed Salts, in the different tastes of Plants; and give some
reflections on them:

One pound of Marjoram affords a scruple of Lixivial Salt; which is an
Aromatic Plant.

Of Oak-Bark, which is Astringent, one pound yields half a dram.

Of Liquorish, which is Sweet, one pound yields half a dram.

Of Anniseeds, which is Sweet, Acrid, and Aromatic, one pound yields two
scruples.

Of Sorrel, which is Sour, one pound yields a dram.

Of Garden Scurvy Grass, one pound yields two drachms and half a scruple.

Of Sea Scurvy Grass, one pound yields nine drachms; which proportion is
greater than in any other Plant, and more than in the Garden Scurvy Grass.

Of Mint, which is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Aromatic, and Astringent, one pound
yields five drachms and a scruple.

Of Agrimony, one pound yields five scruples, and six grains of Salt; the Taste
of it is Bitterish, Astringent, and Sub-acrid, with an Aromatic Smell.

Of Mugwort, which is Bitter, Sub-acrid, and of a mixed Smell, one pound yields
two drachms and two scruples.

Of Rosemary, one pound yielded five scruples.

Of Mallows, which is a Watery Mucilage, one pound yields five drachms and two
scruples.

Of Resins and Turpentine Gums, very little Salt is collected; as out of
Mastich, Olibanum, and Assa Foetida.

Gum-Arabick yields a little Salt.

Euphorbium yields two scruples of Salt.

Myrrh, the same quantity; which is strange, the one being very Acrid, and the
other Bitter.

Opium yields near a scruple of Salt, and is Bitterish, Fetid, and very Acrid.

Aloes, which is Sweet, Bitter, Gummy and Sub-acrid, yields one scruple of Salt.

Scammony yields half a scruple of Salt, in two scruples of Caput Mortuum.

Gutta gamba, in one scruple of Caput

Mortuum, has five grains of Salt.

Rhubarb yields very little Salt.

Jalap, one pound yields one dram and fifteen grains of Salt. Jalap is Clammy
or Gummy in Taste.

Senna, one pound yields four scruples and a half of Salt; the Taste is
Bitterish, Slimy, and Sub-acrid.

Colocynthis, one pound, which is extremely Bitter and Acrid, yields one ounce;
which is more than any Plant except Sea Scurvy Grass.

Of Ash-Bark, one pound yields thirty two grains; this Bark is Bitterish and
Rough. And Bark of Black-Thorn yields one scruple and five grains.

I have transcribed the Instances mentioned, to confirm my Hypothesis, about
the Nature of Salt, That it is a composition of Oil, Acid, and Earth, in
different proportions in Volatile and Fixed Salts; in the latter of which, the
Fire makes the Composition: And these Plants, which have a due proportion of
Oil, Acid, and Earth, yield the most Fixed Salt; therefore Sea Scurvy Grass
yields the most Volatile and Fixed Salts, and all other of the Cress-Taste; and
also amongst Gums, Euphorbium and Opium.

Bitters have less Oil, and more fixed by the Acid and Earth; therefore Mint,
Agrimony, Mugwort, and Rosemary, have less Salt, than the Acrids
abovementioned: But where there is an Acrid joined with a strong Bitter, as in
Coloquintida, those have more Fixed Salts, than pure Bitters.

Mucilaginous Plants, as Mallows, yield a Proportion not inferior to Bitters;
because of a great Quantity of Oil, Acid, and Earth: And these Principles in
Mucilages, are not suddenly driven into Smoke; but are united in the Fire into
Salt.

Sweet, Astringent, and Acid Tastes yield least Salt, for want of a due
Proportion of Oil for its Composition: And Watery Gums have little Salt, for the
same Reason.

Marjoram and Anniseeds have too little Acid for producing a Fixed Salt.

Resins want Earths for the Composition of Salt; and the Oil and Acid burns
away too soon.

The various Figures of Salts, Marine and Essential, (but I cannot allow it
that Name, because it is made by the Fire) are described by Dr. Grew, and
Fracassatus in his Epistle to Malpighius; of which variety of Figures we cannot
give any probable Reasons, but from the various Proportions of Oils, Acids, and
Earths in Plants; and the re-mixtures of them in the Fire, for the compounding
of a Fixed Salt.

The change of a Lixivial Salt by the Air, is an undeniable Argument of the
Composition; for it will turn from a Salt Lixivial, to Nitrose and Marine Salt;
and, at the same time, precipitate an Earth.

The Separation of the Oil from the Acid and Earth, gives this Nitrose Salt a
Bitterness; but, after the Evaporation of that Oil, the Acid and pure Earth
remain, and make a Marine Salt: Which I think may be the clearest Solution of
this great Experiment.

I find this Experiment in Dr. Willis, That Volatile Salts, though very white,
turn into a red Liquor by being exposed to the Air; and then taste not very
salt, but smell smoaky, from the Oil which is loosened from the mixture with
the Acid and Earth.

Since therefore the Fixed and Volatile Salts may be resolved by the Air into
Oils, Acid, and Earth; I do conclude, That they are Bodies mixed in the Fire by
Distillation, and Calcination only, which makes Fixed Salts.

But I cannot omit the Modes of Tastes in Salts; for from the Acids, which are
pungent, the Volatile Salts have their Pungency; and from the Volatility of
distilled Oils, the Volatile Salts have a Volatility, and smoaky Smell. The
Fixed Salts have their Pungency from the Acid, and a Lixivious Smell from the
Oil; and from the Earth, both Salts have a dry Taste, very considerable in
Salts. We find many Alkalies mixed with an Acid, as Crab's-eyes and Vinegar,
which taste Salt. So that, from many Experiments, and likewise from the Taste,
I affirm, That Salts are Compounded Bodies.

CHAP. VI. Of the Tastes of Salts.
ALVM is of a rough Acid Taste; Alumen.
by which it coagulates Milk, Serose Humors, and Choler; and therefore it
becomes a good Febrifuge, and stops all Hemorrhages from the Kidneys and Womb,
by giving an Astriction to the Fibers of the Membranes, as well as by the
Coagulation of Humors, and checking the Fermentation. Outwardly it cools,
repels, and cicatrizes. In Suppositories, the Acid stimulates; and given
inwardly, in a great quantity, it purges and vomits.

Out of a black calcined Slate, is made a Lee; of which is made Alum. The Alum
is precipitated by a Lixivium, and Urine: So that Alum has a Composition of
Salts, besides the Acid and Earthy Parts. The Alum-Stone in the Air produces a
Copperas. Alum has not so much Acid, as Vitriol; and therefore is more Rough.

Nitre is Cool, Bitterish, Pungent, and Nitrum.
Saltish in Taste: It is Inflammable, and seems to be a mixed Salt, having a
great Acid, by which it cools, and has the Effects of an Acid; but it will not
curdle Milk or Choler, neither the Blood, nor Serum; but the Spirit of it will
coagulate all these Liquors. The Bitterness argues some Oily Sulphur in it; and
the Saltness, the mixture of some either Volatile or Lixivious Salt with it;
and therefore it is Diuretic. Spirit of Nitre joined to an Alkaly, becomes a
new Nitre. Inflammable Spirit of Nitre fixes Volatile Salts most; and is the
strongest Acid, in dissolving Minerals and Stones; and therefore a great
Acid-Diuretick.

Sweet Spirit of Nitre is made more Sp. Nitri dulcis.
grateful to the Stomach by the Spirit of Wine; Spirituous Acids being more
agreeable than sour Tastes, or Acid-rough. The Sweet Spirit of Nitre is used
in Colicks, Windiness, Tympany, and all hot Inflammations; the Acid of the
Nitre coagulating with the hot Volatile Oils, and Salts in Animals.

Spirit of Nitre distilled from Nitre and Lime, turned the Serum of the Blood
black, as in black Vomits and Stools.

Sal Prunellae tastes Cool, Nitrous, Acid, Sal Prunellae.
Saltish, and a little Sharp or Pungent; by which it cools Thirst and Heat, and
is Diuretic. It will not Ferment by the addition of any Acid, nor curdle Milk
or Choler.

Borax tastes Cool, like Nitre, and Saltish-pungent, Borax.
having a Fixed Salt added to it, to purify it: If it be Factitious, it is mixed
of a Volatile Salt and Nitre. It is most used as a Diuretic; and for Ulcers of
the Mouth, it seems not to be very Aperitive, nor proper for forcing Labor,
otherwise than as a Diuretic.

Sal-Ammoniack is Salt, Pungent, Subacid, Sal Ammoniacum.
and a good Diuretic; being composed of a Volatile and Acid Salt. By grinding
it with an Alkaly, it flies quick into the Nose. Sal-Ammoniack is also used as
an Antifebrifick. An artificial Sal-Ammoniack may be produced by mixing
Volatile Salt with Spirit of Salt; and is a good Medicine.

Volatile Salt of Hartshorn tastes Cool, Sal Volatile Cornu Cervi.
Saltish, Pungent, with an Urinous, quick, smoaky Smell: It corrects Acids, and
gives a quick Motion to stagnating Spirits and Blood. It is a good Diaphoretick
and Diuretic, and preserves the mixture of the Blood.

Fixed Salt tastes Salt, Pungent, and Sal Fixum.
smells weakly Urinous; it corrects Acids, and is Digestive and Diuretic. I
observe, that Fixed Salts agree in Smell and Taste with Volatile; and therefore
are of a like Nature and Production.

Salt of Ash: I tasted it in the Shops Sal Fraxini
cool and saltish; but, I believe, it was altered by the long keeping of it in
the Air, the fresh being very Corrosive.

Salt of Wormwoood unpurified, tastes Sal Absynthii.
Cool, Saltish, Pungent, and Bitterish. Salts unpurified, taste of the Oil of
the Vegetables; and therefore are better than clear Salt.

Salt of Scurvy Grass tastes only very Sal Cochleariae.
Saltish.

All Fixed Salts are of a Salt Taste; but those Plants in which is most Acrid,
give the strongest Saltness; but this may be altered by the dryness of the
Plant, and the degrees of Fire, or quantity of Oil, joined with Acid and Earth.
By the Acid in the Air, Fixed Salts turn Nitrose, and get a cool Taste.

Sea Salt tastes Salt, Sub-acid, and Pungent; Sal Marinum.
it hinders Putrefaction by the Acid, and is Diuretic; helps Digestion, but is
not altered by it.

Spirit of Salt put to an Alkaly, produces a Sea Salt. Dr. Grew says, That the
Marine Salts of Plants taste like Sea Salt, and have a Cubick Figure. The
Nitrose Salts of Plants, he says, taste Bitter, and have Figures a little
corresponding to their Nitrose Taste.

Salt of Amber tastes Saltish and Pungent, Sal Succini
and smells of Amber: Spirit of Vitriol will not Ferment with it; but Spirit of
Sal-Ammoniack will. All Gums, Resins, and Bitumens yield a great deal of Acid,
and some Volatile Salt mixed with it; by which this Salt is Diuretic; and by
the Smell, like Amber: It is also Cephalic. A Volatile Salt may be distilled
out of the Salt of Amber, by an addition of a Fixed Salt.

Vitriol tastes Sweet and Styptick. White Vitriolum.
Vitriol gives a pale Blue, with Galls and Water: It is used in Distempers of
the Eyes; and inwardly for a Vomit. Blue Vitriol gives a Purple color, with
Galls and Water. Green Vitriol gives a deep Purple, with Galls and Water. The
Stypticity of Vitriols makes it good for the Itch, and for Proud Flesh in
Ulcers.

Some Vitriols have an Acritude in the Taste, besides the sweet Astringency,
says Dr. Grew. This Acrimony is from the Sulphurous Acid.

Irish Slate: This put into fair Water Lapis Hibernicus.
with Galls, gives a Purple Color. The Taste of it is Vitriolick, Rough, and
Acid: It is therefore most proper to stop Bleeding and Overflowings; but not to
cleanse Childbed Women, as the Midwives use it; and thereby occasion a
Stoppage, and Fever.

Tartar tastes Sour and Gritty: It is Tartarus.
precipitated from the Wine, by the Earthy parts adhering to the Acid; by which
it is Cooling and Diuretic. All Acids in Vegetables are of this nature, and
are called the Essential Salts: Some of which are thought to be Nitrose,
because of a Bitterness, which is produced by the Oil of the Plant adhering to
the Acid. Tartar and Essential Salts distilled, yield a Volatile Salt, which is
a little Acid; and such a mixed Spirit is the Spirit of all Woods: A Fetid Oil
arises with this mixed Spirit of Tartar; and the Caput Mortuum has a Fixed Salt,
the Acid of the Tartar being wholly destroyed: part, fluxing with the Earth,
produces a Fixed Salt: part of it ascending with the Oil, carries some Earthy
Parts with it, by its Acidity; and produces a Volatile Salt, and Sub-acid
Spirit of Tartar; The rest of the Acidity adheres to the Fetid Oil, which
yields a further Volatile Salt, by addition of Salt of Tartar; which affords
new Earth to the Oily Acid, for production of a Volatile Vrinous Salt. The same
is produced by an addition of Burnt Alum or Lime.

The Salt of the Juice of Wood Sorrel Sal Essentiale Acetosetae.
tastes Sour, like Tartar; and has a Gritt, or White Vitrious Earth, with
which the Fixed Parts of the Acid, being melted in the Fire, produces a Fixed
Salt. The Acid of Vegetables contains an Oil in it, but very Fixed. This Acid in
the ripening of Fruits, and in Fermentation of Acid Juyces, fixes upon some
Earthy Parts, and then the Oil appears; which, by virtue of a little Acid mixed
with the most Volatile Oil, fixes on some Gritt or Vitrious Earth, and produces
a Volatile Oleose Salt; which being much diluted by Water, a Spirituous Liquor
is produced.

Wood Sorrel yields most Essential Salt; by which it is inferred, that all of
them are pure Tartar.

Vitriolated Tartar tastes Gritty and Tartarus Vitriolatus.
Saltish; and is Diuretic both by the Acid and Fixed Salt: It will not
Coagulate any Liquor: It is an Aperitive, without any Heat.

Oil of Nitrated Tartar, made by Deliquium, Oleum Tartari Nitrati per deliquium.
curdles Choler and Milk; and is Diuretic, as a mixed Salt; and tastes Salt and
Sub-acid, like Nitre.

Spirit of Vitriol tastes Sour and Rough, Spiritus Vitrioli.
by which it cools, and is a good Astringent. The Oil of Vitriol is strongest;
but has an offensive burning Heat upon the Tongue, from the Fire. The Spirit is
best in Fevers and Hemorrhages.

Spirit of Nitre tastes Sour, very Pungent Spiritus Nitri.
and Rough: The Sour and Rough are less in this, than other Acid Spirits: It
fixes Mineral Sulphurs; and therefore condenses all Animal flatuosities: The
great Pungency makes it Diuretic, and fitter to dissolve, as a Menstruum.

Spirit of Salt tastes Sour, Saltish and Spiritus Salis.
Pungent, from the Sea Salt; and differs only from it, by being more Acid and
Cooling: It is an opening Diuretic, and Stomachick Virtue; and good against
the Putrefaction of the Gums.

Spirit of Salt, from the Pungency, is Aperitive; and it has a Roughness to
strengthen, as well as Sowreness to cool.

Spirit of Sulphur tastes Sour, and a little Spiritus Sulphuris per Campanam.
sharp; for so I think it most proper to call the Pungency of Acids, for the
better distinguishing of it from the biting of Acrids. The Acid of Sulphur is
more agreeable to the Stomach, than any other Mineral Acids. There is also a
Roughness in Spirit of Sulphur, but less than in Vitriol.

Vinegar tastes Sour, Sharp and Winy; Acetum.
and is of a Sharp Winy Smell; by which it appears to be a mixed body of the
Volatile Spirit of Wine, and the Tartareous Acids of the same. When Acid
Liquors are decayed, they taste flat, without Pungency, but yet Sour;
therefore the Pungency is from the Oil, and not the Figure only.

Saccharum Saturni tastes Sweet and Saccharum Saturni.
Styptick; by which it Cools, Repels, and Cicatrizes Ulcers: This Sweetness is
from the Winy Spirit in Vinegar; for Chalk with Vinegar gives the same Taste:
and a Vinous Spirit may be distilled from the Sugar of Lead. The Acid of the
Vinegar fixing on an Alkaly, lets the Oily Parts of the Wine loose, on which
the Sweetness depends, and not on the Lead.

So the Bitterness in the Pilulae Lunares depends on the Sulphur in the Nitre;
which appears, most when the Nitrous Acids are fixed in the Silver; so that in
the Spirit of Vitriol, mixed with the Oil of Tartar, some Authors have observed
a Bitter.

The Oily Acid in Saccharum Saturni has a Smoothness of Parts, produced by the
fixing of the Acids in the Lead; and the Bitterness in the Crystals of Silver
come from a Rough* Texture of the Compounded Parts, resembling the Texture of
Bitters.

The Acid in the Composition of Saccharum Saturni makes it cooling.

CHAP. VII. Of Minerals, and Mineral Earths and Stones.
Flowers of Sulphur taste Dry, Sub-acid, Fl. Sulphuris.
and smell strongly Fetid. There is a great Acid in Sulphur, and an Oily Part:
By the Acid it cures the Itch, corrodes Minerals, and fixes Volatile Salts: By
the Oily Part it is a Balsamic Pectoral, and cures the Acid stagnating Lympha.
Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Vitriol mixed, and distilled, yield a Sulphur
vivum: And being the Bitumens and Petroleum are so like Turpentine in Taste and
Smell, I thence argue, That there is a great Agreeableness in Sulphur and
Turpentine; which last seems to be only the Oily Part of Sulphur, deprived of
much of its Acidity, and therefore less coagulate by it. Which Opinion I shall
farther confirm, by observing, that Turpentine is composed of the same
Principles, as Sulphur, of an Oily Part, and an Acid; and, besides, has a great
deal of Water, to make it fluid.

Sulphur easily mixes with the Oil of Turpentine; both are Inflammable, have
the same Physical Virtues, and are the Causes of all Smells; the One in
Minerals, and the Other in Vegetables. Ettmullerus says, Anthrax distilled,
yields an Oil like Petroleum; therefore out of Sulphur, Turpentine-Bitumens are
produced: And I have instanced above, that out of Turpentine, Sulphur may be
produced: Which are convincing Experiments, that Turpentine and Sulphur have
the same Oil and Acid, only in different States and Mixtures.

From hence it is evident, that Chemists speak not much amiss, when they call
the Oil of Vegetables their Sulphur; but I do not think it proper to explain
the Nature of Vegetables, by Mineral Principles; though Galen calls all Bitter
Plants Nitrose: because they resemble the Bitterness of Nitre, and not for
having any Nitre in them. For the same reason I might call Acerb Tastes
Aluminous, because they resemble that Taste; but none will allow, that any Alum
is in the Plants of that Taste.

I will give an Instance of Sulphur's Fertility, in producing all the Salts in
the Earth, as well as the Acids in Vegetables, which I have above intimated;
the Sulphur-Acid being one Part of the Composition of Mineral-Salts.

Vitriol is known to be the Product of the Fumes of Sulphur, which corrode Iron
into an imperfect Vitriol: But the perfect Vitriol is only made in the Air, out
of a Pyrites. Spirit of Sulphur put upon Iron, produces a Vitriol; and so does
the melting of Brimstone with it; and likewise the mixing of Flower of
Brimstone with Filings of Iron, and sprinkling them with Water; this put into
fair Water, with Galls, turns Purple.

Alum is produced from the Acid Fumes of Sulphur, dissolving some Stony Matter;
for Spirit of Sulphur will, with Chalk, constitute an Alum; and Alum-Stones are
full of Sulphur, as Dr. Lyster informs us; and where there is most Vitriol and
Sulphur bred, Alum abounds most.

Sea Salt is compounded of an Alcalizate Body, or Vitrious Earth, and a
Sulphurous Acid: Hence Flowers of Sulphur are sometimes gathered in the Neck
of the Retort, in distillation of Spirit of Salt, as Ettmullerus intimates.
Spirit of Salt being re-affus'd upon an Alkaly, becomes perfect Sea Salt again,
and shoots into Cubes after the distillation of Sal-Ammoniack, with Salt of
Tartar. All Sulphurous Waters have a Sea Salt in them; which is an Argument of
the Acidity of Sea-Salts being the same as Sulphur-Acid, which coagulates with
a Stony Matter into a Fixed Salt.

Sea Salt will be fused in a strong Fire, by reason of the Alkaly.

Nitre consists of a very Sulphurous Acid; which, in Places impregnated with
the Vrines or Dungs of Animals, has a Volatile Salt for its Alkaly. In Old
Walls, and Stony Places, Nitre has some of the Stone or Lime for the Alkaly. In
the Springs of the Earth, the Sulphurous Acid fixes on Sea Salt; whence, after
the burning of Nitre, a Sea Salt remains.

Cinnabar corrects Acids by the Sulphur Cinnabaris Nativa.
and Quicksilver, of which it is made. It smells Sulphurous, and tastes
Gritty. The Acid of the Sulphur fixes the Mercury; which happens also in the
making of all Amalgamas; in which the Quicksilver is fixed by the Sulphur of
the Metal. Cinnabar is given inwardly for all Distempers depending on Acids,
and outwardly dries Ulcers, and cicatrizes.

Antimony is compounded of much Sulphurous Antimonium.
Acid, and Vitreous Earth.

Antimonial Medicines have either Sulphur-Flowres in them, of which the
Tincture plainly smells; or else an Acid in them, most manifest in the Clyssus;
from a mixture of both the Flowers, and Acid of Antimony, the Vomitory Faculty
arises: For Sulphur in Minerals answers the Resin in Vegetables, having both an
Oily Pungency; and both may be produced from the Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of
Vitriol.

Verdegrease is very Corrosive, good for Aerugo.
stopping Putrefaction in Ulcers, and for cleansing them; and is produced from
the Acid of Grapes, corroding and giving a Green Color. The Urine added in the
Preparation, gives a Blue Color, and helps the Dissolution of Copper.
Ettmuller.

Lapis Lazuli, Armenus: They partake Lapis Lazuli, Armenus.
of the Nature of Copper, and very little of Silver; by which they are purging:
The Sulphur-Acid in Copper being offensive to an Animal Body, and most of the
Preparations of Silver, which are purging, have their Virtue from Copper mixed
with it. Lapis Lazuli, besides the Copper, contains some Gold. Ettmuller says,
They have their Earthy Part from Marble, and are found in Copper-Mines, and
Gold-Mines.

Tutia and Pompholyx are the Products Tutia and Pompholyx.
of Copper, and very drying in Ulcers. They are the Soot of Copper.

Lapis Medicamentosus is of a Salt Astringent Lapis Medicamentosus.
Taste, by which it cleanses and heals Ulcers.

The Pumice-Stone, burnt and quenched Pumex.
in Vinegar, is a good Dentrifice: The virtue of Stones that have neither Taste
nor Smell, are only absorbent of Acids, and drying in Ulcers: But Pumice yields
a Green Tincture, with Spirit of Vinegar; and therefore contains Copper.

Limewater tastes Saltish, and is of a Calx.
mixed nature, partly Alkaline, because it gives a Volatility to Sal-Ammoniack,
which is a Salso-Acid; and it precipitates Minerals, dissolved by Acids: But it
has also an Acidity, and coagulates Oils into Butter: So Oil of Roses grows
Thick and Butyrose, if mixed with Limewater.

Spirit of Salt, distilled from Lime, yields a Volatile Vrinous Salt, like
Spirit of Urine; which shows the little difference betwixt Volatile and Fixed
Salts; and that an Acid is an Ingredient of both sorts. An excellent and useful
Salt may be drawn from the Caput Mortuum: Ettmuller. Quenched Lime is very
cooling and drying in Ulcers, though the unquenched be Caustic; which proceeds
from the mixed Salt of Lime. The Oily Part of the Sulphur is lost by the Fire;
the Acid mixes with the Earthy Parts into a mixed Salt.

Flint has no Lixivial Salt in it. Silex.
When Burnt and Quenched in White Wind, it is used as a Diuretic. Flint has a
Sulphurous Smell, and communicates somewhat of a Sulphurous Acid, to the
Liquor it is quenched in.

Chalk has a Gritty Taste, and a strong Creta.
Earthy Smell; it corrects Acids. Outwardly it corrects Acids in Ulcers, and
has something of the nature of Lead.

Crystals and Precious Stones: I cannot Crystallus and Lapides pretiosi.
find any thing in them, but a Grittiness, for curing Acids. The Mineral
Tincture is too little to have any effect; and Effluviums are not to be
expected from such Solids, of any force.

Coral has a Gritty Taste, and a Musky Corallium.
Smell, when ground to Powder; by the former it absorbs Acids, and by the
latter is Cordial; which Cordial Fragrancy, I believe, depends upon the Milky,
Acrid, Astringent Liquor, observed in Corals. Corals Calcined effervesce upon
the affusion of Water, like Lime. They yield an Acid Phlegm in distillation,
and are of a middle nature betwixt Minerals and Vegetables. Ettmuller says, The
Tincture and Salt of Coral, are compounded of Coral, and a Menstruum, which is
Acid.

Pearls taste Gritty, and have the same Perlae.
Musky Fragrancy when ground; and the same Cordial Virtue as Coral. They have
their Origin from a Milky Liquor, somewhat Saline, which is bred in the
Animal, and (as Stones in the Bladder) becomes a Mineral.

Oyster-shells yield but a little Volatile Testae Ostrearum.
Salt in distillation, but much Water. There were some Volatile Salts, which
turned the Syrup of Violets Green; therefore Oyster-shells have little of
Animal Substance in them, and are not of the nature of Bones; for Shells have a
Lixivial Salt in them, like Lime. I doubt, whether the Volatile Salt obtained
from them, was not from some part of the Oyster sticking to the Shell.

Burnt Oyster-shells absorb Acids, are drying in Ulcers, and are good
Dentrifices, if burnt with Common Salt; and Cure Putrid Gums. The curious
Observers of the Crystallization of common Salt, tell us of a white Sand, which
settles to the bottom, distinct from common Salt: It may not improbably be
supposed, That the Shells have their Original from such like Sandy Coagulations
in the Oyster, that lives on Salt Water; the Water in the Shells being perfect
Sea-Brine, as was manifest to my Taste, when I had evaporated the Liquor; and
therefore it is not Antiscorbutick, as is supposed. Such an insipid Earth, Dr.
Grew observed to fall out of the Lixivium of Ash-balls; and the like Earth is
Precipitated upon the Vitriolating of the Salt of Tartar. From such a
Principle, I suppose, Petrisication does proceed.

Sponge-Stone distilled, yields a Volatile Lapis Spongiae.
Oil and Salt, like Animals: for which reason the Calcined is used for
Scrophula's, to absorb Acids.

Crab's-eyes are of a Gritty Taste, and a Oculi Cancrorum.
strong Chalky Smell; if dissolved in Vinegar, they taste Bitterish Salt: and
therefore are Diuretic, having a latent Volatile Salt.

Crabs-Claws have a strong Fetid Smell, Chelae Cancrorum.
and act as a Gritt in absorbing Acids; and by their Foetor (which intimates a
Volatile Oily Salt) they are a little Diaphoretick. A Solution of Sea-Shells,
or other Stones in Spirit of Salt, produces a Saltish Taste, and so becomes a
Diuretic. All Marine things Calcined, are like Calx viva.

All Alkalizate Medicines change their Taste and Nature in the Stomach. The
Fixed and Volatile Salts, by the Animal Acid, turn Sal-Ammoniack or Common Salt.
Testaceous Medicines become also Saltish. All Earths change to Aluminous and
Astringent Tastes. And Minerals, especially Iron and Copper, become Vitriolick
in the Stomach of an Animal.

Marble is of the nature of Lime, and Marmor.
yields the same Salt.

Alabastre: The Lixivium of it differs Alabastrum.
not from Aqua Calcis. The Powder of Alabastre is taken against the Dysentery;
and a cooling Ointment is made out of it, for the Head.

Boodstone is of the nature of Iron, and Lapis Haematitis.
may be used instead of Crocus Martis for Hemorrhages; and is a good
Ophthalmick Cicatrizer. The Flowers of it, Sublimed with Sal-Ammoniack, are of
an Orange Color and Saffron Smell; and therefore make an excellent Medicine.

Calamin-stone is of a Martial nature, Lapis Calaminiaris.
easily absorbing Acids, and cicatrizing very well; it becomes Astringent by
the mixture with Acid.

Ochre has the nature of Iron, and is a Ochra.
Styptick Earth in Taste, because of some Copper that Ochre has mixed with it:
The use of it is most externally, as an Astringent.

Bole Armenick, Sealed and Lemnian Bolus Armena, Terra sigillata, Lemnia.
Earth: They stick to the Tongue at first; which shows their Astringency,
whereby they are fit for all Fluxes: They taste also Fat and Mucilaginous; by
which they allay Sharp Acrid Salts; and the Earthy Parts absorb the Acid. They
have also a strong Earthy Sulphurous Smell, whereby they may be also
Diaphoretick in Ulcers. They cicatrize, and in Fevers resist Putrefaction. By
their Astringency, and by their Mucilage, they conglutinate Wounds.
Bole-Armenick has something of the nature of Iron, and its Sulphur, and yields
an Acid in distillation.

Earth of Japan is Bitterish and Astringent; Catechu.
whereby it stops Catarrhs, in Lozenges: It is a little Sweet and Perfumed, and
Fat like Bole, and Gritty. From these Tastes it seems a Composition of Juice of
Liquorish, Bole, and some Perfume, and not a natural Earth. Ettmuller says, It
is compounded of Sang* Draconis, Gum Arabic, and Glycyrrhiza.

Marle tastes Rough, and feels Oily, Marga.
and has very small Sandy Parts; it will not burn in the Fire, nor melt. It
improves Ground, by furnishing a Slime for Plants.

It is used outwardly for the Acid in Ulcers; and corrects the same, given
inwardly to half a dram, in Sharpness and incontinency of Urine, depending on
the Acidity of it.

Raddle: It has the nature of Iron, by Rubrica.
which it is Aperitive; but most like other Earths, Astringent; good in Fluxes,
like Crocus Martis Astringens; in Ulcers Cicatrizing; and it cures the Acid in
Humors.

PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines, etc. The Fourth Part. OF THE
Tastes and Virtues OF Animal Medicines.
CHAP. I. Of the Origin of Animal Humors, and their Natural Tastes.
IT is very probable, that Animal Humors and Tastes have the same Principles,
Mixtures, and Tastes depending on them, as the Juyces of Vegetables have;
because Animals are fed out of Vegetables, and thence prepare their Humors.
Plants prepare their Juyces by Fermentation, reducing them from the State of
Mineral Mixture, to a more rarefied condition: So Animals, by their Digestions
in their Stomach, rarify and ferment Vegetables into a looser Texture, and an
higher Degree, to fit the Vegetables for the proper Nature of Animals.
Therefore the same Principles are observable in Minerals, Vegetables, and
Animals, and differ only by different Digestions and Mixtures: And I shall also
prove, That from Animals the same Principles turn into Minerals again.

Because Vegetables are but a middle State betwixt Minerals and Animals, and
are designed for the Food and Medicines of Animals, I think it very necessary
to discourse of Animals next, and to give an Analogy betwixt the Principles of
Both Kingdoms; and from thence the Operation of Medicines will be more evident;
especially of the friendly Specificks, which so much resemble the Animal Humors
in Taste, Principles, and Mixture.

When a Vegetable is taken for Food, and chewed by the Animal, it is thoroughly
mixed with the Saliva of that Animal; which, when the Pulpy Nourishment is
heated by the Stomach, begins, by its Natural Acid, to work on the Oily Part of
the Vegetable; as also, the Acid Relics of the former Digestion do; and, by
their Contrariety, a Fermentation is produced, which loosens the whole Texture
of the Plant. Whence the Plant is dissolved by the Liquor, which is drunk; as
also, by the Lympha of the Stomachick Glands, into an Alimentary Tincture.

From this Efficacy of the Saliva, it appears, how much Spirituous Acid
Medicines conduce to the promoting the Fermentation necessary for the
Dissolution of Aliments in the Stomach: And we find by Experience, that
Testaceous Medicines, by destroying the Natural Acid, abate the Appetite, and
hinder Digestion.

I have affirmed, That the Effervescence betwixt Oil and Acid, is the cause of
Fermentation in Vegetables; and the same is the cause of Digestion in Animals:
Which therefore is not any ways different from Fermentation; in which the Acid
acts on the Oil chiefly, and not on the whole Mass, as a Menstruum. Acids are
most manifest in the Stomachs of Animals, and in their Chyle, which is Milk;
and also in their Urine, Sweat, and Salts; of which I will give Instances
hereafter. Acid Smells are manifest upon the Artificial Fermentations of
Vegetables. This Alimentary Tincture smells Sub-acid; but that is corrected, by
coagulating with the Choler in the Duodenum: Whence the Mass of Nourishment
there, seems to be huft and coagulated; and therefore yields the thinner Part
like Milk, which is strained into the Lacteals.

Bitters and Bitter-Acrids are Stomachicks, and help Digestion; because they
have an Oily Acid in them, which, by Digestion, is easily separated in the
Stomach: And for the same reason, Vinous Medicines are Stomachicks, helping
Fermentation.

Chyle, in the Lacteals, has only the State of Milk; and therefore Meats are
not immediately dissolved into perfect Oils, and Volatile Salts, as is commonly
thought, no more than when Wines are fermented, no Inflammable Spirit is
produced, till a full Fermentation has preceded.

In this Milky Chyle the Oleose Parts are kept Fluid in the Serum, by Mixture
with the Acid naturally mixed with all Oils and Fats; and the Caseous, or viscid
Parts, which also naturally attend Oils, are intermixed with the former, and
make the Oils Dissolution more easy in Watery Liquors.

The Nature of Chyle being not different from Milk, that is rationally used to
supply the defect of it.

This Milky Liquor runs into the Receptacle of Chyle; and there, from the
Lymphaticks, and also the Glands of the Mesentery, meets a Saltish Serum, which
gives the Milk a Saltish Taste, and preserves it from Coagulation. Whence we
observe the use of Salts, in attenuating Chyle, and helping its Distribution.

This salt Serum, added to the Chyle, corrects the Acid of the Chyle, dilutes
its Thickness, and disposes it to turn into the Serum of the Blood. But this
abounding Acidity in the Chyle, is fully absorbed by the Salts of the Blood;
and the Oily Parts of the Blood imbibe the same; and therefore the Milk
immediately turns of a clear Limpid Color, like the Serum of the Blood. I have
frequently turned the Serum of the Blood into a Milky Liquor, by Spirit of
Nitre, which must be stirred after the Mixture: And I have reduced the same
into Serum again, by Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack.

From whence I conclude, That Milky Liquors have an Oily Acid in them; and Milk
is turned into Serum, by the Separation of its Acid, as the forementioned
Experiments sufficiently prove. And for this Reason we use Volatile Salts to
help Sanguification, and Oily Vegetables, which absorb the Acidity of Chyle.

This Milky Chyle does not suddenly change its Nature into Blood, but
circulates with it; and is observed swimming on Blood, if let out after a full
Meal.

Whilst it continues in this State of Milk, it produces the Lympha of the
Glandules; which are Conglomerate, and are designed for the use of the Chyle:
This Lympha being like Barm, which is separated from a Fermenting Liquor; and
is therefore fit to raise a new Fermentation in other Liquors.

The new Chyle circulating with the Blood, has only its thin Part separated by
the Salival Glands, and also the Pancreas: And this has a Milky, Sub-acid
Taste. The thicker Viscid Part is separated by the Glands of the Stomach and
Guts; which I have gathered in the Guts by their Ligature: And this in the Guts
serves for a Sliminess natural to the Guts, and is of the Nature of Mucilages;
and its defect may be supplied by them: But the defect of the Conglomerate
Glands, by Milk; which supplies them with a Milky Sub- acid Lympha, which is
the proper Ferment for Digestion.

The greatest Portion of the Oily Part of Chyle, turns into Fat, which tastes
not unlike Butter. This being full of an Acid, is easily separated from Milk by
a long Agitation; which also happens in the Chyle of Animals, whose Butyrose
Parts are separated from it by a long Circulation with the Blood, and thence
separated into proper Vessels.

Some Part of the Oil and Acid of the Chyle, being much cleared from the
Caseous Parts, (which is not separated from Fats, but gives Suet its Gumminess)
is digested by long and frequent Circulations into the Red Part of the Blood;
which looks Florid on the top of the Blood.

From this Mixture of Oil and Acid, the Redness is produced; so by the Mixture
of Oil of Turpentine, and Oil of Vitriol, a reddish Color is produced; and a
clear Red, by Mixture of the same Acid with Oil of Anniseeds: Therefore this
Red Part of the Blood may be compared to the Resins in Vegetables, and the
Sulphur in Minerals, which give the same Red Color; which is evident in
Tinctures from Resins, and in Tinctures of Sulphurs. Resinous Plants and
Sulphurs supply the defect of it, and rarefy the Blood, and increase its Red
Color. The Blood appears most Florid in Scurvies and Hecticks, where the Oil
and Acid are most exalted and fermented. Wormwood and Bitter-Acrids have the
same Effect on the Blood, and heat it; and many times rarefy it too much, by
their Analogous Mixture of Oil and Acid.

From this Effervescence of Oil and Acid, the Heat of the Blood arises; to the
increasing of which, the Circulation of the Blood much conduces; for in the
mixture of Oil of Turpentine and Vitriol, the Heat increased, as I stirred it
with a Stick; and this Heat is more lasting, than any Effervescence made by
contrary Salts. This Opinion may be confirmed by the mixture of fresh Oil of
Turpentine, and Spirit of Aqua Fortis, which will produce a Flame. We may not
improbably conjecture, That the Ferment is of the same nature in Epidemical
Fevers, which depends on the Air. And all Infections may be produced by the
like Combinations of Oil and Acid, which are very Volatile, and subtly
insinuate themselves into the Blood by the Lungs or Saliva.

This Oily Acid, or Red part of the Blood, produces Animal Spirits, which may
be fitly compared to the Effluviums of Aromatic Plants; which are small, Oily,
Acid, Acrid Particles of the Resins, or Turpentines of Plants, lighter than the
Air, and therefore continually spent by Effluviums.

This Opinion may be confirmed by the Virtue of Aromaticks, which refresh the
Spirits; and of Narcotick Fetids, which offend them; but by both it is plain,
Smells work most on the Spirits.

This Oily Acid, whilst it is less digested, has a Viscidity attending it; and
then produces a Sweet-Taste in the Serum; and by a higher Digestion, a
Bitterness; both which Tastes of Sweet and Bitter, are evident in Choler, with
a mixture of a Glutinose Serum, which makes Choler Ropy. This being separated
by the Liver, acts like Fixed Salts, in correcting the Acidity of Chyle. The
same is the use of Bitter Hepaticks; and some of them taste Bitter, Sweet, and
Slimy.

The Caseous, or thick Viscose Parts of the Chyle, by a long Circulation
through the Pores of the Flesh, are drawn into Fibers; which are the immediate
Nourishment of the Fibrous Parts in Animals; but the Glandulous Viscera of the
Body taste Slimy, and not Fibrous; and therefore are nourished by the Caseous
Parts, before they be digested into Fibers, and whilst it remains in the state
of Viscidity. The Fibrous Sediment in the Urine is from hence; and therefore is
a sign of a good Digestion in the Blood.

The Oily Acid of the Blood, when it has arrived to a perfect Digestion, and is
in a disposition to breed Spirits, supplies matter for the Semen in the Testes;
and from hence arises the Foetor of it, when it is further digested, than was
necessary for Spirits. So in Vegetables, the Seeds are Oily, and Slimy; and the
Smells of Fetid and Aromatic, differ only in degree; and both arise from
Resinous mixtures.

The Oily Acid of the Blood, being farther rarefied and digested, fixes on some
light Earthy Parts in the Blood, and unites into a Volatile Salt. So Plants
Putrefied, yield a Volatile Salt from the same kind of mixture. This production
of Salt is the ultimate Resolution of Chyle and Blood. This fixing on the Acid
of new Chyle, becomes an Ammoniack Salt, which is natural to the Blood, and
preserves it from Putrefaction; and supplies the Salt, observable in Sweat and
Urine; and therefore all mixed Salts are Diuretic and Sudorifick.

The Honorable and Learned Mr. Boil mentions an Experiment of putting Oil of
Vitriol upon Sal Ammoniack; from whence a cold Effervescence is produced, though
it be a violent one: The same Effects happen to the Blood, whose Salts are
fixed; and Coolness is produced in the whole Animal, by the use of Acids: And
such a kind of Acid mixing with the Salts of the Blood, may cause irregular
Chilness in Fevers, and the Scurvy.

This Ammoniack Salt always swims in the Serum, and gives a Salt-Taste to the
Blood, and to the Lymphatick Liquor; which tastes Salt, and will inspissate by
the Fire; by which it differs from the Liquor of the Conglomerate Glands, which
is Milky, Sub-acid, and not naturally Salt; but it is Salt in Catarrhs, because
the Lymphatick Juice is stopped in its proper Vessels: It is forced upon the
Conglomerate Glands, and the Salt Serum is evacuated by them, which irritates
so much in Catarrhs; for the Cure of which, the Serum of the Blood must be
restored to its Circulation, through the Lymphaticks, (from the habit of the
Body) by Cephalic and Arthritick Medicines; the quantity of it evacuated, and
the thickness which stops its Circulation, diluted; or the Coagulations
dissolved by Salts, which are natural to it. From the great Use of this
Ammoniack Salt in Animals, I think an Artificial Ammoniack Salt, made of
Volatile Salt, and Spirit of Salt, a very useful Diuretic, Diaphoretick and
Digestive Medicine, helping Sanguification.

Note, All Volatile and Fixed Salts are made Ammoniack, by the Stomach's Acid.

Of the Use of the Spleen.

Malpighius has described the Glandules of the Spleen; and thence inferred,
That some Liquor is separated by them, which is immediately remixt with the
Blood, and carried to the Liver, to help the separation of Choler.

The Choler is like the Turpentines in Vegetables, very Bitter, from an Oily
Acid digested into a particular Texture. And there is also a Gumminess or
Sliminess in Turpentine and Choler. The Bitterness of Choler is from the Oily
Acid of the Blood; but the Ropy Slime of Choler comes from the Glandules of the
Spleen: Though some part of its Slime is separated by the Glandules of the Vesica
Bilaria, and Porus; yet it is impossible, that those few Glands could furnish
the Slime observed in Choler; which is more than the Bitter Part, very
considerably. The Glandules of the Pancreas were too many, to have their
situation in the Guts; for by that thickness of the Glandulous Coats, their
motion would have been hindered; therefore the Pancreas was placed near to the
Guts, to supply that quantity of Lympha, which was necessary for the Chyle: And
such is the Use of the Spleen, which supplies the Liver with a sufficient
quantity of Ropy Slime; which inviscates the Bitterness of Choler, and disposes
it for Percolation through the Liver.

Volatile Oils may be mixed with Watery Liquors, by means of the Sliminess in the
Yolk of an Egg; and by means of its Gumminess, Turpentine is dissolved in
Water; and in Vegetable Seeds, the Oil and Slime are generally joined; the Oil
without it being indissolvible in Water. There being so great a Congruity
betwixt the Slime and Oyliness of Vegetables, it is very probable, that the
slimy Juice of the Spleen mixes readily with the Oily Acid of Choler; and
therefore it was necessary, that the Succus Glandulosus of the Spleen, should
be immediately remixt with the Blood, for to associate with the Oyliness of
Choler.

If we consider the Use of the rest of the Branches of the Coeliack Artery, the
like Juyces are carried through the rest, to be separated in their proper
Glandules: That Branch which goes to the Omentum, carries the Oily Fat of the
Animal; which Oil has a sort of Gumminess mixed with it: That Branch which goes
to the Stomach, carries a Slimy Lympha thither; and the other carry the same to
the Pancreas, and Guts, and Glandules of the Mesentery: Therefore, that Branch
which goes to the Liver and Spleen, carries some analogous Slimy Liquor: That
to the Liver, carries a Sliminess sufficient to preserve the Coats of the
Gallbladder and Porus from the Acrimony of Choler. But these are not
sufficient, without the supply of the Slimy Liquor of the Spleen, to give so
great a quantity of Slime, as is evident in Choler; at least, three Parts of it
are Slime.

This Sliminess is not only necessary for the Separation of Choler, but also
for the Preservation of it in the Vesica Fellea; for the Slime tempers the
Acrimony of the Bitter in Choler, which would irritate the Membranes of the
Bladder, and cause its Expulsion; as it does in the Guts, when it comes in
great quantity thither. This Sliminess causes Choler to descend leisurely, and
by parts, into the Guts, that it may be the better mixed with the Chyle
descending out of the Stomach.

In the Guts, this Ropiness of Choler collects the grosser Parts of the Chyle,
as the White of an Egg clarifies Decoctions: And by this means the Acid
Tincture of our Food coagulates Choler, with the thicker Parts of the
Alimentary Mass, into a Consistence; which grows more thick, as the thinner
Part goes into the Lacteals.

If we consider, that this Slime is easily thickened by Acids, we may thence
believe, that an Obstruction may happen in the Glandules of the Spleen, as well
as in the other Glandules in Hypochondriack Distempers; in which Acids abound
in the Blood, and, by coagulating this Slime, produce those Obstructions
observed in the Spleen, by a Pulsation on that Side of the Hypochondrium. If
the Separation of this Slime be hindered in the Spleen, it is carried into the
other Arteries, neighboring to it, and is strained by the Glandules into the
Stomach. Whence a great Appetite is observed in Dogs, that have their Spleens
cut out; and also in Splenetick Persons. And by this Sliminess, the Stomach is
loaded with Phlegm, and the Guts with Slime; and the Pancreas and Liver suffer
with the Spleen; and also all the Glands of the Mesentery. And from the slimy
Phlegm in the Stomach, the Natural Ferment is perverted, and Ructus continually
raised; and the whole Digestion is vitiated. From whence, and the Obstructions,
all the Hypochondriacal Symptoms are deducible.

The Medicines which cure Spleen-Distempers, are Absorbers of the Acids, which
produce them; and Openers of Obstructions, as Bitter-Acrids, and
Aromatick-Acrids, etc.

A Volatile Salt is not produced in Animals by any of the Viscera, neither is
an Acid; for the Acid comes from our Chyle, and the Volatile is made by a long
Fermentation: Upon a due Mixture of both, an Healthy State of our Blood
depends; when the Volatile Salt abounds, hot Scurvies and Hecticks are
produced; but from the abundance of Acid, a cold Scurvy, and the Distempers of
the Spleen.

All Authors call the Humor prepared by the Spleen, Tartareous; and Galen
plainly says, Melancholy is an Acid Humor. Others call the Splenetick Humor, a
Ferment for the Blood. But we may more rationally argue, from the Structure of
it, that a Glandulous Humor is separated, which serves for the Separation of
the Choler; and such is necessarily Glutinous and Viscid: And this is manifest
in the Choler it self. But I cannot find, that the Spleen tastes Acid, as
Authors affirm; but rather Slimy; and has the Savor of Blood mixed with its
Slime. The Acidity is rather supposed, than manifest to any Sense.

The use of the Spleen, in the Sense I have explained it, suits with the
Opinion of Aristotle; who calls the Spleen, (...): And is not much disagreeing
from that of Galen's; who says, The Spleen cleanses the Limose thick Melancholy
Humor; and he affirms, That it came from the Liver to the Spleen: But I have
given it its Natural Course. To all which I must add, That the same Distempers
affect both Liver and Spleen alike; both are obstructed, and the same Medicines
are used for both, viz. Openers of Obstructions.

This Slimy Humor, separated by the Spleen, being the true Melancholy Humor, I
must declare, That Melanogogues must be also Phlegmagogues; because this Humor
is separated with the Choler by the Liver: And therefore Bitter-Slimy must be
the Composition of the Tastes of Melanogogues. So Senna is bitterish and slimy;
and so is Agaric, Aloes, Colocynthis, and the Hellebores. Besides which Tastes,
there is a moderate Degree of Acrimony, for a suitable Irritation in the
purging of the Melancholic Humor; which is a Composition of Choler and Phlegm,
thickened too much by an Acid. And therefore a Purging Medicine, which is
Bitter-Slimy and Acrid, is proper and peculiar for the purging of Melancholy,
and altering of it; and by the Acrimony, which is a Volatile Salt.

CHAP. II. Of the Analogy betwixt Animals and Minerals.
ANIMAL Humors return to the State of Minerals immediately, without passing
through the Nature of Vegetables.

The Tartar, or Acid of Animals, unites into a Stone in the Kidneys and
Bladder; and the Salt of the Blood shoots into Sandiness, which lodges in the
Kidneys; though some Salts shoot into Chalky Earths, in the Lymphaticks of Gouty
Persons.

Of this Nature are the Scales on the Teeth of Scorbutic Persons; Bones,
Nails, and Horns are not far from the Nature of Stones: For the Ligaments of
Animals are often found petrified; and there is scarce any Part of the Body, in
which Stones have not been found.

The Nitrum Calcarium is the Principle of Petrification in Minerals, Tartar in
Vegetables, and the Ammoniack Salt in Animals: This has a great Congruity with
the Nature of Nitre, which requires Animal Parts for its Generation, and some
Crepitus smells like Gunpowder, and burns like it.

A natural Sal-Ammoniack is bred amongst Minerals, like that in the Blood and
Urine of Animals. Hence the Calculus Humanus yields a Volatile Salt in
Distillation.

The Shells of Oysters have Limestone in them, and yield a Salt, by
Calcination, like it: They are also more heavy than Animal Stones; and yield
nothing of an Animal Substance, but an abundance of Water, and a little Salt.

Therefore these are undeniable Instances of Animal Humors returning into the
Nature of Minerals. So that Dr. Lyster's Assertion, That Calculus Humanus is a
Metallum, is not unreasonable; which he proves by the likeness to the Color of
the Ochre of the Pyrites and Limestone; but especially, by the following of
the Lodestone. The Stony Particles may be supplied from Stony Parts taken in
with the Water we drink: But it is necessary, that a Salt be coagulate with it,
to give it the Nature of a Nitrum Calcarium, which may shoot into Plates; and
those compose the several Coats in Stones.

The Sulphur of Animals is not unlike the Sulphur of Minerals. Hence Putrified
Flesh has a Foetor, equalling that of Brimstone, especially that of Urine and
Blood; which yield those curious Noctilucas, which differ nothing from Sulphur,
by their Smell and Burning. A Nidorose Ructus resembles the Foetor produced by
the Sulphur of Iron, in its Dissolution by an Acid: And Steel, prepared with
Volatile Salts, has the Smell of Marigolds, Saffron, and consequently, the
Menses.

An Epileptical Person complained to me of an Aluminous Taste in the Spittle,
after every Fit.

I have been often sensible of a Vitriolick sweet Taste in my Mouth, by the
spitting of Blood from the Head and Gums; which made me think I had tasted
Vitriolum Martis, or some Steel-Medicine: And by that Taste I perceived the
return of that Scorbutic Spitting of Blood. I cannot understand whence this
Sweet Taste proceeds, unless from an Acid corroding the Teeth.

I have observed diverse Hysterical Women, who have vomited an Acid, which would
corrode Metals, and set their Teeth on edge, like Vitriol.

I have mentioned a Volatile Salt distilled from Coals; and a Fetid Oil, like
that of Hartshorn.

The Earth of Animals will endure Fire, beyond Minerals; and therefore Cupels
are made of burnt Bones: And Becherus mentions the Vitrifying of Animals, as
well as Minerals.

I shall mention but one thing more, from which the Congruity of Principles is
supposed; which is, That many Mineral Stones have the Figures of Animals in
them; and some resemble Bones, and the Brain, and other Parts of the Body:
Which argues the Similitude of Nature, as the Salts of Plants resemble the
Figure of the Plants, from whence they are produced; and the Salts of Vipers
shoot into like Figures; and the Salts of Hartshorn into Figures like Horns.

The Spirits of Animals I have compared to the Smells of Vegetables; and if
they rise from the Oily, Acid, Florid Part of the Blood, which I have compared
to Resins, because the red Part does not dissolve in the Serum; it must be
acknowledged, that the Spirits of Animals are Inflammable, like Sulphur: From
whence arise the Flashings before Fits of Convulsions, the Sparkles appearing
in the Eyes, and the Flashings observable in Plethorick Bodies, upon the
pulling off their Stockings and Clothes.

Nitre and Sulphur are the Cause of all the Explosions, Fires, and Earthquakes
amongst Minerals; and such is the Mixture of the Spirits in Animals: From
whence strange and great Motions are produced.

CHAP. III. The Tastes and Odors of particular Animal Medicines.
NAtural Salt of Animals: The natural Sal Ammoniacum Animalium.
Salt in the Blood and Urine, is a mixed Salt of Volatile and Acid, like common
Sal-Ammoniack; the same mixed Salt is in an imperfect state, in the Dung of
Animals; from which (exposed to the Air) Nitre is bred, by addition of a
Sulphurous Aerial Acid: And from this Salt, Blood, Urine and Dungs have their
Virtue and Saltness. If the Sulphurous Acid of the Air, did by Inspiration of
the Air, mix with the Blood, (as Authors affirm) the Salt of the Blood would be
purely Nitrose; which is not apparent to the Taste. Urine smells strongly
Lixivious; and by the addition of Calx viva, easily in distillation yields a
Volatile Salt; the Acid thereby being loosed from the Volatile Salt, as well as
by Fermentation; in which the Acids of Urine fix upon the Earthy Parts, and
give liberty to the Volatile Salt.

The higher any Animal Humors are fermented, the stronger is the Salt; as in
Salt of Vipers Flesh, Blood, Urine, Choler, and of all Fetid Animals. The
Volatile Salts of Insects are most penetrant, and their Bodies smell strongly
Fetid. The Oil of Animals Chymically Prepared, is very Fetid and
Anti-hysterick. Vrinous Spirits, and Oils of Animals, are externally good
Discussers in Scrophulous Tumors, and allay Arthritick Pains.

Chemical Volatile Salts of Animals: Sal Volatile Animalium
When Spirit of Hartshorn is distilled, it wants many Rectifications to clear
it from that Acid, which is naturally mixed with Animal Humors. Our Diet being
of Fruits, Herbs, Liquors, Bread, and Milk, they all afford a great quantity of
Acid; (the Animal Acid being the same which is in Vegetables); from whence they
receive their Sulphur Acid. All Stomachs of Animals being opened, smell
something of Acid: In an Acid Ructus it is more evident, and also in Acid Urine
and Rheums, and also in Sub-acid Spittle; yet we can meet with no Humor
naturally and purely Acid in Animals; the most purely Animal Acid appears in
Butter-milk; which is therefore very cooling in Fevers. The Oily Part of the
Chyle in Animals mixes with the Acid, and obscures it, as in Milk. And the
Volatile Salts in the Blood absorb the Acid, as appears by the Fixedness of the
Salt in Urine and Blood, being Salso-acid.

All Volatile Salts, as well as Fixed, retain some Acid, from whence they have
their Salt Taste. They are also easily united with Oils, as is manifest in the
Oils of Vegetables and Animals; none of which are free from a Salt, and some
Acidity adhering to the Oil.

In a production of a Fixed Salt by Fire, the crude Acid of a Plant joins with
some Vitrious Earth, and unites into a Salt. So in the production of a Volatile
Salt, the Oily Acid of the Plant carries with it some Earth, and unites into a
Volatile Vrinous Salt. Sulphurs and Oils being of themselves naturally
Volatile, piercing, and Sub-acid, want only an Earthy Part to give them a Salt
Taste. Such a mixture is made in the production of a Volatile Salt, from
Antimony, Nitre, Tartar, and Flints; and in the Soot of Woods, which yields a
great Acid Fume, by which it is offensive to the Eyes: And a Volatile Salt is
produced by that Acid and Vegetable Oil; and some light Earthy Parts mixed with
them. A Volatile Salt may be distilled from Oil of Turpentine, by addition of
the Salt of Tartar. Volatile Salts are either produced by a violent Fire, by
which a mixture of Oily Acid is made with Earth, or else they are produced by
Putrefaction: So from Blood and Urine Putrefyed, a greater quantity of Volatile
Salt and Oil may be drawn, than can be by a violent Fire, without Putrefaction.

A Volatile Vrinous Salt may be distilled from Vegetables Putrefied; as Mint,
Wormwood, Scurvy Grass, etc. And these Vegetable Vrinous Salts are much of the
same nature, and differ as Animal Salts do, by their Fetid Oil.

Milk: It is Sweetish in Taste, and is Lac.
that Chyle, out of which the Serum of the Blood is immediately made: It
consists of much Water to dilute the Blood, and to supply the defect of the
Lympha in Hectical and Scorbutic Persons; and also of much Oily Butter, which
lubricates all passages, and supplies Fat for the Animal; and also of Caseous
Fibers, which are the immediate nourishment of the Solid Parts.

Asses Milk is the thinnest, Goats is the next, Cows has the most Butter and
Caseous Parts: Women's is most agreeable to our Nature, having had a like
Digestion, and past a Circulation with the Blood, most like to our Natures.

Cheese smells like Sweat, tastes Clammy Caseus.
and Gummy, if new; but the very old has an Acrid, Bitterish, Biting Taste; for
which it has been used in Medicine, for the Topha in the Gout: by the
Clamminess it is Conglutinative.

Moldy Cheese tastes like Moss.

Rotten Cheese is Fryable, and full of Insects; of a Livid Color, offensive
Smell, and quick Pungent Taste.

Old Cheese distilled with quick Lime, yields a Volatile Salt.

Butter has the nature of Oil or Fat, Butyrum
Mollifying and Anodyne; good in the Stone, and for expectoration by the
Oyliness.

Fat of Animals is of the nature of Adeps Animalis and Pinguedo.
Oil, mollifying and easily melted. Adeps is more like Wax or Gums, more
difficultly melted. Medulla is like Pinguedo in Virtue. The Fats or Greases of
the most Fetid Animals, viz. Adeps Vrsi, Taxi, Cati, Vulpis, Hominis, Canis,
Viperae, as also that of the Males, and that which has been longest kept, is
most mollifying, and discussing by the Foetor.

Sperma Ceti: It has an Oily Fat Taste, Sperma Ceti.
and is used in Bruises and Pectoral Diseases, outwardly and inwardly, as Oil,
lenifying and making slippery; but because it has a greater Digestion by being
a part of an Animal, it discusses more than common Oil. And it may have some
Virtue from the Preparation, with a Lixivium. It does not seem to be the Brain
of any Animal: It is best given with Oil of Sweet Almonds and Sugar.

Vipers-Flesh smells Fetid; and I have, Caro Animalium.
upon the opening of the body of a Snake, observed it to stink intollerably;
which Foetor depends on an higher degree of Fermentation in that Animal. Vipers
Wine cures the Leprosy, but causes Thirst. The Broth of Animal Flesh contains
a Mucilaginous Juice, which was not perfectly assimliated to the Animal: It is
very nourishing, and easily digested; but by the latent Oily Volatile Salt, it
is too high a nourishment for Persons in Fevers.

That Flesh is most easily digested, which is least Fibrous and Tough; as is
the Flesh of Young and Fat Creatures. We ordinarily eat Mustard with Beef, to
help Digestion; for by the Vinegar and Volatile Salt of Mustard Seed, a mixed
Salt is produced, which helps Digestion and Fermentation.

The Slimy Parts of Animals are very hardly digested, and are crude, like
Mucilages in Plants. But Dr. Lyster gives a remarkable Instance of Glue,
dissolved and putrefied, which thereby grew thin, and lost its Viscidity. So
that Slimes are digested by Fermentation; and all other Flesh after the same
manner.

The Liver of an Eele is commended Viscera Animalium.
in difficulty of Labor, and is given in Powder. In the Liver there are a
great many Bile-Vessels; from whence the Livers taste Bitterish, and smell
Fetid. From the Bile therefore, it has this Virtue, as all other Livers, given
for Fits of Convulsions. And Mad-Doggs Liver, is given against Madness. Each of
the Viscera contains something of the Humors they separate. So the Lungs have a
Pituitose Slime; the Brain, the Pancreas, and most of the Glandules, the same.
The Stones have a Foetor from the Semen; which are therefore used in Powder, in
hard Labors and as Anti-hystericks.

The Spleen has a Sliminess from the Lien.
Juice, separated by it: So that the same Virtue is to be given to each of the
Viscera, as to the Humors separated by them; which Humors, being in an Healthy
state, may help the separations in each particular Viscera. So all the
Medicines which taste like Choler, are properly called Hepaticks. And all other
Medicines resembling the Taste of other Humors, are Splenetick, Diuretic, etc.
respecting the separation of that Humor. The inward Skins of the Gizzards of
Pigeons, etc. have the Taste of the Gall; being Bitter, Sweet, Sub-acrid,
Fetid and Slimy: They are good Diuretics, Stomachicks and Hepaticks.

All Salts tasting like Urine, are Diuretic; and the Kidneys have a Foetor
from the Urine, and may be Diuretic.

The Lungs of Animals yield, in distillation, Pulmo Agninus, etc.
a Slimy Water for Hecticks, with some smatch of a Volatile Salt; a Slimy
Lympha being separated by the Glandules of it.

Mucilaginous Parts of Animals: The Parts Animalium Mucilaginosae.
Decoction of Horns, Bones, and Cartilaginous Parts, as the Feet of Animals, is
Mucilaginous, and Emollient in Baths and Clysters; and, by boiling high,
becomes a Gelly. Snails have a Slime, which runs into a Syrup with Sugar; if
they be boiled in Milk, they give a cold Slimy Nourishment for Hecticks; but
the Slime is destroyed by distillation, and becomes offensive and hurtful.
Snails will conglutinate a Wound, and discuss Tumors, and stick fast to the
Skin.

Fresh Earthworms have a Sliminess in them, good for Consumptive Persons, if
boiled in Water Gruel. The White of an Egg is Slimy, and tempers Sharp Humors;
and outwardly cools Inflammations of the Eyes. I distilled a Volatile Vrinous
Salt from it.

Froggs-Spawn is Slimy, cools inwardly and outwardly.

The Yelk of an Egg is Oily, and yields an Oil fried and distilled. Turpentine,
and Volatile Oils mixed with it, will easily dissolve in Water.

Icthyocolla is very conglutinative outwardly, in Ruptures and Wounds.

Blood dried to Powder is very glutinative, and stops Bleeding, and heals
Wounds; therefore warm Pigeons Blood is put into the Eyes. A distilled Water
is made out of Swines-Blood, for to cool and dilute the Hectical Blood.

Blood, by its Salt, cleanses the Hands and Face. The Spirit of Blood is good
for Convulsion-Fits; for which also, Blood taken fresh into a warm Dish, out of
the Arm, to the quantity of four ounces, and immediately drank, is used to cure
the Fits, by its Salt, and a new Digestion.

The Bones of Carps, Perches, the Jaw Parts Animalium Osseae.
of a Jack, the Tooth of a Boar, the Hooffs of an Elke, Horse, Ass, etc. Man's
Bones and Skull, Bulls-Pisle, etc. The Virtues of these Medicines depend on the
Earthy Part, which absorbs Acids, and on a Volatile; whereby they are Fetid and
Antihysterick; all the Parts of Animals yielding a Volatile Salt and Oil in
distillation.

Toads, Earthworms, and Wood-Lice Insecta.
dried, have a strong Foetor, by which they are Medicinal. All Infects yield a
Volatile Salt by distillation; excepting Ants, which yield an Acid, which is
Diuretic and Venereal; but this Acid Spirit may be turned into an Vrinous, by
addition of Calx viva.

Kermes are Bitterish, and of a great Kermes.
Fragrancy; and therefore Cordial. Out of these Insects, Confectio Alkermes is
made.

Gall mixed with Hot-Water, smells Odor Animalium.
Sweet and Fragrant, like Musk; which Smell is observable in a Piggs-Eye,
roasted.

Every Animal has a particular Scent; which Smell is communicated to Oil, by
the boiling of the Flesh in it; or otherwise is perceived in the distillation
of the fresh Flesh, in a close Still; or may be drawn from the Dungs of Animals.

A Cow, Veal, or Sheep, have a moderate and Milky Smell. A Fox, Horse, Catt,
Dog, or Fitchet, have a very Fetid offensive Smell. A Martin killed, smells
Musky; and a Kings-Fisher is also said to smell so. Salt-Fish has a strong
offensive Smell. Shellfish and Salmon have a different Smell, resembling the
Semen; and therefore may be a Venereal Diet. Ducks, Geese, Swans, and diverse
other Wild-Fowl, have a Moorish Smell and Taste, and are crude and less
wholesome Diet. All Fetid Animals have an offensive Flesh: and by the Smell and
Taste, Animals are chose for Diet, or left to Medicine.

The Taste of the Flesh of Mutton, Veal, etc. is Fresh, Stringy, Watery; the
Taste of the Enterals, is more Soft and Slimy and have an unpleasant Smell.
Each particular sort of Animal, has a particular Scent agreeable to the Food,
and the Degree of the Digestion of it; and from the particular Odor, a
particular Virtue may be inferred: But because all these different Scents
depend on an Animal Volatile Oil and Salt, they differ but in Degree the one
from the other: Fetid Animals being accounted Medicinal; but the moderate
Smells show what Animals are fit for Food.

Choler is Bitter, Sweet, Slimy, Sub-acrid, Excrementa Animalium.
and very Nauseous to the Stomach: It is used for an Opthalmick Cleanser; and
so is the distilled Water of it. The Bile of Biras is more Acrid, and less
Viscid, than that of Quadrupedes. The Bile of a Bull opens the Piles. The Bile
of a Puppy is given inwardly for Convulsion-Fits. Tincture of dried Bile, with
Spirit of Wine, is used for Noise in the Ears. The Wax of the Ears is like
Choler. The stronger Foetor any Animal has, the stronger is the Bile.

Urine is of a Salt Taste, and quick Lixivious Odor: The Salt of it is like
Sal-Ammoniack; and therefore Urine is Diuretic, good to wash Scald Heads,
Putrid Ears, and Oedematous Legs; and inwardly is used in Pains of the
Stomach, Colic, and Stone, in Putridness of the Gums, and Acidity of the
Saliva.

Dungs of Animals have an Acid, from the Meat Fermented in the Stomach; and a
Bitterness, from the Bile coagulate by it; and also an Oyliness or Foetor, from
the Volatile Oleose* Salt of the Aliment opened by a Fermentation: Therefore
Dungs differ according to the differences of Meat, and the different Digestions
of Animals. To which I must add, That Sea Salt is mixed with the Dungs and Urine
of those Animals, who eat Salt-Meats.

Dungs cleanse by their Choler; and by their Foetor are discussing: By the
Relics of the Meat, (which is the Substance of the Dung, and) which has
undergon a Digestion, and also by the Stomachick Lympha, which promoted the
Fermentation, and remains mixed with the Dung, they may rectify the Ferment of
our Stomachs.

Horse-Dung is used in Pains and Stitches, infused in Beer, or distilled in
Milk, with Antiscorbutick Herbs.

Album Graecum is Gritty and Fetid: By the Foetor it discusses; and is a good
drying Medicine in malign Ulcers; and particularly in Dysenteries, it is given
in Milk: By the Grit and Unctuousness it corrects the sharp Humors. Outwardly
it is used to the Throat, as a Fetid Discutient in the Quinsie.

Asses-Dung is an a Astringent in Hemorrhages.

Goats-Dung is very Fetid and Discussing.

Cows-Dung is moderately Discussing, and Anodyne in the Gout.

Sheeps-Dung is accounted good in the Jaundice; for which the White Dung of
Hens is used.

Pidgeons-Dung is used in hot Plasters.

The Stercora of the Carnivorous are most Fetid.

Civet is of a strong Odor; whereby it Zibethum.
is outwardly Discussing: A little of it is Sweet-scented; but Fetid in a great
quantity; and the more Fetid, the more pure it is.

Musk is of a burnt sweet Odor; whereby Moschus.
it acts on the Animal Spirits, in giving them a quick Motion: And therefore is
Cordial, and good in the Hickcough, to three Grains in Pills. Musk has a
Bitterish Taste.

Castor is Acrid-Bitterish in Taste Castoreum.
and of a strong Fetid Scent in Powder, Tincture, and Spirit: It is Hystereck
by the strong Smell, giving a different Agitation to the Spirits, from that
irregular Motion in Fits; and abounds with a Volatile Salt, and Fetid Oil.

Rennet: I took a piece of the Calves Coagulum Vitulinum.
Stomach, which was dried and salted; this being washed, was laid in fair Water
all Night: By this Water I coagulated Milk. I could not find any Acid in this
Rennet, by tasting of it; but only a Sliminess. One Spoonful of it would
coagulate more Milk, than so much Vinegar could. I put some Spirit of Sal
Ammoniack into it, which gave no Effervescence, nor Precipitation: But,
notwithstanding, thirty Drops of it, in a little quantity of the Rennet,
curdled Milk. The only Argument of any Acidity in the Rennet, was, That it soon
dissolved Filings of Steel, and, in a few Hours, gave a Tincture with Galls.

This Acid in the Rennet adheres to the common Salt; and is thereby made less
sensible to us: For the Rennet is a little Saltish, from the common Salt with
which the Bag is salted. And the Lympha of the Stomach is naturally Sub-acid,
though not much observed by our Tastes, because it will fix Quicksilver. Such
is the Acid of Rennet; in the making of which, the curdled Milk is thrown away,
and only that Part of the Stomach used, which is next the Guts; which is lined
well with the thick Coat of Glandules.

The other Parts of the Calves Maw dried and salted, will not so well curdle
Milk: This Rennet I distilled; but could not find, that the Liquor which came
over, would coagulate Milk.

Rennet would not coagulate Gall, or the Serum of the Blood: But Milk is
coagulated by Sack, and strong Ale; in which is no apparent Acid, though it be
coagulated by it.

I cut a piece of a fresh Calves Maw, only washed clean from Milk, and not
salted; this was boiled a little in a small quantity of Milk, which I set by at
least 12. Hours: but this fresh Maw did not at all coagulate the Milk.
Therefore I thought the common Reason, which supposes the Coagulation of
Rennet, to depend on the coagulated Milk, from whence it may have some
Sowreness, must be wholly rejected; because the fresh Bag has the greatest
Tincture of Acid from the Milk, and yet will not coagulate Milk. And because
the Acid-Lympha is most plentiful, and strong in the fresh Maw, and yet that
will not coagulate Milk. I therefore doubted of my own Opinion I have
mentioned; and rather believe, that the Coagulative Virtue in Rennet, depends
partly on the Salt; whose Acid may be loosened, and in part separated by a kind
of half Putrefaction by the Maw: The Putredinous Smell of the Rennet-Beg, and
the Nauseous Taste of the Rennet, (from whence Cheese has that offensive Smell
and Taste) are some Proof of the Putrefaction. We observe, that some Acid may
be separated from common Salt, when Quicksilver is sublimed from it; and more
evidently by Distillation of Spirit of Salt, which coagulates Milk like Rennet.

What the Fire produces suddenly, may by Digestion or Putrefaction, be
attained: So Volatile Salts of Plants are produced by a violent Fire; and the
same is also produced naturally in Plants, by their particular Digestions and
Fermentations, which are tendencies to Putrefaction.

Out of Astringents, the Fire immediately separates an Acid; and the same
happens, when the Astringent Juice in the Roots of Sorrel, are better digested
in the Leaves; in which is an evident Acerbity or Acid: But this Acidity is not
sufficient to curdle Milk, but is only one Part of a Ferment; which, as I have
described it in the Discourse about Fermentation, ought to contain an Oil, and
an Acid: This Acid is from common Salt; but the Oily Part, from the Putrefy'd
Membranes of the Calves Stomach, which smells offensively, and gives a strong
Taste to Cheese. Rennet therefore acts not like an Acid, by coagulating the
Milk; but like a Ferment, in disposing Milk to a Fermentation; by which Milk,
which is long kept, coagulates: For, upon the adding of Rennet to Milk, it is
not immediately curdled, which is the Effect of an Acid; but after some time
standing; and often the Milk is warmed, to hasten the Fermentation. From this
Fermentation Cheese receives from Rennet, it is thought to help Digestion, as
all things once fermented, do. The Foetor of Cheese is an Argument, that the
Milk was fermented out of which it is made.

The End of the Fourth Part.
PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines, etc.
The Fifth Part. Specificks Classed, As they are distinguished by their TASTES,
and by the HUMORS, which they correct.
The PREFACE.
I Thought it very useful, for my own Practice, to reduce Plants into Specific
Classes, and distinguish them by their Taste and Smell; for by them I can best
judge, which Medicine is most suitable to the Nature and Taste of the Humor
producing the Disease, and also to the Constitution of the Patient. By these
Classes I can readily find the Medicines of such a particular Taste, suitable
to my Intention; and in the same Tables I have set no Medicine, which
Experience has not long approved of, as Specific for the Disease. I will only
give one Instance, for the better illustrating the Design of these Tables: I
want an opening Hepatick in a cold Constitution; in the Table of Hepaticks, I
find the Bitter-Acrids to be the most suitable Taste for that purpose, both as
Bitter and Acrid. I find also, under that Taste, ranked Celandine and
Turmerick, with others of that Taste; which Experience has approved of, in the
Disease I here mentioned.

I might give as many Instances, as there are Classes and Tastes; but I will
only observe, That, by this Method, the Patient may judge, whether proper
Medicines are prescribed; and the Physician may, by these Tastes of his
Medicines, give a good and sensible Account of the Virtue of his Medicines, and
the Effects to be produced by them.

I have set down, first, the Class of Acids, and mixed Acids, and the Class of
Acid Absorbents, as generally mentioned in every Class: I have set down those
Medicines, which evacuate the Cause of the Disease: And after that, the Classes
of Hot and Cold Alterers, and those that help some Symptom: Outward Medicines
are mentioned last. I find many Purgers to have three Tastes; but because many
of them are brought dry to us, they are not so sensible to the Taste. In
Diagridium, Jalap, and Cambogia, the Acrid Taste is most obscure; and
therefore, I judge of them by Analogy to the rest that are Resinous, as
Turbith: And if I had these Purgers fresh in the Plant, I could easily
demonstrate those Tastes which give them their Purgative Virtue; which I
conclude to be Acrid joined to Gum, Resin, or Gummy Mucilage in Cambogia.

I find many Plants to have above two or three Tastes; but I seldom mention
more than two, because they contain the chief Virtues, and other Tastes are
very weak; and if more should be mentioned, the Classes would be too many to be
useful. I have referred some of the Dispensatory Compositions to particular
Classes, as well as they can be done; but the Ingredients are so many, and so
contrary, in some Compositions, as to give no certain Taste to the whole Mass;
which makes their Virtues less known, and what is to be ascribed unto them. But
by this method of Tasting, all Compositions will be best examined and amended.

I will, upon this occasion, give this advice, to imitate Natures Composition
of Tastes, in Simple Medicines.

First, To Compound those Tastes she does, and no other.

Secondly, Not to Compound above three or four Tastes: For when we find so many
naturally Compounded, they produce a Nauseous Purging Medicine.

Thirdly, If possible to use Simples, according to that true assertion, Dolus
est uti Compositis, ubi Simplicia sufficient. But if Composition be necessary,
let us Compound but two or three Tastes: So that the whole may have some
certain sensible Taste, which is necessary for curing the Disease.

I cannot but reflect on the humor of jumbling many Tastes together, and often
changing of Medicines, as the occasion of unsuccessful Practice; for by that
means no certain Quality, or Taste of Medicine is used, to conquer the contrary
Nature and Tastes of Humors, which have a particular preternatural state in
Diseases: And a contrary Quality and Specific Taste in the Medicine, is
required to alter and reduce them to a natural Temper; or else a Medicine of
the same Taste as the Humor, is necessary to perform the Office of that Humor,
and to help its separation; which sort of Medicines I have called Friendly
Specificks: and the Alterers I call, Common Specificks. Vid. Part I. of
Specificks.

The Physician is to choose a suitable Taste to the Constitution of his
Patient, as well as to the Nature of the Disease, to continue it a due time,
and to give it in a full Dose; which I conceive to be Rational Practice: For
whosoever knows not the Taste of the Humors in Man's Body, nor understands the
prevailing Taste of his Medicine, cannot deserve the name of a Judicious
Practitioner; and generally has no Success in his business.

I do believe, the Observation of the differences of Taste, and the
Contrarieties of one to the other, will give a great Improvement to the
Practice of Physic, and the knowledge of the preternatural state in Diseases.
For Instance, If Acids abound, Bitters are necessary to correct them; and if
Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks cure Cephalic Distempers, then the Peccant Quality
of the Succus Nervosus, is inclining to an Acid, and to Stagnation; both which,
the Taste mentioned corrects. And it ought to be observed, how Humors in the
Body are mixed in some complicate Distempers, and therefore require mixed
Medicines; in which, both Tastes seem equal; as Bitter-Astringents in Fevers.

Most Authors, under the name of one Specific, have Classed Medicines of very
different Natures; which I have here endeavored to distinguish by their
several Tastes: And that the Use of each particular Taste, in the altering of
the Humors, may be observed, I have mentioned, in the following Classes, the
Peccant Quality of the Humor, as requiring such a contrary Taste. I will now
give a Class of all the Tastes I have observed in the Materia Medica. The
Ingenious Dr. Grew, in his Anatomy of Plants, has computed all the possible
Varieties of Tastes in Plants, amounting to 1800. But I thought it not
necessary to make some nice distinctions he has taken notice of; and therefore,
under the name of Acrid, I have comprehended Hot, Biting, Pungent, Penetrant,
being they all depend on a Volatile Salt, more or less Oleose; and each
particular Acrid is distinguished by its Composition with other Tastes.

These following Tastes are all the Varieties I have observed in these Tables;
though I have mentioned more, as appears in the last Part of this Essay.

The Catalogue of Tastes.
First, Dry Earthy Tastes are, 1. IN Woods, Husks of Fruit, and their Stones.
2. In Common and Precious Stones. 3. In Animals; as, Horns, Bones, Hoofs. 4. In
Minerals; as, Iron, Lead, Gold, Silver.
Secondly, Watrish Tastes. 1. Crude-Watry. 2. Watery Mucilages. 3. Mealy
Mucilages, or Clammy Gummy Mucilages. 4. Earthy Mucilages.
Thidly, Acid Tastes, And Astringents, which depend on an Acid mixed with Earth.
1. Acid-Watry, or pure Sour Tastes. 2. Acid-Bitter. 3. Acid-Acrid. 4. Sweet
Spirituous Acid. 5. Acid-Astringent, or Acerbe. 6. Earthy Astringents, or Rough
Tastes. 7. Styptick, Bitterish, or Austere. 8. Styptick, Sweet. 9. Styptick,
Aromatic, or Bitterish.
Fourthly, Bitter Tastes. 1. Watry-Bitters. 2. Bitter-Sweet. 3. Strong-Bitters,
with an Aromatic Smell. 4. Bitter-Acrids, with a Dead-Nettle Smell. 5.
Bitter-Acrids, without any considerable Smell. 6. Laurel, or Bitters
Astringent. 7. Elder-Bitters, or Bitter-Slimy. 8. Terebinthinate
Bitter-Astringents. And these are either purely Terebinthinate, or else Fetid
or Aromatic Terebinthinates. 9. Bitterish-Slimy-Astringents, with a
Dead-Nettle Smell.
Fifthly, Aromatic Tastes. 1. Bitterish-Acrid. 2. Sweet-Acrid. And some of
both these are extremely Acrid.
Sixthly, Fetid Odors, joined with diverse Tastes, and are contrary to
Aromaticks. 1. Bitter- Fetid.
2. Acrid- 3. Bitter-Acrid- 4. Mucilaginous Fetids, or Narcoticks.
Seventhly, Acrid Tastes. 1. The Cress Tastes. 2. Acrids, with a rank Smell and
Taste. 3. Exulcerators are,
1. Watery. 2. Oily, Milky, Gummy, Resinous. 3. Corrosive Fetids; which are
Venenate; as Napellus, Aconitum.
Eighthly, Sweet Tastes are, 1. Pea-Tastes; which are, 1. Sweet Pea-Taste,
Slimy. 2. Bitterish Pea-Taste, Slimy. 3. Rough Pea-Taste. 4. The Acrid, Bitter,
Slimy Pea-Tastes.
2. Watery Crude Sweet Tastes. 3. Sweet Acrids. 4. Sweet Oily. 5. Sweet,
Sub-acid Slimy. 6. Sweet Mucilaginous.
Ninthly, Nauseous Tastes of Purgers. 1. Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid, Astringent.
2. Bitter, Sweet, Slimy, Sub-acrid. 3. Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Slimy, or Strong,
Bitter, Slimy, Acrid. 4. Fiery, Gummose, or Resinous Acrids. 5. Extreme Bitters
Slimy, with Caustic Acrimony.
Tenthly, Saline Tastes. 1. Vitriolick, Sweet, Styptick. 2. Aluminous,
Sub-acid, Rough. 3. Nitrose, Cool, Bitterish, Pungent, and Saltish. 4.
Salso-acid, or Muriatick. 5. Sulphurous Acid. 6. Sweet, Sub-acid, Spirituous,
Spiritus Salis Dulcis. 7. Pungent Salt, with a quick Vrinous Smell. 8. Pungent
Salt, with a weak Lixivious Smell. 9. Salt, Acrid, Hot, Aromatic, or Oily
Volatile Salts.
Eleventhly, Unctuous Tastes, as Fats and Oils; which are either, 1. Crude
Slimy Oils.
2. Rank Bitterish 3. Penetrant Acrid Chemical

The Names of Specific Classes, and the Explication of their Names by the
Humors that are to be corrected.
. I. Internal Medicines.
EVacuators of the Morbifick Humors,

First, Purgers; which are either,

1. Of Choler, or Cholagogues.

2. Of thin Serum, or Lympha from the Blood; Hydragogues.

3. Of Pituitose Serum, from the Glandules of the Guts and Pancreas;
Phlegmagogues. Or,

4. Melanogogues; which are the gentle sort of Phlegmagogues, purging Choler;
in which is contained a slimy Humor, separated by the Spleen: And therefore all
Melanogogues have a bitter slimy Taste, like Choler, and the ropy Splenetick
Humor.

Secondly, Vomitories; which are gentle, moderate, or vehement; and evacuate
from the Stomach the same Humors.

Thirdly, Diuretics evacuate by Urine.

Fourthly, Diaphoreticks evacuate by Sweat.

Fifthly, Emmenagogues drive out the Menses, or Birth.

Sixthly, Vesicatories evacuate from the Glandules of the Skin, by Blistering.

Seventhly, Sternutatories evacuate from the Nose, by Sneezing.

Eighthly, Salivatories or Masticatories evacuate by Spitting.

Hot or Cold Alterers,

First, Of Choler; and these are called Hepaticks.

Secondly, Of the ropy Glandulous Juice of the Spleen; which are Spleneticks.

Thirdly, Of the salt Serum, or Lympha of the Blood; which are Arthriticks.

Fourthly, Of the whole Mass of Blood; and these respect Sanguification, and
the Circulation of it; as Antiscorbuticks.

Fifthly, Of the Chyle; and these respect its Fermentation and Distribution;
and are called Stomachicks.

Sixthly, Of the Succus Nervosus; and they also respect its Motion: These are
Cephalicks, Hystericks, and Nervines.

Seventhly, Of the Motion of the Blood and Spirits; and these are Cordials.

Eighthly, Preservers of the mixture of the Blood, and Expellers of Poison; and
these are Alexipharmacks.

Ninthly, Expectorators and Correcters of the Lympha flowing from the Glandules
in the Lungs; and these are Thoracicks.

Tenthly, Venereals respect the Semen, and its defect, or too great Evacuation;
which are Anti-venereals.

Eleventhly, Ophthalmicks respect the Humors of the Eye.

Twelfthly, Breeders of Milk respect the Glandules of the Breast, and
Nourishment of the Woman.

Thirteenthly, Anthelminticks are Medicines against the Worms.

Fourteenthly, Narcoticks produce Sleep, and allay Pain.

. II. External Medicines.
First, ANodynes, to allay Pains.

Secondly, Emollients, to soften, mollify, and suppurate Tumors.

Thirdly, Resolvents, to discuss Tumors.

Fourthly, Repellents, which drive back Humors, and cool the Heat.

Fifthly, Vulneraries in Ulcers; which are,

1. Digestives, to ripen Matter. 2. Cleansers, to deterge it. 3. Sarcoticks, to
help the breeding of Flesh. 4. Epuloticks, to skin the Ulcer.
Sixthly, Vulneraries in Wounds; as,

1. Conglutinatives. 2. Stoppers of Bleeding.
Seventhly, Cathaereticks, or Eaters of proud Flesh.

Eighthly, Psylothra; which are Takers-off of the Hair.

Ninthly, Cosmeticks; which are Cleansers of the Face and Skin.

Tenthly, Of Poisoned Wounds; and of Animal, Mineral, and Vegetable Poisons.

The First CLASS. Of Specific Laxatives, and Purgers, and their Correctors.
. I. Of Laxatives, without any considerable Stimulus.
DIluters, which moisten much:

Aqua Communis. Serum Lactis. Lac Ebutyratum. Decoctum Hordei.
Mucilaginous Laxatives, or Emollients, Guts and Meat Slimy:

Malva. Mercurialis. Atriplex. Beta. Brassica. Spinachia. Lactuca. Violae
folia.
Oily Laxatives:

Butyrum. Oleum Commune, Amygdalarum dulcium. Nuces recentes Oleosae.
Laxatives Sub-acid, Sweet, and Slimy:

Pruna. Poma recentia dulcia and syrupus. Pyra dulcia. Cerasa. Passulae. Vvae
dulces. Tamarindi. Baccae Sambuci and Syrupus Mororum, Fragorum. Vina dulcia.
Laxatives, very Sweet and Mucilaginous.

Radices Glycyrrhizae, Polypodii, Graminis.

Manna, Mel, Cassia, Saccharum, Cerevisia recens.

Compound Lenient Purgers:

Diaprunum Simplex. Diacassia cum Manna.
Abstersive Purgers, which gently stimulate, Acid or Acrid Choler in the Primae
viae.

1. The Terebinthinates, which are Bitter, Gummy, and Acrid; by which they
Stimulate a little, and keep the Body Laxative.

Terebinthinae omnes. Balsamus Peruvianus, Lucatellae.
2. Gummose, Bitter, Fetid Acrids, Stimulate, like Turpentine.

Sagapenum, Bdellium, Ammoniacum.

3. Nitrose, Sulphurous, Aluminous Waters purge very well, and they taste
Bitterish and Brackish.

Aquae fontanae Sulphureae. Sulphur vivum.

Flores Sulphuris are a little Purging.

4. Fixed Salts are Laxative, by their Stimulating Acrimony, and by their
Effervescence with Acids in the Stomach.

5. Acids are Laxative, which are mixed with Earths.

Tartarus and Cremor. Sal gem. Sal commune and aquae salsae, Alumen, Nitrum.
6. Acids mixed with Salts, are Laxative.

Tartarus vitriolatus. Sal Ammoniacum. Polychrestum. Ol. Tartari per deliquium
Nitratum.
7. Acids mixed with Minerals Stimulate.

Lapis Lazuli. Lapis Armenus. Vitriolum Martis. Nitrum Antimoniatum.
The Medicines in this, and the former Class, make little Evacuation without an
addition of other Purgers.

. II. Of Purgers.
GEntle Purgers, which are accounted Cholagogues, do not only irritate, and
carry the Mass of Nourishment out of the Guts; but have a stronger Irritation,
causing more violent Peristaltick Motions; and the Vesica Bilaria is thereby
Evacuated. The Purgers have a Nauseous Bitterness in them, like Choler, which
goes into the Veins, and separates the Choler through the Liver, as other
Bitter-Acrids do; whence they act both as Alterers, and also irritate the
Intestines to Purge.

Cholagogues are Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid,

Radices lapathi acuti, Rhabarbari Anglicani, Lapathi Communis.

Rhad. Rhei, which loses the Acrid by boiling; and, it is said, That fresh
Rhubarb flies quick into the Nose.

Cortex Berberum tastes Bitter, Slimy, Pungent, and Styptick.

Myrobalanae Citrinae are Bitterish, Slimy, and Styptick.

Rad. Polypodii are Sweet, and Styptick; The Leaves have a Bitterness; and
Fernes have a Latent Acrimony, discernible in the Roots of some of them.

Rosae Damascenae are Bitter, Slimy, and a little Acrid-Astringent.

Flores Persicorum are Bitter, Slimy, Astringent, and Sub-acrid.

The Nauseousness of Cholagogues is best corrected by Acids and Aromaticks.

Compound Cholagogues.

All the Laxatives and Abstersives beforementioned,

Syrupus Rhabarbari, Rosarum, florum Persicorum.

The Melanogogues seem to be the gentle Hydragogues: By the Bitter, they
Evacuate Choler; by the Slimy Sub-acrid, the pituitous Serum. They are
Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Slimy, as Sena, Sem. Carthami, Decoctum Senae.

The Phlegmagogues are stronger Bitters, Acrid; the Bitter makes them
Cholagogues also: The great Acrid and Mucilage more agree with Phlegm,
Stimulate more, and mix better with it.

Bitter, Sweet, Slimy, Sub-acrid.

Aloes: It has a Resin, and also a Mucilage, Purging by both. Agaricus has a
Resin.

Hydragogues: A little Acrimony irritates Choler-Bladder, for expulsion of it;
a greater Acrimony irritates the Intestinal Glands, for Purging of Phlegm: But
the greatest Purging Acrimony irritates not only the expulsion of Choler, and
Pituitous Serum, but also a thin Serum out of the Blood; for that Acrimony not
only Stimulates the Intestines, but gets into the Blood: It swims readily in
the Serum, to the Glandules of the Intestines, where the Irritation is.

The moderate Hydragogues are either,

First, Resinous, or,

Secondly, Bitter, Slimy, Acrid, Nauseous.

First, The Resinous have no Bitterness, but a latent Oily Acrid Salt,
coagulate into a Resin by an Acrid; which being taken off in the Stomach, the
Acrimony appears. This Acrimony is evident in Turbith, which burns as the
Tithymals do; and this yields a Resin, like Jalap.

Jalap tastes Clammy in the Teeth, the Resin of it smells Sub-acid; which
Acidity fixes the Acrimony. Jalap flies into the Nose, when pounded, and causes
Sneezing; and when it is fresh, it tastes very Acrid, though it be Insipid with
us. And we cannot but conceive all Inflammable Resins to be of very hot Parts;
containing a Rarefied Oil, very Inflammable, and a Volatile Salt, from whence
the Pungency comes; and an Acid, which does abate the Volatility of both, and
causes it to purge downwards. The Acrimony of Jalap is also Diuretic, when it
is given for a Purge. Jalap is not a Bryony, because not Bitter, and Bryony has
no Resin.

Scammony has a Resin like Jalap, which smells Sub-acid, and has no Taste with
us; but when fresh, it runs Milky out of the Root, (as Dioscorides describes
it) and becomes Milky in Water, as both Jalap and Scammony-Resin, dissolved and
Precipitated, do; and therefore I refer them both to a Tithymaline-Acrimony,
Stimulating by their burning Heat; for Agarick has a manifest Pungency, and
yields a Resin. Turbith-Roots burn in the Mouth, like Spurge, and yield a
Resin, and are Milky.

All the Tithymals and Esula's Purge by an Acrimony, like an Acrid Resin, being
Milky.

Mechoacan is Gummy and Clammy in the Teeth, like Jalap; and Resinous, and
Milky in the Stalk.

Hermodactyls: The Roots taste Mealy, like some Mucilages, and of a little Heat.

Many of these Plants purge strongly, though they have little Heat sensible to
us. A great deal of the Tithymaline Fieriness being spent in the keeping them
so long dry; and that which remains, appears not till the Stomach has taken off
the Acidity from the Acrid and Oil, which compose the Resin, and is the chief
Purging Stimulus; though the Mucilage help the Nauseousness, by keeping the
Purging Acrimony fixed to the Nervous Membranes, a good while.

Cambogia is more Gummy than Resinous; the Acrimony may be argued from the
Coloring Parts. The Gumminess conceals it from the Tongue; it, not being
tasted fresh, cannot be so easily discerned. Bontius says, It has the Leaves of
Wood Tithymal; and probably, when fresh, is of a burning Taste, in which the
Purgative Faculty consists. Cambogia and Scammony have little Fixed Salt.

Secondly, The Bitter, Slimy, Acrid, very Nauseous.

The First Degree.

Polygala is Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid, and of a Sweet Fragrant Smell.

Viola Martia is Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid, and of a Fragrant Smell.

Iris fresh, is Bitter, Slimy, very Acrid, and purges strongly.

The Second sort are strong Bitters, very Slimy, and Sub-acrid; as,

Cortex Sambuci. Radix Ebuli. Syrupus de spina Cervina. Cortex ejusdem. Cortex
and Baccae Alni Nigrae. Baccae Euonymi Theophrastri. Cortex Juglandis and
Fructus.
The Third sort, are extreme Bitters, Slimy, and very Acrid.

Colocynthis yield a Resin, and are all very Bitter, Acrid, and Slimy.
Gratiola Elaterium Soldanella
Tabacus, Dulcamara, are very Bitter, Acrid and Fetid.
Bryonia and Baccae, Helleborus Albus and Niger, Helleboraster
Convolvulus is Slimy, Bitter, and Acrid, like Bryony, and seems a Species of
it; the former are all of the same kind and Taste, differing in degrees of
Acrimony, Bitterness and Sliminess, and so differ in Purging. I have more
particularly set down the Tastes of Purgers; because they have hitherto been
supposed to act Occultly, and not by manifest Qualities; of which I have given
Instances in all Purgers.

Caustic Purgers are Cataputia, Mezereon, Esula, Ficus, Ricinus, Euphorbium.

Mineral Purgers are Vitriols, Pil. Lunares, Lapis Lazuli, etc. or Sulphurous
Acids, as Antimonium, Sulphur vivum; Aquae Sulphureae Purgantes.

. III. Correctors of Purgers.
ACids which correct fiery Acrid Salts,

Cremor Tartari. Tartarus Vitriolatus. Succus Limonum. Acetum. Succus Citri.
Phlegma and Spiritus Vitrioli, Salis. Succus Cydoniorum. Spiritus Sulphuris.
Fumus Sulph. accensi.
Oleose, which dissolve the Resins, hinder Guts, and temper their Acrimony:

Balsamum Peruvianum. Vitellus Ovi. Balsamum Gileadense. Ol. Amygdalarum.
Mucilages to correct Acrimony, and to Membranes from it:

Sem. Psyllii, Mastiche. Emulsiones, Amygdalae dulces. Gum Tragacanth. Cassia,
Diaprunum. Conserva Violarum. Pulp. Passularum. Electuarium Lenitivum.
Aromaticks, which correct Bitters and Mucilages, and make them less Nauseous,
and expel Wind:

Ol. Cinnam. Caryophylli. Zinziber. Galanga. Coriandrum. Ol. Anisi, Carui,
Faeniculi, Juniperi, Nuc. Moschat. Semen Anisi, Carui. Spiritus Vini.
Astringents, which hinder too strong

Santala. Rosa Rubra. Myrobalani. Cinnamomum.
Fixed Salts, which take away the Nauseousness Mucilage, and hinder Resins from
sticking to the Stomach, by uniting with their Acid, and making them more
fluid. Not only an Acrimony, but a clammy sticking Mucilage, makes Purges to
gripe much; as it happens in Senna, etc.

Sal Tartari, Absinthii.

The Second CLASS. Of Sternutatories.
STernutatories evacuate Rheum from the Nose and Glandules; and are,

First, Acrid Purgers:

Rad. Hellebori albi, nigri, Turpethi,

Jalapii.

Fol. Tabaci, Asarae-Baccae.

Agarici Pulvis.

Secondly, Bitterish Acrids, Aromaticks, and Cephalicks:

Rad. Primulae Veris, Iridis, Imperatoriae, Pyrethri, Zinziberis.

Fol. Mari, Sir. Majoranae, Satureiae,

Musci arborei, Salviae.

Sem. Cubebarum, Piperis, Sinapeos.

Thirdly, Acid Vomitories:

Turbith, Sal Vitrioli, Vitriolum album.

Fourthly, All Causticks.

Ranunculus, Tithymalus, Esula, Euphorbium.

Caustic Vesicatories, vid. External Medicines.

Diuretics, vid. Nephritioks.

Diaphoreticks, vid. Infra.

Emmenagogues, vid. Hystericks.

The Third CLASS. Of Masticatories.
MAsticatories are the same as the Cephalic Sternutatories; which, by a
pungent Acrimony, stimulate the Glandules of the Mouth to send forth the Saliva.

Fetid Acrids, which have the same Effect; Tabaco.

Gummy Resins, which stick to the Teeth, Teeth and Tongue, whereby the Saliva
is evacuated; Mastiche.

To these may be referred Salivatory Evacuations, by the use of Mercury,
prepared inwardly, or outwardly in Unguent.

Mercury joins with the Salts of the Blood, and coagulates the Serum; and so
produces Salivation.

The Fourth CLASS. Of Vomitories.
VOmitories differ nothing from Purgers, but in the Degree of Acrimony: They
stimulate so soon as they be in the Stomach; and therefore irritate the upper
Orifice of the Stomach: And for the same Reason, too great a dose of a Purge
works upwards, and a gentler Vomitory works both ways.

Vomitories are either,

Gentle; which produce Nauseousness, Stomach; As,

1. Oleose:

Ol. Olivarum, Amygdalarum dulcium,

Juscula pinguia, Butyrum.

2. Mucilaginous Flowers and Herbs Sub-acrid:

Flores Genistae.

Fol. Atriplicis.

3. Cress-Acrids, Sweet-Bitterish:

Rad. Raphani, and Semen.

4. Strong Bitters, and slimy smoaky:

Fol. Cardui, Bardanae.

5. Bitterish, Acrid, Slimy, Sub-Aromatick:

Rad. Eupatorii, Cannabini.

Fol. and Rad. Erigeri.

Fol. Theae.

6. Nauseous Watery:

Aqua Tepida and Sulphurea.

7. Nauseous Sweets:

Mel and ex illo praeparata.

Moderate Vomitories; which evacuate Lympha from the Glandules of the Stomach;
As,

1. Bitter, Acrid, Mucilaginous, Fetid:

Rad. Scillae, Vinum Scilliticum.

Rad. Narcissi, Digitalis, Baccae Polygonati, Sambucae Aquaticae.

2. Gentle, Mineral, Acid Vomitories:

Sal Vitrioli, Gilla Theophrasti.

Strong Vegetable Vomits; which, besides Lympha of the Glandules, evacuate
Choler, and the Pancreatick Juice from the Duodenum.

1. The Strong, Bitter, Acrid, Slimy:

Rad. Bryonii, Hellebori albi.

Fol. Tabaci, Cortex Juglandis.

2. Acrid Terebinthinates:

Rad. Asari, Valerianae; which, besides the Aromatic, Terebinthinate Taste,
have a strong Faetor, like Hellebor a little.

3. Tithymaline-Acrids, Resinous, Gummy:

Cambogia, Laureola.

4. Caustick-Acrids, Watery:

Sedum Minus.

The Strong Mineral Vomits have the Vegetable.

1. Sulphurous Acid Antimonials:

Mercurius vitae, Crocus Metallorum.

2. Mercurials fixed by an Acid, and turned into a Vitriol:

Turbith, Mercurius Sublimatus.

Because Acids, Saline, and Alkalizate Tastes are in all the following Classes
very much used, I have prefixed these separate Classes of them.

The Fifth CLASS. Of Acids.
Sour cool Acids, and some Acerbs; Acids without Acerbity.

Rad. Bellidis minoris.

Fol. Acetosae, Acetosellae, Bellidis, Berberum.

Succi Limonum, Citriorum, Aurantiorum, Granatorum, Ribium, Cerasorum, Prunorum
acidorum. Acetum, Succus Mali agrestis fermentatus, Poma Acida, Pyra,
Prunellae. Succus Acetosae, Bellidis, Vvarum immaturarum.

Conservae Acetosellae, Berberum, Pulpa Tamarindorum, Mivae fructuum Acidorum,
and Baccarum Oxyacanthae.

Syrupi Limonum, Aurantiorum, Aceti,

Acetosellae, Acetositatis Citri.

Spiritus Salis, Nitri, Vitrioli.

Ol. Sulphuris per Campanam.

Mixed Acids. And these are,

First, Sweet Spirituous Vinous Acids; which agree better with the Stomach,
than Sour Acids.

All Acids taste Sour, and the most Crude is the Acerb; which, as well as the
former, by Fermentation become Spirituous. Acids are more Sharp, than the
Sour; but differ not much in Effects.

Baccae Sambuci, Mororum, Rubi Idei, Fragorum, Succus Pomorum dulcium, Mivae
and Syrupi praedict. Baccarum.

Conserva Cynosbati.

Vinum Pomaceum, Vin. Rhenanum, Album.

Vina Ribium, Cerasorum, Mororum, Grossularum, etc.

Spiritus Salis Dulcis.
Nitri Vitrioli
Elixir Vitrioli, which is Acid and Aromatic.

Spiritus Aceti.

Secondly, Acids mixed with Earth; as,

1. Sour gritty Tastes:

Cremor Tartari, Tartarus Albus.

Crystalli Acetosellae, Syrupus Coralliorum.

2. Rough Tastes, Sub-acid: But where the Acidity prevails above the Roughness,
they are to be referred to Sour Tastes:

Fructus immaturi, Rob Prunorum Sylvestrium and Syrupus, Acacia, Mespila,
Sorba, Cotonea Mala, Alumen, etc.

Thirdly, Salso-Acids, which are made by compounding contrary Salts; which
compound Salts mix, without any Effervescence, with the Acid or Alkalizate
Humors in an Animal:

Tartarus Vitriolatus, Tartarus Nitratus, Spiritus Salis refractus cum Sale
Tartari, Sal Ammoniacus Naturalis and Factitius;

which are produced by a mixture of Spirit of Salt, and Volatile Salt.

Vrina, which has the same Salt.

Nitrum, which is compounded of a Sulphurous Acid, and an Alkali.

Fourthly, Salso-Acids Natural; which are a Composition of Acids, and Stony
Particles:

Sal Marinus, Sal Gemmae, Muria, Aqua Calcis.

Fifthly, Chalybeate, Sweet, Sub-acid Stypticks:

Vitriolum Martis, Sal Chalybis, Chalybs cum Tartaro praeparatus, Flores Salis
Ammoniaci and Tinctura, Aquae Chalybiatae;

which consists of much Sulphur; by which a Vitriol is made out of Iron, and
that but an imperfect one.

Sixthly, Acids compounded with Sulphur:

Ens primum Sulphuris, Clyssus Antimonii, Aquae Sulphureae Font. Flo.
Sulphuris, Sulphur vivum.

The Sixth CLASS. Of Acid-Absorbers.
MEdicines of a Terrene or Gritty Taste, absorbing Acids, and Volatile and Fixed
Salts, contrary to Acids, are,

First, Animal Earths or Grits:

Oculi Cancrorum and Chelae, Putamina Ovorum, Calculi Animalium, Vngulae,
Cornua and Priapi, Dens Apri, Mandibulus Lucii Piscis, Os Percarum, and
Carpionum.

Secondly, Animal Flesh powdered, or their Dungs:

Caro Viperarum, Stercora Gallinae, Ovis, Canis, Capri, etc.

Thirdly, Animal Ashes:

Testae Ovorum, Ossa combusta, Spodium, Cornu Cervi ustum, Cancri Fluviatiles
combusti, Cornix aliaeque Aves combustae.

These Animal Parts, being burnt, have fit Pores for Acids to enter into: And
it is not improbable, that Animal Earths have Parts more apt to coagulate with
Animal Acids, (of which they have been deprived by the Fire) than any other
Alkalies have.

Fourthly, Insects, and some Bitter, Acrid, Animal Parts:

Lumbrici, Cantharides, Apes, Cochinella, Castoreum, Millepedes, Tunicae
interior. Ventriculi Gallinarum and Columbarum, Bilis Perdicum, Catuli,
Gallinae, etc.

Fifthly, Volatile Chemical Salts of Animals, having a quick Urinous Smell, and
a Salt pungent Taste:

Sal and Spiritus Cranii Humani, Vrinae, Sanguinis, Viperarum, Millepedum,
Lumbricorum, Picarum, Hirundinum: Spir. Salis Ammoniaci, Tartari Volatilis:
Spir. Bilis: Sal Volatile Vrinosum, Cochleariae, Absinthii, Menthae, Glasti,
etc.

Sixthly, Volatile Oily Compound Salts; which are either of an Aromatic Taste
and Smell, or else impregnate with some Foetor:

Sal Volatile Oleosum Sylvii.

Spir. Salis Ammoniaci Succinatus, vel cum Gummi Ammoniaco.

Seventhly, Fixed Salts, saltish, pungent; as,

1. Lixivial Salts, which are mild:

Sal Genistae, Juniperi, Absinthii, etc.

2. Strong and Cleansing Lixivial Salts:

Sal Brassicae, Fraxini, Fabarum, Filicis.

3. Acrid, Burning Lixivial Salts:

Sal Tithymali, Fici.

Eighthly, Fixed Salts made out of a Stony Matter, and Sulphurous Acid:

Aqua Calcis, Lixivium Silicum ignit. Lixivium Testarum Ostrearum combust.

Ninthly, Stony or Chalky Earths, and petrified Vegetables:

Creta, Lapides pretiosi, Testae Ostrearum, Perlae, Corallium, Ossa Dactylorum,
Cerasorum, etc.

It is observable, that the Stones of Fruits yield an Acid Spirit, like Woods.

Tenthly, Mineral Earths, and Minerals themselves:

Chalybs, Ferrum, Fol. Auri, Tinctura, Crocus, Antimonium Diaphoreticum,
Bezoardicum Minerale, Mercurius vivus and dulcis, Cimabaris Nativa, Bolus
Armena, Lapis Haematitis, etc.

The Minerals and Earths, by their Grit and Earthy Sulphur, imbibe Acids, and
produce an imperfect Vitriol in the Stomach, by joining their Mineral Parts to
the Animal Acid.

The Seventh CLASS. Of Stomachicks.
. 1. Hot Stomachicks,
WHich correct the Acidity of the Ferment, or Lympha of the Stomach, and so
volatilize it; and thereby help the Fermentation and Dissolution of the Meat
and Chyle.

1. Acrids, vid. Spleneticks. 2. The Saline Taste, Volatile. Fixed.
3. The Terreous or Gritty Stony, Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral-Chalybeates,
etc.
4. Aromaticks, Sweet-Bitterish -Ol. Cinnamomi and Caryophyllorum. Acrid.


Which deterge the Pituitose Lympha, Stomach:

1. Bitters-Vomitory. 2. Purging Bitters. 3. Strong Bitters. Tunicae Ventriculi
Gallinae.
Which strengthen the Fibers of the Stomach

1. Aromatic Astringents. 2. The Sweet Stypticks and Chalybeates. 3. The
Bitterish Stypticks. 4. Nervine, or Bitterish, Acrid Aromaticks.
Which strengthen the Stomach externally:

1. The Sweet Aromaticks. 2. Aromatic Astringents. 3. The Nervine Bitterish
Aromaticks. 4. Terebinthinate Aromaticks.
. II. Cool Stomachicks,
WHich cool and dilute the too Acrid Bilious Ferment of the Stomach, and temper
the Blood, from whence it arises:

1. The Watery Mucilages, and Earthy Mucilages. 2. The Terreous Gritty, which
shoot and combine with Acrid Salts, and give them a new Figure.
Which cleanse away Choler, and sharp Salts, by the Liver and Stool; as
Dock-Bitters, or Cholagogues.

Which cleanse away sharp Salts from Blood by Urine; as Watery Bitters.

Which coagulate and fix the Choler and Blood; and thereby abate the Ebullition
of it, and correct the putrid Ferment of the Stomach.

1. Acids. 2. Acerbs, and other Watery or Crude Astringents.
Spirituous Acids, which supply the Defect Spirituous Acid Ferment of the
Stomach; as Wines, Vinegars, and Sweet Fruits, which are Sub-acid; and
therefore the Friendly Specificks for the Stomach. Vid. Sweet, Spirituous,
Vinous Acids. But slimy Sweets, which are Oleose, abate the Appetite, and
destroy the Fermentation; as also too much Watery and Astringent Medicines do;
for these Tastes are not easily fermented; but the Sweet Sub-acid are soon
fermented, and so are the Vinous.

Salso-Acids help the Fermentation of Stomach, and are moderate Stomachicks.

Tables of Hot Stomachicks.
TAB. I. Of Strong Bitters.
SOme whereof are Bitter-Slimy, others Bitter-Astringent, or Laurel-Bitters.

Rad. Gentianae.

Fol. Centaurii, Cardui, Trifolii Fibrini, Verbenae.

Cortex Fraxini, Ceras. Nigr. Populi Libycae, Guaiaci, Cort. Peruvianus.

Fructus, Amygdalae amarae, Nuclei Persicorum.

Decoctum and Vinum cum Rad. Gentianae.

Fol. Centaurii, Cardui, Trifolii Fibrini, Verbenae, additis Aromatis.

Aqua Gentianae composit.

Extracta Gentianae, Centaurii, Cardui, Trifolii Fibrini.

Phlegmagoga, Decoctum amarum, Pil. Ruffi, Stomach. cum Gummi, Mastichinae.

Species Hierae Picrae and Tinctura, Elixir Proprietatis Tartarisat.

Gummi, Myrrha, Ammoniacum.

Animalium Parts amarae, Hepata and Tunicae interiores ventriculorum Gallinae
and Columbarum, Bilis Piscium and Volucrum.

Vomitoria amara, Vinum Scilliticum, Decoctum Cardui, Bardanae.

Note, That the Tables of other Tastes, mentioned as Stomachicks, may be found
in the following Tables, amongst other Specificks.

I have only placed here Strong Bitters, and Aromatic Astringents; which are
most properly esteemed Hot Stomachicks.

TAB. II. Of Aromatic Astringents.
RAd. Caryophyllatae, Filipendulae, Pimpinellae, Vlmariae, Calami Aromatici.

Fol. Agrimoniae, Schoenanthi, Pimpinellae, Filipendulae, Vlmariae, Myrti,
Menthae.

Cort. and Fol. Aurantiorum, Limonum, Citreorum, Excrescentia Spongiosa
Cynosbati.

Flores Rosarum rubrarum.

Ligna, Agallochum, Santala.

Conserv. Rosarum rubrarum, Menthae; Species, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diacorallion,

Diamargarit. frigid. Diatrion Santalon, Aromaticum rosatum.

Syrupi Myrtillorum, Rosarum siccarum, Cydoniorum.

Spiritus Menthae, Vinum Rubrum.

Confectio de Hyacintho.

Aquae Rosarum, Menthae, Myrti.

Aromatic Astringents externally used:

Ceratum Santalinum, Emplastrum de Mastiche, de Crusta Panis, Stomachicum
Magistrale.

Aromatic Resins and Balsams:

Tacamahac, Caranna, Balsamum Peruvanum.

Ol. Rosarum, Myrtillorum, Mastichinum, Vnguentum Rosaceum.

TAB. III. Of Carminatives*
WHich correct the Rarefaction of the Chyle into a Windy Spirit: Which happens,

First, For want of a through Digestion* And in this Case, the Hot Stomachicks
aforementioned are most useful; as Bitters, Acrids, Aromaticks, and the
Absorbers of Acidities, Saline and Terreous.

Secondly, Or else Flatuosities arise from too strong a Digestion, and an high
Fermentation of the Meat and Chyle, by a great quantity of the Spirits
contained in them; or the exceeding Heat of the Humors of the Body: And then
the Cool Stomachicks cure the Wind best; as Acids, Mucilages, Watery Bitters,
Astringents, and Dock-Bitters.

Thirdly, If Flatuosities happen by the Inflations of the Fibrous Membranes of
the Stomach, occasioned by the tumultuous Motion of the Spirits in them; then
Hystericks and Opiates are most useful.

Fourthly, In Hypochondriack Persons there is an Extraneous Ferment, which
proceeds from the Acid Humors of the Body, and the putrid Relics of former
Digestions; which produces continual Ructus: In this Case Vomitories,
Cholagogues, Phlegmagogues, Bleeding, Sudorisicks, and Chalybeate Waters are
necessary: And outwardly the Bitterish, Acrid Nervines, and Sweet Aromaticks,
and Astringent Aromaticks, are accounted the best Carminatives.

A TABLE of CARMINATIVES, consisting of Bitterish, or Sweet Acrid Aromaticks.
RAd. Galangae, Zinziberis, Calami Aromatici. Sem. Cardamomi minoris, Piperis,
Cubebarum. Fol. Chamaemeli, Anethi, Foeniculi, Calaminthae. Cort. Winteranus,
Aurantiorum, Limoniorum, Cinnamomi. Flo. Sambuci, Chamaemeli, Caryophylli.
Spir. Menthae, Mirabilis, Carui, Cardamomi, Vinum Hippocraticum, Spir. Vini.
Condita, Zinziber, Nux Moschata, Cortices Aurantiorum, Citri, Limoniorum,
Radices Eryngii condit. Lignum Sassaphras, Baccae Juniperi, Lauri. Species
Diatrion Pipereon. Ol. Piperis, Carui, Foeniculi, Cinnamomi, Caryophyllorum,
Nucis Moschatae, Tinctura Piperis cum Spiritu Vini. Externe, Emplastrum de
Baccis Lauri, Gummi foetida, and Resinae Aromaticae Terebinthinatae.
Tables of Cool Stomachicks.
TAB. I. Of Watery Mucilages.
RAd. Buglossi, Boraginis, Althaeae, Nymphaeae Flore albo.

Fol. Malvae, Symphyti, Boraginis, Parietariae, Violarum, Pulmonariae
Maculosae, Portulacae, Betae, Prunellae.

Conserv. Flor. Malvae, Boraginis, Violarum, Nymphaeae, Symphyti.

Aquae Cucurbitae, Melonum, Cucumerum.

Cortex Vlmi.

Sem. Psyllii, Lini, Bombacis, Malvae, Portulacae, Melonum, Cucumeris,
Cydoniorum, Amygdalae dulces.

Gum. Arabicum, Tragacanthum, Cerasorum, Prunorum, Sanguis Draconis.

Species Diatragacanthi frigidi, Amylum.

Aquae Spermatis Ranarum, Lactis cum Limacibus, vel Sanguine Porcino, vel
Pulmonibus Agninis, Aquae Albuminis ovi, Cancrorum fluviatilium.

Animalia, Decoctum Ras. eboris, Cornu Cervi, Cancrorum fluviat. Limacum.

Vitelli ovorum and Albumen, Lac Asininum, Caprinum, Vaccinum.

Aquae Vegetabilium, Flo. Malvae, Fol. Portulacae, Boraginis, Emulsiones ex
seminibus 4. frigidis, Decoctum Hordei.

Sir. Althaeae, Nymphaeae, Violarum, Portulacae.

Terrae mucilaginosae, Bolus Armena, Terra sigillata.

Fructus dulces mucilaginosae laxantes, Passulae, Ficus, Jujubae, Cassia,
Manna, Decoctum commune emolliens pro Clystere.

TAB. II. Of Cool Stomachicks, Watery Bitters.
RAd. Cichorei, Dentis Leonis, Sonchi, Endiviae, Bardanae.

Fol. Cichorei, Endiviae, Dentis Leonis, Fumariae, Genistae.

Conserv. Flo. Cichorei and Radicum, summitatum Fumariae; Aqua Cichorei,
Fumariae.

Sir. Fumariae. Cichorei, and succi eorundem.

Sem. Bardanae, Cardui Benedicti, Decoctum sennae, and Syrupus de pomis.

TAB. III. Of Dock-Bitters, or Cholagogues.
RAd. Rhei and Syrupus, Radix Rhabarbari Monachorum, Lapathi acuti, and
vulgaris Folio obtuso.

Cortex Berberum, Syrupus de Rosis Damascenis, and floribus Persicorum.

TAB. IV. Of Acid-Stomachicks.
1. ACido-dulcia Spirituosa, fructus Corasorum, etc. 2. Acido-salsa, Tartarus
vitriolatus, etc. 3. Acido-styptica, Aquae vitriolatae, Aluminosae. 4.
Acido-tartarea, Cremor Tartari, Acetum, etc. 5. Acido-sulphurea, Nitrum, Ens
primum Sulphuris.
TAB. V. Of Astringents.
First, Styptick, Bitterish, or Austeres:

RAd. Tormentillae, Bistortae, Quinquefolii, Acetosae, Cynosbati, Hydrolapathi,
Orobanchi, Fragrariae, Rubi.

Fol. Summitatum Rubi, Cydoniorum, Potentillae, Tormentillae, Quinquefolii,
Alchimillae, Summitatum Ericae, Tamarisci.

Cort. Querci, Aceris, Coryli, Prunorum, Mali Cotoneae, Salicis, Betulae, Alni,
Cupuli glandium, Gallae.

Flo. Balaustiorum.

Sem. Lapathorum, Acetosae, Iuli nucum, Alni.

Secondly, Acerbs, and Crude Watery Astringents:

Rad. Plantaginis, Gladioli.

Fol. Acetosae, Lapathorum, Plantaginis, Polygoni, Equiseti, Semper-vivi,
Vermicularis, Quercus, Persicariae maculosae, Vitis.

Fructus, Mespila, Sorbi, Cydonia, Berberes, Vvae immaturae, Malus sylvestris,
Pruna sylvestria, Acacia, Hypocystis.

Syrup. Prunorum sylvestr. Cydoniorum, Syrupus de Agresta.

Rob. Fructuum praedictorum.

Externe, Alumen, Vitriolum.

The Eighth CLASS. Of Hepaticks.
. I. Hot Hepaticks,
WHich open the Passages of the Liver, and volatilize the Choler, by absorbing
the fixing Acid from it; or by supplying its Defect, as the two first Tastes
do: But the following Tastes correct the Acid chiefly:

First, The Strong Bitters.

Secondly, Bitter Acrids.

Thirdly, Absorbing Gritts: And these are,

1. Testaceous, or Animal Gritts. 2. Stony. 3. Vegetable. 4. Mineral: Which
are,
First, Chalybeates. Secondly, Antimonials. Thirdly, Mercurials. Fourthly,
Cinnabarines. Fifthly, Preparations of Gold.
Fourthly, Saline Tastes; as, Acid-Absorbers: which are Volatile, Mixed, or Fixed.

Fifthly, Acrids.

Sixthly, Aromaticks, Bitterish or Sweet.

Which purge away the Choler: As,

1. Vomitory-Bitters. 2. Dock-Bitters.
Which strengthen the Vessels and Glandules Liver: Vid. Strengtheners of the
Fibers of the Stomach.

Which discuss the Tumors of the Liver

. II. Cool Hepaticks.
First, WAtry-Bitter. Secondly, Acids pure and mixed, Salso-Acid, and
Chalybeates. Thirdly, Terreous Gritts. Fourthly, Styptick, Bitterish, and
Acerbs. Fifthly, Watry-Mucilages. Sixthly, Externals, Ceratum Santalinum. Vid.
Cool Stomachicks.
A Table of Strong Bitter Acrids.
RAd. Curcumae, Chelidonii, Rubiae, Capparis, Lupulorum, Verbenae. Fol.
Chamaedryos, Salviae agrestis, Cardiacae, Marrubii, Scordii, Ballotis: Fol.
Absinthii, Tanaceti, Eupatorii, Cannabis, Matricariae, Abrotani. Sem. Fraxini,
Santonici, Tanaceti. Cortex Radicum Capparum. Conservae Flo. Fraxini: Fol.
Tanaceti, Absinthii. Extract. Absinthii, Marrubii, Scordii. Succus Chelidonii,
Absinthii, Tanaceti, Marrubii. Species Diacurcumae, Dialaccae, Trochisci de
Absinthio, de Eupatorio, de Rhabarbaro, de Capparibus, Elixir Proprietatis cum
Spiritu Salis Ammoniaci. Elect. Diatessaron. Gum. Ammoniacum, Bdellium,
Sagapenum. Stercora Animalium calidorum, Columbae, Gallinae, Equi, Anseris. Fell
Catuli nigri, Lucii Piscis, Gallinae, Hepar anguillae pulverifat. Purgantia
acria, amara, Etract Rudii, Pil. Cochiae, de Duobus, Stomach. cum Gummi,
Trochisci Alhandal. Unguent e succis aperitivis. Ol. Absinthii.
The Ninth CLASS. Of Spleneticks.
. 1. Hot Spleneticks,
WHich take away the Acidities in the Blood and Chyle, and correct their
Coagulations, and Stagnations, by an over-fixing Acid in the Blood: As,

First, Earthy Gritts, Vegetable, and Stony Mineral; which are either
Cinnabarines, Antimonials, or Chalybeates. Secondly, Testaceous Gritts or
Saline, Fixed, Volatile, or Mixed. Thirdly, Strong Bitter Stomachicks. Fourthly,
Bitter-Acrids; Vid. Hepaticks. Fifthly, Aromatick-Acrids, Bitterish; Cortex
Winteranus, etc. Sixthly, Aromaticks Sweet, Acrid; Vid. Thoracicks. Seventhly,
Fetid, bitterish Acrids; Vid. Hystericks. Eighthly, Acrids, or Antiscorbuticks.
Ninthly, Terebinthinates; Vid. Diuretics. Tenthly, Aromatic Astringents.
The Strong Bitters, or Bitter Acrids help the Digestion, and preserve the
Mixture of the Blood, and open Obstructions of the Spleen.

The Aromaticks Bitterish Acrid, and Sweet Acids, and Fetid Bitterish Acrids,
respect Windiness, or the disorderly Motion of the Spirits.

The Acrids are the most proper Hot Spleneticks, called Antiscorbuticks.

. II. Cool Spleneticks.
1. A Queous Bitters.

2. Watery Mucilaginous.

3. Acids, pure and mixed; especially Chalybeates, and Salso-Acids, and Sweet
Acids.

4. The Cool, Gritty, or Terreous, or Mucilaginous Earths.

Syrupus de Erysimo, de Rapis, Cochlearia. Infusio. Seminum sinapeos ad lb. ss.
in Vin. albi lb. ii. capiat. iv. bis in die. Conserv. Fol. Cochleariae,
Becabungae, etc.
TAB. II. Of the Garlic Acrids.
RAd. Cepae, Allii, Porri, Scordii. Allium conditum, and Syrupus, and infusio
in Cerevisia, Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci cum Gummi Ammoniaco. Gummi Sagapenum,
Galbanum, Opoponax, Ammoniacum. Emplastrum de Cicuta cum Ammoniaco. Diachylum
Magnum.
TAB. III. Of the Sweet Stypticks, or the Ferns.
WHich, by their rough Taste, check the irregular Fermentations in the
Hypocbondria; and, by their Bitterishness, and Orris-Smell, (which is manifest
in Harts-Tongue-Ale) they are Pectoral and Aperitive. Rad. Osmundae, Filicis
Maris, Polypodii. Fol. Ceterach, Linguae Cervinae, Rutae murariae, Capilli
Veneris, Lonchitidis.
TAB. IV. Of the Pea-Tastes.
WHich, by their crude Juice, check the Ebullition of the Blood, and help the
Separation of Choler, and supply the Defects of the Spleen-Juice. Succus
Viciarum, Pisa viridia, Fumaria, Aquilegia. The Purging Pea-Tastes: Senna,
Collutea, Laburnum, Genista.
The Tenth CLASS. Of Thoracicks.
. I. Hot Thoracicks,
WHich attenuate the Lympha, sticking in the Bladders of the Lungs. They
correct its Acidity, and diminish the quantity by Sweat or Urine. They also
open the Canals of the Glands, whereby the Lympha has a more clear Circulation
through the Lymphaticks of the Lungs.

First, The Acrids, vid. Spleneticks. But those that are most chiefly used as
Pectorals, are

Rad. Ari, Syrupus de Erysimo, Rapis, Allio, Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci cum Gummi
Ammon.

Secondly, Strong Bitters, of a Dead-Netle-Smell:

Fol. Marrubii, Chamaedryos, Scorodoniae, Cardiacae.

Thirdly, Bitter Astringents, Sub-acrid Vulneraries:

Fol. Scabiosae, Decoctum Guaiaci, Fol. Tussilaginis, Veronicae, Bugulae.

Fourthly, Bitter Acrids, vid. Hepaticks:

Ammoniacum in aqua Hyssopi solut. Tinctura Myrrhae, etc.

These open the Obstructions made by viscid Phlegm.

Fifthly, Bitterish-Acrid Aromaticks, vid. Cephalicks:

Fol. Hyssopi, Pulegii, Calaminthae.

Rad. Iridis, Baccae Lauri.

Species Diaireos.

Sixthly, Hystericks Fetid Acrid in the Convulsive Motions of the Lungs:

Rad. Enulae.

Tinctura Croci, Castorei, Asae-faetidae, Camphorae.

Sulphuris* Tinctura, Flores and Syrupus.

Seventhly, Terebinthinates, vid. Diuretics; and the Classes of
Turpentine-Gums, vid. Mastiche:

Olibanum.

Bitumens, Succinum.

Balsamic Terebinthinates, vid. Aromatic Gums and Resins.

Syrupus Botryos.

Balsamum de Tolu, Balsamum Polychrestum, Syrupus Balsamicus.

Resinous Purgers carrying off the greater quantity of Serum.

Eighthly, The Bitterish slimy Astringents, of a Dead-Nettle-Smell, vid. Lamium:

Hedera Terrestris, Gali^psis, Betonica, Salvia, Syrupus Hederae Terrestris,
and Succus, and Cerevisia, and Pulvis, and Conserva Florum Hederae Terrestris:

And these are Cleansing, and also Vulnerary.

Ninthly, Sweet Acrid Aromaticks, vid. Tabulam:

Sassaphras, etc.

These, by their Oily Salt, are Diuretic, and promote the Circulation of the
Lympha in the Lungs.

Tenthly, Diaphoreticks, especially the Woods:

Decoctum Sarsae, Chinae, etc.

These diminish the quantity of Serum.

Eleventhly, Diuretics:

Salts, Volatile and Fixed.

These diminish the quantity of Serum, and restore it to a Circulation through
the obstructed Lymphaticks.

Twelfthly, Externally, Oily Mucilages:

Vnguentum Pectorale, Emplastrum de Mucilaginibus, de Meliloto.

. II. Cool Thoracicks,
Cooling the Blood and Lympha, and diluting of it, and stopping a violent
Circulation.

First, A Queous Mucilages, vid. Cool Stomachicks:

Pulmonaria maculosa, etc.

Secondly, Aqueous Bitters, vid. Stomachicks.

Thirdly, Terreous, Testaceous, and Mucilaginous Earths:

Terra Japonica, etc.

Fourthly, Bitterish Stypticks.

Fifthly, The Pea-Tastes, Sweet and Rough:

Glycyrhiza, etc.

Sixthly, Sweet Stypticks, or Ferns: Capill. Veneris.

Seventhly, Spirituous Acids, or Sulphurous Acids:

Spiritus Salis and Nitri dulcis, Clyssus Antimonii, Ens primum Sulphuris.

Eighthly, Oleous Tastes:

Ol. Lini, Amygdalarum-dulcium, Olivarum, Butyrum recens, Sperma Ceti.

Ninthly, Sweet Tastes:

Rad. Liquiritiae, Graminis, Fol. Bellidis majaris and Flores.

Pulpae mucilaginosae dulces, Dactylorum, Passularum, Ficuum, Jujubarum,
Prunorum dulcium, Succus Glycyrhizae, Syrupus Jujubarum, Liquiriciae, Decoctum
Pectorale, Vsquebach, Lohoc Sanum, Rotulae Pectorales, Chocalata.

Saccharum Candum, Mel, Hydromel.

These sweet slimy Tastes most resemble the Taste of the Lympha in the Lungs;
and therefore are Friendly Specificks to the Lungs.

Tenthly, Opiates, which stop the Defluxion of Catarrhs through the Glandules
in both Hot and Cold Rheums:

Pil. Cynoglos. de Styrace, Laudanum liquidum, Theriaca, Diascordium,
Diacodium, Emulsio Seminum Papaveris.

Eleventhly, Slimy sweet Purgers:

Cassia, Manna.

A TABLE of Sweet Acrid Aromaticks of the Fennil-Class.
RAd. Petroselini, Foeniculi, Apii, Eringii, Cherefolii, Levistici, Angelicae,
Brusci. Fol. Foeniculi, Cherefolii, Pectinis Veneris. Sem. Foeniculi, Anethi,
Carui, Coriandri, Cherefolii, Apii, Petroselini, Dauci, Saxifragiae, Cumini,
Seselios, Amnios, Anisi, Angelicae, Lignum Sassaphras, Cinnamomum. Ol. Anisi,
Faeniculi, Carui, Cinnamomi, Sassaphras. Spiritus Angelicae, Carui, Anisi.
Aquae distillatae Foeniculi, Saxifragiae, Angelicae, Cherefolii, Petroselini.
The Eleventh CLASS. Of Cephalicks.
. I. Cool Cephalicks.
THese respect the Liquor of the Nerves, and correct its Acidity; to which all
the Glandulous Liquors are prone: They give a brisk Motion to the Spirits, and
open the Obstructions of the Nerves.

First, Strong Bitters, Digestive.

Secondly, Bitter Acrids, Aperitive.

Thirdly, Acrids, Antiscorbutick.

Fourthly, Aromatick-Acrids, Carminative.

Fifthly, Acid-Absorbers, Mineral Cinnabarines, Chalybeates, Antimonials,
Mercurials.

Animal Fetid Parts, Testaceous:

Chelae Cancrorum, Cornua Hirci, Cervi, Vngulae Alcis, Caballi, Ossa, Cranium,
etc.

Stercora Pavonis, Columbarum.

Insecta, Millepedes, Lumbrici.

Saline Acid-Absorbers; Volatile, Fixed, Mixed, and Oily Salts:

Sal Volatile Oleosum.

Sixthly, Terebinthinates, Aromatic, or Sub-Fetid:

Rad. Serpentariae, Valerianae, Hyperici Tinctura; Rad. Spicaenardi, Rad.
Asari.

Baccae Lauri, Juniperi.

Balsamum Mechae, Peruvian.

Sweet-scented Resins.

Seventhly, Laurel-Bitters, hindering the Fermentation of the Blood, and thereby
the Flux of Humors to the Head:

Cortex Peruvianus, Cortex Cerasorum Nigrorum, Amygdalae amarae, Aqua Cerasorum
Nigrorum.

Eighthly, Bitterish-Astringents, Aromatic.

Ninthly, Bitterish, Acrid Aromaticks, which are the most proper Cephalicks:
And because they supply the Nerves with Volatile, Oleous, Fragrant Effluviums,
and they also perform the Office of the Spirits, in quickening the Circulation
of the Blood, and the Nervous Juice through its small Vessels: Therefore these
are Friendly Specificks to the Brain, and Nervines.

Tenthly, Opiates, which stop the violent Motion of Spirits.

A TABLE of the Bitterish Aromatic Acrids.
RAd. Zedoariae, Galangae, Iridis, Contrayervae, Imperatoriae, Acori, Calami
Aromatici. Fol. Roris Marini, Lavandulae, Melissae, Majoranae, Thymi, Epithymi,
Salviae, Calaminthae, Satureiae, Dyctamni. Flores Lilii Convallium, Sambuci,
Cortices Aurantiorum, Limoniorum, Citreorum, Ol. Chymica, and Aquae
Spirituosae, and Cortices conditae praedictorum, Cortex Winteranus, Nux
Moschata, Macis, Cardamomum, Cubebae, Piper, Caryophylli. Ol. Caryophyllorum,
Nucis Moschatae, Macis, Piperis, Roris Marini, Majoranae, Salviae, Lavendula;
Spiritus Lavendulae, Roris Marini, Melissae, Lillicrum Convallium: Corticum
Aurantiorum, Citriorum. Conservae Flo. Roris Marini, Salviae, Betonicae,
Liliorum Convallium. Aqua Flo. Tiliae, Sambuci, Aurantiorum, Violae Tricoloris,
Melissae; Flo. Chamaemeli. Species Diambrae, Diamoschi dulcis, Diagalangae.
Emplastrum de Betonica, Cephalicum.
Cool Cephalicks are the same as Cool Stomachicks. Vide.

LAc Asininum, Emulsiones, Acida Volatilia, and Nitrosa, Decoctum Lactucae, and
Aqua; Vnguentum Alabastrinum, Populeum and Opiata mucilaginosa.

The Twelfth CLASS. Of Uterines: VIZ. I. Hystericks. II. Emmenagogues. III.
Procurers of the Birth. IV. Stoppers of the Menses.

. I. Hystericks.
WHich are Cephalicks, and good I.
against Convulsive Motions, by their Faetor; being full of a strong Volatile
Oil and Salt. And these are,

First, Bitter Fetids; some whereof have a Mucilage, others are of a
Dead-Nettle-Smell, and others are Terebinthinate Fetids; and of mixed Smells,
Fetid, and Aromatic Resinous.

Rad. Bryoniae, Aristolochiae, Gentianae, Poeoniae, Enulae campanae.

Fol. Rutae, Poeoniae, Ballotis, Sophiae Chirurgorum, Cotulae Foetidae.

Flores Calendulae, Hormini, Croci.

Sem. Poeoniae, Sphondylii.

Gummi Foetida, Myrrha, Assa foetida, Galbanum, Camphora, Bitumina, Succinum,
Ol. and Sal Succini.

Tinctura Croci, Succini, Assae foetidae, Galbani, Castorei.

Aqua Bryonae composita, Poeoniae composita, Spiritus Castorei, Hormini,; Aquae
Simplices Rutae; Flo. Poeoniae, Nepetae, Pulegii, Artemisiae, Juglandium.

Terebinthinate Fetids:

Rad. Asari, Valerianae; Fol. Sabinae, Arboris vitae.

Conserva Arboris vitae; Flo. Poeoniae, Trochisci de Myrrha, Foeculae Bryoniae,
Pulvis de Gutteta.

Sulphur. Flos Sulphuris, Cinnabarina, Tincturae Sulphur. and Antimonii,
Fuligo, and Spiritus Vrinosi, Potus aquarum Sulphurearum.

Emplastrum de Galbano.

Fetid Purgers:

Pilulae Foetidae, de Succino, de Ammoniaco.

Ol. Rutae, and Castorei.

Secondly, Cephalicks:

Dictamnus, Melissa, Mentha, Calamintha, Serpillum, Pulegium, Lavendula,
Majorana.

Cool Hystericks are the same as Cool Stomachicks, and Cephalicks. Vid. Which
help the rectifying of the Animal Spirits, especially Chalybeates.

Thirdly, Acid-Absorbers, which offend much in Hysterical Persons.

Fourthly, Bitterish and Sweet Aromaticks, Carminatives; as,

Daucus, Anethum, Angelica, Cuminum.

Fifthly, Opiates which compose all irregular Motions of the Spirits; and are
themselves very Fetid.

Sixthly, Strong Bitter Hepaticks and Stomachicks; also bitter Acrids, and rank
Acrids.

Seventhly, Aquarum Sulphurearum potus, and externe.

. II. Emmenagogues,
WHich excite an Effervescence of the Blood, and give it a tumultuous Motion:
They also correct Acids, which fix the Blood, Choler, and Chyle.

1. Bitter Stomachicks; Gentian, etc. 2. Bitter Acrid Hepaticks; Absintbium,
Matricaria, etc. 3. Bitter Fetid Hystericks; Castoreum, Asa Foetida,
Peucedanum, etc. 4. Bitterish Acrid Aromatic Cephalicks; Pulegium, Artemisia,
Dictamnus, Nepeta, Calamintha, Rad. Zedoariae, Galangae, Cortex Winteranus, Ol.
Cinnamomi, Caryophylli, Cassia Lignea. Rad. Asaraebaccae. 5. Sweet Acrid
Aromaticks; Sem. Apii, Dauci, Petroselini, Seseli. 6. Acrids; Rad. Ari. 7.
Strong Fetid Terebinthinates; Sabina. 8. Terreous Absorbers of Acids, Saline,
Volatile; Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci, cum Succino vel Ammoniaco. Fixed Salts. Mixed
Salts; Borax. Minerals. Chalybeates. Cinnabarines. Antimonials. Mercurials.

Externally Emollient Baths, with Fetid Hystericks and Cephalicks.

Pessus made of Vomiters or Purgers, stimulating the Vagina; Helleborus albus.

Acrid Pessus; Rad. Allii, Rhaphani.

. III. Procurers of the Birth.
1. SPirituous Aromatic Cordials; Aqua Cinnamomi, Spiritus Alchermes. 2.
Hysteric Fetids; Spiritus Croci, Castorei, Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci succinat.
Aqua Bryoniae, Tinctura Myrrhae, Croci, Castorei, Asae foetidae.
Externally Hysteric and Emollient Fomentations and Clysters.

. IV. Stoppers of the Menses.
1. BItterish Stypticks; Rad. Bistortae, Tormentil. etc. Gallae. 2. Watery
Sub-acid Astringents; Plantago, Polygonum. 3. Watery Mucilages; Sanguis
Draconis, etc. 4. Terreous Astringents, and Chalybeates; Bolus Armena, Crocus
Martis, Lapis Haematites. 5. Acids; Tinctura Rosarum, Spiritus Vitrioli,
Alumen, Sal Prunellae. 6. Chalybeate Acids, and mixed Acids; which open the
Obstructions of the Viscera, and do not heat. 7. Opiates, to stop the
Evacuation; to which due Purges and Bleeding must be added, for Revulsion.
The Thirteenth CLASS. Of Cordials. VIZ. I. Hot Cordials. II. Cool Cordials.

. I. Hot Cordials,
First, WHich afford new Spirits, and give a brisk Motion to them, and to the
Blood.

1. Aromaticks, very fragrant in Smell:

Rad. Angelicae, Calami Aromatici, Caryophyllatae.

Flor. Tunicae, Sambuci, Liliorum Convallium, Tiliae, Aurantiorum, and illorum
Aquae distillatae, Aqua Rosarum.

Conservae Flor. Tunicae, Liliorum Convallium.

Fol. Melissae, Angelicae, Geranii Moschati, Violae Tricoloris and aquae
distillatae.

Confectio Alchermes, Nucis Moschatae condit.

Cortices Citri, Limonum, Aurantiorum condit.

Caules Angelicae, Electuarium Sassaphras.

Ol. Cinnamomi, Caryophyllorum, Citri, Nucis Moschatae, Syrupus Florum
Caryophyllorum.

Species Loetificans Galeni, Diamargarit Calid. Perlae, Corallia, Trochisci de
Gallia Moschata, Diaxyloaloes.

Ambra grisea.

Zybethus, Moschus.

Gum. Resinae odoriferae.

Benzoinum.

Balsamum de Tolu.

Styrax.

Aquae Spirituosae, Aqua Caelestis, Cinnamomi, Doctoris Stephani, Imperialis,
Mirabilis, Spiritus Citri, vel Limoniorum cum Vino Canarino, Spiritus Angelicae.

Secondly, All the Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks and Cephalicks are Cordials.

Thirdly, Hystericks are Cordials, by altering the Motion of the Spirits; as
Castoreum, Asa foetida, Crocus, Species Diambrae.

Fourthly, All Acid-Absorbers are Cordial, by preventing the Coagulation of
Humors; as all Salts, and Testaceous Medicines, and Chalybeates.

Fifthly, Animal Bitterish Acrid; Cochinella.

Sixthly, Aromatic, Bitterish, Astringent; Myrtus, Mentha, Rosae rubrae.

All Aromaticks being friendly Specific Cordials, by their similitude to the
Spirits, and their Effluvia, pass through the Organ of Smelling, and
immediately alter the Motion of the Spirits; as the Sweet Smells evidently do
in Hysterical Women: The same inwardly taken, by their Effluviums, pass into
the Nerves, and quicken the Motion of the Spirits, and increase their Quantity,
as all Vinous Liquors do.

. II. Cool Cordials.
THey temper the Effervescence of the Blood, and give it a due quantity of
Serum, and thereby preserve its Mixture.

First, Aqueous Mucilages, some whereof have a little Heat in them; Decoctum
Hordei cum radicibus Scorzonerae, Cornu Cervi.

Flo. Cordiales Boraginis, Violarum, Leucoii, Buglossi, Tunicae, and Conservae
illorum. Sem. 4. frigida, and emulsiones. Aqua frigida Saxoniae, Boraginis,
Vlmariae, Pomorum. Aqua Fragorum, Cinnamomi hordeati.

Secondly, Acid Cordials, which abate the Heat of the Blood.

1. Sour and Spirituous Acids; Succus Lujulae, Aurantiorum, Citri, Limonum,
and Syrupi. Spir. Salis dulcis and aceti. Fructus Ribes, Grossulae, Mora,
Fragae, Syrupus Rubi Idaei, Acetum Rosaceum.

2. Acrid-Acids, and Bitterish-Acids; Fol. Rosae solis, Anagallidis Flo.
Phoeniceo, Acetum Theriacale, Mixtura Simplex, Sal Nitrum depuratum, Sal
Prunellae, Sal Volatile vel fixum Vitriolatum; which are Salso-Acids, and
preserve the Blood from Putrefaction, as common Salt does Salt-Meats.

3. Strong Acids, Mineral; Spiritus Sulphuris, Vitrioli, Nitri, Tinctura
Rosarum.

4. Astringent Cordials, good in all Fluxes, Hemorrhages and great
Effervescences.

1. Aromatic Bitterish Astringents; Vlmaria, Pimpinella, Caryophyllata,
Santala, lignum Aloes. 2. Bitterish Stypticks; Rad. Tormentillae, Bistortae,
Acetosae. Fol. Quinquefolii, Potentillae, Confect. Hyacinth.
5. Cordial Fragrant Stones; Perlae, Corallia: And Mucilaginous Earths; as,
Bolus Armena, Manus Christ. Perlatae, Diamargarit frig.

The Fourteenth CLASS. Of I. Diaphoreticks, II. Alexipharmacks, III. Hinderers
of Sweat.

. I. Diaphoreticks,
WHich correct the Acids that fix the Blood, and hinder the rarefaction of it.
These by their hot Parts quicken the Circulation, and force the Serum toward
the Skin-Glandules.

First, Bitter Acrids; Rad. Contrayervae, Succisae, Chelidonii.

Fol. Chamaedryos, Scordii, Scorodoniae, Saponariae, Lupulorum, Cardiacae.

Lignum Guaiacum, Fraxini, Buxi. Fol. Cardui, Bardanae, Scabiosae, Centaurei.
Rad. Gentianae, Extract. Cardui, Gentianae, Syrupus Fol. Cardui.

All which are either, Laurel-Bitters, or strong Bitters.

Secondly, Bitterish Aromatic Acrids; Rad. Zedoariae, Imperatoriae,
Millefolii, Petasitidis, Angelicae, Carlinae, Dictamni. Fol. Pulegii, Salviae,
Calaminthae, Aqua Epidemica. Flo. Sambuci, Chamaemeli, Roris marini.

Thirdly, Terebinthinate Acrids; Rad. Serpentariae Virginianae, Valerianae,
Asaraebaccae and lignum Juniperi.

Fourthly, Acid Absorbers are Diaphoretick; as,

1. Woods; Sarsaparilla, China, Sassaphras. 2. Testaceous Powders; Pulvis e
chelis composit. Lapis Goae, Bezoar, Oculi Cancrorum. 3. Minerals; Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, Cinnabaris nativa, Bezoardicum Minerale. Flor. Sulphuris. 4.
Animal Powders Fetid; Pulvis Viperarum, Bufonum, Cochinella, Sanguis Hirci,
Stercus Caballi. 5. Saline Urinous or Lixivial Salts, or Salso-Acids; Flores
Salis Ammoniaci.
The Saline Tastes are the Evacuaters of the Serum by Sweat, having a Saltness
like it. And the Vegetable Acrids are also Salts; so that in this Evacuation
there is a Similitude betwixt the Medicine and Humor evacuated, as well as in
Purgers.

Fifthly, Acid Acrids, Diaphoreticks, and Acid Bitters; Rosa Solis, Annagallis
Flo. Phoeniceo, Acetum Theriacale, Aqua Theriacalis, Spiritus Guaiaci, Tartari,
Sal Succini, Mixtura Simplex, extractum Theriacale, Tinctura Bezoardica cui
Spiritus Vitrioli additur.

These Cool by the Acid, and Sweat by the Acrid.

Sixthly, Acid Sulphurous; Clyssus Antimonii Acidus, and Salsus, Ens primum
Sulphuris. Sp. Sulphuris.

Seventhly, Hystericks Acrid Fetid; Rad. Enulae, Flo. Calendulae, Croci, Fol.
Rutae. Gummi Camphora, Myrrha, Guaiaci. Opium. Flos Sulphuris, and Aqua
Sulphurea.

Eighthly, Opiates with Diaphoreticks; Diascordium, Theriaca, Mithridatium,
Orvietanum, Tinctura Diaphoretica Anodyna.

. II. Alexipharmacks,
First, WHich throw out the Venomous Poison by Sweat. Vid. Diaphoreticks.

Secondly, Bezoardicks, resisting Putrefaction.

1. Acrids; Allium, Thlaspi. 2. Bitter Acrids; Chelidonium, Scordium, etc. 3.
Strong Bitters, Stomachicks; Gentiana, Carduus, Centaurium. 4. Strong Bitters,
Aromatic; Absinthium, Tanacetum, Polium, Eupatorium. 5. Bitterish Aromaticks,
Cephalicks; which preserve the Spirits from Venom; Salvia, Zedoaria. 6.
Aromatic Astringents. 7. Styptick Bitterish, which preserve the mixture of the
Blood, by fixing it; Radix Tormentillae, Pentaphylli, Bistortae. 8. Acids which
fix the Volatile Salts and Oils; Spiritus Salis, Vitrioli, Nitri, Aceti.
Thirdly, Bezoardicks, hindering the Coagulation of the Serum of the Blood by
Acid Poisons.

1. The Testaceous. Absorbers of Acids.
2. Mineral. 3. Bitter Acrids. 4. Salts Volatile or Fixed.
Fourthly, Bezoardicks, supplying the defect of the Serum of the Blood, and
hindering too great a rarefaction.

1. Aqueous Mucilages. 2. Acids. 3. Watery Astringents. 4. Terreous Mucilages.
5. Mucilaginous Opiates.
. III. Hinderers of Sweat,
First, WHich hinder the hot Effervescence and rarefaction of Humors.

1. Acids; Sp. Sulphuris, Salis Dulcis, and Nitri Dulcis. Succus Acetosus. 2.
Bitterish Stypticks. 3. Watery Astringents. 4. Watery Mucilages, and Mucilaginous
Draughts.
Secondly, Which preserve the mixture of the Blood and Serum, and also cool.

1. Salso-Acids, tart Vitriol; Sal Prunell. Nitrum. 2. Sweet Stypticks and
Chalybeates; Lingua Cervina, Capill. Veneris. Rad. Osmundae, filicis Maris,
Vitriolum Martis, Aquae Vitriolatae. 3. The Cichory Bitters. 4. The
Pea-Stypticks, Succus viciae, fumariae. 5. Testaceous Medicines, absorbing
Acidities; Coral. Margarit. 6. Salt Tastes; Tinct. Sal. Tart. Antimon. 7.
Acrid Antiscorbuticks.
Thirdly, Aromatic Astringents and Austeres, which strengthen the Glands of
the Skin; Santala, lign. Aloes.

Cortic. Quercus, Prunorum Conserva, Bolus Armen. Tinct. Coral.

The Fifteenth CLASS. Of Nephriticks and Diuretics.
. I. Cool Nephriticks,
First, WHich allay Pain, relaxe and lenifie the Urinary Passages, and supply a
great quantity of Liquor to wash the Kidneys.

1. Watery Mucilages:
Rad. Althaeae, Malvae, Nymphaeae. Fol. Malvae, Althaeae, Portulacae. Conserv.
Fl. Malvae, Violarum, Nymphaeae. Sem. Psyllii, Lini, Bombacis, Malvae, Hordei,
quatuor frigid. Pulvis Senelorum. Castanearum emulsio. Sir. Althaeae, Viol. Lac
Asininum, Aqua Lactis, and serum Lactis and Aquae Chalybeatae. Gum. Arabici,
Tragacanth. Ceras. Persicae. Aq. Flo. Malvae, Betulae, and vinum Portulacae,
Nymphaeae. Juscula cum Diureticis, Mucilaginosis, and Sub-acribus.
2. The Mucilaginous Pea-Taste, Bitter, Sweet or Hot:
Radices Ononidis, Asparagi, Aquilegiae. Fol. Ononidis, Genistae. Fl. Genistae,
Fabarum, and Aqua distillata. Sem. Fenugraeci, Genistae, Cicera rubra,
lupinorum. Aq. Ononidis, fl. Genistae, e Siliquis Fabarum. Syrupus Ononidis.
3. Watery Bitters Sub-acird:
Radices Dentis Leonis, Sonchi, Cichorei. Fol. Cichorei, dentis leonis,
Endiviae.
4. Sweet Pectorals:
Rad. Glycyrrhizae, Graminis. Fructus Ficuum, Jujubarum, Dactylorum, Passul.
Pruna dulcia, Sir. Jujubarum, Glycyrrhizae. Mel, Saccharum. Cassia.
5. Oleose:
Oleum Amygd. dulc. Juglandum, Lini, Olivarum, Butyrum, Sperma Ceti.
6. Opiates:
Fol. Lactucae and Aqua, and Sem. and Emulsio, Diacodium, Laudanum, Aq. Solani.
Terreous and Lapidose Correctors of Acids: as, 1. Stony Parts of Vegetables:
Sem. Millii solis, Lapides Dactylorum, Sorborum, Pyrorum, Persicae, Cerasorum,
Senelorum, fructus Cynosbati. 2. Pure Stones: Lapis Judaicus, Nephriticus,
Spar, silices, Crystallus, Lapis Spongiae, Lyncis, Vitrum combustum. 3.
Minerals Chalyb. Aq. Chalybeatae and Sulphureae. 4. Decoctions of the Woods,
which are Sub-acrid: China, Sarsaparilla, cum ras. Eboris C. Cervi, Santal.
Secondly, Nephriticks, Cleansers of the Gravel, which also force a great
quantity of Serum to the Kidneys; or else coagulate with the Sabulous Matter;
or by Stimulation of the Membranes cause the expulsion of it.


. II. Hot Nephriticks.
First, STrong Bitters, Laurel Bitters, and Smoaky Bitters, which cleanse the
Kidneys:

Fol. Centaurii, Verbenae, Cardui.

Sem. Persicae, Amygdal. amar. Sem. Bardanae.

Secondly, Bitter Acrids:

Rad. Lupulorum, Mors. diaboli, Corallina, Petasitidos, Rubiae.

Fol. Chamaedryos, Salviae agrestis, Marrubii, Absinthii, Tanaceti, Scordii,
Enpatorii, Lupulorum, Aparines, Asperulae. Sem. Fraxini.

Lignum Nephriticum.

Thirdly, Vegetable Acrids: Vid. Spleneticks.

Sem. Erucae, Nasturtii Aquatici, Rhaphani.

Flores Nasturtii Indici. Fol. Erysimi.

Aqua Fol. Erucae, Cochl. Rhaphani Composit. Persicariae acris, Ari.

Fourthly, Acrid Mucilaginous:

Rad. Vrticae. Fol. Lysimachiae, Leucoii siliquosi.

Sem. Violarum, Vrticae, Brassica, Rapa and jus earundem.

Fifthly, Bitter Mucilaginous Sub-acrid.

Rad. Bryoniae, Bardanae, Aristoloch. Gentianae, Carduorum.

Fol. Alkekengi, Bryoniae, Sambuci, Saponariae, summit. Agrifolii.

Conser. Fl. Periclymeni. Cortex Tiliae.

Sixthly, Bitter Acid:

Sem. Fraxini Bugulae, Baccae Alkekengi.

Seventhly, Salts Volatile:

Sp. Salis Ammoniaci, Ar.

Eighthly, Parts of Animals, abounding with a Latent Volatile Salt, being Fetid
and Acrid:

Millepedes, Apes, Cantharides, Sanguis hirci, Vrina Hominis sani. Calculi
Humani, and Vesicae fellis Vaccini, oc. Cancr. Test. ovorum, ostrearum, and
Chelae Cancrorum.

Ninthly, Fixed Salts:

Sal Fraxini, Fabarum, Genistae, Absinth. Ol. Tart. per deliquium, silicum
ignitorum extinct. Lixivium, Aqua Calcis vivae, Tinct. Salis Tartari. Sapo ex
Sale fixo cum Oleosis componitur.

Tenthly, Salso-Acids:

Tart. Vitriolat. Sal Prunell. Sal Succini, Sal Ammoniacum, Nitrum, Borax, Oc.
Cancrorum cum Aceto decoct. Infusiones Sterc. Columbar. Equorum.

Eleventhly, Acids dissolving the Sabulose Matter:

Sp. Salis, Sp. Nitri and Sulphuris, etc.

Cremor Tartari.

Succus Limonum, Acetosae, Vinum Rhenanum, Pomaceum, Vinum album, Fructus
Sub-acidi, Fragae, Succus Plantaginis.

Twelfthly, Sweet Aromaticks:

Rad. Foeniculi, Petroselini, Brusci, Eryngii, Levistici, Chaerefolii,
Filipendulae, Fol. and Sem. Foeniculi, Dauci, Apii, Anethi, Saxifragiae.

Ol. Chymica and Aquae distillatae praedictorum, Lignum Sassaphras.

Thirteenthly, Bitterish Aromatic Acrid.

Rad. Iridis, Imperatoriae, Milefolii, Galangae.

Flor. Chamaemeli, Sambuci.

Fol. Calamenthae, Pulegii, Satureiae, Hyssopi, Betonicae, Salviae.

Fourteenthly, Terebinthinates:

The Table of Terebinthinates, Bitterish, Astringent, Sub-acrid.
I. Aromatic Terebinthinates;
Fol. Lauri, and Baccae Juniperi, Cedri, Virgae aureae, Ladani segetum,
Botryos, Balsamitae, Saniculae, Geranii Moschati. Rad. Calami Aromatici. Rob.
Juniperi and Spiritus. Sweet Gum-Resins; Labdanum, Benjaminum, Caranna,
Tacamahac, Balsamum de Tolu, Mechae, Balsamum Peruvianum, Ol. Juniperi.
II. Pure Turpentines;
Rad. Valerianae, Serpentariae Virginianae, Asa^i. Fol. Hyperici, Ascyri,
Androsaemi, Perfoliatae, Nummulariae, Geranii Robertiani. Pini, Abietis,
Chamaepityos, Cupressi. Sem. Nuclei Pinei, Pistachia. Terebinthina, Mastiche,
Olibanum, Ol. Terebinthinum and Spiritus, Tinctura Hyperici, Aqua
Terebinthinata, Balsamum Lucatellae, Capivit.
III. Fetid Turpentines;
Sabina, Arbor vitae, Hepatica Terrestris. Fol. Hederae and Baccae. Pix
liquida, and Bitumina, Succinum, Sal and Oleum, Petroleum. Fetid Gums;
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Bdellium, Sagapenum. Fifteenthly, Acrid Purgers are
Diuretic; Pil. de Cambogia, Resin. Jalapii, Diagridium, Turbith. Vid.
Hydragogues. Sixteenthly, Caustic Plants; Aqua Ranunculi, Persicariae,
Anemones.
. III. Inward Vulneraries in the Ulcers of the Kidneys, Bladder or Lungs:
I. TErebinthinates, Bitterish Astringent.

II. Bitterish Astringents of the Dead-Nettle smell: Fol. Lamii, Galeopsidis,
Hederae Terrestris, Panacis, Veronicae, Betonicae, Extract. Hederae Terrestris
cum Resina and Laudano in Pilulis.

III. Bitterish Stypticks;

Rad. Acetosae, Tormentillae.

IV. Sub-acrid Astringents; Saxifragia Alba, Beccabunga, Chelidonium minus,
Tussilago, Scabiosa.

V. Sweetish Astringents; Capillus Veneris, Ruta Muraria, Rad. Osmundae.

VI. Acid-Absorbers; Sulphur vivum, and Flo. Chalybeata, Cinnabaris Nativa,
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Tinctura vel Balsamum Antimonii, and Sulphuris, Oculi
Cancrorum, etc.

The Sixteenth CLASS. Of Arthriticks
1. WHich evacuate the Serum, abounding in too great a quantity in the Blood,
and Lymphaeducts.

First, Catharticks.

1. Resinous, Res. Jalapii. Scammonii.
2. Mucilaginous Acrid Bitter, Pulvis Cornachinus. Pulvis hermodactyloru^
compositus. Electuarium Caryocostinum. Succus radicis ebuli. Syrupus de Spina.
3. Tithymaline Acrids. Pil. de Cambogia.

Secondly, Diaphoreticks,

1. Urinous Sp. C. C. etc. 2. Bitter Acrids: Decoctum Guaiaci. 3. Mineral
Absorbents: Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Cinnabaris.
Thirdly, Diuretics.

1. Terebinthinates: Chamaepitys, Hypericum, Pinus, Asarum, Juniperus. 2. Salts
Fixed, Volatile, or Mixed. 3. Insects abounding in Volatile Salt: Millepedes,
Apes.
II. Arthriticks, which correct and alter the Serum and Lympha, are either Hot
or Cooling:

First, Cooling Arthriticks,
WHich correct the Volatile Acrid Salts, and supply a due quantity of Serum and
Lympha.

1. Aqueous Mucilages; Emulsiones ex sem. 4. frig. Aqua Hordeata, Lac
distillatum, Asininum, Serum lactis, aqua Boraginis, Radix Consolidae, Succus
Portulacae, Lens Palustris, etc.

2. Waterish Bitters, which cool and deterge the Salts by Urine; Cichorium,
Fumaria, Genista.

3. Acids which Vitriolate, and Fix Animal Salts Spiritus Salis Dulcis, Nitri
Dulcis, etc.

Sulphurous Acids, not only Fix Salts, but are also Diaphoretick by their
Sulphur; Clyssus Antimonii, Ens primum Sulphuris.

4. Terreous Mucilages, which act as Astringents and Mucilages; Bolus Armena,
etc.

5. Bitterish Stypticks, Sub-acrid; Radix Pentaphyl. Tormentillae, fol. Ericae,
Tamarisci.

Secondly, Hot Arthriticks.
I. HOt Arthriticks, which correct the Acidity of the Serum and Lympha.

1 st. Splenetick Acrids, Radix Ari, fol. Cochl. Porrum.

2 dly. Volatile and Fixed Salts.

3 dly.

Mineral Acid-Absorbers. 1. Cinnabarins. 2. Chalybeates. 3. Antimonials. 4.
Testaceous. 5. Animals, Millepedes. Lumbr. terrestres.


II. Nervines, which open the Obstructions in the Nerves and Glandules; (vid.
Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks) the chiefest of which are, Rad. Dictamni, Iridis,
Angelicae, fol. Calaminthae, Betonicae, Salviae, Rorisarini, Artemisiae.

Fl. Chamaemeli, Sambuci, Rorismarini, Lavendulae, Liliorum Conval. and illorum
aquae distillat.

III. Hysteric Foetids, which open the Nerves, and alter the motion of the
Spirits; Radix Poeoniae, Enulae, Castoreum, etc.

IV. Bitter Stomachicks, which help the Digestion, Radix Gentianae, fol.
Centaurii, Verbenae, etc. And Laurel Bitters, Viscum, Cortex Peruvian. Guaiaci,
Buxus.

V. Bitter Acrids, Hepaticks, and Diuretics; Semen Fraxini, Rad. Succisae,
fol. Chamaedryos, Scorodoniae, Scordii.

VI. Arthriticks, which strengthen the Nervous Fibers of the Limbs.

1. Aromatic Astringents; Rad. Caryophyllatae, fol. Myrti, Rosar. Santal. etc.
2. Externally Aromatic Gums and Nervine.
VII. Arthriticks, which stop the Pain and Flux of Humors, are Narcoticks.

Internal Arthriticks, Slimy, Fetid, or of a heady Smell, Aqua Papaver. Rubri,
Lactucae, Solani, Paralyseos, sir. Papaveris Rubri, Diacodii, Paralyseos, Sem.
Hyoscyami, Papaveris albi, Cynoglossae, Milii solis, and emulsiones
praedictorum, Baccae Herbae Paridis, Alkakengi, Solani Hortensis, Pomum Amoris.

The Seventeenth CLASS. Of Opiates.
I. Bitter Acrid Narcoticks:
GVm. Opium, Tincturae cum Succis Cydoniorum, Limonum, vel Sp. vini
Tartari^ato, Laudanum liquidum, Opium Pulverisatum. Pil. de Styrace,
Mithridatium, Theriaca. Rad. Paralyseos, Auriculae ursi, have a heady Smell.
Rad. Lactucae, Papaveris, which have a Fetid Smell.
II. Mucilaginous Narcoticks Fetid:
Aq. Papaver. rhoead. Lactucae, Solani, Sir. Papaveris rubri, diacodii, sem.
Hyoscyami, Papaveris albi, Cynogloss. and emulsiones semin. pil. de Cynoglossa.
Vid. External Narcoticks.
The Eighteenth CLASS. Of I. Breeders of Milk, II. Lesseners of it.

. I. Breeders of Milk.
First, Watery Nourishments: Lac, Emulsiones, Serum lactis, decoctio limacum,
aq. lactis distillata, Rad. Scorzon. tragopogi decoct.

Secondly, Watery Bitters, cooling the Blood, and cleansing it from Choler.

Fol. Cichorei, dentis leonis, Sonchi, and radices.

Thirdly, Bitterish Acrids, opening the Obstruction of the Glands in the
Breasts, by promoting Sweat.

Fl. Chamaemeli, Sambuci.

Fol. Salviae, Betonicae.

Fol. Menthae.

Fourthly, Sweet Aromaticks, discussing Wind, helping Digestion.

Rad. fol. and Sem. Foeniculi, Chaerefolii, Carui.

Fifthly, Testaceous Medicines, and all other Absorbers of Acids coagulating
the Milk.

Crystallus, oc. Cancr. Sp. C. Cerv.

Sixthly, Externals, which are,

1. Emollients; as, Althaea, Malva, Sem. lini, hordei farina.

2. Sweet Aromaticks, joined with the Emollients, relaxe the Skins of the
Breast, and make the Glands more apt to receive Milk.

Fol. Angelicae, Faeniculi.

. II. Lesseners of Milk.
First, BY Abstinence; Sudorificks, Diuretics, and Purgers.

Secondly, Outwardly, by resolving Medicines, Fetid Gums:

Galbanum, cum Sperm. Ceti and Cera, Camphora, Diachylum cum Gummi, Sp. Salis
Ammoniaci, Balsamum Sulphuris.

Thirdly, By Repellents, Acid, or Bitterish Stypticks. Alumen decoctum, and cum
Linteis applicatum, Plantago aquatica.

Repellents and Discutients are best mixed.

The Nineteenth CLASS. Of Venereals which respect the Semen.
I. THose that supply an abundance of Nourishment, which is Slimy:

Juscula Gelatinosa.

1. Slimy Sub-acrid Vegetables:

Orchides, Fabae, Asparagi turiones, Castaneae, Avellanae.

2. Aromatic Nourishments and Wines:

Confectio fructus Coco, Piperata, Vinum Hippocraticum, Pastinaca.

Rotulae stimulantes Minsychti.

3. Rank Nourishments, resembling the Smell of the Semen:

Astaci, Ostreae, Cancer, Cancri fluviatiles, Salmo, Sturgeon, Pisces Marini,
Scincus.

Testes Gallorum, Agnorum, etc.

The Stones of all Animals contain some Relish of the Semen, as the Liver does
of the Gall; which being good as an Hepatick, I think there is the same reason
for the Stones of Animals to be Venereal Medicines by supplying Matter.

II. Those Medicines that stimulate the Vrethra, are Venereals.

1. Diuretics, which cause a sharpness of Urine, as the Sweet, Hot, Acrid
Aromaticks:

Rad. Eryngii, Apii, Sceleri, foeniculi, Sem. Dauci, Petroselin.

2. Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks:

Piper, Zinziber, Confect. Alchermes cum Moscho, Ol. Cinnamoni, Majoranae, Nux
Moschata, Mentha, Horminum.

3. Acrids:

Sem. Erucae, Rhaphani, Sem. Fraxini, Vrticae, Sinapi, Nasturtii, Flores Croci,
Calendulae.

4. Terebinthinates:

Sem. Pini.

Pistachia.

5. Animal Acrids: Cantharides.

Animal Parts Fetid:

Priapus Cervinus, Taurinus, Millepedes, Apes.

6. Salso-Acrids:

Muriatica, Haleces, Borax, Aq. Magnanimitatis, and formicarum Spiritus
Salso-Acidus.

7. Opiates are also Acrid.

Externally:

Ol. Formicarum, Moschus, Zibethus, Ol. nuc. Mosch. Spicae, Axungia hirci.

Antivenereals good against the Gonorrhoea, Fluor albus, and Pollutio Nocturna.

1. Mucilages, correcting the Acrid Serum, and Opiates:

Rad. Althaeae, Nymphaeae.

Sem. 4. frigida, and emulsiones, Lac.

Aq. Lactucae, Portulacae, Nymphaeae, and Syrupi.

Cassia, Sem. Cynoglossae, and Opiata.

Gum. Mastich. Terebinthina coct.

2. Astringents Bitterish Styptick:

Rad. Tormentil. Bistort. Fragariae.

Fol. Salicis, Plantag. Polii, Fl. Balaustiorum.

3. Acid Absorbers:

Terrae Mucilaginosae, Lapis Haematitis, Decoctum Lignorum.

Chalybeata Styptica, Crocus Martis.

Astringents or Testaceous:

Coral. Os. Sepiae.

Sacch. Saturni.

Injectiones ex Aq. Calcis Vivae, Sacch. Saturni, etc.

4. Coolers of the Acrid Salts and furious Spirits:

Sp. Vitrioli, Decoct. Tamarindorum, Sp. Nitri, Lapis Prunellae, Acetosa,
Mercurius dulcis.

5. Cleansing and drying Diuretics, Bitter Acrids, killing the Animal in
Semine:

Millefolium, Mentha, Ruta, Agnus Castus, Radices Iridis, Sem. Cannabis, and
emulsio ejusdem, Camphora,

Absinthium, and other Medicines for the Worms, act by their Virtue, as Bitter
Acrids.

6. Bitters Acrids:

Gum. Succinum, Mastiche, Resina, Olibanum.

7. Vulneraries: Vid. Diuretics.

The Twentieth CLASS. Of Ophthalmicks.
Internals, opening the Obstructions of the Nerves, and those that give a
quicker Motion to the Spirits.
1. BItterish Acrid Aromatic Cephalicks:

Fol. and Flores Betonicae, Salviae, Rorismarini, and Conservae florum, Fol.
Majoranae, Rad. Iridis.

2. Hysteric Fetid Acrids respect the Motion of the Spirits.

Rad. Peoeoiae and Semen, and Flores, Crocus, Horminum, Ruta, Rad. Enulae.

III. Sweet Aromatic Acrids:

Rad. and Sem. Foeniculi, Sem. Carui.

Aq. Foeniculi, Chaerefolii.

IV. Cleansing Aperitives, and cleansing Vulneraries:

1. Strong Bitters, Bitter Acrids:

Fol. Verbenae.

Succus Chelidonii Majoris and Aqua, Myrrha, Aloes.

2. Bitterish Astringents, which are also Vulneraries, Cleansing and Healing:

Hedera Terrestris, Euphrasia.

V. Aromatic Astringents, strengthners of the Membranous Fibers and Nerves:

Lignum Aloes, Cinnamom. Agrimonia, Caryophyllata.

VI.

VII.

VIII.

IX.

Chalybeata. Testacea. Salina. Volatilia. Fixa. Absorbers of Acids. Salina
Oleosa. Acria.


Internal Coolers are the same as in Cool Cephalicks.

External Ophthalmicks, Discutients, and Detergents.
1. BItter Acrids; Chelidonium and Aqua, Myrrha, Aloes, Sarcocolla, etc. Fell
Lucii, Gallinae, Perdicis. 2. Bitterish Astringents. Vid. The Internals. 3. The
Sweet Acrid Aromatic; Aqua Foeniculi, and Succus. 4. Terebinthinates;
Hypericon, Thus. 5. The Bitterish Acrid Cephalicks; Flores Sambuci, Chamoemeli.
6. Hysteric Fetids; Crocus, Camphora. 7. Sweet Detergents; Mel, Saccharum
Cand. 8. Ophthalmick Gritty Powders; Tutia, Os Sepiae, and Saccharum.
External Coal Ophthalmicks.
1. MUcilaginous, allaying the sharp Rheums: Sem. Lini, Psyllii, Cydoniorum, 4
frigidorum, Foenugraeci, Papaveris, Album. Ovi. Gum. Tragacanthi, Sanguis
Draconis, Lac, Panis albus. Aqua Malvae, fl. Nymphaeae, Portulacae, Lactucae,
Pulp. Pomorum Putridorum. Vnguentum Rosatum, Ophthalmicum, Pomatum. Anodyna.
Aqua Solani, Papaveris.
2. Watery Astringents, Bitterish Repelling: Ros. Rubrae, flores, and albae, and
Aquae Distillatae Rosarum. Aqua Plantaginis, fol. Quercus, sempervivi, Conserv.
Rosarum. 3. Watrish Bitters, Cooling and Cleansing: Aqua Cichorei, fl. Cyani,
fl. Fabarum. 4. Acid Absorbers: Pulv. Coralliorum, Perlarum, Tutia, Cerussa,
Sief Album cum Opio, Lapis Calaminaris, Os Sepiae. 5. Acid Waters repelling:
Vitriolum Solutum, aes viride, Saccharum Saturni solut.
The Twenty first CLASS. Of Medicines against the Worms.
1. BItter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Purgers, which carry away the stagnating Chyle,
from whence the Worms are produced:

Helleborastri Succus cum Vino expressus, Senecio, Aloes, Elixir Proprietatis,
Myrrha, Species Hierae Picrae, Sir. Florum Persicorum. Rhabarbarum, and
Syrupus.

2. Bitter and Bitter Acrid Hepaticks, which hinder the Corruption of the
Chyle, and open the Obstructions in the Lacteals, and disturb the Worms:

Rad. Gentianae, Aristolochiae, Faeculae Bryoniae, Centaurium.

Scordium, Abrotanum, Tanacetum, Absinthium, Marrubium.

Sem. Santonici, Tanaceti.

Ol. Absinthii, Fell Tauri, Colocynthis, Oleum Rataceum, Laurinum.

3. Acids disturb the Worms much, but increase the Obstructions:

Sp. Salis Vitrioli, Clyssus Antimonii, Succus Limonum, Sp. Nitri Dulcis.

4. Acrids disturb the Worms, and open Obstructions in the Lacteals:

Allium, Caepe, Cochlearia.

5. Salso-Acids:

Sal commune, Sal Ammoniac. and Plantae Marinae salsa Aqua aspersae, ut
Corallina.

6. Salia Volatilia disturb the Worms, and open Obstructions.

7. Fixed Salts:

Lixivium cujusvis Plantae and Sal Fixum.

8. Fetids:

Radix Enulae, Fol. Rutae, Sabinae, Matricariae. Flores Sulphuris, Ol. Succini,
Camphora, Balsamum Sulphuris, Cinnabarina.

9. Mercurials:

Infusio and Decoctio Mercurii, Mercurius Dulcis.

10. Oleosa, praesertim Chymica, Ol. Absinthii, and Spirituosa, Vinum Rubrum,
Spiritus Vini.

Sweet Tastes, Sugar, Honey.

Externals:

Ol. Rutae, Laurinum, Fell, Hiera Picra.

The number of Medicines for the Worms is infinite, but there are few which
will kill them: And Worms that live constantly in the Guts (where Choler is
mixed with their Meat) are not much offended with Bitters; as will appear by
the following Experiments; viz.

I put diverse Earthworms into diverse Glasses full of Water, and into each
Glass put a different Medicine.

Coloquintida put into the Glass, disturbed them much, as appeared by their
violent Motions; but the Worms did not dye, till after a long time.

Rhubarb disturbed the Worms much, but did not kill them.

Spirit of Salt did most disturb the Worms, and put them into furious Motions,
and killed them. The same effect had Salt, put into the Glass.

Elixir Proprietatis, Prepared with an Acid, did much offend the Worms, and
killed them.

Spirit of Hartshorn did disturb the Worms as much as Spirit of Salt.

Sugar put into the Glass, made them very uneasy.

I put some Worms into Quicksilver-Water, in which they lived well; but
sometimes they would creep out: but they would not be offended at the
Quicksilver in the bottom: Therefore when Quicksilver is used inwardly, it must
acquire some Vitriolick Taste from the Acid in the Stomach, otherwise it cannot
be excellent for the Worms.

Mercurius Dulcis did very little disturb them, but would not kill them.

The Worms would creep out of the Water, in which Walnut-leaves were infused.

Corallina did very little disturb them; neither did burnt Hartshorn.

Wormseed is an excellent Medicine, for that, by the Acridness, did very much
disturb them; but above all, Claret Wine killed them presently, and they never
recovered.

Wormwood and Sena did but little disturb them.

Scammony, added to Mercurius Dulcis, did not stir them.

Oil of Olive did not offend nor kill the Worms.

From these Experiments, I infer, That we cannot give any Bitter to kill Worms;
but if by Bitter things they be for diverse days driven into the Colon, then a
Purge or Clyster will carry them away. And for the prevention, the Obstructions
of the Lacteals must be opened, and the Diet altered; and Plasters to the Belly
may offend the Worms, and open the Obstructions in the Belly.

External Medicines.
The First CLASS. Of Cosmeticks,
First, WHich clear the Pores of the Skin from the Humors or Worms stagnating
in them.

1. Medicines abounding in Volatile Salt:

Faecula Radicis Ari and Aq. Foliorum.

Camphora, Spiritus Vini, Vrina Pueri.

2. Lixivious Medicines, cleansing the Skin, and absorbing Acids:

Ol. Tartari per Deliquium, Saponata Lavacra.

3. Sulphurous Medicines:

Sulphur Vivum.

4. Bitter Medicines, Oleous or Mucilaginous; and these Smooth and Cleanse:

Oleum Amygdalarum amararum, and Emulsio. Radix Bryoniae, aq. Fabarum, fl.
Aurantiorum, fl. Sambuci, aq. Dipsaci.

Secondly, Repelling Cosmeticks; they stop the flux of Humors toward the Skin.

1. Acids:

Acetum, Phlegma Vitrioli, Succus Limonum, Lac ebutyratum.

2. Mercurials Vitriolick:

Aq. Sublimati, Mercurii dulcis.

3. Astringents:

Aq. Argentinae, Lac Virginis, Alumen cum lacte decoct.

4. Smoothers of the Skin.

The Mucilaginous:

Emulsiones ex Amygdalis dulcibus, Rad. Sigilli Solomonis in Vino infusa, Aqua
Albuminis Ovorum, Aq. Fragariae, Aq. Solani Lethalis, Aq. Cerasorum, Sperma
Ceti, Pomatum, Pinguedo Viperina, cum Bals. Peruviano.

Liquor ex Cochleis cum Sale Tartari, Aq. Spermatis Ranarum.

5. Cooling Ointments:

Vnguentum ex calce lota.

6. Psilothra, taking off the Hair,

1. By fretting it, as Woollen Fillets. 2. By Corrosive Salts; Lixivium forte,
and Calx viva. 3. By Acids; Ol. Vitrioli, Sulphuris. 4. By Poisonous Corroding
Sulphurs; Auripigmentum, Arsenicum, Sandaracha.
The Second CLASS. Of Vesicatories which evacuate Serum from the Skin-Glandules.
I. VEsicatories abounding with a Volatile Salt, or Corrosive hooked Salt.

Rad. Ari, Allii, Ranunculi, Dracontii.

Sem. Sinapi.

Fol. Ranunculi Pratensis and Flammei.

II. Acid-Acrid Vesicatories:

Ros Solis, Anagallis Flore Phoeniceo.

III. Vesicatories from Acrid Animal Salts:

Cantharides, Emplast. Vesicatorium.

IV. Lixivial Salts:

Cineres Fraxini, Vitis.

The Third CLASS. Of Causticks,
WHich make an Eschar, and afterward an Ulcer, by which Tumors are evacuated;
and if kept open, become Issues.

First, Mineral Causticks which Burn, and make a Black Eschar, are Lixivial
Salts; as, Lapis Corrosivus: or Mineral Salts; as, Calx viva.

Secondly, Mineral Causticks which burn, and make a White Eschar.

I. Acids with a Fiery Sulphur; as, Butyrum Antimonii, Ol. Vitrioli, Arsenicum,
which is compounded of a strong Sulphur, and Acid Salt, whereby it is Corrosive.

II. Acids mixed with Minerals; Mercurius Sublimatus, which has the Acid of
Spirit of Salt; Crystalli Lunae, which have the Acid of Spirit of Nitre.

Vegetable Causticks are the strong Vesicatories:

1. Acrids, abovementioned, abounding with a Volatile Salt; as, Ranunculus
Flammeus. 2. Milky, Gummous, Acrid Plants; Tithymalus, Esula,-Ficus,
Euphorbium.
The Fourth CLASS. Of External Narcoticks,
WHich allay Pains, and discuss and soften Tumors:

Sweet and Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid Narcoticks.

Rad. Solani, Cynoglossi, Hyoscyami.

Fol. Solani, Cynoglossi, Hyoscyami, Tabaci, Stramonii, Papaveris, Lactucae,
Cicutae.

Vng. ex Stramonio, Tabaco, Vng. Populeon, Anodynum, etc.

Ol. Solani, Ol. Express. ex sem. Hyoscyami, Papaveris.

Suc. Solani, Lactucae.

Aqu. distillat. Solani, Lactucae, Papaveris.

Gum. Opium in Sp. Vini solutum.

The Fifth CLASS. Of Anodynes,
WHich, by their Mucilage, allay Pain, moistening and cooling the dry Fibers,
relaxing the tense; and also, by their warm Heat do please the Spirits
irritated by Pain.

Emollients and Suppuratives have the same Mucilage and gentle warm Parts, by
which they cherish the Natural Heat of Animals, relaxing the Skin, and thereby
soften and suppurate Tumors.

I. Slimy Sub-acrid:

Rad. Malvae, Althaeae, Liliorum, Symphyti, Sigil. Solomonis.

Fol. Malvae, Althaeae, Erigeri, Tiliae, Vlmi, Violarum, Atriplicis,
Mercurialis, Parietariae.

Sem. Lini, Psyllii, Malvae, Faenugraeci, Hordei, Tritici, Panis Medulla.

Cort. Vlmi, Tiliae.

Flor. Malvae, Liliorum, Nymphaeae, Meliloti, Genistae, Croci.

Fruct. Passulae, Ficus, Dactyli, Baccae Taxi, Visci, Agrifolii, Oxyacanthi.

Animal. Lumbrici, Cochleae, Vitellus Ovi, Sperma Ranarum, Lac, Brodia Pinguia.
Decoctum Capitis and pedum Vervecis.

Ol. Liliorum, Lini, Amygdal. Nymphaeae, Pedum Bubuli, Ovorum, Olivarum,
Violarum, Lumbricorum.

Pingued. and Adip. Vrsi, Porcl, Gallinae, Hominis, Vulpis, Butyrum, Medullae
Vituli, Cervi, Bovis, Sperma Ceti.

Empl. De Mucilaginibus, Diachylum.

Vng. Dialthaeae, Basilic. Pectoral. Resumptivum.

II. Strong Emollients, which are Mucilaginous, and have an Oily Acrid to
discuss and attenuate, as well as a Gum or Mucilage to soften.

Rad. Caeparum tostarum, Bryoniae.

Fol. Porri, Digitalis, Bryoniae, Sambuci.

Gum. Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Sagapenum.

Empl. Diachylum cum Gumm. de Cicuta cum Ammoniaco, de Ranis, de Galbano.

The Sixth CLASS. Of Discutients,
WHich open the Pores, and discuss by attenuating the Humor collected in Tumors.

I. Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks, or Nervines.

Rad. Iridis, Imperatoriae, Angelicae, Calami Aromatici, Zedoariae.

Fol. Majoranae, Salviae, Lavendulae, Calaminthae, Hyssopi, Satureiae,
Matricariae, Artemisiae.

Flo. Chamaemeli, Sambuci, Stoechados, Lavendulae, Rorismarini.

Bac. Lauri.

Ol. Chamaemeli, Laurinum, Lavendulae, Rorismarini

Vng. Martiatum.

Empl. Diachylum Ireatum, de Baccis Lauri, Cephalicum.

II. Fetid Acrid Discutients:

Rad. Enulae, Poeoniae, Bryoniae, Aristolochiae.

Fol. Rutae, Ballotidos, Cotulae Faetidae, Conyzmediae.

Spirit. Fuliginis.

Gum. Camphora.

Ol. Tartari, Guaiaci, Succini.

Vng. Agrippae.

III. Discutients of an Elder Smell being Bitter.

Rad. Ebuli, Scrophulariae.

Fol. Ebuli, Sambuci, Saponariae, Scrophulariae, Digitalis, Linariae.

Ol. Sambuci.

Vng. Corticis Sambuci and Cataplasm. ex foliis.

IV. Sweet Acrid Aromatic Discutients:

Rad. Levistici, Apii.

Fol. Faeniculi, Apii, Levistici.

Sem. Cumini, Faeniculi, Anisi.

Ol. Anethinum, Foeniculi Chym.

V. Acrid Discutients:

Rad. Raph. Ari, Allii, Porri.

Sem. Erucae, Sinapeos.

Fol. Alliariae, Thlaspi, Erucae, Nasturtii, Ari.

Sp. Cochleariae.

Vng. e Foliis Nasturtii Aquat.

VI. Terebinthinate Discutients:

Fol. Sabinae, Cedri, Hyperici, Virg. Aureae.

Bacc. Juniperi, Hederae.

Ol. Terebinthin. Hyperici, Bacc. Juniperi Chym.

Bitumina, Oleum Terrae, Petroleum, Album, Rubrum. Ol. Succini Chym.

Gum. Aromatic. Tacamahac, Styrax, Ladanum.

Fetid Gums, Ammoniacum, Sagapenum.

VII. Bitter Acrid Discutients:

Fol. Chelidonii, Absinthii, Tanaceti, Eupatorii, Scordii, Chamaedryos,
Marrubii.

VIII. Animal Discutients having a Faetor:

Stercora Caballi, Columbarum, Hirci, Hirundinis Nidus cum Stercore.

Sal. Volatile. Spir. Salis Ammoniac. cum Sp. Vini, Sp. C. C. Vrinae.

Ol. Viperarum, Scorpionum, Bufonum, Lumbricorum, Vulpinum, Catellorum,
Hirundinum.

IX. Discutients from Fixed and Mixed Salts and Minerals:

Lixiv. Absinthii, etc.

Vrina, Aq. Calcis, Solutio Nitri, Aluminis usti, Sal. Marin. usti, Sal.
Ammoniac.

Sapo and Ol. Saponis.

X. Mineral Sulphurs:

Aq. Chalybeatae and Sulphureae.

Cinnabaris, Antimonium, Pyrites, Flor. Sulph.

Empl. Diasulph. and Balsam. Sulphuris, Balsamum Antimonii.

The Seventh CLASS. Of Cooling External Repellents, which temper the Hot Humor.
I. AQueous Mucilages, and crude Juices, and externally cooling Minerals:

Rad. Symphyti, Althaeae, Fungi Mucilaginosi.

Fol. Nymphaeae, Cucumerum, Melonum, and fructus and aqua; Lens Palustris,
Alsine.

Aq. Frigida, and Portulacae, Lactucae, Nymphaeae.

Animal. Albumen Ovi, Sperma Ranarum.

Ol. Violarum, Nymphaeae.

Vng. Alb. Camph. Popul. Alabastrinum. de Calcelota.

Gum. Tragacanthi, Sanguis Draconis.

Empl. de Minio.

Mucilaginous Earths; Bol. Arm. Amylum.

Mineral Coolers; Minium, Cerussa.

II. Repelling Acids, and Mixed Acids:

Succus Limonum, and Malorum Sylvestrium.

Fol. Plantag. Lapath. Polyg. Semper-Vivi.

Acetum, Lac Virginis, Sacch. Saturni, Vitriolum and Phlegma, Alumen.

Sal Prunel. and Nitrum, Borax, Sal Ammoniacum.

Aq. Sublimati.

Empl. Diapalm.

Vng. Nutritum.

III. Astringent Repellers, which give an Astriction to the Fibers, and stop
the Humor out of the part.

1. Austeres:

Rad. Tormentil. Bistortae, Hippolapathi.

Cort. Querci, Aceris, Fagi, etc.

Fol. Rubi, Equiseti.

Sem. Lapathorum, Sumach.

Flor. Balaustiorum, Rosarum.

Ol. Rosarum, Myrtillorum.

Vng. Comitissae, de Bolo.

Empl. contra Rupturam.

2. Minerals:

Ochra, Crocus Martis astringens, Bolus Armena, Saccharum Saturni.

Gum. Mastiches, Sanguis Draconis.

The Eighth CLASS. Of Vulneraries Internal and External.
First, CLeansing Vulneraries.
1. Strong Bitters Slimy:

Rad. Gentianae, Aristolochiae, Scrophulariae, farina Lupinorum, Fabarum.

Fol. Saponariae, Sambuci, Gum. Myrrhae, Aloes.

Vnguentum Apostolorum.

2. Bitter Acrids of a Dead-Nettle Smell, and those have an Astringency also:

Fol. Scordii, Chamaedryos, Salviae Agrestis, Marrubii, Ballotidos.

3. Bitter Acrids Sub-Astringents:

Fol. Absinthii, Abrotani, Rad. Rubiae.

4. Cephalic Cleansers, Bitterish Acrid Sub-Astringents:

Rad. Zedoariae, Iridis, Fol. Chamaemeli, Menthae, Hyssopi, Dictamni, Millefol.

Empl. De Betonica, Vnguentum Enulatum.

5. Sweet Acrid Aromaticks:

Radic, Apii, Foeniculi, Petroselini, Chaerefolii.

Lignum Sassaphras.

Sem. Dauci.

Vnguentum ex Apio.

Secondly, Sarcoticks.
1. Laurel-Bitters; these cleanse by the Bitterness, and heal by the
Astringency:

Fol. Verbenae, Centaurii Minoris, Vincae Pervincae, Trifolii Palustris, Fol.
Lauri, Cerasi, Ligustri, Ol. Laurini.

Cortex and Lignum Guaiaci, and Fraxini.

2. Bitterish Slimy Astringents:

Fol. Lamiorum, Galeopsidis, Panacis, Syderitidis, Veronicae, Bugulae, Hederae
Terrestris.

3. Strong Smoaky Bitter Astringents:

Jacea, Scabiosa, Hieraceum, Auricula Muris.

4. Bitterish Aromatic Astringents:

Filipendula, Pimpinella, Myrtus, Agrimonia.

5. Terebinthinate Bitterish Astringents: Vid. Diuretics.

Rad. Valerianae, and Enulae Campan. Consolida Saracenica, Fol. Hyperici,
Saniculae, Geraniorum, Androsaemi, Nummulariae, etc.

Ol. Terebinthinae, Hyperici, Balsami Peruviani, Bals. Sulph. Petroleum.

Unguent. Basilici, de Gummi Elemi.

Gum. Resina, Olibanum, Colophonia.

Bitumina, Succinum.

Cortex Thuris.

Thirdly, Epuloticks:
I. Which make the Cicatrix by Astringency.

1. Bitterish Stypticks, or Austeres:

Rad. Tormentil. Bistort. etc.

Cortex Quercin. Aceris, Betulae, Gallae, Alni, etc. Vide Astringent Repellents.

2. Gritty Earths, which imbibe the Humidity of an Ulcer, and the Acid in those
which are sordid, and thereby become Styptick.

Creta, Oc. Cancrorum, Testae Ovorum combust. Ostrearum, C. Cervi ustum, and
Ossa combusta, Corallium, Crocus Martis, Lithargytus, Os Sepiae, Spodium, Suber
ustum, Cerussa, Minium, Plumbum ustum, Terra Vitrioli dulcis.

Amalgama Mercurii cum Plumbo, Lapis Calaminaris, Tutia, Vnguentum album,
desiccativum rubrum, de Tutia, Diapompholyge.

3. Astringent Earths:

Bolus, Ochra, Empl. de Bolo.

4. Sweet Stypticks as the Ferns:

Rad. Osmundae, Filicis maris, Saccharum Saturni, Lac Virginis, Lac Aureum ex
Gallis, and Solutione Lythargyri.

5. Rough Acids:

Vitriolum, Alumen, Lapis Medicamentosus.

Fourthly, Conglutinatives for fresh Wounds.
1. Bitterish Stypticks Cicatrisers. 2. Terebinthinates. 3. Laurel-Bitters,
Astringents; and these Two last cleanse as well as Cicatrise. 4. Earthy
Astringents. 5. Mucilages very Clammy or Gummy, sticking the Wound together;
and those are the only proper Conglutinatives.
Rad. Symphyti, Sigill. Solomonis, Typhae, Cynoglossi, Fol. Symphyti,
Cynoglossi, Tabaci, Farinae Tritici, Hordei.

Gum. Arabici, Tragacanthi, Gluten, Sanguis Draconis, Mummia, Resina, Pix,
Cera, Terebinthina. Albumen Ovi, Gelatinae ex Ras. C. C.

Decoct. Sarsae, interne.

Empl. Gryseum, Stypticum Crollii.

Ol. Ophioglossi, Hyperici, and Balsama Vulneraria, Empl. contra Rupturam.

Fifthly, Digestives in Ulcers.
1. Oleose or Fats:

Ol. Rosarum, Batyrum, Ol. Olivarum.

2. Terebinthinates:

Gum. Elemi, Olibanum, Resina, Terebinthina cum Vitello Ovi, Mastiche, Cera,
Mel, Vnguentum* Basilicum.

3. Mucilaginous Herbs and Meals: Farina Hordei, Fenugraeci, Tritici, Lini.
Rad. Liliorum, Malvae, Althaeae, Cynoglossi. Fol. Digitalis. Flores Croci,
Liliorum.

Sixthly, Cathaereticks, or Eaters of Proud Flesh.
1. Burnt Minerals very Drying: Vitriolum ustum, Colcothar, Cinnabaris, Alumen
ustum, Pumex ustus, Pompholyx, Sal ustum, Aes ustum, Lapis Calaminaris,
Antimonium ustum.

And Burnt Vegetables, Gallae ustae.

2. Mixed Salts: Aqua Calcis, Lapis Medicamentosus, Acetum.

3. Minerals mixed with Acids, or Vitriolick Acrids: Vnguentum Aegyptiacum, Aes
Viride, Mercurius Praecipitatus, Aq. Sublimati, Vitriolum.

4. Acids: Ol. Vitrioli, Sp. Salis, Nitri, Aq. Fortis.

All Acids and Mixed Acids (as well as Bitters and strong Stypticks) hinder the
Putrefaction in Ulcers, and correct the Acrid Volatile Salts which corrode: for
where any Putrefaction is, there is a Salt very Volatile; therefore in putrid
Ulcers the Acid does not abound, but most chiefly in undigested, thin, gleeting
Ulcers it abounds.

4. Strong Bitters Acrid: Pulv. Sabinae, Radix Aristolochiae, Aloes, Cucumis
Agrestis.

5. Strong Stypticks: Gallae, Fl. Balaustiorum, (hence a Decoction is made for
sordid Ulcers) ex Gallis, Alumine and Vitriolo.

Seventhly, Medicines against the Caries of the Bones.
1. The Strongest Bitter Acrid Cephalicks:

Rad. Iridis, Ol. Caryophyllorum, Succini.

2. Strong Acrid Causticks:

Gum. Euphorbii.

Eighthly, Stoppers of Bleeding, inwardly and outwardly, in Wounds.
I. Inwardly.
1. Watery Mucilages incrassating: Rad. Symphyti. Albumen Ovi. Gum. Arabicum.
Limaces, Lac, Bolus Armena.
2. Acids Coagulating the Blood, Serum and Lympha, and fixing Acrid Salts:
Tinctura Rosarum cum Sp. Vitrioli, Succ. Limonum, Lac ebutyratum, Sp. Salis
Dulcis, etc. 3. Watery Bitterish Astringents, and Acid Astringents: Fol.
Plantag. Polygoni, Succ. Acaciae, Hypocistidis, Rad. Bistort. Tormentill. etc.
II. Outwardly.
1. Acids and Cool Astringents, applied as Frontals: Oxycratum. 2. Fetid
Smells: Stercus Porcinum, Muscus Terrestris, Opium. 3. Amulets causing Fear:
Bufo exiccatus, usnea ex Cranio. To those must be added Revulsions by Bleeding,
Cupping in the Neck, Purging, Compression of the Arteries, near to the
Bleeding. 4. Causticks put upon Tents: Colcothar, Crepitus lupi, Fungus
Quercinus, Gypsum ustum, Alumen ustum, Lapis infernalis. 5. Vitriolicks applied
with Tents: Atramentum, Fuligo Cacabi aenei, Vitriolum Caeruleum solutum. 6.
Powdered Gums, which help the thickning of the Blood, and therewith stop the
Orifices: Terra Sigillata, Thus, Mastiche, Aloe, Telae Aranearum, Pili
Leporini, Ossa and Lintea calcinata, Amylum, Resina.
Of Poisoned Wounds by Animals.
I. THe Venomous Poison must be extracted and destroyed.

First, It is destroyed by

1. Fire, or actual Cautery, which is applied to the Bites of Serpents. 2. By
Medicines contrary to Fermentation and Putrefaction.
1. Acids; as, Spongia aceto madida. 2. Mixed Salts: Sal commune, Halec. 3.
Oils: Ol. Scorpionum, Succini, Caryophyllorum. 4. Bitters: Gentiana,
Aristolochia, Centaurium, Verbena, Ruta, Theriaca, Mithridatium, Myrrha, Aloe.
5. Acrids: Cepe, Allium, Sinapi, Piper.
Secondly, It is drawn out

1. By Cupping-Glasses. 2. By the Oils mentioned, with which all Oily Acrids
(as the small active Particles of Poisons seem to be) easily mix. 3. By Vinous
Spirits, which easily imbibe such Particles. Sp. Vini, Sp. Rorismarini, Aq.
Vitae.

4. By some parts of the Animal applied, with which the Poison readily mixes.
Pulvis Serpentum calcinatorum, Bilis Serpentum and Capita. 5. By Fomentations
of Cephalicks.
The Wound, after the Poison is removed, is to be treated as in Ordinary
Wounds; but because internal Antidotes are necessary, and they cannot be known
without some general Notions of Poisons, I shall next discourse of Poisons.

Of POISONS.
THere is observed to be Poisonous Minerals and Animals, as well as Vegetables.

Poisons either corrode the Stomach, or coagulate the Serum of the Blood, or
putrefie the whole Mass, or else act most on the Spirits.

I. I will mention Mineral Poisons first, which taken inwardly corrode the
Stomach, and gripe, vomit, and cause Hiccoughs and Faintings, and at last
gangrene it, and give a blackness to it.

1. Arsenic is corrosive, by a particular Texture of Sulphurous Particles and
Acids. The proper Antidotes for it, are those which destroy its Texture; as
Fixed Salts and Acids, as Nitre: But first we must endeavor its Evacuation, and
the securing of the Stomach, as is hereafter prescribed against corrosive
Poisons.

2. Antimony is less corrosive, by a particular Texture of Sulphurous parts,
and Acid, and produces violent Evacuations with Convulsions. This Texture is
also destroyed by Acids, which fix the Sulphur; and Fixed Salts, which take off
the Pungent Acid.

3. Mercury sublimate is corrosive, by a particular Texture made by the
particles of Quicksilver, dissolved by an Acid: And this vomits, corrodes, and
produces Convulsions; but this going into the Blood coagulates it, and produces
Salivation: This Acid is absorbed by Fixed and Volatile Salts, and so the
corrosive Texture is destroyed.

4. Aqua Fortis corrodes and vomits by its Acid pungent Figures: The Acid must
be altered by Absorbents; as, Earths, Steel, Alkalizate Salts. And the same
serve for Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Salt and Nitre; and for all other Mineral
Preparations made by Acids; as Vitriol, which corrodes and vomits, Aes Viride,
Squama Aeris, which is vitriolated in the Stomach.

The particular Texture of all these is altered by Absorbers and Precipitaters
of Acid; but the Brasssavour taste is best cured by Spirit of Salt.

5. Calx viva and Gypsum are corrosive to the Stomach, by a fiery Fixed Salt,
which is corrosive; and produces Pain, Thirst, and a Dysentery. Acids temper
the fieriness of Fixed Salts; and Fat Earths, Mucilages, and Slimy Oils do the
same.

Ale will not cause Lime to effervesce.

6. Lead, Ceruss, Red-Lead, and Litharge, produce Pains, Gripes, and
Dysenteries; and Litharge binds the Belly. The Sulphurous parts in Lead being
corrosive, these are best cured by fixing them with Acids; and the dryness of
the Lead is corrected by Oils. Lead is turned into a Salt by Spirit of Vinegar,
which will more easily pass off the Stomach; to which that is also observed to
be very hurtful, causing Nauseousness by its Sweetness.

7. Glass and Diamonds are only Poison by their sharp edges which fret the
Guts; and these cannot be altered, wherefore they are very dangerous Poisons.

II. Minerals are Poisonous by their Fumes, which pass through the Organ of
Smelling, and immediately act on the Spirits; as the Fumes of Arsenic and
Antimony which kill suddenly, by destroying and fixing the Spirits: Or
Quicksilver Fumes, which cause Palsies, by coagulating the Succus Nervosus: Or
the Fumes of Lead, which smell sweet, and produce a Convulsive Asthma, and also
dry the Lungs.

Oils, Mucilages, and Watery Medicines are used to cure this Asthma.

II. Vegetable POISONS.
First, VEgetable Poisons corrosive.

I. The pure Acrid Volatile Salt in the Cress-Tastes, are a little corrosive by
their pointed Figures; but in the differing kinds of true Corrosives, there is
some difference in the Figures of the Volatile Salt, which is given it by a
particular Texture of Oil and Acid, which are Ingredients in the making of this
Salt of a hooked Figure.

1. This Corrosive Salt is mixed with much Water in Ranunculus, etc. These
cause Vomitings, Gripes, and Pains in the Stomach.

2. This Corrosive Salt is mixed with a well-digested Oil, in Clematis and other
Fragrant Corrosives; and this also burns, blisters and vomits.

3. This Corrosive Salt is mixed with a little Sliminess and Elder-smell, in
Hellebor, Colchicum.

4. This Corrosive Salt is mixed with much Water, and a Resinous Oil; as in
Spurge, they burn, blister, purge and vomit violently; as Spurge, Cambogia, etc.

5. If this Corrosive Salt is joined with a great Foetor, it produces a
Venomous Plant; as in Aconitum, Napellus, Cicuta: Nature has marked these
Plants, by the black Roots, and given them a considerable Foetor to offend our
Smelling, and thereby cause an Aversion. These last produce Giddiness,
Delirium, burnings in the Stomach, Inflations of the Body and Fever. They first
corrode the Stomach, then pass into the Blood, and at last affect the Spirits.

Acids change and fix this Corrosive Salt and Fetid Smell.

6. Because Fetid differs but in degree from Aromaticks, therefore there are
some Corrosive Poisons of a Smell mixed of Aromatic and Fetid; as Cicutaria,
Madnep, and Coriander; and these have a strong heady Smell, Sweet and
Offensive, with sweet Roots, by which their Acrimony is allayed: And they act
by a Vapor which passes through the Stomach and Blood without much trouble;
but they cause a Vertigo in the Spirits and a slight Delirium.

These have their Volatile Oily Salt fixed and changed by Acids.

Secondly, Vegetable Poisons, which have a Faetor producing Sleepiness; as all
Narcoticks, Hyoscyamus, Cynoglossum, Solanum, Mandragora, Nux Vomica.

Solanum Lethale produces a Suffocation by its Sliminess, as the Mushroms do;
but the Fetid part of all the Opiates mentioned, produce an Itching in the
Flesh, which is a sign of a Volatile Salt in Opiates, and a Giddiness,
Delirium, Stupor, and in too great a quantity Convulsions, low Pulse, and
Breathing slowly, and at last Death.

Some Opiates which are very Slimy, Bitter, and Acrid, purge and vomit
violently; as Tabaco, and Solanum Lignosum, and Marvel of Peru.

Mandragora has a strong Narcotick Foetor, but something Aromatic in the
Fruit. And there are poisonous Narcoticks which have an Aromatic mixed Smell;
as Pomum Amoris, and Flos Africanus.

Opiates were accounted cold, because of their Mucilage, but their Foetor makes
them hot.

The proper Antidotes for Narcoticks, are,

1. Those things which correct the Bitter, Acrid, and Foetor of Narcoticks, as
all the Acid Alexipharmacks, Sp. Vitrioli, Sulphuris, Aceti, Succ. Limonum.

2. Those Fetids which excite the Motion of the Spirits, and promote their
Agitation; as Asa Foetida, Castoreum, Crocus.

3. Those fragrant Aromaticks which supply new Spirits, and give a quick and
brisk Motion to them: And therefore large quantities of Wine are recommended by
Galen against Opiates.

4. Those Medicines which correct the Sliminess of Narcoticks; as Sal Tartari,
and the Lixivia, these open Gums, by taking off the Acid which coagulates the
Mucilage into a Gum.

Thirdly, Vegetables become Poisonous by a very indigested crude Mucilage, as
in Mushroms, from whence there is produced in the Stomach a crude Juice, which
not being digested by a Ferment, like other raw Meat, it produces a violent
Cholera, and, by the Earthy Foetor, (observable in Mushroms, a Strangulation,
Gripes, and sometimes a Stupor is produced.

Acrids, Aromaticks, and Carminatives are here most useful against Mushroms,
with which therefore they are pickled to give them a Taste, and also to help
their Digestion, as with Spice, Pepper, Dill, etc. we use also Vinegar, and
austere Pears are commended to stop Vomiting, and to correct the Fetid part of
Mushroms. To this kind of Poison may Cucumbers, Melons, and other crude Plants
be reduced, which are Poisons to some Persons, not being easily digested by
them.

I have mentioned Vegetables as Poisons to Men, though Insects and other Animals
feed on them safely; and Dogs cannot be Poisoned by any of our Country
Narcoticks. And I find this observed in Sennertus: Multa sunt Animalia, quae
cibis nobis venenosis pascuntur, sicut Sturni cicuta, and Coturnices veratro,
Anates bufones aquaticos devorant, Ciconiae Serpents, Gallinae Araneas, quae
tamen Animalia homini in cibum veniunt.

III. Animal POISONS.
First, COrrosive Internal Animal Poisons; as Cantharides, which have a fiery
Volatile Salt, which frets the Passages of Urine, and sometimes produces bloody
Urine. This effect is best corrected by Milk, Oil, and Emulsions: And also
Acids fix the Volatility of those Salts. These hot Insects corrode the Guts,
and produce a Dysentery; but if they pass into the Blood, they there cause
Heat, Fever, Delirium, Vertigo, or swellings of the Face or Skin, and sharpness
of Urine.

These are the Effects of Animal Poisons taken Inwardly; their Poisons being
from a fiery Volatile Salt; as in Toads, Spiders, and other Insects.

Secondly, Corrosive Animal Poisons which happen externally,

I. By the sting of a Be; these are also a very Acrid Salt; as it appears by
the Experiment mentioned in Wedelius, Si ictus Apum vel Vespae ungue
excipiatur, and degustetur, salinum aut hujusmodi quid manifest deprehendi
potest. This Acrid Salt will kill a Viper if a Wasp sting him. This Animal
Liquor being instilled warm into the Vessels of another Animal, there ferments
the Humors of the Animal which is stung; and by this new Fermentation a
Putrefaction is produced, which destroys the natural Crasis of all the Humors.

Such is the nature of the Stinging of Common and Roman Nettles, which send out
a Saline, Acrid Liquor, which enters into the Pores of an Animals Skin, and
there instills that Venom cold, which is the cause of Itching, Burning and
Blistering of the Skin. I find the same Acrid in the Root of the Nettle; and
there is also a Sweetness in Nettle-Roots. The stinging Acrid Juice is the
Juice of the proper Vessels of Nettles; and therefore it is not improbable,
that the proper Vessels of the Plant constitute those Spikes which prick the
Skin, and convey the Venomous Liquor into it: And by this we find that Plants
and Animals agree in their Stings and Poisons, as well as in their Principles,
which I have mentioned.

II. The Corrosive Animal Poison which happens Externally, by the Biting of
another Creature which is either naturally Venomous, or else made Venomous by a
Disease.

1. The Bitings of a Viper, or other Serpent, produce Pain, Swelling, and make
the part Black, Livid, or Red. The Animal, after a few hours, vomits, faints,
has cold Sweats, and Convulsions, and then dies. The Blood of the Poisoned
Animal is Black, and coagulates; as it appears upon Dissection, and that gives
the Vomiting and Blackness to the Intestines: From the Coagulation the Pain and
Lividness of the part proceeds; and from thence also the Faintings, cold
Sweats, and Convulsions arise. So that all the Symptoms in an Animal Bitter
proceeds from the Coagulation of the Blood.

The cause of this Coagulation cannot be from any Acid in the Viper, for we
find no considerable Acid but in the Stomachs of Animals: And we find all the
Acids in Animals, either joined with the Salt or Fats of Animals, and no Acid
is naturally pure in the Humors of Animals; therefore the Coagulation must be
deduced from some other reason.

We observe that Rennet coagulates Milk, and we find no Acid in it sufficient
to coagulate so great a quantity of Milk, as one spoonful is used to do. We
find that Rennet will not immediately coagulate the Milk, but after some space.

The White of an Egg thickens and curdles Milk, by fermenting with it, and not
by an Acid. And we find that in the Stomachs of Animals Milk is coagulated by
its Ferment. Blood being produced out of Milk, it may well be supposed, that
Blood may be coagulated the same way as Milk is.

I will therefore compare the manner of Operation of Rennet on Milk, and
Poisonous Ferments on the Blood of Animals.

1. The Milk is warmed before its Coagulation, by which the Rennet is sooner
dispersed through it, and the Fermentation is promoted.

So in Poisons: The Saliva of the Animal is not Poisonous, unless it be
instilled Hot from the living Animal into the Wound of another living Animal;
for then the Poisonous Ferment has the greatest activity and agitation of
parts: And a Dead Animal receives no alteration by a Poisonous Bite.

2. The taste of Rennet is Slimy, Sub-acid, or Saltish; and this slimy Liquor
dissolves from the putrefied Skins of a Stomach.

The taste of the Saliva of a Viper (as Monsieur Charras describes it) is not
Bitter, but tastes flat, like Oil of Almonds, and leaves, after a little while,
some Acrimony in the Mouth, such as may be discerned in all kind of Spittle.
The Yellowness of the Saliva, argues that it has some Tincture from the Gall;
and if it be like other Spittle in Taste, it is Sub-acid and not Acrid, as
Charras says. A Putrefaction is necessary to produce Rennet, and a high
Digestion in a particular Animal is requisite to produce a Poisonous Saliva;
and we find Dogs to have a Poisonous Saliva when their Digestions are raised,
and Humors putrefied by a Fever, which occasions the Madness.

Though the Saliva taken from the Viper cannot Poison another Animal, yet the
same fresh and warm instilled amongst the Juices of an Animal, will readily
ferment them, and putrefie them.

It is observed that the Bite of a Mad-Dog does not venom the Wound
considerably, if the Bite be upon any part covered with Clothes; but if it be
upon a bare place, the Bite is generally fatal. It is evident, That the Saliva
in one is more insinuated into the Wound, than in the other; and therefore the
Wound is more Fatal. From whence I believe the Saliva to be the Animal Ferment,
coagulating the Blood of any bitten Animal. The sliminess of the Saliva makes
it more certainly stick to the Wound; and this Slime we observe in Barme, which
is a Ferment as well as Spittle and Rennet: with this Slime is usually joined
some more active Spirituous, Brisk, Oily, Acid Particles, which give the first
motion to Liquors which are Fermentiscible. This Slime helps the dissolution of
the aerie Particles in Liquors; and by this those fine parts are preserved; as
in the Bubbles of Barme. These brisk spirituous Particles are more brisk in
some Ferments, than in others; and therefore produce different degrees of
Fermentation; and the one kills quicker than the other.

3. Rennet, after a small time, thickens and coagulates the Milk; and a small
quantity of it coagulates a great quantity: one Spoonful coagulating some
Gallons of Milk.

The Poisonous Bites of Vipers, after a few hours, coagulate the Blood, and
produce the Symptoms I have mentioned. The quantity of the Poisonous Ferment is
very small, and we find all Ferments to work in a little quantity; as in the
use of Barmleaven; and many Medicines, as Opium, produce great Effects, by the
quantity of one Grain: And amongst the corrosive Animal Poisons, a grain of
Cantharides produces violent Symptoms.

Milk and Blood attain their natural Crasis by a Fermentation in the Stomach,
and receive their perfection by diverse Circulations; but if after they have
attained their perfect Mixtures and Texture, they be further fermented, they
are then putrefied; the Acid being then separated from its Texture with the Oil
and Earth, it precipitates and coagulates the whole Mass of Milk or Blood: So
when we ferment Wines or Beer, which is perfectly clear and spirituous, this
second Fermentation makes it eager or Acid, and destroys its natural sweetness
and briskness. We generally observe Acid smells after the Fermentation of
Vegetables, and in Animal Stomachs; so that Acidities in putrefied Bodies, are
the effects of Putrefaction, which separate that from the Oil and Earth, and
thereby cause Coagulations in those Liquors which have Viscid and Fibrous Parts.

The most proper Antidotes against Animal Poisons, which are the Bites of
Venomous Creatures, are,
I. The Poison must be destroyed in the Wound, or drawn out, as is mentioned in
Poisoned Wounds. II. The coagulation of the Blood must be prevented by those
Alexipharmacks which hinder and stop the Fermentation; as, 1. Volatile Animal
Salts; as, Sal Volatile Viperarum, etc. 2. All the Alexipharmacks which resist
Putrefaction. Vide. 3. Diaphoreticks, which discuss the Venomous Ferment by
Sweating. Vide. 4. All absorbers of Acids do prevent the Coagulation of the
Blood. 5. Cordials which strengthen and supply Spirits, during the coagulation
of the Blood. 6. At last when the coagulation is prevented; the cool Cordials
are necessary to allay Heat, Thirst, and Fevers, arising from the Coagulation,
or the long use of hot Antidotes.

The Bite of a Mad-Dog is cured after the same manner, as those of Vipers.

The Bite of a Dog not being Venomous, the Fever renders his Spittle Venomous;
and then it causes Trembling and Fear at present; and after a Months time, or
such a space, it occasions a little Fever, Vomiting, Delirium, Quinsie, and
Convulsions of the Breast and Throat. And the same Symptoms I observed in a
Woman who dyed by the Bite of a Mad-Cat.

This Woman was afraid of Liquids; and those that are bit by Mad-Dogs have a
Hydrophobia from their Delirium, or else from a difficulty of swallowing
Liquids. And to these, Antidotes are to be given in a solid form, which they
will take well.

I put a large quantity of Diascordium into Milk, and after some Rennet, which
turned it presently; and therefore these famous Antidotes do not hinder the
coagulation of Poisons.

I boiled Garlic in Milk, but that would not hinder the Coagulation by Rennet.

I mixed Sal Volatile Oleosum with Milk, and put Rennet to it, but it would not
curdle; therefore this is a good Medicine against Venomous Bites.

I mixed some Lixivium of Fern with Milk, and put Rennet to it, but it would
not turn; and therefore Fixed Salts are good against coagulating Venoms.

I mixed some Lobsters-Claws, burnt and powdered, with Milk and Water, and put
some Rennet to it, but it turned immediately; and therefore neither Testaceous
Medicines nor Vegetable Acrids (as appears by Garlic and Diascordium) can be
confided in, but only Volatile and Fixed Salts; and therefore these are the best
Antidotes against Venoms, which act on the Blood by Fermentation and
Coagulation.

The Symptoms of Malignant Fevers are so like those of Fermentative Poisons,
that the occasion of them seems to be some Animal Humors Putrefied, and
coagulating the Blood: And the same Medicines cure Poisons and malignant
Fevers. In malignant Fevers the strength is immediately gone without much
Fever; but a lightness in the Head and Delirium, with Faintings, cold Sweats,
and Convulsions, are ordinary Symptoms attending it.

The Infection of malignant Fevers is communicated by Effluviums, which are
only the Humors of the Diseased Person in the form of a Vapor; and therefore
Effluviums may propagate Infection as well as the Humors of the Body. These
Effluviums, by which the Infection is propagated, pass (like Fetid Smells)
through the Organ of Smelling, and mix with the Succus Nervosus, and with it
circulate into the Blood, out of the Nerves, whither the Succus Nervosus runs,
as all other Glandulous Lympha's do.

These Infectious Fumes may mix by Inspiration with the Lympha in the Lungs;
and with it pass by the Lymphaticks of the Lungs into the Blood, which is
coagulated by them.

It is not so probable that Infection is propagated by the Spittle, being
Infected, because the Digestion in the Stomach alters the Texture of Animal
Liquors; and consequently their Poisonous quality: and thereby Oil of Vitriol,
Milk, and other Liquors, which Poison an Animal, being injected into the Veins,
are made Innocent by passing through the Digestions of the Stomach.

The Cure of Corrosive Poisons in general, is,
1. To Vomit up the Poison immediately by Oily Vomits; as, Ol. Olivarum,
Amygdalarum, Butyrum: And those Poisons which dissolve in Water, may be Vomited
up by warm Water plentifully taken, as in Sublimate; but Oils best dissolve
Corrosive Sulphurs.

2. Oily Mucilaginous things are necessary to purge downwards the Poison, if it
be in the Guts; as Cassia, and lenitive Emollient Oily Clysters.

3. Mucilages, Oils, etc. temper the Acrid Corrosiveness:

Lac, Juscula Pinguia, Emulsiones, Mucilago sem. Cydon. in aq. hordei, decoctum
ficuum, Oryza cum lacte, Mucilago Althaeae, sem. Cydoniorum, and Gum.
Tragacanth. extract. cum aq. Ros. and Melle, misceantur in Electuarium,
Gargarismatae ex Mucilaginosis; fotus emollientes Stomacho applicentur.

4. Absorbers of Acids; as, Sal Tartari, Crystallus, and Testacea, and Lixivia.

5. Proper Antidotes which destroy the Texture on which the Corrosiveness
depends, and those I have mentioned.

The End of the Fifth Part.
PHAPAKO-ASANOS: OR, THE Touchstone of Medicines, etc.

The Sixth Part.

A New Method for distinguishing VEGETABLES Into several CLASSES, By the Taste
and Smell and their Several Juices.

Quot Plantarum Species extant, totidem peculiares Succi inveniuntur.
Malpighius Anatom. Plantarum. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.

A new Method for distinguishing Vegetables into several Classes, by the Taste
and Smell, and their Oily Juices.
CHAP. I. Of the Anatomy of Plants and their several Juices contained in their
proper Vessels.
I HAVE mentioned many Varieties of Compound Tastes in Plants, and have
intimated, That they depend on their different Juices, and the particular
Digestions of them. I think therefore my self obliged to give some further
account of the Original of these Juices, and the distinct Vessels in which they
are prepared and contained, but must refer the Reader to the Anatomy of Plants,
Written by the curious Malpighius, and Dr. Grew; from whom I have collected
what I thought necessary for the Explication of the Vessels, and Juices of
Plants.

Plants consist of Two Parts, Vessels and Juices; and in this they resemble
Animals, which are constituted of the same parts.

First, The Ligneous Pipes which run all the length of the Plant, and
constitute the Woods. These Ligneous Fibers are described by Malpighius, as
hollow Tubes. These are placed in parcels, and by their Inclination to each
other, they make a Net, whose spaces are filled by the Bladders, which are
inserted Horizontally toward the Pith; and these Bladders are open into one
another, and receive their Juice from the Ligneous Fibers or Pipes.

The Sap rises most apparently by those Ligneous Pipes, which stand in a ring
betwixt the Wood and the Bark, and others standing near the Pith; these are
called the Lymphatick Vessels, from the crude Juice they contain.

The Wood consists of these Antiquated Lymphaticks, which grow every Year; and
by the woody Pipes, the Sap rises only in the Spring, but more constantly and
plentifully by the Lymphaticks.

These Lymphaticks are in all Plants, because there are Ligneous Parts, which
are hollow Pipes.

The Juices of these Lymphaticks may be gathered in the Spring, by tapping of
Birch-Trees: this may be collected in great quantity, in a small time; and that
quantity of Sap was necessary for the Increase of the Tree, the Leaves and
Julus, which annually grow.

This Sap is not the proper Oily Sap of the Birch, because this rises in the
Spring, and has not had sufficient time to be digested into an Oily Gum or
Resin: Such as is that Juice which gives a Bitterness to Birch-Bark. Neither is
this Sap of Birch a pure Elementary Water, because it tastes Sweetish, and
looks Milky as Chyle does.

In this Sap is a mixture of the Vegetable Principles; and therefore after the
Distillation of Birch-Water, a Resinous Sediment is left, as Etmuller observes.
This Liquor turns sour with keeping; and by Fermentation it becomes Vinous.

This Sap is the most crude Juice of Vegetables, as it is separated from the
Earth by the Ligneous Pipes, which perform the Office of Lacteals in
Vegetables; and therefore this Sap may be called the Lymphatick Chyle of
Vegetables.

The Lacteals in Animals, are properly Lymphatick Vessels, in which both Chyle
and Lympha are contained.

The Coats of the Root strain this Juice from the Earth.

This ascends by the pressure of the Air externally; by the Spring of the Air
included in all Liquors; by the Fermentation of the Juice, or Rarefaction of it
by the heat of the Sun: and the ascent of the Sap is much facilitated by the
Inclination of the Fibers.

The Principles of Vegetables must be looked for in this sweet Lymphatick
Liquor; for from this all other Juices are Fermented and Digested, and they can
therefore acquire no other Principles than those contained in it.

1. This Lympha has Water very plentiful to dilute the Oily and Gummy part.

2. By the Sweetness an Oily part may be observed, which may be further
digested into Oils, Gum, Resins or Turpentines; for all other Tastes in Animals
arise from sweet Chyle, and the same may be asserted to arise in Vegetables,
from a Lympha which is in all Plants sweet, more or less.

3. The Acid appears in this Juice, by keeping of it; and this may be called
the Tartar of Vegetables; in Acerbs it is most crude, in the Acid Acrid most
Volatile.

4. The Viscidity or Mucilaginous Sliminess helps the dissolution of the Oil in
the Lympha, and hence is the nutriment of each Plant prepared, to increase its
solid parts.

These are therefore the Four only Principles of Vegetables, differently
digested in their several Species, and varied by the Oily Juices of the Seeds,
which ferment the Lympha into a particular Vegetable nature, and raise the Oil
of the Lymphatick nutriment, to the same state of Volatility, and the same
Texture as the Seed has.

Secondly, The soft Cortical Pulpy part of Vegetables is a heap of Bladders,
and into these the Ligneous Fibers or Pipes empty their Lymphatick Juice, where
this crude Juice is deposited, that it may be Fermented into the Taste of that
particular Plant. These Bladders are like the Stomachs in Animals, which, by
Fermentation, change the nature of Vegetable Food into the Texture of Animal
Juices; so the Bladders in the Seeds of a Plant, and all other parts contain
some digested Juice, which Ferments the new Lymphatick Liquor of Plants, and
prepares it for its change from a Mineral Juice, into the nature of a Vegetable.

In Malpighius's description of Galls, there is an exact description of the
rise of the Bladders from the Ligneous Pipes; and we may observe that the
Parenchymous Bladders contain the most crude Juices: So in unripe Oranges and
other Fruit, as Berries and Nuts, whilst unripe, there is an austere Juice, and
this austerity may be observed in all the parts of the Plant. Whence we may
observe, That the same Juice is received into all the Bladders at first; but by
ripening, which is a long digestion by the heat of the Sun, the Juice in the
Bladders of Fruits ferments, by which the austerity or Bitterness turns into
Sweetness, as in Nuts; and the acerbity, as appears* in Plumbs, into a Vinous
Sub-acrid Taste.

Malpighius observes, That the Bladders are reticularly inosculated, and open
into one another; from whence we may conceive how the Sap which rises by the
Ligneous Pipes, may sink or descend by the Bladders toward Winter, when the
heat of the Sun is wanting, for the keeping it up in its higher Vessels.

The reason why the Roots, Seeds, and Bark taste differently from the Leaves of
some Plants, as in Barberry-Tree, Vines, etc. is, because the bitterness of the
Bark depends on the Oily Vessels, which are there very plentifully, and
probably obscure, or else change the acerbity of the Juice in the Bladders; but
in the Leaves the Oily Specific Vessels are few, and cannot therefore change
the Taste of the Sowreness in the Leaves.

When the Juices of Vegetables, contained in the Bladders, have fermented, by
the Virtue of their original Liquors, contained in the Seed, or by the relicts
of the former digestion in the Bladders of the Plant, then the Oily Juice is
prepared for the Specific Turpentine Vessels, and the remainder of the Juice
in the Bladders is Acerb: So Wines deposite their Tartar by Fermentation; and
an Acidity is produced in the Mass of Meat fermented in the Stomach; and
Acerbity differs from Tartar by being of a greater Astriction, and a cruder
sour Taste.

From hence it appears, That we find all Acerbity only in the Juices contained
in the Bladders, and not in the Specific Vessels: So in Animals, we taste the
Acid most evidently in the Stomach, but obscurely in other places.

As to the austere Taste of Plants, it is a composition of a low Bitter, which
is mixed with an Acerbity; and this compound Taste is lodged in the Bladders,
when there is a higher Bitter in the Specific Vessels, but in austere Plants,
the Acerbity is in Bladders, and the low Bitterish Taste is in the Specific
Vessels.

A crude Juice is observed in the Bladders of Chickweed, etc. and from thence
is the crude Taste, from the Indigestion of its Lympha.

A Mucilage is observed in the Bladders of Mallows; and therefore, thence a
Sliminess may be tasted, as well as from the Muciducts.

The great Sweetness in the Fennil-Class shows that the Bladders are full of
that Juice: and since the Lympha of Trees tapped is Sweetish, it is probable
that this Lympha in Plants is Sweetish, and that it is immediately carried into
the Bladders.

Thirdly, The Bark contains other proper Vessels, which are called the
Specific Vessels, and may be called the Oily or Turpentine Vessels, because
Turpentine is that Oily part of Vegetable Juices which is digested or changed
from the Mineral Bitumen. And we find in Turpentine all these Tastes, as a Gum
or Slime, a Bitterness, an Acrid, and out of it is prepared an Oil or Resin;
and in Aromatic Turpentines, as Juniper, there is a Sweetness; and in Cedar
there is a Corrosive Acrid. Because all these Tastes are observable in
Turpentine, and that is the most common Oil of Vegetables; I take the liberty
of naming these Vessels the Turpentine Vessels, or Oily Vessels; but for
distinction sake, I will give more particular Names to each Vessel, from their
Juices.

1. The Muciducts, in which a Mucilage or Watery Gum is contained; and these
differ only in consistence, Gums being thickened Mucilages: These Vessels are
observed in Mallows; and it is digested from a Slime in the Bladders.

2. Sweet Sap Vessels, such as is in the Pea-Tastes, as in Liquorish; this is
digested from a Slime, observable in all Leguminous Plants, by rubbing them.

3. Vessels containing a Bitterish Acrid Milk, which dries into a Gum, as in
Cichory, and then it burns like Turpentine, which is a sign of their Oyliness.

4. Vessels containing Acrid Juices, Bitterish, as Celandine, and the Cresses.

5. Corrosive Acrid Milk Vessels, as in Spurge, which inspissate into a Gum, as
Cambogia; or a Resin, as Jalap, Scammony.

6. Balsamic, Aromatic, or Fetid Milk or Balsam Vessels, in the Vmbelliferous
Plants.

7. Common Turpentine Vessels, in Pine and Fur.

8. Resinous Turpentine Vessels, in Rosemary and Sage, and other Bitterish
Aromaticks.

Malpighius has very clearly described these Vessels, as mutually inosculated;
which evidently appear by the bloody color in those of an Artichoak: And in
another Plant he shows the Specific Vessels spread over the Bladders, and
mutually inosculated; and from the structure it appears, that the Specific or
Turpentine Vessels receive their Juices from the Bladders, and terminate in the
Seeds; the Chives and Terebinthinate Fungi globuli, or Papillae of the Plant.
He observes, That where the Juices of Vegetables are very clear, and do not
inspissate into a Gum, they cannot well be discerned by his Glasses: but they
may be described by the Taste and Smell, (as I believe.)

When the Juice in the Bladders is fully digested, it is strained into the
proper Oily Terebinthinate Vessels: for by digestion it acquires a particular
Texture fit for Secretion; and the Bladders resemble the Glands in Animals,
which are Folliculi membranosi.

The Juices in the Bladders are like the Blood in Animals, from whence other
Humors are strained; and these Oily Juices may be compared to the Humors
separated from the Blood, as, Spirits, Seed, Choler, etc. by the Glands or
Bladders of Plants.

These proper Oily Juices are designed for the production of the Oyliness
manifest in all Seeds, which have the same Taste as these Juices: and as Seeds
have their Vessels and Juices from the Vessels and Juices of Plants; so Plants
have these Juices and Vessels originally, from the Vessels and Oyliness of the
Seed; and also the other Juice of the Bladders, which is the lowest digested in
the Seeds.

These proper Juices are nothing but the Oil, Acid, and Viscid part of Plants,
under several Digestions and Mixtures. As the Blood makes Blood in Animals, so
in Plants the original Juices digest or ferment the new Nourishment into
particular states.

1. In crude Plants there is little or no Digestion, and therefore little
distinction of Juices; and therefore it is not improbable that there are no
Turpentine Vessels, unless for the strength of the Plant.

2. In Mucilaginous Plants the Oil is a little separated, but yet continues
diluted, by much Water; in Gums the Water is less, and the Earth most.

3. In the sweet Leguminous, the Oil is still mixed with much Mucilage.

4. In the Aromatic Sweet the Oil and Acid is well digested, and diluted with
Water into a smooth grateful Texture in the Bladders; and from thence is
separated a Milk or Balsam in the Umbels.

5. In bitter Plants the Oil is coagulated into a Gum; in Austeres most, but
less in the strong Laurel-Bitters.

6. In Acrids the bitter Oil is compounded with a Salt; and a Bitterness is
observable in the Bladders, from whence the Acrid is digested.

In Aromaticks and Fetids, the Volatile Oil and Salt are compounded; and these
are digested either from a sweet or a bitter Juice in the Bladders.

In Turpentines the Oil and Acid are most loosely mixed; whence there is an
evident Acid, and also a great Astringency in Tutsan, Perfoliata, and other
Turpentine Plants. The Seeds of Turpentine Nuts, as Pistacheos, are Sweet; and
therefore Turpentine seems to be digested from sweet Juices, Sweet easily
becoming Bitter.

From these descriptions of the several Juices of Plants, the variety of their
Tastes, and their several Compositions, are evident,

The Vessels of Plants can give no Taste, but that of Wood; but the several
Juices afford us all the Compositions.

The Juices in the Bladders may be either Crude, Acerb, Austere, Mucilaginous,
Sweet, or Bitterish.

The Juices in Oily or Turpentine Vessels may be either Slimy in crude Plants,
Sweet in the Pea-Tastes, Bitter, Acrid, Aromatic Acrid, Fetid, or Corrosive.

These different Juices being always tasted in Plants, Two of them at least,
must render the Tastes of all Plants compounded; but the same Juice may also
have a compounded Taste, as some Milks of Vegetables are Bitter, Acrid, Gummy,
and Fetid, as Sagapenum; and others Bitter, Acrid, Aromatic, as the Balsam in
Angelica.

Sweet and Bitter are frequently in the same Juice, because Sweet easily
becomes Bitter.

Bitter and Acrid are usually compounded, because Acrid rises out of Bitter.

Aromatic and Fetid are frequently mixed, both in Taste and Smell: And both
Fetid and Aromatic have generally an Acrid Taste.

The Fruits of Vegetables and their Seeds, have usually the most compounded
Tastes: So in Ivy-Berries, the Taste is Sweet, Bitterish, Slimy, Aromatic, and
very Acrid.

The Bitter, Acrid, and Aromatic appears in the Rind of an Orange, from the
Oily Juice observed in it; but the Pulp is Sweet and Sub-acid: This last is
from the Juice in the Bladders; but the first from the Juice of the Oily
Turpentine Vessels.

In Barberry-Tree a great variety of Tastes may be observed in its different
Parts: The Bark is Bitter, Slimy, and Sub-acrid, from the Juice of the
Turpentine Vessels, but from the Sap of the Bladders it is Astringent; which
Astringency being further digested in the green Leaves, it produces an
Acerbity; and in the Fruit, the same Acerb Juice is mixed with a Slime in the
Bladders, of the Fruit (for the Fruit will boil to a Jelly) and it tastes more
pleasantly Acerb, but the Seed is Bitterish Astringent: So that the Pulp of the
Fruit has the Juice of the Bladders, but the Seed the Oily Juices; the Oily
Juice seems the same in all parts, and gives the general Taste of the Plant;
but the Juice of the Bladders is most alterable in the Leaves and Pulp of the
Fruit, where it is most exposed to the Sun.

In some Plants there are more than Two Oily Turpentine Vessels; for in
Thistles there are Muciducts and Lacteals; and we taste in Thistles a Slime
besides the Bitterness: in these both the Juices in the Bladders supply proper
Oily Juices; and by these several Juices, different Tastes arise.

From the Instances I have given, it appears how many Tastes may be observed in
one Plant; for,

The Lymphaticks may give one Taste, as Sweetness or Waterishness.

The Juice in the Bladders, one or two, as Acid-Astringent, Austere, or Slime,
or Sweet and Bitter.

The Turpentine Vessels may give four Tastes, as Bitter, Sweet,
Acrid-Aromatick, Gummose: So we find in Angelica, a Turpentine Balsam, which
tastes Bitter, Sweet, Aromatick-Acrid, and Gummy; the Bladders furnish an
Astringency, and the Lymphaticks have a sweet Waterishness: So that Plant has
seven Tastes, or seven modes of Taste. And these are the most that can be
observed in one Vegetable, but all need not be so nicely described; for its
enough to discover its Virtue, by observing its Aromatic Acrid Taste, for that
shows it to be a Diuretic, Cephalic, and Cordial Medicine, by its Volatile
Oily Salt.

Fourthly, Air Vessels.

There are none of them in the Bark, but in the Wood, and therefore they are
framed by the growth of the Tree, whose Wooden Pipes or Fibers, by being
closely compacted by the growth of the Tree, do stop the flowing of the Sap
into some Bladders, which therefore shrink and break into hollows. As the
Lymphaticks lose their Office when they grow into Wood, for then the Sap rises
not constantly by them, but only in the Spring; so it is with the Air Vessels,
which are only broken Bladders, having lost their first use, like the Pith of
Trees, they remain empty, and only transmit a Lympha in the Spring, when the
Woody part is full of the same.

Mr. Leuvenhock describes the Air Vessels as a large Tube filled with Bladders;
so that they may be esteemed a small Pith, encompassed with the Wooden Pipes,
and are necessary for the growth or bending of the Plant.

The Leaves of Plants have the same constituent Parts, many Bladders and
Ligneous Pipes, which, with Air Vessels, constitute the great Fibers.

The Globulets found on the Leaves, seem to be the Turpentine of Plants, which
transpire from its Specific Vessels. Malpighius calls them Papillae; and he
observes a Turpentine in Laurel, Cherry, Vine, Medlar, Poplar, and
Quince-leaves. These Plants being all Bitter, I may hence confirm my Opinion,
That Bitterness depends on a Terebinth, which may be seen on these Leaves.

In dictamno albo, the Terebinthinate fungi are numerous in the Flower.

He observes a Turpentine on the Hairs of the Sponge of Dog-Rose. Pulvis
croceus in Antheris Cynosbati est Sulphur Vegetabile.

He observes Turpentine in the Stylus of Fennil; and in Nettles, Loco styli
vesicula Terebinthina refertur.

In Horminum there are Fungi or Papillae, which send forth that clammy Juice
which is felt.

From these Observations I infer, That though the Specific Oily Juices differ
much in their natures, yet it may properly enough be called a Turpentine,
because it appears like it in the Glasses, and gives a Bitter Taste.

The Stalk of a Plant consists of diverse Lymphaticks, and Ligneous Fibers,
Air-Vessels, Bladders, and Specific Vessels, whose Juice is more evidently
tasted in the Stalk than in the Leaf.

The Fruit of some Plants consists of large Parenchymous Bladders, and of
diverse branched Ligneous Fibers, of a Core, Stone, or Calculary.

The Stones of Fruits are the Bladders filled up with an Acerb Juice, and that
is coagulated into a Stone.

The Stones of Fruits are the two Membranes of the Seed, and are like the Skins
of the Ova in Animals; the Juice separated into the inner Coat of the Seed, is
from the proper Oily Vessels of the Plant, whence it is Milky, and the Seed
always tastes much of the Oily Juice.

Malpighius says, The Seed is bred in the Stylus of Plants, which he calls the
Vterus, as this dilates the Bladder in which the Colliquamentum lies, appears
in a cavity, from whence proceed Tubes which resemble the Cornua of the Womb.
The seminal Matter being abundant, affords the Semets or Eggs which stand upon
the Chives in the Flowers; these Globuli are of a white, red, yellow, blue,
black Color, and are like Eggs for the Food of Insects, having the Oily
Seminal Juice of the Plant.

In the Seed the Ligneous Pipes, the Bladders, and the Oily Specific Vessels
are only the elongation of the same Vessels in the Plant; and all these Vessels
are filled with the Juices from the original Plant: These are always bred in
August, when the Juices of the Plant are fully digested, and they shoot next
Year from the Bud.

The Seeds of Plants have two Skins besides the Seed-Case, in which is
contained a Plantula Seminalis, consisting of two Lobes, which grow into
Seminal Leaves, and also a Radicle and Gemma; and there is in some Seeds
another Pulpy Substance, which supplies the first nutriment to the Seed.

I have mentioned (in other Papers) the Equivocal generation of Insects, from
rotten Wood, and putrefied Animals; and I find many Equivocal generations in
Plants. In the production of Misletoe the Juices and Vessels shoot into a new
Plant of a different Taste and Figure from the Crab-Tree, on which it commonly
grows; for the Misletoe tastes of a Laurel-Bitter-Astringent, with a great
Acrimony.

Moss seems to be produced from the Fibrous parts of Plants, as appears by the
Roots which are Fibrous.

Mushroms have Membranous Roots, which consist of a Congeries of Bladders.

Both of these arise from the corrupt Juices of other Plants: Mosses grow on
rotten Wood, as Mouldiness does on Flesh Meat putrefied; and that is described
as a Plant.

The Juice which produces Mushroms, seems to be the fresh Nourishment which
Plants receive in Autumn, which never arises to a higher digestion in Plants
decaying, than to an Earthy Slime; and this is confirmed by an Observation in
Botanicum Monspeliense, Eryngii demortui radicibus elegans innascitur fungus,
post pluvias Autumnales.

I have observed a corrosive Acrid, like the Crowfoot-Taste in the common
Mushrom we eat; by which it produces all its virulent Effects: And this Vinegar
corrects in its Pickle; the Acrimony is best perceived in the Stalk of the
Mushrom; the Acrid Earthiness is the Specific Juice of the Mushrom, and the
Slime is in the Bladders.

From the Acrid Taste of Mushroms, I may conjecture that it springs from
Crowfoot, which is plentiful in all Pastures.

The Fungus Pipereus may arise from Hydropiper, but Agaricus from the
Terebinthinate Vessels of Trees, and such kind of Fungi, containing a
Terebinth. are described by Malpighius in sound Plants.

The Woody Mushrom is from the Woody Juice of the Tree; and the highly Fetid
from Fetid Plants, or their putrefied Juices.

Galls, and other Excrescences of Plants, arise from the Insertion of an Egg of
an Insect, by a hole made by its Terebra, whose Liquor ferments the Juices of
the Plant, and thereby causes the great swelling of that part where the Egg is
lodged; so the Eggs of Flies seem to putrefie Flesh Meats, on which they are
left by the Fly.

CHAP. II. Of the several Classes of Plants, as they are distinguished by their
Tastes and Smells.
SInce all the Juices of Plants, and their several Compositions, may so easily
be discerned by the Taste, and the several states of their Digestion by the
Smell, I will endeavor to reduce them into a few Classes, by those Tastes and
Smells I have observed in Plants.

The Taste of the Juices in the Bladders of Plants is most apt to vary, and to
be higher digested in the Fruit and Leaves, than in other parts; and therefore
I shall not distinguish Plants by any of the Juices of the Bladders, but by
that of the Oily Specific Terebinthinate Vessels, which are constantly of the
same kind in all the parts of Plants; though in some they are in a small number,
and in those the Juices of the Bladders obscure the Oily Juice as to its Taste.
It may be that the Juice may receive some little alteration by being exposed to
the heat of the Sun, in some parts more than others, though this would appear
unusual, that a different Juice should be in the same kind of Vessels.

This Oily Juice is the most constant, and the highest digested Juice in
Vegetables, containing also the chief Virtues, and the highest Smells.

I shall endeavor to distinguish Plants by the tastes of these Oily Substances,
and I will therefore make no distinct Classes of the Watery Juices and Tastes,
because their Specific Juice is a Slime or Sweetness, to which Tastes they
must be referred.

Neither will I make distinct Classes of Acids, Acerbs, and Astringents,
because they are compounded with a low Bitterness in their Taste; and the
Bitter or Austere is their Oily Juice. The taste of Acid, Acerb, and
Astringent, are from the Juices in the Bladders. I therefore refer the Acid,
Acerb, and Astringent Tastes to the Class of Austeres, which are Bitterish; and
by them I may sub-distinguish some of the Bitters.

The distinction of Plants into Arbores, Frutices, and Suffrutices, is
sufficiently confuted by the Anatomy of Plants, which discovers the same Woody
Vessels in all alike.

I will not make any Objection against any Method used by any other Author,
lest I reflect unwarily upon their Opinions, who are better Skilled in
Botanicks than my self; and to whose Writings I am very much obliged. I will
therefore only intimate the usefulness of my Method.

I. I refer all Plants to the same Class which have the same sort of Oily
Juices, and thereby their Virtue will more readily appear: and Plants of
different Natures will not be placed together, as Bellis Major and Minor, which
extremely differ in their Tastes, as Docks and Hellebore do, and Blitum and
Botrys; neither can Valerian be placed with the Vmbels.

This Method of Classing by the Taste, will decide many disputes about the
placing of Plants; as for Example:

Nasturtium Indicum, by the Flower, is like Larkspur; by the Leaf, Navelwort;
by the Climbing, Convolvulus; by the Seed, Heliotropium: By these accidents an
Herbalist doubts to what Class to refer it: but the Taste soon decides the
Controversy; for by that it is a Cress, and properly belongs to that kind by
its Virtue.

Bardana is a Thistle by its Taste; but Eryngium is none.

II. By this Method the Classes of Plants are but Seven summa genera, and to
them I will add one Class of Imperfect Plants, which have but one Taste, and no
distinction of Juices considerable; as,

1. The Gritty, the Woody, and the Woolly Tastes, which I call Earthy Tastes,
because that Principle prevails most in them; and from that, they taste dry and
hard.

I refer Mosses and Mushroms to the same Class, because they have a strong
Earthy Taste and Smell, though they have a distinction of Juices, very
probably, as appears by the Astringency which fills the Bladders, and the
Acrimony which may be in Specific Vessels of Mosses: And in Mushroms the Slime
fills the Bladders, and the Acrimony is in the Specific Vessels; and therefore
Mosses and Mushroms might most properly be referred to the Fetid Class; but I
place them here, because their Earthy Taste is very remarkable; and in this I
follow the usual Method.

In the Woody Tastes, the Acerb Juice in the Bladders, which tastes Astringent,
is turned into Wood; and therefore Wood distilled yields an Acid Liquor, and
very little Oil, if the Resins and Turpentines be dissolved from the Specific
Vessels before distillation.

The First CLASS.
Of Plants of an Earthy Taste or Smell.
First, OF those which taste dry and hard, and have but one Taste.

Secondly, Of those which have a distinction of Juices, with a savor of Earth.

The Sub-alternate Species of Earthy Tastes, are,

I. Gritty Vegetables. II. The Woody. III. The Woolly. IV. The Mossy, having
the savor of common Mould, or the Mouldiness of Woods. V. Very Fetid Earthy.
First, Gritty Tastes in petrified Plants; as,

1. Corallium, which smells of Moss, being ground to Powder, and before
petrification it has an Astringent Milk; and therefore Coral was a perfect
Plant, having distinction of Juices before Petrification, but the Acerb Juices
are easily petrified.

And Malpighius has mentioned the Acerb Juices of an Oak and Poplar, coagulated
into a Stone in the Bladders of those Plants; and that these Stones are of the
Figure of a Die.

By this we observe how little Wood and Stone differ, both being made out of
the same Juice.

The External accident whereby Coral may be distinguished from the following
Plants, is the branching of it self like a Tree.

2. Pori which, as Mr. Ray mentions, differs by the Porosity from Corals.

3. Eschara Marina which resembles Leaves.

4. Fungi Lapidei resembling Mushroms.

5. Corallina which has a strong Mossy and Earthy Smell; the inward part is
Ligneous.

I have mentioned the several accidents whereby the Individuals under Gritty
Tastes might be distinguished, that my designed Method might be better
apprehended, for I would have Plants in general, first distinguished by their
manifest Tastes and Smells; and then the Individuals distinguished by their
external accidents of Color, Figure, number of Seeds, etc. And hence the
Reader may be satisfied, That if Plants were clearly distinguished by their
Taste, where there is but one, or by the Oily Specific Taste, where there is a
distinction of Juices: a long description of external Accidents is not
necessary, but some one obvious Note may distinguish each Individual, under
each Species.

Secondly, Woody Tastes; as, Flabellum Marinum.

Thirdly, Woolly Tastes, as in a Sponge, which has a Fistulous Substance, and
grows on Stones, and is a Mushrom according to Mr. Ray, Mucagine quadam
Membranea vestita; by which it is Conglutinative in Wounds, when fresh: Galen
says, It smells of the Sea, by which it is discussing; the old Sponge has not
the same Virtue; burnt Sponge smells like burnt Bones. Dr. Grew affirms, That
Sponge has no Ligneous Fibers, but only the Pithy Bladders; and therefore it is
but half a Plant.

Fourthly, Plants of an Earthy or Woody Smell and Taste.

I. Of a dry Earthy Taste as Mosses, which have other Tastes mixed with their
savor of Mould.

1. A Bitterish Astringent Acrid Taste, with a pungent Smell; as, Muscus
arborum, Querci, Mali, Alni, etc. Muscus Pyxidatus, which has a Red Flower in
the Cups.

2. A Sweet Rough Taste; as in Lichen cinereus terrestris, and Adianthum
aureum. These two first Species smell of Wood.

3. A very Crude Rough Taste, with a smell of Mould very strong; Muscus
communis viridis, and Muscus ex Cranio.

4. With a Bitter Sub-acrid Taste Terebinthinate; and also a smell of Mould:
Hepatica Terrestris.

II. Of a stronger and more violent offensive Fetid Earthy Smell, which is
produced from some Oily Specific Juice in Mushroms, different from their other
Tastes, by which they must be sub-distinguished.

1. Mushroms of a Slimy Taste, and also of a Corrosive Acrid, with an Earthy
Smell; as, Fungus esculentus.

2. Of a Pepper Acrimony in its Milky Juice; as, Fungus pipereus.

3. Of a dry Dust, which is Corrosive to the Eyes, and stops Bleeding: Fungus
pulverulentus.

4. Of a Woody Taste; as, Fungus Quercinus, Betulaceus, Fraxineus.

5. Of a Sweet Bitter Acrid Slimy Taste: Agaricus.

6. Of a Sweetish Taste and Goatish Smell:

Tubera edulia.

7. Of a Sweet and Rough Taste:

Tubera Cervina.

8. Of a Slimy Taste, with a mixed Smell of Earth and Wood:

Fungus arborum putrescentium.

9. Of a Carrion Putrid Smell:

Fungus Phalloides. Dr. Plott.

10. Of a Slimy Fetid, with an Elder-Smell:

Auricula Judoe, five Fungus Sambucinus.

The Second CLASS.
Of Plants which have a Watery Gum or Mucilage, for their Specific Oily Juice.
MUcilaginons Plants have their Lympha digested in the Plant -Bladders, into a
Sliminess, which is thence separated into the Muciducts; which Dr. Grew has
described in Elm and Mallow-Roots: but there is a Bitterness in many
Mucilaginous Plants; the Vessels in which this Bitter Gum is contained, he has
not described: in Holly and Elm he has mentioned the Muciducts and Lymphaticks
only; but in Carduus three sorts of Vessels are described; Milk Vessels, which
are the Bitter Gum Vessels, and give the Bitterness in its Taste; and two sorts
of Lymphaticks, the one contains the common Lympha, but the other probably the
Mucilage; for Carduus has a Slimy Taste.

The Mucilage is evident in the Bladders of Mallows; and less of it in the
Bladders of Borage; by which Instances it is evident, that the Mucilage is
there prepared before it be strained into the Muciducts.

The Mucilage in these Plants exceeding the other Oily Juice, being also a
Gummy Bitterish Milk probably: I refer these Slimy Bitterish Plants to this
Class.

Mucilage contains these Principles, much Water, some Oil, Acid, and Earth, and
these have a low state of digestion; in which, though they be of a looser
Texture than in the former Class, yet they are not generally so far
volatilized, as to send out Effluviums for affecting the Smell.

Mucilaginous Plants taste Slimy, and there are these Subordinate Species of
Slimy Tastes. 1. Crude Watery Slimes. 2. Sub-acid Slimes. 3. Bitterish Sub-acrid
Nauseous Slimes, or Orach-Slimes. 4. Nitrose cool Slimes. 5. Pure Mallow
Slimes. 6. Borrage Slimes. 7. Elm Slimes. 8. Melon Slimes. 9. Sweet Slimy
Bulbes. 10. Lily Slimes. 11. Nauseous and very Acrid Slimes, or Hermodactyl
Slimes. 12. Slimes with a Walnut Flower, or Cress Slimes. 13. Violet Slimes.
14. Bindweed Slimes. 15. The Pea-Taste.


I. Watery Slimy crude Plants, with a raw Smell:

Alsine vulgaris, Spergula, Lenticula Palustris.

These are Chickweed Slimes.

II Watrish Slimy Sub-acid Plants, or Spinach Slimes:

Spinachia, Blitum, Atriplex Hortensis, Baccifera, Mercurialis Hortensis.

Spinach has sweet Roots, fit for Physical use.

III. Mucilaginous, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Nauseous, or Orach Slimes:

Atriplex vulgaris, Bonus Henricus, Amaranthus.

IV. Watrish, Slimy, Cool, or Nitrose Slimes:

Beta alba, rubra.

V. Pure Watery Mucilages in the Leaf, Flower, Seed, and Roots, with a little
Sweetness in the Flower, and a latent Acrimony in the Plant. These may be
called Mallow Slimes.

Alcea, Althaea, Malva Arborea, Althaea arborescens.

VI. Grateful Bitterish Sub-acrid Slimes; or Borage-Slimes:

Echium, Buglossum, Borago, Pulmonaria maculosa, Parietaria.

Symphytum, whose Taste is more Gummy and Mealy.

VII. Mucilaginous Barks a little Bitterish and Astringent; as Elm-Slimes.

Vlmus, whose Seed is Sweet; Vlmus latiore folio is Wych-Hasle, which is an Elm
in Taste and Virtue.

Tilia, which is Bitterish, Sweet, Astringent, and Sub-acrid, besides the
abundant Slime: The Fruit is said to be Sweet, and the Flowers are Fragrant.

VIII. Crude Slimy Flowers, Leaves and Seeds, with a Bitterish, Sweet, Slimy,
Mellowy Fruit, or Melon-Slimes:

Cucurbita, Pepo, Citrullus.

Melon has a Smell of Musk; also Cucumis has a Bitter Sweet Stalk. The small
green Cucumbers smell like Tallow. Melon Stalk is Bitter Sweet, very Nauseous,
and Sub-acrid and Purgative.

Wild Melons, Pompions, Wild Gourds, etc. are said to be very Bitter, like
Coloquintida, and Cucumis Asininus. Quaere, Whether they are referible to the
Class of Bitters, or here to be placed as Sweet, and strongly Bitter Slimes?

IX. Sweet Slimy Bulbes, which seem to belong to the Sweet Grassy Class.

1. Crocus, with Fetid, Slimy, Sub-acrid Flowers; and Grassy, Sweet, Acrid,
Green, Slimy Leaves.

2. Crocus Fl. Caeruleo, is Sweet, Slimy, and Sub-acrid; the Flowers inodorous,
and the Leaves have a Grassy Smell and Taste.

3. Tulipa, it has sweetish Leaves and Stalks, with a great Slime: Ornithogalum
luteum is described as Sweetish Slimy.

X. Mucilaginous Bitterish Roots, with a Lily-Fragrant Smell in the Flowers, or
else a Fetid.

1. Lilium commune with Leaves of an Elder-smell, and fainty sweet Flower. 2.
Pseudonarcissus with the green Leaves of an Elder-smell, and Flower smelling
like Jasmin. 3. Hyacinthus Anglius, whose green Leaves smell like Elder, and
the Flowers have a Lily sweetness. 4. Hyacinthus Botroides is Slimy and Bitter
in the Root. 5. Orchis has Leaves of a Goatish Smell; and the Flowers smelling
somewhat like the Lily kind. 6. With a Fetid offensive Smell in the whole
Plant; as, Martagon, Corona Imperialis, which smells like a Fox. Frittillaria,
which is very Fetid.
XI. Mucilaginous, Bitter, Acrid, Nauseous, and Fetid Roots:

Leucoium praecox minus, Asphodelus, Ornithogalum vulgar, Scylla,
Hermodactylus.

Anglicum Colchicum is very Acrid in the Stalk, and the Root is Fetid Milky; by
its strong Acrid it vomits, and causes a Strangulation. It is used by the
Country People, in Powder, for Scald-Heads and Lice.

Helleborine and some other Orchides are Sweet, Bitter, Nauseous, Slimy, and
Acrid. Quaere, Whether white Hellebor be of this Class?

XII. Slimy, Bitterish, Sub-acrid Roots, of a Walnut Flavor, whose Flowers
smell of a mixed Smell, of Lily and Cresses:

Nymphaea fl. luteo and albo.

Quaere, Whether these may be referred to the Cress-Taste?

XIII. Mucilaginous Bitterish Leaves, with Flowers of a Fragrant Smell, and
Sub-acrid Taste.

The Violet-Roots taste Bitterish Sub-acrid, with a Violet Flavor; by which
they are Diuretic and Purgative. Quaere, Whether this ought not to be referred
to the Bitterish Acrids of a Fragrant Smell?

These are the Violet-Slimes:

Viola Martia, Tricolor, Polygala, Pinguicula.

XIV. Mucilaginous, Bitter, Sub-acrid Roots, which are Purging.

Convolvulus major, minor; Soldanella.

Bryony seems to belong to this Class, and Aristolochia, or to the Bitter.

Note, If Mucilages be only Bitterish and Sub-acrid, they may be Classed here,
or else amongst the Bitters, according to the Taste which prevails in the
Specific Juice.

XV. The Pea-Tastes, or Slimy, Sweet, Leguminous Plants.

These Plants bleed slowly upon cutting; they have Lymphaticks, from whence
their Waterishness is tasted; and they have a Sliminess in the Bladders, from
whence a sweet Liquor is digested, and an Oyliness, which is evident in the
Smell of the Flowers of that Class. The Pea-Tastes are in a state of digestion,
betwixt Mucilages and sweet Tastes; for their Taste seems to partake of both
Sweet and Slimy.

I can observe very little from these Plants; Anatomists, about the proper
Vessels of Asparagus, observe only the Lymphaticks, and the large Parenchyma;
but it is certain that there are some proper Gum Vessels or Milks, which give
the Bitter Acrid Taste in the Roots; and therefore the Pea-Taste is from the
sweet Mucilage in the Bladders. The Roughness in this Class is from the Juice
in the Bladders, as in other Classes; and the Pea-Taste in some of these
Plants, is the proper Specific Oily Juice; but in others it is higher digested
into a rancid Oil, or a Bitter Acrid Taste, which is compounded with the
Pea-Tastes.

Malpighius observes, That in cutting the Stalk of the Seed of Fermenting
Beans, Conclusi utriculi humorem fundunt Terebinthinae analogum. And he also
observes, That there are proper Vessels in Peace.

The Mucilaginous Sweet, or Pea-Taste have much of a Linseed Oily Smell in the
Flowers, or a great Fragrancy.

Gum Tragacanth is the Gum of a Leguminous Plant; and the Mucilage in this
Class is not unlike it.

The Species of the Pea-Taste, are, 1. The Mucilaginous, Sweet, or ordinary
Pea-Taste. 2. The Bean-Tastes. 3. The Rough Pea-Taste. 4. The Fumitory Bitter
Pea-Taste. 5. The Asparagus Pea-Tastes. 6. The Lily Pea-Tastes. 7. The Broom
Pea-Tastes. 8. The Fetid Pea-Taste, or the Aromatic. 9. The Acrid Pea-Taste.


I. The Mucilaginous sweet Pea-Taste:

Pisum arvense, Cicer, Lathyrus, Glycyrrhiza, Citysus pedicularis, rubra, Herba
viva.

II. Mucilaginous, Sweet, inclining to Bitter, or Bean-Taste:

Faba, Phaseolus, Lupinus, Orobus, Anthyllis leguminosa.

Trifolium Palustre tastes Sweet and Bitter, like a Bean, inclining to the
Laurel-Bitters; by its Bitter Astringency it cures Putrid Gums, and Ulcers in
the Scurvy, if it be used in Decoction or Syrup.

Trifolium Fibrinum, in Bonetus, is said by Tilingius, ipsam aloen resipere;
but by Ettmuller it is described, Saporis acris instar Piperitidis; therefore
these Authors mean different Plants by Trifolium Fibrinum.

III. The Rough Pea-Taste: Hepatica nobilis, Barba Jovis, Vicia vulgaris,
Arachus, Ornithopodium, Trifolium lupulinum, Trifolium hirsutum, Lagopoides,
Lagopus, Trifolium foliis purpureis, Trifolium siliquosum, Trifolium pratense,
Fl. albo and luteo. Herba humilis, Acacia is a leguminous Astringent.

IV. With a Bitterish, Sweet, Sub-acrid Pea-Taste in the Roots and Leaves.
Aquilegia, the Leaves have a Roughness. Consolida Regalis, Fumaria, Thalictrum.

Meadow-Rue smells Fetid, something like Rue; in the Root it is not unlike a
Dock-Bitter; in the Leaves it is Sweet and Rough.

V. With Sweet, Bitter, Acrid Roots and Berries, of a Sweet Slimy Pea-Taste, as
Asparagus and Ruscus.

VI. Sweet, Slimy, Bitterish, Sub-acrid Roots, with Berries of a Sweet, Slimy,
Acrid Pea-Taste.

Polygonatum, whose Berries are Sweet and Slimy, like the Pea-Taste, and Sweet
Sub-acrid in the Seeds, the Leaves are Rough, the Roots taste Sweet, Acrid and
Slimy: This is therefore of the Pea-Class, as well as the following: Vnifolium.

Lilium Convallium, whose Flowers are Fragrant; but the green Leaves of the
Taste and Smell of the Pea-Class.

VII. The strong Bitter Sweet Pea-Taste, with a manifest Linseed Oily Smell in
the Flowers, as Genista vulgaris and spinosa, Spartium, Genista aculeata,
Anonis, which has a Goatish Smell in the Leaves, etc. and the Roots taste like
Brom.

These are the Brom Pea-Tastes.

VIII. Bitter Sub-acrid Pea-Taste, Fetid.

1. With an Oily Smell like Linseed: Sena, Collutea, Anagyris, Foenugraecum,
Linum; Psyllium, de quo quaere.

2. With an Elder-Smell: Linaria, Antirrhinum.

IX. The strong Acrid Pea-Taste.

1. Of a Pea-Smell: Melilotus, Trifolium luteum, Galega, Pedicularis fl. flavo
and Palustris rubro.

Persicaria siliquosa is of the Pea-Class, Sweet and Acrid.

Trifolium odoratum has a mixed Smell.

Trifolium Bituminosum smells like Bitumen.

2. Of a sweet Smell in the Flowers: Jasminum, Periclymenum, Lilac, Syringa,
fl. albo, Trifolium purpureum, pratense.

Jasminum, the Leaves taste Sweet and Bitter, like the Pea-Class.

Lilac tastes Sweet and Bitter, and has Cods, whereby it is of the same
Pea-Class.

Jalap is said to be an Indian Jasmin; and there are many other Exotic purging
Legumens, as Siliqua arborea, which is of a sweet Pea-Taste, Purging. Collutea
Vesicatoria Purges. Cassia Fistula is of the Pea-Taste; the Pulp is described
to have some Aromatic Acrid, besides the sweet Acid Prune-Taste; and the Bark
is Bitter Astringent.

Tamarinds is a Siliquose-Tree, of which we use the Fruit.

The coloring Exotic Legumens are of this Class.

Lignum Nephriticum is described of the Pea-Class, and it tastes Bitterish and
Acrid, by which it is Diuretic.

Acacia tinctoria, Logwood is a Bitter, Acrid, Leguminous Tree, and the Flowers
of a sweet Odor.

Brasilea arbor is of the Pea-Taste Astringent.

Indico is also of the Pea-Class, by its Slime.

Our Native coloring Plants are also of the Pea-Class, as Yellows. I doubt
whether Woade, Ophioglossum, and Luteola ought not to be placed here.

Ophioglossum colors Oil green; it tastes Sweetish and very Acrid; it feels
Slimy being rubbed. Pinguicula colors, and is Bitterish, Slimy, and Sub-acrid.

Since there is so much Oyliness in the Plants which are of this Class, it is
most likely that the colors these produce are from their different Oily
Particles.

Curcuma has a Bitterish Acrid Slime, and Colors.

Sarsaparilla has a moderate Acrimony to cause Sweating, and also a Mealiness
to temper Humors: This seems to make it of the Pea-Class, for Mealiness is a
dried Mucilage, and many Mucilages taste Mealy.

The Third CLASS.
Of Plants of a Sweet Taste.
THe Plants of this Class have their Lympha somewhat Sweet, as in Parsneps,
which being farther digested in the Plant-Bladders, into a more Oily Juice, is
separated into the Turpentine or Oily Vessels, though those are not yet
observed by the Anatomists. In the sweet Juices of these Plants the Oil and
Acid is well digested with the Water and Earth into a smooth or pleasing
Texture: These Sweets give a small Fragrancy from the Oily Juice in their
proper Vessels. And by this degree of Fragrancy we know that the Plants Oily
Juice is but moderately digested, and is most temperate, like Sweet Tastes
themselves, which are most agreeable to Animal Humors.

Malpighius has observed in the Flowers of Corona Imperialis, Lilium Persicum,
and Digitalis, a Sweetness, like Honey. And the like I tasted in the Flowers of
Melanthium, and other Flowers; so from the like Specific Juice, Sweetness may
be produced in all Plants: And he affirms, that, Melleam hanc Substantiam non
exterius advenire, sed ex succo interius concocto provenire. Anat. Plant. p. 41.

Honey tastes Sweet, Slimy, Sub-aromatick, Sandy, and a little Rough; it may be
the Juice of Vegetables, gathered from the Globuli in the Flower.

It yields too much Acid for an Animal Juice, and no Volatile Salt like the
Animal Humors, which are not so sweet as Honey. It may be boiled into a Gum.

That Sweetness may be a Specific Juice, appears by Manna, which flows from
the Leaves of a Tree. Sarcocolla has a Sweetness, and is a Gum: And likewise
Sugar, which is the Juice of a Reed.

The Species of Sweet Tastes, are, I. Grassy Sweets, or Astringent Rush Sweets.
II. Corn Sweets, very Slimy or Mealy Sweets. III. Sub-acrid Sweets, like the
Rampions. IV. Aromatic Sweets, like Parsnep. V. Sweet Fernes. VI. Sweet
Turpentines. VII. Orris, or Fragrant Sweets. VIII. Sweets of a Fetid Smell.


1. Of a Grassy Sweetness, with a crude Astringent Taste.

Juncus vulgaris.

Equisetum which is sweetish and brackish in the Stalk, and Astringent in the
Leaves; by which it seems a Rush, which has the same brackish Sweetness.

Gramen Leucanthemum is Sweet and Rough.

Arundo, Typha.

Sparganium tastes Sweet and Rough, like a Rush.

2. Corn Sweets, which are also Slimy Seeds, with the green Leaves of a crude
Smell.

Avena, Hordeum, Triticum, Maza, Oriza, Fegopyrum, Phalangium, Lachryma Jobi.

Gramen Caninum has Sweet Slimy Roots. Galen mentions the Acrimony of Gramen
Parnassi, and attributes a little Acrid to all Grass; by which it is opening
and Diuretic. Lolium is very Acrid and Sweet, affecting the Head. Aegylops and
Phalaris are described as Acrid. Blasted Corn stinks like Carrion, and contains
a black Dust.

3. Sweet Sub-acrid Milky Plants:

Rapunculus, Campanula rotundifolia, Rapunculus Scabiosae capitulo.

Trachelium has a thick bitterish Milk.

Speculum Veneris seems of this Class.

4. Sweet Sub-acrid Astringent, and a little Aromatic, like Parsnep.

Plantago aquatica, the Flowers and Seeds taste Sweet, Hot, Aromatic, like
Parsnep: The Leaf is Sweet, Sub-acrid, of a crude Smell. Plantago aquatica
habet sal Causticum. Etmuller.

Juncus floridus, the Stalk tastes Sweet, as Rushes; the Flowers smell
Fragrant, and taste Sweet and Acrid.

Polygonum Germanicum is Sweet and Sub-acrid.

Sagittaria is of this Class.

5. Sweet Fernes being Astringent and Bitterish, Sub-acrid in the Roots: The
green Leaves smell like Tallow.

1. These are most Astringent.

Osmunda Regalis, whose Leaves smell like the snuff of a Candle. Filix mas,
Lonchitis, Asplenium.

2. These Fernes have the most Mucilage.

Filix faemina, whose Roots are very Mucilaginous.

Capillus Veneris, Adianthum album, Trichomanes.

Polypody Leaves and Roots taste Sweet, Bitter, Sub-acrid, Nauseous, and
therefore Purgative.

I did not discern the Fragrancy in dried Hart's-tongue; but Dr. Willis asserts
it.

The Roots of Polypody dried, are given for the Rickets to Children, in Powder.

6. Sweet, Bitterish, Aromatic, Acrid, like Odoriferous Turpentines.

Calamus Aromaticus, which has the Cones of Pine.

Cyperus longus, Schaenanthus.

7. Sweet Bitterishes of a burning Orris-Taste, or Fragrant Sweets, with a
Fragrant Smell and Bitterish Acrid Taste. Iris, Costus dulcis and amarus, Iris
palustris, Zinziber, Zedoaria, Galanga, Contrayerva, which is said to be
Aromatic and Acrid, like Orris.

Cardamomum is a Reed.

8. Acrid Sweets of a Fetid Smell; as,

1. Spatula foetida, which smells like Roast-Beef. 2. Poeonia, which is
Bitterish, Sweet, Fetid, and Sub-acrid. These are the Fetid Sweets.
Quaere, Whether some of this Class may not be referred to the Bitters, because
they have more Bitter than Sweet? and some a high Acrid Aromatic, and seem to
belong to that Class; as Zinziber, Galanga, Zedoaria?

The Sweetness in many of this Class, is evident only in the fresh Plants.

The Fourth CLASS.
Of Plants of a Bitter Taste.
BItter Plants, if they be Austeres, have their crude Tartareous Lympha
digested in the Plant-Bladders; and from thence is separated some little Oil,
Gum, or Milk into the Specific Vessels, which gives the Bitterness; and the
remaining Juice in the Bladders is Acerb, which being tasted with the mentioned
Bitterness, they produce an Austere Taste.

Malpighius mentions some of the Vtriculi, containing a Tartareous Stony
Matter, of the shape of a Die in Oak and Poplar, etc. from whence I may infer,
That an Acerb Liquor is contained naturally in the Bladders. Malpighius calls
the proper Specific Juice of the Oak, a Shining Gluten, which preserves its
Fibers, and makes it durable. Dr. Grew supposes it to be a Resin; but it is
most probable that this Bitterness is a Gum: for Resins have less Bitter than
Gums; and the Oak Sap is too crude to be digested into a Resin.

There is some Muciducts in Hasle and Oak, because the one bears Nuts, and the
other Acorns, which have a Slimy Milk from the Oily parts of the Plant: And the
same Mucilage is observable in all Plants which bear Fruit.

In Plumb-Tree, which is an Austere, there are Muciducts, besides the Milky Gum
Vessels.

Because the Oil and Acid in Vegetables can never be perfectly separated,
therefore there is no Astringent Plant without some Bitterness; for as the Acid
fixes on the Earth, the Oil appears and gives a Bitterness, which is separated
into the Turpentine Vessels.

The number of Vessels in Bitters may be confirmed by the Vessels in Carduus,
which is Bitter, from Milk Vessels; and Slimy, from Muciducts.

Burdock has the same Milk Vessels, and is Bitter and Slimy.

These are the Bitter Smoaky. The Smoaky taste is a sign of an imperfect Acrid;
such as is in the Oily Acid of Soot and Smoke.

All Bitters are of a higher Digestion than Sweets, because these are digested
into Bitters.

The Bitter-Sweet, as in Apple Tree Bark, seems in a middle state betwixt Sweet
and Bitters: for Sweets are not made Bitters immediately, but the Juice must
pass a gradual alteration; therefore in the Spring we taste a Sweetness in many
Bitter Barks. The Bitter-sweet may be in the same Vessels, as we find Choler
tasting of both: or else the Sweet is in the Bladders, and the Bitter in the
Gum Vessels; there are also Muciducts in these, because they bear Fruit.

In the Laurel-Bitters the Oil is less coagulate, and the Bitterness is greater
than in Austeres (where it is most coagulate by the Acerb Juice) and the
Astringency is much tempered by the Bitterness in the Laurel-Bitters; and from
the Muciducts in these, the Bark sweats a clear Watery Gum, which is a thickened
Mucilage: their Leaves are Slimy, as in most Fruit Trees, as Peaches, Cherries,
Almonds, etc. and in most Bacciferous Trees, as Mulberries, Hawthorne,
Barberries; and in the Nuciferous, as Beach, Chestnut, etc. which have Oily
Slimy Nuts.

Malpighius (Anat. Plant. p. 69.) mentions in the Pericarpium of Almonds,
Turpentine Vessels, quae secta copiosum fundunt hujusmodi succum.

In Ash there is a Laurel-Bitter, and therefore both Bitter, Gum, and Mucilage;
though these Vessels are but obscurely described by Dr. Grew, as two Rings of
round parcels of proper Vessels.

In Mulberry-Tree, Malpighius observes the Bitter Milk Vessels.

In Cherry-Tree he mentions a Red Liquor in the Fibers of the Bark.

In the Laurel-Bitter-Acrid, as Walnut, there are two Rings of special Sap
Vessels described by Dr. Grew, which are like the two Rings in Ash.

Sumach, which is a Bitterish Acrid, has Milk-Vessels, and the Milk gives the
Bitterness, and it dries into a Gum.

From these Instances it appears, That Bitterness depends on a Milky Gum, like
that in Cichory.

The Bitter Acrid Taste in Holly must depend on some Milk Vessels. Dr. Grew has
only described the Muciducts and Lymphaticks: He observes the Milk Vessels in
Dandelion to stand in a Ring; in Figgs they stand in arched parcels, and these
somewhat represent Rings; therefore I may suppose that the Rings he mentions in
Oak, Hazle, Barberry-Bark, and the arched parcels in Apples and Pear Tree are
Milk Vessels.

The Muciducts in Mallow and Elm, stand in round parcels; and therefore it is
probable that the same round parcels in Oak, Walnut, and Ash, are Muciducts:
but in some Plants, as in Holly, the Muciducts and Lymphaticks are so mixed as
to be obscure, and are less observed by the Plant-Anatomists.

I could wish we had a Cut of some Plant in each Taste; and that the several
Juices of Plants were tasted, before they observed the varieties of Vessels;
for by the Taste they might know what Juices and Vessels are to be observed in
each Plant.

Barberry is a Bitter Slimy Acrid, having a yellow Gum of that Taste, contained
in Vessels which stand in a Ring; and from that Gum, is its Purgative Virtue;
but by the Juice in the Bladders is its Astringency.

Turpentine-Bitters have large Turpentine-Vessels; the Juice in the Bladders is
Acerb, very considerably.

In Turpentines, the Oily part being separated, it leaves this Acerbity; from
whence comes the Astringency in Terebinthinate Plants.

The taste of Turpentine, is Bitter, Acrid, Gummy, or Slimy: the Acid is
loosely mixed with the Oil; and therefore it sends forth strong Effluviums for
Smells.

The Bitter-Acrid seem in a middle state betwixt Bitter and Acrids; all Acrids
arise out of Bitters.

In Wormwood Dr. Grew observes Turpentine-Vessels, which, I believe, give the
sweet Aromatic Taste to the Roots of Wormwood, and also Sap Vessels in
parcels, which are arched as the Bitter Gum-Vessels; and these give the Bitter
Taste to Wormwood Leaves: the Astringency in Wormwood is from the Juice in the
Bladders.

Plants of a Bitter-Taste are either Bitterish, or of a strong Bitter Taste;
and these Tastes are observable in Herbs, or in the Barks of Trees.

I. The first Species of Bitters are the Austeres, which are Bitterish
Astringents in the Roots of Herbs.

First, Bitterish Astringent Roots, with Crude, Astringent, and Sub-acrid
Leaves:

1. Plantago vulgaris, Quinquenervia, Coronopus vulgaris, Myosuros. 2.
Polygonum vulgar, Persicaria maculosa, Potamogeiton, and these have knobbed
Stalks. 3. Sempervivum majus, Vermicularis, Bedum arborescens, Vermicularis
frutex.
Sempervivum-Leaves are of an Acerb Taste; and the Roots taste and look like
Sorrel, and therefore may be of the same Class. There is an Acid in
Vermicularis, and it is used in Sauce, like Sorrel.

Anagallis flore luteo, and Nummularia are of the same Class, being Acerb in
Leaves; but more crude and indigested than Sorrel.

I have used the Juice of Sempervivum in Hecticks, to cool the Salts, and
Volatile Oil of the Blood.

Secondly, Sub-acrid Austeres.

1. With Acerb Leaves:

Saxifragia fl. albo, aurea, Polygonum Germanicum, Herniaria.

2. With Slimy Leaves:

Portulaca, whose Roots taste Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent, and turn
Reddish, and color the Spittle; the Stalks taste Saltish, like Sal Prunellae;
and by this Taste it it is probable they were first chose for Pickle.

Purstain-stalks taste Saltish from the mixture of two Tastes, Bitter in the
Roots, and the Acid in the Leaves. Chamomile-Flowers, and other Bitters, are
said to make a Salt Diuretic Infusion. Herba Kali is described Saporis salsi
instar urinae: but I never tasted any but the Saltness in Purslain.

Purslain is good for Spitting of Blood, both by the Slime, and the Astringency
of the Leaves; but the Root seems to be of a contrary Virtue.

Orpin is Slimy in the Leaves, and Bitterish Subacrid in the Roots, but these
are white Roots; yet is of the same Class as Purslain.

3. With a Sweet, Sub-acid, Slimy, Fragrant Fruit, having three Leaves:

Fragraria.

4. With Bitter Astringent Leaves.

1. Quinquefolium, with five Leaves. 2. Tormentilla, with seven Leaves. 3.
Argentina, with creeping silver-coloured Leaves; the Juice tastes a little like
Tansie. 4. Alchimilla, with Mallow-Leaves.
The external accidents are here noted, to show how unnecessary a large
description appears, for the distinguishing of Plants.

Thirdly, Aromatic Austeres.

1. With an Aromatic Smell, like Roses:

Rosa alba Damascena.

Rosa Canina, which has a pulpy, sweet, subacid Fruit.

Radix Rhodia smells like a Rose; and the Root tastes Bitter, Acrid, Astringent.

China-Root has an Aromatic Acrid Root, whereby it sweats.

Cistus has a Rose-Flower, and is Bitterish Astringent.

2. With an Aromatic cool Smell, like Burnet: Filipendula, Vlmaria,
Pimpinella, Sanguisorba.

Fourthly, Acerb Austeres, being Bitterish Astringent in the Root, with Acerb
Leaves; and these are the Vine-Austeres.

1. With Sweet Acerb Fruit:

Vaccinium nigrum and rubrum.

2. With Slimy Sub-acid Fruit:

Grossularia, Ribes, Vitis.

Ribes fol. nigro, it smells strongly of Turpentine, and is Diuretic; if
Infused in Wine, it gives the Rhenish-Taste.

3. With Sweet Watrish Acerb Berries, and Rough Leaves:

Rubus vulgaris, the Flowers smell like Roses.

Rubus Idaeus has Fragrant Berries, more Slimy, and less Acerb.

Austere Barks of Trees.

1. With Sweet Slimy Fruit, which contains a Stone:

Ziziphus, Sebesten.

Gum laccae grows on the Jujuba Indica; the Hepatick Virtue is from the red
color; the Insects bite the Bark, and probably give the Color and Virtue; as
the Insect in the Kermes.

2. Or Acerb and Sweet Slimy Fruit; as,

Prunus Damascena Sylvestris.

Palma is Sweet and Rough in its Fruit, but Astringent in all its other parts,
as Galen describes it.

Lotus is described Astringent in the Leaf, and of a Sweet Astringent Fruit.

3. With Sweet Slimy Berries, in which are Stones.

Pyracantha, Paliurus, Oxyacanthus.

Viburnum has Astringent Leaves, and Sweet Slimy ungrateful Berries.

Smilax is a Thorny Plant, with red Berries, like Paliurus.

4. With Acid Acerb Fruit:

Mespilus, Sorbus torminalis, Alpina.

Cornus is of an Austere Taste, with a Styptick Taste, like Medlars in the
Fruit.

The ripe Fruit of Services, is Sweet and Rough.

Rhus obsoniorum is referible to the Sorbes; the Skin of the Berries being
Acid, and the Leaves very much Astringent.

Oxyacantha with Sorrel-Leaves, it Purges.

5. With Slimy Gummy Leaves, and Astringent Cones.

Alnus vulgaris, Betula.

6. With Membranaceous Seeds, and Angular Leaves of an Austere Taste.

Acer minus, Sycamorus; which last has a great Sweetness, and the springing
Buds seem to smell like the Pea-Class.

Platanus has Rough naked Seeds.

7. With Sweet Astringent Nuts or Fruit:

1. Corylus in a Shell. 2. Staphylodendron in a Bladder. 3. Castanea in a
prickly Husk. 4. Fagus in a Rough Cup. 5. Ilex, Quercus, Suber; these are
glandiferous. Chestnuts Roasted eat Mealy and Sweet; the Raw are more Sweet and
Rough.
8. With Juli of an Austere Taste:

1. Salix latifolia, with Sorrel-tasted Leaves. 2. Salix angustissimo and
longissimo folio, have Austere Tastes in the Leaves.
Spinea Theophrasti is a Willow.

The Catkins of Withy smell sweet at first; but by much rubbing, very strong
and Bituminous. In hac arbore pinguis quidom humor crescit Terebinthinae non
absimilis; nam ex salicis serratura humida vernix confici solet. Goedartius de
Insectis.

9. With a Pulpy-sweet Fruit, and a Bitter-sweet Taste in the Bark.

Malus hortensis, sylvestris.

Apples have their different Tastes from one another, according to the
different mixtures of Sweet and Acid; and so have Pears: The Seeds of Apples,
Pears, and Plumbs, are of the Laurel-Bitter.

10. With a Pulpy-sweet Fruit, having a Stoniness in the middle:

Pyrus.

11. With a very hard, acerb, fragrant Fruit:

Malus Cotonea.

The fresh Buds of Quince-Tree taste Acrid, and smell like the Laurel-Bitters;
which, with the Fragrancy, may refer them to that Class.

12. With slimy Leaves, and fetid, sweet, slimy, fub-acid Berries.

Morus, whose Bark is Acrid, and it is Juliferous.

Plants of a stronger Bitter Taste, whose Species are,

1. Laurel-Bitters. 2. Smoaky-Bitters. 3. Bitter-Acrids Aromatic. 4.
Bitter-Acrid of a milder Taste. 5. Elder-Bitters, or Bitter Slimy. 6.
Dock-Bitters. 7. Hemp-Bitters. 8. Turpentine-Bitters. 9. Dead-Nettle-Bitters.
10. Bitter-sweet Barks and Herbs.
The Species of Bitters I have mentioned, are all Austeres; as,

First, Austere Herbs;

1. The Crude. 2. The Sub-acrid. 3. The Aromatic. 4. The Acerb, or
Vine-Austere.
Secondly, Austere Barks, which are sub-distinguished by the Taste of the
Leaves or Fruit, or some compound Taste, as I have mentioned above.

II. Plants of a strong Bitter Taste, with an Astringency or Laurel-Bitters,
which have a Taste of a Laurel-Leaf, which is the Taste of a Kernel of a Peach,
or like it in the Bark or Leaves.

I. With Bitterish Acerb Berries; this, in the first Buds, smells like a
Peach-Kernel.

In Cornus faemina, the Flowers are Fragrant, the Bark Fetid, the Berries
Acerb, Bitter, Sweet, Nauseous.

II. With Cherries of a sweet, slimy, sub-acid Taste, or bitterish: Cherries
have different Mixtures of Acerb and Sweet, and Sub-acid or Slimy.

Laurus Cerasus has a slimy sweet Fruit.

Cerasus fructu nigro and rubro.

Cerasus avium racemosa.

Myrobalanes have an Acidity with a little Acrimony.

III. With bitterish and nauseous sweet slimy Berries, and little Leaves of a
Laurel-Taste.

Ligustrum, Philyrea, Alaternus.

Lignum Colubrinum is said to be Bitter, like a Peach-Leaf, with Berries, like
Elder: It is used against Fevers and Poisons, by that Taste.

IV. With fragrant Leaves and Flowers.

1. Gelseminum Indicum fl. flavo. 2. Laurus, whose Berries are Bitter, Acrid,
Aromatic.
The Clove-Tree is described with Laurel-Leaves; and our Bays has the smell of
Cloves.

Cinnamon-Tree has Leaves and Berries like Laurel.

Lignum Sassaphras has a Laurel-Leaf, and is Bacciferous.

Piper Jamaicensis has the relish of Cloves.

3. Myrtus, with bitterish, astringent, sub-acrid Berries.

Myrtus Brabantica with a Myrtle-smell, and Myrtle-leaves, but more Bitter: It
has the Juli of Willow; the Seeds are observed to smell like Stoechas.

4. Salix odorata with Willow-leaves; the Leaves, when young, are very
Fragrant; and, if long rubbed, they smell like Laurel.

Vitex must be placed with sweet Gaul.

A Fragrant and a Terebinthinate Smell are observed in the Blossoms of many
Trees: The Juice of the Plant being kept close all Winter, becomes more Vinous,
Odoriferous, and higher Digested; like the Juice of Grapes, and other Liquors
bottled up; and therefore the Blossoms of Trees have an odoriferous Smell,
which depends on the Oil of Plants well digested.

Most Aromatic Trees are of this Class; as Benzoinum is the Resin of a Tree
with Citron-leaves.

Tacamahac is Bitterish Aromatic; this and Caranna are of the
Laurel-Aromaticks.

5. Thea is a Bacciferous Frutex; the Berries Bitter-sweet; the Leaves
Bitterish, Aromatic, and Sub-acrid, whereby they are Cephalic; the Berries
are nauseous and very hot.

V. With fragrant Fruit, whose Pills are Bitterish, or Sweet Aromatic, and the
Pulp Acid.

1. Malus Citria, whose Pill is Sweetish Aromatic, and the Pulp sweet Acids.

2. Malus Limonia is more Acid in the Fruit, and more Bitter and Acrid in the
Pill than Citrons.

3. Malus Aurantia has a Pill of the greatest Bitterness, but of the same
Aromatic Acrid as the former.

4. Malus Granata has either Sweet, Vinous, or Acid Fruit, with a Pill, having
some Stypticity; and the Leaves have a mixed Smell of Fetid and Aromatic.

VI. With Oily Nuts, Sweet or Bitter:

Amygdalus amara or dulcis; Almonds have a Watery Gum, and the sweet Almonds
have some Bitterness.

Palma Indica nucifera; the Coker-Nut tastes Bitterish, Sweet, Oily, and a
little Fetid; the Fruit yields Oil, Vinegar, Milk, and Sugar.

VII. With sweet Nuts and acrid Barks:

1. Juglans, whose Leaves smell and look like Laurel.

2. Ilex glandifera, whose Bark tastes Bitterish, Acrid, and Astringent; the
Leaves are of a Laurel-greenness, and the Acorn is Sweet.

Some of this Tree was sent to me by my Ingenious Friend Mr. George Anthrobus
of Tameworth, who has tasted many Plants with me.

VIII. With Barks of a Bitter Acrid Laurel-Taste, with Berries.

1. Agrifolium, whose Red Berries taste Sweet, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Slimy, and
the Leaf has a Laurel-Bitterness. This is our English Laurel.

2. Viscus, which tastes like the Laurel-Bitters, and it grows out of other
Trees; the Berries are Slimy and Acrid.

IX. Plants of a Laurel taste Acrid.

Clematis daphnoides, whose Root is Bitter-Acrid: And this clasps about other
Plants.

Pyrola is said to be Bitter-Astringent.

X. With Acrid Gums, or Milk.

1. Guaiacum has Laurel-leaves; it is said to be somewhat Fetid, but the Gum
tastes Acrid, and smells somewhat Sweet in Burning. The Bark of Guaiacum seems
to resemble the Bitterness of Box.

2. Draco arbor is a Laurel-Acrid; the Gum tastes Acrid as well as Gummy; by
which it is good for those Haemorrhages which come from Obstructions: It
dissolves in Water and Oil, and melts at the Fire, as Resins do.

3. Rhus Virginiana has any Acrid Milk, the Milk dries into a Gum: It seems a
Laurel-Bitter Acrid.

XI. With a strong Foetor in the Leaves:

1. Buxus which is a Laurel-Bitter, and Bacciferous: The Foetor makes it a
Narcotick.

2. Hedera arborea whose Leaves smell Oily Fetid; and the Berries are Sweet,
Acrid, Aromatic, Slimy, and Bitter; the Berries are Diuretic, Sudorifick, and
Purgative.

Coffee; the Berries are Bitterish, Nauseous; the Skin of them Sub-acid and
Rough; the Kernel Bitterish and Hot; the Leaves are perpetuo virentes: by this
description of Mr. Ray's, it appears to be a Laurel-Bitter; the Acrimony
hinders Sleep, and makes Coffee Diuretic. Quaere, Whether Ivy-Berries, or
Juniper Berries would not make good Coffee?

XII. With a crude Smell in the Leaves.

Oleander with long Laurel-Leaves, and a Nauseous Taste: This is Siliquose, and
referible to Apocynum.

XIII. With a large Watery Pulpy Fruit, whose Kernel is of a Peach-Bitter Taste;
as also the Bark of the Tree.

Persica, Nucipersica, these have a Vinous Taste, a little Bitterish.

XIV. With Juli, of a Laurel-Bitter Taste: Populus alba, nigra, Lybica, alba
foliis minoribus. Salix folio Amygdalino.

The Catkins of the Asp taste like the Bark.

Populus Lybica is fragrant in the Buds, if rubbed.

The Buds of Poplar have a yellow, fat, resinous Juice, from whence they have
their Virtue.

Quinquina is described by Mr. Ray, to have the Leaves Prunorum rubrorum; the
Flower of Tunicae; the fresh Bark is a little Purging, like the Bark of
Cherries, Peaches, Almonds, which purge, and resemble the Taste of Quinquina.
The Chelsy-Tree is not the Quinquina, because it tastes Terebinthinate, and not
of the Laurel-Bitter, like Quinquina: And in this I have Mr. Wats's concurrent
Opinion.

XV. With Bitter Acrid Seeds in Keys: Fraxinus.

XVI. With an Oily Fruit:

Ripe Olives are Black, Acrid, Bitter, and Nauseous; the Leaves of Olives are
Bitter Acrid; the Oil is the Mucilaginous Juice, observable in Laurel-Bitters;
the Amurca is Bitterish.

II. Smoaky Bitters.

1. Watery Bitters, Smoaky, Sub-acrid, and Milky. Dandelion, whose Roots taste
Sub-acrid; and therefore like Choler by the Bitter and Acrimony.

Sonchus, Cichoreum, Endivia, Scorzonera, whose Roots dried taste Slimy and
very Acrid, by which they sweat. I could not taste it in the fresh Roots.

Tragopogon belongs to the same Class.

2. Smoaky Bitter Astringents:

Hieraceum vulgar, Pilosella, Chondrilla, Pulmonaria Gallorum, Lampsana.

3. Bitter, Slimy, and Smoaky:

Carduus vulgaris, Mariae, benedictus, lanceatus, Dipsacus, Bardana, Carthamus,
Branca ursina.

The Roots of Burdock have a Bitterness like Soot, which I call a
Smoaky-Bitter; the Leaves are much bitterer.

4. Bitter, Astringent, Sub-acrid, Smoaky:

Jacea, Stoebe, Cyanus.

Serratula.

Scabiosa succisa.

5. Bitter, Sweet, Astringent, Smoaky, with Slimy Leaves, a little Fragrant,
like Parsnep.

Bellis major, it tastes Bitterish besides the Sweet; and therefore of the same
Class as Jacobaea.

Jacobaea, Centaurium majus, Erigerum majus, Tomentosum, Tussilago.

6. Bitter Acrid with a mixed Smell of Aromatic and unpleasant; as

Carlina.

III. Wormwood-Bitters, or Aromatick-Bitters, Sub-acrid, Astringent, of a
Sea-Wormwood Smell, or mixed unpleasant Smell.

Absinthium commune, Romanum, Seriphium, Santonicum, Gnaphalium, Polium
montanum.

Tanacetum, Millefolium, Ageratum, Ptarmica, Chamaemelum, Buphthalmum, Cotula,
which is Fetid.

Artemisia, Matricaria, Abrotanum mas and foemina.

By the resemblance of Smell and Taste, Millefoil, Chamomel, Bupthalmum,
Cotula, are Wormwoods.

Tansie smells not unlike Matricaria.

And Balsamita smells like Tansie, with a Balsam Smell; and it has a Wormwood
Bitter, Acrid, Astringent Taste.

IV. Madder-Bitters, being Bitter, Sub-acrid, Astringent.

Gallium, Mollugo, Asperula, which is very Fragrant; and Gallium has some
Sweetness.

Aparine, Cruciata, Rubia, Anchusa.

Celandine seems to be a Madder by its Bitterness, and color of the Root; but
it has too much Acrid.

Rubia colors the Urine Red, as Gerard observed, all coloring Plants have
Oleose Acrid Particles, which act on the coloring Particles in Animal Humors;
such is Choler, and the red part of the Blood; therefore they are accounted
Hepatick; and because they are Acrid, they are Diuretic.

V. Dock-Bitters, or Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid, Astringent in the Root.

1. With Acerb Watery Leaves:

Lapathum vulgar, acutum, Rhabarbarum verum, Ponticum and Monachorum, Lapathum
rubrum.

2. With Sorrel-Leaves more Acid:

Acetosa vulgaris, Lanceolata, rotundifolia, Acetosella.

3. With Acerb Leaves, and very Astringent Roots:

Bistorta, Hydrolapathum.

VI. Hemp-Bitters, with Bitter, Acrid, Aromatic Leaves, with a strong heady
Smell. The Hemp-Taste is in the Root most; the Agrimony smells most in the
Leaves; the Roots are Sweet.

There is a Stinging Taste in common Hemp.

Cannabis, Eupatorium Cannabinum, Eupator fl. flave.

Agrimonia vulgaris has but little of the Hemp-Taste in the Root; as Eupatorium
Cannabinum has.

Eupatorium fl. luteo smells Sweet like Parsnep, and is of a Bitter-Acrid
Taste. Eupatorium Cannabinum smells like it, but stronger.

Marrubium aquaticum smells like Agrimony.

VII. Elder-Bitters, being Bitter, Acrid, Mucilaginous Purgers.

Sambucus vulgaris, and aquatica, Ebulus, Euonymus Theophrasti.

VIII. Bitter, Sweet, Sub-acrid Tastes.

1. Of a little Bitterness, with a low degree of the Clove-Smell in the Flower,
but crude green Leaves.

Lychnis fl. albo, rubro, viscosa, Calcedonica, Behen album.

Paronychia fol. rutaceis has a Bitterish Sweet Roughness, and a Flower like
Lychnis, and it feels viscous.

Lychnis sylvestris, Calcedonica, Behen album, have all a Bitterish Acrid in
the Roots.

Lychnis viscosa is Bitterish, Astringent, Slimy in the Leaves, and Sub-acrid
in the Stalk, which feels Gummy.

Lychnis segetum is Bitter Acrid in the Seed.

Lysimachia purpurea spicata tastes Bitterish and Sweet in the Cups of the
Flowers (the Flowers rubbed smell of Codlings) and Roots, but Slimy in the
Leaves; for which reason I think it a Lychnis, or else a Prunella.

2. Of a very Nauseous, Bitter, Sweet Taste, with a Clove-Smell in the Flower.

Armerius pratensis, Armerius, Saponaria.

Or without any Clove-Smell nauseously Bitter Sweet.

Centaurium, Gentiana, Gentianella.

Scrophularia, Digitalis, which have a Bitter Sweetness in the Flowers, and in
the green Leaves a smell of Elder.

Cynocrambe in the Root is Sweet, and Bitterish Sub-acrid, of an Elder-Smell.
Quaere, Whether of the same Class? The Leaves boiled, and taken inwardly, purge
strongly.

3. Of a strong Aromatic Smell, like Cloves:

Caryophyllus, Caryophyllata, Lychnis, Coronaria, in the Root is like Cloves.

IX. Species of strong Bitters, is Turpentine-Bitters.

First, Bitter-Astringent, with a Turpentine-Smell.

1. Plain Turpentine-Trees:

Abies, Pinus, Picea, Lentiscus, Cupressus, Terebinthus, Pistachia.

Larix, Taxus is a crude Turpentine-Tree.

Venice-Turpentine is from the Larix, Cyprian from the Terebinthus.

Burgundy-Pitch is the Resina Picea; the common Turpentine from Pinus Montana.

Lamp-black is, Fuligo resinae aut picis concrematae.

Sarcocolla is a Gum, Ex arbore Thurifera, which is a Pine.

Frankincense is a Firre-Resin; Manna thuris is the Powder of it.

The Myrrhe-Tree is like Lentiscus; Stacte is a Liquid Myrrh: Myrrh is Bitter,
Sub-acrid and Gummy.

Bdellium smells pleasant, like Myrrh, and is the Gum of a Tree.

2. Turpentine-Herbs very Styptick:

Hypericum, Ascyrum, Androsaemum, Perfoliata, Bupleurum.

Secondly, Bitter Astringent Turpentines, with an Aromatic Smell.

Lignum Aloes, which is Bitterish, Astringent, and Acrid; by which it is a
Cordial.

Lignum Rhodium is like the Laurel-Class.

Santala they are Aromatic, Bitterish, Astringent, and Sub-acrid, of a
Rose-Smell; the Leaves are described like the Mastick-Tree.

Opobalsamum is the Turpentine of the Balsam-Tree.

Carpobalsamum is the Seeds of Terebinthus.

Xylobalsamum the Wood of the Balsam-Tree.

Balsamum Capaivae tastes Bitterish-Terebinthinate, with a smell of Lignum
Rhodium.

Styrax sicca is a Gum-Resin of an excellent Scent; the Tree has a Resinous,
Acrid, Oily Nut.

Terebinthus is Bacciferous, and has Laurel-Leaves, which shows the similitude
of Nature betwixt Laurel-Bitters and Turpentines.

Turpentine in Plants is of a pale, a reddish, a yellow, and a purple Color.

Juniperus whose Berries make the Urine smell of Turpentine.

Cistus ladanifera, Botrys, Sanicula.

Cedrus Virginiana is of an Acrid burning quality, Odoriferous.

Styrax, Nux Moschata; Mace is the Skin covering Nutmegs; the Nutmeg-Tree is
described as a Laurel.

Thirdly, Fetid Turpentines.

1. Fetid mixed with a smell of Turpentine in Trees and Leaves.

Sabina, Arbor vitae.

Fetid mixed with a smell of Turpentine in the Roots.

Nardus Celtica, Indica, Asarum, Valeriana, Serpentaria Virginiana.

Camphora is described like Juniper, it is a natural Sal Volatile Oleosum cut
out of the Tree.

Fourthly, Bitterish Acrid Leaves and Flowers of a Smell of Fetid Turpentines.

Flos Africanus, Calendula, Chrysanthenum segetum.

Fifthly, Bitterish, Acrid, Astringent, Terebinthinate, Sub-aromatick Plants.

Consolida Saracenica, Virga aurea, which is very Acrid; by which it is
Diuretic. Herba Doria, Stoechas Citrina. Quaere.

Conyza caerulea, acris; the Conyza media, in the Roots smells of Turpentine.

Enula Campana evidently tastes of Turpentine in the Root; by which it is
Pectoral and Diuretic. Dr. Grew observed a Citrin-Balsam in Enula.

Flos Solis, if it be broke, smells of Turpentine, and it sweats it forth in
the middle of the Flowers; which colors the Fingers Purple.

Lappa minor is of the same Class.

Aster serotinus fruticescens savours of Turpentine.

Malabathri folium is Canellae folium, tasting like Spikenard, and of the same
Virtue.

Sixthly, Bitterish Astringent, with a Musk, or Terebinthinate Smell.

Geranium Robertianum, Batracoides, Geranium Moschatum, Columbinum.

Some Geraniums have little Smell.

X. Species of Bitters.

Dead-Nettle Bitters being Bitterish Astringent.

First, With a smell of Fetid, such as is in Dead-Nettle.

Secondly, Bitterish Astringent.

1. With a Sliminess in the Leaves:

Lamium fl. albo, rubro, flavo, Syderitis, Panax Coloni.

2. Fetid Resinous:

Hedera terrestris, Morsus gallinae, Galeopsis.

3. With a Lamium Smell, and mixture of Aromatic Resin:

Ladanum segetum, Betonica, Horminum, Sclarea, Melissophyllum.

4. In which there is a high degree of the Bitter Acrid:

Ballote, Marrubium, Cardiaca, Scorodonia, Chamaedrys, Teucrium, Stachys,
Lupulus, Scordium.

XI. Bitterish Astringents agreeing with the Lamium in Taste, and of the same
Vulnerary quality; but the Lamium-Smell is wanting.

Verbena, Bugula, Euphrasia, which tastes like Vervain, and has no considerable
Smell; it has therefore the same Cephalic Virtue as Vervain, which seems to be
a Lamium.

Alsine Veronicae facie, Veronica, Prunella, which, by its Bitterish Astringent
Root, is a Veronica, Crateogonum, Cuscuta.

Verbascum is a Lamium by its Bitter, which is like Murrubium; the Roots taste
Bitter-Acrid; the Flower smells a little Sweet.

Quaere, Whether Tapsus barbatus be a Lamium by its Bitter Astringency? it has
the same Nauseous Bitter Astringency as the common Verbascum, which is not
unlike the Vervain-Bitter.

Digitalis seems to come near to the Mullein Bitterness, as I perceived by
tasting the Root.

Scrophularia, Betonica aquatica, seem Lamiums by the Flower, and the
squareness of the Stalk, by the Bitter Astringency; but they have the Fetid
Smell of Elder, not Dead-Nettle.

These may therefore be placed as Bitter Astringents with a Fetid Smell:

Verbascum, Tapsus, Digitalis, Scrophularia, Betonica aquatica, and Cynocrambe.

XII. Strong Bitter Sweet Tastes in the Bark and Berries, being Purgers.

Rhamnus catharcticus, whose Bark is very Acrid or burning in chewing.

Alnus nigra baccifera of the same Taste and Virtue.

XIII. Herbs of a bitter, sweet, slimy, sub-acrid Taste, and Purging.

Aloes: Quaere, Whether this is referrible to the Grasses; it is Astringent in
the Leaves.

Gratiola, Lysimachia galericulata. Quaere, Whether these be not referible to
the Lychnis Bitter-Sweets.

The Fifth CLASS.
Of Aromatic Plants.
PLants of an Aromatic Taste, are either Sweet-Aromaticks, or
Bitterish-Aromaticks. There are some Aromaticks both Bitterish and Sweet; and
there are also mixed Smells of Aromatic and Fetids.

The Sweet-Aromaticks have their Sweetness from the Juice in the Bladders,
which is of a smooth Oily Nature; but their Acrid-Aromatick from a Milk; which,
in Fennil, may be dried into an Oily Balsam, in which is a Volatile Salt mixed
with the Oil: And hence all the Aromaticks are Acrid, and Hot in Taste. All the
Umbelliferous Plants are Milky; and in Angelica the Milk dried looks like
Blood-clutters; which is observed by Dr. Grew.

The digestion is higher in the Bitterish Aromatic than in the Sweet, which I
call of the Fennil-Class, because that is most known; and a savor of it is
observable throughout that Class: boiled Fennil-Roots savor of Parsneps.

The Oily Salt is spread through the whole Plant, and gives the same Taste to
each part: This also produces the Effluviums which affect the Smell and Taste.

In the Bitterish-Aromatick, as Rosemary and Lavender, the Balsamic Turpentine
is like a Resin, which gives the Bitterish Acrid Taste, and is lodged in Oily
Vessels; but an Astringency is in the Bladders.

In the Aromaticks of a mixed Smell, the Oily Juices are highest digested.

First, Sweet Acrid Aromaticks.

1. Of a Parsnep-Smell:

Pastinaca latifolia, tenuifolia, Aquatica, Sisarum, Sium, Sison, Oenanthe
aquatica.

Ballatis, Sisarum Peruvianum, whose Roots taste Sweet and Mealy, Slimy, and so
fit for Food; the Flowers and Leaves smell Fragrant, like a Parsnep.

Daucus, Pimpinella, Saxifrago major, minor.

Or of a mixed Smell of Parsnep, with Fetid:

Sphondylium, Cicutaria vulgaris.

2. Of a Fennil-Smell Aromatic:

Foeniculum, Anethum, Dracunculus hortensis, Anisum, Carum, Crithmum, lignum
Sassaphras, by the taste is of this Class.

Or of a Fennil-Smell mixed with Fetid.

Peucedanum has a Sulphur-Smell.

Ferula, Panax, Libanotis, Cuminum, Meum, Coriandrum, Ammi, Levisticum, Siler
montanum, which smells like Lovage, and tastes Acrid: by the Taste and Smell
arising from a Volatile Salt and Oil, these are Vterines, as Strong, Fetid,
Diuretic, Pectoral, and Carminative; as all other of this Class are.

3. Of a Parsley-Smell.

Caucalis, Petroselinum Macedonicum and Sativum, Bulbocastanum, Smyrnium,
Percepier, Hipposelinum, Opium, and the last has a strongness or Fetid.

4. Of a Chervil-Smell:

Chaerefolium, Pecten Veneris, Gingidium, which is described Bitter-Aromatick.

Seseli Hartwort of Candy, smells like Chervil; as Gerard affirms.

Of a mixed Smell of Chervil and Fetid:

Myrrbis Sylvestris Seminibus asperis.

5. Of a Sweet, Aromatic, Acrid, Astringent Taste, as Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea,
but these I have placed with the Laurel-Aromaticks; but by the Taste they are
of this Class.

6. Of a Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, Aromatic Taste, with the Smell of Angelica.

Angelica hortensis, Imperatoria, Herba Gerardi, Petasitis, which sweats out a
Balsam, instar Balsami Capaivae.

7. Sweet Acrid Aromatic in a very high degree: Cubebae, Cardamomum.

Amomum is reckoned like Cardamomum or Acorus.

To this Class the Aromaticks in the Sweet Tastes are most properly referible.

Secondly, Species of Aromaticks are Bitterish, Acrid Aromaticks,
Sub-astringent.

1. Of a Mint-Smell pure or mixed:

Mentha spicata, Calamintha, Mentha crispa, Mentastrum, Sisymbrium.

Fetid mixed with a Mint-Smell:

Nepeta, Dictamnus, Pulegium.

2. Of a Smell of Citron:

Melissa, Ocymum.

3. Of a Marjoram-Smell:

Marum Syriacum, Origanum, Majorana, Clinopodium, Acinos.

4. Of a Sweet Resinous Smell:

Rosmarinus, Lavendula, Stoechas Arabica.

Thymus, Serpillum, Epithymum.

Of a mixed Smell with Fetid:

Hyssopus, Satureia.

5. Of a very great Acrimony:

Zinziber, Galanga, Acorus.

Vide, The Class of Sweet Tastes, where they are placed more by their external
similitude to the rest of that Class; but must here be placed by the Taste.
Cortex Winteranus is referible to the Laurel-Bitters.

Of a mixed Smell:

Zedoaria, Camphora.

Vide, Bitter Astringent with a Burnet-Smell.

Bitter Sweet Astringent with a Clove-Smell.

Laurel-Bitters Aromatic.

Terebinthinates Aromatic.

Aromatic Austeres.

I generally find the Roots of Bitterish Aromatic Plants to be only Bitterish
Astringent; the Aromatic is more evident in the Leaves, as in Balm, Marjoram,
Clary, Sage.

The Roots of Mint taste not so Acrid and Aromatic as the Leaves; therefore
the Juices are higher digested than in the Root, which taste only Bitterish
Astringent; and the Acrid Aromatic is produced from the Bitter of the Root.

I compared the Taste of Mint, which had been long kept growing in Water, with
fresh Mint; it was not so strong in Taste and Smell as the fresh Sprig got out
from the Garden; there was some difference, but not much.

The growing of Herbs from Water, shows that Water is no pure Element, but a
compounded Body, having some mixture of Oily, Acid, and Earthy Particles, which
are contained under the form of Water, and nourish both Plants and Fish. Water
long kept tastes Acid, and is Fetid, which are sensible proofs of an Oil and
Acid dissolved in it.

In many Bitters, as the Smoaky, the Roots taste stronger than the Leaves,
because of the greater plenty of the Bitter Milk Vessels; but in the Leaves
there are the same Milk Vessels; and besides them, in the Bladders of the
Leaves, is contained a crude slimy Juice, which is not capable of any farther
digestion by the heat of the Sun; and hence it is that the Leaf tastes most of
that crude slimy Juice, with a mixture of Bitter, from the Milky Bitter Gum in
the Specific Vessels.

The Root of St. John's-wort, tastes Bitterish Astringent, with a lower savor
of Turpentine than in the Leaves; in which the Oily Juice is more exalted and
Volatilized, and smells more of Turpentine.

The Wormwood-Bitters, as Feaverfew, Mugwort, Chamomile, have less Bitter in
the Roots than in the Leaves; they have a sweetness like the Root of Wormwood,
which sweetness is digested in a bitterness in the Leaves.

The Sixth CLASS.
Of Fetids.
I Find that the Fetids will not easily be distinguished from the Aromaticks,
because of the likeness of the Plants in Figure and Taste, of Sweet or Bitter;
and the mixed Smells of Fetid and Aromatic are to be placed in the same Class.

I mentioned many Fetids which are placed in other Classes, by other remarkable
Tastes, with which they are joined; as,

1. The Fetid Earthy-Tastes.

2. The Fetid Rank Oily in the Pea-Class.

3. Fetids of a Lamium-Smell.

4. Elder-Fetids.

5. Terebinthinate-Fetids.

6. The Laurel-Fetids.

7. The Sweet-Fetids.

But these Fetids will be mentioned in the following Classes.

8. The Garlick-Fetids.

9. The Cress-Fetids.

10. The Corrosive-Fetids, Venomous Plants.

I shall here only mention the Narcotick-Fetids, which are Mucilaginous: To
which I will add the strong heady Opiates; though rather Aromatic than Fetid.

The strong Aromaticks have a nature inclining to Fetid, and something mixed of
both in their smells; and they are accounted something Soporiferous.

1. Fetids with Mucilaginous Leaves, with a mixed Smell of Aromatic and Fetid,
being Opiate, and very heady, bearing Fruit.

Mala insana, Syriaca.

Mandragoras has an Aromatic Fruit; and the Bark smells Narcotick.

Pomum amoris, Flos Africanus.

2. Mucilaginous Leaves, with Bitter Acrid Roots of a sweet heady offensive
Smell.

Auricula Vrsi, Primula veris.

3. Mucilaginous Bitterish Leaves, with Bitter, Acrid, Milky Roots, of a Poppy
Fetid Smell.

Lactuca hortensis, sylvestris, Lactuca agnina.

Papaver rhoeas, Papaver hortense, Argemone.

4. Mucilaginous Bitterish of a Solanum Fetid Smell: Solanum lignosum, Amomum
Plinii, Mirabilis Peruviana, Solanum lethale, Herba Paris, Circaea, Asclepias,
Tabaco, Hyoscyamus.

5. With a Fusty Smell, like Mouse-Turds: Lithospermum.

Cynoglossum, whose Roots have a Sweet Slimy Pea-Taste. Quaere, Whether
referible to that Class.

Nux Vomica smells like Opiates Fetid, and is of a Bitter Slimy Taste; it cause
Trembling, Convulsions, and Shortness of Breath; these Symptoms depend on the
Poisoned Spirits; for I find no alteration in the Stomach of a Dog poisoned by
it, or the Solanums.

Coculus Indi is very Bitter and Acrid, and a Narcotick; by which it offends
Insects and Lice.

Opiates have a great Slime in the Bladders, and a Bitter, Acrid, Fetid Gum or
Milk, like Opium, which is their Oily Juice; and therefore by the Gummy,
Bitter, Acrid, Fetid they must be Classed, and not by the Slime; by reason
whereof, the Ancients esteemed Opiates Cool; though the Foetor and Acrimony show
them to be Hot Plants.

Opiates yield much Oil by distillation; i. of Opium yields ss. of Oil, iii. of
Earth, i. of Water.

lbi. of Poppy-Seeds yields ix. of Oil, of Water, and Earth ana iii. in a
distillation, in Sand, as Bonetus mentions.

The Narcotick Faculty lies in the Foetor, which depends on the Volatile Oil;
which being Fetid, like the Animal Spirits, it acts on them, and is offensive
to them, being too much Fetid for them; it extinguishes their Lucidity, as a
Candle is put out by the Fumes in Mines, or the Fumes of strong Liquors in
Cellars; or else the Mucilage passing into the Nerves, with the Fetid
Particles, it may clog the motion of Spirits, and produce a Stupor, by
obstructing the Nerves.

The Seventh CLASS.
Of Plants of an Acrid or Cress-Taste, which are Bitterish or Sweet, and
Pungent Acrid.
ACrid Plants have a great deal of Volatile Salt Pungent, from some Bitter
Watery Gum in its Oily Vessels; this Gum is both Bitterish and Pungent. The
Bladders in Horseradish- Roots give a Sweetness, which is digested into a
Bitterness with Acrimony, which may resemble the Gum of Bdellium, which tastes
Bitter Acrid; and Celandine, which is of this Class, bleeds a Bitter Acrid Milk.

Malpighius observes in the description of Onions, That the Specific Vessels
being cut, Ichorem quasi lac fundunt.

We want Cuts of this Taste, more than any, to describe their Milky Gum-Vessels.

If Plants were described according to their several Tastes, by the Classes, I
would advise it to be done by a slice of the Stalk, where the Specific Vessels
appear best, because the Bladders are least; for when I have doubted of the
Oily Tastes, I have found them evident in the Stalk, where I have perceived an
Acrid which could not be tasted in the Root or Leaves, as in Chelidonium minus.

The Oily Balsams may be always tasted in the Seeds of Plants.

The Acrid Salt is tempered by the Oil in Aromaticks; but it is more Pungent in
Acrids, where there is less Oil.

I suppose the Acrid Salt has some pointed Figure like other Volatile Salt.

All Salts are compounded of Oil, Acid, and Earth; but this Pungency in Plants
seems to be the Oil and Acid of Plants only: and because of its want of Earth,
or sufficient Acid, does not taste Salt.

This Composition of Oil and Acid in Plants, spends the Oil of Plants, and
turns it into another Taste, and a long Figure, on which the Pungency depends;
and the quick pungent Smell, different from the Smells of Resins and
Turpentines.

The Pungency in Choler is the ground of the Animal Salt; and if Acrid Plants,
as Woad be putrefied, it yields a Volatile Urinous Salt: The Pungency therefore
in Plants is the Embryo of a Volatile Salt, and may be esteemed an imperfect
Salt, wanting either the Acid part or Earthy to give it a Saltness; as the Acid
of digested Meat gives a Saltness to Cholers Acrid; so, by Putrefaction, a
Volatile Acid is produced to give a Saltness to the Pungency of Plants.

The Species of Acrids may be the Aromatick-Acrid, the Cress-Acrid, and the
Corrosive; but I think fit to make distinct Classes of these.

The Species of Cress-Acrids; are, 1. The Fragrant-Cresses. 2. Pure
Cress-Acrids. 3. The Colouring-Cresses. 4. The Sweetish-Cresses. 5.
Fetid-Cresses. 6. Pepper-Cresses. 7. Garlick-Cresses. 8. Garlic Slimy-Acrids.
9. Gummy-Acrids.


1. Acrid Tastes, with Mucilaginous Leaves and Fragrant Flowers, and Bitter
Acrid Seeds:

Leucoium sativum, luteum, Viola lunaria, Hesperis, Lysimachia siliquosa,
Thlaspi Creticum.

2. With a Cress Pungent Smell, without any Aromatic:

Erysimum, Barbarea, Nasturtium aquaticum, hortense, Cardamine, Paronychia
vulgaris, Cochlearia, Bursa pastoris, Nasturtium Indicum, Sinapi, Draba,
Iberis, Rapistrum, Turritis, Myagrum, Coronopus Ruellii.

3. Bitter, Acrid, Slimy, Coloring Plants:

Luteola, Glastum, Ophioglossum.

Chelidonium majus, the Bitterness is like the Madders, but the first seem to
be of the Pea-Class.

4. Acrid joined with a Sweetness in the Leaves or Roots, besides the
Bitterishness.

Rapum, Rhaphanus, Brassica vulgaris, and multiflora.

Vrtica has Sweet Acrid Roots.

Nettle-Juice tastes Bitterish, like Cresses, and is Diuretic like them, and
Acrid.

5. Acrid, Bitter, and Fetid:

Eruca, Sophia Chirurgorum, Ruta, Fraxinella, which smells like Ruta, upon
rubbing. Gerard supposes it to be called Tragium, from its smell of a Goat.

I refer Rue to this Class, by its Acrimony, and similitude of Figure to the
Cresses.

The Seeds of Fraxinella grow in Cods; and by its Bitter-Acrid I have placed it
here. Fraxinella has a sort of Turpentine Fragrancy at first, but upon rubbing,
a Rue-Smell.

Dentaria is described, by Mr. Ray, to be Gustu fervido. Gerard describes it of
an unpleasant Savor, and sharp in Taste, whose Flowers are shaped like
Stock-Gilliflowers; and the Seed contained in Corniculis, like Hesperis.

The Coralloides is described of a Bitter and Hot Taste, having Seeds like
Rocket.

For these Reasons I take these Plants to be of this Class.

6. Acrid with the Taste and Odor of Pepper.

Lepidium vulgar.

Piper sive Capsicum Indicum.

Jamaica-Pepper has a savor of Cloves.

7. Acrid, with the Odor of Garlic.

Thlaspi, Alliaria.

8. Acrid, Bitterish, Fetid, Rank, Slimy Roots:

Allium ursinum, Corvinum, vulgar, Porrum, Scorodoprassium, which has a mixed
Smell of Garlic and Leeks.

Moly, Cepe vulgar, Cepe Ascalonicum, which is a Leek.

9. Bitter, Acrid, Gummy Plants, which being Umbels, are referred to them; but
I place them here because of their smelling like Garlic: if they have a
Sweetness, they are Umbels.

Panax Herculeum, whose Seed is of a pleasant Savor: This Plant yields a
yellow Gum, called Opopanax, tasting Acrid, and smelling like Garlic.

In Ammoniacum I perceive a Fennil-Taste; and therefore it is the Gum of an
Umbelliferous Plant.

Gum Elemi is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Gummy, of a Fennil-Smell, very offensive;
and it is also Terebinthinate and Resinous, dissolving in Oil, and burning: it
is said to be the Gum of an Olive Tree, which is a Laurel-Bitter.

Asa is the Gum of Laserpitium, and comes also from a Shrub, like Salix.

Liquid Amber is a Resin of a Tree, like Ivy, and to be Classed with it.

The Eighth CLASS.
Of Corrosive Tastes.
THe Corrosive Salt is of some hooked Figures, because their Acrimony tears,
corrodes, and sticks long on the Tongue, and burns the Mouth.

It is not improbable that there is a difference in the Figure of their
Volatile Salts, since there is so great a one in the Fixed Salts of Plants,
which are described by Fracassatus de lingua, in his Epistle; and there is also
a great variety in Mineral Salts.

Sal communis, cubicus, octoedricum Alumen, Vitriolum Rhomboicum, Sal
Ammoniacum in hexagonas cuspidulas abeat.

Mr. Leuvenhock gives the Figures of the Acid Particles of Wine and Tartar,
pointed at both ends, which easily crystallize into other Figures, as into
square Figures, by addition of Crab's-eyes, and then they taste Salt.

If these Corrosive hooked Salts are joined with an Elder-Bitter-Slime, they
purge violently in the Hellebors.

If with an Oil they constitute the Oily Corrosives, as in Euphorbium and the
Spurges.

If with Turpentine they make the Corrosive Acrid Turpentines, as in Cedar, and
Persicaria acris.

If an offensive Foetor be joined with these hooked corrosive Salts, they
produce a Poison, as in the Acenites.

The Species of Corrosive Tastes, are, 1. Watrish mild Corrosives. 2. The Acid
Acrid. 3. The Acrid with Slimy Berries. 4. The Crowfoot Corrosives. 5. Fiery
Fragrant. 6. With an Elder-Smell. 7. Terebinthinate Causticks. 8. Sweet and
Fetid Acrid Poisonous. 9. Milky, Resinous, or Spurge-Corrosives. 10.
Laurel-Causticks.


1. Watrish Corrosives in a low degree burning Acrid.

Chelidonium minus.

Ranunculus pratensis, erectus, dulcis, and nemorosus dulcis, Aquaticus
Hepaticae facie, Caltha palustris, Cotyledon aquatica.

Ranunculus globosus, Sedum minus.

2. With Sub-acrid Acid Leaves, whose Roots are also Acid Acrid.

Bellis minor, Anagallis flore Phoeniceo; this as well as Bellis has a
Bitterness as well as Acid Acrid, by which it is good in Fevers.

Rosa Solis smells Acid, and tastes so, with an Acrimony.

Pyrethrum-Root is Acid Acrid, which is reckoned a Volatile Tartar; and it is
used in making Vinegar.

3. Sweet Watrish Corrosives, with slimy burning Berries.

Aron, there is a Milky Juice in Aron-Root; and therefore the Corrosive lies in
a Watery Gum, very Acrid, like Euphorbium.

Dragon-Flower is Fetid; and Aron green Leaves smell of Elder.

Arisarum is more Acrid than Arum.

Arisarum, Dracontium.

4. Watery Corrosives, with a Pungent Acrid Smell; these are the
Crowfoot-Corrosives, or Anemones.

Ranunculus pratensis, flammeus, flos Adonis, Pulsatella, Anemone sylvestris.

5. Bitterish Caustic, with a fragrant fiery Smell, Clematis sylvestris,
latifolia, flammula Jovis.

Anacardiums are Causticks and Aromaticks.

6. Very Bitter Causticks, with a Fetid Elder-Smell in the Leaves, but of a
more Virose Fetid Root.

Helleborus niger, ferulaceus, Helleboraster, Staphys Agria.

Cyclamen, which is described by Galen, Slimy and Acrid, Purging violently, a
Sternutory, Pessus; and discusses Scirrhose Tumors.

7. Terebinthinate Causticks.

Cedrus, Persicaria acris, maculosa; this smells strongly of Turpentine in the
Leaves and Seeds; and therefore by that, and its Caustic Acrimony, it is the
strongest Diuretic.

Walter Chetwind of Ingstreny, my Honored and Ingenious Friend, gave me this
Observation:

The Leaves of Persicaria acris in Powder, or Decoction, in Posset Drink, are
excellent in a suppression of Urine.

8. Causticks with Sweet Acrid Roots, very Fetid, being Poisonous.

Cicuta, this is usually reckoned amongst the Umbels, and supposed to have a
Milk or Balsam, as the rest have.

Oenanthe Cicutae facie, succo croceo, viroso; it is of a strong Fetid Smell,
and the Juice is Exulcerating and Acrid, which is at first Milky, afterward
Yellow. The Foetor produces Giddiness, like Hemlock. The Acrid causes burning
in the Mouth and Stomach, and purges violently, with Convulsions; as Mr. Ray,
and Vander Wiel observe.

Thapsia Deadly-Carrot is described to be Fetid, Milky, very Acrid and Bitter;
by which it vomits, and is Poisonous.

Christophoriana, Napellus, Aconitum hyemale, autumnale, Lycoctonum, seem to be
of this Species.

Apocynum is described by Galen very Hot and Fetid; there is a Milk in it, and
it is Poisonous by its strong Acrid and Fetids; for the Foetor of Poisonous
Herbs irritates the Spirits, or else fixes them as Narcoticks do; the Acrimony
corrodes the Membranes, and causes Anxieties and Inflations, or immoderate
Evacuations and Inflammations of the Blood.

9. Milky, Resinous, Spurge-Corrosives:

Tithymalus Characias, Cataputia, Peplus, Turpethum, Esula, Cambogia,
Euphorbium, Scammoniu^.

Ficus; the Juice of Figs burns; the Leaves rubbed incline to the smell of Rue;
and its Milky Juice curdles Milk, by dropping it into Milk in a Spoon.

10. Bitter Astringents of a burning Acrimony, with fragrant Flowers and
Berries; these seem to be of the Laurel-Class.

Laurestinus which burns the Mouth.

Laureola is Acrid and Bacciferous.

Thymelaea.

Chamaelaea, Mezereon have also sweet Flowers and Berries, as many of the
Laurel-Class have; and a Tithymaline Acrimony in the whole Plant.

Apocynum may be placed here, and Oleander, which killed some Rabbits, who eat
the green Leaves: It has Cods like Apocynum; and is described Odor^ foetido and
acuto instar Raparum in which its Poison lies; but I could not observe that
smell in the Garden -Oleander. All Poisonous Herbs are made milder by
transplanting them from the Field into Gardens.

Mr. Ray describes a Yew, Odore noxio and viroso; and this Yew is a Poison by
that smell.

Arbor venenata; it has a Caustic Milk exulcerating the Skin, and by that it
is a Poison.

Fungi venenati; they are Fetid and Acrid, as other Poisonous Plants; the Acrid
causes a Strangulation and Vomiting, and their Fetid produces a Stupor, fixing
the Spirits; the crude Slime lies indigested in the Stomach.

Mushroms, and other Plants, may be made Poisonous, by touching of Poisonous
Animals.

These Tables I have made, manifest the distinct Classes of Plants, as they are
distinguished by their Terebinthinate or Oily Juices; and in them I have
distinguished the Species, by the several compositions of Tastes, and the
difference of Tastes, and different parts of Plants: Where the Taste can go no
farther, I have mentioned the Smells to sub-distinguish; but the external
accidents must be admitted to distinguish the particular Plant in each Species.

I will Instance in some more of the advantages of this Method.

The Ancients, as Dioscorides, described the Tastes and Smells of many Plants:
And Galen thought that Method so useful, that he used it for the examining
Medicines; and transcribed out of Dioscorides the Tastes of many Medicines, and
on them grounded his Methodus Medendi; therefore by this Method we shall more
fully understand the Plants described by the Ancients, and those excellent
Notions which were grounded upon Tastes; but our Moderns have neglected Tastes,
and rambled into Chemical and Mathematical Notions, which can never explain the
Humors of Animals, and the Virtues of Medicines; for Chemistry only shows us
the Principles of Bodies, but not the Qualities arising from their Mixture and
Texture: And from the Mechanical Qualities we demonstrate what may be the
Figure and Motion of Particles, but prove nothing of their real existence in
Bodies.

This neglect of Tastes gave Helmont a just reason of complaining, Nihil fere
ab ipsius Dioscoridis tempore accessisse rei Herbariae.

By this Method we may know a Plant at any time, when the Seed, Fruit, Flowers
are not in Season; for their Taste and Smells are obvious in the Bark, Root,
and Leaves.

It is a great advantage to Physicians to have Plants of the same Taste and
Virtue ranked together, who cannot but allow of the Rule mentioned by Mr. Ray,
Quaecunque Plantae saporibus convenient, facultatibus convenire consentaneum
est: therefore, if a Physician knows the Virtue of one plant of a particular
Taste, he will easily understand that they are all of the same Virtue, which
have the same Taste; and he need not put so many of them into a Medicine as is
usually done, to trouble the Apothecary, and also inflame the Patient's Bill.
The Specific Juices are the most useful part of the Plant to Physicians,
according to that Remark Mr. Ray has given of them:

Esse quintessentiam Plantae, ejusque odorem and saporem reddere, viresque
veluti concentratas in se continere, non diffiteor.

I conceive this Method of distinguishing Plants by their Oily Specific
Juices, to be much to be preferred by Physicians to any other Method; because
by the Taste of Plants we discover their Virtue, and by placing all of a Taste
together we are sure to have them all of the same Virtue, and no other.

I suppose our Ingenious Herbalists will consider the easiness and shortness of
this Method, which contains only Eight summa genera, and those obvious to our
Senses; and they will observe that the description of the Taste and Smell of a
Plant will give a better distinction of one Plant from another, than a whole
Page of external accidents; and it will be more satisfactory than the Picture
of the Plant it self. It seems impossible to remember all the external
accidents, unless a Man reads nothing but Herbals all his Life; and Galen says,
There were more writ in his days than any Person could ever read; but the
general Tastes are but few, and the particular Tastes are obvious in every
Plant I meet with, and desire to know.

I find a common Objection against this Method, That Plants have different
Tastes in diverse parts; but this I have answered already, by intimating, That
the Oily Juice does give the chief Taste, by which Plants ought to be
distinguished; but the Juice in the Bladders is altered in the Fruit and Leaves
only.

The taste of the Oily Juice is always the most prevailing Taste in Plants, as
the Taste of the Barks of Trees is the most general Taste in the Tree, but the
Leaves and Fruit may differ, after a long digestion, but before it they had the
same Taste, while unripe, as the Bark and the Skin of the Fruit; and the Seed
retains usually much of the Taste of the Bark, as in Peach-Kernels and the Peel
of Oranges is most evident; and in their Seeds the same Taste is usually found
in all the parts of Sweet Aromatic Plants, and in Acrids, and the Corrosive;
but more strong in the Seeds than other parts. The Bitters are most inclined to
alter their Tastes from Austere to Acerb, or Sub-acid, Slimy, and Sweet Tastes,
and Acrid.

Therefore in distinguishing of Plants by the Taste, we must first observe the
most prevailing Taste in all the parts of the Plant, which is the Oily Juice:
Secondly, We must describe the Juice in the Bladders, and the alteration it
receives in the Leaves and Fruit; for Astringent Roots bear Acerb Leaves, which
obscure the Taste of the Oily Juice in the Leaves; as in Sorrel.

Some sweet Roots have bitter Leaves; as Wormwood. Sweet and Bitter differ not
in Principles, but in their Texture; which is altered, from a smooth one to an
unequal rough Texture in Bitters, by a farther Digestion.

In Wormwood, Dr. Grew observes Turpentine-Vessels, which give the Sweet
Aromatic Taste to the Roots. And he also observes Sap-Vessels in parcels,
which are arched like the Bitter Gum-Vessels: And these may give the Bitter
Taste to Wormwood-leaves: The Astringency is in the Bladders.

Where Two Specific Vessels happen in a Plant, the highest Taste is to be
considered; and that which prevails most in the Plant, is to be esteemed the
highest Oily Juice for the distinguishing the Plant.

If the Juices in the Bladders of the Root, become Bitter in the Bladders of
the Leaves; yet the same Aromatic Acrid appears in the Specific Vessels, in
both Roots and Leaves.

The Seeds of the Cresses are more Bitter than the Leaves, because of the
abundance of the Oily Juice in them. And the Stalk is Bitter also, because the
Juice of the Bladder is higher Digested, than in the Roots; where it tastes
more Sweet and Acrid; as in Horseradish: So that we may allow the Juice in the
Bladders of the Leaves, to be higher digested into a Bitterness, when they are
only Sweet in the Root: But notwithstanding this change of Taste, the Specific
Juice in Cresses, is the Milky Acrid Gum; and in Wormwood, the Aromatic Acrid
Balsam.

The Second Objection is, That Plants have different Virtues in their several
Parts; and so, by the Taste, we cannot reduce them of the same kind of Virtue,
into the same Classes.

To this I Answer, That we usually allow many Virtues to the same Taste; and
the Juices of Vegetables may have different degrees, of the same Taste, in
their several Parts; and to that difference, several Effects are to be
attributed: So in the Bark of Elder, and in the Leaves, there is the same kind
of Taste; but of a different degree of strength, to Purge and Vomit: The
Flowers, and Pulp of the Berries purge not so much; but they both purge a
little: One handful of the Flowers boiled, purge: The Seed has more of the
Elder Taste and Virtue, to vomit and purge; and all Purgers are also Diuretic;
and if it be given in a great Dose, it vomits.

I could wish, That a few proper Virtues were allowed to each Plant, which it
most eminently and constantly produces, by its peculiar Taste; and that other
Virtues were rejected, which are more certainly produced by Plants of a more
Specific Taste.

The Third Objection may be, That the same Plant growing in the Garden, differs
in Taste, from the same growing in the Field, and its native Soil; as in
Scurvy Grass, Wormwood, and all the Poisonous Plants, is most evident.

To this I Answer, That the Tastes differ in the Wild and Field Plants only in
Degree, and not in the Kind, or Species of Taste; so Sea and Garden
Scurvy Grass have the same Cress-Acrid, but the Sea is strongest: The Wild
Hemlock poisons in a higher degree than the Garden; but both have the same
Fetid Acrimony.

The fat Soil in the Garden gives a greater Magnitude, and alters the crude
Juices, toward a sweetness in the Bladders; as appears in Carrots.

In some Plants, the Smells do plainly Characterize the Class or Species; as in
Aromaticks, Fetids, and Narcoticks, there is a Bitter Smell also, though Galen
denies it; for we may plainly smell a Peach-Bitter, or Laurel-Bitter, in the
rubbing of the Flowers of Peaches and Cherries: And in the green Leaves of
Laurel and Walnut, we smell a Bitterness, which may be a note of the
Laurel-Class; but the Species of Plants is not to be multiplied, where they
have the same Taste, though some alteration happen in the Smell; for we may
observe various Smells, in the different parts of Plants; and in some Plants, a
compounded Smell.

I have not excluded the external Figure, from any consideration in the
Classing of Plants, but allow it no farther, than as marks of distinction of
the several Individuals, under the same Taste; and a great help, for the better
sorting of Plants, where the Taste is obscure. I observed, That many Plants had
Leaves of other Plants, which agree with one another in Taste; as, Pulsatilla
Anemones facie, Quinquefolium Tormentillae facie; and by such similitudes of
parts, I was directed to compare their Tastes and Virtues.

I have Classed all the Plants I have mentioned, according to such Tastes as I
have observed my self, or borrowed from Galen, Mr. Ray, and others. I hope the
Reader will not expect any exact Methodizing of Plants, but will correct all
those Mistakes I am guilty of in this Design; in which, all I pretend to, is,
To have proposed a useful and rational Method for distinguishing Plants; but
this I shall leave to be perfected by Time, and those who have a better Skill
in the general Botanicks, than I can pretend to, who live so far distant from
any of our Famous Gardens; where I might, upon any doubt of a Taste or Smell,
consult the Plant it self. And I cannot desert the Employment of Physic, to
prosecute thoroughly this pleasing Study, of the Tastes and Smells of the Juices
in Plants, which renders Botanicks very useful to a Physician.

The End of the Sixth Part.
AN APPENDIX TO THE Second Part OF THE (...): Containing Two Parts;

I. A TABLE of the Tastes of Animal Humors, in their Natural States: With many
Observations omitted in the Second Part.

II. The Tastes and Smells of many Minerals, in their several Classes; which
were not fully described in the Second Part.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.

A TABLE of Animal Tastes.
I. Animal Humors of a Sweet Milky Taste; these are Chyle, Milk, and the Milky
Lympha's. II. Animal Humors of a Slimy Sub-acid Tartareous Taste; as the Slimes
of the Stomach and Guts. III. Animal Humors of a Sweet Vitriolick Taste; as
Blood and Spleen-Juice. IV. Of a Fetid Animal Taste, as Spirits. V. Of a Fat,
Greasy, or Unctuous Taste; as Suet, Fat, Marrow. VI. Of a Bitter, Acrid, Slimy
Taste; as Choler. VII. Of a Salso-acid Taste, like common Sal-Ammoniack; as the
Serum of the Blood, and Salt Lympha's, and Sweat and Urine.
An APPENDIX to the Second Part, etc.
I. Animal Humors of a Sweet Milky Taste, are either, First, Of a Milky Smell,
or of no considerable Smell. Secondly, Of a Fetid Smell.

First, THE Humors of a Milky Smell, and Milky Taste, without any Smell
considerable.

1. The Milk of the Breasts, which is not different from Chyle, but by its
being depurated from Saltness, by the Glandules of the Breasts. Milk has the
Smell of the Animal from whom it is drawn; and therefore the stronger the
Blood, and Smell of each Animal is, the more offensive is the Milk: that Animal
Savor of Milk, is the Volatile Oily part, and may be called the Spirit of Milk,
which is more Fetid in Goats, Asses, and Mares, than in Cows; but that of Women
has the most agreeable Animal Smell, being most like the natural Temper of
those of the same kind.

The Sweetness of Milk shows, that it is very capable of Fermentation in the
Stomach of Animals. And Rennet curdles it by Fermentation, and not by its
Acidity.

In Milk we distinguish Four Parts.

1. The Serose Whey. 2. The Buttery, or Oily Part. 3. The Cheesie, or Viscid
Part. 4. The Acidity, evident in Butter-Milk.
These several Parts of Milk have their uses in Physic.

The Serose or Whey Parts are useful in diluting of Animal Humors; but
especially the distilled Milk Waters.

The Buttery Part of Milk, by its Oyliness, allays the Acid sharpness of
Humors; and, by its Viscidity and Sliminess, it tempers the Acrids; whence Milk
is Anodyne in Clysters, Eye-Medicines, and all Injections. Butter is emollient
by its Oyliness, and is something Hot or Discussing: The Oil of Animals being
the Matter of Heat.

The Cheesie Part in Milk, which Hippocrates calls (...), is very nourishing;
and, by reason of its Gummy Viscidity, it conglutinates Wounds.

The Acidity in Butter-Milk is cooling, as all Tartar-Acids be; and it is like
the Sowreness of Vegetables.

2. The Chyle in the Thoracick-Vessels, tastes of a Milky Sweetness, with a
manifest Saltness, and a strong savor of that particular Animal; which I call
the Animal Taste and Smell.

Though Dr. Glisson affirms, That Chyle has neither the Bitterness, nor the Savor
of the Guts, nor the Saltness; yet I find the Judicious Dr. Lower affirms its
Saltness. I tasted the Chyle of a Dog, Fed with Flesh, before it came to the
Receptacle, by cutting one of the Lacteals near the Guts, and I found the Chyle
Sweet and Saltish, and of an Animal Savor: The same was the Taste of the Chyle,
in the Thoracick ductus.

There is the same Parts in Chyle, as in Milk.

1. A Buttery Oil. 2. A Serose Whey. 3. A Cheesie Viscid. 4. A Saltish-Acid,
and Tartar-Acid.
The Slimy Sweetness of Chyle, shows it to agree with Milk, as well in Nature,
as in Taste: This Sweetness of Chyle is tasted in the Urine, in a Diabetes;
where Chyle either wants its Sanguification, or else is diverted by some
unknown Lymphaeductus to the Kidneys, from the Glands of the Mesentery.

This Sweetness of Chyle is evident in the Blood, which is spit from a broken
Vein in the Lungs; and from hence is the Sweet Taste of Blood.

This Sweetness is tasted in the Saliva, and the Milk of the Breasts; and
therefore these, and all other Sweet Slimes arise from the Chyle.

The color of the Chyle was White and Reddish, or Rosy, in the Chyliduct of
the Buttery Oil of Chyle, becoming Red by the mixture of the Acrid of Choler,
which produces the Saltness: So Salt of Tartar, by digestion with Milk, turns
it Red: And a mixture of Crab's-eyes, Vinegar, and White Wind, looks Reddish.
Hence I infer, That the Acrid of Choler helps Sanguification, by turning the
Chyle of a color mixed of Red and White, it becoming wholly Red upon a perfect
Sanguification.

From the different parts of Chyle, all the several parts of Blood, and other
Humors, are prepared; and therefore all the parts of Animals have the
principles of Chyle only altered by a higher Digestion, and new Mixtures, and
different Textures: And therefore I think it very impertinent for Physicians to
look after any other Principles of Animal Bodies, than what occur to our
Senses, in Chyle and Milk; for these are sufficient to explain all the
Phenomenon observable in Animal Humors, without any Supposition of the
Mathematical qualities of Atoms, or the Products of the Fire, by Chemistry;
these are the curious Thoughts and Experiments of Philosophers; but the
Physician needs none other Notion, but what occurs by an obvious deduction from
sensible objects: neither need we assert any other Principle, than a Serose, a
Viscid, an Oily, and an Acid Principle in Animal Humors. These are easily
understood, and we need not consider the farther Resolution of these Integral
Parts, (which I call sensible Principles) what sort of Atoms compose them; And
what their insensible Motion is: Nor whether all these may be resolved into one
Principle. For in these particulars, every Philosopher has a different
Hypothesis, and asserts what he pleases.

3. The Saliva resembles thin Milk, well diluted, and tastes Sweetish, like
Milk. Milk is most like Chyle, and thicker and sweeter than the Saliva:
therefore it is the first Humor separated from Chyle; for the Nourishment of
Nurses, after Eating, immediately goes to the Breasts.

The Saliva is increased by the use of Milk-Meats; and is therefore of the same
Nature with it.

4. The Milky Slime of the Glandulous Coats of the Windpipe and Nose: This
returns out of the Bladders of the Lungs into the Thoracick ductus of the
Chyle: And with this Lympha, I think it very probable that the Air passes into
the Chyle-Vessels, for the better mixing of it with the Blood; and this is the
only way I think the Air can pass into the Blood-Vessel.

5. The Glandulous Milky Slime of the Thymus, seems to be of the nature of the
Saliva; and is evacuated either into the Oesophagus, or Chyliferous Vessels of
the Embryo, for the supply of a sufficient Lympha for the Chyle.

Secondly, Animal Sweet Slimes, of a Fetid Smell, arising from Chyle highly
digested.

1. The Male-Seed, which is Milky, Spumose, Viscid, and full of Volatile Fetid
Oily Particles, which are the Spirits of Animals: All the Seeds of Plants are
Oily, with a Slime adjoined; these ferment the Bituminous Juices (which are
imbibed by their Coats, out of the Earth) into the Nature of each particular
Seed, for the Growth and Increase of the Plantula Seminalis, contained in the
Pulpy part of the Seed: So Impregnation of the Female, is by the Seminal
Ferment, which alters the new Chyle in the Veins of the Female, into an
albuminous Nature, fit for the Nourishment of the Embryo, contained in the
Female Egg.

2. The Glandulous Slimy Lympha of the Vagina, and the Womb, and of the Female
Testicles; all which resemble the White of an Egg: This is the Female Semen; it
becomes Milky by boiling, like the White of an Egg; if the White be hard
boiled, it smells very Sulphurous: These Sulphurous Particles are the active
Ferment of the White of an Egg, which ferments both Bread and Milk, which it
thickens and curdles; but swells and rarefies Bread, or Puddings.

The Seminal Milks of both Sexes are Fetid, like putrid Fish; and therefore
have a greater quantity of Animal Fetid Particles, fit for the nature of a
Ferment; which is generally in Animals a Slime; in which Fetid Particles are
lodged.

Stum, which is the greatest of our Vegetable Ferments, has a Slimy Sweetness;
and also a Sulphurous Smell and Taste, on which its great Activity depends as
a Ferment.

The two Masculine and Female Slimes mix in the Vagina or Womb; the Spirituous
Male Seed alters the Female Slime into that digestion, which is peculiar and
fit for preparing the Nourishment of the Egg to be Impregnated, and for the
Embryo contained in the Cicatricula. The Impregnate Slime passes through the
Lymphaticks of the Womb, into the Females Blood; and, by acting on the Slimy
Chyle, therein it prepares a fit Nourishment for the Foetus in the Egg: That
Nourishment is determined to the Ovarium, by the Act of Coition, which heats
the Back, and opens the Passages to the Eggs, and determines the motion of the
Blood and Spirits to those parts.

The Sperm of a Pearl, dropped into Vinegar, is presently Coagulated; hence may
be explained how Acids hinder Impregnation, when given for Medicine, or
abounding in the Female Blood; for it is necessary that she have a sufficient
Chylose Matter for the nourishment of the Egg; and that also of a sweet
nutritive temper, neither too Salt or Acid, which destroys the Male Ferment, or
the Embryo's Nutriment.

3. The Glandulous Milky thin Slime of the Brain-Glands, being full of Fetid
Oily Particles; for the Brain tastes Oily and Slimy, and of the Animal Fetid;
from whence, I suppose, a Liquor is separated of the same Taste; for all the
Glands have a Taste of their Lympha's.

The Animal Fetid Particles being very high digested, and of an Oily Nature are
the Animal Spirits, diluted in the purest pellucid Lympha which can be
separated from Chyle.

This Lymphatick Slime preserves the Spirits, as our Noctiluca's are preserved
in Water; and I suppose the Spirits to be like them, having a lucid Nature, by
the admission of Air through the Nervous Canals of the Nose; as that Phosphorus
which is made of Blood, by pulling out the Stopple and admitting Air, it
becomes an innocent Flame: And the different tempers and motions of the Spirits
may most intelligibly be explained, by comparing them with different sorts of
Flame. Blood it self is very Inflammable, and burns like Resin, with a yellow
Flame; from the different tempers of the Blood, a different Luminosity in the
Spirits is produced. Light is a thin Flame, and that is produced naturally in
Animal Bodies, by Putrefaction, as in the shining Shells of Lobsters: And this
is the ultimate Resolution, or Rarefaction of the Animal Oil; which, like
Sulphur, becomes more lucid, by being cleared from its Acid. Acids are the most
Injurious to the Nerves, because they are prejudicial to the Light or Flame of
the Animal Spirits; and hence, I suppose, the Spirits to be of an Oily Nature,
and Fetid, as all the Noctiluca's be.

4. The Lympid Humors of the Eyes, are not improbably the Lympha of the Nerves;
especially the Vitreous Humor which is next to the Optic Nerve. The Aqueous
Humor probably is derived from the Glands about the Eye; and if it be emptied
by puncture, it fills up again, and is a Serose Lympha. This Vitreous Humor
tastes Slimy, and so does the Crystalline; and these two only differ in
Consistence.

The Vitreous Humor becomes more Limpid, by beating it in a Spoon, and then it
has some little Saltness, which did, after some time, turn Syrup of Violets
green; as all Animal Humors do, in which there is a Salt. This Vitreous Humor
did not turn thick, by Oil of Vitriol; nor altered, with Spirit of Hartshorn;
but it becomes White by boiling, and a little White by the Acid.

It appears very pellucid, like Crystal; and in it seems to be lodged the
furious hot Spirits of Dogs, Cats, and Lions, which appear lucid in the dark;
for which reason, I suppose it to be the Nervine Lympha, and the hollow of the
Eye to be the dilatation of the Nerve, whose Membranes and Fibers are
manifestly spread in the hollow of the Eye; and therefore the Humors of the Eye
flow from the Nervose Fibrillae. The external Light, which is reflected from an
Object, cannot move the Fibrillae, to cause Vision; but more probably, it acts
on the Luminous Spirits of an Animal, modifying them into the same Figure and
Motion which they have from the Object.

II. Animal Humors of a Slimy, Sub-acid Taste, and Viscid Consistence.
THese have little Sweetness, but only the Slimy part of the Chyle, and the
Tartar-acid of it, which remain after the Spirituous Sweetness is separated by
the Brain-Glands, etc. or digested into other Tastes.

1. The Mucous Sub-acid Slime of the Glands of the Stomach and Guts.

2. The Lympha of the Pancreas is of the same Nature, Slimy and Sub-acid, and
designed for the same use as the Lympha of the Guts, viz. The Fermentation of
our Meat.

Those Slimy, Viscid, and Sub-acid Humors, arise from the Chyle, which is long
digested with the Blood, till it becomes Viscid and Sub-acid, like the
Tartar-acid of Butter-Milk.

All Ferments are Slimy, as Barme, and Rennet; they have also hot, strong, or
fetid Particles, lodged in the Slime, and preserved by it. These Fetids are the
active Principles of Fermentation in Rennet, and likewise in all Animal
Ferments, as in the Semen, and the Slimy Lympha's of the Stomach and Guts,
which ferment the Nourishment received into the Stomach. This Fetid, in the
Slimy Lympha of the Stomach, is communicated from the Nerves; and is that I
call the Animal Fetid. The Sub-acid helps the Oyly-Fetid in its Fermentation;
as Nitre helps Sulphurous Minerals in their Conflagration, and Explosions.

I could not coagulate this Slimy Lympha, by the Acid of Spirit of Salt, or by
the Fire. I gathered it by two Ligatures, made in the Guts of a Rabbet; and
emptied the space betwixt them, for the reception of the Slime.

3. The Slimy Sub-acid Humor, separated by the Spleen, which helps the
separation of Choler by the Liver. This is the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood,
which, joining with the Bitterness of Choler, produces the Acrid observable in
it: So, by the mixture of Bitter and Acid in Plants, a Salt taste is produced:
And from Acrid Plants, as Horseradish, I have distilled an Acid Liquor.

Note, That all the Conglomerating Glands look white like their Milky Slimes:
And though some of their Lympha's be Sweet, yet these last mentioned are less
Sweet, and are either naturally Sub-acid, or else turn so immediately upon
Stagnation in the Stomach.

All the Slimy Sweet Lympha's are properly supplied by sweetish Slimes, or Milk
Diet, when they are deficient. These Slimes being naturally produced from
Chyle, which is Sweetish, and like Milk.

The Slimy Sub-acid Humors are best supplied by Tartar-Acids, which quicken the
Appetite, and help Digestion, especially the well digested Acids of ripe
Fruits, and Wine it self, which is Sub-acid.

There is a Volatile Acidity in the Contents of the Stomach; for all digested
Vegetables smell and taste Acid, with a mixture of Fetid; such is the Smell of
the same Vegetable, if it be artificially digested: And the Acidity is
generally more evident to the Smell, than the Taste, which is a sign of its
being fermented.

When the Spirituous Oily Particles of Chyle are carried off into the Lacteals;
the remaining contents have the Acidity of Vinegar in the Colo^^; and therefore
the Ascarides are bred there, which resemble the Eels in Vinegar: This Acid has
a putrid Savor joined with it, which is produced by a precedent Fermentation.
This Acid is produced from the Tartar of Vegetables; which being Fermented or
Distilled, it appears Acid Oleose.

The Contents of the Jejunum are Bitter, from Choler; of the Duodenum Salt; the
Choler being turned to Salt, by the mixture of the Acid Contents of the
Stomach; and the Excrements have the Color, but not the Bitter of Choler.

III. Animal Humors of a Sweet Vitriolick Taste.
THE Blood of all Animals taste naturally Sweet Vitriolick, with a Saltness,
and a savor of the Animal Fetid. I observed this Vitriolick Taste in the Blood
of a Carp, and in that of a Chicken, and in the Blood of a healthful Woman: And
I have often found this Observation confirmed, by the Trials made by diverse
other Persons, to whom I communicated it, both Physicians and Surgeons, who
agree with me, in asserting the Steel Taste of Blood.

This Vitriolick Stypticity in Blood, probably arises from the Tartar-Acid of
Chyle, fixing on the Terreous or Osseous parts of the Succus nutritious,
swimming in the Blood after its full digestion; for all Stypticity arises from
the mixture of an Earthy part, and an Acid. If we mix common Tartar, and Steel
Filings, a strong Vitriolick Salt is produced, like the Taste of Blood.

I did not perceive any Steel Taste in Chyle, neither will Chyle turn Syrup of
Violets green, as the Serum of the Blood does; and therefore I believe the
Vitriolick Taste is produced in the Blood; but the sweetness in the Blood is
from the Chyle mixed with it.

The use of this Vitriolick Stypticity is very evident, and necessary to the
Blood.

1. From the effervescence of this Vitriolick Acid, with the red Oily part of
the Blood, the Heat of the Blood depends: So, by the mixture of the Oil of
Human Blood, with the Oil of Vitriol, Mr. Boil produced a lasting and burning
Heat.

2. This Animal Vitriol may be called the proper peculiar Acid, or Tartar of
the Blood. This supplies the Acidity for the Spleen, whose substance tastes
Slimy Vitriolick, and abates the high Ebullitions of Blood, as other Stypticks
do; and thereby preserves the Consistence of it, and precipitates the Choler
from the Blood.

This Steel Taste in Blood, may probably be the first occasion of using Steel
Medicines, for the strengthening of the Blood; for in all the Humors of Animals,
for the increasing or helping their Preparations and Secretion, we use
Medicines of the same Taste as the Humor.

Vitriolum Martis does not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, though Alum does
curdle it into a white Curd; therefore the natural effect of this Steel-Taste
in Blood, is only to preserve the Consistence, as Stypticks do, but not to
coagulate, which would be injurious to all Animal Humors.

Common Vitriol Powdered, coagulates the Serum and Lympha's of the Blood.

This Steel-Taste in Blood, gave me a hint of putting Galls into the Serum of
the Blood: And I did thereby, diverse times, turn the Serum black; but at other
times the Experiment did not succeed, which I attributed to a certain
proportion of Galls, or else too much or too little of the Bloodiness in the
Serum. I made a strong decoction of Oak-Bark, and put to it some Bloody Serum
out of the Surgeons Dish: I let them stand Twelve hours, and then found the
red Color turned blackish, and the Serum was precipitated or curdled: This
shows the precipitating Faculty of Stypticks: And also, that the preternatural
blackness in Urine and Stools depends on an Acid, which is called the
Splenetick Humor: So Vinegar turns the red part of the Blood black. This
Decoction of the Oak-Bark had stood Two days before I used it, but it did not
taste Acid, but Austere Styptick. This must stand long mixed with the Serum of
the Blood, at least 12 hours.

Jesuits-Powder would not turn the Serum black, but I put some of it into a
Solution of green Vitriol, and it turned the Solution greenish, which it was
not before. Therefore the Jesuits-Powder operates on the Blood, most by its
Bitter, but yet something also by its Stypticity. Abele-Bark, which I call a
Laurel-Bitter, turned the mentioned Solution green, as the Jesuits-Powder did.
Tormentil-Roots made the Solution of a deeper green; but Galls which are a high
strong Austere, turned it purple. Bole could not turn the Solution, though it
be Styptick.

By these Experiments it is evident, That Stypticks, if Acerb, like Alum,
coagulate the Serum of the Blood; but if Austere, they precipitate and alter
the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood.

I put some Syrup of Violets into the Serum of the Blood, which turned green
upon stirring of it; That this greenness did not proceed from the Ammoniac Salt
of the Blood, I was convinced, by the following Experiments.

Common Sal Ammoniac dissolved in fair Water, and mixed with Syrup of Violets,
did not turn the Syrup, neither did strong Urine turn it green, in which there
is a greater quantity of the Ammoniac Animal Salt, than in the same quantity of
the Serum of the Blood; therefore I believe the greenness in the mixture of the
Serum of Blood; and the Syrup of Violets did proceed from the Steel Taste of
Blood; for Steel Liquors turn Syrup of Violets green, and all Chalybeate Waters.

I observed a Vitriolick Steel Taste in fair Water, in which I quenched heated
Pebbles; but this would not ferment with Acids, nor turn with Galls: This Steel
Taste was from the Sulphurous Martial Acid of the Flints: And I suppose the
Animal Steel Taste to be of the like Sulphurous Acid nature.

This Steel Taste does plainly demonstrate the similitude betwixt Minerals and
Animals, and the circulation of Principles; as I have asserted in the Second
Part.

The Mixture of Choler, and Syrup of Violets looks Green, because Yellow and
Blue mixed, produce that Color; not upon the account of its Acrid Salt
contained in it, as I did upon the first trial suppose; and that the Animal
Salt cannot turn the Syrup, is proved by this, because Chyle will not turn that
Syrup, though it taste very Salt.

The Vitriolick Acid of the Blood, if it be Evacuated into the Stomach, upon
the Obstructions of the Spleen-Glands, it therein produces all the
Hypochondriacal Symptoms.

The abundant quantity of this Vitriol in the Blood, produces the Stone, Gout,
Scurvy, and all the Hypochondriacal effects in the Nerves.

It may be objected, That it is impossible that the same Vitriolick Acid should
both serment and hinder the Ebullition of the Blood; but this may clearly be
answered, by asserting, That a very Sulphurous Acid ferments the Humors, by
acting on the Oily part, and agitating of it; but if the Vitriolick Acid be
very Styptick, it stops Fermentations. This is evident in the different
Preparations of Steel: The Sulphurous Acid Preparations raise the Blood, but
the more Styptick, as Vitriolum Martis, fix the Humors, and stop their
irregular motions. Vitriolum Martis, and all Steel Acid Preparations increase
the Styptick Vitriol of the Blood; as also all Acerbs, and Styptick
Spleneticks; but the Sulphurous Filings of Steel, and especially the
Preparations of Steel, made by Animal Salts, ferment, agitate, and rarefie the
Oily parts of Blood, and all its viscid Slimes.

IV. Animal Humors of an Unctuous Taste.
1. THE Fat of Animals, which is a mixture of the Chylose Butter, and Acid,
which coagulates it, as Oil Olive, coagulates by Spirit of Nitre; and this will
melt like it. Fat is very Inflammable, like Oils, and I can most aptly compare
this to the Turpentines of Vegetables.

2. The Marrow in Bones is Oleose, and more Fluid than Fat; it preserves the
Bones from dryness and brittleness. Bones were, at their first growth, like a
Jelly; as appears by the Teeth of young Creatures; other Bones are Ligamentous,
and by addition of much Earthy Nourishment, become hard: The immediate
Nourishment of the Bones is a Viscid Serum, such as constitutes the Jelly
boiled from Bones, and Ligamentous Parts: And it may be observed, that the
shaving of old Bones, smells not unlike old Cheese; and therefore Bones are
nourished by the Caseous parts of Chyle.

The Marrow is like the Balsams of Vegetables, in consistence and use.

3. The Suet is of an Unctuous Gummy Taste, having a viscid Slime, coagulate
with the Oily Fat, and resembles the Gum-Resins of Vegetables.

The Fat of Animals is first consumed in Emaciating Fevers; and therefore is
probably the matter resorbed into the Veins (as Malpighius has observed by his
Glasses) necessary to supply the red Oily part of the Blood, as it spends by
the generation of Spirits, or Evaporations.

V. Animal Humors of a Fetid Taste, having the peculiar Savor of each Animal.
THE Oily Acid red part of the Blood (like the Resins of Vegetables) gives the
highest Smells and Tastes; from this red part is the highest digested Oil,
which gives the Animal Taste and Smell to the Bodies and Humors of each Animal.
This Fetid Savor we taste in the Flesh of the Muscles. This Fetid is evident in
Eggs, which smell like their several Birds to whom they belong. This Foetor is
evident also in Horns and Hoofs, in the highest degree.

From this red Oil of Blood, is the natural Spirit of it, which is distilled
and separated into Animal Spirits, as it becomes more Rancid or Fetid; which
also returning from the Nerves into the Blood, it gives the Animal Fetid to
each Humor, separated from the Blood, and this constitutes the active Fetids in
all the Animal Slimes. This Animal Fetid circulating from the Blood into the
Nervous Juice; and, returning with that into the Blood again, becomes more
Volatile, Fetid, and at last Inflammable and Lucid.

All Vegetable and Mineral Fetids increase this Animal Fetid Spirit; and also
help the production and motion of the Fetid Animal Spirits; as all Antimonial
Sulphurs, and Fetid Gums, as Assa foetida.

lbi. of Blood yields, by distillation, iss. of Oil; and the Oil of Blood is
both Mr. Boil History of Blood.
red and yellow, by distillation. Spirit of Wine extracts a yellow Tincture, as
it does from some Resins; but Volatile Spirits, a red Volatile and fixed Salt
dropped on Blood, increases the Floridity, and so does Choler, which is very
Acrid, and also the Acrid Juice of Scurvy Grass; but Vinegar, Juice of Lemmons,
and all Acid Spirits, abate the Florid, and coagulate the Blood. The Florid
part of the Blood separates from the Serum, unless it be long stirred with it,
as some Watery Gums do; as Aloes, Opium, etc.

From these Experiments I conclude, That the red part of the Blood is Oily and
Gummose; for these dissolve by Spirit of Wine, and Salts, but are coagulated by
Acids.

The red color remains after the Evaporation of the Serum, in the dried Cake;
and this redness is not lodged in a Volatile Oil, but is fixed by an Acid, as
the Oils in Gum-Resins.

The Animal Fetid may be distilled in the cold Still; and therefore is
Volatile: It vomits readily with Oils, which argues its nature to be from the
red Oyliness of the Blood.

The Spirit of Blood, by Fermentation, is very Fetid; and therefore a good
Anti-hysterick. It is also Salt, correcting the Acids of the Glands, and
stagnation of Humors. It is Diuretic, and Diaphoretick, as all Salts be.

The Cake of Blood in a healthful Person, exceeds the Serum, as I have often
observed by weighing of both in ordinary Scales.

VI. Animal Humors of a Bitter, Sweet, Acrid, and Slimy Taste; as Choler.
THE sweetness in Choler shows its original Rise from Chyle; and sweet Chyle
becomes bitter by a farther digestion. The red part of the Blood may become
yellow by digestion: And out of Blood, an Oil may be distilled of both Colors.
I have observed Choler of a red, yellow, green, and blue Color in different
Animals; so we may observe in the same Animals, a diversity of Color, when the
Choler comes into the Stomach, and is there mixed with Acids: The same
varieties of color we observe in Turpentines; a green Oil may be distilled
from Turpentine-Trees; and a red and yellow Oil from Turpentine; there is a
bluish Turpentine, in the middle of the Flowers of Flos Solis, which, like the
Conyza's, is a Turpentine Plant. Since Turpentine varies its color, like
Choler, and has the tastes of Choler, as Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid. I think it
an excellent Hepatick; and it is also Cleansing and Laxative, like Choler.

The Acrid Pungency of Choler, is the ground, and one of the parts of the
Animal Salt; for when it is united with the Tartareous Acid, produced by
digestion in the Stomach, and also with the natural Acid of the Glandulous
Slimes, and that of the Lympha of the Pancreas, the first Ammoniac Salt is
produced; for if we taste the Chyle, strained from the Contents, we may taste
it Salso-acid in the Lacteals.

This Acrid in Choler, like the Acrid in Plants, after a perfect Putrefaction,
turns into a Volatile Urinous Salt; as is evidently proved by Wedelius, in the
Preparation of Woad, which tastes Acrid; and without any Fire, it sublimes a
Volatile Urinous Salt, in its Preparation by Putrefaction; yet the fresh Woad
tastes only Acrid, and not Salt; but the Fermentation turns it to Salt.

The Slime of Choler is from the Spleen; and the different Color is from a
diversity of digestion of the Oil in each Animal, and the diversity of the
Spleen-Acid joined with the Choler. The Juice of the Spleen is Vitriolick and
Slimy; the black Color of the Spleen, is a true sign of the Acidity of its
Juice; for all Acids give a blackness to the Blood. The color of the Spleen is
more florid Red in young Creatures, and blacker in the old, by reason of a
greater quantity of the Vitriolick Slime produced in them; which blackens the
Blood, and that gives the Color to the Spleen.

VII. Animal Humors of a Sal-Ammoniac Taste, being Salso-Acid.
THis Sal-Ammoniac shoots into Feathers in frozen Blood, and may be easily
observed, like the Teeth of Combs. Dr. Grew mentions the Figure of the Animal
Salt like Crosses; but I can more certainly describe any Salts by my Taste,
than by any Glasses; and their Nature and Virtue will more clearly be
apprehended, by their manner of affecting the Organ of Taste, than by
consulting their Figures; though these may explain the Modes of Taste, and the
operation of the Salt on our Humors.

1. The Serum of the Blood being only the Whey part of the Chyle, dissolves
most of the Animal Salt: This is the Vehicle of the thick Mass of Blood,
rendering it diluted and fluid. In the Serum there is little Oil, but much of
the Viscid and Cheesie Particles: These may be observed by Inspissating the
Serum by the Fire, and by curdling of it by Acid Spirits, or Alum. Vinegar
whitens the Serum, and Oil of Vitriol; but Spirit of Nitre thoroughly coagulates
it into a white Curd, like Alum. If we let the Blood run from an opened Vein
into a Dish, containing Spirit of Salt, it will presently coagulate, look
black, and it will have no Serum.

Spirit of Sal-Ammoniac makes the Serum more clear; and therefore we may
suppose the Salt of the Blood promotes its fluidity. If the Blood be received
in a Dish, in which Spirit of Sal-Ammoniac is put, it will not coagulate. This
shows the effects of Volatile Salts on the Blood.

I mixed Oil of Turpentine (and Oil of Aniseed did the same) with some fresh
Blood, but it looked more black, and not more florid, as I expected; and common
Oil made the Florid rather darker, which I could not well explain; there being
no Acid nor Volatile Salt in the Oil Olive, though there be in Oil of Aniseeds
and Turpentine.

Mr. Boil and Bonetus affirm, That the fixed Chemical Salt of Blood, made by
Calcination, tastes more like Sea Salt, than a Lixivial; but, by its
Precipitation, after the manner of Lixivials, and not like Sea Salt, it is a
Lixivial, made from the Tartar, or Vitriolick Acid of the Blood, in which there
is a mixture of Earth, Oil, and Acid; these, by being united more closely by
the Fire, become a fixed Salt. But this is the product of Art, by the Fire, and
is not naturally found in the Humors of Animals; and therefore no effects can
be imputed to it, though many Authors suppose it.

2. From the Serum of the Blood, all the salt serose Lympha's are produced; and
separated by the conglobate Glands; and this returns into the Chyle Vessels and
Veins: There is a Saltness in this Lympha, which shows its origin from the
salt Serum of the Blood. There are Caseous parts in the salt Lympha, and
therefore it may be inspissated by the Fire; and, of it self, being exposed to
the Air, it turns to a Jelly in the Spoon; for which reason, it may be esteemed
the proper Nourishment of the Ligamentous parts of the Animal, because such
like Jellies are boiled from them: The Serum of the Blood will not become a
Jelly, like the salt Lympha; but this may be imputed to the longer digestion a
Humor has had. This salt Lympha has a higher digestion than the Serum, because
it is separated from it. Chyle will not exactly inspissate by the Fire, so soon
as the Serum; but will more easily be coagulated than the Serum:
Notwithstanding this difference, Chyle is digested into the Serum, and likewise
the Serum, after some alteration, by digestion it becomes of a nearer
consistence to the nature of a Jelly: And so it is made more fit for the
Nourishing of the Animal. This Gelatinose Serum being well diluted, constitutes
the Lympha salsa, serosa Glandularum conglobatarum.

Besides this useful Lympha, there is an Excrementitious, serose, salt Lympha,
separated from the Serum of the Blood, when, by digestion, it becomes very
thin, salt, and putrid: And this is the Matter of Sweat and Urine.

These different salt Lympha's may be observed in diverse parts of the Animal;
but they are useful, and not excrementitious.

1. The Lympha in the Pericardium, distilling from the Glandules of the
Pericardium; this is necessary for the motion of the Heart, and tastes Salt,
and inspissates by the Fire.

2. The Liquor in the Amnion, which tastes Salt, and is the first Nourishment
taken into the Stomach of an Embryo. This seems to be the Succus Nutritious of
the Female, separated by the Glands of the Womb, for the use of the Foetus: The
Saltness shows it to be a product of the Serum of the Blood, which being
digested into a certain degree, and of a consistence fit for Nourishment, it is
made capable of a Secretion, by its particular Glands. The Serum of the Blood
is of a mixed Nature, containing the fresh Chyle, newly turned into Serum; it
also contains some of the old Serum, which grows very putrid and salt by long
digestion. In the Serum is also contained the Lympha Salsa, returning out of
the Lymphaticks: Out of all these, there is made one common Fluid, which we
call the Salt Serum of the Blood. This Serum containing different Liquors, and
acquiring different States in its crudity, perfect digestion, and also its
putrefaction, it may very well produce a difference of Lympha's; and they may
also differ much from the common Serum, after their Secretion.

It will not be amiss, to observe the different States the Aliments pass,
before they make the highest perfect degree, in which they become fit for the
Nutriment of Animals.

Our Meat contains a sweet Slime: This is fermented into the nature of Chyle,
and that defaecated from its Acidity in the Guts, by the Acid mixture of
Choler; it acquires in the Lacteals, the state of salt Milk; from whence it is
changed into a salt Serum. From thence, by digestion, it becomes the salt
Lympha; and by often circulating into the habit of the Body, the gelatinose
Lympha becomes Fibrous, which constitutes the highest state of the Animal
nutritious Juice: And I believe we must allow three different states of the
Succus nutritious in the Blood.

1. Whilst it is Chylose, it may nourish the conglomerate Glands, which look
Milky. 2. The Lympha salsa may supply fit Nourishment to the conglobate Glands;
and also to the Ligaments and Bones. 3. The Fibrous Cake of Blood seems the
fittest Nourishment for the Fibrose Muscles of the Body.
3. The Lympha separated by the Glandules of the Brain, being probably the
super-abundant Liquor Nervosus; too much of which would drown the active
Spirits, or clog their motion.

4. The Tears which are a Glandulous salt Lympha, naturally moistening and
cleansing the skins of the Eyes; and for that end, we use salt Ophthalmicks to
cleanse away the Gumminess of the Humors from the Eyes.

Tears are violently forced out by a Passion, which stops the motion of the
Arteries in some other parts, and quickens them toward the Eyes, for the
supply of Tears.

5. The conglobate Glands of the Mesentery taste Saltish; and therefore
separate a salt Lympha from the Blood, which passes to the Receptaculum
commune, but some Lympha may be separated from the Chyle, which goes toward
the Kidneys, as is probably conjectured; for the Urine could not appear so
thin, and pass so soon in great quantity through the Blood and Kidneys: And if
there were not provided such diversions for the quantity of Liquors we drink,
the Blood would wholly be destroyed in its mixture, and the Vessels
over-distended; but by this Passage the abundant Serosity of the Chyle is
evacuated, and many Injuries to the Blood prevented; and by the dilatation of
these unknown Vessels, the Diabetes happens, after Drinking of Waters, or other
Liquors in great quantity: And in that Distemper, the Urine is pale, but sweet
like Chyle.

6. The Lympha separated by the Glandulae Renales is Salt; for the Glandules
taste Salt, and therefore seem to have the nature and use of conglobate Glands.
These Glands separate a salt Lympha into their Cavities, and return it
immediately into the Cava or emulgent Veins, where the secretion of the salt
Urinous Serum, by the emulgent Arteries, has made it deficient.

These Glands were made for the use of the Foetus, in whom they equal the
Kidneys; for the Urine Membranes of the Embryo would be too much filled, if too
much of the salt Serum of the Blood passed the Kidneys. The Blood would want
its due dilution, if none of it returned by these Glands into the Cava:
Therefore the use of these Glands is to preserve a due quantity of the salt
Lympha in the Blood, and to hinder the Urine-Membrane from too great a fullness
in the Embryo, whose Water tastes but little of Salt.

Malpighius has described the structure of the Renes succenturiati to be like
that of the Kidneys; and therefore they separate the same sort of Lympha salsa.
He mentions a Diaphanous salt Lympha to be separated by the Peritonaeum,
pleura, tunica vaginalis, which is of the same nature. Those Lympha's which
will not coagulate by powdered Vitriol, have least of the Gelatinose Particles.

The Excrementitious salt Lympha's are Sweat and Urine.

1. The Sudor, which is a Glandulous Lympha, very Salso-acid. Galen says it is
Bitterish: It smells Sour.

2. The Urine, which is separated by the Glands of the Kidneys.

Both Sweat and Urine have Fetid and Lixivial Smells.

The Salt is from the Serum of the Blood, of a Salso-acid nature, like common
Sal-Ammoniac. The Urine yields a Spirit less Oily than any other Humor of an
Animal.

The Contents in the Urine are the superfluous parts of the Succus Nutritious,
which turn the Urine muddy by Cold.

The Urine will effervesce with the Oil of Vitriol, which is a sign of its
Volatile Salt.

Urine long kept, is said to burn like Brandy, and to color Silver yellow as
Brimstone does. And also it certainly conduces to the production of Nitre.

By these Instances I may confirm my former assertion, That the Principles of
Animals do naturally return into a Mineral State, and produce real Sulphurs,
Salts, as Nitre and Stones.

The color of Urine is from the Contents, and also from Choler, which readily
passes by Urine; and dissolves readily upon mixture with it. The Salt of Urine
is produced by the mixture of the Volatile Acid of digested Meat, and the
Bitter Acrid of Choler, (which is the reason why Chyle tastes not Acid, Bitter,
or Acrid) for the Acid corrects the Bitter Acrid of Choler, and curdles Choler,
and both unite into the Animal Salt; which is evident in Chyle. The bitterness
in Choler is produced by the Spleen; Acid mixing and uniting with the red Oily
part of the Blood, which it precipitates from the Blood; and thereby prepares
it for its separation through the Liver. I dropped some Oil of Vitriol into the
Blood about the Liver, and found it to look yellow like Choler: By the Acid of
the Spleen, the red color of Blood may be turned yellow. The red Hepar
Sulphuris has less Acid than the yellow Flowers. I must also observe, That
Bitter in Animals must have the same Principles as Bitterness in Plants, which
have much Earth and Acid, and Oil digested into a rough ungrateful Texture.

I have transcribed these Remarks about Animal Humors, from a larger account,
in a Discourse about the tastes of Diet: And I have grounded some Assertions on
Experiments I have mentioned in those Papers; but I think these Observations
sufficient to explain the Operations of Medicines by their Tastes on Animal
Humors; and to justify that Assertion, I have made, as a general Rule, That
all Medicines and Meats which have the same Taste and Smell as the Humors of
Animals, do increase, digest, prepare, and help the Secretion of those Humors
they resemble. And for that reason, such Medicines may be called the Friendly
Specificks; but the contrary Tastes to them, may be used as Alteratives in the
diseased state of the Humors.

The Slimy, the Acid, or Styptick Tastes, are the crudest Animal Tastes, and
are produced by the lowest digestion. The Sweet and Oily Tastes are most
Temperate and Nutritive; and therefore have a natural moderate digestion. But
the Bitter, the Acrid, the Salt, and Sulphurous Vitriolick Acid, are the Hot
Animal Tastes; and are produced by the highest digestion of Humors in Animals.

I cannot observe naturally any Fermentation of Humors in any part of the
Animal, but in the Stomach, where the first preparation of our Diet is made:
And there it was necessary to turn the Vegetable Principles into an Animal
nature; and to change the slimy sweet Juices of the Aliment, into a sweet milky
Chyle. From the sweet Chyle all other Juices in an Animal are prepared, by
digestion, mixture, or secretion, without the help of any Ferment.

So we observe the tastes of Plants to alter: The Sweet becomes Bitter; the
Bitter, Acrid; the Acrid, Salt; and the Salt Corrosive. All these Tastes are
produced successively, by a degree of a higher digestion; by which only, the
Texture of Principles is altered into a new one. So in Cheese, which is an
Animal Product, we observe a sweet Gumminess or Slime, whilst new; in the old,
a Bitterness, and a biting Acrimony, which alteration happens without any new
Ferment.

The Glandules separate each Humor, when they have acquired that Taste and
Texture which is suitable to the Pores of each Gland; and there is no need of a
particular Ferment in each Gland, for their Secretion.

Animal Humors are circulated, and have also an Internal motion from the
activity of their Particles; they have also an Effervescence betwixt
contraries; but neither these Ebullitions, nor the external Motion are properly
Fermentations, for that requires a slimy fetid Ferment in Animals: And all
Fermentation tends to a very great change of a Liquor, which has once been
fermented, as we observe in Wine, which becomes Vinegar, by a new ferment: And
in Animal Humors, a Fermentation in the Blood excites a Fever, or produces the
Scurvy.

All Animal Humors given inwardly, retain something of their original Textures,
till they arrive at the Blood, whereby they readily pass their original Glands;
so Urine is a great Diuretic. Milk breeds Chyle, and the milky Lympha's. The
Gall of Animals is a good Hepatick, and opens the Liver. The Decoction of the
Spleen, is used for Spleen-Obstructions, and seems to be useful where the Juice
is defective.

The Menses are given by some absurd Practisers; they produce the Menses, but
also a great Anxiety at the Stomach, and a Frenzy; as is observed by
Vanderwiel.

The Lungs afford a milky Slime, in distillation for Hecticks; wherein that is
continually evacuated.

The Fetid Parts of Animals, as the Horns, Hoofs, Volatile Chemical Oils and
Salts, readily pass into the Nerves, where those high Fetids are bred.

The Liver tastes like Choler, and helps its separation by that Taste.

The Heart has much of the Animal Fetid in it; and therefore the decoction of
it is used for a Cordial.

The Stones are fit nourishment to supply the Semen.

The Grits of Animals are used for the Stone, as Crab's-eyes.

Jellies are used to supply the Succus Nutritious.

I cannot observe any necessity of using more Principles in this Discourse of
Animals, than those four I have mentioned.

In Vegetables I call them a Water, an Oil, an Acid, and an Earth. In Minerals
they may be called an Earthy, a Bituminous Oily, an Acid, and a Watery
Principle. But in the explication of Animal Humors, I will not use the Names of
the Principles of either Vegetables or Minerals; but I have described them by a
viscid or caseous part, an Acid or Sour, an Oily or Fat Principle, and a Water
or Lympha. These Principles are the same in all the Parts and Humors of
Animals, but in different Proportions and Digestions.

I. Oil is capable of these different States in Animal Humors.

1. In Slimes it is crudest, as in the Vegetable Mucilages. 2. It is like
Butter in Chyle, which is Sweet. 3. It is Oily in Fat, and Red upon longer
digestion in the Blood, and yellow in Choler, and Bitter. 4. It is Fetid in the
Spirits.
II. The Acid of Animal Humors has these different States naturally.

1. In milky Chyle it is Sour, like Tartar, as is evident in Butter-Milk; and
the sowreness is somewhat perceptible in the milky Lympha's. 2. The Volatile
Acid in the Stomach, is a Volatile Tartar, like the Spirit of Vinegar: This is
the effect of Fermentation in all Acid Vegetables, and is a combination of Oil
and Acid. 3. The Vitriolick Acid in the Blood, which is a Sulphurous Acid. 4.
The Acid in the Ammoniac Salt of Animals, like the Spirit of Salt.
The Acid in the salt Taste of Chyle, is from the sour Tartar of Chyle; but
the Acid adhering to the Volatile Salt produced in the Blood, by putrefaction,
must needs be from the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood.

III. The Viscid Principle has these Successive Changes naturally.

1. It is a Slime in the Meat; but a caseous Viscid in the Chyle. 2. It is like
Glue in the Serum, when inspissate by the Fire. 3. It is like Jelly in the salt
Lympha's. 4. It is Fibrous in the Mass of Blood. 5. It is Bony, or Calculous,
or Sandy, upon its last resolution, by a long circulation or digestion.
IV. The Water is only altered into a thinner Consistence, and much rarefied to
pass the several Glands, and to dilute the several Humors.

Many other Tastes might be added to these; but they are the effects of a
preternatural state of Humors.

1. An Albuminous Styptick Taste in the Spittle of the Convulsive. 2. A
corrosive Acidity in Colicks, Heart-Burnings, and Ulcers: This is Oleose-acid,
like Acid-acrid in Rosa Solis, and Bellis minor. 3. The corrosive Saltness,
such as is that of Lime-Salt, being burning and Salso-acid. 4. A viscid Taste
is produced by the Inspissation of the milky Slimes; such is the vitreous
Pituita in the Lungs, and the white Skin, or Pleuritick Blood. 5. A nauseous
Taste in the Saliva, by Choler; and by that Mixture, a bitter, sweet, and slimy
Taste is produced, which is nauseous. 6. A Fetid nauseous Taste, from some
putredinous Fetid, communicated from a stagnating Humor, or the nidorose
Contents of the Stomach, like rotten Eggs, or the Womb in a dead Child, or the
putrid Gums in the Scurvy.
But these Observations belong to the preternatural state of Animal Humors.

A Scheme of Animal Smells, naturally observable in Animal Humors, or the solid
Parts.
1. The smell of Milk in the Flesh of young Creatures, and in Milk it self. 2.
The stronger Spirits any Animal has, the stronger is the Smell of that Animal;
so that by the Animal Smell we discern the height of the digestion in each
Animal; for the Spirits give the particular Smell to each Animal, and the
Spirits are the high digested Oily parts. 3. There is a Nitro-Sulphureous
Foetor in the Guts: I cannot observe any Nitrous Taste or Smell in any other
parts of an Animal, but in the primae viae, where it is evident, after
over-digestion, by this Smell. 4. A putrid Smell of Cheese may be observed in
Sweat, and in the Pisle of a Seahorse scraped, and in Horns. 5. A Lixivial
piercing Smell is in the Urine. 6. A smell of Marigolds is in the Menses. 7. A
virose rank Smell is in the Semen, like putrid Fish. 8. A high degree of Fetid
is in the Hoofs, and in the old Bones and Nails. 9. A Fetid Oily offensive
Savor is in melted Fat or Grease. 10. An Acid piercing Smell mixed with Fetid in
the Stomachs of Animals, after the digestion of their Meat.
Preternatural Smells.
1. A Sowreness in the Stomachs of Children, when they vomit Milk, and in their
Stools. 2. A Nidorose Sulphurous Smell in the overdigestion of some Meats. 3.
A putredinous Smell in some Fevers, and in the Smallpox. 4. A higher degree of
the putrid Smell in Gangrenes and foul Ulcers, like Carrion, and in the Scurvy.
5. An Earthy Smell in dying Bodies.
Of the similitude betwixt Plants and Animals.
The great similitude betwixt the natures of Plants and Animals; and the
transmigration of Principles, from Plants to Animals, might be the cause why
Democritus and Plato attributed Sense to Plants: And Anaxagoras esteemed them
sensible of Pleasure and Pain.

The similitude of their Principles is evident, and the number is the same.

1. Water distilled from Milk and Blood, if considered without the smatch of
the Oil, is very little or nothing different from the water of Vegetables, as
to their Physical use.

2. The sowreness of Buttermilk exactly resembles that of Tartar. The
Sulphurous Acid of Minerals, with the Earth of Plants, turns to a pure Tartar;
but with the Oil and Earth of Animals, it produces a Vitriolick Acid; as from
the Acid of Sulphur we produce a Vitriol from Steel.

3. The Oil of Animals is the matter of Heat, and ferments with an Acid like
that of Vegetables; and it, like Resins, yields all the varieties of Animal
Smells, when it is associated with the Volatile Salt; and there is as great a
variety of Animal Tastes and Smells, as there is in Vegetables. I have
Instanced in the similitude of the tastes of Animal Humors, and their Vegetable
Medicines. The pungent Acrimony in Choler, and the Cress-Tastes in Plants is
very much alike; and some Marine Plants, as Sponges, yield a Volatile Urinous
Salt by distillation; and also a fixed one, like that of Plants.

The sweet Tastes in Plants contain much Oil, and feed much, by supplying
Chyle; the Vegetable Oil turning into an Animal Fat. I have compared the Fat,
Marrow and Suets of Animals, to the Vegetable Balsams, Oils, Resins, and
Turpentines: And we usually find Oils of Vegetables, and the Axungias to mix
well together, as being of a like nature.

Though the Ingenious Writers upon Insects have given us many Instances of
their production from Eggs, which former Ages esteemed to proceed from
Putrefaction (for they demonstrate how Insects insert their Eggs into Stalks,
Roots, Fruits, and the Leaves of Plants, and also into putrid Substances of
Animals, and into the Bodies of other Insects,) yet there remain so many
particulars which they have not solved, that I cannot but approve the ancient
Opinion, which affirms, That Insects are produced both from Plants and
putrefied Animals.

There is necessary for the ordinary production of Creatures,

1. A fit nourishment prepared for the Embryo. 2. The first rudiments of it
produced from the Vessels of Parents.
Vegetable Juices, by putrefaction, may be changed into the nature of Animal
Humors; and when they are digested in the Stomach, they change their Vegetable
nature; and if we artificially putrefie Vegetables, they will yield a Volatile
Salt, which is of an Animal nature.

In putrid Vegetables, Insects are always observed: The contrary opinion
allows, That putrid Bodies are fit nourishment for the young Insect: And I may
probably affirm therefore, it is fit for its original constitution at first, as
Eggs serve other Animals for Food, as well as the production of the Foetus: And
if the Juices of Vegetables turn into the nature of Animal Humors, it is also
probable, that these may also cause the Vessels of Vegetables to shoot, and
branch themselves into some Animal Vessels, necessary for the constitution of
the Embryo's solid parts. It seems not improbable, that the Vessels of Plants
should become fit Vessels for Animals; for the Plant-Anatomists have described
those Vessels of Plants to be as curiously wrought as any in Animals: And we
observe the Vessels of Plants and Animals shoot into Mould upon Putrefaction,
which therefore alters both Vessels, and the Juices in Plants: And if Mould
(which is described like a Plant) can grow out of Animals, we cannot believe it
unreasonable to assert, That Animals should grow out of Plants, from whence
they are constantly nourished. Malpighius gives an Instance of Plants growing
out of the dried Serum taken out of Hydropical Tumors; Minimae Plantulae quasi
pulmonariae vel coralloides eleganter attolluntur. De struct. gland. conglobat.
page 15.

We find that a Plant of a different nature may grow out of another Plant,
without a Seed, as is evident in Misletoe, Mosses, Mushroms, Hypocystis,
Orobanche; why may not an Insect of another Species grow out of the living and
dead Bodies of the Erucas, without the insertion of an Egg?

The Worms in Animals are very different from all the other Insects in the
World. It is impossible that Insects should insert their Eggs into the Horns,
Guts, Liver, and Bones of Animals, in which Insects have been observed. I have
taken the broad Worm out of the Guts of the Embryo, upon the dissection of a
Cow with Calf; I am sure it is highly improbable that any Insects Egg should be
conveyed thither.

The Ingenious Dr. Tyson has observed a difference betwixt the long Worm in
Animals, and the ordinary Earth-worm; and therefore they are not of the same
nature.

Insects are not only superficially changed, but many also of their Internal
parts are changed also; they alter their Diet, for the Eruca and Papilio have
different Food and Actions. These changes from one Species of Insects to
another, show the change from the Fibrous parts of a Plant to the first
Lineaments of an Insect, not to be improbable.

The Tastes and Smells of some Insects.
1. Insects of a slimy Taste, as Snails; the Slime of Snails, supplies the
Milky Slime, being like the Saliva. The threads of Spiders and Silkworms is bred
of a slimy viscid Humor, which is used to stop Bleeding, as viscid Gums be.

Frogs have a cool Slime for Ointments; and their slimy Spawn yields a cool
Water, which may be given to cool the glandulous Juice of the Womb.

I have taken an hundred of Grass-snails in a Morning, and swallowed them whole
in May, after they are mixed in a Napkin. Other Snails are better boiled in
Milk for Hecticks; for distillation destroys their Slime.

2. An Acid Odor is observed in Ants; and an Acid Spirit is distilled from them.

3. An Acrid Taste may be observed by chewing live Millepedes, with a savor of
the rotten Wood on which they feed. This Acrid passes by Urine, and makes them
Diuretic, and also Hepatick and Cephalic. The dried Millepedes are Fetid, and
thereby discuss Scrophulous Tumors.

4. There is a bitter Astringency in the Kermes, which is the Nest or Gall of
the Insect. The Insect is supposed to be Fragrant and Acrid; from whence its
Cordial Virtue may depend: And its Antifebrile Virtue from the taste of Galls,
which resemble the taste of the Cortex Peruvianus; and therefore the Cortex of
the Ilex coccifera ought to be tried for the Jesuits-Bark; it grows in Italy,
Spain, and France, and is described, as having green Leaves, like the
Laurel-Bitters.

Coccus Polonicus grows on the Roots of Polygonum: It contains a Worm which
turns into a Fly, and that leaves a Skin which smells of Musk: It is used for
Convulsions. Bonetus.

The Syrup of Kermes has a Fragrancy from the Juice of Apples, and Rose Water.

5. The Cimices smell Fetid: The Insects bred in the Body of the Willow are
said bircum olere.

6. A corrosive Taste is in Cantharides: Their Acrid Salt affects the Kidneys
and Bladder; and they offend the Nose by pounding, as Acrids do: And if they be
ground to Powder, they turn Syrup of Violets green.

7. Of a Salt Taste: This is observed in the Venomous sting of a Be: And the
Venom of a Scorpion is, Guttula aquae candidae, as Redi informs us. The same
corrosive Acrid, or salt Ferment is in all Venoms. A burning Coal applied to
the Bite or Sting immediately, prevents all Mischief. And Volatile Salts most
successfully prevent the coagulations of the Blood by poisonous Bites.

A TABLE of Mineral Tastes.
I. Gritty Tastes of Earth, Stones, Minerals, and their hot Calces. II.
Styptick fat greasy Earths. III. Vitriolick Tastes. 1. Acerb Aluminous, of
Alum and Quicksilver. 2. Sweet Vitriolick in Steel, Gold, Tin, and Lead
Vitriols. 3. Bitter Vitriolick in Silver-Crystals. 4. Nauseous Brass-savored
Vitriols in Copper.
IV. Bituminous bitterish Tastes, either Fetid, Aromatic, or Terebinthinate.
V. Fetid sulphurous Tastes. VI. Acid Tastes of Spirit of Sulphur, Vitriol,
Salt, Nitre. VII. Salt Tastes, Volatile or Fixed, or Vitriolated or Ammoniack.
VIII. Marine Salso-acids, as Sal Gemmae, or else Nitrose cool Salts. IX.
Caustic burning Tastes, and Styptick.
The First CLASS.
The Tastes and Smells of Earths.
WE call those Mineral Earths, which dissolve or soften by Water, and taste and
smell Earthy.

1. Earths of a sandy or gritty Taste, such as common Earth, and of a smell of
Mould. This common Earth is produced from the minute Particles of Stones, worn
off by Rain, the current of Springs, Rivers, and the Sea, where Sandiness most
abounds; or else by the Airs motion, or the sulphurous Acid in it, arising
from the hot central parts of the Earth: With this the common Earth seems to be
Impregnate, and not to be the pure Element of Earth, which I suppose to be like
Glass or Ashes, since most Bodies are reducible by Fire into one of them. And
that solid part in Minerals which is Alkalizate, and serments with Acids, seems
to me the true Element of Earth; and this also yields the Alkalizate parts both
to Plants and Animals.

I distilled in an Earthen Retort, and an open Fire, some common dry Earth, and
sifted it clean from Vegetables: It was taken half a Foot or more deep under
the green Turf: It yielded a great deal of Water, and I observed a burnt Smell
of Smoke: I mixed Syrup of Violets with the Water, and it turned it green. From
this Experiment I suppose I may conclude, That the common Earth contains Water
and some Oil, and Volatile Salt is made out of it. By the Fire, the Caput
mortuum turned white, like burnt Ashes.

All gritty Earths ferment with Acids, as Chalk.

2. Earths of a Styptick Taste, sticking to the Tongue, and feeling Unctuous,
with a sulphurous Earthy Smell. These are Metallic Earths, taken from Mines;
and their Vitriolick Stypticity is from the Metal.

Bole has its Stypticity and color from Iron, because it yields a green
Tincture with Spirit of Salt; and is Aluminous, by mixing with Spirit of Nitre.

Terra sigillata contains some Particles of Gold, and ferments with Acids; but
Bole does not, it becomes Aluminous by Acids.

Raddle distilled, smelt a little Acid; but the Phlegm which was in great
quantity, tasted like pure Water: The Raddle lost not its color, but turned
deep Purple in the Caput Mortuum.

Raddle is given to ss. for two or three Doses in the beginning of the
Smallpox, to stop and prevent Looseness, and too great Putrefaction. It tastes
like Bole, and has the same Virtue as an Antidote against Infectious Fevers.

3. Earths of a bituminous fetid Taste, which give a bitterness to some purging
Springs, as North-hall-Waters.

The Fires made of Boggy Earths smell Sulphurous and Fetid, as in our
Pea-Turfs. Hence it appears that Sulphurs are lodged in Earths, as well as
other Minerals.

Bituminous Earths are of a discussing nature, because Fetid.

4. Aromatic Earth, Samos Earth mentioned by Dr. Grew.

5. Acrid Earths, and sweet Earths, and bitter sweet, are mentioned by Kircher.

6. Salt Earths may also be observed as well as Salt Springs; for all Physical
Waters have their Tastes from Mineral Earths.

I observed a white Salt on new Brick-Walls, which tasted cool and saltish,
like Nitre: This seems to come from the Burnt-Brick, whose Volatile Salt is
made Nitrous, by the Acid of the Air.

I distilled Marle, and Clay, but had nothing but Phlegm, but they turned Syrup
of Violets green, which is a sign of a Volatile Salt. And Bartholin mentions an
argilla flava, which yields a Volatile Salt in Glass Vessels, but it is lost in
Earthen; which caution I did not observe. And Le Mort affirms, That Argillae
variae species praebent sal volatile mediante distillatione. The Phlegm of the
Marle looked Oily, and smelt very strong of a particular Smell, not unpleasant.
From hence I suppose some Oyliness is latent in Marle, as well as because it
improves Sandy ground.

By these Experiments I found how difficult it was to resolve the common Earths
into their Principles by the Fire; but nature easily dissolves all her own
mixtures, by a gradual Fermentation, by the Sulphurous Acid in the Air: And
the constant agitation of the Materia subtilis, which flowing from the Sun
gives motion to Fluids, and vegetation to Plants. Though Plants spread their
Roots in common Earth, yet thence neither their Oil, Acid, or Earth is drawn,
but only from the Rainwater, impregnate with the Sulphurous Acid of the Air;
and also saturated with the Bituminous Fumes, lodged in the common Earth. The
bituminous Oil, and sulphurous Acid unite in the Water, and are capable of the
Vegetable Ferment, which changes the Mineral Principles into a Vegetable State,
and the particular nature of each Plant. The stronger the Oil of the Plant, the
higher is the Fermentation of this bituminous Nutriment of Plants, and the
weaker Fermentation depends upon a crude Oil: When the Nutriment of Plants,
which is a Mineral Juice is become of a Vegetable nature, it receives no new
Fermentation in any part of the Plant, but in the Bladders of the Root; all the
alteration which happens afterward, is only from its digestion by the heat of
the Sun, the agitation of the Plant by the Wind, and the long conservation of
its Juices in large Vessels, as in the Bladders of Fruits, and the Leaves of
Trees.

Of the Taste and Smell of Stones.
STones may be observed in Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals.

I. Animal Stones of a chalky Substance, and of a dry gritt in Taste, and
earthy Smell: These ferment with Acids, like Chalk, and thereby become
Styptick; but with Spirit of Salt they acquire a saltish Taste, and are
Diuretic. And by their unequal rough Particles they cleanse the Teeth in
Dentifrices, and probably rub off the Gravel in the Kidneys.

Crab's-eyes is a chalky Animal Earth, and smells like Chalk, when powdered.
Egg-shells and Oyster-shells have the same chalky Substance. Egg-shells burnt
taste Saltish, and burning like Lime; and Oyster-shells burnt have a Saltness.

Bezoar-Stone tastes Gritty, and ferments strongly with Acids. Since petrified
Animal Substances are dissolvable by Acids, as Spirit of Nitre; by this they
resemble the Gypsum or Limestone. Petrified Animals also burn into a Caput
mortuum, like Lime, and have a little ebullition like Lime, upon the effusion
of Water. I may hence conjecture, That the Stony Particles which petrifie
Animals, is from the Limestone; which joining with the natural Vitriolick Acid
of Animal Blood, produces the petrifying Principle, which is like Nitrum
calcarium in petrifying Waters: Petrified Limestone Icicles hang naturally on
Limestone Rocks.

Petrified Animal Parts distilled, as Pearls, Bones, Crab's-eyes, and human
Stones, yield Volatile Salts and Oils, and have a Lime for their Caput Mortuum;
which being intermixed with their Animal Principles, petrified them.

The Calculus humanus contains little fixed Salt, but much Volatile; and
therefore it is not bred out of Tartar, but the Limestone Particles associated
with the Ammoniac Animal Salt, coagulates into a Stone, which is much lighter
than Minerals, but heavier than Animal Bones.

II. Vegetable Stones petrified, as the Stones in Fruits, of Dates, Haws,
Peaches, etc. These Stones distilled, yield an Acid Spirit, like the Spirit of
Wood: This Acid combining with the Limestone Earth, constitutes the petrifying
Principles in Vegetables. The Stones of Pears ferment with Acids; therefore
these Vegetable Stones may imbibe the Animal Acids, and become Diuretic. So
the Seed-cases of Gromwel ferment by Acids.

Malpighius has observed some Turpentine-Vessels in the Stones of Peaches,
whence their Diuretic Virtue may be increased.

Petrified Vegetables, as Coral, ferments with Acid; and the Powder of it
smells Earthy, like Moss. If it have any Fragrancy, it may resemble that of
some Mosses, or is ground by the Apothecary, with fragrant Waters. Coral
distilled yields a smoaky Acid Spirit, like that of Wood, and an Empyreumatick
Oil, which are its Vegetable Principles; and the Caput mortuum is like Lime,
which equalled the quantity of the Acid Spirit; but it did not effervesce with
Water, as Lime.

From the distillation of petrified Animals and Vegetables it appears, That
their Principles are not changed by petrification, but only Nitre mixed with a
Limestone, or chalky Stone, by which they acquire a greater hardness and
solidity. And it is observed in Bonetus, That Coral may be dissolved in
Rubicundissimam mucilaginem, by reason of its Vegetable Principles, which I
believe remain unaltered by petrification.

III. Mineral Stones:

These are either of the nature of Lime-stones or Flints, or Metalline Stones,
or Bituminous.

I call all those Lime-stones which burn into a kind of Lime; and these may be
divided into Stones of a chalky Substance, or those of a harder Substance, as
common Stone, etc.

1. Stones of a chalky Substance, as Lapis Spongiae, which smells like Chalk,
and dissolves with Spirit of Salt: This grows in Sponges.

Osteocolla: It looks like the inward part of a Bone, Spongy and Porous; and
therefore the Powder of this was given to supply the petrifying Earthy part,
necessary for the solidity of Bones, which are not far from the nature of
Minerals. Knitbone grows like a Plant, and branches it self in the Earth, and
has a chalky Pith: It is esteemed a petrified Marle. Dr. Grew observes, That a
fat putrid Substance, like rotten Wood, is found with it, which he thinks the
Mother of it.

Lapis Judaicus is Flinty, but by rubbing it looks like Chalk: It ferments with
Spirit of Nitre, and is of the nature of Chalk, being used as a Diuretic.

2. Stones of a greater hardness, as Limestone, Marble, Alabaster; all which
burnt yield a Lime. I have seen a Limestone finely polished, which, in its
colored Veins, resembled Marble, and is plentifully found in Hereford-shire,
and there Lime is made of it. I burnt a piece of building -Stone into Lime,
which is used in many places both for Stone and Lime.

Gypsum ustum is Styptick, and dries Ulcers in the Mouth; and is used for sore
Horse backs.

Calx viva has a Styptick, burning, and corrosive Taste: From the common
Limestone a Sulphurous Acid may be distilled. The Limestone is burnt half
away in the Fire; and an Oil is observed to sweat out of it in burning. This
Sulphurous Oily Acid unites with the Earth into a Salt, and gives the
Stypticity to burnt Lime. These Experiments show the natural composition of
Stones, that they have both Oil and Acid in their Bodies.

Spirit of Vitriol makes Limewater Bitterish, by separating the Oil from the
Earthy part, with which it unites: From this mixture, evaporated by addition of
Salt of Tartar, a Volatile Salt may be distilled, which smells Urinous. This
Experiment shows the Volatility of the Salt of Lime; and hence it has its
Urinous Smell; and some of it passes over in the distillation of Sal Ammoniac,
which makes it somewhat Corrosive. This Volatile Earth of Lime seems to be the
terrene part, necessary in the composition of Salt, by the addition of an Oily
Acid: And this may be the Alkalizate part in all Plants. The Ashes of Plants
and Calx of Lime agree in their Saltness; and both are used for the Improvement
of Land.

2. The Second Species of Stones is of those glassy Stones which have the
hardness and nature of Flints: These being ground to Powder have angular edges
like broken Glass, whereby they cleanse and scowre the Kidneys from Sandy
coagulations.

Sand is of the nature of Flints, and seems to be the product of Sea Salt,
being plentifully produced in the making of Salt. And Le Mort observes, that
Arenae masticatae salsum, blandum gustum linguae communicant. And Sand is also
produced from the Animal Salts coagulated in the Kidneys. Black Sand is from
Iron, yellow from Ocher, green from Copper, golden from Gold intermixed with it
in its coagulation. The Nitrum calcarium is the chief part of Flints, which
coagulates either with the Limestone Particles in common Sand, or else with
some Mineral in colored Flints.

The gritty Stones used for Building is nothing but a congeries of Sand. This
grows soft in the Fire, but will not burn into Lime; the Clay which unites the
Sand is dried by the Fire.

No flinty Stones will burn into Lime.

Lapis Nephriticus is flinty, and ragged like the Stones of the Kidneys; it
looks Oily without, and is of a pale green color: It is a kind of Jaspis,
having its Tincture from Iron; and all its Virtue is to be deduced thence.

Common Flints, and common Pebbles, which are Flints, smell Sulphurous if
knocked together, and strike Fire, by a brisk agitation of the Sulphurous
Particles. When they are burnt in the Fire, and quenched in Water, they crack,
and give a Sulphurous Taste to it. The Water will not ferment by an Acid,
neither would it turn with Galls, though the Water tasted very much of Steel.
Flints and Pebbles have diverse Metals mixed with them, as Iron, Gold, Silver,
Copper, etc. and sometimes diverse Earths, or Boles, which color the Stones.

Gems seem not to differ from Flints, in which Diamonds are bred.

Crystal is the softest: It is used in Powder to abate the Acid in Colicks, and
the poison of Sublimate, which is a corrosive Vitriol.

I cannot believe that Gems can be dissolved in the Stomach, because Pebbles
pass through the Guts of Hens undissolved; and also Fruit-stones, which are
less hard.

The colored Gems are colored Flints.

Rubines Granates, Hyacinth, have their Tincture from Gold, and likewise their
Virtue, Aq. Regis extracts the Tincture from Granates, like that of Gold; to
which a Cordial Virtue is attributed, because it is made like a Vitriol, by
dissolution, by a Menstruum, and that raises the Fermentation of the Blood; but
it is impossible that the Liquors in the Stomach should dissolve Gold; and
therefore they cannot extract a Tincture from these Stones.

The Smaragdus and Jaspis have their green color from Iron, and that
Astringency and Chalybeate Faculty which is attributed to them in Bleeding and
Fluxes; but a little powder of Steel is more efficacious; for though Iron is
dissolvable by Acids, yet Iron Ore, such as is in the Stones, cannot yield to
them.

Saphires have their Sky-colour from Copper, and are used as Vitriol in
Eye-Medicines.

Topazes have their Virtue, and Saffron-colour from Iron.

The Salts of precious Stones are only a composition of the Acid and the Stone.

Some precious Stones are said to smell fragrant when ground, but I could not
observe the Fragrancy in some which had been long powdered. I will mention what
I find in the Illustrious Kircher, Geodes Misenus violae odorem refert: It has
the Virtue of Aetites, and is a Stone of the same nature.

Lapis Marieburgicus moschum olet, serpilli Kircher Mundus subter. de lapidibus.
odorem Turingicus, musti odorem ophites, vinum olet echites, lac galactites,
sulphuris odorem marchasitae, and silices, succinum, and gagates resinae
odorem.

The Sulphur in some precious Stones, is like a Flame, and shines in the dark,
by rubbing, or warm Water, as some Diamonds. These are the natural Mineral
Noctiluca's, which, like those made of Animal Humors, are shining and
Sulphurous. This Sulphur gives the Violet Fragrancy in some Stones; and thence
some effects may be produced on Animal Spirits.

3. Stones of a Metalline hardness, and something Vitriolick, from the Metals
they contain. All Metals are fixed in some Stony Mineral, as Spar, Limestone,
or such like.

I distilled some Iron-stone in an Earthen Retort, it yielded a Phlegm, which
smelt Sulphurous, and tasted Vitriolick Sweet, and turned Syrup of Violets
green. This Iron-stone burnt in the Furnace was a pure Flint. This I had from
my Worthy Friend Mr. Humphry Jennings's Furnace in Warwickshire, near Aston.

Lapis haematites: I distilled a red Liquor from Lapis haematites and Sal
Ammoniac, of an Aluminous Taste, fit for Fluxes, and of a Saffron Smell; and
therefore called Aroma Philosoph. by Zwelfer. The Tincture made of Vitriolum
Martis, and Saccharum Saturni, looks of the same color, and is an
extraordinary Styptick in Fluxes; and is called the Tinct. Antiphthisica. An
artificial Boodstone is produced by the Sublimation of Vitriol. Martis, and
Saccharum Saturni; for which reason, the haematites is supposed to partake of
both Metals, and its Virtue lies in the Astringency.

The Magnet is used in Wounds, and all Martial Medicines; but neither this, nor
the haematites, nor the Ore of Iron ferment with Acids.

Amber, and other Bitumens, attract by their Sulphurous Steams; for rubbing
increases their Electrical Virtue, by exciting the motion of the Sulphurous
Effluviums. The Lodestone being Iron must attract by its Sulphur Effluvia, of
which Iron smells strongly: And those circulate through the Stony matter, with
some respect to the Poles, to which the Materia subtilis determines it.

The Pyrites tastes Vitriolick, and smells Sulphurous: It is the Mysy
Diascoridis.

The Copper-stones are of a Sulphurous burning heat, and Vitriolick Taste.

Lapis Lazuli and Armeni are Vitriolick Purgers, and vomit sometimes: They are
washed to abate their Acrimony: They are sensible of Acids; and Urinous Spirits
extract a blue color; by which it appears, That Copper may be dissolved in the
Stomach; and thereby those Stones purge.

Smiris contains Iron; and its Tincture turns black with Galls. Mr. Boil.

Pumex is a soft Stone, but out of it a Copper Tincture may be extracted,
whereby it dries and cicatrises.

4. Stones of a Bituminous Smell, as Gagates, Lithanthrax.

The white Belearnites is mentioned to smell like Amber, but the Ash colored,
like Cows-Horn, as Dr. Grew observed.

Lapis Lyncis tastes Fetid, and smells Sulphurous; and therefore is not fit
for inward use, as a Diuretic: It is described of an Electrical Virtue.

There are some Stones indissolvable by Acids, neither melt by the Fire; and
therefore they consist of an Earthy Principle alone, without the mixture of Oil
or Acids, as Talc, and Selenites, or Specular Stone, both are used only as
Cosmeticks.

Burnt Minerals and Stones retain the Particles of Fire, whereby their weight
is increased, and they acquire a heating and drying Faculty.

Magisteries of Stones ferment neither with Alkalin or Acid, and therefore are
little esteemed.

Stones dissolved by Acids are Styptick, and Coral Austere.

The Tincture of Coral is binding, and rough in Taste; and no other Virtue can
be expected from a petrified Substance in Tincture, though the Chemists
unjustly boast of it, and have writ so much about its Tincture.

Lead-spar burnt, yields a Lixivial Salt, as Dr. Grew affirms: The Powder of it
unburnt, is good for the Stone and Gravel; as I have observed, all gritty
Powders pass by Urine, as Crab's-eyes, etc. These are the chief parts of Salt,
to which an Oily Acid joins it self for compounding a Salt.

Of the Tastes and Smells of Metals, and Metallic Bodies, and their products,
as Vitriols, Calces, Sulphurs, and Bitumens.
ALL Metals taste something Vitriolick, by reason of their Sulphurous Acid. In
their Composition there is little Water, much Earth, and Sulphur, which last is
compounded of an Oil and Acid.

All Metals have the same Principles, but in different proportions and mixtures
of them: And we may evidently smell the Sulphur in all Metals, except in Gold,
which does not smell Sulphurous. Metals have little Taste or Virtue of
themselves, but by their Preparation.

First, Of Vitriols.
1. Of the Taste and Virtue of Gold Medicines. Le Mort in his Pharmacia
Rationalis, gives the taste of the Tincture of Gold, and says, It is a little
Styptick, and afterward very Sweet; the sweetness following the Vitriolick
Taste.

This Vitriolick sweet Taste agrees exactly with the Steel-Taste of Blood; and
therefore may be a great Medicine for the strengthening of the Blood, as all
Steel Medicines be, which have also a sweet Vitriolick Taste.

Mr. Molt, an Ingenious Chemist, informs me, That his Tincture of Gold tastes
like Spiritus nitri dulcis; therefore this Preparation is different from the
former.

The Volatile Alkali which extracts the Tincture, acquires the nature of an
Ammoniac Salt, by mixing with some of the Acid Menstruum, adhering to the Calx
of Gold; and that Salt may render the Tincture Diuretic and Sudorifick.

There is in the Blood an Ammoniac Salt, besides the Vitriolick Taste: And in
all these the Tincture of Gold, and the Flowers of Sal Ammoniac Martiale, agree
with the natural Taste of Blood; and therefore very much help its digestion,
and the sanguification of Chyle.

The Sulphur of Gold cannot be extracted, but may produce some effects like
Sulphur; so the Sulphur of Flint and Iron may appear burning, by striking both
together, which excites a brisk motion: And Iron looks of different colors, by
different degrees of Heat. The detonation of Metal, their smell of Sulphur, and
also their burning are plainly effects of their extraverted Sulphur, though
that cannot be divided from the other Principles.

Aurum fulminans has a Vitriolick Taste, and purges if unwashed, and colors
the Stools black: It yields a purple Sublimate, like the solution of Gold; this
color proceeds from its Sulphur, but that is not separable from the Earthy
parts; for the Tincture of Gold may be reduced into Gold again. The fulminating
Virtue depends on a new Nitre, regenerated by a mixture of the Salt of Tartar
with the Menstruum; and this is lodged in the Pores of the Gold, and thence
exploded.

2. Silver Medicines: The Crystals which are the Vitriol of Silver, are
accounted very Bitter: In the Pil. Lunares they purge violently.

The blue Tincture of Silver tastes Bitterish; by which, and the Volatile
Alkali of its Menstruum, it is Antiepileptick, and it tastes also Styptick; for
which it is used in the Gonorrhoea.

3. Copper Medicines are Vitriolick, Bitterish, of a Brass-savour Taste, very
Nauseous.

The Roman Vitriol is most Acrid. Copper Ore, and all Copper Medicines have a
strong Sulphurous Smell; by which they discuss and deterge, and eat proud
Flesh, as Aerugo does; but the Vitriolick Taste cicatrizes.

Galen mentions the Acrimony of Copper Vitriol, with a suffocating Smell.

Spirit of Verdigriese has a strong Acid pungent Taste, by which it is a great
dissolvent, and smells of a quick Acid.

Sal Vitrioli vomits, by its Brass-savored nauseous Vitriol-Taste.

White Vitriol will not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, neither will burnt
Vitriol; I mixed both with it: but Roman Vitriol curdles it.

Aes ustum must be drying, and Astringent in Taste.

Sulphur Vitrioli narcoticum tastes Vitriolick. The Sulphur in all Vitriols,
when it is precipitated from the Acid, smells Fetid, as in Oil of Vitriol; and
thereby it becomes Narcotick, or Anodyne.

Copper has a very strong Sulphur, whereby it becomes inflammable, and very
prejudicial to the Miners.

A Copper-Farthing swallowed by a Child, caused a large Salivation.

The Lunar Caustic tastes of a Brass-savored burning Vitriol, as a Surgeon
informs me. Burnt Alum and Lime have also a burning Stypticity, and are thereby
also very Corrosive.

Common Verdigriese coagulates the Serum of the Blood, into which I put some of
it; and therefore it acts the same on the Succus nutritious, which is bred from
the Serum, and flows from Ulcers; and therefore by this Vitriolick coagulative
Virtue it dries and cicat^^zes, stopping the Vessels, and coagulating the Serum.

Burnt Alum coagulates the Serum very much; and therefore is very drying: It
tastes extremely Styptick, with some Heat and Acid.

4. Iron Medicines: They taste all Vitriolick Sweet; and Iron smells
Sulphurous; the Virtue depends on the Vitriol, and also on the Fetid Sulphur.

Iron may be dissolved into a Crocus, by Spirit of Hartshorn; but it will not
taste so Vitriolick as other Preparations. Sal Chalybis calcined, tastes
Aluminous, and very Styptick; and then is most fit for outward use. Sal
Chalybis will not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, nor Choler.

5. Lead Medicines are Vitriol, Sweet, and Styptick Aluminous.

The great Stypticity of Lead makes all its Preparations Offensive to the Guts
and Stomach, where Lead leaves an indelible nauseousness, as Wedelius informs
us. Borellus assures us, That the Salt of Lead produced the Palsy. Bonetus
affirms, That the Fumes of Lead produce pains in the Bowels, stoppage in the
Belly, and trembling of the Limbs, pains in the Head, and blackness of Teeth. I
have often observed the dry Cough, and shortness of Breath, which he mentions,
in the Miners. These affects are deducible from the Stypticity acting on
different parts, and most particularly on the Nervous Juice. Since the Fumes of
Quicksilver and Lead affect us after the same manner, I have supposed them to
have some similitude in their natures.

For these Symptoms Bonetus commends Oily Medicines, which have a contrary
effect to Stypticks, as Sperma Ceti, Soap. Milk, after Evacuation, and fresh
Butter used, prevent any ill effects of Lead-Medicines.

Tinctura Antiphthisica, which is made of Saccharum Saturni, and Vitriolum
Martis tastes extremely Styptick, by which it heals the Ulceration of the
Lungs, stops the putrefaction of the Blood, and prevents Loosnesses; but
Stypticks make the Breath of Hectical Persons very short and strait, as I have
often observed by use of Stypticks, after Spitting of Blood.

Cerussa is Styptick and Cooling, being Lead corroded by Vinegar.

5. Tin Medicines: The Vitriols of Tin are described as Insipid and Rough. Mr.
George Molt communicated these Tastes to me.

Sal Jovis is sweet on the Tongue at first, and goes off with a Rough
unpleasantness at last.

The Sulphur of Jovial Medicines make them Anti-hystericks: And Tin smells very
Sulphurous and burns. The Stypticity of Jovial Medicines outwardly heals all
Ulcers and Tetters, if they be mixed with Pomatum.

6. Mercurial Medicines: Mercurial Vitriols are of a Brass-savored Taste, and
Aluminous Styptick: Diverse Persons have complained of that Taste after Purging
with Mercurius dulcis; by this Aluminous Vitriol they cicatrize and resist
putrefaction; and then coagulate the Serum of the Blood to produce a
Salivation: And Alum it self does coagulate it.

The Fumes of Mercury produce the Palsy and Giddiness, by coagulating the
Nervous Juice. Fumus Mercurii ob aciditatem hostilem laryngem statim
praecludit, and constringit. This is Doleus's Observation: So that Mercury
unprepared has as evident qualities as other Metals.

That Mercurial Fumes pass through the Nerves into the Brain is not improbable;
and also all other Smells act immediately upon the Spirits, and not on the
Membranes or Fibrillae nervosae. This may be proved by the effects of Charcoal
Fumes, which kill by their Fetid Oily Acids. And new Aqua Fortis will strike
them down who smell to it, and cause a Giddiness. These Mercurial Fumes which
get into the Blood, acquire some Vitriolick Acid thence, and thereby are more
Vitriolated to coagulate the Serum, and produce a Salivation.

Turbith Mineral seems of little Taste at first, but leaves, after a few
Minutes, an exceeding Roughness, with much Spitting; by which Tastes it
salivates and vomits.

Mercurius dulcis, and Praecipitatus albus dulcis leave a Vitriolick Taste, a
little Brass-savored; but Sublimate has the strongest Styptick, curdling the
Serum of the Blood.

Red Precipitate is a corrosive Styptick, but it would not curdle the Serum of
the Blood, though I stirred it with it.

Mercurius vitae after some time tastes Rough, and leaves a Brass-savored
Vitriolick Taste. The Antimonial Sulphurous Acid makes it vomitive, especially
being joined with a Brass-savored Taste, which this, as well as all other
Mercurial Purgers, leave, after their Operations. Salt of Tartar imbibes the
Acid, and makes it milder. Spirits that are Acid correct the Antimonial
Sulphurs, and take away its violence.

A scruple of Diaphoretick Antimony does well correct all Poisonous effects by.
Quicksilver, ill prepared; and so does Salt of Tartar, and Limewater.

Mercury has some Acid in it, whereby it corrodes Iron, the Teeth, and offends
Worms.

Spirit of Sal Ammoniac makes Mercurius dulcis black, by separating some
Sulphur from the Acid Salts.

Mercury dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and precipitated by Limewater, is of a
yellow color: Salt Water precipitates it into a white: Urine to an Incarnate
color, as Oil of Tartar to a Milky; but if Sublimate be precipitated, the
colors vary, as at Page 19. Second Part of the Pharmaco-Basanos.

7. Antimonial Vitriols, which consist most of Sulphur; but in Antimony some
Lead is supposed to be, from whence it has its Alkali; which, combining with
the Acid, is commonly added in the preparation of Antimony: It thence receives
its Vitriolate Astriction, which is perceived by the Taste; as my Ingenious
Friend, Dr. Edward Betts, has intimated to me: And he also informed me, That
Crocus Metalloru^ had some Taste like Vitriolum album. Common Cinnabar has the
Ceruss of Lead mixed with it, and therefore is noxious. Le Mort.

Secondly, The Taste of the Mineral Calces.
These dry Earthy Calces imbibe Acids, and they are Diaphoretick, by retaining
something of their Mineral Sulphurs; for diaphoretick Antimony becomes again
Vomitive, if long kept; for the activity of the Aerial Acid dissolves the
Sulphur out of it, as other Acid Spirits will do. This Instance is sufficient
to show that in Mineral Calces some Sulphur is contained, as well as some
Oyliness in the Fixed Salt of Plants.

Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Antihecticum, Bezoardicum Solare, Lunare, Joviale,
Minerale, are pure Calces, having some heat from the Sulphur, or the Fire, or
the Spirit of Wine burnt on them.

Bezoardicum Minerale stirs not with the Alkalies or Acids, and therefore
acts chiefly by the latent Sulphur; and these Calces may be given in Milk.

The Antihecticum has the Calces of Antimony, Steel, and Tin, to absorb the
Animal Acids; and some of each Mineral Sulphur adheres to their Calx, and
therefore it Vomits, and is given till it becomes nauseous, by increasing the
Dose. It corrects all Acids in Lues Venerea, in Ulcers, and the Hectic; but I
must honestly confess, I could never observe any Cure to be done by it in
Consumptive Cases, in which I have often tried it. The Acid in the Stomach may
give these Calces either a Saline Taste, or else a Stypticity, and so advance
their Virtues, and help the separation of their Sulphur, which was before
locked up with the Alkali, as appears in the Glass of Antimony, and other
Calces which vomit.

Thirdly, The Taste of Mineral Sulphurs.
1. Sulphurous Acid, as in common Sulphur, which is evidently both Acid and
Sulphurous upon burning it, and pierces the Nose strongly.

Ens primum Sulphuris smells strongly of Sulphur, and tastes much of the Acid,
by which it cools Hectical Blood, and coagulates Choler in the Colic.

Sulphur is a good Preservative against all Infectious Fevers, and especially
the Smallpox, and all Epidemical Distempers depending on the Air, and as a
Fetid it is Antihysterick. The Flowers taste both Fetid and something
Vitriolick, and dry the Piles, in Pills or Lozenges.

2 Stronger Sulphurs and less Acid. In the Clyssus of Antimony the Acid is
small, but the Sulphur is stronger than the smell of Sp. of Sal Ammoniack,
which makes it an excellent Antihysterick, being strongly Fetid.

Emetick Tartar has a pleasing Acidity, but the Sulphur of the Antimony vomits.

Sal Antimonii has the taste of a dulcified Acid.

Ettmuller mentions a Salt Clyssus of Antimony as a good Diuretic: And he
affirms, That Antimonial Sulphur may be prepared to smell like Musk. Dr.
Needham says, Antimonial Sulphur smells and burns like Brimstone. Cinnabar of
Antimony smells Sulphurous.

3. Sulphurous, hot, burning or Corrosive Acids.

Arsenick tastes of a burning heat, and is also Acid. So the Butter of
Antimony, which is Corrosive, smells strong of Sulphur, and has an Acid in it.
Oleum Stanni is very Corrosive, and Acid, and is not to be distinguished from
Butyrum Antimonii; but, by its continual Smoking, both being very Corrosive.
This Corrosive quality in Minerals depends on a Volatile active burning
Sulphur, edged with an Acid. Arsenick did not mix with the Serum of the Blood,
nor curdle it: Neither would common Sulphur Flowers either mix or increase its
Floridity. The Mineral of Arsenick causes shortness of Breath, and Palsies in
the Miners, by its great Foetor: The Spirits, like the Flame of a Candle, are
wholly extinguished by Sulphurous Damps.

Crocus Metallorum dissolves well in the Serum of the Blood; it gives it a
yellow color, but does not coagulate it, and therefore works more on the
Membranes than Humors. The chief Virtue of Antimony lies in the Sulphur, which
may be strongly smelt, by rubbing two pieces together; and by this Sulphur
Antimony discusses, and dries in common drying Decoctions; but I must confess,
Sulphurs are much more evident to the Smell than the Taste in all Minerals, and
therefore by that Sense are most to be observed.

Fourthly, The Tastes or Smells of the Bitumens.
1. Bitumens taste Bitter, like Turpentines, as Petroleum, and smell like it,
with addition of some Earthy Fetid. Asphaltum tastes like Pitch, as I am
informed, and it burns into a Cinder.

2. Some are Bitter and Fetid, as Succinum; the Tincture of Amber tastes
Bitterish, and is Antiepileptick like other Fetids.

3. It is not improbable that Amber-griese is a Bitumen, and of a fragrant
Smell, very Cordial. It yields the same Principles as Amber by distillation,
both Oil and Salt. If the consistence of the Bitumens be considered, they are
like Oils, Turpentines, or Resins.

Ebenum fossile is said to be of a sweet scent and Cordial.

An Account of the Tar-Bitumen in Shropshire.

A Bitumen is called by the Famous Kircher, Sulphur liquidum, and Sulphur
Bitumen fixum: This is plainly proved by some Bitumens which smell plainly of
Brimstone, as the Tar-Bitumen or Pici-Bitumen, and have also a Tar Smell; for
by both these Smells a Sulphur, and a Turpentine Bitumen are evidently known to
be nearly related or compounded. I received this Bitumen from my Worthy and
Ingenious Friend, Mr. G. Plaxton of Sheriff-Hales in Shropshire: And these
following Observations were made at Aston, in Warwickshire, in the Laboratory
of my ever Honored and Learned Friend, Sir Charles Holt, Baronet.

The smell of the Bitumen was like a mixture of Tar and Brimstone, which shows
the middle state Bitumens have betwixt Minerals and Vegetables.

This Bitumen tastes Bitterish and Smoaky, and swims on a Spring, which rises
about the middle of a Hill in a Wood, near to Rowton, in the Parish of Brosely,
in Shropshire. We mixed this Tar-like Bitumen with Sand, and distilled it in a
Sand Furnace, out of a Retort. At first a Phlegmatic Water came over, then a
black Oil, which we rectified with Water, and then it appeared like a yellow
Oil; in Color, Smell, and Taste like Oil of Amber, and therefore I believe it
to be of the same nature.

By this Experiment it appears, That Amber is no Vegetable product, as a Gum
-Resin, but truly a Mineral Bitumen, which is in some places dug out of the
Earth, and that this Tar is a Petroleum or liquid Amber.

It seems probable to me, That this Tar is the Oil of Coal, for such an Oily
substance sweats from our Pit-Coal, in burning, and also comes from it by
distillation; and also the Sulphur-smell in this Tar appears to be like Coal
smoke. Many other Bitumens have a mixed smell of a Terebinthinate and Smoaky, or
Sulphurous Smell.

The taste of Petroleum is Bitterish, and it smells of a mixed smell of
Turpentine, and Fetid Sulphur, by which it discusses Tumors; and the Country
People cure Ulcers and Swellings in their Cattle by this Tar. All Bitumens are
discussing by their Fetid Smell, Conglutinative by their Gumminess, and
Detergent by their Bitter Taste.

North-hall Water tastes Bitterish, and smells of a Sulphurous Smell, upon
keeping; it seems therefore to have something Bituminous. The Sediment after
Evaporation, tasted very burning and hot, and that Taste continued long on my
Tongue: By this Acrimony it is Purgative and Diuretic. Spirit of Hartshorn
precipitated the Water white, like Alum-water; and it curdles Milk like that.
As an alterative it has the Virtue of Alum in curing Itch, Scab, and all
Fermentations, and fixes the Volatile Salts and Oils, and coagulates the
Lympha's, and Serum of the Blood, which may sometimes occasion Rheumatick
Pains, as I have observed it in some Persons.

Of the Tastes of Salts.
I. SAlts properly so called, of a salt, hot, pungent Taste, and a Lixivial
Smell, as all fixed Salts; these feel Unctuous to the Fingers, from some Oil
adhering to them; and these are strong Diuretics and Sudorificks. II. Volatile
Alkalies; these are of a burning pungent, salt Taste, with a smoaky urinous
Smell; the smoakiness and burning is from the Oily Particles in Salts: By the
addition of an Acid the Heat and Burning and Fetids are abated, for Acids
correct all Oils, and fix them. III. An Acid sulphurous Salt, for so we
improperly call all Figured Bodies, though they have no salt Taste; and Acids
are the principal Ingredients of all other Salts: This sulphurous Acid is the
aerial Salt, which mixes with all Fluids, and then fixes in the Earthy
Particles, by which it is made evident to the Taste: It cannot be tasted in
Snow or Ice, for want of an Alkali: All Acids we taste have a roughness; and
therefore an Earthy part to make them act on our Taste is necessary. This
aerial sulphurous Acid rises from the sulphurous Fumes of the Earth, or the
sulphurous lucid matter of the Sun. IV. Mixed Salts tasting Salso-acid. 1.
Urinous Salso-acids, made of a Volatile and Acid, mixed as Sal Ammoniack, which
most resembles the salt of the Blood, being Diuretic and Sudorifick. 2.
Vitriolated Salts, consisting of a Fixed and an Acid. 3. Nitrous Salts,
consisting of a sulphurous Acid, and a Volatile Salt, tasting Cool and
Saltish. Arcanum duplicatum is esteemed as a mixed Salt; and Ettmuller says, It
is Bitterish, it is Diuretic, a Digestive, and a Febrifuge. Spirit of Nitre
ferments with the Sand in the Urine, and is esteemed the best Lithontriptick by
Dr. Grew.

V. Salts compounded from some Acid and Mineral. 1. Aluminous Tastes, tasting
Acerb or Acid-rough. Burnt-Alum tastes Sweetish, Sub-acid, Hot, and very
Styptick, whereby it coagulated the Serum of the Blood, and stops its
extravasation in Ulcers, but it did not change the florid of the Blood, as
Vinegar does. 2. Vitriolick Salts, so called from their shooting into
particular edged Figures, like Salts, and they have a Styptick Taste. 3. Marine
Salts, as Sea Salt, Sal-Gem, are Salso-acid. Sal Anaticum is of a Salso-acid
Taste, and is used for Eye-Medicines to supply the saltness of the Tears to
cleanse the viscid Lympha in the corrosive Acidity. We use Tutty and Calaminary
Stone to absorb the Acid, for they ferment with them.
VI. Of a burning, corrosive, salt Taste, as in the Lixivium of Soap-ashes: It
tastes burning, and smells of Lime. I put some of it into the Serum of Blood,
and it turned it higher colored, but did not coagulate it. Alumen scissile
urit instar urticarum, Ettmuller.

FINIS.

