THE FOLLOWING COLLECTIONS OR PIOUS LITTLE TREATISES, TOGETHER WITH THE RVLE OF
S. CLARE AND DECLARATIONS UPON IT, Are printed for the use of the ENGLISH POOR
CLARES IN AIR. An Index whereof begin's in the sequent page.

This shall be unto you a direct Way. Is. 35. v. 8. You shall not decline,
neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Deuteronomy. 5. v. 32

Printed at Douay by MICHAELL MAIRESSE.

PERMISSV SVPERIORVM: 1684.

A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS IN THE ENSUING BOOK.
I. A Pious Collection of several profitable directions and devotions, fitted
for the ENGLISH POOR CLARES, in order to the better observance of their holy
Institute: very useful and necessary for all Religious Persons, both men and
women.
A Morning exercise for every day in the week. p. 1 From the rising until the
work house. p. 5 In dressing your self, several prayers. p. 5 A morning
purpose. p. 9 From the workhouse till dinner. p. 13 From dinner till the examine
at night. p. 15 Before sleeping, prayers. p. 19 A direction how to say the way
to Jerusalem. p. 19 How to apply the seven words, Christ spoake upon the
Cross. p. 21 The 7. Ave's which are to be read for the 7. sorrows of our B.
Lady: how they are to be said. p. 22 Considerations on the 3. Pater's and Ave's
which are said at the showing of the B. Sacrament. p. 23 After your examine at
night, how to salute our Lady with 3. Ave's. p. 24 How to say your Pater's and
Ave's in thanks giving to Allmighty God for his benefits, for night or any
other time. p. 24 An exercise for Mass. p. 25 Certain Intentions or Meditations
which we ought to have when we communicate: out of S. Bonaventure. p. 37
Considerations before Communion: taken out of the same Saint. p. 37 Four
considerations of S. Mathildis before Communion. p. 38 A Prayer before, and
another after receaving the B. Sacrament. p. 39 What we ought to do, the day we
communicate. p. 41 A Prayer before and after confession. p. 42 Directions how
to say the divine Office with due devotion and attention. p. 43 Certain holy
Meditations of the 7. effusions of blood: distributed for the canonical hours.
p. 47 A direction for mental Prayer. p. 51 An Instruction for mental Prayer.
p. 54 Colloquies or speeches, part in meditation, and part in Prayer: praising
Allmighty God's excellency, goodness, holiness, worthyness, etc. p. 67 Causes
of distractions. p. 68 The means to resist distractions of heart and
tediousness of spirit. p. 69 The chiefest effects of prayer. p. 70 Things to be
considered in meditating the Passion of our Savior. p. 72 Several Affections
to be drawn from the consideration of the same Passion. p. 72 Considerations of
the knowledge of ones self. p. 73 Considerations of sin. p. 73 How to consider
death. p. 73 Of the pains of the damned. p. 74 How to contemplate Heaven. p. 74
How to consider virtue. p. 75 How to consider the feasts of Saints. p. 75 How
to meditate on the perfections of Allmighty God. p. 76 Considerations of all
Gods creatures in general. p. 76 Considerations of Gods creatures in
particular. p. 77 The benefits in brief of Allmighty God. p. 77 What you ought
to do in the time to come with God's benefits in particular. p. 77 The benefit
of our Redemption. p. 78 The benefit of our Vocation. p. 78 The benefit of our
Justification. p. 79 The benefit of donation. p. 80 The benefit of
Preservation. p. 81 The benefit of glorification. p. 81 The eight Beatitudes.
p. 82 A Religious person ought often to consider the benefit of his vocation,
by these circumstances: Vnde es? Quo? Quomodo? Quando? Quo fine vocatus? p. 84
The Privileges and benefits of a Religious Person. p. 86 Jesus, Maria. Certain
aspirations, for every day in the week. p. 86 Aspirations for every day in the
week, upon the Passion of our B. Savior. p. 92 An Oblation unto our B. Lady,
to say on any of her feasts 70 Ave Maria's, and then during every day 5. Ave's
and the prayers there following. p. 99 A Prayer to Jesus Christ. p. 99 When you
pass by the B. Sacrament a prayer. p. 100 When you take holy water. p. 101 How
to honor the B. Virgins Name. p. 101 Litanies of our holy Father S. Francis.
p. 104 Litanies of our B. Mother S. Clare. p. 106 Litanies for the conversion
of England. p. 108 A daily exercise of prayers, with weekly meditations upon
the Passion. p. 113 Meditations upon the Passion for every day in the week. p.
117 A method for meditation. p. 123 A prayer before meditation. p. 124 A prayer
after meditation. p. 125 A Table of daily Patrons, Meditations, Virtues, Vices,
and Intentions. p. 126
II. A Short treatise concerning the perfection of a Religious life, written by
S. BONAVENTURE to his devout Sisters.
The Preface. p. 3 CHAP. 1. By what means a man may attain to the true
knowledge of himself. p. 8 CHAP. 2. Of humility, and the stepps or degrees by
which it is attained. p. 14 CHAP. 3. Of Religious poverty. p. 22 CHAP. 4. Of
silence, and how necessary it is to all Religious. p. 30 CHAP. 5. Of the study
of Prayer. p. 35 CHAP. 6. A remembrance of Christ's Passion. p. 44 CHAP. 7. Of
the perfect love of God. p. 54 CHAP. 8. Of final perseverance. p. 57

III. The Rule of the holy Virgin S. CLARE, faithfully translated into English.
The Apostolical Confirmation of the Rule. p. 3 CHAP. 1. Of the rule and form
of life of the order of the poor sisters, given by S. Francis. CHAP. 2. Of
those who desire to enter into this Religion: and how they shall be received.
p. 6 CHAP. 3. Of the divine office, of Fasting, of Confessing and
Communicating. p. 10 CHAP. 4. Of the election of the Abbess. p. 11 CHAP 5. Of
silence, and of the manner of speaking at the speak-house, and Grate. p. 14
CHAP. 6. How the sisters may not receive any possessions, by themselves or by
any person interposed. p. 16 CHAP. 7. The manner that the sisters shall observe
in their manual works. p. 18 CHAP. 8. How the sisters shall not appropriate
any thing to themselves: and of the sick sisters. p. 19 CHAP. 9. Of penance to
be enjoined the sisters that offend: and of the manner of conversing without
the Monastery. p. 21 CHAP. 10. Of the Admonishment and visitation of the
sisters. p. 23 CHAP. 11. Of the duty of the Portress. p. 24 CHAP. 12. Of the
visitour and Chaplin. p. 26
The rest of the Bull for the Confirmation of the Rule. p. 27 The Testament of
our holy Mother S. Clare. p. 28 Our holy Mother S. Clar's Benediction unto her
sisters present and to come. p. 36 The Bull of Pope Innocent the fourth: that
the Religious may not be constrained to receive Rents or Possessions. p. 38
IV. The Declarations and Ordinances made upon the Rule of our holy Mother S.
Clare.
A letter of the Approbation and Confirmation of the declarations, sent by the
Reverend Father William Cassall, to his devout daughter S. Collet. p. 4 Another
by the same Reverend Father, to Sister Collet, and all the other Sisters of the
said Religion. p. 5 CHAP. 1. Of the entry into this holy Religion. p. 10 THE
FORM OF PROFESSION. p. 15
CHAP. 2. Of the quality of their habits and of their garments. p. 16 CHAP. 3.
Of the Divine Office. p. 20 CHAP. 4. Of Abstinence. p. 24 CHAP. 5. Of
Confession and of Communion: of the Confessor and his companions. p. 26 CHAP.
6. Of the observance of Cloister. p. 29 Chap. 7. Of the election of the Abbess,
discreetes and other officers. p. 34 Chap. 8. The manner of keeping Chapter. p.
38 Chap. 9. Of silence and the manner of speaking at the speak-house and at the
grate. p. 41 Chap. 10. Of the observance of poverty, and that the Sisters may
not admit of any possessions, nor have any thing proper. p. 45 Chap. 11. Of the
sick Sisters. p. 49 Chap. 12. Of the manual works of the Sisters. p. 52 Chap.
13. Of the correction of the faulty. p. 55 Chap. 14. Of the portress and
entering into the Monastery. p. 57 Chap. 15. Of the Visitour. p. 64
An exhortation for the better observance of these present constitutions. p. 72
What the Religious are obliged to, under mortal sin, by their vows. p. 78 The
perfections of the Rule. p. 78 The praise of the Rule. p. 81 Three Privileges,
which our holy Father p. 8^. Francis obtained of Allmighty God. p. 81 Three
other Privileges. p. 82 Seven other Previledges, for those that observe the
Rule and dye in the Order. p. 82 Certain Indulgences granted to all the
Religious of the Order of S. Francis. p. 83 An examine of conscience, for a
Religious Person. p. 86 Twelve great evils, which come by venial sins. p. 88
Nine ways by which we participate of the sins of others. p. 88 The Twelve
fruits of the B. Sacrament. p. 89 The Twelve Evangelicall counsayles. p. 90 The
Benediction of our Holy Father S. Francis. p. 91 The malediction of our Holy
Father S. Francis. p. 91 A PLENARIE ABSOLUTION FROM GUILT AND PAIN.
Otherwise called. p. 92 THE ABSOLUTION OF THE CORD.

TO THE READER.
BELOVED and DEVOUT READER, though this BOOK, as to the whole, and every part
thereof, might reasonably be judged very co^venient and useful, at lea'st for
all Poor Clarisses; yet (as appears by the TITLE) it is desig'nd, fitted out,
and printed, particulerly by the CARE, and for the USE, of the ENGLISH POOR
CLARES OF AIR; in the Diocese of S. Omers Who signally observe their INSTITUT,
and ORDINANCES upon it, in their NATIVE PURITY, living accordingly, in the
TRUE SPIRIT of S. CLARE, under the GOVERNMENT, and DIRECTION of their HOLY
ORDER, as both RULE and DECLARATIONS prescribe, Teach and ernestly recommen'd
unto them.

Fiat, Fiat.
Imprimatur actum in Vicariatu Andomarensi, die tertia Novembris 1684.

De Mandato B. DE LARRE Secret.

A PIOUS COLLECTION Of several profitable directions and devotions fitted for
the English POOR CLARES In order to the better observance of their holy
INSTITVTE. Very useful and necessary for all Religious Persons both men and
women.
A Morning Exercice, on Sunday.
CALL to mind this sentence: Haec dies quam fecit Dominus, exultemus and
laetemur in ea. This is the day that our lord has made let us rejoice and be
glad in it. Remember your duty and obligation unto Almighty God, being careful
to spend the day wholly in his service and praise, and particularly this day
honor the most Blessed Trinity, thanking those three divine Persons for the
benefit of our Creation, and for all others bestowed either upon your self, or
any other in the behalf of man.

On Monday Morning.
CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, eur jaces pronus in terram. Arise, why
lie thou grovelling on the ground. Remember your banishment and punishment or
suffering of being deprived of the presence of Almighty God, and the company of
the Angels, and pray that after your death you may be united unto them offering
this day to honor them, but especially your good Angel, beseeching him and all
the others to pray for the state of the Holy Church and that we may so use this
our warfare that after death we may reign with them in all eternity.

Tuesday Morning.
CAll to mind this sentence. Surge qui dormis, and exurge a mortuis, and
illuminabit te Christus. Arise thou that sleep with the sleep of death and
Christ will illuminate thee. Remember that Christ and his holy Gospel are the
lights of the Church, and endeavor you to follow the same better then you have
hitherto done: offering this day to honor the holy Apostles, Patriarks and
Prophets, beseeching them to pray for the conversion of all Heathens,
Infidells, and for all those that are out of the Catholic faith, particulerly
in England.

Wensday Morning.
CAll to mind this sentence: Surge and comede, grandis tibi restat via. Arise
and eat, thou have yet a great way to go. Think how far you are from virtue
and the perfection of your holy Foundress and Saints of your Order and pray
them that they will obtain you strength and force to follow their examples with
greater fervor then you have hitherto done, offering this day wholly to their
honor, beseeching them to pray for the good and reformation of the whole
Order, and for all Holy Orders.

Thursday Morning.
CAll to mind this sentence. Surgite quid dormitis, surgite and orate ne
intretis in tentationem. Arise why do you sleep. Arise and pray least you enter
into temptation. Consider what occasion you give your self to enter into
temptation in negligently employing your time, and being slothful and dull in
holy prayer and spiritual Exercises, offering this day in honor of the
Confessors, beseeching them to obtain for you new fervor of spirit and
constancy in the service of Almighty God, and to pray for the comfort and
releasement of the souls in Purgatory.

Friday Morning.
CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, propera amica mea and veni. Arise, make
have my beloved and come. Think that our sweet savior calls you to show you
what he has suffered for you, out of the great love he bears you. Desire
gratitude for the same. Resolve that you will with patience suffer all such
temptations and contempts as it shall please him to send you: And offer this
day wholly in honor and memory of his bitter Death and Passion, the sorrows of
his holy Mother, and beg the suffrages of all the holy Martyrs beseeching them
to pray for all those who are in any affliction, or desolation be it corporal
or spiritual.

Saturday Morning.
CAll to mind this sentence. Surge, read quod debes. Arise and render what
thou owe. Think what you owe unto Almighty God by the vows of Poverty,
Chastity, and obedience, and what you do not pay in this world you must satisfy
in the next. Wherefore offer your self this day wholly to honor the most
glorious Virgin Mary with all the other Virgins beseeching them to obtain
grace that you may be more diligent in the observance of your vocation, and
also to pray for the comfort and constancy of all the Catholics in England,
and the conversion of the same.

From your rising till you go to the workhouse.
HAving said one of the foresaid sentences that befitteth the day; you must
rise with all speed offering your intention according to the same and
immediately being risen, kneel down, and Kiss the ground with an Elevation of
heart unto Almighty God, giving him thanks for having preserved you that night,
and brought you unto the beginning of the day beseeching him you may employ it
in his service.

In dressing your self say these sentences following as they are set donn.

In putting on the Habit, say.
INduat me Dominus novum hominem qui secundum Deum creatus est in justitia and
sanctitate veritatis.

O Lord cloathe me with the new man, who according to God is created in
justice, and sanctity of truth.

In putting on the cord.
CIngat me Dominus Jesus cingulo fortitudinis, ut viriliter perseverem in Dei
servitio.

O Lord gird me with the girdle of fortitude and strength, that I may persever
courageously and with alacrity in thy holy service.

In putting on the Scapular.
POnat Dominus in cord meo jugum in memoriam Passionis and Sanguinis ejus.

Our Lord lay his yoke on my heart as a memorial of his Passion and blood.

In washing your hands or face.
AMplius lava me Domine ab iniquitate mea, and a peccato meo munda me, meritis
Domini nostri IESV CHRISTI filii tui qui dilexit nos, and lavit nos a peccatis
nostris in sanguine suo.

Wash me O Lord yet more from my iniquities, and from my sin make me clean
through the merits of JESUS CHRIST thy only son, who has loved us and washed
us with his precious blood.

In putting on the Cloak.
COoperiat me Dominus JESUS clamyde munditiae and castitatis, ut nullum praeter
Iesum amatorem admittam.

Cover me, O Lord, with the mantle of cleanlines and chastity that I may admit
of no other lover then my savior JESUS.

In putting on the Kercher.
TEgat me Dominus tegumento paenitentiae contra infidias Diaboli, ut non
praevaleat inimicus contra me.

Cover me, O Lord, in the shroud of Penance against the snares of the Devil,
that my enemy may not prevail against me.

In putting on the veyle.
ACcipiam velamen sacrum quod seram usque ad. Tribunal aeterni Iudicis ^ui
omnia flectuntur genua: recordabor meipsam, mundum, and sprevisse and penitus
reliquisse, ac in veritate me Domino Jesus subjecisse, eique tamquam sponso me
conjunxisse. Ille contra adversa omnia me defendat, and secum in vitam aeternam
recipiat. Amen.

I will put on the sacred veyle, which I shall appear in before the Tribunal
of the Eternal Judge, to whom all knees do bow. I will call to mind, that I
have despised, and forsaken both the world and my self, to be subject in real
truth to my Lord JESUS CHRIST, and to join my self unto him as to my spouse.
May he defend me in all adversities, and receive me to himself into life
everlasting. AMEN.

After: or, in saying each one of these sentences reflect either on your
intention in directing your works that day. Or, consider how great a benefit
Almighty God has bestowed on you in giving you that day to spend in his
service, whereby you may glorify his divine Majesty, increase your own merit,
and satisfy for your negligences past. Call to mind what the souls in Purgatory
and thousands in the world would do if they had the same means: and also think
that it may be the last day that shall be granted you In this life.

Being dressed, make have unto the Quire, with out foreign cogitations,
recollecting your self, and keeping diligently your sight, and at the entering
into the Church, after the saying. Asperges me etc. Thou shall sprinkle me etc.
In the taking of holy water. Say, Domine in multitudine misericordiae tuae
introibo in domum tuam, adorabo ad templum sanctum tuum in timore tuo. Lord in
the multitude of thy mercy I will enter into thy house: in thy fear will I
adore thee in thy holy Temple: and kneeling down at the Perentory say.
Adoramus te sanctissime Domine Jesus Christ, hic and ad omnes Ecelesias tuas
and benedicimus tibi, quia per sanctam Crucem tuam redemisti mundum. We adore
thee o most holy Lord JESUS CHRIST, here, and in all thy Churches, and we bless
thee, because by thy holy Cross thou have redeemed the world.

After, being in your place, or before the B. Sacrament, imagine Almighty God
present, as indeed he is, and adore him with the greatest reverence and
humility you can, representing unto your self his Majesty, Power, and Goodness.
Accustom your self to this in all your Examins, especially that of the
morning, noon, and night: and as much as you can in whatsoever exercise you
undertake.

A Morning purpose.
FIrst: give thanks unto Almighty God for having preserved you that night, and
delivered you from so many misfortunes both spiritual and corporal which
since your going to bed thousands have fallen into.

2.ly Examine your conscience, and see wherein you have offended that night, and
if you find any thing, humbly crave pardon, begin by Gods grace to amend, and
to spend the day wholly in his service.

3.ly Offer your self in all that you are, or may be able to perform by your
corporal forces or spiritual powers unto Almighty God, especially that which
you shall do that day with the intention for which you offer your actions, in
union of the life, death, and Passion of our blessed savior Christ Jesus, the
merits of his most glorious Mother, beseeching his divine goodness to dispose
wholly and entirely of you, as may be most to his honor, and the good of your
soul in confidence of which resolve and endeavor to receive all things that
day from his holy hands with equal indifference, beholding them as coming from
his fatherly hands and providence, and the love with which he sends them.

4ly. Make a renunciation of your proper will passions, and wicked
inclinations, or what soever may hinder you in the way of perfection and true
conformity to the divine will.

5ly. Call to mind what your Obediences ar like to be, and with whom you are to
converse and how you ought to carry your self for the gaining of virtue and
overcoming of imperfection: but particularly bend your spiritual forces
against that vice which you find most to hinder you, and that you are most apt
to fall into, purposing and resolving on such means as when the occasion
presents it self, you may by the grace of God overcome it, calling to mind at
that present your good purpose.

Offer these your good desires unto Almighty God acknowledging that without his
grace you could not have made them, confessing your own weakness, and force of
your external and internal enemies. Wherefore earnestly and humbly beg his
assistance by the intercession of his holy and blessed Mother, whose help
instantly crave, as also the aid of your good Angel, with the Saints you are
most devoted unto, and if you have leisure say the prayers following. O Domina
mea etc. O my lady, etc. as in the Primer. The oblation of the 7. Aves. with
this Prayer unto your Angel Custos.

O most loving Angel, my Guardian, Tutour, Master, Guide, Governor, and
defender, wise Counselour, and my most faithful friend, to whom J am commended
by the goodness of God our sweet Savior from the instant of my birth unto the
last period of my life: What reverence do J ow you, knowing that you are
present with me? And with what devotion ought J to serve you in respect of the
great care you have of me? And what confidence ougt J to have, having you at my
side in all occasions to defend me. Teach me then, O holy Angel: chastise me,
conserve, and conduct me the right and assured way unto the heavenly Jerusalem
without permitting me to do any thing in your presence which may be offensive
in your sight, and which J dare not undertake before another without shame. J
beseech you present unto our Lord my miseries and wants, and obtain me a remedy
of his infinite goodness. Watch when J sleep, and be not wearied when J am tired:
stay me when J am ready to fall: raise me up when J am fallen, direct me when J
am gone astray: fortify me when J am weak: illuminate me when J am assaulted:
check the rage of my subtle enemy, and at the hour of my death defend me from
the infernal dragon, that being guided and assisted by thee J may arrive unto
the glorious dwelling place, and thou rejoice in my good, and J in thy glory,
and our Lord King of all glory be honored in us world without end. Amen.

These Prayers being ended prepare your self to Prime according as it is set
down in the direction for the Divine Office, being careful to carry your self
with all fervor and devotion, observing well your thoughts: considering that
you are not only in the presence of Almighty God, but also exercising the
office of Angels in singing his holy praises. Having done this; exercise your
self as you have been taught until it ring to Mass, and be careful to observe
this manner in all other hours. When the Litanies are read do not sit fiddling
with your fingers, turning the leafes of your book, or looking about you, but
imagine you are a poor beggar full of miseries, afflictions and necessities, and
that for your great unworthines to present your self before the divine Majesty
of God, you beg an alms through the intercession of his Angels and Saints,
considering that one of them alone is able to strike down infinite men. Likewise
you are not only to pray for your self, but also our Benefactours, and our poor
Country: wherefore endeavor to read them with great devotion, and when they are
finished make a short examine as you did after Mass: and prepare your self to go
to Sext: In the reading of which, exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem,
observing the same directions: which where set down for Prime. When Office is
ended make your Examine again, and when the sign is given read the Pater noster
with great devotion and attention for the Benefactours, which being done the
sign will be given to go forth of the Church: then observe that modesty and
reverence which you have been taught. At the first entrance being in your cell
kneel down, and Kiss the ground, offering your little work of Obedience of
making your bed unto Almighty God, and exercise your self in the way to
Jerusalem until it ring to the Workhouse, and rhen take a point therein which
is ordained for that time.

From the workhouse till dinner.
BEing come unto the Workhouse and Veni Creator, being said, Prepare your self
to read the dirge with all devotion and attention. Consider in what great
necessity the souls in Purgatory are, what pains they suffer, and that if you
be diligent in praying for them, you may be a means to release tnem: Almighty
God having perhaps ordained you for that end: but if you be unmindfull and
negligent in the performance thereof, they may be detained from his divine
presence through your fault, and also he will permit others when you are in the
like case to forget you, and neglect to assist you: wherefore endeavor to be
very attentive, and devoutly recollected in reading. After the Dirge, the beads
are read, unto which give great attention, and read them with devotion: the
rest of your time in the Workhouse exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem,
carryng your self with all modesty and stillness. When, it ringeth to the
second Mass. (Signum magni Regis est) (It Is a sign that a great King is at
hand) being come into the Churh offer your self unto Almighty God, and make
some reflection on your Exercise and carriage in the workhouse. In time of the
2. Mass Exercise your own devotions. When you go to None observe the directions
which were set down for Prime exercising your self in the way to Jerusalem.
None being read make your Examine how you have spent your whole forenoon: for
better doing of which crave the assistance of our sweet savior, begging pardon
where you have failed, and make new resolutions for the performance of what you
purposed in the morning, and the exercising virtue in all occasions. After
which consider that it is a punishment due to sin that you must now leave the
bread of Angels which is holy meditation and Prayer to feed upon corporal
meats: which punishment is due unto the children of Adam: wherefore humbly
submit your self unto it, considering the great hunger, which the poor souls
in Purgatory do sustain in being deprived of the presence of Almightly God, and
with hearty compassion and great devotion read the De profundis for them. Going
down, with Grace use what is appointed in the way to Jerusalem. When you sit
down at the table you may behold our B. Savior according to that foresaid
exercise, who lived in this world 33. years, and humbly submitted him self unto
all pennances due unto men for their sins: wherefore beg grace to use this
Corporal food, because it it is his blessed will and give your body its
necessities, not using therein superfluity to please nature or sensualit^: but
season your meat in the wounds of our B. Savior: and drink from the delicious
fountain of his sacred side, mingled with the gall and vinegar which he drank
for your sake, Being at dinner give your attention wholly to that which is read
at the table. At twelve of the clock exercise that which is appointed in the
way to Jerusalem, saying. Christus factus est pro nobis obediens: after which
you may return to that which is read at the table. When you have dined, make
some little reflection how you have behaved your self: if you find to have
fallen, humbly crave pardon, purposing to amend. At the going up, with Grace
exercise your self in the way to Jerusalem.

From Dinner until the Examen at night. When Grace is finished read your Pater
nosters for your benefactours; When you come to your Cell you may stay there
until it ring to the workhouse, employing your self in reading writing, or
keeping your devotion, or doing some other thing which you desir. When the Bell
calls you to work, exercise your self there according to the same directions,
which are set down for the forenoon, using the Way to Jerusalem, After your
beads are read until it ring to Evensong. And then leave your work saying. Hoc
signum etc. And making what have you can into the Church, being kneeled down
either in your place, or elsewhere, make your short Examine; which being don read
the little office, if you have not read it before, Keeping your Devotion until
it ring up to Evensong: in the reading of which observe well your thoughts, and
the manner which was set down from Prime. The Office being ended prepare your
self to Meditation, and afterwads the sign being given, make your short
Examen, as it is set down in the directions for mental prayer. When you go
forth of the Church, employ your self in the way to Jerusalem until you go to
Collation, where when you have time in considering the Mystery of the Washing
of the feet give your attention to that which is read at the Table* when you
have ended Collation, you may read that which you mean to make your Meditation
of, if you have not read it before, or do not take that which is read at the
table: being-sure never to omit the matter before Meditation. The best time to
read it is the quarter before five* when the sign is given after Meditation,
going up from Collation use the way to Jerusalem, and continue the same until
Recollection: then kneeling in your place, make your Examen: First, present
Your self before Almighty God and give him thanks for all the benefits you have
received that day: in particular esteeming your self as unworthy of them as any
creature on earth, or the souls in Hell: as also the miseries both spiritual
and temporal, from which he has delivered you, to be as many and as great as
are, or might have fallen upon any in the world.

Secondly, beg grace to see the offenses committed that day acknowledging your
unableness to do the same without his special assistance.

Thirdly: how you have spent that day with obedience, and exercises you have
had, weighing wherein you have failed by omission or commission, in thought,
word, or work, toward Almighty God, your sisters and your self: how you have
exercised your interior powers, your senses, particularly your sight, and
especially how you have observed the services and exercises of your Religion,
whether you have governed your exterior with that modesty, mortification,
submission and mildnes, that you are taught.

Fourthly: if you see your self to have overcome any imperfection, give thanks
unto Almighty God, and where you find to have failed and offended, humbly crave
pardon.

Fifthly: purpose with his holy grace to be more careful and watchful over
your self the day following, making such resolutions as may help you most for
the overcoming of that vice wherein you find your self that day to have sinned
in.

Then say the Prayer following.
I Confess unto you, O Lord God omnipotent Creator of heaven and earth, all my
sins which ever I have committed even from my infancy until this present-houre
wittingly or ignorantly, and particularly this day in thought word, or work. To
you, O Lord only I confess my offenses and beg pardon for them as being
innumerable: therefore I humbly beseech thee to forgive and forget all, whereof
thou know me guilty in all my life past, and enkindle in me a fervent
amendment with faith, hope, and charity, O merciful, O pitiful o sweet JESUS
son of the B. Virgin Mary.

Going to your cell make use of that which is ordained in the way to Jerusalem,
and during that time you are undressing your self, call to mind the strict
account, which you are to render unto Almighty God when the day of this life is
ended: also of the uncertaintie to live until the next morning, much less any
longer, reflecting how many miseries may and will fall upon thousands before
your uprising: and always before you go to bed kneeling commend your self to
our sweet savior, and his blessed Mother with your good Angel, Kissing the
ground and the Crucifix. Being laid in bed, think you lay your mouth to the
sacred side or feet of or sweet Savior, saying the prayer following.

O most sweet Lord JESUS CHRIST in union of the love which caused thee to
create for us this corporal rest, and disdainedst not thy self to take the
same whilst thou livedst here on earth: I do make use of the same to fulfill
the necessity of my body, that it may be more prompt and ready to serve thee.
Amen.

Before sleeping say thus.
O Most sweet JESUS let me now rest upon thy sacred breast, and grant me to
fetch my breath out of thy most sacred heart, that thy sweet spirit may flow
into my soul, vivificate my mind and unseparably unite me unto thee sweet
JESUS; so often as this night I do fetch my breath, so many millions of praises
I beseech thee receive from me.

Unto your good Angel say.
O Angel of God who art my keeper, illuminate, preserve, rule, and govern me
committed to thy charge by the supernall power this night and evermore, Amen.

A direction how to say the way to Jerusalem.
1. AT five a clock when Meditation is ended, going to put off your cloak,
take the Mystery wherein our savior took leave of his B. Mother.

2. When it ringeth to Collation, that which is then present, his going unto
the place where he made his supper.

3. When you are at Collation, the washing of the feet.

4. That of the Institution of the most B. Sacrament, the which continue till
the end of Compline.

5. Then take our savior's going into the garden with his disciples.

6. When the B. Sacrament is seen, the three prayers which he made in the
garden.

7. Going forth of the Church, his betraying.

8. In your cell his being at Annas's, and leave him there until Matins; at
which time go with him to Caiphas, and find him there at Prime.

9. Under which go with him to Pilate, and from thence to Herod.

10. At Terce take the Mystery of the white garment.

11. At Sext the whipping and crowning with thorns, Going forth of the Church,
our savior's being lead and showed to the people.

12. Making your bed, remember the three sentences of death which were given
against him.

13. Going to the Workhouse his going with his Cross to be crucified, and
passing through the golden gate.

14. In the workhouse the three falls: the meeting of our sweet savior with
his holy Mother, Simon Cyrenean, and Veronica.

15. Going forth from the Workhouse, the carrying the Cross up Mount Calvary.

16. Between the two peales to None, his sitting naked upon the stone.

17. At None, the nailing to the Cross.

18. Going down to Grace, how the Cross was reared up and set in the place
where it was to stand.

19. At twelve a clock behold our savior hanging on high upon the Cross,
saying these first words, Father forgive them for they know not what they do.

20. From evensong, exercise your self in the 7. words: the piercing of our
Saviors side: his taking down from the Cross, and lyng in the lap of his
Mother, his burial, and descending into Limbo.

How to apply the seven Words.
1. FAther forgive them for they know not what they do. Here pray for all those
that are in mortal sin: for all Heathens, and Heretics, and beseech Almighty
God to illuminate their hearts, and pardon their offenses.

2. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Pray for the happy departure of
all faithful Christians, and releasement of the souls in Purgatory.

3. Son behold thy Mother: and again, Woman behold thy son. Recommend to our B.
Lady your self, your Parents, kindred and Benefactours and the state of the
whole church: beseeching our sweet Savior to give her unto us for Patroness,
Mother, and Advocate, and grant us grace to serve, honor, and obey her.

4. I thirst. Pray that we, and all creatures may continually thirst after
justice and the perfect love of God.

5. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Here pray for the comfort and
assistance of all in temptation or affliction, either spiritual or corporal.

6. It is consummated. Beseech Almighty God that his holy will may be
accomplished in you, and all creatures to the perfect praise of his most holy
name.

7. Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. Pray rhat as he recommended his
to his heavenly Father, our souls may be protected by him in this life by the
fruition of his holy grace, and in the next received to that beatitude which by
his death and Passion he has purchased, for us.

The 7. Ave's which are to be read for the 7. sorrows of or B. Lady; you may
take according to your devotion, or these following.
1. THe departure of our sweet Savior when he went to make his last supper.

2. When S. John brought her word of our Saviors being apprehended, and his
cruel usage.

3. When she met him bearing his Cross.

4. When she beheld him crucified upon the Cross.

5. The cruel piercing of his sacred side.

6. When she had him dead in her lap.

7. When she parted from the body of her dear son at his burial.

Considerations on the 3. Pater nosters, and Aves which are said at the showing
of the B. Sacrament: in honor of the Prayer in the Garden, offering your
intention to gain the Pardon.
1. SAy the first Pater and Ave, in honor of the unspeakable love with which
our sweet Savior made oblation of his dolorous agony, craving by the merits of
the same, that our sins may be forgiven us, and that we be reconciled to his
heavenly Father, and obtain strength and comfort in our temptations and
afflictions.

2. The 2. Pater and Ave, in honor of the entire resignation with which our B.
Savior offered his Prayer: crave thereby grace to conform our selves unto the
divine will, and attain perfect union with Almighty God.

3. The 3. Pater and Ave, say in honor of our sweet Saviors perseverance in
his most painful prayer, beseeching him that by the merits of the same we may
not leave of the good once begun for the repugnance we feel, or want of
consolation therein, but with love and confidence persever to the end.

After your Examine at night, you may salute our B. Lady with these 3 Ave's.
1. BY the first beseech her that she will obtain for you pardon of all your
sins, and especially those you have committed that day.

2. That she will please to present all your works unto her blessed son,
rendering them agreeable by her merits in whatsoever is wanting on their part.

3. Recommend your self unto her, and beseech her that she will preserve you
from all sin deceits and illusious of the devil, and particularly from all
evils.

How to say your Pater noster's and Ave's in thanksgiving unto Almighty God for
his benefits either for night or any other time.
1. THe first Pater and Ave address to the right hand of our sweet Redeemer
offering to his Eternal Father, the precious blood which issued out of his
most sacred wound in thanksgiving for the benefit of your Creation and the
Creation of all others, as also of all things created for man's use.

2. The 2. address unto the sacred wound of his left hand in thanks giving for
the benefit of consetving you from evils, and the like for others.

3. The 3. address unto the wound of his right foot in thanksgiving for the
benefit of your Redemption, and the like for others.

4. The 4. address unto the sacred wound of his left foot in thanksgiving for
the benefit of your vocation, and all others on whom he has bestowed the like.

5. The 5. address unto the sacred wound of his blessed heart, for all general
and particular benefits, either spiritual or corporal, which with so great
love he has bestowed on you, and all creatures.

An Exercise for Mass.
FIrst know that Mass is a sacrifice, wherein is offered the very same body and
blood of our Savior, that was before offered upon the Cross, and was
infinitely able to redeem infinite worlds: and since the world is sufficiently
redeemed with one redemption, he gives unto every one such and so great grace,
as he has prepared himself to receive: therefore, like as a man that fetches
water forth of the sea cannot want for any scarcity that is there, yet he may
want by reason of the littleness of his vessel: even so no man need want grace
coming unto this holy sacrifice if the vessel of his heart be of sufficient
bigness. Wherefore prepare your self worthily, and beg such grace, devotion,
reverence and attention, as the worthiness of the sacrifice following requires.

The Exercise.
THe Priest signifies God, the Altar the church: and as the Altar is of many
stones, so is the church of God, of many people. Wherefore you must not hear
Mass for your self alone, but for the whole church: for since he is a common
Lord, he is not delighted with particular service.

A Prayer before Mass.
O Good JESUS vouchsafe me the virtue of your holy grace, and grant J beseech
you that J may purely assist at this divine sacrifice of the holy Mass to the
eternal praise of your holy name in memory of all that you have been pleased
to suffer for my sake, and for all mankind.

When the Priest says the Confiteor.
COnsider the offenses of our first parents with those of the whole world, and
in particular those which you have your self committed, and at the Kyrie
elerson, ask most humbly pardon for them, and beg grace for amendment.

At Gloria in excelsis.
COnsider how the Angels in heaven rejoice at the conversion of a sinner,
wherefore beseech them through the great desire they have of man's salvation to
aid and assist us, and all creatures to obtain the same.

At the Epistle.
COnsider that this World is a place of Penance, and be sorry that so few do
embrace the same, but follow vain pleasures and delights: and beseech Almighty
God to enlighten their hearts, and offer your self to suffer whatsoever it
shall please him to lay upon you, begging grace for the same.

At the Gospel.
COnsider what pains our Savior took in this world going from one place to
another, preaching and inviting all men to follow his most perfect example and
doctrine, begging by the merits of his pains and labors, that you may be a true
follower thereof.

At the Creed.
THink what a multitude of people were converted by the holy Gospel; and
nevertheless how many there are which remain in blindness, and will not be
lightened, for which be heartily sorry, and beseech God to convert them, but
principally pray for the conversion of England.

At the Offertory.
COnsider the promptitude with which our sweet Savior offered himself into the
hands of his heavenly Fathet to suffer his bitter death and Passion for your
Redemption, and all mankind. Wherefore offer your self wholly to his divine
goodness with your vows of obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, purposing from
thence forward to be crucified by these three nails to the Cross of all
mortification.

At the Preface.
COnsider how our sweet Savior raised Lazarus after he had been dead four
days: and thence you may draw comfort and confidence, that although you find
many evil customs in your self, all hindering you from the true service of
God: yet acknowledge that he is able to raise and deliver you from them all.
Wherefore you must purpose strongly to resist them according to the grace and
strength, which it shall please him to give you.

At Sanctus.
COnsider how the Angels in heaven do continually praise Almighty God, and how
pleasing their service is unto him: wherefore pray unto them to obtain for you
such fervor of spirit in this life that at your death you may be worthy to be
assisted by them in heaven.

At the Canon.
COnsider the unspeakable love of our Savior in offering himself for you in
this most holy Sactifice: weighing his Majesty's greatness and Omnipotency,
which is therein contained: and here you may pray for the intention of the
whole church, and for all those you are to pray for that day.

A prayer at the Elevation of the most B. Host.
ADoro te Domine Jesus Christ and benedico tibi, qui pro nobis in cruce moriens
redemisti mundum. Ave caro Christi immaculata Crucis hostia, morte tua nos
amara fac redemptos luce clara tecum frui gloria. Deus propitius esto mihi
peccatori. Aufer a me quicquid tibi displicet. Infunde in me quicquid tibi
placet. Converte me totum tuum dulcis Jesus, Deus meus. Amen.

J adore thee o Lord JESUS CHRIST, and J bless thee who dying on the Cross for
us, have redeemed the world. Hail holy flesh of CHRIST, immaculate host of the
Cross, Make us, redeemed by thy bitter death, to enjoy with thee in glory,
eternal light. God be merciful to me a sinner. Take away from me all that is
displeasing to thee; infuse into me all that is pleasing to thee. Convert me
wholly to thee sweet JESUS my God. Amen.

A Prayer at the Elevation of the Chalice.
SAnguis tuus Domine Jesus Christ pro nobis effusus, sit nobis in remissionem
omnium peccatorum nostrorum, negligentiarum, and ignorantiarum nostrarum: in
robur and augmentum fidei, spei, charitatis, gratiarum, and virtutum: in
cautelam vitae, in adoptionem gloriae aeternae in absolutionem omnium fidelium
defunctorum and omnium pro quibus orare tenemur. Amen.

Let thy blood, O Lord JESUS CHRIST, which was shed for us, be a remission of
all our sins, negligences and ignorances, a strengthening and increase of faith,
hope, charity, graces, and virtues, a caution to my life, an adoption to
eternal glory, an absolution of all the faithful departed, and of all for
whom we are bound to pray. Amen.

Whilst the Pater noster is said.
COnsider who made this Prayer, and join your intention with the Priest's, who
repeateth it for the necessities of the whole church.

An Excrcise for the 5. Pater nosters after the Elevation.
1. FIrst you make a particular intention to get pardon, and to dispose your
self to receive the Blessed Sacrament, either corporally or spiritually for the
which observe this exercise.

The first Pater and Ave, address to the right hand of our B. Savior
beseeching him that the precious blood which issued out of this his sacred
wound may serve you for a bath to wash and purify you from all stains and
spots of your sins, and particularly those which you have committed since your
last confession.

The 2. address to the left hand, beseeching him that the sacred blood which
issued from the same may serve for a spiritual balsome to cure all your
infirmities, and spiritual sicknesses.

The 3. address unto the wound of his right foot, beseeching him by his sacred
blood which issued forth thereof, that it will please him to adorn you with the
garment of charity, and purity of heart and mind.

The 4. address to his left foot, beseeching him that his sacred blood which
issued forth of this wound may lighten the eyes of the soul to know his
greatness, fear his justice, and love his goodness.

The 5. address unto the sacred blood which issued from thence that he will
pardon and extinguish all your inordinate desires and affections and unite your
heart to his through perpetual love and continual memory of him.

A Prayer before spiritual Communion.
O Pie Domine Jesus Christ, qui huc propter me venisti, and te mihi in panem
quotidiaenum, imo in omnem desiderabilem usum tribuisti; vellem te libenter
etiaem in Sacramento suscipere, sed heu non audeo, nec possum accedere, quia
timeo te offendere propter indispositionem meam inimicam and tamen scio quod
sine te vero cibo non possum vivere: quare humiliter te rogo ut licet non sumam
te sacramentaliter, me tamen reficias and ad me descendas spiritualiter and
velis mihi gratiam impertiri, quam te devote sumentes debent sentire. O bone
Jesus noli me despicere, noli me indignam famulam tuam transire; sed digneris ad
me venire, mecum manner, and effectus tuos in me operari. Amen.

O most pious Lord JESUS CHRIST, who came hither for me, and have given thy
self to me for my' daily bread, yea to every desirable use. J would willingly
receive thee even in the Sacrament: but alas J dare not, nor can J approach,
because J am afraid to offend thee by reason of my indisposition offensive to
thy eye: and yet J know that J cannot live without thee the true food: Wherefore
J most humbly beseech thee, that although J do not receive thee Sacramentally, yet
that thou would refresh me, and come down to me spiritually, and impart unto
me that grace, which those that receive thee devoutly must feel. O Good JESU
despise me not, and pass not by me thy unworthy servant, but vouchsafe to come
to me, and to remain with me, and work thy effects in me. Amen.

An Exercise to be said by word or heart when you Communicate spiritually or
corporally.
1. WHen the Priest says Domine non sum dignus, say interiourly at the 1.
time. O my God J am not worthy for the multitude of my sins that the earth
should bear me.

2. At the 2. O my God J merit not to lift up my eyes to behold the heavens.

3. At the 3. O my God, J am she who for my iniquities merit no other then
hell; but notwithstanding, O infinite goodness, leave not to visit me.

A devout Prayer to be said in time of Communion.
O Bone JESU, dilecte mi, charissime mi, amor meus, dulcedo cordis mei, vita
animae meae. O aeternum bonum meum, melliflue JESU miserere mei, uni me tibi
intime ad gloriam nominis tui. Amen.

O good JESU, my beloved my dearest, my love, the sweetness of my heart, the
life of my soul. O my Eternal good, mellifluous JESU have pity on me, unite
me to thy self most intimately, to the glory of thy name. Amen.

Another.
O Light increated, illuminate my darkness, illuminate my understanding with
pure knowledge, replenish my memory with holy remembrance and chaste thoughts,
set my will on fire with a holy and enflamed love, quicken my soul and make
that J may taste the virtue of your holy presence, and by the same ever remain
in me, and let me remain in you. Amen.

A Thanksgiving after you Communicated spiritually or Corporally.
GRatias tibi ago Domine JESU CHRIST, qui me tantis Sacramentis spiritualibus
refecisti; indulge Domine obsecro reverentiam, mane mecum per gratiam, and fac
me hodie and semper tuis obedire mandatis, ut effectus and virtutes hujus
Sacramenti sentiam. Amen.

J give thee thanks. O Lord JESU CHRIST, who have refresht me with such great
spiritual Sacraments: grant me, J beseech you, reverence; stay with me by your
grace, and make me this day, and always obedient to your commands, that J may
feel the effects and virtues of this Sacrament. Amen.

When the Priest says Agnus Dei.
COnsider how your sweet savior is the lamb of God who has offered himself
for all the sins of the world, and is now at the right hand of his Father to be
the Advocate and Judge of sinners. Pray him humbly to pardon you your offenses,
and make you worthy spiritually to receive him, which endeavor to do with the
Priest in the devoutest manner you can, and with the greatest affection you are
able.

When the Priest says the last Collect or Prayer.
GIve thanks unto the holy Trinity for having granted you so great a benefit as
to be present and prataker of so worthy a Mystery.

At the last Dominus Vobiscum.
Imagine as if you heard the sound of the Angels trumpet, wherewith our Lord at
the end of the world will call to Judgment, and beseech him to give you grace
to be ready and prepared against that day.

When the Priest says Ite Missa est.
COnsider that at the last day of Judgment the wicked shall be condemned to
everlasting pain and torment, and perpetually deprived of the presence of
Almighty God.

At the last Benediction.
COnsider the Benediction which Almighty God will give to all the Elect, and
will lead them unto everlasting rest: wherefore beseech him so to bless you and
all creatures both in this life and in the next as you and all other may
perpetually bless his holy Name. Amen.

At the End of Mass, say the Prayer following.
SWeet JESUS I offer unto thee the sacrifice of this holy Mass, and of all the
Masses which shall be said throughout the whole world, by means whereof I
beseech you to give me knowledge of my sins and miseries, as also to restore
the ruins and defects of my poor soul, and to supply my wants and
unworthiness: mortify in me whatsoever is displeasing unto your divine Majesty
and make me one according to your own heart: conform my spirit, soul, and body
to that of your sacred humanity, and always illuminate and direct me by the
sight of your incomprehensible Divinity. Amen.

Having said this Prayer under the Gospel Examine how you have behaved your
self in this holy Mystery, and if you find your self to have failed humbly
crave pardon of Almighty God, purposing by his holy grace to amend, and be more
diligent the next day. DEO GRATIAS.

Certain intentions or Meditations which we ought to have when we Communicate:
out of S. Bonav.
1. FIrst to unite our selves more and more to Almighty God.

2. To gain thereby some virtue or grace.

3. To acknowledge his benefits which we cannot do in any thing which is more
pleasing and agreeable to him then by worthily frequenting this holy Sacrament.

4. The desire of the praise of Almighty God, and his goodness, the same being
a Sacrifice of praise.

5. To receive the spirit of Christ Jesus, and to live in humility, charity,
Obedience, Poverty of spirit, mortification of body, and contempt of the world,
that thy Redeemer may live in thee, who is thy final end.

6. To renew the memory of the Passion of Christ Jesus.

Considerations before Communion taken out of the same Saint.
1. WE are to meditate vhat we are about to do; which is to receive Christ
Jesus, true God and true man, who died upon the Cross for us.

2. That we are to receive the Holy of Holies: for which cause, it behooves
that we approach thereunto, without sin; purging our selves by true Contrition.

3. Consider the divine Excellency and our own misery: how great this Lord is,
and how mean the servant. Ponder that his goodness is much more then our
offenses, or virtues.

4. Stir up in your self a most fervent desire to harbor in your heart such a
loving Lord: The holy Doctor says it is a very strange thing that man
receiving into his soul Almighty God in the most B. Sacrament, his heart does
not even faint, yea even burst through vehemence of love.

Fooure considerations of S. Mathildis before Communion.
1. THe great love of God who had remembrance of her from all Eternity.

2. That he created her Knowing how ungrateful she would be unto his divine
Majesty.

3. That he would die for her, upon the Cross, and with his sacred blood satisfy
his Eternal Father for her demerits.

4. That for her love he would remain in the holy Sacrament to feed her with
his own blessed body and Cleanse her with his own sacred blood.

A Prayer before receiving the B. Sacrament.
O Sweet JESUS J most ardently desire to receive you Sacramentally and
spiritually: although J know my self to be most unworthy you should enter into
the house of my soul; be favorable unto me wretched sinner, and take from me
whatsoever is displeasing unto you: prepare in me, and in all hearts a
habitation agreeable unto your divine Majesty. Would to God, O my sweet Savior
JESU, would to God J were wholly enflamed with an ardent desire and love of you.
Behold J here renounce, and give up to you all things, O sweet JESU, O JESU, my
love for ever.

A Prayer after receiving the B. Sacrament.
O Most sweet Lord JESUS CHRIST, J humbly beseech thy unspeakable mercy, that
this holy Sacrament of thy precious body and blood which J unworthy have
received, may be to me and to all sinners a full purgation of all our offenses,
a strength against frailties, a fortress to defend us against all perils both
of soul and body, an entire pardon and establishment in all grace, an amendment
of life, a continual memorial of thy sacred Passion, a nourishment against
all spiritual weakness and a staff of our Pilgrimage: let it, my sweet Savior
JESUS, guide us going, reduce us straying, receive us returning again, hold us
up stumbling, lift us up falling and persevering bring us to glory. O highest
God let the reception of this most worthy Sacrament so alter the taste of our
hearts, that at no time we feel any sweetness, love, or desire, and
consolation, admit any delight, esteem any honor, fear any adversity, or
even-live but for thee, and to accomplish thy blessed will, which may ever be
perfected in us. Amen.

Another Prayer.
O Most glorious and ever blessed Virgin Mary, O holy Father S. Francis, O holy
Mother S. Clare, S. Michael, Angels, Archangells, Virtues, Powers,
Principalities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubins, Seraphins, and all celestial
Spirits, J beseech you to prostrate before the face of my God, and beseech him
in favor of his most dear son, my Savior and Redeemer CHRIST JESUS, that it
will please him to pardon the unworthines and indevotion wherewith J have
received the most blessed and dreadfall Sacrament, and do not permit the same
to cause that the spirit thereof be not communicated unto me also, that by the
virtue and efficacy of this holy Communion J may feel the effect of his divine
mercy: that I may receive this day a full remission of all my sins, true light
and knowledge of his grace, which is in me: that be reduce and put me in such
an estate as shall be most pleasing unto his divine Majesty: augment in me
faith, hope, charity, obedience, chastity and patience, with all other virtues
and gifts of the holy Ghost, necessary to procure the glory of his divine
Majesty, and the salvation of my soul to the honor and praise of his holy
name. Amen.

What we ought to do the day we communicate.
1. BE very careful to govern our senses, especially our tongue; and if it
happen we fall by frailty, we ought presently to crave pardon and beseech our
sweet Savior not therefore to absent himself from us.

2. To render to this blessed guest all the best services we are able, he being
infinitely worthy to be served, loved, and adored of all creatures. Wishing
above all things his holy honor and pleasure.

3. Seek still to entertain this blessed spouse with holy thoughts and desires,
beseeching him to give you and all others, whatsoever he knows to be needful
for his love and service, believing that he is inestimably rich, and a most
liberal giver.

4. Do nothing that day without considering first whether the thing you do will
be pleasing and agreeable unto him, and demand his permission and leave.

5. Make fervent aspirations, cast forth arrows of divine love toward that
most amiable and sweet Lord with a vehement desire of loving him infinitely,
and be wholly transformed into him by conformity of will. Deo gratias.

A Prayer before Confession.
O Soverain Creator of heaven and earth, and of all things which in them are:
J worm and miserable wretch have offended your divine Majesty, I wonder at my
folly, detest my ingratitude, and lament my offenses, craving through the
merits of the bitter Passion and death of your only begotten son, and the
infinite love, with which he did both offer and suffer them for my sake, and
for the whole world: grant unto me and all sinners true knowledge and perfect
contrition of our sins and offenses with entire remission of them all, loose us
from the chains of our imperfections, and heal the wounds of our souls:
grant us ever to be purged and refreshed in the fountain of his holy wounds.
Amen.

A Prayer after Confession.
O Good JESUS let this my Confession be grateful and acceptable unto you by the
merits of your admirable life and painful death, with all the labors,
anguishes, and sorrows, which you suffered for mankind, together with those of
your B. Mother, and all your holy Saints supplying whatsoever is wanting in me,
either now or any other time, through want of true contrition, entire
confession, or full satisfaction: beseeching they may also be unto me light,
direction and strength in all my ways unto the perfect possession of you my
sweet JESUS in eternal glory. Amen.

Directions how to say the Divine Office with due devotion and attention.
WHat care we ought to have in saying the divine Office according to the
examples of the holy men, is witten in the 27. Chapter of Paralipomenon,
Despise not your self, our Lord has chosen you to stand before him and adore
him. Wherefore since God has chosen man to so high a preferment, it is very
requisite we should know how, and in what manner humble service does consist.
The holy man Gerson affirms that in saying your Mattins and other hours,
carefully and studiously, leasurely and distinctly, consists the greatest
exercise of a Religious man, and is so fit for him as nothing more. S. Benedict
does call this the work of our Lord, especially because it it is the chiefest
office that any man can perform grateful to the divine Majesty. S. Jerome does
affirm that to offer up Hymns, Psalms, and spiritual prayers, and to shed
tears for our own offenses, and those of our neighbor, is to reconcile the
people to God, and to pacify our Lord with his flock: all which things are to
be accomplished in the divine office. Wherefore we ought very diligently to
apply our whole study, and inward powers to the due execution thereof: least
perhaps that dreadful sentence pronounced by the Prophet Jeremy c. 48. v. 10.
fall upon us, maledictus qui facit opus Domini fraudulenter. Artursd be be who
does our lords work negligently.

Three sorts of preparation for saying the Divine Offices.
THe first of living well, which is to be exercised in doing all pious works,
to restrain our selves from all vanities, and daily to keep our hearts free and
pure from all things that may in the least sort soil them, always directing
our thoughts and works whatsoever unto Almighty God and his honor.

The 2. is, that before we begin the Divine Office, we be careful to recollect
our spirits, excluding all foreign thoughts, or whatsoever may give us
distraction in our Divine Office, considering seriously what we are going bou^
It behooves us also diligently to weigh these, things following.

That we come To worship God. To thank God. To entreat God.


First we come to worship God in three persons and one essence with the worship
of Patria which is due to God alone, for the benefit of justification, that is
the Incarnation of his only son, our B. Savior his life, death, Resurrection,
and Ascension; which Mysteries we ought carefully to consider, and ponder with
great devotion and reverence.

2. We come to thank God in praising him for the great benefits which we have
received and do momentarily receive, and hope to receive herafter. Therefore it
is requisite that we behold and renew the same every hour and moment of our
life: but especially when we are so particularly employed in a work that has
so great relation and adherence thereunto.

3. We go to entreat God, in beseeching his most immeasurable clemency for our
own necessities and those of the whole Church: but to bring all these
particulars with more facility to our mind it will assist us much, attentively
to think that nothing is more necessary or profitable for us then God.

The 3. Preparation is a zealous prayer, which we must make to the end we may
worthily finish the task of our devotions, and in imitation of the three Kings
offer to his divine goodness the gold of devotion, the frankincense of
attention, and the Myrrh of constant perseverance.

Being to begin the Office you may say. I adore thee O Christ, and bless thee O
Lord, for by thy Cross and Passion thou have redeemed the world. Thou art my
God, and I will exalt thee; To thee be praise. To thee be glory. To thee be
thanks giving for ever. All creatures worthily worship thee; praise, glorify,
and adore the most high and undivided Trinity, and the humanity of my blessed
Lord Jesu, who in time past was conversant with men upon earth, and now sits at
the right hand of his Eternal Father: J beseech the Holy Virgin with the holy
Angels and Saints, and those whose feasts are celebrated this day throughout
the whole Church, that they will all help me with their aid and furtherance, to
the end I may finish this my office worthily to the true praise of Almighty
God, and the profit of my soul Amen.

For the Prayer before the lesser Hours take either REX CHRIST etc. or the
Prayer following.
O Good Jesu I desire for the love and honor which I owe unto you, humbly to
obey you, faithfully to serve you, and purely to love you, in union of that
most perfect attention, which you being here on Earth prayed and praised your
heavenly Father. Help me O Lord Jesu with your holy grace, for being left by
you, I shall be able to do nothing. Amen.

Devout Meditations at Gloria Patri.
GLory be to the Father, who when I was not, has created me.

Glory be to the son, who when I was lost has redeemed me.

Glory be to the Holy Ghost, who has sanctified me, and the elect of God.

Here ensue certain holy Meditations of the 7. Effusions, distributed for the
Canonical Hours.

At Matins.
COnsider with devotion, and yield manifold thanks to our B. Savior for the
effusion of his precious blood, and suffererings in his Circumcision, offering
the dolours and pains of the said effusion to God the Father for all those that
are in state of mortal sin, that it would please his divine goodness to give
them a perfect knowledge of their offenses with contrition, confession,
satisfaction and amendment.

At Lauds.
POnder and give thanks for the dolorousness, pain and effusion of blood, which
our Savior CHRIST JESUS endured in the garden a little before he was
apprehended and taken, where with great pain and agony he sweat blood and
water: offering this spiritually unto God the Father for those that are in the
state of grace, favor and love of God, and his holy name, that it would please
him to conserve them in that state and purity.

At Prime.
YIeld many thanks for the pain and effusion of blood, which our B. savior
CHRIST JESUS suffered in his flagellation, offering it up unto God the Father,
for all those that are in any affliction or tribulation, be it spiritual or
corporal, beseeching his divine Majesty to conserve each one of them, as he
knows to be most to his honor, and the health of their souls.

At Tierce.
IN devout contemplation give Many thanks unto God our sweet Savior CHRIST
JESUS for the effusion of his most precious blood which he endured in his
crowning with thorns: offering it to God the Father for our parents, kindred and
benefactours, and all for whom we are any ways obliged to pray: beseeching
him to give them his holy grace to live in his true love and fear, and at
their death to possess everlasting life.

At Sext.
YIeld manyfold thanks unto our B. Savior JESUS for the pains and effusion of
his precious blood, which issued forth of his hands and feet, being nailed on
the Cross; offering it to God the Father for the state of our holy Mother the
church, that the Popes holiness, and all Ecclesiastical Powers may be exalted,
to the increase of his honor, and have grace strength and ability, well to
discharge what is committed to them therein.

At None.
GIve manifold thanks unto our B. Savior for the effusion and shedding of his
sacred blood when nailed to the Cross his most holy side was pierced with a
lance; offering it to God the Father for the Conversion of all Heretics:
particularly for England, that it would please him to enlighten them with his
holy grace to know and embrace the truth, that they with all others may in
union and perfect charity, love, praise and magnify him everlastingly.

At Evensong.
CAll to mind the dolorous Mystery of our B. Saviors taking from the Cross and
lying in the lapp of his Mother, offering it to God the Father for all
religious persons who are especially dedicated unto his holy service,
beseeching his divine goodness to give each one of them grace perfectly to
perforn his holy will even unto death, and to live virtuously in the observance
of their institutes, and persever therein until the end.

At Compline.
COnsider how our B. Savior being dead and his holy body taken down from the
Cross, it was by our B. Lady, S. Mary Magdalen and other holy persons laid in
the sepulcher whilst his glorious soul descended into Limbo, where he
delivered the just: all which with devotion we may present unto God the Father
for the comfort and releasement of the souls detained for the purging of their
sins in Purgatory, beseeching him mercifully to receive them unto his happy
rest, that they may eternally praise him. AMEN.

A Prayer after the Divine Office.
O Good JESUS be propitious unto me a miserable sinner: unto thy goodness do J
commend this my office most coldly and distractedly accomplished, beseeching
that through your merits it may be amended and perfected. Unto you good JESU do
I offer it for the good of the whole church, and the salvation of my soul, in
union of that most perfect attention, with which here on earth you did pray
unto your heavenly Father; Answer I beseech you, Satisfy, and pray for me. AMEN.

A Direction for Mental Prayer.
THose who desire to increase and go forward in a spiritual life, let them go
that certain way, which is the interior and mutual communication with
Almighty God, performed in this holy Exercise. Because in Prayer virtues are
ceived, obtained, and augmented. Prayer as the holy Apostle S. James says,
avails much, ascends to heaven before the tribunal seat of Almighty God,
and brings unto men every good and perfect gift; causes such a league and
union betwixt God and them, as it makes their souls apt to receive infinite
grace from his divine Majesty. Daniel by Prayer converted the fierceness of
Lions into the meekness of Lambs. Prayer made the fire loose its force, being
not able to burn the three children in the midst of the flaming furnace. Prayer
likewise stayed the course and altered the uniform motions of the heavens,
giving power to the voice of man to stop and detain the sun for as many hours
as was necessary for the obtaining the victory against his enemies. Jacob
through the virtue and efficacy of Prayer prevailed against the Angel. Yea
Prayer tied the hands and infinite power, (if we may so say) of the Lord of
Angels: for by the Prayer of Moses Almighty God seemed to be as it were
disabled to chastize the people, when he said unto this faithful servant of
his. Suffer me that my fury m y be angry against them: as if he should have
said: Detain me not with thy Prayers. Prayer finally obtains pardon for
whatsoever offenses: the Publican gets remission of his sins, and the
Prodigal child pardon, and returns again into favor by Prayer. Therefore it
being so profitable and necessary for a spiritual life, obtaining by the
virtue thereof whatsoever it will in heaven or Earrh; it is requisite that all
Religious persons, spend as much time as their state and leisure will permit
them in this kind of Prayer: which rather consists in the actions of the will
then the long discourse or speculation of the understanding, sensible gifts, or
consolations: for that is not in our own hands. The fruit of Prayer is, that we
raise from the same, humility, patience, obedience, Indifference etc. This is
always in our power, (the grace of God presupposed.) To the end that Prayer be
performed with Recollection and attention, it is necessary that we do not take
it in hand as a thing of small moment, not rashly, but advisedly; not with a
slow and dull heart, but with a lively attention, and undaunted courage: for
otherwise we might incurr the curse of the Prophet Jeremy, who says, Cursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Neither is so great attention
and force to be used as thereby to weary and break our heads, and hinder our
health: for so, instead of pleasant and sweet milk we should wring forth blood,
(as the wisdom of God signifies in Proverbs) cause a fear and horror to
undertake this holy Exercise. Wherefore to avoid these extremes, Moderation is
to be used in such sort, as by over much striving therein we hurt not our
selves, as was aforesaid, nor through too much carelessness let our mind be
carried away with unprofitable matters Let not wandering thoughts trouble you,
but put them away sweetly: for you merit more by patient resistance then in
having great comfort and consolation. Humble and accuse your self in the fight
of Almighty God, that you cannot be so long in his presence without so many
earthly cogitations: beseeching our B. Lady, your holy Angel, and all others
with the Saints to pray for you and supply your wants in due praise and love of
his divine Majesty. For scruples and temptations, which happen in Prayer, the
first remedy, is not to hearken, or give ear unto them.

An Instruction for mental Prayer to which are required 5. Conditions. To wit.

1. Preparation. 2. Meditation. 3. Preambles. 4. Colloquie. 5. Recollection.
1. PReparation has 4. conditions. The 1. which is universal to all piety,
Purity of heart and calmness of passions, and affections, and Recollection both
of senses and fancies: but above all things, that the intention be pure, and
that you undertake this virtuous Exercise sincerely for the love of God to
please him, and reform your life and manners according to his most blessed will
and not for hopes of consolations or divine lights; which were an intention
proper to hirelings, and not fit for his children, nor grateful to our
heavenly Father, who desires above all things a pure intention.

2. The 2. is Reading, which you may accustom in this manner: read those
points you intend to make your Meditation on after even song, before or about
dinner: and that which you purpose to meditate on after Mattins the night
before. Ruminate the matter diverse times before you meditate, moving your self
to taste and feel those good motions and affections, which you think the matter
will yield you to draw forth. For if in an affair of importance which we
handle with earthly creatures, we seriously think and consider thereof before:
how much more ought we to do it in this so spiritual an Exercise and the
greatest which can possibly be undertaken, being we are therein to treat with
Almighty God about the good and salvation of our soul.

The 3. condition, is the Presence of God. Coming to the place where you
purpose to meditate consider the presence of Almighty God comparing his
greatness and goodness, with your own baseness and vileness and imagining our
sweet Savior calls you to show you what he has don, said and suffered for
you. Or consider your self a beggar, sick, and guilty, to crave of your
benefactour an alms, of your Physician health, and of your Judge pardon;
beseeching your good Angel, and some of your Patrons to accompany and assist
you therein.

4. The 4. and last condition of preparation* is the Prayer preparatory,
wherein you crave grace affectuously in general to perform your Meditation to
Gods honor and glory, and the good of your own soul, remembering that
sentence. Omnis nostra sufficientia a Deo est. All our sufficiency is from God:
beseeching your heavenly Father who is a sea of mercies to rain down by his
power plenty of pious thoughts to possess your memory; God the son the true
light and wisdom to illuminate and instruct your Understanding with heavenly
knowledge; God the Holy Ghost, who is an infinite burning fire of charity, to
inflame your will with pious affections.

The 2. Condition of Mental Prayer is Preambles, which are for the most part
three.
1. THe fitst whereof is a tepetition to your self as you would to another, of
the matter, sentence, or verse, of which you are to meditate.

2. The 2. if the matter be Historical, is to represent unto your self the
place and persons present. As for example: Meditating some Mystery of Christ,
put before your eyes some mountain, city, or desert, fitting the place to the
Mystery or sentence, which you are to consider. If what you purpose to meditate
be spiritual matter, void of such similitude, abstain from the 2. Preamble
accordingly. If of Hell: think of the length, breadth, and depth of that horrid
place, with all things that may give horror unto If of Heaven: represent the
spacious pleasantness of that Celestial Country. If on death: your self lying
on your death bed, or laid in your grave. If on Judgment: our sweet Savior
sitting on his Judgment seat. If on sin: your soul to be held prisoner in your
body, fettered with chains of disordered passions, and clogged with the burden
of the flesh. But if the sentence of your Meditation be such, as cannot make
these nor the former similitudes: call to mind who spoke or did it, in what
manner, sort, or with what intention: reciting that sentence two or three times
unto your self: which manner you must also accustom in all sorts of
Meditations, expecting what it shall please God to teach you: therefore saying:
Speak Lord thy servant hears.

3. The 3. Preamble, or petition is briefly to crave light and knowledge of the
Mystery you meditate on, and grace to stir up in your self such particular
good affections of this or that virtue as you shall see the matter is most apt
to minister occasion, for your spiritual profit.

The 3. Condition of mental Prayer, is Meditation, which consists in the
three powers of the soul.
1. FIrst: let the memory remember to call to mind the presence of Almighty
God, before whom you are to choose the matter whereon you are to meditate, in
what manner you are to do it, and the end wherefore.

2. Secondly: the Understanding must discourse of the matter, whether it be of
some person, as of our Savior: some words of holy scripture, some actions, as
of the Passion of CHRIST JESUS, or the suffering of his Saints: the verity,
cause, properties, effects, conveniences, and circumstances, as, WHO, WHAT,
WHY, WHERE, WHEN, BY WHAT MEANS: And this is not to be don slightly, but very
seriously, so as they may move the will, pondering and as it were showing them
again.

3. Thirdly: the will must stir up in it self these affections, and make such
good purposes as the subject does require, and the understanding has before
approved for good: seeking to perform toward God: 1. The affections of praise
of his holy name. 2. Love of his goodness. 3. Confidence in his mercy. 4. Faith
in his verity. 5. Fear of his justice. 6. Gratitude for his benefits. Toward
your self, affections of love or hatred, desire or disdain, joy or sorrow,
conversion, or aversion, fear or hope, dislike or pursuit of the matter which
you have discovered: and in these of the will you must incite and stay your
self in every point of your meditation.

How to proceed with fruit in every point of your Meditation.
FIrst the memory is to present the matter unto the understanding, as is above
said, and that is to consider the persons, actions, and circumstances as is set
down: and when by discourse and particular view of the matter, you shall
sufficiently understand any special point to move affections: as to discover
Gods goodness, love, or any benefit, don toward us by him, example of virtue,
or difformity of vice, then stay that discourse, and seek to stir up such good
affections, as the matter will most aptly afford. As for example; when by
discourse you have found the goodness of God, or some great benefit of him to
us; then stay, love, view, and admire him for the greatness thereof: inciting
your self to have a perpetual memory and acknowledgment of them, drawing
something for your instruction and encouragement to his most perfect service and
your own progress in virtue. This is a great part of the fruit, which you are
to reap of Meditation, the which you must perfect by colloquy and Prayer.

Helps, if the will does not yield unto those affections which you desire.
REflect with your self what affections such considerations ought to move in
you toward God, whose love, goodness, and benefits you see to be so great, and
you have deserved so little: the which consideration ought to produce in you
exceeding great love, praise, gratitude, obedience, confidence etc. Then come
to your will again, and see whether it will yield to those affections. If it do
not, then labor to move it either by such persuasions as you would give to
another, whom you desire to incite to the same affections: Or else, reprove
your dullness; or ask your self the question why you should not yield thereunto:
seeing that you can remember your self and others to be exceedingly moved unto
such affections toward creatures for less motives. And again say. Why should
not I feel the like to my Creator, or at least yield with my will to desire
it, and purpose the same? Then have recourse to Prayer and say. O my God, J
will purpose etc. J desire you to assist me with your grace: confessing your
misery and unworthines, beseeching him to be your help. And sometimes say these
words of Jacob: I will not leave thee O Lord until thou givestme thy blessing:
or those of the Cananean woman. Yes Lord I am a dog, yet dogs eat, the crumbs
which fall from their Masters table: or other such like. And thus, having at
least by some means or other stirred up the foresaid affections, though not so
fervently as we desire, persever in exercising the will, drawing forth something
for your profit. This example, in due proportion may serve to teach you how to
proceed upon any other matter: as when you have by discourse discovered any
virtue or vice in some word, deed or thought, of some person who is presented
in the Meditation: first by staying or pondering, or sometimes admiring how
worthy a thing that virtue is, in that person, and how foul the vice: the
fruit and profit which arises of the one, and the loss and shame of the other.
Then proceed as you will to move and stir up the affection you seek; never
contenting your self with general affections, be they never so fervent, nor
spend to much time in them, but make some particular resolutions, of which you
stand in most need for the advancement and correction of your life, which
having stirred up, confirmed, and resolved to practice, conclude always the
part, and much of the whole Meditation with devout colloquies or speeches of
heart unto Almighty God.

The 4. Condition of Prayer, or Colloquy to be said at the end of Meditation or
part of them during the same.
1. THe first is to give God thanks for the holy affections, resolutions, and
purposes, which he has inspired into you, as also for his goodness and mercy
which you have discovered in the discourse of your Meditation.

2. Secondly, by way of oblation, wherein you present unto God the self same
goodness and mercy of his, which you have tasted in Meditation together with the
death Passion, virtues and merits of his holy son our Redeemer, and
consequently with all the affections and resolutions which by his holy grace
you made in your Meditation.

3. Thirdly by Petition or Obsecration, which you demand of God, and earnestly
conjure him, as it were through the death and Passion of our fweet Savior, the
merits of the glorious Virgin Mary, the intercession of your good Angel, and
all the holy Saints to bless your affections and resolutions, which to his
honor and glory you have made, to the end you may faithfully put them in
execution, and for making your self more capable of his grace; crave pardon for
your sins and offenses committed against his divine Majesty, with remedy of
some vice and augmentation of some virtue, offering your self wholly unto his
holy service with a firm purpose to avoid whatsoever may offend him.

4. Fourthly; besides these particular petitions which appertain unto your
self, it is very good to make a general suit for all both living and dead, but
especially for those who have most need, and to whom you are most obliged, and
particularly for the souls in Purgatory.

The 5. Condition of Mental Prayer is Recollection.
FIrst, your Meditation being ended, it is very profitable to ponder well and
consider how it succeeded; whether you followed the method that was taught you,
in the preparation, Preamble, Meditation and all the rest, and what point moved
you most, and how you have exercised your self therein, craving pardon for your
defects, and giving Almighty God thanks for what was well, resolving to follow
what you see to be profitable unto you, and avoid the contrary.

2. You must have a particular care to conform your felf unto those good
motions, which Almighty God shall give you in Prayer: for, so to do, is a most
special means to obtain the increase of grace: for the contrary would be an
ingratitude and contempt of Gods graces, which deserves not to have the like
hereafter: a principal help for the same is to have care to remember them: and
for that end it is good at Mass, and the Divine Office to renew and offer them
to Almighty God, and diverse times in the day to do the like.

3. Thirdly and lastly, if at any time it happen that through ill disposition,
want of due Preparation, or yielding to temptation, your Meditation does not
succed; be not dismayed or discouraged, but humbling your self in Gods sight,
acknowledge your imperfections and negligences; crave pardon of his divine
Majesty, purposing by his holy grace to be more careful and diligent the next
time: for the obtaining of which, have confidence in his divine goodness, and
thank him that he has vouchsafed to permit you the favor to be so long in
his presence. And if it were to have the least good affection in all the time
of your meditation, or but a remembrance of Almighty God, think not the time
lost, and labor fruitless, but rather if you will make use of that little you
have by often remembering it, doubt not but that little spark by laying wood to
it, and often blowing the coals will turn to a great fire of the love of God.

An advice how to overcome some difficulties that fall out in Meditation.
THe first is when you find your self without gust of devotion, and so dry that
Meditation will not only seem to be cumbersom unto you, but also time lost. To
overcome this difficulty: you must understand, that aridity and dryness may
come sometimes out of your own fault; as when you used not that diligence you
ought either in meditation, or in preparing your self, by foreseeing what you
are to meditate on, according as has been said, whereof it comes, that you do
it with negligence, and dryly: and Almighty God in punishment thereof does
worthily deprive you of the consolation and taste of Meditation. The remedy to
rid your self of this punishment, is to take away the cause. At other times
this aridity comes without fault; and we must not therefore leave Meditation:
for as a time of consolation does please you, when our Lord like the sun in the
spring comes near to you, and mak's you have gust in meditation: so you must
not be displeased or leave your Exercise, when the self same savior as the sun
in winter does go from you, which he also does for your good, that you may
plant roots of humility, exercise patience and resignation, knowing that when
he goes from you, you remain dry without devotion, having confidence that God
will accept of your Meditation and endeavors, and send you consolation when he
thinks most fitting; and persevering with courage and hope, remember the
words of Tobias. Qui post tempestatem, tranquillum facit. Who after a storm
mak's a calm. As also that of Job. If we have received good things, why should
not we bear with the basd. It may be also that Almighty God suffers you to
be dry in Prayer, to try with what intention you come to so holy an Exercise:
proving whether you be his soldier for payment, expecting he should reward you
with gust and devotion: or else to make you know that your taste and comfort in
meditation is his gift, which he bestows on who^, and when he will, that by
this means you dispose your self to ask humbly of him, and with confidence
expect what you ask* whe^soever you prav to please God thereby as you ought to
do; you may say: I did not begin my meditation to feel gust or devotion, but
for the love of God, my sweet savior JESUS, and for his love I will continue
it.

Another difficulty is, that the devil will represent Meditation unto you, as
very hard and difficult, so to make you differr it, and afterward wholly
forsake it. But if you have a true desire to do a thing acceptable to your
Creator, either Meditation will not seem so tedious or you will hold all well
employed for his love. How many courtiers do you see going a hundred times a
year unto the Princes chamber without hopes of once speaking unto him, only
to be seen-by him, that he may take notice how they endeavor to show their
duty unto him: so must you come to the Exercises of Prayer, which is as it were
Gods Chamber of Presence purely and merely to do your duty and testify your
fidelity. And if it please him not to speak to you, no otherwise then if he saw
you not, or if you were not in his presence, you must not for all that go away
discontented, or discomforted, but continue still with patience and a devout
behavior in the presence of his soverain goodness: and without doubt your
service will be acceptable to him, and at last he will take notice of your
constancy and diligence.

Colloquies or speeches, part in Meditation and part in Prayer; Praising
Almighty Gods Excellency, goodness, holiness, worthiness etc.
TO THE SOUL.
EXhorting it to some virtuous action: sometimes reprehending her vices and
faults, little zeal, imperfections etc.

PURPOSES.
Purposing to Gods honor, Obedience, Humility, Resignation, Mortification etc.

AFFECTIONS.
More affections toward God, increase of his honor, augmentation of the
Church, etc.

SUPPLICATION.
Make supplication unto God, as a son does to his father, a beggar to his
benefactour, a sick man to his Physician, a scholar to his Master, and a
spouse to her bridegroom.

TO OUR B. LADY.
Alleging that she is our mother, Mistress, Queen and Advocate, and therefore
ought and does love us, defend, protect, and pray for us.

TO OUR GOOD ANGEL.
Alleging his office, charge, and power to help us: his honor to defend us.

TO THE SAINTS.
Especially those to whom you are most devoted, alleging their affinity to
our nature, their trials of our necessities, their security in glory, and
their ability and willingness to help us.

CAUSES OF DISTRACTIONS.
1. First from the Devil who does still endeavor to hinder from the fruit of
Prayer.

2. It proceeds from our own imagination which is free, untamed, and ill
governed.

3. From some affections unmortified, which draw our thoughts after them, for
where the treasure is, there is the heart.

4. From cares which sting, and divide the heart into a thousand parts.

5. From coldness in enforcing our selves to this so noble an Exercise.

6. From ignorance, not knowing how to discourse or meditate, or search into
hidden verities, and ponder them in such sort as may move the will and stir up
affections of devotion. This ignorance by the grace of God will be remedied by
this form, and method following.

The means to resist distractions of heart and tediousnes of spirit, are
principally four.
1. FIrst, profound humility, acknowledging our weakness and misery; being
ashamed to stand before God with such distractions, accusing our selves of our
offenses both past and present.

2. The second, fortitude of mind, resolving not to admit any distraction,
although it administer matter of content, of seem of much importance; for
nothing behooves us so much as to tend to Prayer and to God, before whom we
are. Wherefore if a thousand times we should be diverted, we must turn again as
many times more, without loosing courage.

3. The third remedy, Prayer it self: beseeching our savior to recollect our
thoughts and wandering affections, that we may use attention and devotion:
craving the help and intercession of his glorious Mother with the holy Angels
and Saints, who are willing to assist all those that pray: saying sometimes with
David. My heart has forsaken me, may it please you Lord to deliver me from the
violence which I suffer, and have respect to help. Other times with the
Prophet: My soul is as earth without water. Again: with the blind man in the
Gospel. O son of David have mercy on me. Or with the Psalmist. Depart from me
o ye malignants, and I will search the Commandments of my God.

4. The fourth is Confidence in Almighty God: persuading our selves, that being
he commands us to pray, he will give us grace whereby we may resist the
devil, bridle our imaginations, restrain our passions, moderate our cares,
cast from us our coldness: But with this confidence we must adjoyn diligence,
as Cassian says, removing before Prayer whatsoever you think may distract you
therein: imitating in this the subtilty of our adversary; who as S. Nilus Abbot
says, ordains all his temptations, wherewith he tempts sp rituall persons,
to hinder them from Prayer and the fruit thereof: tempting them with impatience
to disquiet them, curiosity to distract them, multitude of business to disturb
them, pride and ingratitude to make them barren and dry etc. By this we may
learn to be no less provident and careful of our good then the devil is of
our harm, ever governing our selves in such sort as may most forward our
Prayer, remembering the words of our sweet savior in S. Luke. It behooves us
always to pray, and never to be weary.

The chiefest effects of prayer.
ARe particular lights, affections, and resolutions. And whatsoever else is
needful for a large Examine after Meditation, is set down in the end of the
book of the practice of Meditation.

1. Consolation is an inward motion unto the more perfect love of God, and
withdraws our affections from all earthly creatures.

2. Tears, springing of love or sorrow, rightly ordained to the honor of God.

3. Increase of hope and Charity.

4. Joy and devotion, which incites the soul unto greater perfection.

5. Illuminations of the understanding, whereby it understands some things
anew or better, and more perfectly then before.

1. Desolation is that which vaileth the eyes of the soul, that it may not
behold that which appertains to the glory of God, and the perfection of the
soul.

2. That which troubles, and moves us to earthly and outward things.

3. That which draws us to the distrust of obtaining perfection, or what may
help us.

4. That which drives away Hope and charity.

5. That which brings the soul to a certain tepidity, heavines, and
tediousnes of mind. S. Bernard speaking of the devout Meditation upon the
Passion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, says thus. If thou desire
perfectly to be purified from all thy sins and vices, if thou would be nobly
enriched with virtues, illuminated in holy Scripture: if thou would
gloriously triumph over thy enemies: if abundantly be conforted in adversities;
if often, to have compunction and shed tears of devotion: if to obtain the
burning fervor os spirit in Meditation: if to be replenished with spiritual
joy, if to persever in well doing, if in the end well and blessedly to die, and
to reign in heaven eternally: and finally to be beloved and crowned by our
Savior Jesus, everlastingly, exercise thy self in the holy Meditation of the
blessed life and Passion of Jesus, and often reduce the same unto thy heart and
memory.

Things to be considered in Meditating the Passion of our Savior.
1. Who it is that suffers. 2, What it is he suffers. 3. How he suffers.
4. For whom 5. To what end he suffered.

Several Affections to be draw'n from the consideration of the same Passion.
1. To have compassion on the greatness of his pains.

2. Contrition for the sins, which were the cause of his sufferance.

3. Imitation in following his examples.

4. Gratitude for the largeness of our Redemption.

5. Hope he dyed to save us.

6. Love in seeing the greatness of his love.

7. Admiration in beholding his unspeakable bounty and goodness. It is written
of him, dixit multa, fecit mira, pertulit dura.

Considerations of the knowledge of ones self.
1. Consider what you have been, what you are, and what you shall be.

2. Ponder what you are by nature: by fault, what you have deserved; and what
you may do by grace.

3. The effectual cause of your Being, is God.

4. The matter of which you are made is Earth, agreeing with the nature of
beasts.

5. Our souls to the image of God.

6. Our end to serve him, and live eternally with him.

Considerations of sin.
1. How much it displeases Almighty God, and hurts man.

2. How contrary to his justice, displeasing, and disedifying to our neighbor.

3. God's severe punishment of it, and what we loose thereby.

4. The disgust that follows sin, and dishonor that accompanies it.

5. The grief of God, his Angels, and Saints, with the joy of the Devil.

6. The difformity of sin, and the disagreement between men and it, according
to the nobleness of the soul.

How to consider Death.
1. That all must necessarily die, and then be deprived of all things.

2. Only accompanied with grief and sickness of the body, with temptations and
fears of the soul.

3. And nothing will confort you at that hour but only good works.

4. Death ought not to be feared, contemned, or desired.

Of the Pains of the damned.
There are many ways to meditate of this, as in that which follows of glory,
only changing the good for the evil.

To contemplate Heaven.
1. Consider the dowries of the soul, which are the vision, possession and
enjoying of God.

2. The dowries and perfections of the body: Impassibility, Brightness, Agility,
Subtility.

3. The place: most excellent, most large, most beautiful and most rich.

4. The company of the Angels and Saints with the Blessed Mother of God, which
shall endure for all Eternity.

How to consider virtue.
1. In what virtue consists.

2. What examples and doctrine my sweet Savior has given you thereof.

3. How beautiful, excellent, necessary, and profitable it is: how pleasing
unto God, and makes man agreeable to him.

4. How much it edifieth and profits your neighbor.

5. The spiritual joy it brings with many benefits.

6. The victory we gain thereby over our selves.

7. How far we are from the perfection thereof and what you ought to do
hereafter.

8. The power we gain thereby, in presenting our Prayers to God.

How to consider the Feasts of Saints.
1. In what place they are now and with what glory they are crowned.

2. How much they may help us by their Prayers and merits.

3. By what works, Prayers, and virtues they have attained such glory.

4. If you will come where they are, do as they have don.

To meditate on the Perfections of Almighty God.
1. His infinite Essence. 2. His Power. 3. His Wisdom. 4. His Bounty. 5. His
Goodness 6. His Love. 7. His Mercy. 8. His Justice. 9. His Providence. 10. His
Omnipotency: concerning which weigh this sentence of holy scripture, or what
himself has don in testimony thereof. Caelum and terram ego impleo. In ipso
vivimus, movemur and sumus. I fill heaven and Earth. In him we live, move, and
are. For his power. Dixit, and facta sunt. He said, and they were made.

Considerations of the creatures of Almighty God, and first in general.
1. BY the largeness of the world, consider the greatness of Almighty God.

2. The multitude and variety of things with the infinite perfections of God.

3. His bounty in the profit they bring unto us.

4. His beauty by the beauty of the creatures.

5. His wisdom in the well ordering of all things.

6. His Eternity, in the roundness, which has neither beginning nor end.

7. The unity of the world, showing that God is only one.

The creatures in particular, their beginnings and continuance which is of God.
1. The end thereof, to wit his honor, and the service of creatures.

2. Of what and how they were made by his only word and power.

3. The qualities and effects of these creatures, the reverence they use unto
God and his perfections.

The benefits in brief of Almighty God.
1. Who has don you the benefit.

2. Who has moved him to do it.

3. Wherefore he has don it unto you.

4. How great the benefit is.

5. How much you are obliged thereby,

6. How ungrateful you have been.

What you ought to do in the time to come with the benefits of Almighty God in
particular.
1. First how God has predestined us in perpetual love before the world was.

2. How he has made man like to himself.

3. Given you a body of most seemly features void of all defformity.

4. Made your soul immortal, and adorned it with three powers.

5. Appointed an Angel to keep and defend you.

6. Made you to be born of Christian parents, and members of the Church,

The benefit of our Redemption.
1. First sent us his well beloved son to be our Redeemer and example.

2. By Baptism purged you from orignal sin and restored you the vesture of
original justice.

3. Fortified you with the Sacrament of Confirmation, whereby he has armed you
against your enemies.

4. Made you a Christian, and thereby the child of God and coheire of his
Kingdom.

5. Has given the holy Ghost in token of adoption of love, communicating unto
you his benefits inspirations and fruits.

6. Lastly the Sacraments of Confession and Communion, as a refuge in all
Spiritual relapses and necessities.

The benefit of vocation.
1. First the patience of Almighty God with you: you falling so often after so
many great benefits received, long expecting your return, and not letting you
die in an evil state.

2. Sought to recall you by inward inspirations admonitions, and exhortations.

3. Mollified your heart, giving you a good will to virtue, and removed such
impediments as might withdraw you from him.

4. Lovingly received you at your return, as the Father did his prodigal
child, putting on you the stole of innocence, which you had lost by sin.

5. Has called you from the vanities and miseries of the world, as he did Lot
from Sodom.

6. What great plenty of means he has given you in Religion, whereby you may
satisfy for your sins, increase your crown and merit.

The benefit of justification.
1. First how God has changed your will, and moved you to do penance, made
bitter things sweet, and that which was unsupportable to be easy unto you.

2. Secondly, he has given unto you perseverance in his fear and love: many
beginning well have failed in the end to their condemnation.

3. Thirdly he has given to you the Evangelicall virtues of hope and grace, to
persever in your good purposes to avoid vice and labor for virtue.

4. Fourthly has left the holy scriptures and devout books, wherein as in a
glass you may behold your defects and imperfections.

5. Fifthly, the examples of Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, and the daily
edification of those with whom you live.

The benefit of donation.
1. FIrst the gift of nature, fortune, and grace: as the five senses with the
three interior powers of your soul, health, strength, etc.

2. God brought you back when you were astray, instructed you when you were
ignorant, and lifted you up when you were fallen.

3. Thirdly enlightened your understanding when it was in darkness of sin, and
stirred up in you many good motions and desires.

4. Moved your will and affections to spiritual works and exercises.

5. Preserved you from many enormous sins, taking from you the occasions, and
giving you grace to persever and resist them.

6. Delivered you from diverse sorts of temptations, drawing you forth when you
were overwhelmed in them, and given you greater force to resist them.

The benefit of Preservation,
1. PReserved you both spiritually and corporally in a good state, with
increase of good desires, to execute good purposes.

2. From the cradle to this moment preserved you from many enemies, diseases,
dangers, etc.

3. Has hitherto furnished you with all necessaries both spiritual and
corporal.

4. Ordained for you succession of times, as day and night, winter and summer
etc.

5. Directed you in prosperity and adversity, in sickness and health, and in
the whole course of your life.

The benefit of Glorification.
1. THe fruition of the divinity with the vision of God, and his B. Mother.

2. The company of your good Angel with the Martyrs, Confessors Virgins, etc.

3. The dowry of the soul: the glorification of the body more bright and
clear then the sun it self.

4. the place of the blessed, the delights of the senses, the riches and
abounding pleasures of the inhabitants, which are innumerable, inestimable, and
immeasurable.

5. By the grace of God you shall escape the torments of Hell: the miseries of
this life: ^ hurts and cruelties of your mortal enemies.

These Meditations are as it were a cord to draw you unto Almighty God.
Gratitude is a great part of justice, and amongst all Christian exercises none
is more easy, if you be willing: none more needful, if you regard your duty:
none more profitable, if you desire reward, then often to look over the great
and manifold benefits, which we have received of Almighty God.

The eight Beatitudes.
1. BEati pauperes spiritu, quoniam ipsorum est re'gnum coelorum.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

Poverty of spirit Acknowledges her sins. Contemns her self. Despises none.
Honors all.


2. Beati mites quoniam ipsi possidebunt terram. Blessed are the meek, for they
shall possess the land.

Meekness Answers sweetly. Admonishes benignly. Is mild being reprehended.
Behaveth her self piously.


3. Beati qui lugent quoniam ipsi consolabuntur. Blessed are those that mourn
for they shall be comforted.

Sorrow Excludes all glory. Abides in misesery, For the love of her neighour.
For her own sins.


4. Beati qui esuriunt and sitiunt justitiam quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. Blessed
are they that humger and thirst justice for they shall be satiated.

Hunger and thirst Has horror of vice: A fervor of spirit: Tediousnes of
temporal things: desire of Eternal.


5. Beati mundo cord, quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt. Blessed are the Clean of
heart, for they shall see God.

Purity of heart Is sincere in intention: Right in works: Excludes perverse
cogitations: Assiduous in contemplation.


6. Beati misericordes, quoniam ipsi misericodiam consequentur. Blessed are the
merciful, because they shall find mercy.

Mercy Has compassion in tribulation. Succoureth in necessities. Delights in
liberality. Is benign with affability.


7. Beati Pacifici, quoniam filii Dei vocabuntur. Blessed are the Peace makers
for they shall he called the children of God.

Things which work Peace Silence and solitariness. Frequent and devout Prayer.
Fervent contemplation. To admit no interior trouble.


8. Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur prvpter justitiam, quoniam ipsorum est
regnum coelorum. Blessed are they that suffer persecution, for theyr's is the
kingdom of Heaven.

Things which produce Patience. Fear of eternal sufferance. Fervent love of
God. Memory of the Passion of our Savior. Hope of Eternal joy.


A Religious person ought often to consider the benefit of his vocation by
these circumstances following.
VNDE ES? Quo? Quomodo? Quando? Quo fine vocatus?

1. FROM WHENCE, God, to wit, has called you? From the world, the gulf of sin
and evils.

2. WHITHER? TO holy Religion, the house of God, the school of virtue, the gate
of consolation, and the pourtrait of the celestial Jerusalem.

3. HOW? With what love, wisdom, and power he called? without your own merit.

4. WHEN? In your youthful, or old age, when you least desired or sought after
such a course.

5. Lastly for what END? 1. To serve God perfectly, and forsake all things to
accomplish it. 2. To do penance, bear your Cross, and follow the steps of
Christ Jesus. 3. To work your salvation and to gain perfection. 4. To help your
neighbor as much as is possible according to your vocation and institution by
good example and prayer.

S. Bernard had this sentence always in his heart. Bernarde ad quid venisti?
Bernard, to what end did thou come hither?

The Privileges and benefits of a Religious person.
Homo vivit purius, cadit rarius, surgit velocius, incedit cautius, quiescit
securius, irroratur frequentius, moritur confidentius, purgatur citius,
remuneratur copiosius.

A Religious person.
1. Lives more purely: by the observance of Poverty, Chastity and Obedience.

2. Falls more rarely: by flying the occasions of sin and perverse
conversation.

3. Rises more quickly: by consideration of holy scriptures; the lives of
Saints, and example of those with whom we live.

Walks more warily: by meditating their sins past, imperfections present, and
the joy which comes of virtue.

5. Rests more securely: by attaining the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
interior consolation.

6. Receives more grace: by bettering their disposition, and becoming more
familiar with God.

7. Dies more confidently: by the the efficacy of Privileges in Religion,
meritorious works and help of Communaulty, with the imitation of their spouse
CHRIST JESUS.

8. Is sooner purged: by the many remedies to make satisfaction, by the
multitude of holy inspirations, and frequent exhortations.

9. Is rewarded more abundantly: because a Religious life is victorious over
her enemies the FLESH, the WORLD, and the DEVIL.

JESUS MARIA. Certain Aspirations for every day in the week.
Monday, Humility.
1. WHen shall it be my God, that J shall be so odious, execrable, and
insupportable to my self, as J desire to be afflicted and punished of all
creatures.

2. O sweet Savior, when shall it be, that J shall have such a true contempt
of my self, as with all my heart J wish to be contemned and reputed of every
one, most vile.

3, When shall J, dear JESUS, for the love of, you desire in such sort to be
humbled, as J be ever reduced to nothing.

4. O most meek Lord, J confess before thee, and will acknowledge to all the
world, that J am the most vile and unprofitable of all creatures.

5. O my God there is not on earth to be found a creature so disloyal and
ungrateful as J am unto thee.

6. J am not worthy to look up to heaven, and much less to possess the same.

7. If the greatest sinner in the world had those inspirations, and daily means
of virtue, which J, o Lord, confess to have: J verily think he would not be so
wretched as J am.

Tuesday, Confidence.
1. ALthough every moment, dear JESUS, J commit many imperfections, yet J hope
by thy help to attain to Christian perfection.

2. My sweet Savior, if J committed all the sins and crimes, which have been
from the beginning of the world, yet would J be confident of pardon.

3. J hope most firmly, O son of God, my Redeemer, by thy holy merits and
Sacraments to enjoy eternal life.

4. O infinite clemency! was there ever any sinner that truly asked pardon, to
whom you denied it?

5. My sweet Savior: if all creatures both in heaven and earth should tell me
that thou had forsaken me, and did refuse to help me, yet J would not
believe them.

6. O sweet JESU; albeit the furies in Hell, together with all the afflictions
of this life should torment me, yet would J trust in thee.

7. O good JESUS: thou that said. Ask and it shall be given: believe, and
you shall receive: J humbly beg, and unfainedly confide in thy goodness,
whatsoever is necessary for me, either spiritual or corporal thou will give
me.

Wednsday, Poverty.
1. O My Lord, J desire no riches, ease, or sensual delights, but only the
love of thee.

2. O that J had a thousand worlds, with all the fained pleasures thereof, not
to possess, but willingly to leave for the love of thee.

3. Most dear Lord, J will possess nothing but thee, and what J have, only for
thy sake.

4. O dearest spouse all riches without thee are unto me unsupportable poverty:
joy, sorrow, ease, pain, consolation, a consuming grief.

5. O my sweet Savior that was it both in life and death so poor and naked of
all things: for thee I most willingly embrace the want of what is necessary for
corporal life and health.

6. My sweetest Jesu, which was it so poor and free from the posession of your
will even in the repugnance of death: for thee, I entirely forsake my own will
and sense to the consummation of my life.

7. O my dearest Savior that Would not admit in all thy torments the least
comfort, I beseech thee make me so perfectly poor as for thy love I entertain
no unnecessary consolation.

Thursday, Gratitude.
1. O my good God I render thee eternal thanks for all thy gifts both of grace
and nature bestowed on me and on all creatures.

2. O most liberal God thou have don to me above all I can ask or desire.

3. O my Savior what shall J render for all those numberless benefits, which
I have and continually do receive from thee?

4. O dear Savior in gratitude for all thy mercies toward me, I offer and
beseech thee to accept of my heart and soul, with what else thou have bestowed
on me.

5. O my Creator and dear Redeemer, that I could be gratfull unto thee.

6. Teach me, my God, to render thee such thanks as may be most acceptable unto
thee.

7. O would to God I had the gratitude of creatures both in heaven and earth to
offer up unto thee my only good: but all being too little, I beg thou will thy
self supply these wants.

Friday, Obedience and Resignation.
1. O Most benign Lord, let me but know what you would have me to do.

2. Sweet Jesus I offer my self both in time and Eternity, most entirely to
accomplish thy will.

3. Although J should be lost, yet if it be thy will: for love of thee I most
willingly yield to live in continual affliction and torment.

4. I offer my self with all my heart, my sweet Savior, in what I may
possibly, in body, life and soul to be disposed of, by thy blessed will and
pleasure.

5. Behold, sweet Lord for love of thee, I abandon and deny my senses, renounce
my understanding, and wholly forsake my self to prove, and accomplish thy holy
will.

6. Most dear God, for thy sake I firmly purpose, rather to die a thousand
deaths then once to be disobedient to thee.

7. O good Jesus, when shall I see that happy hour, wherein by perfect
obedience and entire Resignation I shall wholly live in thee, and thou in me.

Saturday, Love of neighbor.
1. MOst merciful Lord, I beseech thy infinite goodness, so to illuminate the
hearts of all sinners, that they may be truly penitent for their sins, to seek
thee with all care who art the only God.

2. I beseech thee my sweet Lord by the bowels of thy infinite mercies, that all
such as seek after ambition and earthly delights, may turn all their affections
to love thee.

3. Grant sweet Jesus through the merits of thy bitter Passion, that all those
for whom thou have suffered, may reap the benefit thereof.

4. Most merciful Lord, I humbly beseech thee to comfort all afflicted souls.

5, Most sweet Savior; give such grace and virtue unto all creatures, as they
may be truly conformable unto thy holy will.

9. Most merciful God, release for thy own sake, and thy B. Mother's, all
those who either in Earth or Purgatory, thou do by justice punish.

Sunday, Love of Almighty God.
1. TAke form me. O sweet Savior, that which separateth me so far from thee.

2. Purge my soul, O Lord, from all sin, and imperfection, by which it is
defiled, and made unworthy of thy Image.

3. Behold, O my God, I hate and detest with all my heart, even the least
offense that ever I have committed against thy divine Majesty.

4. Forgive, sweet Savior, all that which justly thou might lay to my
charge: for that now I desire to be perfectly united unto thee.

5. My sweetest Lord, as a channel of all uncleanness desirous to be
purified, I present my self unto thee.

6. O Eternal God, I beseech thee, that I who am the least of all creatures,
may by perfect love of thee, be elevated above all created things, and my
spirit only satisfied in thee.

7. What shall I render thee my beloved Lord for all thou have bestowed on me,
that am but dust and ashes and yet thou have made all things for me.

Aspirations for every day in the Week upon the Passion of our blessed Savior.
Monday, Contrition.
1. O Vile and most detestable sin, by which I have so often betrayed and sold
thee my Eternal Father: yea even for a momentary pleasure.

2. O that I had never by ingratitude bound thy liberal hands, and thereby
deprived my self of thee, and of thy will, and merciful pleasure in me.

3. O my soul unto what streights have thy sins and offenses brought thy
Savior: would to God I had some seas of tears to shed for having thus often
cruelly tormented thee.

4, O, if it had been thy will, my sweetest Jesu, I wish I might have endured,
not only temporal but endless pains, rather then have caused the least part of
thy affliction.

5. O Sacred wounds of my dearest Savior in revenge of my cruelty, wound my
heart with ten thousand darts of true remorse.

6. O sin how deformed and unjust art thou, that thus has't defiled the beauty
of heaven and crucified my Immaculate Jesus.

7. O that I might with a thousand millions of lives, and infinite seas of
blood, blot out of my soul the guilt of thy death and Passion.

8. Sweet Jesus ingulfe and drown me in thy sacred wounds, that there I may
learn to love.

Tuesday, Compassion.
1. O That I could shed for thee my Lord so many tears as the sea contains
drops of water, in true compassion of thy torments.

2. O who will give water to my head, and a fountain of tears to my eyes, to
weep upon thee, the love of my soul.

3. O love, and only comfort of my heart, what consolation had thou in all
thy torments?

4. Alas, my well beloved; why am not J always present to suffer with thee, at
least by compassion on thy pains.

5. My sweet JESUS, O that I might be crucified with thee.

6. O love of my soul, that I might have had the privilege of the lance to
have rested in thy heart.

7. My dearest Savior permit me the favor to remain at the foot of thy Cross,
to the end that I may weep continually, sigh, bleed, cry, and consume in
compassion of thee.

8. Give me an endless spring of tears, to wash away the sacred blood of my
sweetest love, which still issues as flowing rivers from thee.

Wensday, Imitation.
1. O Most sweet JESUS: give me grace in imitation of thy sacred Passion, most
willingly to undergo the burden of this transitory life.

2. For that thou have suffered so many and cruel torments for my sake; let me
never, O merciful God, fly any tribulation, which thou shall vouchsafe to send
me by thy self or others.

3. My Jesus, to accompany thee in thy manifold afflictions, I would be glad,
not only to endure the wants which thou sendest me, but seek others, and never
be satisfied in suffering with thee.

4. In imitation of thy nakedness, reproaches and whippings at the pillar; I
will endeavor to strip my self of all inordinate desires and affections.

5. I will continually follow thee my dearest Savior with the Cross of
perfect obedience, and never for any difficulty leave the same till I come to
die with thee.

6. O my Eternal God, that would for my sake be nailed to the Cross: let me
by true mortification be always crucified with thee.

7. My loving spouse, I beseech thee, that with a full renunciation of my self,
and perpetual death of all earthly things I may irrevocably die with thee.

Thursday, Thanksgiving.
1. WHat thanks shall I yield unto thee my Eternal life, who would endure
unspeakeable torments to free me from the snare and fetters of death.

2. All you seraphins, and celestial Spirits, with whatsoever has been
created praise my Redeemer for the unspeakeable price of my Redemption.

3. O my soul: how can thou devise to render the least part of due
gratitude unto thy Jesus, who has by his own humility so much exalted thee.

4. O let me ever acknowledge, my dear Savior, that endless bond of
gratitude, which thy Passion alone exacteth of me.

5. Sweet JESUS, that I could incessantly love thee, for these inestimable
treasures, which thou by thy torments have purchased unto me.

6. Good JESUS; since I have nothing but my self to offer in requital of thy
infinite love: I beseech thee to accept in love and gratitude what by-right is
thy own.

7. O eternal God, that I had a thousand hearts and lives to offer unto thee,
who by thy death have given and bequeathed thy self to me.

8. Grant, sweet JESUS, that thy dolorous death and Passion be ever imprinted
in my heart my true thankfulness and imitation thereof.

Friday, Admiration.
O My God, who art thou, who have endured so many and cruel torments? sweet
and dearest love have thou forgotten thy Majesty and glory?

2. O light of heaven, and splendor of thy Fathers glory, unto what art thou
now reduced?

3. Alas, my Savior, what art thou who art so despightfully treated?

4. O love of loves, that through the excess of thy love, thou would for me
endure so bitter a death.

5. O love how strong art thou, which with thy force surmounted'st him, that by
no other means may be overcome.

6. O incomprehensible God, for whom do thou suffer, but for miserable
sinners, ungrateful creatures, thy enemies, children of the devil, and those
who contemn thee.

7. O dearest love; that my heart is not pierced with thy dolours.

8. What were it o Lord, if I had all the loves of the world to unite and offer
unto thee?

9. My sweet JESUS, if I could reduce all thy drops of blood into tears of
love, what were it compared unto thy love?

Saturday, Joy.
1. My heart and soul rejoice and praise the mercies of my God who out of his
infinite love has died to give thee life.

2. O my delight, what joy will it give to my heart to receave that life, that
infinite good, through the merits of thy most bitter and dolorous passion.

3. Sweet JESUS, I praise thee with eternal joy for having in thy most cruel
death so perfectly accomplished the work of our Redemption.

4. It was by thee, O beloved Cross, that peace has been established between
God and man.

5. O triumphant glory, and most puissant King who by thy most sacred death,
have overcome the Prince of Hell, and delivered our souls out of his bondage.

6. O Heaven, Earth, sea, and all things therein; yield praises in our behalf
unto the savior of our souls; and let us rejoice in the merits of his sacred
passion.

7. If all my members were tongues, O how willingly would I employ them in the
praise of thee my sweet savior, and thy health-bringing wounds.

8. O all ye celestial spirits assist me to love and praise my God, by the
virtue of whose Passion your ruins are repaired.

9. Sweet JESUS, what glory and comfort is it unto human nature to be exalted
in thee, unto the right hand of thy Eternal father.

Sunday, Love.
1. When shall it be, my crucified JESUS, that both the senses of my body, and
powers of my soul shall be wholly employed in thy praise.

2. O my JESUS, when by perfect love and imitation shall I be daily crucified,
and continually die with thee.

3. O my beloved JESUS, when shall I love thee in such sort, as that thy sacred
wounds be by burning love imprinted in my heart.

4. O my beloved JESUS, when will thou bring me into the wine cellar of thy
blessed side and make me wholly drunk with the most sacred wine, which flows
from thy loving heart.

5. O when shall it be, my dearest JESU, that the flame of thy love shall
pierce and wound my heart, that I may be wholly conformable unto thee.

6. Sweet JESUS let me love thee so unfainedly as that by force of thy love, I
neither feel, see, nor take comfort in any thing, but accompanyng thee my
afflicted Lord.

7. My sweetest Savior, when shall I have my full and wished repose within thy
crucified arms.

8. O sacred wounds of my JESUS, especially of his tender side, and most
amourous heart, why do you not burn and consume my soul in the delightful
flames of his love.

An Oblation unto our B. Lady to say on any one of her Feasts 70. Ave Mary's,
and then during every day 5. Ave's and these Prayers following.
1. O B. Virgin Mary, and Eternal Queen of Angels, I offer my self unto you in
all that I am, or ever shall be, beseeching you to receive me as your own.

2. O B. Virgin Mary, preserve me living and dyng from all evil, for I am your
own.

3. O B. Virgin Mary, receive me for your own, ever govern, and protect me as
your own and have mercy on my soul, when it shall part out of my body.

4. O merciful Mother, through your holy departure, make joyful my departure,
and in the hour of my death, receive my soul.

A Prayer to Jesus Christ.
ANima Christi sanctifica me,
Corpus Christi salva me,
Sanguis Christi inebria me,
Aqua lateris Christi lava me.
Passio Christi conforta me,
O bone IESV exaudi me,
Intra tua vulnera absconde me,
Ne permittas me separari a te,
Ab host maligno defend me,
In hora mortis meae voca me,
Et jube me venire ad te,
Vt cum Sanctis tuis laudem Te
In saecula saeculorum Amen.
In English thus.
Soul of Christ sanctify me,
Body of Christ save me,
Blood of Christ inebriate me,
Water of Christ's side wash me,
Passion of Christ comfort me,
O good JESU hear me,
Within thy wounds hide me,
Suffer me not to be separated from thee,
From the malignant enemy defend me,
In the hour of my death call me,
And bid me come to thee,
That with thy Saints I may praise thee
For ever and ever, Amen.
When you pass by the B. Sacrament.
DVlcissimum nomen Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and gloriosae Virginis Mariae
Matris ejus sit in aeternum benedictum.

In English.
Let the B. Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and the glorious VIRGIN MARY, his
MOTHER be blessed for ever and ever.

And then offer your intention herein to get the pardon which is gained.

When you take Holy water.
Aqua benedicta, sit nobis salus, protectio and vita. Asperges me Domine
hissopo, etc.

In English.
May this holy water be to us health, protection and life. Thou shall sprinkle
me o Lord with hissope, etc.

How we may honor the most holy and B. Name of the most glorious Virgin Mary,
by sayng these 5. Verses with 5. Psalms.
1.
Matter amabilis Maria nomine,
Multo nobilior quocunque lumine.
Muni me miserum in tuo nomine,
Malignis obvians tuo juvamine.
Magnificat.
2.
Aurora rutilans lunaque pulchrior,
Astris fulgentior, and luce clarior,
Afflictum respice qui nimis crucior,
Averte jaculum hostis quo ferior.
Ad Dominum cum tribularer.
3.
Regina nobilis, filia filii,
Rosae consimilis and flori lilii,
Refove flebiles lacte consilii,
Ruentes per dies huius exilii.
Retribue servo tuo.
4.
Iesse tu congrue vocata virgula
Immarcessibilis and sine macula,
IESV jam florid o qui regit saecula,
Ipsa tu suggere ut solvat vincula.
In Convertendo.
5.
Ancilla Domini sumens tam nobilis
Ave, quod Gabriel dedit mirabilis,
Accipe canticum servi inutilis,
Adsis in omnibus mihi placabilis.
Ad te levavi.
. Dignare me laudare te Virgo sacrata.
. Da mihi virtutem contra hosts tuos.
OREMUS.
COncede nos famulos tuos, quaesumus Domine Deus, perpetua mentis and corporis
sanitate gaudere, and glorio a B. Mariae Virginis intercessione, a praesenti
liberari tristitia, and aeterna perfrui laetitia. Per Christum Domenum nostrum.
Amen.

The 5. Verses Englished.
1.
O Amiable Mother o Mary hail by name,
More noble then the light of natur's frame,
Defend me, by your means, which way so'ere J go,
And by your sheltering help, preserve me from my foe.
2.
Bright shining dawn, fairer then the moon,
More sparkling then the stars, and brighter then the sun,
Look on me, wretch afflicted, and tormented, so,
As to put by those darts, my foes do at me thr'o.
3.
O noble queen, and daughter to thy son,
Like to the Rose and Flower-de-Luce at noone,
It Is milk of your good counsel, must cherish us that weep,
It Is you that from all banished ruin's, must us keep.
4.
You are the rod of Jesse fittly named,
You neither wither, nor with spot are shamed,
Pray to our Jesus, who the world does rule
That J from bonds of sin, may save my soul.
5.
O handmaid of our Lord, who took the noble hail
From wondrous Gabriel's mouth, the world's great bail,
Receive the sacred Cantick, your worthless servant sing's,
And gracious be to me, sweet Mary in all things.
LITANIAE B. P. N. FRANCISCI.
KYRIE eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de caelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus,
Miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus
Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancte Francisce, Pater amabilis, ora pro nobis. Pater
admirabilis, Pater benign, Pater venerabilis, Vexillifer Jesu Christi, ORA PRO
NOBIS. Eques Crucifixi, Imitator filii Dei, Seraphim ardens, Fornax Charitatis,
Arca Sanctitatis, Cultor pacis, Vas Puritatis, Norma Justitiae, Speculum
Pudicitiae, Regula Poenitentiae, Magister Obedientiae, Exemplar Virtutum,
Patriarcha Pauperum, Profligator Criminum, Lumen tuae Patriae, Decus Morum,
Vivificator Mortuorum, Saturator Famelicorum, Obsequium Leprosorum, ORA PRO
NOBIS. Praeco magni Regis, Forma Humilitatis, Consors Sublimitatis, Victor
Vitiorum, Dux Minorum, Praedicator Silvestrium, Portans dona Gloriae, Auriga
militiae nostrae, Novis utens Prodigiis, Caelum caecis aperiens, Gratum gerens
obsequium, Templum Christo consecrans, Hosts malignos proterens, Tenens vitae
bravium, Spargens virtutum munera, Amplians iter ad Gloriam, Agnus Dei qui
tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi,
Exaudi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere nobis.. Ora pro
nobis beat Pater Francisce.. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.
OREMUS.
DEus qui Ecclesia^ tua^ B. Fraucisci meritis foetu novae prolis amplificas:
tribue nobis ex ejus imitatione terrena despicere, and caelestium donorum
semper participatione gaudere. Per Dominum nostrum, etc. Amen.

LITANIAE B. M. N. CLARAE, VIRGINIS.
KYrie eleison, Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de caelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus,
Miserere nobis. Spiritus Sancte Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus
Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis. Sancta Dei Genitrix, Sancta
Virgo Virginum, Sancta Clara Virgo Matter nostra. Virgo Christi Sponsa, ORA PRO
NOBIS. Virgo Francisci plantula, Virgo electa prae millibus, Virgo Seraphica,
Virgo Matris Jesu discipula, Virgo primogenita pauperum, Virgo gemma Virginum,
Virgo norma Perfectionis, Virgo humillima, Virgo mundo abscondita, Virgo
speculum Paupertatis, Virgo Lilium castitatis, Virgo rosa paenitentiae, Virgo
Crucifixi amore saucia, Virgo crucis ardentissima amati Virgo stella
clarissima, Virgo sequens Agnum quocunque Matter nostra honorificata, Matter
admirabilis, Matter amabilis, Matter sicut balsamum aromatizans, ORA PRO NOBIS.
Matter paranympha Christi, Matter pulchrae dilectionis, Matter puritatis nutrix,
Matter Obedientiae magistra, Matter scala Paradisi, Matter gloria Filiarum, Matter
socia Angelorum, Matter clipeus in te sperantium, Matter protectrix Pauperum,
Matter consolatrix flentium, Matter terror Infidelium, Matter triumphatrix
daemonum, Agnus Dei qui tollis etc. Parce etc. Agnus Dei qui tollis etc. Exaudi
nos etc. Agnus Dei qui tollis etc. Miserere nobis.. Ora pro nobis Beata matter
Clara.. Ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.
OREMUS.
FAmulos tuos quaesumus Domine, beatae Virginis tuae Clarae votivam
commemorationem recensentes, caelestium gaudiorum sua facias interventione
participes, and tui Unigeniti cohaeredes. Per eundem Dominum nostrum etc. Amen.

JESUS MARIA. Litaniae dicendae pro conversione Anglia ad Religionem Catholicam.
KYRIE eleison. Christ eleison. Kyrie eleison. Christ audi nos. Christ
exaudi nos. Pater de coelis Deus, Miserere nobis. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus,
miserere nobis. Spiritus sancte Deus, miserere nobis. Sancta Trinitas unus
Deus, Miserere nobis. Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis Sancta Dei genitrix, ora etc.
Sancta Virgo Virginum, ora. Sancte Michael, ora. Sancte Gabriel, ora. Sancte
Raphael, ora. Omnes sancti Angeli and Archangeli, orate. Omnes sacti beatorum
spirituum ordines, orate etc. Sancte Joannes Baptista, ora. Sancte Joseph, ora.
Omnes sancti Patriarchae and Prophetae, orate. S. Petre. ora. S. Paul, ora. S.
Andrea, ora. S. Jacobe, ora. S. Joannes, ora. S. Thoma, ora. S. Jacobe, ora. S.
Philippe, ora. S. Bartholomaee, ora. S. Mathaee, ora. S. Simon, ora. S.
Thadaee, ora. S. Mathia, ora. S. Barnaba, ora. S. Luca, ora. S. Marce, ora.
Omnes sancti Apostoli and Evangelistae. orate. Sancte Joseph ab Aremathia, ora.
Omnes sancti Discipuli Domini, orate. S. Eleutheri, ora. S. Victor, ora. S.
Albane, ora. S. Georgi, ora. S. Thoma, ora. S. Juli and Aron, orate. S.
Socrates and Stephane, orate pro nobis. S. Euvalde, ora. S. Kiliane, ora. S.
Osualde, ora. S. Rumolde, ora. S. Bonifaci, ora. S. Colmanne, ora. S. Augule,
ora. S. Alphege, ora. Sancte Livine, ora. Sancte Edmunde, ora. Sancte Eduarde,
ora. Sancte Kenelme, ora. Sancte Arnulphe, ora. Sancte Clare, ora. Omnes Sancti
Martyrs, orate. Sancte Gregori, ora. S. Augustine, ora. S. Celestine, ora.
Sancte Palladi, ora. Sancte Patrici, ora. Sancte Carole, ora. Sancte David,
ora. Sancte Melite, ora. Sancte Julte, ora. Sancte Germane, ora. Sancte Lupe,
ora. S. Quintigerne, ora. Sancte Niniane, ora. S. Erconvalde, ora. Sancte
Felix, ora. S. Corentine, ora. Sancte Cedda, ora. Sancte Aidane, ora. Sancte
Eadberte, ora. S. Willibrorde, ora. Sancte Asaphe, ora. Sancte Bean, ora.
Sancte Mackure, ora. S. Ethelnolde, ora. Sancte Donstane, ora. Sancte Honori,
ora. S. Cuthberre, ora. Sancte Sampson, ora. Sancte Maglori, ora. Sancte
Mansuete, ora. Sancte Mallone, ora. Sancte Laurenti, ora. Sancte Suiberte, ora.
Sancte Pauline, ora. Sancte Suithune, ora. S. Wolstane, ora. Sancte Osualde,
ora. Sancte Vito, ora. Sancte Walfride, ora. Sancte Richard, ora. Sancte
Theodore, ora. Sancte Joannes, ora. Sancte Hedde, ora. S. Wolfranne, ora.
Sancte Gilberte, ora. Sancte Malachia, ora. Sancte Thoma, ora. Sancte Berine,
ora. Sancte Aldelme, ora. Sancte Osmunde, ora. Sancte Laurenti, ora. Sancte
Edmunde, ora. Sancte Anselme, ora. Sancte Hugo, ora. Omnes sancti Pontifices
and Confessores, orate. Sancte Eduarde, ora. Sancte Edilberte, ora. Sancte
Sebbe, ora. Sancte Richard, ora. Sancte Brandane, ora. S. Columbane, ora.
Sancte Galle, ora. Sancte Dei-Cola, ora. Sancte Columba, ora Sancte Querare,
ora. Sancte Joannes, ora. Sancte Winoce, ora. Sancte Canise, ora. Sancte
Egberte, ora. S. Willebalde, ora. Sancte Fintane, ora. Sancte Benedicte, ora.
Sancte Beda, ora. Sancte Fiacri, ora. Sancte Fursee, ora. Sancte Guthlaci, ora.
Sancte Roberte, ora. Omnes sancti Sacerdotes, Monachi and Eremitae, orate.
Sancta Maria Mag. ora Sancta Vrsula and Sociae, orate. Sancta Wenefrida, ora.
Sancta Dympna, ora Sancta Brigida, ora. Sancta Theresia, ora. Sancta Editha,
ora. Sancta Ediltrudes, ora Sancta Hilda, ora. Sancta Edilburga, ora Sancta
Ebba, ora. Sacta Osita, ora. Sancta Milburges, ora. Sancta Vereburga, ora
Sancta Fredesuida, ora. Sancta Thecla, ora, Sancta Batildes, ora. Sancta Lioba,
ora. Sancta Cuthburga, ora. Sancta Syra, ora. Sancta Walburga, ora. Sancta
Margarita, ora. S. Helena, ora pro nobis. Omnes sanctae Virgins and Viduae,
orate pro nobis. Propitius esto, parce nobis Domine. Propitius esto, Exaudi nos
Domine. Ab insidiis diaboli, Libera nos Domine. A neglectu inspirationum
tuarum, Libera nos Domine. A mala and pertinaci voluntate, Libera. A caecitate
cordis, libera. A morte perpetua, libera. Per mysterium sanctae Incarnationis
tuae, libera nos Domine. Per Nativitatem tuam, libera. Per infantiam tuam,
libera. Per divinissimam vita^ tuam, libera, Per Passionem and mortem tuam.
libera. In die judicii, libera. Peccatores, Te rogamns audi nos. Vt nobis
parcas, Te rogamus. Vt Ecclesiam tuam sanctam regere, and tueri digneris, Te
rogamus. Vt Sacerdotes in Britannia, pro Religione Catholica laborantes,
custodire and adjuvare digneris, Te rogamus audi nos. Vt Britanniam ad
Catholicam Fidem and unitatem Ecclesiae revocare digneris, Te rogamus etc. Vt
nos exaudire digneris, Te rogamus audi nos. Fili Dei, Te rogamus audi nos.
Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Parce nobis Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi, Exandi nos Domine. Agnus Dei qui tollis peccata mundi, Miserere
nobis.
Oremus.
MEntes nostras, quaesumus Domine, Paracletus, qui a te procedit, illuminet and
inducat in omnem, sicut tuus promisit Filius, veritatem.

COncede, misericors Deus, fragilitati nostrae praesidium, ut qui sanctae Dei
genitricis memoriam agimus, intercessionis ejus auxilio a nostris iniquitatibus
resurgamus.

OMnipotens sempiterne Deus, qui saluas omnes, and neminem vis perire; respice
ad animas Britannorum diabolica fraud deceptas, ut omni haeretica pravitate
deposita, errantium corda resipiscant, and ad veritatis tue redeant unitatem.
Per Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.

DEO GRATIAS.
A DAILY EXERCISE OF PRAYERS With weekly Meditations upon the Passion.
IN THE MORNING.
IN nomine Patris etc. Pater: Ave: Credo: Confiteor: etc.

I adore thee most Blessed Trinity, and give thee thanks for all benefits
bestowed upon me, especially, for my Vocation to this State, the use of
Sacraments, and other Divine helps; and particularly, that thou have preserved
me this night, wherein perhaps many have been summoned before thee, to give an
account of their lives; The living O God shall bless and glorify thee, as I
will this day.

O Eternal Father, to thee I offer up my self, with whatsoever I am able to
do; admit O Gracious Father, these first fruits of my love, united with the
merits of thy beloved Son.

O B. JESUS, I purpose through thy Grace, to walk the paths of thy H.
Commandments, performing the duty of a good Christian by the practice of all
Virtues, especially of N. Grant O Lord, that I may do and suffer all things,
according to thy Holy will.

Come O Holy Ghost, direct, assist and comfort my distressed Soul, with thy
Grace, that I may shun all Sin, especially N. I have hitherto greivously
offended thee, but I will be more watchful over my ways; Help me I beseech
thee in this my spiritual warfar, for thou have promised, that I shall walk
amongst Serpents and Basilisks, and trample over Lions and Dragons.

Help me also O Holy Angels and glorious Saints, thou especially O Sacred
Virgin Mother, with thy chaste Espous S. JOSEPH. Protect me O Angel Guardian,
and Ye O Holy NN. my Patrons for this day; that I fall not into the snares of
Satan. But thou O my God and my All, art my chief hope; let the flames of thy
Divine Love consume all evil affections in me, that I may for ever love and
obey thee.

AN OBLATION.
O B. JESUS, in union of thy N. I offerr up all my thoughts, words and deeds,
purposing to practice the Virtue of N. and shun the Vice of N. beseeching thee,
that all I do or suffer, may be acceptable to thee, for NN. through the
Mediation of my glorious Patrons NN. Amen.

BLess me O JESU, with thy Sacred Virgin Mother Bless me all ye Holy Saints
and Angels, specially my Angel Guardian, and Holy Patrons NN.. O Eternal God,
Father, Son, and H. Ghost, bless and keep me, now and for ever. Amen.

IN THE EVENING.
IN nomine Patris etc.

O Most Blessed Trinity, I glorify thee with all the Saints and Angels, for all
favors, at all times bestowed upon me, especially this day. (make a survey of
Gods favors to thee.) Alas what thanks can I return to thee, for these, and
all thy gracious benefits?

O God who have observed all the motions of my heart, and all my words and
actions, Enlighten me, that I may know wherein I have offended thee, and what
is wanting to me, that I may bewayl my sins, and through thy Grace amend my
life. (Examine thy conscience through all hours and duties of that day,
toward God, thy Neighbor, and thy self; considering wherein thou have
offended by thought, word or deed.) Lord be merciful to me a sinner! Behold
here my God, what sins I have rendered thee for thy gracious gifts; It greives
me, that, I have offended thee; Pardon me O my God, through the Cross and
Passion of thy dearest Son, the merits of the Sacred Virgin, and all Angels and
Saints, especially N N. I purpose hereafter never more to offend thee, and to
undergo all Crosses for the satisfying my transgressions against thee, and
purchasing Grace, for the amendment of my life.

AN OBLATION.
O B. JESUS, I offer up to thee, thy N. as a propitiation for all my sins,
especially of this day; Uniting therewith the merits of thy Sacred Mother, and
all Angels and Saints, especially my Patrons NN. to whose protection I now and
for ever commend my self.

Bless me O JESUS etc.

MEDITATIONS UPON THE PASSION. For every day of the week.
SUNDAY. Washing of the Feet.
CONS. 1. Who washes? God, thy Creator, Redeemer and giver of all good things.

2. Whose feet he washes? of ignoble persons, great sinners, and his own
betrayer.

3. Why he washes? to give example of meekness, and teach us to cleanse our
Souls, ere we approach his Altar.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could love thee and all creatures, as I ought, and
thou desire!

Resolve, To practice the Virtue of Charity, and shun the vice of Envy, in
occasions best known to thy self.

MONDAY. Prayer in the garden.
CONS: 1. How CHRIST prays, kneeling, prostrate, and with instancy: and thou
how tepid.

2. What Is his prayer? That his Chalice may pass, yet with resignation to obey
his Fathers will: do thou pray thus.

3. How he sweats, blood, in great drops, in great sorrows; will thou rely on
thy own strength?

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could humble my self to Thee, and all creatures for
thee.

Rosolve, To practice Humility and shun Pride, etc.

TUESDAY. Mocking before Herod.
CONS: 1. How JESUS betrayed, apprehended, and manicled, is led to Annas,
Caiphas, Pilate and Herod: Follow him in this sorrowful Pilgrimage.

2. How He is every where falsely accused, and yet is silent; be silent too,
when injured.

3. How before Herod, he is clothed and mocked as a Fool; if thou be a
Christian, imitate CHRIST'S self-denial.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could contemn my own will for thy sake.

Resolve, To practice Self-denial, and shun self-love, etc.

WEDNESDAY. Whipping at the Pillar.
CONS: How JESUS led back to Pilate, is there accused as a Blasphemer, Seducer
and Traitor; Barabbas though a Murderer, is preferred before him; can thou
repine, when vilified?

2. How that Innocent Body uncloathed, and bound to the Pilar, is whipped for thy
sins: thou sin'st, and he suffers.

3. How barbarously those Soldiers treat thy JESUS; Oh cruelty! this he suffers
for thee: Bath thy heart in his saving blood.

Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could bear all Crosses, from all persons, for the
love of Thee

Resolve, To practice Patience, and shun Anger, etc.

THURSDAY. Crowning with Thorns.
CONS: 1. How JESUS thus bleeding, is crowned with sharp Thorns; this Crown is
instead of a Crown of Glory.

2. How they cloth him in scarlet, put a reed in his hand for a Scepter, and
then kneeling deride Him. O my JESU thou art a King indeed; reign for ever in
my heart.

3. How JESUS, thus adorned is led forth by Pilate, and shown to the Jews,
with, Behold a Man: O sad Spectacle! Yet still, they cry, Crucify Him: Oh! the
heavy weight of my sins.

Affect: Oh my JESU, that I could obey Thee, even to loss of life.

Resolve, To practice Obedience and shun Sloth, etc.

FRIDAY. Carrying the Cross.
CONS: 1. How JESUS thus derided, whipped and crowned, goes forth carrying the
Cross, whereon he is to be sacrifized for thy Sins.

2. What shouts of joy the Jews make after Him, through the streets of
Jerusalem: thus is Innocence despised.

3. How the devout women meet and bewail Him: thy hard heart sheds not one
Tear amidst these his sorows, or for thy own sins.

Affect. Oh my JESU, that I could abandon all sensual satisfactions for the
Love of Thee!

Resolve, To practice Temperance, and shun Gluttony, etc.

SATURDAY. Crucifying of Jesus.
CONS: 1. How JESUS with much pain and shame, arrived to Mount Calvary, is
again unclothed, and thus all his soars are renewed: My Sins not blotted out
by Repentance, shall one day be disclosed to the whole World.

2. How they streatch thy JESUS upon the Cross, fastening him with nails
thereunto, and then raise him up, where he hangs between two thieves: Oh what
ignominy!

3. How He there hangs for the space of three hours, reviled by Jews and
Gentiles, forsaken by his Disciples, drenched with gall and vinegar, peirced to
the heart with a spear, yet He prays for his Enemies: Enter, and make thy
aboade in that love-wounded-Heart.

Affect: Oh my JESU that I could imitate Thee in the purity of thy Life and
Doctrine.

Resolve, To practice Modesty and shun All contrary Thereunto, etc.

Woodcut illustration of the crrucified Christ, with two male figures standing
to either side.

A Method for Meditation.
1. PReparation has 3. parts. Presence of God, Choice of matter, and
Invocation.

2. Meditation it self has 3. parts. Consideration, Affection, and resolution.

3. Conclusion has 3. parts. Thanksgiving, Oblation and Prayer.

A Prayer before Meditation.
O my God, my Sovereign, my Creator and my All; I here most humbly prostrate
my self with the profoundest adoration J am possibly capable of, before your
devine Majesty, earnestly imploring a continuance of your blessings upon me,
your poor needy Creature, and that you would be pleased out of your infinite
bounty, by means of your holy spirit so to illuminate my understanding,
inflame my will, recollect from distractions and strengthen in good resolutions
all the powers of my soul, as that J may worthily, attentively and devoutly
perform this sublime exercise of mental prayer J am now undertaking, to your
honor and glory, the comfort of my own distressed soul, the joy of the Saints
in heaven, and the edification of men on earth, through your mercyes the meritts
of my Blessed Savior and the inspirations of your Celestial Paraclet Amen.

A Prayer after Meditation.
BEhold O my God, Behold, o my most patient and merciful Lord, how J have
passed over this time of Meditation, and treating with thee; with how much
negligence, sloth, coldness, and distraction, and with how little feeling of thy
good motions within me: but thou O Lord know all my infirmities and Miseries
and therefore J crave of thee pardon for them. J thank thee also most heartily
and humbly, for all the good thoughts and suggestions, which have presented
themselves to my mind, in time of this my meditation, as most holy Ambassadors
sent from thy heavenly Throne, to deal with me for the gaining of thy
kingdom; whose blessed voices and most profitable speeches, J beseech thy
divine goodness, to give me grace to imprint in my heart, and seek to put in
execution, in the course of my life to come: to the end that my judgment and
Damnation, be not the more grievous in respect of these thy Benefits, but rather
that my life being mended thereby, and my soul stirred up to more zeal of thy
service, J may be finally made partaker with thy true Children, of that
eternal bliss which thou have prepared, for such os love, fear and serve thee
and yield obedience to those holy inspirations which thou sendest them for
their eternal happiness, Amen.

A Table of daily Patrons, Meditations Virtues, vices, and Intentions.
Day. Patron. Meditation. Virtue. Vice. Intentions. Sund. H. Angels. washing
feet Charity. Envy. For the H. church. Mund. Apostles. Prayer in the Garden.
Humility. Pride. For Union of Christian Princes. Tuesd. Martyrs. Mocking. Self
denial Self love. For benefactors. Wednesd. Bishops. Whipping. Patience.
Anger. For Religious orders. Thursd. Doctors. Crowning. Obedience. Sloth. For
conversion of Infidells. Frid. Confessors. Carrying the Cross. Tempera^ce.
Gluttony For souls departed. Saturd. Virgins. Crucifying. Modesty. Impurity
For distressed persons

Woodcut illustration of the crucified Christ, with Mary and John standing
either side of the cross (a skull resting at its base).


