THE PRISONERS PRAISES FOR THEIR Deliverance from their long Imprisonment in
Colchester. On a day of public thanksgiving set apart for that purpose by the
Gentlemen of the Committee of Essex, who for their fidelity in serving their
Country were surprised by the Enemy at Chelmesford. In a Sermon upon the
sixth, seventh, and eighth, verses, of the CXLIX. PSALM. Preached at Rumford
September. 28. 1648. By SAMUEL FAIRCLOUGH, Pastor of the Congregation at Ketton
in Suffolk.

EZRA. 9.8, 9. We were bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our
Bondage, but has extended mercy to us in the sight of our enemies, and has
given us a reviving.

PSALM. 102.19, 20. God looked down from the height of his Sanctuary; from
heaven did the Lord behold the earth: To hear the groaning of the Prisoners,
and to lose them that were appointed to death: That they might declare the name
of the Lord in Sion, and his Praise in Jerusalem.

LONDON Printed by John Macock, for Lodowick Lloyd, and Henry Cripps, and are
to be sold at their shop in Popes head Alley. 1650.

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Massam, Barronet, Sir William Roe,
Knight. Timothy Midleton, John Eden, Robert Smith, Col. Thomas Ayloffe, Arthur
Barnardiston, Samson Sheffeild, Major Langley, and Robert Crane; Esquires.
The Gentlemen of the Committee of Essex, that for their sidelitie in the
Service of their Country were surprised by the Enemy, at Chelmsford, and
imprisoned in Colchester.
GENTLEMEN,
I Conceive it will not be accounted any presumption to present that unto you,
which without injustice, and breach of promise, I cannot detain from you; for
howsoever when I heard you had designed me to this solemn Service; of being
Gods mouth unto you, on the day of your public Thanksgiving; the
consciousness of mine own weakness, caused me to entertain the message with
fear: yet when you were pleased to give life and encouragement to this plain
and unstudied Sermon: First, by your cheerful and affectionate attention in
hearing, and then by your earnest importunity, That it might be made public,
when you had heard it: I must confess I was overcome (contrary to mine own
inclination) to promise, that if my reverend Brother, who joined with me in the
work, did send his Sermon to the Press before, that mine in due time should
follow after: in performance whereof, and in answer (if not satisfaction) to
your desires therein, I have tendered it unto you without addition or alteration
of one material passage, that was then delivered unto you. I was intended to
have added a Doctrinall Explanation, of the remaining part of the Psalm; with
Scripture Resolutions, to some Questions that may serve to be obvious therein,
before this mangled and imperfect piece had come to your hand: but upon the advice of some godly judicious friends, I have suspended the same (conceiving
it better to speak enough, then to speak all) accept it therefore as a
testimony of my compliance, rather to your pleasures, then mine own will (who
am not so great a stranger to mine own weakness, as to think any thing of mine
worthy of public view) wherein if mine obedience shall appear better then my
sacrifice, yet this is my comfort, That the same candor of Spirit, and
ingenuitie, that put me on the Service; and gave so undeserved approbation,
unto the weak performance; Knows also, how to pardon my weakness, and
imperfection, with favorable acceptations: then which indulgence, as when I
reflect upon my self, I dare desire no more; So when I look upon you I can hope
no less: All that I would further say unto you, you shall receive at large
expressed in the Book; which I will not anticipate by any earnest solicitation
of your forward minds, to raise up themselves by the reading of it to
wel-grounded determinations, and constant resolution, daily to act and practice
accordingly; only this I must add, That the Subject is so excellent, that it is
as worthy of your daily remembrance, and deepest consideration; as my Pen is
unworthy of so excellent a subject: and withal, That as your desire of
publishing of it, has obliged me to present it to the world; so has it
engaged you also to walk more answerable to the Intents, and directions of the
same, before the world.

The Discourse is yours, the Duty therein is yours, and my uttermost
Endeavors, Service, and Prayers, are yours; which shall speak that unto God for
you, which (to avoid the appearance of flattery) I dare not speak unto you. The
most high God, that has highly honored you, with his highest dispensations,
enable you al jointly, and severally, with his grace and blessings, to honor
him again, with your highest praises and thanksgivings; which shall be the
constant Prayer

Of the lowest and most unprofitable of all Christ's Servants, SAMUEL FAIRECLOUGM

THE PRISONERS PRAISES FOR THEIR Deliverance from their long Imprisonment in
COLCHESTER.
PSALM 149.6, 7, 8. Let the high Praises of God be in their mouths, and a two
edged sword in their hands;

To execute vengeance upon the heathen; and punishements upon the people.

To bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron.


SO great and thick is the cloud of Interpreters commenting upon this Psalm,
that instead of inlightening, Introdu.
they darken the Text; for the Occasion, Analysis, Argument, and Scope, is
rendered by them so various and different, as that it would swallow up the whole
time allotted to both our exercises, to rehearse their opinions, to dispute
their grounds, and to make choice of the best amongst them; I shall purposely
wave them all, and only hint unto you that wherein they all concur, viz. that
this Psalm is one of them which they call (...), gratulatory Circles, where, by
the cast of your eye upon it, you may perceive the Center in the middle, the
fifth verse to be the Glory of God, the circumference on all sides the Praises
of God, beginning and ending with Hallelujah; the several verses as so many
radii, or right lines, Piscator Mollerus.
either ascending from the Center of divine Goodness, to the Circle of the
Churches Praises, (holding forth the Beams of Gods Mercies to his People,) or
else descending from the Circumference of the Churches Praises, to the Center
of divine Love, (expressing the Peoples duties to their God.) Observe the words
of the Text, with their relation to the Hallelujah in the end of the Psalm, and
what I have said will be manifest to you, they containing these two generals:

First, The text analys'd.
A prescription of duty to be done. Secondly, A description of the duty how it
is to be done.
1. The prescription of the duty to be done, is the high Praises of God. 2. The
description how it is to be done, in all the following words to the end of the
Psalm, where we have, First, The Instruments. Secondly, The Execution.

The Instruments, by which the high Praises of God and to be performed, are two:

First, The Mouth, that they may be expressed verbally; Let the high Praises of
God be in their mouth.

Secondly, The Hand, that they may be performed really; And a two-edged sword
in their hands: A sword of two mouths, or edges, as well for God, as to God; as
well defensive for his Truth, as offensive against Error, These are the
Instruments.

The Execution follows, where we have,

1. The Sufferers. 2. Their Sufferings. 3. The Rule of Execution. 4. The
Reward.
The Sufferers, by this two-edged sword, are of four sorts:

1. Heathen, swallowed up with Infidelity. 2. The People, the meaner sort and
Commonalty. 3. The Kings, in supreme Authority. 4. Their Nobles, the highest of
their Nobility.
The next thing is their Sufferings, which also is four-sold, according to the
different condition and quality of the persons to suffer.

1. For the Heathen Vengeance. 2. For the People Punishments. 3. For their
Kings Chains. 4. For their Nobles Fetters of Iron.
The third thing is the Rule of Execution, either of the Vengeance upon
Heathen, or Punishments of People, or Chains on Kings, or Fetters on the
Nobles; and that is the Judgment written, Janius. Amesius.
no more, no less, no other, and by no other persons then is expressly written,
and declared by the great Judge of Heaven and Earth in his Word: The Sword of
men, of Saints, against the worst of Heathen, must not exceed one Iota, the
Sword of the Spirit, the written Word of God.

The fourth, the Reward of this Execution, is Honor: This honor have all his
Saints.

Where first we may observe what the Reward is, namely, this Honor; that is,
first, To have high praises of God in their mouths, and this two-edged sword in
their hands. Secondly, To be guided to execute no Judgment but that which is
written, upon any: This is Honor.

Secondly, Who they be that are thus honored, to have praises in mouths, and
execute Judgment written, namely, his Saints, such as God has made, and by his
Word accounts Saints; not such as are Popish Saints, or canonized by
themselves, or Satan, or their Flatterers, but such as show themselves Saints,
by having their minds and hands bound by the written Word from executing any
thing further, and otherwise, then God has appointed; these, and no other, are
his Saints, and therefore to be honored; yea, God to be honored by them, in
them, and for them, which is determined in the uttermost extent of this
laudatory Circle in the end of the Psalm, Hallelujah, Praise ye the Lord.

Every observing eye may clearly perceive what a large field is laid open in
the Text for my discourse to walk in, and how many Clusters of divine matter,
seasonable, and apt for our times, and present occasion, do offer themselves to
my hands; but I am resolved to let all pass, and to take hold only of one, and
gather it for a Peace Offering to the Lord, in applying it only to your present
occasion, and it shall be that one that grows upon the very top of this Tree
of Life in my Text, and furthest from the shadow of those Collections that may
be found on the under boughs, namely, The prescription of the duty to be done,
The high Praises of God; where every one may take notice,

1. The subject of duty, Divided.
to be praise, yea Praises. 2. Object of duty, to be God, praises of God. 3.
Their property to be high, High praises of God: Which word alone needs a little
Explication, because so variously rendered by the most Interpreters; some
rendering it only, Exaltations of God; others, Praisings exalting God; others,
Songs exalting God; others, (...) Expounded
Sublime Praises of God; others, Praises highly uttered unto God: the Reason
whereof is, because the word Romemoth in the Text signifies sometimes actively,
and then it notes the height, exaltation, Psalm. 71.19 Prove 24.7
and lifting up of any thing to the observation of others; and sometimes
passively, and then it notes the height, worth, excellency of the thing that is
exalted, or lifted up, in it self: But the scope and nature of the duty
prescribed in the Text, necessarily comprehends both, as well the high acts for
which God is to be highly praised, as the high Praises to be given unto God for
those high Acts, but especially the latter, namely, the height and excellency
of the duty of praise to be performed for those high Acts of God, as appears
both from the whole Argument of the Psalm, merely laudatory, as also from the
Instrument wherewith these high Praises are to be performed, namely, the mouth,
The high Praises of God in their mouth, showing the height herein mentioned is
a property of man's duty or work in praising God, and not only of the work of
God, for which he is to be praised; but in the Observation I shall from hence
propound unto you, I will comprehend both, and all the particulars in the duty
prescribed besides, which is this:
The Praises of God are of an high nature, Doctrine propounded.
and high performance: OR, The duty of praising God is a high duty, which must
exalt and lift up the high God in it.

This truth I shall labor to demonstrate, 1. From the Object. 2. Demonstrated.
The Effect. 3. Their Price. 4. Their Performance: Or to use the School terms,
they are high, 1. Objective. 2. Effective. 3. Oppretiative. 4. Perfective.

First, The Praises of God are high in relation to their Object, 1. From the
object, being peculiar to God.
which is none other but the most high God, and that in the consideration of
his transcendent height and Sublimity over and above all other things or
persons, so the Psalmists resolution intimates, Psalm. 7.17. I will praise the
Lord according to his Righteousness, which he expresses in the following
words, To sing praise to the Name of the Lord most high; and Psalm. 92.1. It is
a good thing to give thanks to the Lord, and to sing praise to thy Name, O thou
most high: In which places, and very many more in the Scriptures, it is
evident, That the Lord, considered in his highest Sublimity, is the object of
high Praise, and that by most special and peculiar approbation of them unto
himself, and none other: Isai. 42.8. I am Jehovah, that is my Name; I will not
give my Glory to any other, nor my Praise to graven Images: See how the Lord
appropriates and owns it, yea specially does reserve it; It is my Glory, my
Praise, and so mine, that I will not part with any of it to any other, how high
soever they be, it is too high for any but my self: The Lord will and does give
the highest of all things else, in the whole Creation, to others, as the
Heavens, how high soever above them, and the earth, and all the works of his
hand beneath them, has God put in subjection under man's feet, and made him to
have dominion over them, Psalm. 8.6. Nay, he gives the Services of the highest
Angels, in the highest Heavens, to many others, Heb. 2.14. Yea, the highest
Felicity, and Joys of Heaven, even the Masters Joy, Mat. 25.23. Yea, he will
give his Son, his Spirit, and all his own Excellencies and Perfections, besides
his Glory, to be the portion of his People; but his Praise and Glory is so
peculiar to himself, as that he will not give the least part of it to any, how
dear and beloved soever they be unto him. I confess, this high God permits
and allows some kind of praises in the Scriptures to some special Instruments
of his Praises, but he allows no high Praises to any, Distinguished from the
praisepermitted to men, which are, first, Relative.
but only low Praises, and those bounded and refracted with many cautions and
limitations to distinguish the low Praises, which are communicated to men, from
the high Praises peculiar to the most high God.

As first, All praise to men is relative, not absolute; praise to man relates
to no virtue or power essential in himself, but derived and borrowed from God:
Acts 3.12. Why look you on us as if we by our own power and holiness had done
any thing?

2. All praise permitted to men, 2. Transient.
as it is relative for mere borrowed and received worth; so is it not immanent
in them, but transient through them unto God, in so much, that when it is most
abundantly given unto him, it is most fatal and sacrilegious to let the least
degree of it abide with them, or to be terminated upon them, as the example of
Paul and Barnabas, Acts 14.15. and Herod, Acts 12. demonstrate: Now who sees
not that relative and transient Praises, Praises for borrowed things that must
not be received or kept, are but low Praises, and yet such are the highest
Praises the Lord allows to be given or taken by any of his Instruments, by whom
or for whom he works; I say, to any, even the best and choicest Instruments of
his Glory, because there be many Instruments by whom, and for whom, the Lord
does many high Acts and Works, to whom he will not have any of this low
relative, transient praise be ascribed.

As first, 3. Limited John 9.6.
To no dead Instrument; who will give any praise, of the blind man's receiving
his sight, to the Clay which was put in his eyes?

2. To no irrational Instrument, though living; who will give any praise to the
Locusts, Grasshoppers, Lice? that were Instruments to overcome Pharaoh, Exodus
8.9.
and force him to let the Israelites go free from his Tyranny, to serve the
Lord in the Wilderness?

3. To no dissallowed Instrument (though rational in himself, and permitted of
God,) Matthew. 26.
what praise is due to Judas, for being Instrumental in the work of Redemption,
who acted from his own lust and covetousness, to empty his masters bags, and
fill his own?

4. To no Instrument that is allowed in his work, and approved of God, if he
intends not Gods end in the work, as well as the performance of the work it
self: For what praise is due to Ashur, the Rod of Gods Anger, and the Staff of
Gods Indignation? who was sent and approved of God against an hypocritical
Nation, to spoil, prey upon, and tred them down as mire in the street, if yet
he thinks not so, nor intends Gods end in so doing, but rather to strengthen
his own hand, and to cut off Nations not a few; for instead of any praise
therefore, the Lord says, Isai. 10.11, 12. When be has performed upon
Jerusalem, and mount Zion Gods work, Gods whole work; Gods whole work (alone)
without other help and assistance, that then he will punish him therefore, yea,
and not only him, but the fruit of his stout heart, and proud looks? Seeing
then, that no praise at all is due to many Instruments, by whom, and for whom
God does perform many glorious Acts, both in subduing the Foes of his People
and Church, and redeeming his Church from Vassallage, Tyranny and Bondage; and
the Praise, that he allows to be given, or taken, by the most holy and choycest
of Instruments, in the Service of his Church, is but relative, and transient,
low praise: It is manifest, that the Praises of God are so high, that they are
not to be communicated to others, but peculiar to himself alone, whose glorious
Name is exalted above all Blessing and Praise, Neh. 9.5.

In the second place, 2. From the Effect.
The Praises of God will appear to be of a high sublime nature, from the high
Effect, the genuine and proper fruit they produce, viz. That although their
Object, to whom they are peculiarly appropriate (I mean, the Lord himself) be
in his own Nature, and of himself, most infinitely high and transcendent, yet
by the Attribution and performance of praise unto him, does he account his
Name, his Power, his Wisdom, and Justice, and himself to be exalted and
promoted thereby; yea, accepts of those inward conceptions of his Glory, and
those outward honors we do him, in ascribing high Praises unto his Name, as
additions and augmentations of his highest Excellencies, who was
(notwithstanding) before, God over all blessed for ever: What else do those
expressions in Scripture imply, wherein it is asserted. That by this high duty
of praise the high Jehovah is exalted, Psalm. 107.32. His sublime Perfections to
be extolled and lifted up, Psalm. 68.4. His great Name to be magnified, Luke
1.64. His infinite Majesty to be glorified? Psalm. 50.23. Oh how high must that
duty, that adds height to the high God, that magnifies the great God, and
glorifies the God of Glory, and makes him higher, greater and more glorious
then he was before: Not that men's praises, Not internally,
how perfectly and fully soever ascribed to God, add any thing to the essential
and inward perfections of the Almighty, which can neither be enlarged or
decreased, but the Lord would show unto us thereby. That these high Praises,
added unto him, But externally.
do therewith make as great an addition to the external splendour and luster of
his Glory, as the most flagitious and exorbitant practices of wicked men do
darken and detract from the same, which practices of theirs (though they do
not, neither can, or ever shall diminish the least grain of the Immensity of
his internal Bliss and Glory, nor injure, or harm, in the least degree, those
infinite perfections of his Immutability, or All Sufficiency, yet) by
withdrawing and detracting from God, those external good things, which are due
unto him, which he requires to be given unto him, and declares himself much
delighted in the receipt of them; they are said in Scripture to disgrace,
dishonor, contemn God, and despise him; even so these high Praises, rendering
unto God that Honor, Praise and Glory which he both commands and entertains
with highest delight and pleasure, do therewithal render him to all the world
more conspicuous in Beauty and Glory, then he would be without them: For though
the Sun would shine most gloriously in it self, though all the world were
blind, or all the clouds in the air did hide his face from us, yet when its
beams are interposed, and luster over-clouded, we account it to be in a
suffering condition; so the inward Perfections of God, without the duty of
Praises, are as it were in a suffering condition, and like a rich Diamond or
Jewel hid in a dark corner; but by the duty of high Praises the luster and
beauty of his Wisdom, Power and Goodness are openly produced, and made
conspicuous to the observation and admiration of all Beholders and Spectators,
for which cause they are called in the Text, (...) not (...) Exaltations of
Jehovah, rather then Singings unto his Name, because according to his Name so
is his Praise, Psalm. 48.10. therefore his Name being most high, his Praise must
be also most high and proportionable thereunto.

Thirdly, 3. From their value discerned.
The Praises of God are high, and of high nature, appretiative, in respect of
the high estimation and value the Lord him-himself has them in, and sets them
at, which appears two ways:

1. By the high Price wherewith he purchases them. 2. By the high Delight he
takes in them, after he has procured them.
First, 1. In their procurement.
The price, wherewith God is willing to purchase them, is very high: For not
only the expense of all his wisdom, power, and goodness put forth in Creation,
nor only the layings out of all his counsel, care, love, and faithfulness in
Providence and Preservation; but also the rich Treasure of his Promises,
Covenant, Grace, yea, the precious blood of his own Son, in our Redemption, is
given freely, absolutely, intentionally, and ultimately, for no other thing,
but the purchase of high praises to God, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. All that God does and
gives, all that Christ does and suffers, is for no other end, but the praise
of the glory of his Grace: I confess, consider men's highest praises of God, as
they are man's performances, they are poor and inconsiderable things: but
consider them as they are the Testimonies and expressions of a believing heart,
declaring and making known the unspeakable wisdom, faithfulness, bounty, and
excellencies of God, exercised in his works in this notion; The Scripture
declares the heart of God so to be taken with the desire of them, that he is
willing to give Heaven, Earth, Himself and Son to poor men for the praises of
their hearts, hands, and tongues; and accounts himself abundantly satisfied
therefore, when his People will speak good of his Name, speaking well of him in
the Dialect of Angels-notes, the high praises of God, which most strongly and
undeniably demonstrates the high worth of the Duty of high praises, when the
most high God will purchase them with the expense of Himself, Son, and all he
has: Give me praise, and take my Christ, Self, and Kingdom (says God): When a
profane and foolish Esau will purchase a mess of pottage with the price of his
birth right, (a mean and contemptible thing with a great price,) we rather
undervalue the wisdom of the Purchaser, then esteem any thing the better of the
Purchase: But if a wise Merchant, that is certainly and undoubtedly known to
have perfect understanding and deep insight into the worth of the things he
deals for, if such a one sells all he has, and takes up what he can elsewhere
procure, to purchase a pearl or field, we then conclude the hidden worth of the
Purchase from the high price given for it by the knowing and wise Purchaser,
Now then, must it not undeniably advance the height and worth of high praises,
when we see the omnipotent and infinite only wise God, that regards not Gold,
Silver, Kingdoms, Honors, but yet knows how to prize and value his own contents
and pleasure, does dispense and lay out all that Heaven and Earth is worth,
solely and purposely to purchase to Himself the highest praise of his Glory and
Grace?

Secondly, 2. In their Enjoyment.
The high value that God has of high praises, will be evident, by the high
delight and pleasure God takes in them thus purchased: for skilful Artists, and
high principled, elevated understandings, never take pleasure, or delight, in
any thing, or work, which is not answerable to their highest principles, and
proportionable to their uttermost skill and desire: Now the Lord, who is the
most perfect understanding, and deepest skill and knowledge, declares himself to
take infinite delight in his Peoples Praises; It is his solace and pleasure to
be attended with them, either in Earth or in Heaven, by men or Angels; and his
Soul is ravished with the thoughts and contemplation of them. This was it which
was typed by the Feasts, Psa. 148. Lev. 6.7. Number. 29.12.
and rejoicing in the peace offerings, by the sweat Odors and Incense in the
Encharistical Sacrifices; by the melodious Tunes, dilightful Sangs, Harmony,
Music, Organs; Timbrels, Cymbals, Harps for exaltation and triumph, in the
solemn Feasts and days of Thanksgiving; the Scripture intending thereby to
declare (not only) with what cheerfulness and delight these gratulatery
S^rvi^^t were to be performed by men: but also how ancentable and pleasing they
are unto the Lord, as sweet savars and odors in his nostrils; as Angelical
music and heavenly ayrs in his ears, as wine and divine delicatias to his
taste: yea and if in Heaven it self, the Lord of life and glory receives any
additional exaltation from the glorified Saints and Angels, besides what is
exernally enjoyed in the Circle of his own perfections, it cannot be concluded,
from any thing expressed in Scripture, to proceed from any thing else, but the
everlasting acclamations and benedictions of the glorified Saints and Angals,
giving glory, honor, and praise unto him that site on the Throne, and to the
Lamb; whose Hallelujabe are nothing else but the highest of these high praises
of God in their hearts and mouths. 4. From their performance requiring the
exercise of greater measures of Grace then a public day of Humiliation.
Does not then this height of Gods valuation in their Procurement, and the
height of the Lords satisfaction in their Enjoyment, set the high Praises of
God upon the highest top of the transcendent Sublimity of divine worth and
excellenty.

In the fourth place, The Praises of God are high, and of a high nature
perf^^ti^d, that is, in respect of the high measure of Grace they are to he
attended withal in their per^o^^^^^; the Lord requiring the duty of high
Praise (especially in a public Day of Thanksgiving for any remarkable and
high mercy) should be performed with a great measure of Scripture Light, with a
higher degree of effectual Faith, and with a more ample proportion of practical
Holiness, then any other of the most solemn Exercises of of his public
Worship. For the more full and clear demonstration of which particulars, I mean
of the singular measure of Light, Faith, and Holiness, which the Lord requires
should be exercised in solemnizing of a day of Thanksgiving above any other
part of his Service, I conceive will be no way unprofitable to insist somewhat
largely, either for the better observing this present day, or more acceptable
discharge of our duties unto God in days of the like nature for the future.

In the demonstration whereof, I shall make choice to instance in that
Ordinance, and Exercise of Religious Worship, which the Scripture requires to
be performed with more extraordinary degrees of Sanctity and Piety then any
other, besides a day of Thanksgiving, I mean a day of public Humiliation,
observed according to Gods Institution.

2. I shall show, That the duty of public Joy and Thanksgiving, is by Gods
Institution to be performed with a greater measure of Light, Faith, and
Sanctity, then a day of Humiliation.

Which may be collected from the Scriptures thus: Which appears, 1. From the
titles.


First, From the different names, titles, and adjuncts the Spirit of God in the
Word is pleased to cloth them withal: As first, a day of public Fast is
called a day of restraint, Isai. 58. or day of afflicting the Soul, Levit. 23.
or day of mourning and weeping, Joel 2. But on the other side, a day of
Thanksgiving is called a good day, Esth. 9. they must keep the days of Purim
for good days, very holy days: Neh. 8.10. Weep not, for the day is holy to the
Lord; intimating therein, That by how much the exercise of goodness and
holiness (which are the high Attributes of God himsef) is more heavenly and
spiritual then the exercise of sorrow, weeping, and affliction, (the
inseparable offspring of misery and sin,) by so much a day of Thanksgiving
(rightly performed) is better and holier then a day of Humiliation; which is
yet more manifest in the Levites Inhibition, Weep not, for the day is holy: The
tears there shed by the people, and forbidden by the Levites, were Tears of
godly sorrow for their sins against the Law of God, which are most expressly
commanded on a day of Humiliation, and are in their performance, the splendour
and glory of the day: But these Tears are forbidden on a day of Thanksgiving
upon this ground, because they are not holy enough for the Services of it; Weep
not, for the day is holy to the Lord; Oh how transcendently holy is that
Exercise, where the pearl of a Tear of godly Sorrow is a blemish!

Unto this more general demonstration of the point in hand, 2. The end.
let me entreat you to take notice of that expression of the Holy Spirit, in
Esth. 9. Verse. 31. when the days of Purim, or Thanksgiving, are said to be the
matter of the fastings and cries; that is the success and fruit of their former
days of Humiliation, mentioned in the fourth Chapter of the Book: Now who knows
not, That the End is the perfection of the Means? and in that respect more
excellent; as Faith is better then Hearing, because Faith is the End of
Hearing; Christ better then Faith, because the End of Faith is to bring to
Christ: So a day of Thanksgiving is better and higher then a day of
Humiliation, because Fasting is but the subservent Means, leading to a day of
Thanksgiving; and a day of Thanksgiving is the End and Perfection of a day of
Humiliation.

As these different Titles of a day of Thanksgiving and Humiliation, in the
Scripture, declare their high excellency of one above the other in the general;
3. The particular graces: which are 1. Scripture Light in 3 particulars.
So it is yet more manifest from the different degrees and measures of Light,
Faith, and Holiness, required in the observation of a day of Thanksgiving above
a day of Humiliation in particular: As first, In the observation of a day of
Thanksgiving there is required exercise and practice of more heavenly knowledge;
In the second of Joel, the Lord requires a day of public Humiliation should
be performed, not only by men, women, Priests, and Levites, that are supposed
to be persons of knowledge; but also even babes and sucking children (that are
known to be in a condition of ignorance:) Yea, and the people of Nineveh, Jonah
3. who cannot be conceived to have had any art, or speculative understanding
and skill, in the form, nature, or order of observation of a Fast, according to
Scripture, (being Heathens, and having had the means but three days amongst
them, yet) they were called to that Duty, and their performance of it was
accepted of the Lord, because the Lord requires little art, or skill, in
confessing our sins, or sorrowing for them: But now in the Duty of our return
of thanks and praises, there is an express injunction of the exercise and use
of special skill and understanding, as Psa. 147.6, 7. Oh sing praises unto our
God; sing praises, sing praises to our King; Sing praises, for God is King of
all the Earth, sing praises therefore with understanding. And Psa. 119.171. My
lips shall utter praise, when thou have taught me thy statutes. And Verse. 7. I
will praise thee with uprightness of heart; when thou have learned me thy
Judgments. All which Scriptures evidence, That how upright soever men's hearts
be to God, yet there can be no acceptable performance of praise, except also
that upright heart be an understanding heart, that has learned the Statutes
and Judgments of God from the Lords teaching: and therefore in the
Solemnization of that Duty of Thanksgiving, which was so holy that they might
not shed a Tear in it, Nehem. 8. it is expressly said, There were none of that
great Congregation that were gathered, either of men or women, but such as
could hear and understand, Neh. 8.2. And the observation of Gods mind,
expressed in other Scriptures, will certify us of the special degree of
Heavenly skill, required to be in such as offer high praises of God, namely,
Knowledge, First, Of the form of the Service. Secondly, Of the blessing for
which the Service is undertaken. Thirdly, Of the matter to be returned.

First, 1. The form.
Of the manner and form of the Service prescribed of God, not minted in our
brains, as is most evident, first, from the description of days of
Thanksgiving, Esth. 9. where the form, and manner of observation of the same,
is prescribed in every particular, even to the appointment of their meat,
drink, apparel, and looks on that day: And secondly, from Nehemiahs and the
Levites reproof and Inhibition, Neh. 8.10. rebuking and blaming the people for
their varying so much as in shedding a Tear, contrary to the same.

Secondly, 2. The matter.
There is required special understanding and knowledge of the nature and worth
of the mercy, for which the Duty is undertaken; for God will not be praised
confusedly, but distinctly and proportionably to his Dispensation, Psa. 150.
Praise him according to his wondrous works; which is to be the prime and
peeper matter of their high praises, even his more proper and peculiar high
acts, then to be remembered, as is largely expressed in Moses praise for the
particular mercy of coming safe through the red Sea; Exodus 15. and Debora's
high praise, for deliverance from the host of Sisera, Judge. 5. where the
chiefest and highest part of the celebration, and exaltation, of God in his
praise, consists in the declaration and commemoration of the particulars of
Gods special goodness, in their present deliverance: And to come near to our
selves, in respect of the Nation in general. Who in all the Kingdom can observe
that anniversary day of Thanksgiving (never to be forgotten, on the fifth of
November) that was near acquainted with the name, nature, and intentions of the
proceedings of the Traitors in contriving, and the Lord our God in defeating,
the Gunpowder-plot: Nay, to come to your selves in the particular, for which
you have set apart this day, Who amongst you can give high praises to God for
your selves? Or, of all the Auditors, can join with you therein, that is
ignorant either of the means, cause, and place of your Imprisonment, or the
glorious passages of divine providence in your enlargement?

Thirdly, 3. The return.
Neither is there required, in the exercise of high praise, knowledge only of
the mercy for which praise is to be rendered, but also of the lawfulness of the
matter, or peace offering, that by way of thanks is to be returned: In no
Service is the Spirit of God more particular in prescribing, or exact in
expecting punctual observance, then in offering the thank-offering, or
sacrifice; because in our praises (being the sole return we can make unto him
for all his cost upon us) he expects we should pay him with no coin, but what
has his own stamp and superscription upon it; if it be the price of a profane
dog, or the reward of an unclean whore, the Lord abhor it: How strict the Lord
is in acceptance of nothing, in a day of Thanksgiving, but the matter of his
own appointment, let the sad consequence of Gideons Ephod, Judge. 8.27 and 9 11,
1 Samuel 15
Jephtha's. Vow, Saul's sparing the best of Agags anathematized Cattle, (all for
peace offerings) be a watchword and warning to you all this day, and all
others hereafter, to take heed what they do in the day of their Thanksgiving,
viz. That nothing be done, or returned, in way of thankfulness to God, which
proceeds not from an understanding heart, instructed in the form of the
Service, the nature of the blessing, and the lawfulness of the matter, that
they manifest their thankfulness withal.

Secondly, A day of Thanksgiving as it requires the exercise of more
Scripture Light; 2. Grace, effectual Faith in 3 particulars.
so also the use of a greater measure of more effectual Faith then a day of
public Humiliation; which I conceive may hence be manifest, The Ninevites
fasted acceptably to God, and profitably for themselves, and had Faith to
believe the threatening of God against them; but their Faith, in the promise of
mercy toward them, was very weak, expressed in these words, Who can tell if
God will repent? And David fasted acceptably, Sam. 12. when in the sense of
Gods anger against himself, and sin in the sickness of his Child, he humbled
himself before God: But in the return of high praise, in a day of Thanksgiving,
besides says in Gods threatenings, is necessarily required the exercise of
Faith in the promise, and besides the habit of Faith (without which it is
impossible to please God in any Service) in this, a threefold special actings
of Faith upon God is required, as manifesting himself reconciled unto the
person who has received the mercy, and is therefore now performing the duty.

First, By Faith to apprehend in himself some sense and feeling of the love and
grace of God manifested to his Soul; for seeing high praises are to be
performed with love and joy, yea, exaltation in God, who ever did or can return
thanks to God, with spiritual joy, for any mercy, when he apprehends still the
angry countenance of God frowning against him, and hiding his favor from his
Soul?

Secondly, It is necessary, in a Thanksgiving for a mercy, faith to see and
know he has title in Christ, as well as by common providence to the benefit of
the mercy for which he is thankful; for else there will be more cause of sorrow
for the want of title by Christ, then of joy in the partaking the mercy without
Christ.

Thirdly, So much exercise of Faith is necessary, as to see Christ to be
willing to return their-praises, and mix his odors with them, in presenting
them unto God; as to see him conveying unto them their title unto the blessing,
by his purchase and satisfaction; faith having as much need of an Altar and
Mediator to offer up acceptable praises, as prayers; and this is done by acting
faith upon Christ therefore, as is evident Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us
offer unto God continually the sacrifice of praise, that is, the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his Name.

Thirdly, Thanksgiving requires a greater proportion of practical Holiness then
a day of most solemn Humiliation, Grace, practical Holiness, in two particulars.
which I conceive may in these particulars (at least) be evidenced.

1. God calls men to fasting, prayer, and mourning, when they are held captive
under the violence of some prevalent corruption and temptation, as Paul and
others, 2 Cor. 9. I beat down my body, and bring it under subjection, by
extraordinary fasting; but God never calls any to joy, and rejoice, or keep
days of Thanksgiving, that lie under the power of their lusts, and bondage of
corruption prevailing over them, general uprightness, are conscious of their
own actual innocence, Psalm. 26. I will wash mine hands in Innocence, and so
will I compass thine Altar; yea, and able, in some measure, to make profession
of their actual subjection to God, and join it as a ground of their praises; as
Psalm. 116.16. Oh Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, the son of
thine handmaid; thou have broken my bonds (of all sorts;) Therefore I will
offer up unto thee the sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call upon the Name
of the LORD: which ability, to be able to profess their present subjection unto
God, in the consciousness of their Innocence, is a greater measure of practical
Holiness, then is required of such as observe days of Fasthing; which will yet
be further manifested, in that God calls such to fasting, and those that are so
called, may fast acceptably unto God, who can but procure their hearts before
they fast; reformation of their heinous transgressions, (though there be no
antecedent or present actual reformation or satisfaction on the day) as is
manifest in the Fast observed by Ezra, and the rest of the people, when they
fasted acceptably, before they had put away their strange wives, or taken off
all the oppression of their burdens; yet upon their Covenant, and Vow to do
it, they were accepted; But in a day of THANKSGIVING, God requires not only a
purpose of Reformation consequent, but actual performance of Vows and Covenants
of Reformation for present, as David in Psalm. 116.18. I will offer praise, and
pay my vows, now in the presence of all his people, even in the Courts of Gods
House; which made our Savior enjoin an antecedent actual reconciliation, and
satisfaction, before the offering a gratulatory gift, as if an intention of it
afterward would not be sufficient: God rejects all the Solemn Feasts of his
people, Isa. 1. Upon this ground, They had not before put away the violence in
their hands: but they were still full of blood: a day of Thanksgiving is not a
day of running into more debts by future Covenants, but a coming out of debt by
present payment, in which respect more practical holiness is required to be
exercised in a day of Thanksgiving, then in a day of Humiliation.

Having thus confirmed to your Judgments the duty to be high by way of
Demonstration, suffer me now to improve it on your consciences by way of
Application, wherein I shall look no way, but to the sanctifying of the Name of
our God in relation to your present occasion, who have for that end and purpose
called me hither, and that first by way of Information; 2. Exhortation; 3.
Direction.

And for the first, let me inform you, and by you all other, Use of Information
of the excellency of the work.
concerning the great and high Work which ye have undertaken to perform, in
setting a day apart for this high Service, in delivering you from your late
restraint and Imprisonment, a duty of so transcendent nature, as requires the
abilities of the Angels in Heaven, rather then of any persons (Gentlemen, or
others) in earth, and a far more suitable work for a glorified Saint above,
then poor sinful souls beneath; you have herein undertaken to return this day
unto God all the splendour both of the virtue and beauty of his Glory, which
has shined forth in this work of your deliverance, to carry him home, to day,
the crop and fruit of all the passages of his divine providence, exercised for
you, or dispensed unto you therein, which is more prized, and is dearer to him,
then any thing else in heaven and earth: You have undertaken to perform that
service unto God this day, that shall exalt him that is the highest already, to
magnify him that is greatest already, and to glorify him that is already most
glorious; yet how high, great, and glorious soever before your service began,
when it is once done, he shall thereby be rendered to all Spectators more
glorious then he was before, in raising higher thoughts of God, his power,
faithfulness, and graciousness, as well in their as your own hearts.

Yea, and you have undertaken to make the day a good day, and more holy then
any other days whatsoever, by exercising a greater measure of Scripture Light,
effectual Faith, and practical Holiness then ever.

Yea, to perform that Service, which being rightly performed, will ravish the
divine thoughts and heart of the Almighty with highest delight and
satisfaction, as with Incense and sweet Odors in his nostrils.

I note this, Applied 1. for Encouragement.
first, to raise the value and estimation of this duty in your hearts, and to
stir up and quicken your endeavors and resolutions in the observation of the
same, (being simply and absolutely the most sublime and perfect part of Gods
Service under Heaven,) wherein the conscientiousness of men, in observing such
days, according to rule, discovers more sincerity of love to God, and obedience
to his Will, then all other duties, either of doing or suffering for God
besides, if this be neglected, because necessity, fear, self-love may drive us
to fast, pray, and extort other duties from us, but only sense and feeling of
Gods Love to us, and our delight in him, can draw us to this so high a Service,
which is so pleasing to God, that he declares himself to be pleased in no other
duty of his Worship, whatsoever it be, further then it is gratulatory, and done
in way of thankfulness unto him, and make for the exaltation of his praise.

I note this in the second place, Applied 2. for Caution.
to discover the odiousness and heinousness of their sin that shall neglect,
contemn, or abuse this so high a Service, as celebrating Gods high Praises in
conscientious observing the days of Thanksgiving, which is then perpetrated
when they are appointed, and also performed rather as a Ceremony, then in
sincerity; rather as a matter of pomp and state in relation to men, then as a
duty of highest devotion and conscience toward God, where men turn the days of
Thanksgiving to God, to days of liberty and licenciousness in themselves, to
days of inordinate eating, Exodus 32.
and excessive drinking, as if, with the Israelites, their days of Thanksgiving
to God, were directed only to worship the golden Calf, in sitting down to eat,
and drink, and rise up to play; and their practice therein the same that the
wicked Jews observed in their Feasts against our Savior, to let loose a
Malefactor, Mat. 26.
and crucify the Son of God; by which means it comes to pass, that whereas
days of Thanksgiving should be of all other the holiest, these men (by their
wickedness) change them into the prophanest; possibly some of these men make
some conscience to prepare themselves with some devotion when they come to the
duties of hearing, praying, fasting, etc. but when they come to observe days of
Thanksgiving, their care is about nothing else but to put on their richest
apparel, to get ready a Thanksgiving dinner, to be jovial with their carnal
friends, in carnal ways; which done, God must rest himself contented, thus to
be glorified; but Oh ye foolish people, Deuteronomy. 32.8
and unwise, do you thus requite the Lord? Will you call this a day of
Thanksgiving? and giving high Praises to God, to eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and then being thereby waxen fat, and pampered, with Jesurun, to kick up
your heel against God by your profaneness, whom you pretend to extol by your
high Praises? What is this observation of days of Thanksgiving unto God, but to
do therein unto God as the Soldiers did unto Christ? first to bow the knee of
their profession by praise to worship him, and then, by their irreligiousness
and excess, to spit on his face and buffet him; and instead of putting upon his
head a crown of high Praises and Glory, to crown him with the thorns of their
profaneness and infamy; and could our Lord Jesus's voice be heard in the midst
of their confused jollity, they would hear him say unto them as he speaks to
the Jews, John 10.32. Many good works have I done for you, (for which you
pretend to serve me,) for which of them do you thus stone me? I expected bread
to day, and you give me stones; I looked for fish, and you give serpents; I
looked for high praises, and you have brought me high reproaches and disgraces.
Bell-joy, Table-joy, Musick-joy, and Bonefire-joy in a day of Thanksgiving,
without the exercise of a greater measure of Scripture Light, effectual Faith,
and practical Holiness, in giving him high praises, is but to do with our God
as the fisherman in Plutarch with his, 2 Use of Exhortation to heighten
Praises, because God requires,
who for blessing him with a great draught of fish, promised to give his god
half, but paid him by taking out all the fish for himself, sent the shells to
his god.

For prevention of which abominable sin against God in the observation of this
your day, let me now by way of Exhortation entreat you (Gentlemen) in the Name
of that great God, who has of late so graciously heard and answered so many of
your own and others prayers speaking for you, now to hear, and also obediently
to answer the Counsel and Exhortation of God in this truth you have heard
speaking unto you, which is this, That seeing the Praises of God are and ought
to be high Praises, that then both your selves, and all others that would join
with you, to answer God in thankfulness for this or any other mercy received,
be careful and studious to raise and heighten their praise before they be
returned: The things that the Lord has done for you all are not small and low,
but many great and high Favors; be careful therefore that the thanks you
return him to day be not formal, common or ordinary, but many, great, and
raised praises, unto which your hearts will the sooner be convinced to yield
obedience in raising and heightning your praises, if you consider with me these
two things manifest in Scripture:

First, That whenever God requires praise to be returned for any mercy, 1.
Proportionable Praises.
he does not only require it to be returned in kind, but also in weight,
measure and proportion, and that according to the greatness of his love
manifested either in himself, word, or works toward them: So Psalm. 29.1, 2.
Give unto God you mighty (that is, men of place and power,) give ye unto God
glory and strength; that is, your highest and uttermost strength in giving him
glory; and why? verse. 2. Because this is his due, from you that are mighty by
way of proportion, therefore give him the Glory due to his Name, give him his
full due, in worshipping him in the beauty of holiness; and Psalm. 66.2. the
Spirit of God does require of all Nations not only to sing forth the honor of
his Name, but to make his Praise glorious, raise it to the height of beauty and
greatness, make his Praise as great as himself, proportionable to his own
greatness: So Psalm. 145.3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and
because the Psalmist adds, that his Greatness is unsearchable, he also infers,
that men must wonderfully, gloriously and abundantly praise him in proportion
thereunto, from verse. 3. to 7. They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy
great goodness, and declare thy greatness, even proportionable to the
excellency and height of it, Psalm. 150.2. Praise him in his mighty acts, and
according to the excellency of his greatness. Thus you see the first thing that
God looks for proportionable praise, great praise for a great God, doing great
things, and high praises for a high God, doing high things.

The second thing I would have you observe to move you to raise your praises
for the mercy received, before they be returned, 2. Proper Praises.
is this, That that goodness of God in delivering you out of prison (wherein
you were unjustly detained) is a mercy of that nature, that God in his Word
has required, and expressly and particularly declared, that he expects proper
and special thanks and praise for the same; as Psalm. 107.10. Such as sit in
darkness, being bound in affliction and iron; these prisoners cried unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from their distress, and brake
their bands asunder, Verse. 13. What then does the Lord expect from these
praying and now delivered prisoners? see Verse. 15. Oh that they would praise
the Lord for his goodness, and declare his wonderful works (in their
deliverance) to the sons of men, because he brake the gates of brass, and cut
in sunder the bars of iron, in which they were restrained; by which you see,
That the Lord expects, amongst all other mercies, express praise for delivering
men out of bonds, which made David, Psalm. 142.7. when he was imprisoned, and
shut up in the Cave, and had the Army of Saul round about him seeking his
blood, use this as the strongest motive he could use to obtain his liberty,
That if God would grant him the same, and set him at freedom, he would then
praise his Name; Bring my Soul out of prison, that I may then praise thy Name,
which I cannot do now so fully and freely as I would, being in bonds: And as he
here promised praise unto God for liberty, if he might obtain it; so we see him
as faithful and careful to perform it, when he did enjoy it, Psalm. 116.16. Lord
I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid, and thou have broken my bonds, and
set me at liberty, and therefore I will offer unto thee the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving; my thanks (which I will return for my liberty) shall be a
Sacrifice without blemish or imperfection, the first, the best; no low, mean,
formal, but high and masculine praises, by which (Gentlemen) you may both be
strengthened and justified against all gainsayers in this your action, in
setting this day apart for this public way of thankfulness unto God for your
late enlargement, seeing the Lord looks and expects it specially and
proportionably therefore, and also be now thoroughly incited, seeing God looks
for special praises, for the mercy received, to heighten your praises before
they be returned; 3 Use, direction how to raise them.
which leads me to the third and last Use intended, namely, Direction, from
what has bin spoken, how to raise your thanks, and make your praises high
praises before and in their delivery, which you shall effect, if in relation to
the high praises you are to give for this your special mercy in your
enlargement, you be careful to perform these two things:

1. To raise their conception in your hearts inwardly. 2. To heighten their
expression in your lives outwardly.
For the first, 1. Inwardly.
High praises must be heightened in womb, and conceptions of the heart inwardly,
they must be of high descent, and noble birth, and therefore the heart (which
is the spring and fountain from whence high praises must arise) must be
enlivened and quickened with the seminal virtues, from whence all high praises
take their original, which are these three especially:

1. 1. By the deep sense of the danger in 4 particulars.
From a clear understanding and apprehension of the greatness of your misery
under which you were enthralled.

2. From an enlarged affection, from the sense and feeling of Gods Love, by
which you were delivered.

3. From the actings and exercise of faith, in seeing God the sole Author of
your mercy, and making the Lord Jesus the sole Mediator to receive your praise,
and present your duty.

Wherefore, that I may help your heart to breed and beget these high praises,
let me first of all stir up your hearts to praise God from a true understanding
and apprehension of the depth of the danger and misery from whence you are
escaped, which being duly considered and weighed, will appear no small or
single calamity, but a thraldom and bondage, compounded of many ingredients of
bitterness and aggravations of extreme perplexity.

As first, families, wives, children, friends, estates at once, seems to be
misery raised with the highest and most killing aggravations: As the
Amalekites, at Ziglag, took all David had, wives, children, cattle, and drove
them away from him; so these Amalekites at Chelmsford took you, and drove you
away from all these: That affliction made David weep, whiles he could weep no
more; and surely had you fountains of tears, you might have had occasion to
have shed them all in this your captivity, had not the Lord wrought your
deliverance, being thus suddenly and unexpectedly carried from all at once, and
that without so much liberty as verbal salutations, or time, or space to take
your leaves of them, (which the Martyrs, not only in their prisons, but even at
the stake, were permitted to do,) the want whereof struck the churlish heart of
Laban so deep, that he complains of it as a great wickedness and injury in
Jacob, that he had not suffered him to take his leave, nor salute his sons and
daughters before their removal from him: You were surprised and snatched from
all your dearest relations, as Joseph from his father Jacob, when he was sent
to visit his brethren, who for his conscience to his fathers command, and
courtesy to them, was by his false brethren first stripped, then cast into the
pit, and afterward sold as a slave to the Midianites and Egyptians; so were you
by these Midianites and Egyptians, that carried you up and down whither they
pleased; the meditation of this cup of bitterness will become one spark to heat
your hearts, and inflame them to a higher heat of thankfulness, especially if
unto the consideration of that part of your misery, whereby at once all your
comforts were unexpectedly removed, enemies, amongst whom you might truly and
properly have had cause to cry out daily, We unto us, we are constrained to
dwell with Mesheck, and have our habitation in the tents of Kedar, where your
righteous Souls were of necessity grieved and tormented, from day to day, to
hear and see the uncleanness and profane conversation of the wicked, when
those (whose prisoners you were, and carried you away captive) daily insulted
over your selves, Cause, and Religion; must it not of necessity pierce your
hearts with sorrow, and compel you like captive Jews in Babylon, to hang up
your Harps, forget your Songs, and lift up your voices, and weep, when you
remembered the Zions either of your own or Gods Houses, whither you had gone
with your multitudes? but now you saw not your signs, neither was there any
Prophet left to tell you when your misery was like to end, but still one deep
called upon another, until all the waves went over your heads, and these
ploughers ploughed what they pleased upon your backs, which was bitter enough
for the present, enemies) were in their hands as lambs among wolves, and as
sheep under the hand of the slaughter-man, where you had nothing to defend your
selves but silence, patience, equity, and innocence, all mediation of your own
or their greatest friends for your deliverance rejected, all offers to redeem
you by exchange denied, and into what desperate condition soever, either their
own wickedness, or weakness should bring them, from it your lives and estates
must secure them. (Gentlemen) If you would this day, by meditation, recall your
former thoughts and sad apprehensions, think those thoughts over again which
were conceived in your distracted hearts and heads when you were carried in the
long march to Colchester, and were in hazard of the violence of the Soldiers
all the way: if you would lay your selves down in the same condition of sorrow
and grief by contemplation, from which the Lords own outstretched hand has
freed you; if your Souls have that night in remembrance, when they sent you
word in the evening to prepare for death in the morning, surely the the deep
apprehension of the great danger, from whence (by the favor of God) you have
been delivered, would prove a singular help to heighten and raise the praises
of God in your hearts before they be returned. Especially if,

In the second place, 2. The true apprchension of Gods presence with them
discovered in four particulars
you shall add hereunto the enlargement of your affections, which will
certainly arise in your hearts from the serious consideration of the high and
singular Love of God flowing out unto you, in taking this yoke of your enemies
from your necks, in opening the prison doors for you, and breaking your bands
in sunder; for first of all, when the comforts of your nearest relations failed
you, Lover and friend stood far away from your trouble, when you were destitute
of all other Society, (besides your fellow Prisoners mutually bemoaning and
declaring each others losses and sufferings,) when you looked to the right
hand, and the left, but there was none to help from either of them; then the
Lord appeared amongst you, nor was there one day, in all your restraint,
wherein he forsook you, but every hour discovered his presence with you: as the
Angel was with Daniel in the Den of Lions, Dan. 3.25
as the Son of God with the three Children in the Furnace, Genesis 39.21
as the Lord himself was with Joseph in his prison; so both the Lord himself,
his Son, and Angels, may seem to have been all resident with you, and that not
only as Spectators, to visit you in your Trouble, but as most glorious Actors,
to comfort you in, and deliver you out of your Trouble: which appeared;

First, In binding the hands of them that bound you, Den you were, and were
wide open against you, by calming their spirits in such a manner, that he
suffered not any one of them to do you harm, or pull one hair from your head,
or to increase the tediousness of your restraint, by their incivilities, which
was the Lords doing, and ought this day, and ever, be mavelous in your eyes;
yea, it is your Duty, from thence, to conclude undoubtedly, That the divine
providence did so awe, and overruled their intentions, as if you had heard him
vocally from Heaven give your Enemies the charge in the Psalm, Touch ye not
these my Servants, Ps 105.15
and see you do these Prisoners no harm.

Secondly, His glorious presence discovered it self, their rage, but also
turned their hearts to favor you, in being civil and courteous to you so far,
as to suffer you (their Prisoners) to eat the fat, and drink the sweet, when
many of themselves starved, and others suffered very much, by their more
unwholesom diet, and infected provision: They sent you out freemen the same day
they yeeled themselves to bonds: To give you your lives, when they resigned
their own to death, this was not their good nature, or any sweetness in them,
but the singular love of God to you, that made their stern and angry
countenances to become your Mirrors, wherein you might (with Jacob) see the
manifest smilings and aimable countenance of God himself: I confess freely,
when I saw some of you spectators at the execution of some of the principal
Leaders, whose prisoners you were the day before, I could not but conclude,
Jehovah-Jirch, apprehending my self to be with Abraham in the Mount, and to
behold Isaac delivered from the knife and fire; and these sacrificed Rams first
snarled in their own briars for your deliverance.

Thirdly, Gods gracious presence with you, (and such an one as should this day
raise your hearts to high praises) that you had the invaluable benefit of so
many prayers all the time you were in restraint? Whence could it proceed, but
from the unspeakable love of God to you, that so many thousand were stirred, in
their most earnest prayers, to speak unto God for you? multitudes, not only of
your friends and acquaintance, but of strangers also, (that never saw your
faces, or heard of your names before you were Prisoners) were so constant and
instant with God in their petitions for you, as if they had been seeking the
Salvation of their own Souls: In every public meeting, and private family
duty, the Prisoners at Colchester were still the subject of a great part of the
exercise: I am confident the prayers of the Church, mentioned Act. 12. that
were made for Peter's enlargement, did not exceed those which were made for you,
either in fervency or constancy, so cordial and affectionate (even unto Tears)
were the expressions that were poured out to God for your liberty and safety,
that for my part I am persuaded, that few prisoners of your circumstances,
since the world began, had the like, for number and vigor; which evidenceth far
greater love of God unto you, then the gift of Kingdoms and Empires: for
(though tire prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, nor are they so
beneficial unto men as one crust of Brend, yet) the prayers of the righteous
prevailed much for you, Iam. 5.16
and were effectual, not only in preserving you from base dispondency of
spirit, in the time you were in custody; but also in making your yoke easy,
and your bonds light, above your own, and others expectation, until the time of
your delivery; which love of God to you (being seriously pondered) will so warm
your hearts, and raise your affections, that withal, your praises proceeding
from them will be heightened in your selves before they be returned to God;
Especially,

If you take into your hearts the consideration of a fourth Discovery of Gods
especial Love into you, Imprisonment, which was the sweet society and
fellowship, both in temporal and spiritual mereies and duties, that was
permitted unto you, until the very day of your enlargement; you might meet
together, prey together, confer with one another, and comfort each other in
your bonds, by reading, singing, and brotherly obligations, whereby your Prison
was turned into a Temple and Sanctuary, as the Goalers house, and other
prisons, was by Paul and Silas; Act. 16.27. Phil. 10. Col. 4.
in one prison they convert the Jailer, in another Onesimus, in a third they
receive comfort and mutual edification from the Churches, from Epaphus
Aristarchus, and other their fellow Prisoners; for this fruit of love Paul
gives many thanks in diverse of his Epistles, Go you and do likewise; make the
comfort of your mutual edification, whiles you were confined, an argument to
raise the conceptions of your praises to God, from whom it was received, until
the womb of your hearts grow pregnant with the high praises of your God.

Thirdly, The exercise of Faith.
But yet nevertheless when your praises are first quickened by the meditation of
the greatness of the danger under which you were enthralled, and secondly
strengthened and confirmed by the renewed sense and feeling of Gods Love so
many several ways difcovered, they will not withstanding prove abortive, dye in
their conception, and appear liveless issues, if the hand of your Faith does
not first being them forth of the place of conception; and secondly, being
brought forth, carry them up, and present them to the most high God: The acting
and exercise of your Faith in the duty of Thanksgiving will raise your praises
so high, that of low moral conceptions in men, they will become evangelical,
high Sacrifices and Oblations to God; adding a further degree of excellency,
first, to their Conception; secondly, Production; thirdly, Acceptance.

First, 1. The Conception of praise.
The exercise of your Faith will heighten the Conception of your high praises,
by enabling you both to see and acknowledge, that the mercy, which is the ground
and subject of your praises, proceeded from an high, from no lower original
then the most high God, that the most high God was the author and sole
efficient of your deliverance, whosoever were the instruments: see this in
Peter, Act. 12. he there praises God for liberty from imprisonment, as you do
here; wherein this exercise of his faith is most observable, That both in the
meditation of it himself, and declaration of it to others, he still
acknowledges God to be the sole efficient of it; first in his own meditation
by himself, Act. 12.11. Now I know for a truth, that God has sent his Angel,
and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from all the waiting-for of
the people of the Jews: Secondly, In his declaration of it to others, Verse. 17.
He beckoned with the hand, and declared unto them, how the Lord had brought him
out of the prison; and said, Go show these things to James and the brethren:
Whence you may learn (if you will faithfully return due praises unto God for
your liberty) You must never think on it by your selves, nor speak of it to
others, (much less in your solemn Thanksgiving to God for the same) but you
must believe and acknowledge the Lord alone to be author and essicient of it: so
als does the Tune of David's Psalm of praise, for liberty, run in this high
Tone, Psalm. 116.16. (I mean in the exercise of his Faith, by acknowledging the
Lord the sole author of his enlargement,) Thou, O Lord, have broken my bonds,
and therefore I will offer unto thee the sacrifice of Thanksgiving: So does
good Ezra, in the like cause, go before you, in returning praises for his own,
and the Churches freedom from the Babylonish Thraldom; whose words and
expression ( Ezra 9.8, 9.) I desire all of you would print them on the tables
of your hearts, and make them as frontlets before your eyes; yea, that you
would write them in your Note-books, on the walls of your Studies, and
Bed-chambers, where you must lodge in the night, or converse by day, that you
may acknowledge, and confess with him as long as you live, saying, We were
bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended
mercy to us, in the sight of our enemies; and has given us a reviving, to set
up the house of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and to give us
a wall in Judah, and in Jerusalem: Thus lifting up the eye of your faith to the
most high God, seeing and acknowledging the height of his wisdom, goodness, and
mercy working your deliverance, will raise the conceptions of your high praises.

Secondly, The Production.
So will the exercise of your faith heighten your production also, by showing
and causing you to confess, that as God was the efficient, so the Lord Jesus's
sufferings was the meritorious cause procuring this deliverance from your
temporal as well as spiritual bondage; It was the blood of Christ that brought
all of you (that are true Believers) out of this house of bondage also; That
was the red Sea in which your liberty came swiming to you; he was once bound,
that you might be now free; Joh. 8.
and if the Son make you free, then are you free indeed: For as by his stripes
ye are healed, so by his bonds are you losed; he dyed in custody, Isai. 53.
under the hand and power of Heathenish Soldiers, that none of these
Heathenish Soldiers (in whose custody you were) might have any power to lay
violent hands upon you: Mat. 27.
he was taken from his prison and judgment, that you might be taken from yours
also; and when he ascended up on high, he led not only his own, but your
Captivity captive: when you shall thus act your faith in beholding the Lord
Jesus meriting this your dismission, Ephesians. 4.
and coming along with your discharge, and delivering it unto you as a fruit of
his sufferings for you, then will your Souls be enlarged, and your affections
extended to a more ample production of the high praises of God.

Thirdly, As you must, by the exercise of your faith, The Acceptance.
heighten the production of your praises from your selves; so their acceptance
with God also: Faith will not only demonstrate God alone to be the original,
and the Lord Jesus the procurer of the mercy; but also be an effectual
instrument to work high acceptance and respect to this your duty, whiles it
will direct you to return all your high praises to God, by the hand of Christ
alone, as their Altar and Presenter, Heb. 13.15. By him therefore let us offer
up the Sacrifice of praise unto God; who as he is a Mediator, and praying
Savior, for the supply of our wants; so is he a praising Savior, in the
return of our thanks: His oders and incense alone must sweeten and persume the
oblation of our praises: as well as prayers: your highest praises, if they be
not presented by his hand, will be rejected in anger; if offered through his
mediation, will be accepted with love and welcome, as the Philippians bounty,
Chap. 4.18. an odor of a sweet smell, and a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing
to God. Let me now therefore conclude the first part of my Direction, for the
heightening your praises in their conception inwardly, with the words of the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.5. above and besides all that you have heard for that purpose
before, approve your selves, by this exercise of faith, to be Living stones,
built up together into a spiritual Temple, and an holy Priesthood, to offer
these spiritual sacrifices of highest praises, acceptable to God, by the
mediation of Jesus Christ alone.

The conception of your praises being by these means thus raised inwardly, The
outward expression of praise.
proceed also to heighten their expression outwardly; let their birth be
answerable to their conception, and their production to God as high as their
birth in men; which will be effected, and the external expression of your
praises much heightened, by a two-sold gratulatory practice: First, In your
words; Secondly, In your lives: The words of the Text lead me to this
distinction, by holding forth not only the duty of high praises, that they are
to be performed, but their manifestation also, how they are to be expressed;
namely, first, by the mouth and tongue, the instrument of speaking: secondly,
the two-edged sword and hand, the instruments of action; whereby the Psalmist
does manifest most evidently, that these high praises, that are conceived in
the heart, must be expressed in the tongue and life: First then, Let the high
praises of God be in your mouth, or in your throat, (as the Text has it,) to
note the extension of your voices in their expression, which is that which is
commanded in the former verse, when the Saints are enjoined to sing aloud upon
their beds, and Psa. 148.2. to praise God in the heights; that is, not only in
high places to exalt his Name above the Heavens and Earth, but also in high
expressions of words and voices, and therefore, Psa. 150.5. the Spirit of God
requires that the Lord be praised not only on a well sounding Cymbal, or (as
the Text is) a Cymbal of hearing, but also upon a high sounding Cymbal, that
is, notes of highest exaltation and shoutings: All which Scriptures call upon
you, as well as my Text, to let the praises of God be high in your mouths,
publishing them in the highest expressions of his glory, and that principally
these two ways; First, In a thankful celebration of them before others:
Secondly, 1. By the tongue in celebration before men. Psa. 78.4
In a thankful commemoration of them between the Lord and your selves.

First, You must heighten them by your tongues, in an high celebration of them
to others, by making joyful and perpetual confessions, professions, and
declarations thereof to your brethren, and the Congregations of his people;
that all you fathers make them known to your children, and they also make your
deliverance and praises to be remembered by future generations: This is
punctually prescribed to be observed in uttering praises for deliverances from
bonds and imprisonment, Psa. 107. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his
goodness, viz. for being the Author of their liberty, and declaring his
wonderful works, in their deliverance, to the children of men; which also is in
like manner observed in Peter's praise for his escape out of prison, Act. 12.
where, besides the thankful confession of it to God, Verse. 17. he both declares
it to the Congregation of Saints himself, and also requires the Church to make
relation of it to others, and especially to James and John, who (being public
persons) he knew would cause the praises of God to be remembered and celebrated
therefore, in all the assemblies of the Saints, wheresoever they came; in
conformity to whose practice, let me exhort you also to go tell your John's, and
James, and other brethren, how great things God has done for you in this your
enlargement; so that, as the Spirit of God in your very case requires, Psalm.
102. 18, 19, 20, 21. it may be written for the generations to come; and the
people that shall be created, may praise the Lord for you and with you, saying,
God looked down from the height of his Sanctuary; from Heaven did the Lord
behold the Earth: To hear the groaning of us Prisoners, and to loose us that
were appointed to death, That we might declare the Name of the Lord in Zion,
and his praise in Jerusalem; When the people are gathered together, and the
Kingdoms to serve the Lord.

Secondly, Heighten the verbal expression of your praises, 2. By Commemoration
unto God.
by a thankful Commemoration of Gods great mercy in your deliverance, between
the Lord and your selves; the practice whereof I would have you learn from the
Psalmist, Psalm. 136. where he praises GOD with high praises; First, for the
work of Creation, unto the tenth Verse; and then for the deliverance of his
people from the Egyptian bondage and thraldom, Verse. 18. In both which he
heightens the praises of GOD these two ways: First divides the total sum of
GODS goodness into the several parcels and particular remarkable passages of
his providence therein: Secondly, He multiplies and reiterates the expression
and attribution of his praises, according to the nature and number of the
particulars observed in his antecedent distinction; this is the method he
observes in the first part of the Psalm, unto the tenth Verse; where he
praises God for works of Creation, dividing the mercy, and multiplying the
praise, according to the number of the special. Attributes and Actions of God
observed therein.

First he observes the attribute of Goodness of God, and then praises him for
that; Oh give thanks unto the Lord, because he is good, for his mercy endures
for ever: Then observes him as God of Gods, Verse. 2. and praises him for that
by it self; Oh give thanks to the God of Gods, for his mercy, etc. Then as Lord
of Lords, Verse. 3. Then takes notice of his wonderful Power, By diviving the
mercy.
That alone does great wonders, Verse. 4. Then of the attribute of his Wisdom in
making the Heavens, Verse. 5. And having thus observed the distinction of
Attributes in God, and multiplied Praises according to the number, of them, he
then proceeds to the division of the total of his work into the principal parts
of it, and multiplies his Praises according to the number of them; As first,
His stretching out the earth above the waters, Verse. 6. Then the making great
Lights, Verse. 7. The Sun to rule the day, Verse. 8. The Moon and Stars to rule
the night.

And as he observes this method of division of the mercy of Creation, and the
multiplication of praises for it; so in praising God for their deliverance from
bondage and their slavery in Egypt (which is more properly your case,) he first
in the beginning of each verse does distinctly observe the several parts and
circumstances of their deliverance, as that he smote the firstborn of Egypt,
and brought Israel from amongst them, and with a strong hand overthrew Pharaoh,
and smote great Kings, and famous Kings, Sihon King of the Amorites, and Og
King of Bashan; and unto every one of these particulars, adds a particular
reiteration of the praise of God for the fame in the end of each verse, still
inculcating and concluding, That his mercy endures for ever; which is written
for your learning and instruction, that you also, in praising God for your
liberty, should particularize the total sum of your safety, and then to
multiply and reiterate the expression of your praises accordingly: And
multipliing the praise.
Come therefore and sing unto the Lord a new Song, and praise him this day, in
the Congregation of Saints; and with good Ezra, Heman, and Asaph, Ezra 3.10,
11. Praise ye the Lord after the Ordinance of David King of Israel; singing
together by course, praising and giving thanks unto the Lord your God, because
he is good, for his mercy endures for ever: To the God of Gods, that stood by
us when all other comforts sailed us, For his mercy endures for ever: To the
Lord of Lords, that has subdued our Enemies under us, For his mercy endures
for ever; That rescued us from anger and rage of the multitude, when they first
apprehended us at Chelmsford, For his mercy endures, etc. That preserved us in
the long march from Brantree to Colchester, For his mercy endures, etc. That
suffered not our Enemies to do us any harm, For his mercy, etc. That turned
their hearts to be civil to us, For his mercy, etc. That secured us from the
bullets that were shot through our chambers, For his mercy, etc. That made our
society so comfortable whiles we were in custody, For his mercy, etc. That did
provide for us meat and drink, plentifully, when our Enemies starved, For his
mercy endures etc. Who by his Spirit stirred up so many to pray for us, For
his mercy, etc. And in his faithfulness answered those prayers, For his mercy,
etc. That caused our Enemies to give us life, when they yielded themselves to
death, For his mercy, etc. That after so many weeks imprisonment brought us
home with Honor, Safety, and Freedom, For his mercy endures for ever. Thus if
you shall begin to particularize your mercies, and then proceed in multiplying
your praises, you will raise the expression of them, to be high praises of God
in your Mouths, verbally, unto which the Text requires another and higher
expression of them to be added:

Namely, An actual raising them in your lives, The real expression of praise
heightened.
with a two-edged sword in your hands; which two-edged sword in your hands is
not your own sword, but the Sword of the Lord, even the Sword that proceeds
out of his Mouth, the Word of God, which Word of God must be born in the hand
of all those that have the high praises of God in their months, that both hand
and tongue, celebration and action may concur in the expression of Gods high
Praises: Two ways were the expression of your praises verbally, viz. by
Celebration and Commemoration; and two ways you must heighten them actually,
namely, by the acts of Obligation and Vindication; and these two are written on
the two-edged sword in your hands, I mean, the Word of God, which directs you
actually to heighten your praises for your liberty.

First, By acting with one edg of this Sword, in fighting therewith for God and
his glory.

Secondly, By acting with the other edg of it, in fighting therewith against
Satan, and all his rout and company, whether they be Heathen, Vulgar, Kings, or
Nobles; the former is accomplished in making your liberty a bond and Obligation
upon you to promote the worship and glory of God; the latter by improving your
liberty for due suppression and vindication against the Enemies of God.

First, 1. By way of obligation to God.
Therefore convert your broken bonds and chains (whereby you have been loosed
from men) into cords of love, to bind you faster to glorify God; thus David
actually expresses his praise unto God for granting him liberty from men,
Psalm. 116. Because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from
tears, my feet from falling; I will therefore walk before the Lord in the Land
of the living: And thus the Lord himself teaches the people of Israel, Exo.
20. to show their thankfulness for being brought out of the house of bondage,
by making the consideration of it an Obligation to observe all his
Commandments; I am the Lord thy God that took thee out of the house of bondage,
therefore thou shall have none other gods but me, nor bow down to any other,
nor take my Name in vain; but sanctify my Sabbath: So argue your hearts unto
real thankfulness for your freedoms, by making it an over-powering argument,
and a prevailing motive to engage you to every duty which the Word of God shall
call for at your hand; when no other reason can persuade, or motive induce you
to be accurate and exact in walking with God, or be strictly cautelous and
abstemious from the occasions and appearance of evil, then let the remembrance
of your deliverance from prison, out of Colchester, overcome you to, and
resolve with David, and declare, That because when the snares of death, and the
sorrows of bondage did encompass you, in so great extremity, the Lord your God
did so graciously and wonderfully deliver you, therefore you will wholly give up
your selves to do his Commands all the days of your lives, under the engagement
of the strongest bond and Obligation.

Secondly, 2. By way of Vindication against his enemies.
Raise the actual expression of your praise with the two-edged Sword of God in
your hand, by improving your liberty by way of Vindication, in executing
vengeance upon the Heathen, punishments upon the People; by binding their Kings
in chains, and Princes in fetters of iron; that is, to execute the Judgment
written, according to the Rule of the Scripture (in your Callings and Places)
to bring to condign punishment all the Enemies of God and his Church, of what
rank or order soever they be, which you shall perform three ways, Origin:
Ecumen: Chrisost: Moller.
(according to the variety of Interpretations that are made of this act of
Vindication and Execution of the Judgment Written, mentioned in the Text,) 1.
Morally. 2. Instrumentally. 3. Politically.

1. Morally in your own persons, as you are distinct Members of Christ in your
selves, without relation to others. 2. Instrumentally in the Church, as you are
joint Members of Christ's Church in fellowship with others. 3. Politically in
the Commonwealth, as you are Magistrates, and in place of Government over
others.
First, As you are distinct Members of Christ, 1. Morally.
so show your thankfulness in executing the Judgment written against the
Enemies of God Morally: In your own bosoms are heathenish, popular, potent,
reigning Enemies of God; against your heathenish sins execute the vengeance of
penitential revenge, and the punishments of self-condemning and self-judging
against your popular sins; the iron fetters of fasting and prayer, and the
spirit of mortification upon your potentate and predominate sins.

Secondly, As you are joint Members of Christ's Church, 2. Instrumentally.
show your thankfulness in executing the Judgment Written Instrumentally; as
God has taken the chains and fetters from your feet most graciously, so do you
in thankfulness therefore show your uttermost endeavors to take off the bonds
and chains that are upon Ordinances, the Worship, the Messengers of the Gospel
ministerially; so reasons and concludes Ezra, God has not forsaken us in our
bondage, but has showed us mercy, that we might set up the House of our God,
and repair the desolations thereof: It cannot be unknown unto you what
desolations has been made, in the House of your God, in his Worship, against
Christ Ministerial and Sacramental, by heathenish, popular, royal and powerful
Enemies: I may truly say in the words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. Flesh and
blood, principalities and powers, worldly Governors of the darkness of this
world, and spiritual wickedness in high places, have taken away the liberties
thereof, and subjected it to heathenish, popular and royal bondage: It is your
duty, and should be your work, to be Instruments (like Peter's Angel) to open
the brazen gates, and unhinge the prison doors, that Christ Ministerial may be
enlarged, and that the Gospel may run and be glorious, so shall you
Instrumentally execute the Judgment Written upon the Gospel Enemies, for by it
the Kingdom of Christ shall be exalted, the Heathen by the preaching of the
Gospel converted from their Idolatries, the People by Scripture conviction and
reproofs reduced from their profaneness and Heresies, the Kings and Nobles
bound in chains and iron fetters, restraining their vices, and bringing their
persons under bonds and subjection to the Gospel.

(...) are Magistrates and Members of the Commonwealth show your thankfulness
in executing the Judgment Written Politically, where also you shall meet with
many heathenish, popular, royal and potent Enemies to lawful Government and
Magistracy, whilst they are abettors and actors for Tyranny, Injustice,
Oppression and Cruelty, do you execute the Judgment written upon these, and
cast the chains and fetters of your power upon them, by restraining them from
evil, by executing, preventing Justice on some, and by executing the vengeance
of vindictive Justice upon the evil demerits of others; so that, as far as
lies in you, all may be brought to condign punishment that manifestly and
wilfully break those bonds asunder, and cast away those cords from them
wherewith and whereunto they were bound by our solemn League and Covenant: God
has made many of you Magistrates in your respective habitations and divisions,
and so has put chains and fetters into your hands, wherewith to hamper and
fetter, to restrain and chastise the malefactors of all sorts and rank that are
brought before you; it will be a most acceptable Sacrifice to God, and a real
expression of your high praises to God for your own liberty, to execute lawful,
political vengeance upon them, and with your chains and fetters to overcome
them, by which means these your bonds shall become famous, your praises for
your liberty become glorious, and God himself become propitious to you all, in
perpetuating your liberty, and augmenting your felicities, and thus the Lord
himself by your high praises be exalted, magnified and glorified, and you your
selves be rewarded and honored, even with this honor, that is peculiar to all,
and only his Saints, to have the high praise of God in their mouths, and a
two-edged sword in their hands.

FINIS.

