A Real PROTESTATION OF MANY, AND Very eminent persons in the County of YORK,
Declaring Their Resolutions concerning the present distractions; some of whose
names are subscribed.



September: ye 8th London, Printed for H. Blunden. 1642.

A Real Protestation of many, and very eminent Persons in the County of York,
declaring their Resolutions concerning the present distractions, some of whose
names are subscribed.
WE the Gentrry, Freeholders, and others of the County of York, whose names
are hereunto subscribed, being none or very few of us present, and none at all
of us consenting to the late Assembly and Consultations at York, wherein
Propositions have been made for the raising of forces of Horse and foot in this
County, the levying of monyes for the maintenance of them, and taking away the
Arms of some peaceable Subjects, nor none at all of us consenting to the
lawless and unpresidented presentment of the grand Iuries at the last Assizes
held for this County, being framed to give more strength and color to part of
these propositions, the said propositions and presentiments, being contrary (as
we conceive) to the Laws of the Land, and tending to the introducing of an
arbitrary government. The taking away the propriety of every Subject in his
estate, the liberty of the person, and the most necessary use and privilege of
Parliaments, and which is the worst of all evils to beget a war in the
bowels of this County. We thinking our selves and all the rest of the Subjects
of this County, to be so highly concerned in the proceedings before mentioned,
as without great disadvantage to us all, we may not be silent therein, do make
this our Protestation and declaration before God and the world, that as our
actions have hitherto been altogether peaceable, so our desires, intentions
and resolutions are altogether pacificall, and that all our endeavors and
labors shall only tend to the settlement and continuance of a real peace
(according to the Laws of the Land) and to the uniting of the fractions, and
taking away the distractions that have most unhappily broken the general unity
of the Inhabitants of this County. And that nothing can be more dangerous and
destructive thereunto then the raising and continuing together in a body, such
forces of Horse and foot in this County, as has been propounded and advised,
as aforesaid without consent and authority of Parliament. We conceiving the
advisings thereof to proceed from some destructive Counsels, the ends whereof
are to imbroyle this Kingdom in such a deluge of war, as has already
(though under other pretenses) swallowed up the Protestant Religion, the peace
and prosperous condition of the Kingdom of Ireland.

And seeing his sacred Majesty has of en Declared to us, that the Laws of the
Land shall be the Rule of His Government: and that He expects it shall be the
measure of our Subjection; We cannot conceive that any of these proceedings, so
grievous to the Subject, are consented to, or warranted by His gracious Majesty.

And therefore, We further declare that we will not consent, nor as much as in
us lies, suffer that any such Forces, either Horse or Foot, be raised of the
Trained bands of this County, nor that moneys be levied for the maintaining
thereof, nor that the Arms of any Subjects (other than Popish Recusants) be
taken from them, nor will we consent nor suffer (as much as in us lies) that
any War or Hostility be acted in this County, nor any Foreign Forces brought
in upon us; and if any such attempts shall be offered or made, we will
endeavor to resist and suppress them, and to keep the Peace of the County
entire, so far as the Ancient known Laws of the Land, and the late
Declarations and Orders of Parliament, made upon these immergent Occasions
shall enable us therein.

And we do likewise Declare, that we shall be most ready and willing upon
general Summons given at York or any other convenient place to be appointed
to meet the rest of the Gentry and other considerable inhabitants of the County
to advise of such matters as may endanger the violation of the Peace, and may
conduce to the prevention thereof, and the uniting the whole Country into an
amicable resolution to oppose all such unlawful pressures, so as such an
Assembly of the County may be with Freedom of every man's person and vote, and
not overawed by any Forces of Horse or Foot, laid together in place where they
may command the Assembly, in which Assembly and Consultation, We Declare that
it is not our intention to decline the provident care of the Parliament, in
placing a Garrison for the present at Hull to prevent the surprizall of that
important place, either by Foreign Forces or such native Plots and
Conspiracies, as are to the life represented to us in that most deplorable
Kingdom of Ireland, which by the bloody Councels and rebellion of the Papists
is in a manner brought to utter desolation.

And we desire that this our Declaration and Protestation may be published in
all the Parish Churches and Markets of this County, to the end that all men may
take notice of our legal and peaceable resolutions,

Dated August 29 1642. Signed at Ottley by Ferdinando Lord Fair-Fax. Sir Thomas
Fair-Fax Knight. Sir Thomas Malenerer Knight and Baronet. William Instor
Esquire. Sir Richard Haukesworth Knight. Sir John Savile Knight. Charles
Fair-Fax Esquire. John Farrer Esquire. John Malenerer Esquire. Thomas Stockdale
Esquire. William White Esquire. William Inglebye Esquire. Thomas Listorr
Esquire. John Copley Gentleman. John Farrer Gentleman. Thomas St. Nicolas
Gentleman. John Bright Gentleman. Thomas Westby Gentleman.


FINIS.

