THEIONENOTIKON,

A DISCOURSE OF HOLY LOVE, By which the SOUL is united unto GOD.

Containing the various Acts of Love, the proper Motives, and the Exercise of
it in order to Duty and Perfection.

WRITTEN IN SPANISH By the learned CHRISTOPHER de FONSECA, Done into English
with some Variation and much Addition,

By Sr GEORGE STRODE KNIGHT.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivy-lane.
1652.

Charity




The Epistle Dedicatory.
Dear Children,
THE good old Patriarch Jacob, constrained in his later days to live in a
strange Country, considered the manner how to make himself happy, and to bless
his Children before his death; Such were the thoughts of my heart, in these sad
distracted times, when, in the declination of my age, I was enforced to eat my
bread in foreign parts; where, having abandoned the thorny cares, and troubled
cogitations of worldly employments, some way to alienate the weight of my
pressing afflictions, I resolved by studious endeavors to find the right and
true way to my eternal habitation, and heavenly Country as it is manifested in
the book of God, which although alsufficient every way for man's salvation; yet
I omitted not to cast mine eyes on such objects, as might prove helps to
discover the clearest and easiest paths for my better conduct thereunto, to
which end amongst other books, I translated this treatise entitled the Love of
God, Compiled in Spanish by the learned Christopher De Fonseca.

This when I had finished, and considered that the general subject of the
whole work was love, and the several parts thereof might tend to the better
ordering of a Godly, Moral and Civil life, I knew not unto whom more fitly to
recommend it, as the Legacy of a dying man, then to you my dear children, the
living Cions of my Corporal stock, and the comfortable cares of my drooping
age, and this I do the rather bequeath unto you, as confident that you like
Noah's good children, will not only turn your own eyes from your fathers
nakedness (in this his undertaking) but as much as in you is, labor to cover
the same from others.

But that which especially invites me to address this tract unto you, is that
you may not only be put in mind (so far as God shall enable you) to imitate
your father, in Holy Love, whereby I may seem to revive and live again in you,
but that making your selves first Scholars and followers, and then having your
hearts replenished with the Spirit of Love, and your feet conducted in the
right paths of Charity you may become guides of others unto the heavenly Canaan.

After which as my soul ever longed, move then after all earthly goods, worldly
contents or fleshly delights, so that herein you may imitate and exceed me your
father, is the earnest desire, hearty counsel and most fervent prayer of

Your most tender affectionate father, GEORGE STRODE.

The Contents.
Chapter. 1. OF the division of Love into its kinds. Fol. 1 Chapter. 2. What
love is, and how it is the cause of all our passions. Fol. 3 Chapter. 3. Of the
power and force of love. Fol. 6 Chapter. 4. That love is silent yet active.
Fol. 9 Chapter. 5. How love lesseneth or facilitateth things most difficult.
Fol. 11 Chapter. 6. Love extracteth delights and glory, out of sufferings and
torments. Fol. 13 Chapter. 7. Love transformeth the lover into the thing
beloved. Fol. 15 Chapter. 8. Vehement love causes ecstasies. Fol. 19 Chapter.
9. Love exchangeth and counterchangeth all with its beloved. Fol. 21 Chapter.
10. The motives and causes of love. Fol. 25 Chapter. 11. Love is only conquered
and remunerated with love. Thus far of love in general. Fol. 29 Chapter. 12.
The love of God is not to be parrallelled. Fol. 33 Chapter. 13. By the same
means that man's love decreaseth, Gods love increases. Fol. 36 Chapter. 14.
Gods jealousy. Fol. 39 Chapter. 15. Gods revealing his secrets unto man is a
great demonstration of his love. Fol. 40 Chapter. 16. God seems to be
solitary without man. Fol. 42 Chapter. 17. Charity is the most eminent amongst
all the virtues. Fol. 44 Chapter. 18. Our love to God is to precede all other
loves. Fol. 47 Chapter. 19. God must be loved with the whole heart. Fol. 52
Chapter. 20. The love of the heavenly Angels unto man. Fol. 58 Chapter. 21. Of
the love which man owes to his neighbor. Fol. 61 Chapter. 22. The manner how
we are to love our neighbor. Fol. 72 Chapter. 23. That we ought to love our
enemies. Fol. 77 Chapter. 24. Motives and reasons inducing love to our enemies.
Fol. 86 Chapter. 25. To pardon is a sign of honor, and of pusillanimity to
revenge. Fol. 93 Chapter. 26. Of friendship. Fol. 102 Chapter. 27. Of the
comfort and benefit of friendship. Fol. 111 Chapter. 28. Of self-love. Fol. 115
Chapter. 29. Temporal goods connot give content. Fol. 121 Chapter. 30.
Temporal goods deserve not man's love. Fol. 123 Chapter. 31. The brevity,
frailty, mutability, uncertainty and misery of man's life abateth the love
thereof. Fol. 140 Chapter. 32. The honor of this world deserves not man's
love. Fol. 157 Chapter. 33. Pleasures and delights are not worthy of man's love.
Fol. 168 Chapter. 34. Of the love of women. Fol. 175 Chapter. 35. Of the
inordinate love of eating and drinking. Fol. 185 Chapter. 36. Of the immoderate
love of apparel. Fol. 195 Chapter. 37. Of favorites to Princes, and Conquerours
in war. Fol. 202 Chapter. 38. Of the mutual love of the married couple. Fol.
208 Chapter. 39. Of the love of Parents and Children. Fol. 247 Chapter. 40. Of
the love of our native Country. Fol. 262
Holy Love.
CHAP. I. The division of Love into its kinds.
THat which is most pleasing and delightful to the Soul and Nature of man,
next unto God, is Love. Of which I intending to speak, (by way of Preface) I
must tell you that there are two kinds of Love; the one metaphorically so
termed, which is that natural inclination in things insensate, and
irrational, whereby they are moved according to that, which may most work to
their rest, or better being. By the power and strength of this Love, the fire
ascends, the earth descends, the air and water ever strive to attain and
reach their own Region, or place; wherein, and where, (never till then) they
are at rest.

And I may not altogether improperly call that quality, strength, or virtue,
Love; which does so unite, and knit all the parts of this great world (the
Universe) together, that without it, both it, and all the parts thereof, would
soon be dissolved and come to nothing, of what they are. An ancient Philosopher
called this kind of love, unity; and to this loving unity, other Philosophers
attributed so much, that they conceived the whole world, and all in it, to be
nothing else but that, or but one entire thing; which, though consisting of
many various and different natures, are yet by Love collected, drawn together,
and knit into one; which so long as it holds to be one, becomes incorruptible.

What is Music, but an harmony or consonancy of various discordant sounds?
What Is health, but a temper or accord of the elements and parts of the body?
Some write that the stone Tuces, if broken, though then less weighty, sinketh;
but, so long as it is one, whole and entire, then, and so long it swimmeth, and
keeps from sinking under water: and the like power has love and unity in all
other bodies.

Consider and know, that if the Almighty Architect of the world had not
breathed or infused a spirit of unity into the upper and celestial parts with
the inferior elementary, that these had soon been scorched, and indeed
consumed by those. Again, the inferior parts ever stand in need, and crave the
help, benefit, or influence of those above them, as the earth of the water, the
water of the air, the air of the fire, and the fiery element of the Heavens;
in which if one Sphere should thwart, and not gently yield to the others
influence or motion, they, as the inferior world, would suddenly perish and be
consumed.

The great Creator of these, and all things in, and under them, Genesis 1.31.
gave not the high praise and title of very good unto them, until himself, by
his most admirable power and goodness, Genesis 1.31.
had united them by love, and so made them all one. I cannot but acknowledge,
the saying of that Philosopher to be good and wise, who called this kind of
love, the Soul of the world. For, as the soul gives life and motion unto the
body: so does love unto all other things; and as the soul cherishes and
enlightens the body: so does love beautify and enrich the world.

In a word, there is no creature, nor part of the world, either great or small,
but has, if not all, yet the greatest part of its perfection, subsistence, or
continuance from this love.

But besides this kind of love hitherto spoken of, which in unreasonable
creatures may more strictly be called inclination; there is a love properly so
termed, which has its working in the will, both of God, Angels, and men.
Parmenides (though an Heathen) could say, That love in God preceded the Chaos,
or the creation of the world, as causing and making both. Take this love as in
man, and then hear another Philosopher call it, the Pilot; a second, the Sun; a
third, the guide and director of the will of man, and of all his choice actions.

CHAP. II. What love is, and how it is the cause of all passions.
THings high and immense, having some resemblance to infinity, hardly come
under the limits of a strict definition: which has caused the ancients to set
forth love by Emblemes and Hieroglyphics. Yet so, that some have in general
described it by negatives: as that, it is a thing which is I know not what,
affects and works I know not in what manner, and which hurts I know not
how. S. Gregory calls it, the fire in man's heart, which, according to the
working thereof, either cherishes, or destroys the Tabernacle of its
residence: and it may well be conceived, that when the holy Ghost descended in
the figure or show of fire, Act. 2.3.
that that fire signified the love and accord to be amongst the holy Apostles,
being assembled together in one place; which is, the complement and blessing of
all good Assemblies, when they are all of one mind and one heart, in a godly
innocent love. The fire which came from Heaven to consume the Sacrifice, God
commanded ever to be continued, Levit. ^.13.
that so it might never be extinguished, or put out. Isaiah says, Isa. 31.9.
That God has his fire in Sion, and his furnace in Jerusalem: each, Symbols of
Gods love, burning in the temple of our souls. Now Philosophy teaches, that
love is a passion both of complacency, and such as fasteneth the thing or
person beloved, in the heart of the lover; and it adds, That this love is the
original cause of all other passions in man, according as they please or
displease, suit with, or are contrary to our love and desire.

For the soul of man has two great powerful faculties, called by
Philosophers, the concupiscible and the irascible. In that are love, hate,
desire, fear, joy, and sorrow, arising from the presence or absence of
something or other, which is either truly or apparently good. And according as
the concupiscible part is affected with grief, want, or loss of that which is
desired: so, more or less, the irascible part is inflamed or incensed to the
prosecution or revenge of the affronts or bereavings of the souls desire. S.
Basil compared this passion unto the Shepherds dog, more valued by him, then
many of his sheep; not for that the dog has any wool, or gives any milk, but
because by his watchfulness and barking, he defends the flock from the wolf;
and so the concupiscible faculty, or part of the soul, proposes to it self
matter of delight and content, and the irascible removes or converteth the
inconveniences and difficulties which cross or oppugn this desire. And these
are the two wings wherewith man's soul flies in the pursuit of great Acts, and
without which, she appears as a Galley unoared, and a bird unwinged, each
unable to move or help it self.

A certain Philosopher has compared the body of a man, to a Coach drawn with
two horses. Conceive them to be love of good, and hatred of evil. But
considering that they are disorderly, and oft-times unruly, God has assigned
them a discreet guide, that is, reason, to rule and govern them. Seneca the
Philosopher, calls this the Guardian: and S. Augustine terms it, the Author
and Mover of all our actions, be they good or evil, as having tied at its
girdle the keys of all our wills and affections.

Betwixt love and concupiscence some put this difference: 1. That concupiscense
aims at a supposed good that is absent: but love, both at the absent and
present. 2. Concupiscence, after the having and enjoying the thing desired, (as
being satisfied) grows cold, or cease for the present to desire: whereas
love, by possessing and enjoying, increases, and is more ardent toward the
thing beloved. For the possession or enjoyment of the thing beloved, serves as
fuel to continue and increase the flame or fire: whereas things desired by a
concupiscence, being enjoyed, die, and are often resolved into the smoke of
disgrace, or the ashes of hate.

CHAP. III. The power and force of Love.
SOlomon says, Love is strong as death. But if we examine the strength of
each, we shall find love to be the stronger. ^antic. ^.6.
It Is true, that all earthly things submit to the power of death; the young as
the old, the King as the Peasant, the rich as the poor, the wise as the fool.
Scepters and spades are both alike to death. All know this truth; would we did
but half so well consider and prepare for it.

And as the jurisdiction of death, so is that of love, universal. None ever
escaped the flames of this fire; not the Supremacy of the King, not the
holiness of the Prophet, both proved in David: not the gravity of the high
Priest, verified in Eli to his sons; not the wisdom of Solomon, nor the
strength of Samson; all owe homage, and pay their tribute to Love, as unto
Death.

When Solomon compared Loves force, to the power of death, he so compared it,
because he could find no one thing so strong, to which he might have likened
it. And if with the Hebrews there had been in their expressions any comparative
degrees, I conceive Solomon would, as well he might, have said, That Love is
stronger then Death; which will easily appear, if we compare the powerful acts
of Love, with those of Death.

For the power of Death is seen in that (as is before said) Kings, wise, rich,
strong, young, all stoop and submit to the stroke of Death Nay, it you say
further, That Death adventured upon, yea, and prevailed over the Son of God,
the Savior and life of the world: yet know, that all this was done, neither
could it have been done, but only by the Love of Him, who submitted himself to
this Death. For love it was, and only love, that wrestled with God, and
overcame him in this, that he should leave the Heavens, and lay down his life,
submitting himself to that death, which had no power over him, but through his
own unspeakable love. So that I may truly say, That all Deaths achievements
are but weakeness, in comparison of this Love.

Might I not add to this, that it was love, and love alone, that brought down
God himself from Heaven, to be incarnate in the womb of a woman, to suffer all
the miseries and hardness to which humane nature (not sinful) is subject? to
endure weather, travail, hunger, thirst, fear, yea, the sadness of soul, even
unto death, and to a kind of expostulation with his Father, My God, why have
thou forsaken me? and, in conclusion of all, to suffer his glorious body to be
nailed to the Cross, and there, by direful long tormentings, to linger out
his life? and what were all these sufferings, but so many triumphs of his love?
and may I not cry out, O the power of Love! triumphing (with reverence and in a
right sense be it spoken) over God himself?

You have in a glaunce or shadow, as it were, seen some glimpse of Loves power
in God; will you now see, how it has wrought on men? where to rehearse the
many great affronts disgraces, persections, suffered by S. Peter, S. Paul, and
by other the glorious company of the Apostles, and the noble Army of Martyrs:
were to write Volumes greater then have been seen yet. In close of all, we must
conclude, that all those glorious Martyrdoms were performed by the power of
Faith, through Love.

It were easy to enlarge the history of Loves power, should I tell you, that
Love oft-times rejects the greatest Commands, wisest Edicts, and best Laws,
despises honor, neglects fame, wealth, health, life, soul, and all: yea, and
perverteth the very course of nature; such is the unruly and untamed
disposition and power of Love. It makes the weak dare and to encounter the
strong, and the coward, the most valiant. In a word, it turns the hen, having
chickens, to become an Eaglet, and a timorous Do, as a courageous Lion.

Love by many is rightly compared to fire, the most active, and strongest
worker of all the Elements, which destroys houses, Castles, Towns, Cities,
which melts and consumes the hardest Metals; and such is, and so oft-times
works, Love. Which as it most takes and works by idleness, and converse: so is
it best resisted by the contraries, good employment, and the shunning wanton
company.

We read that one of Darius his servants held, 1 Esd^a^ 3.
that the King, a second, that Wine, and a third, that a Woman, is of the
greatest power to persuade, or overcome man. But neither wine nor woman, has,
or can have, this power over man, unless it first prevail, and get the love
of man. So that it is not the beauty, or inticements of woman, but man's love,
that overcomes, inthralls, and destroys man.

CHAP. IV. Love is silent, yet active.
SCripture, and experience teach us, that they who love most, make the least
show of their love; and in this they resemble, the most righteous, the wisest,
the noblest, and most valiant: who rather let others see, and judge of their
goodness and virtue, then themselves to become their own trumpets.

True love has hands, and no mouth: whereas the false has only a tongue to
prate, but no hands to act. Some Ancients therefore portrayed Love, with the
finger on the mouth, as sparing of words: but naked, as having distributed, and
given all away unto his very skin. And, our most blessed Savior after his
resurrection, showed unto his Disciples his side and his hands pierced, that,
by that fountain, and these channels, his love might appear to them, and to all
the world. S. John therefore, his beloved Disciple, 1 John 3.18.
and true follower, admonishes his scholars not to love, by tongue, and in
words; but in truth, and works: S. Peter having made large promises, though all
forsake thee, yet I will not: and again, I will lay down my life for thee:
Christ upon this puts Peter to it, three times questioning him, Love thou me?
and as often bidding him, to make proof of his love, by feeding his sheep, Joh.
21.17.
the elder, and his lambs, the younger sort. Action and performance is the
touchstone, and surest trial of true love; for which, and the cause thereof,
showed in anointing Christ's head, washing his feet, and wiping them with her
hair, one M. Magdalene has no less reward, then the forgiveness of all her
sins; and all this says Christ, because she loved much.

Moses the Angel and servant of the Lord, had prodigious or wonder-working
hands, and such, as with his rod could draw fountains of water, out of the hard
and dry rock: such as could bring flies, frogs, and destroying armies of small
beasts upon Pharaoh, and all the land of Egypt: yet he was a man, as it were,
without a tongue, tongue-tied, or no man of fluent speech: and therefore his
brother Aaron, Exodus 4.10.
was in his stead, the mouth, Exodus 4.30.
and Orator, to deliver the Almighties message unto King Pharaoh. Ez^kiels
living creatures, Ez^k. 1.
the representations of Gods Ambassadors, had wings to fly, and soar aloft by
contemplation, and spreading glad tidings to the world, but under these wings
they had hands, herein expressing the nature and work of true love.

Love, we see, is best seen by works, not words: and the work of love is such,
that oft-times it disroabs, or takes away that stupidity, or incivility, which
naturally is inbred, and by a gentle influence and cultivation, infuseth, or
begets fantasy, and manly deportments. Plato a great Philosopher, was of
opinion, that, the strength of fantafie, which was showed in many high strains
of Poesy, was kindled, and inflamed by the heat of love.

And this love, though it oft-times want a tongue for outward expression, yet
this defect, it makes good by the eye; for as loves palace is the heart: so
this palace is full of lights, through which love makes it self visible, and
known.

And as a Chamaeleon, or an Actor on the stage, is now fearful, then
confident; sorrowful, and anon joyful; jealous, yet secure; weak, but made
strong: so love makes one man twenty several men, it makes him all, and again
a nothing, but all working love.

CHAP. V. Love lesseneth, or facilitateth things most difficult.
LOve has a participation of the Almighties power, able to make the bitter,
sweet; heavy, light; and the almost impossible things, feasible. A taste of the
Colloquintida in Elisha's pot of portage, 2 King. 4.41.
causes his guests the Prophets, to cry out, Death is in the pot: to remedy
the which Elisha casts meal, and then says the text, there was no harm, or
evil thing in the pot: what that meal did, Love can do, and more. Our most
blessed Savior says, My yoke is easy, Mat. 11^.30.
and my burden light: now his yoke, and burden are, the renouncing all that a
man has, wealth, liberty, and life; and are these so easy, and light? yes,
Truth it self has spoken it, and most true it is, that Love makes these, both
light, and easy.

The traditionall Jews had branched, and summed up the precepts of the
Mosaicall law into 793, whereof they made 428 affirmatives, and 365 negatives;
but all these, and if there were a thousand times more, Joh. 15^.12.
Christ has reduced them all, into this one, Love; and according to this
truth, S. Paul averreth, that the fulfilling of that law, which to flesh and
blood was impossible, is now done, and performed by love; Love, says he, is
the fulfilling of the law. Romans 13.10.


As love fulfills all, and makes all things easy and light: so where love is
wanting, nothing is light, easy, well done, or indeed is done at all, or not
as it ought to be done; for where love is wanting, all is too much, that is
done: and where love is, all that is done is too little; love makes a beam, a
straw; and contrariwise it can change a straw, into a beam. He, says Christ,
that loves me, keeps my law: for where love is, the least word is a law, and
that law is fulfilled by this word, Love. Some spectacles there are, that
represent things greater, and others lesser then indeed they are, and both
these spectacles are made of love; which makes the virtues of the beloved
greater, but his vices less.

Jacob loves Rachel, and that he may enjoy this beloved piece, he serves twice
seven years, bearing the heat of the day, and cold by night; and yet all this
seemed to him, but as a pleasant act of a few days, Genesis 29.20.
for the love (says the text) he had to her.

The truth of this Axiom, is made manifest by the mirror of love, Love it
self, Christ, our Savior, who being very God, and so, impassible, yet assumes
our nature, and then suffers himself to be reviled, scornfully used, scourged,
and put to a shameful and most ignominious death; and all for us, his open,
deadly enemies.

Look upon me O Lord, says David, and be merciful unto me, ^s. 119.132.
as thou usest to do unto those, that love thy name: that is, as to thy
friends, and servants whom thou love; for as Love, by the Heathens, and Poets
is feigned, and portrayed blind: so indeed, where love is, it does not, or will
not see, or censure the infirmities, and blemishes of its beloved, but takes
them to be as Love-spots, rather then deformities.

When Adam laid the blame of his transgression on his Wife, S. Bernard seems to
blame Adam, that, he had not taken it upon himself, which, says he, he would
have done, had he loved her.

CHAP. VI. Love extracteth delight, and glory, out of torments, and sufferings.
I Speak not this of carnal, or politic love, which is usually changeable,
and inconstant, and accompanied with falsity, tending to self ends; but of
Divine love, and of this I may truly say, the greater or lesser the affection
is, such, more, or less is the perfection acquired.

The blessed Apostles, and holy Martyrs in the primitive times, give us ample
testimony, and proof to this assertion, whose revilings, and most exquisite
tortures, begot in them not patience only, but delight, and pleasure; the
stones thrown at the Proto-martyr Stephens head, he esteemed, as so many
jewels. The fire under Laurence, was to him, as some precious balm, or
sovereign confection. Ignatius, who so much longed, to be torn in pieces by
wild beasts, said, If they be tame, I will provoke them; for I am as wheat to
be bruised, broken, and to be served up to my Lords table. And S. Paul said,
that his afflictions, 2 Cor. 11.30.
temptations, and tribulations were his joy, and glory: so that, though pain,
oft-times, might have drawn tears from their eyes, or blood from their veins,
yet, the love they bore to their Lord Christ, raised content in their hearts,
and such smiles in their faces, as if they had been already with him, in
heavenly joy.

And, in all this, they did but as scholars imitate their Master; who, as he
often delighted to treat of his passion: so he professed to his disciples, that,
Luke 22.15.
with desire he desired, that is, he greatly, and earnestly desired to eat the
Passover, not as delighted to feast with them, but to suffer for them: and when
S. Peter would have dissuaded his Lord from his last great sufferings, his Lord
reproved him more for this, then for his denial of him in the high Priests
hall; for on this denial Christ did but cast his eye toward Peter, minding him
thereby of his high promise made never to deny him; but for that, he not only
bids him avaunt, Mat. 16.23.
which we only say to Dogs, but he calls him Satan, as being an adversary or
hinderer of his much desired and longed-for Death.

We read in the New Testament of two Mountains whereon Christ more eminently
appeared, the one was Tabor, where the shine of his glory seemed greater then
that of the sun: the other was Calvarie, where he was beheld as a man despised
more then the worst of men, Barabbas the thief and murderer preferred before
him; and when the sun hid his face, ashamed of the horrid fact, of putting the
God of Heaven to death; yet this exaltation on the Cross in Mount Calvarie,
took more with Christ, then that other, of his transfiguration on Mount Tabor,
insomuch as here he finished the great work of his love, for which he came into
the world, for the redemption of mankind, and that all might be saved: a pledge
of which the thief dying besides him, found; who, upon the word of Christ
spoken unto him, presently entered Paradise: and this suffering on the Cross in
Calvarie, substantially proved, what the other appearing on Tabor, did but
typically prefigure, the glory of his passion; so that, here, not there, the
standers by, and since that, the Christian world proclaimed him, Mat. 27.54.
what before was believed but by few, that he was truly the Son of God.

Men on earth study to blazon their coats with Dogs, Hogs, Cats, and the like;
and by these means think to traduce their names, as famous to posterity, though
themselves never in their lives, did an act worthy of a Dogs-taile; whereas our
most blessed Lord Christ, who acted all things worthy the Son of the most high
God, and all for the good of mankind, had no other coat armor, but the Cross,
which his love procured and wrought; and has thereby made him justly to be
adored, and worshipped, as the God of the whole world.

CHAP. VII. Love transformeth the Lover into the thing beloved.
NOT only some choice Philosophers, but learned Fathers of our Church have
deemed, and called a friend, a second self; the half of the soul: or the same.
And, among them, one says, he that loves entirely, is dead as to his own
body, and lives in that body which he loves: for that, love carries with it,
if not the whole substance, yet the principal vigorous acting faculties of the
soul. This position, (in some sense) is made good in the divine Lover, by that
of S. Paul, when he says, Your life is hid, Col. 3.3^.
with Christ, in God: where love to God has mortified the Lover, as to the
body, and to the world; and, makes him live by, and in Christ: for truly the
soul cannot be thought, or said to live, but where it appears to move, or
work. Hereupon, some wittily have pronounced, that the beloved is become an
homicide, and guilty of murder, if he return not love, for love; but robs the
Lover of his soul, not returning his again to the Lover.

And some Philosophers have conceived, that, the soul of a dead friend by a
strange transmigration, has been secretly conveyed into the body of a friend
living, and there kept alive, and operating: and all this to be effected, and
brought to pass by the spiritual power of love. S. Augustine comes somewhat
near to these conceits, when he says, My love is as the weight in a clock, or
the magnetic virtue in the lodestone; for whithersoever I am moved, or
carried, that it is which carries, or moves me, and my soul.

Every one therefore it strongly behooves seriously to consider, before he
setleth, upon what he intends to set his love: for if on earth, he becomes
earthly; if flesh, fleshly; if heaven, heavenly; which agrees well with those
terms given in holy Scriptures, to several kinds of affectionate lovers. Our
most blessed Savior prays for us, that, we may be in him, and be one with
him: Joh. 17.21.
as Christ is in, and with his Father: which holy residence, and blessed union,
must be next to Gods goodness, the work of love.

S. Paul says of himself, that he is crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20.
nevertheless (says he) I live, and yet (he adds) it is not I that live, but
Christ lives in me; if you ask him, how this can be? he tells you in the words
following, the life which I now live, I live by faith, this is the
isntrumental mean: and if you enquire into the cause of this life, it is there
mentioned, when he says, by the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself,
and all his merits, and benefits to work for, and in me.

Our carnal and profane loose lovers, usually court their mistresses with
these, and the like unhallowed speeches; You are my life, my heart, my soul;
which oft-times is more true, then godly. Divinely spoke King David, (O that we
would imitate him!) God is my light, and salvation.

Plato said, that a friend is like a good looking-glass, in, and by which, the
other friend may see himself; and be seen by others: for so it was in Jonathan
and David, that who saw the one, discerned the other.

Or, you shall find two friends united by true love, to be like the mother and
the child; where if the child smile, or weep, the mother does the like: and as
the Chamelcon appears to be of that color with the thing to which it is
joined; so is it with good, and true lovers; who like Hippocrates twins looked,
laughed, cried, each as the other, and were of like color, condition, and
passion each as other; so that the union of friends made by sincere love, is
well compared and presented by inoculating a bud into another stock, whereby it
is made one with it.

Now in man there be three unions, and each of them caused or bottomed on love:
the first is that of the soul and body matched together by a natural love.
The second is the union of souls, whether as among ordinary friends, or as
among Christ's disciples, Act. 2.1.
who were of one heart and mind, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
(as S. Paul speaks) in the bond of peace: Ephesians. 4.3.
the former of these is wrought by a natural, the other by a spiritual love.
The third union is that which is betwixt God, and man's soul, when, as S. John
says, God is in the righteous, 1 John 4.16.
and they in him: and the efficient cause of this union is, Divine love.

Which union as of all other, and above all things in this world, it is to be
most desired, esteemed, and preserved; so is the separation or divorce the most
to be feared, grieved for, and most carefully to be prevented; for, as by that
blessed union we are made partakers of all the best things that earth or heaven
can afford; so by that separation, we not only lose all the blessings by that
union acquired, but we purchase to our selves all the miscries, vexations, and
torments, that hell, the Devils, and our own conscience can afflict us with:
the cutting off a finger from the hand is painful; of the hand from the arm
painful, and damagefull; and of the head from the body, painful, grievous,
and deadly: but the dividing or divorcing the soul of man from God, the life
of the soul, is a pain, grief, and loss not to be expressed, no nor to be
imagined fully, no not by them that suffer and feel it. Of all separations and
divorces, O my soul be fearful and careful to avoid this: and, O thou the
God of my soul, be gracious, and merciful unto me, that through blindness of
understanding, or hardness of heart, I never incur the dreadful sentence of
such a divorce or separation.

CHAP. VIII. Vehement love causes ecstasies, making the Lover besides, or to
rob himself, of, himself.
LOve (says the Wise man) is strong as death; and, in this comes near to
death, Cant. 5.6.
in that it makes the Lover oft-times not to see what he fixes his eye on, not
to answer what he hears, or what he is demanded: and indeed, oft-times to put
him into such trances, as that he seems rather a moving trunk of flesh, then a
living soul: and, this in part excuses the words and acts of Lovers, as
proceeding from men distracted, rather then from men in their wits; and
hereupon the Romans had a law, exempting such Lovers from the penalty of death,
holding them to be no better then mad men.

This holy frenzy of love, has not escaped the Saints of God on earth. S.
Paul was near this, when in his extreme love to his Countrymen, as Moses, Exodus
32.32. Romans 9.3.
that wished himself blotted out of the Book of God: so he wished himself
accursed from Christ, unless the Jews his brethren might be pardoned, and
saved with him: so that which is said of Peter, ravished with the glorious
apparition on Mount Tabor; the like might be spoken of S. Paul, in his
excessive love to the Jews, he knew not what he said; or, as Felix said unto
him, Paul, thou art surely besides thy self; love, in stead of learning, has
made thee mad.

And if ever any exceeded in love, Joh. 10.20.
above all the love that ever was in the world, it was Christ; who so exceeded
herein, that the Jews once thought him mad. And might not others, as well as
they, have imagined the like of him, when in the excess of his love to his
very enemies, he would suffer himself to be taken, delivered up, and shamefully
put to death for them? Thus far did the love in Christ work him to go, or seem
to be besides himself: and all, that he might work us to return to, and to look
into our selves, and up to heaven; that, as ravished with the love hereof, we
might live here in the world, as though we were out of the world; and that we
might so look on these delights below, as men blind; and hear of them, as
deaf; and discourse of them, as not concerned; but as men in part translated to
heaven, and here become earthly Angels.

S. Paul made his daily prayers unto the Father of our Lord Christ, That he
would grant unto the Ephesians the riches of his holy Spirit, to be rooted and
grounded in love: Ephesians. 3.17.
and that they might know the love of Christ, which passes all knowledge;
where he prays for the mutual love between the head and the members: their
love to him, but his love to them first. For without this love of Christ to
them, they cannot love him. He loved his first, says S. John: and then without
their love to him, 1 John 4.1^.
they cannot understand the power that love has, ere it is rooted in them.

For it is able to make things in themselves base and contemptible, to be of
great price and esteem. Might it not seem in our blessed Savior a blemish and
dishonor to his person, to be reviled, scorned, whipped, and crucified: yet the
love of Christ took and accounted all as acts of glory; and all, that he might
prove himself thereby, the Savior of the world. It is registered of the wife to
the Emperor Theodosius, That she, as a Nurse-keeper, rather than an Empress,
attended the sick and weak, and made playsters, and dressed the sores of the poor
Hospitallers: who when she was by some nice Courtiers gently reproved, her
answer was, That although those offices were below the person of an Empress,
yet were they not able to reach and express the love which she bore to the
poorest members of her Lord and Savior Christ Jesus: who in his unspeakable
love did more, says she, for me, then ever I can in the least deserve, or in
any measure requite.

CHAP. IX. Love exchangeth and counterchangeth all with its beloved.
FOr proof of this, I could instance in many Lovers Registered in profane
Authors, as in Pylades and Orestes, each of them, though but one was guilty,
took the fact upon himself, that he might thereby redeem the life of the other.
King David, when the plague seized on, and destroyed the people, cries out to
the Lord, 2 Kings 24.17.
It is I, Lord, that have sinned, let me suffer, but spare these innocent
sheep, for what have they done? And when the Soldiers came to apprehend Jesus,
whom they yet knew not, and some of his Disciples being present with him, he
asks, Whom seek ye? they answered, We seek Jesus; he roundly and readily
answers, I am he. And this he did, Joh. 18.
to the end that he might save his disciples from their arrest; and therefore
he adds, Ye have me whom you seek, therefore let these go their way.

Read and consider that of S. Paul, Who is weak, 1 Cor. 21.29.
and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? the troubles,
infirmities, and sufferings of the Corinthians, through the Apostles love to
them, are all become and made his. Yea, but see a greater power of love
manifested in the same Apostle toward the Philippians, whom he tells, that his
death will be gain to him, v. 21. Phil. 1.
for thereby he shall enjoy Christ; whereas life to him, will prove but labor
and pain, v. 22. and yet, says he, though the difference be so great, as is
betwixt everlasting joy and glory, being with Christ, and pain and labor,
living with you; yet my love is such to you, more then to my self, that I am in
a strait, not knowing which to choose; but concludes, Though it be far better
for me to die, and to be with Christ, v. 23. nevertheless says he, v. 24. to
abide in the flesh is more profitable for you; and therefore he concludes, v.
25. Having this confidence, I shall abide and continue with you, for your
furtherance and joy of faith.

But, S. Paul writing to the Romans, seems to go beyond all the bounds of love,
I, and of common reason, Romans 9.8.
when he says, I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen, (the Jews.) Expositors, ancient and modern, generally
conclude that this wish or desire of S. Paul, was an expression of the most
transcendent power of love, which might possess any mortal man; but what the
full extent and force of the words may be, is not so clearly agreed on; for
some expound the words [accursed from Christ] (wherein all the difficulty lies)
to intend a temporal affliction, or corporal punishment: 2. others, a
spiritual separation, or excommumcation from the Church of Christ: 3. a third
sort, will have an eternal separation, rejection, or casting away from the
joys of heaven, to be here understood.

Moses, saying, Lord, Exodus 32.32.
if thou will not forgive the sins of the Israelites, in making the golden
calf, then blot me out of thy book; and this blotting out of the book, they
expound, of deposing, or casting Moses from his government of that people;
which was, as they would have this in S. Paul to be, but a temporal
punishment; and this they would deduce and infer, from the word [accursed;]
which in the Greek, they say, may here, as elsewhere among sacred and profane
Writers, signify a separation, or setting apart the person of man, and beast,
to suffer death or the like, as a sacrifice, thereby to expiate the offense of
others; and if this sense may be admitted, then much more cannot be inferred,
then that S. Paul preferred his Countrey-mens spiritual, and eternal estates,
before his own temporal, or before his life; which shows (that which we
allege for to prove) the transcendency of his love.

anathema, or accursed from Christ,] to mean Excommunication; and this to be
like that casting out of Cain, Genesis 4.14.
where it is said, and from thy face shall I be hid; Gods face noting
typically, the Church, or visible congregation of Gods servants: and this wish,
or desire in the Apostle, though it go far, yet because it includes not an
everlasting separation, but such as by Gods mercy, and the Apostles repentance
may be relaxed, it is not so scrupulous, and dangerous as

viz: that S. Paul hereby should wish, his eternal disherisance, from heaven,
for his brethren and Contrymen; which curse, separation, or disherisance, if
it be the sense of the words, then some answer, that the word is, I could have
wished it. So that S. Paul does not expressly and plainly say, I do wish this,
but, I could; or, my love is such, that rather then my Countrymen, to whom the
Promise and the Covenant is made, should perish, and they lose the benefit
thereof, I could find in my heart to wish, that I might be separated. But, say
they, he does not explicitly, and in the indicative mood, say, I do wish.

But if this answer be not admitted as satisfactory, but that S. Paul seems to
wish, as a dear friend and tender father, to be kept from eternal joys,
rather then want the company of his children and Countrymen, (whom he calls by
a near relation brethren) the question then will be, (as it is generally made)
how far forth this desire may be held justifiable, or be accounted sinful, as
to himself, to wish the privation of his own eternal bliss. Which question or
difficulty, some thus assoile.

promotion and exaltation of Gods glory, this may be desired: being that this
is the first main principal end of man's being made or redeemed, to advance the
glory of God: and that Gods glory should the more appear, by the restoring and
saving of the Jews, cannot be denied, or doubted by any.

I do wish, but that I could so wish; and that, I could wish, may imply, that
this wish in the Apostle, is not so absolute, as simply to desire his own
damnation, for his Countrymens salvation: but that it may well comprehend under
it, at least a tacit condition, as, Lord I wish it, if so it agree with thy
will, decree, and good pleasure; for whatever is agreeable to this, must be,
and is justifiable, and no ways sinful.

Paul may be construed thus to mean, if for any cause under Gods glory, I may
desire mine own exclusion from Heaven, then I could wish it for my Countrymens
benefit and salvation; such was the height and depth of the love of this
blessed Apostle, which desires at least to translate all its own good to his
beloved.

CHAP. X. The Causes and Motives of Love.
I Shall not yet here touch upon the prime and principal cause of Love, which
is God: but of that which is nearest unto God, goodness; which is the true
proportionate object of the will, and so of our love. Insomuch, that if the
will at any time makes choice of the contrary, which is evil, this comes to
pass by the wills being deceived by a false object, and counterfeit color, in
appearance of some seeming good. For the will, in its pure constitution, does
not, cannot affect or desire that which in it self simply is, and so appears to
be evil.

A man blinded in his reason, and deceived by the pleasancy of wine, or the
beauty of women, may will the unlawful company of the one, and the inordinate
use of the other: yet in neither does he will or desire fornication, or
drunkenness, as they are evils; but, as he is ashamed to be termed a
fornicator, or a drunkard: so though he become, or be both, yet he desires not
drunkenness or fornication, but only the base delight and pleasure in them;
which has deceived and cousened his desire; under a show of that which seemed
then unto him good.

For God, which made all by weight and measure, has given to our understanding
and will, certain natural inclinations, which as laws, cause them to affect
their proper objects, which are truth to the understanding, and goodness to
the will. So that who is perverted, or willingly perverteth the truth, this is
done by the false color and shadow of truth: and so it comes to pass in the
matter of our will, which ever desires that which is good, and if deceived, it
is by that which appears at that time so to be.

Aristotle has ranged Love into three kinds, according to the three several
objects alluring the will and desire. The one is, love of pleasure and delight,
which too commonly follows, and is entertained by youth. Another is, the love
of wealth, and is the servant mostly of old age. A third, is the love of that
which is comely and honest, which, I fear, has the least part or predominancy
in man's will, where private interest bears the sway. We have read, that in ages
before us, virtue, honor, and beauty, had the mastery in the will; but those
objects are laid aside, and are past away with those times.

Some ancient Fathers give a reason why our Savior openly proclaimed his gift
of paradise to the Thief on the Cross, rather than to the Patriarchs and
Prophets; and it was, say they, because he, at that time when Christ was
publicly disesteemed, and contemptuously used by all, that he then proclaimed
him to be the Messiah and the Savior of the world. This singular bounty
therefore of our Savior, accompanied that rare piece of faith and love in the
Thief, to whom (at that time when the Thief professed him) Christ had showed no
miracle, nor done him savor. Whereas now adays few serve or worship Christ,
unless he honor or serve their turns: so that were it not for the benefits he
daily bestows on us, he might for us, live as retired in the contemplation of
his own infinite goodness, with little or no love of the world.

Next to goodness, not only Philosophers, but the holy Scriptures, have
assigned knowledge to be an especial worker of love. Our Savior says, This
is life eternal, Joh. 17.^.
to know the Father and the Son; for from this knowledge arises our love, and
by them both, we attain to life everlasting. Unbelief, ignorance, or the
forgetfulness of this principle, as to say with the fool, there is no God, or
with the Epicure, he regards not our works below, but that we may, for all
him, eat and drink, and die. These, and such like, are the great causes of all
our sins. S. Paul professedly has expressed so much, when he says, The
Gentiles have given themselves over unto all lasciviousness, Ephesians. 4.19.
to work all uncleanness with greediness. Whereof the cause is expressed in
the verse before; when he says, this they did, having their understandings
darkened, through the ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of
their hearts. And the Prophet Hosea says, there is no knowledge of God in the
land: Hos. 4.^.
and what then follows? but ver 2. swearing, lying, killing, stealing,
adultery, so that blood touches blood.

I may add another cause, or the ingenderer of love, which is likeness. Like
will to like, is seen among the beasts, among whom sheep flock not with
woolves, nor will Hearts heard with Lions.

And the like to this in man, some Philosophers have attributed it to the
complexion in men; among whom we find the company, gesture, voice, and looks
of some, to be displeasing and distasteful to others; for which the person
disaffecting, at first happily, can give no sufficient reason.

Others, and more nearly to reason and truth, have given the cause of this love
betwixt men, to be the likeness of their qualities and dispositions: as the
sinner hates the righteous, whatever the alliance is, as it was seen in Cain
to Abel, Ismael to Isaac, Esau to Jacob: so on the other side, the good, just,
and wise, love each other. S. Paul has determined this piece, when he says,
Be ye not unequally yoaked; for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? 2 Cor. 6.14.
and what communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ
with Belial?

The Pythagorean and Platonique Philosophers were of opinion, that the souls
of men had a kind of harmonious concent each to other; so that, as in music,
one string being struck, another will quaver, and offer to give the like sound,
though not touched: so say they, and not improbably, fares it with the souls
of many men.

S. Ambrose gives another cause or parent of love, which is conversation; when
as he tells us, that to this end God walked with man in Paradise, and that it
is said of Enoch, that he walked with God; and though God had given Adam all
the goods of the air, earth, and water, yet with none of these, or any, or all
of the Beasts took he any delight, but only in that consort which God gave
him, as a companion to his body, and solace to his soul, and to her he
cleaves, and so of two, they are made but one, by a loving converse and
agreement.

If any ask, how this comes to pass, that likeness and conversation should
thus beget, continue, and increase love: the reason is easy and plain: for
seeing every man naturally loves himself, and the rather because he is ever
conversant with himself; therefore it must needs follow, that whatever is
nearest to, or most like him, that he most nearly loves, and most desires.
Can any give any other reason, why man or woman delights to see their face in a
glass, but because it represents them, and makes them, as it were, to see and
know themselves by this representative, whereby the imagination apprehends it
self?

CHAP. XI. Love is only conquered and repayed with Love.
LOve (that is the inward affection of the heart) is the soul, as it were, of
the soul of man, yea, of the whole world; for by it the world continues, and
without it, it could not stand, as was showed before.

We thank not the water, nor the air, nor any inanimate or animate thing for
doing us good, it this good proceed from a natural disposition in themselves,
without an affection of doing good to us. For this latter is it, which truly is
called love: and he that thinks to requite this with gold, or other gifts of
price, returns scarce dross for gold. Our Savior and his Apostles, have
summed up all the Law in this kind of Love: and after all their precepts and
counsels, call for this love, as the fulfilling of all. For he that has this,
cannot but believe, and endeavor to work according to what is required or
desired by Christ and his Apostles.

Our blessed Savior promises heaven to him that gives but a cup of cold water
in his Name, Mat. 10.4^.
and for his sake: and can any imagine, that heaven is of so mean a value, or
water so much worth, as that heaven should be given for a cup of water? no, not
the cup of water, nor all the waters under heaven, can be valued with heaven,
but the cordial love and affection of the heart; this is that God esteems; and
therefore calls to every one for it, when he says, My Son, take all earth,
heaven, and all, as my gift; and for all, only give me but thy heart. Prove.
23.^.


It was not Abels sacrifice, nor the widows mite cast into the Treasury, that
God so highly prized and commended, but the love of the sacrificer and giver,
which he esteemed more than all the worlds good. For all these are his, The
earth is the Lords, Ps. ^4.1.
and the fullness thereof. And when we have these, or any part thereof, we
receive and hold them as his gift; and for all, he only requires our love;
which only is ours to give.

If you tell me, Prove. 21.^.
the heart of Kings, and so of all men, is in the hand of the Lord, he turns
it whither soever he will. And that without God, 2 Cor. 3.5.
we cannot so much as think a good thought, and therefore not love. I answer,
that though all things in man, are of him, through him, Romans 11.36.
and to him, as the Apostle speaks: yet of all things in man, man's will is most
his own; and this so lest by God to man, that for it, when it freely loves God,
it may return him in recompense (as it were) his love again. The free present
of a pair of pigeons, with man is more esteemed than the return of 100 l.
which was lent, and the borrower bound to repay. God often expresses his
regard to the love of his servants, when he asks them, Am I delighted with the
sacrifices of goats and bullocks, Ps. 50.9.
and who requires these things at your hands? Isa. 1.12.
and by his Prophet Jeremiah, I spoke not to your fathers, Jer. 7.22.
nor commanded them, when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning
sacrifices, to be satisfied or served therewith. Save only by these, as
outward testimonies of your inward affections, which indeed, as to me, are the
only sacrifice and service.

And from hence iris, that. God and man repay love with love. For love has an
Adamantine power, that is able to draw the hardest heart of iron unto it self,
by a mutual love. For the very apprehension of being beloved, directs the soul
without any force, to a return of a love reciprocal.

And as love mollifies the heart of the beloved, drawing from it a return of
love: so this return of love gives ample satisfaction and reward, as it were,
for that love that was bestowed. And so the Spouse in the Canticles, Can. 1.2.
for her love to her beloved, desires some kisses (as testimonies) for the
assurance of his love to her again.

And neither the first, nor the second, neither an inviting nor the returned
love, are purchased, won, or procured by gifts, greatness, or power. These
have no force on a generous heart, to cause love; which is only begotten by it
self, through love; and this may be well called the mystery of love, that the
same thing, and nothing else, should beget it self.

And this love being of so rare an extraction, so amiable, and so much to be
desired; we shall find God, of all things desiring it, and in comparison of
it, nothing else but our love; and therefore uses it, as a conjuration to the
effecting his will and commands; as when he says, John 21.16.
If ye love me, keep my commandments; to Peter thee times, as it were, in a
breath, love thou, love thou, love thou me, Peter? and then follows three
times, Peter, feed, feed, feed. For this thou can not choose but do, and keep
my (...). Love, as we say, breaks through stone walls; intimating, that nothing
is hard to a loving heart, but that this tender love, as is said of the milk
of the Goat, is able to mollify, and soften the hardest Adamant.

God, willing to draw man to himself, first used his power, showed in the great
deluge of the world: after that he used his goodness, bringing his people out
of Egypt into a goodly and plentiful Land; but when neither power nor
goodness prevailed, he takes the ready course, if any could prevail, to show
his love unto them, in sending his only Son into the world, there to suffer so
ignominious a death for them. And if this did not, he never meant to use other
means to draw them to him. For if love, such love could not, then nothing in
heaven, earth, or hell, can work or move their conversion.

Charit as Christi urget nos, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 3, 14.
the love of Christ, this, this, or nothing, does, or can, with a sweet,
delightful force, as it were, constrain us. Christ shows this in the parable
of the Creditor and Debtor, concluding, that to whom most was forgiven, that he
should and must love most. For love freely showed to the well beloved, may be
resembled to the depositing or trusting a great Treasure in a friends chest or
Cabinet; which friend, if he return it not when desired, deserves the note and
estimation, not of ungrateful alone, but of a false and most wicked man, and
no friend.

CHAP. XII. The Love of God is not to be paralleled.
THe essence or being of God is pure and simple, and the infinity of his
attributes and perfections are single: so that his omnipotency is his mercy,
his mercy is his justice, his justice his goodness, his goodness his love,
neither is there in these any distinction real or formal, only man's
apprehension conceiteth a variety in this simple unity.

Now the love of God differs from the love of man, as in many other things,
so in this, that man's love often times wants power to effect what it loves and
desires: whereas Gods love is both operative and effective, it both works and
accomplisheth whatever it will; so that to love with God, is the same thing as
to do us good.

And this is so large, as to do that, beyond which nothing more can be done.
Isaiah expresses this in Gods person, saying, Isa. ^.4.
What could have been done more, that I have not done? so that if we would
enter into, and consider all the works of Gods love, in creating, redeeming,
sanctifying, and glorifying man, how can they be fathomed? man's soul cannot
apprehend it in the least degree.

To help man's weakensse in this, and by shadows, as it were, to make some
appearance of this love; Isa. 49.15.
the Prophet Isaiah tells us of the love of a mother to her child, when he
asks the question, Can a mother forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? Which, can she? is as much as, she
cannot: but says God, If she could, yet such is my love to man, that I will
not, I cannot, my love is my self: and therefore I may be said as well, to
forget my self, as to forget or deny my love to mine own Image, man.

The Prophet Isaiah seems to go a little farther, by a similitude to set forth
Gods love, when he compares it to the love of a Bridegroom, (...). 62.5.
married to a Virgin, in whom he is delighted and rejoices, says the text,
where it adds, and so shall thy God rejoice over thee.

Nay, the Prophet Jeremiah goes farther yet, saying, If a man put away his
wife, for her lewdness and adultery, shall he return unto her again? ^e^. 3.1.
But thou Judah lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou
have not been lien with: in the ways thou have sat for them; and thou have
polluted the Land with thy whoredoms, and with thy wickedness; and yet hear
the husband of this wife, which is God, notwithstanding all this crying out,
and proclaiming, thou have played the harlot with many lovers: yet return
again to me, says the Lord. Tell me now, whether a greater love can be
expressed, than this in God.

As the love of God is infinite, so might I be in the prosecution of this
argument; but I contract my self, and wish you to remember, that as God in holy
Writ is parabolically called King, Father, Husband, Physician, Shepherd, Head
of his Church: so under all these, and many other names and notions, his love
is manifest unto us; for as the head, he governs: as the Shepherd, he leads us
to good pastures, and defends us from destroying beasts: as the Physician, he
cures and heals our infirmities and soars: as an husband, he imbraceth and
delights in, and rejoices over us: as a Father, he nourishes, and provideth
for us: and as a King, he not only protects us from oppression and danger, but
gives us honors, yea, makes us heirs with his only begotten Son Christ
Jesus, to reign with him in his heavenly Kingdom for ever. And is there any
love that can be compared to this?

All that I will add for close, is this: love requires love. And, O my soul,
though thou will not love this thy Father, this thy King first: yet when he
has so super abounded in his love to thee, too flinty hearted, I must needs
say, thou art, if thou shall refuse to return all the love thy heart can
afford or conceive to him again, for that infinite and endless love which he
has bestowed on thee.

Chap. XIII. By the same causes and means that man's love decreaseth, the love
of God increases.
SOme Divines have propounded the question, why Christ, the second Person in
the holy Trinity, rather than either of the other persons, was made man; and
among other reasons, this they give in answer: That our first parents sin, 1
Cor. 1.24.
in desiring to be as God, knowing good and evil, directly opposes the
wisdom of God, which is Christ. And to show the infinite love of God to man?
that Person who most directly was offended, came down from Heaven, took man's
nature, and suffered more than man could do; and all to redeem man. So that he
alone, (God, that can draw good out of evil, and light out of darkness) used
man's sin as an occasion, through his love, to save mankind.

The Prophet Zacbary describes the state of the world, Zach. 6.
and in especially of the Israelites, by four Chariots; the first whereof had
red horses, which typified the bloody Babylonians: the second had black horses,
which noted the Persians; under whom the Jews were near their utter
extirpation: the third had white horses, by which may be meant the Macedonians,
who, as Alexander and others, were gracious and favorable to the Jews: the
fourth had grizled, or horses of diverse colors, which figured the changeable,
various, and mixed government of the Romans, which first or last is destructive
to a State. And now under this power and rule, which contained all the misrule
and barbarous usage of the three other Governments, came the Messiah into the
world, and this by the Apostle is called the fullness of time: Gal. 4.4.
because when the sin of the world was at the full, now was.the time of our
blessed Savior to come into the world, and by his unspeakable love to redeem
it.

The Prophet Isaiah sets forth Jerusalem thus: Their hands are defiled with
blood, and their fingers with iniquity, Isa. 59.3.
their lips have spoken lies, and their tongues perverseness; none calls for
justice, nor any pleads for truth: the act of violence is in their hands,
their feet run to evil, and they make baste to shed innocent blood: their
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their paths.
The way of peace they know not; yea, judgment is turned backward, and justice
stands afar off: for truth is fallen in the streets, and equity cannot enter:
and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey. And the Lord saw, and
wondered that there was no Intercessor; therefore his arm brought salvation.
For he put on righteousness as a breast plate, and vengeance for a clothing;
and according to their deeds, he will repay fury to his adversaries: but to
Zion shall the Redeemer come. And is there any thing in all this, that savours,
but of the love of God (to truth and justice) to his people, though laden with
their sins; and for this punished and oppressed by their enemies?

The love of Christ in this kind, is not to be uttered, or any way expressed.
I will sum it up therefore in that one passage of S. Paul; the same night
that our Lord Jesus was betrayed, he instituted the Sacrament of his body
broken, 1 Cor. 11.23.
and of his blood shed: as a sacrifice fully and solely expiatory for the sin
of the whole world. And, while the Jews cried to the Romans, Crucify, crucify
him: he for them more incessantly prays to his Father, Father, forgive them;
and though they said. Let his blood be upon us, and our children; yet he tells
them, My blood is shed for you, and for all that will take and apply it to the
forgiveness of their sins.

The Psalmist, in a wonder and amazement of this excessive love, Psalm. ^.4.
exclaims, Lord! what is man, that thou art so mindful of him? or the son of
man, that thou visitest him? for what is there in himself, as man, but that is
to be abhorred? his body being at the best, but a bag of bones, a sink of
foul water, and stinking dirt, and his soul like a cage of unclean birds, or
a forge of wicked imaginations, and a storehouse of sin. To the Psalmists
question, Why, Lord, have thou so visited man? no other answer or reason can be
given, then this of the Apostle, Job. 3.16.
So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, to be made, says
the Prophet Isay, Isa. 9.6.
as a child; as the Apostle Saint Paul, says, as a Servant, who emptied
himself, as it were, Phil. 2.7.
to a nothing; and all this, as the effect only of his infinite,
incomprehensible Love.

CHAP. XIV. Gods jealousy.
Jealousy in man is an excess of love, and for the most part, is the
attendant of some ill condition in him: whereas in God, it is the quintessence
(as it were) of his love. And this rises in God, and moves him to anger and
punishment, when he finds himself dishonored or neglected by those he loves.

Moses not only tells us, Exo. 20.5.
that he is a jealous God, but adds, Exodus 34.14. that his Name is jealous. And
such is his jealousy, that although he suffered the rebellious murmurings of
his Israel, Exo. 34.14.
yet when they committed spiritual whoredom, in making and worshipping the
golden calf, he destroyed 33000. of them: and had not his dear servant Moses
interceded, he had in his jealousy utterly destroyed them all.

Covetousness, by S. Paul is called Idolatry; Col. 3.5.
and when God finds his people worshipping or setting their hearts on these, it
moves him to jealousy.

Yea, God is jealous of the inordinate or overmuch love of the husband to the
wife, or of the wife to the husband. For these may love each other so much,
that some part of the love and worship due to God, is bestowed on the Creature.
And for this God often times turns jealous, and in his anger takes the one from
the other; or bereaves them of their delight, which is children.

And it being so, that God has commanded us to love him with all our heart,
and with all the strength and powers of the soul, the least alienation of our
love from God, and bestowed on vain delights, moves God to jealousy, and
provokes his anger.

And as the least withdrawing of our love from God, works jealousy in him: so
when he finds us persist in a daily revolt from him, he cease any longer to
be jealous. See this proved in Isreal's case; where God, for Isreal's multiplied
departings from him, threatens, My jealousy shall depart from them, Ezekiel.
16.42.
and I will be quiet, and will be no more angry. And this is the saddest
condition that a soul can fall into; for then it is apparent, that God has
sent a bill of divorce to that soul: and has removed his love utterly from it;
for where God loves, he cannot but be jealous.

Chap. XV. Gods revealing his secrets, is a great demonstration of his love to
man.
DElilab uses this as an argument, Judge. 16.15.
that Samson loved her not, because he did not open the secrets of his heart
unto her: for so she said, How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is
not with me? and when thou tellest me not where thy great strength lies?

When God purposed the destruction of Sodom, Genesis 18.17.
he says, I know Abraham, that he will command his children, and his household
after him, to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment. Here God
rests assured in Abraham's love and service to him; and what follows? why
this, that though God intended a secret and sudden burning of Sodom: yet he
will not do it, before he acquaints Abraham therewith: and therefore says,
Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do?

We read the like of God to Moses; Exo. 33.9.13.
that when God spoke face to face with Moses in the Tabernacle, that there was
a, cloudy pillar at the Tabernacle door, so that the people might not see
them. And at this interview and conference betwixt God and Moses, Moses says
unto God, If I have found grace in thy sight, show me now thy way. The Prophet
says, Psa. 147.19, 20.
the Lord showed his word unto Jacob. And then adds, He has not dealt so
with any Nation, but this his beloved. And S. Paul says, Col. 1.2^
The mystery (of salvation by Christ Jesus) has been hid from ages, and from
generations; but now is made manifest to his Saints. In a word, he that loves
me, says Christ, John 14* 21.
shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and (...) my (...) unto him.
And accordingly he says unto his Disciples, To you (as my friends) it given to
know the mystery (or secrets) of the Kingdom of God: but unto those that are
without, all these things are done in parables. And why in parables to these?
that seeing, Mark 4^ 11.
says Christ, they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and
not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins
should be forgiven them. Whence we may gather and learn, that whom God loves,
to those he reveals his word and will: so that they may see, and hear, and
understand it to their conversion and salvation of their souls; which none can
deny to be an especial argument of Gods love; the fruition whereof, the Lord
grant unto us in Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XVI. God seems to be solitary without man, which is an especial
argument of his love to man.
THe Scriptures tell us of thousands of Angels that attend Christ; and in the
Gospels we find them upon all occasions, at his birth, in his life, and at his
passion with him: how then, having such a company of holy Spirits ever with
him, and at his command, can he be said to be alone (if without man?) It is
true, in respect of the sweet society of Saints and Angels, he cannot be truly
said to be alone; yet in regard that he made man to his own Image, and every
one loves that which is most like unto himself: and that God has said, My
delight is to be with the Sons of men; in this respect, without this his like,
with whom he is delighted, he may well be said to be alone.

In the parable of the lost sheep, Matthew. 18.12.
it is seen, that the shepherd had 99. besides that which was strayed, yet he
left them all. Suppose these to be the Saints and Angels in heaven, and all to
seek the one that was lost, which is man. The Prophet says, Psalm. 33.10.
The Lord looked down from Heaven, to behold the Sons of men; and seeing them
captived by the Devil, weltring in their filth of sin, and therefore
lamentably afflicted; for them he came down, and never rested, but underwent
all travel, hardness, and death; that he might exalt them, and bring them
where himself was to have his everlasting residence, in Heaven.

God under the Law, when he saw his Israel scattered in Egypt, he rested not,
till he brought them together; and though in the wilderness, yet there he
commanded them to make a Tabernacle, and after that, a large and glorious
Temple; that he might be with them, and enjoy, as it were, their company there
together.

And Christ, God in heaven, that he might have the company of man, he descended
from heaven; and as though this were too little, to have the more full society
of man, he took his nature, and was made man; yea so, that as it was spoken of
Adam to Eve, he was so married to man's nature, that he might truly say, He is
bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh.

More yet; see Christ in his agony and torture on the Cross, and wanting the
company of his Disciples, and men believing in him, he cries out, My God! my
God! Mat. 27.46.
why have thou forsaken me? and as soon as the the Thief on the one hand was
converted, and prayed unto him, Lord, Luke 23.43.
remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom; he was so pleased with this,
that he readily granted his petition, and told him, This day shall thou be with
me in Paradise: and so gently departed, and took his new convert with him to
Heaven.

And it is the opinion of many ancient and learned Fathers, that the Saints and
holy men which rose out of their graves, at the time of our Saviors
resurrection; that they likewise, as pleasing company, ascended with Christ
into Heaven, there to be with him; and as of the Chore, to sing continual
Allelujahs of glory, Glory to the Lamb, that was, and is, and ever shall be.

S. Hierome cries out, O ungrateful man to thy God, who ever thou art!
considerest thou not the wonderful and unspeakable love of him, the Lord of
heaven, to be thus delighted, and to do, and to suffer so much for thee? and
think thou thy self best, when thou art in the company of the wicked,
blasphemers, murderers, adulterers, drunkards, and profane persons? return
rather, Shunamite, return, and run to him who is delighted with thee, and is
thy Savior.

CHAP. XVII. Charity is most eminent among all the virtues.
EVery virtue has its proper opposites; as liberality has covetousness and
prodigality to encounter: whereas Charity is enemy to, and opposes not two, or
more, but all vices. And if any particular sin be more opposite to Charity then
other, it is the enmity to God. And it being so, that there is no sin that man
commits, but, more or less, is tainted with this enmity; hereby Charity is
become a general enemy and opposer of all sin.

When David had wickedly deflowred the wife of his faithful Soldier Vriah,
and basely slaughtered the husband; here were sins of murder, adultery,
scandal, and all these sins, and enmities against his neighbor: but as though
these were nothing in comparison of that one sin and enmity to God; Psa^. 51.4.
he says, Against thee alone, O Lord, have I sinned.

But although against this sin principally, Charity opposes her forces; yet no
less does she abhor and resist all other sins of the lower rank. S. Paul, when
he says, Charity suffers long; 1 Cor. 13.4.
what says he less than that, as the impatient man acts against the long
suffering Charity: so Charity works against all impatience: and as Charity,
that envieth not, is assaulted by the envious: so Charity fights against
envy: and as Charity, that vaunteth not, nor is puffed up, is opposed by pride:
so Charity labors to beat down pride. And what from S. Paul I have said of
those sins mentioned, is alike true of those other sins instanced by S. Paul;
and of all other sins committed in the world. And therefore not only the
Apostles, but their and our Lord and Master, Christ, has taught us this
lesson, that Charity is the fulfilling of the Law. Insomuch as, Romans 13.10.
so far as Charity can prevail to the killing of sin, Mat. 22.40.
which is the transgression of the Law, she may well be called the fulfilling
of the Law.

And so high an esteem had our Lord Christ, of the great virtue and power which
Charity has in the work of our salvation. that when he had largely preached of
the whole duty of man, and given him many precepts, and expositions of the
Decalogue, necessary to be understood and followed by old and young, learned
and illiterate: for the relief of man's memory, and the greater encouragement to
his proceeding, he sums up all, and tells us all the Law, and all that God
requires of man, is nothing else but Charity; (that is) love to God, and for
his sake, love to thy neighbor.

S. Augustine adds, that as God calls himself Love, who is all in all: 1 John
4.8.
for all things are from him, by him, and for him: so the like* in a quailfied
and reverend sense, we may speak of Love or Charity; we say, he that has not
houses, nor Vineyards, nor Lands, yet if he has Money, he has potentially
all: so may we say of Charity, in respect of other graces and endowments of the
soul.

In the place before cited, S. Paul speaks that of himself, 1 Cor. 13.1.
which the best of men may say of themselves with the like truth; that could I
preach as though I spoke with the tongue of Angels: yet this without Charity,
will make me but like an empty sound of brass, or like the bell in the
sleeple, that calls others to the Church, and so to Heaven, while it self hangs
without doors. Nay, do I give all my goods to the poor, and my body to
martyrdom for the truth, and have no charity, these will profit me nothing.
Yea, if I understand all the mysteries of God, and have all faith, says he,
and have not Charity; observe this, he says not of this last, as of the former
gifts of preaching, martyrdom, or goods, that these without Charity profit
nothing; but he says, that although he has all understanding, all knowledge,
and all says, yet these without Charity, make him not only as a sound, or
which profits nothing; but he says, that having these, and not having
Charity, he is plainly nothing; nothing as in Gods acceptance, and nothing as
appertaining to the Kingdom of Heaven.

The Prophet Isaiah tells the people, that God regards not, Isa. 1.
but abhors the sacrifices which he requires of them; and that when they lift
up their hands to Heaven, he will hide his eyes, and not see them: and when
they make many long and loud prayers unto him, yet he will not hear them. And
how? or why is God become so averse to his own commands and ordinances? the
Prophet tells us, the cause is want of Charity, when he says, Your hands are
full of blood, your works are full of evil, injustice, and oppression. In a
word, I see not, I hear not, says God, but I abhor you, and your works,
because both want Charity.

Much like this has the same Prophet, Isa. 58.
taxing the falsehood of the Israelites, who hypocritically cried out, saying,
Have we not held our Fasts? and have we not afflicted our souls? yet thou, O
Lord, see not, neither take thou knowledge of our holy acts. To whom the
Lord in truth makes answer, It Is true, I neither see, nor take knowledge, nor
pleasure in your sounds and shows of holiness. For in, or by these, says God,
ye exact your labors, or things wherewith ye grieve others. And ye fast for
strife and debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness, and call ye this
your fasting, says God? no, says he, the fast that I have chosen, is to loose
the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed
go free, and that ye break every yoke (of Taxes, Excize, and the like) these,
these, and not praying, preaching, fasting, with murder, robbery, and
oppression, are the works of Charity, well pleasing to, and required of God.
Without which, no man by his crying, Lord, Lord, Mat. 7.23
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

CHAP. XVIII. Our love to God, is to precede all other loves.
SUch was the exceeding goodness of God to his people, that he knowing the
many delights and enticements of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, to
withdraw man's love from his God, that he not only wrote in the heart of man,
that he was to love his Creator: but that he might never forget it, he gives
him this as a spiritual Law, written in the Tables of stone, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, Deuteronomy. 6.
with all thy soul, and with all thy might. In which words, not only the
precept is expressed to love him: but the reason is annexed, because he is the
Lord of all, and thy God in special. And that thou may keep this
commandment, it shall be in thy heart. And because from the abundance of the
heart, the mouth speaks; therefore thou shall talk of it sitting, walking,
lying, rising, that thy children thereby may learn the same: and thou shall
bind it on thine hand, and between thine eyes; and shall write it upon the
posts of thine house, and on thy gates. I do not remember that any law or
precept was so largely and strongly enjoined as this, binding heart, tongue,
eyes, and all the faculties of the soul, to love God.

Probably some may demand, wherefore the Almighty should so earnestly and
desirously require our love before, or more then any, or all things else, that
are in man's power? In answer whereunto, I may say, that man has nothing else
to present, that is so much his own, or that is so much worthy of Gods
acceptance, nor so easy and beneficial to himself (for man) to give, as his
love. And therefore that which is least painful, or chargeable, and most easy
and beneficial to the giver, man: and which, withal, is most pleasing to the
Receiver, God: God the Receiver, in his infinite goodness, has required of
man, the giver, only his love.

If a man were in danger to lose his life, or his understanding, or but an eye,
or any other member of his body, how would he love that person, who could and
would cure, free, or deliver him? and how much more then is he bound to love
him, who both gave the eye, the other members, reason, and life; and not only
made them wonderfully, but gave them freely, with all manner of gracious
endowments; and not only so made, and so gave them, but who hourly so
preserves them from all outward and inward dangers of corruption and
destruction? can any price or estimate be set, sufficient for such a rare
workmanship, so bounteous a gift, and so gracious a preservation? and then can
we render any thing less for them all, than love to him, that so made, so
gave, and so preserves them all?

And yet hitherto I have told you but the least of what God has done for the
meanest part of thy self. For when I shall add, that when thou had destroyed
thy soul by sin, and forfeited it with thy body, and all the faculties and
members of both, to the Devil and everlasting hell fire; that then thy God
should descend from Heaven, should be disgracefully used, shamefully tortured,
and cruelly murdered; and all this only to ransom and free both thy body and
soul: Can any price be set too high for this? or can thou repay any thing
less then thy love?

Should God, as he might justly, for the least of his mercies and benefits,
have commanded thee to offer unto him all thy worldly wealth, or to sacrifice
thy children to him, as some Heathens did, and as once he tempted Abraham to
do: or with stripes or fasting to mortify or kill thy body; had it been too
much for a compensation or requital? but, in lieu of these, what a mercy, what
a goodness, what a love is it in thy God, to require only that which costs
thee least, which is easiest performed, and is in the power of all sorts of
people to give, love? which if thou keep back, and cheerfully renderest not,
how can thou answer thine own soul without blushing here, or without
confusion and condemnation of thy self at the last day of judgment?

If God had required of man, almost any thing else but love, some or other
might have framed, at least, some probable seeming excuse for not performance;
as if God had commanded our bounty to Gods poor, the poor man might have
answered, I have it not to give; if fasting, or labor, the sick and infirm; if
knowledge or contemplation; the ignorant or simple might have pleaded, these
are not in our power to do; and therefore, Lord, I am to be excused. But when
God requires only thy love; neither the illiterate, nor ignorant, neither the
poor, nor the weak, nor any other condition or sort of people, have any show
or color of excuse for not performance; for it is in every man's power, if he
will, to love.

I may add, that this sweet return of our love, as it is generally easy for
all men to give: so is it as generally always to be performed, in all the
actions, studies, or demeanours of our life. Art thou eating, drinking,
recreating thy self, buying, selling, meditating? loving of God hinders thee
not, but furthers thee in all these, so in, and with all these, he has but
justly and graciously commanded thy love.

God by his Prophet thus reasons with his Israel, Isa. 43.^3.
as now with us; I have not caused thee to serve with an Offering, nor wearied
thee with Incense, but without these; Thou have made me to serve with thy sins,
and thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. And for all this, I ask but
that, which without expense, pain, or labor, thou may easily afford me, thy
love; and for it receive heaven. So easy and plain a way, and so open a door
to everlasting joy, has God prepared for us, when he requires from us only
our love.

The Scripture is plentiful, not only in telling thee, O man, that God came
down from Heaven, and was incarnate for thee; but that he suffered, died, and
rose again, and all this for thee: and it is as often repeated in holy Writ,
that he is thy Lord, thy Father, thy King, thy God; and if God in all be thine,
1 Cor. 3. 22, 23.
the Apostle rightly infers, then all that is Gods, Angels, Spirits, and all
that is in God, power, justice, mercy, all is thine. And can thou possibly
think, how to make a better purchase, then to make God, Heaven, Earth, and all
thine wholly and only by Love?

And when God is thus made thine, then in loving him, thou do but love thine
own; and this is so common, that it is natural for a man to love what is his,
rather then what is another man's. But further, indeed to love God, who by love
is made thine, is but to love thy self; who by love art united to God; and no
man, says the Apostle, hates, Ephesians. 5.29.
but rather cherishes and loves himself.

S. Paul reckoning up the fruits of Gods blessed Spirit, in the first place
sets love, as being the source and spring of the rest; Gal. 5.22
The fruit of the Spirit, says he, is, love, peace, joy, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; where the first, as the
parent of all, is love.

From the consideration of somewhat here, and elsewhere spoken of love, some
holy Fathers have professed, that nothing can be accounted difficult, hard,
chargeable, or painful to him that truly loves; such are the fruits of an
hearty active love, and such are the sufferings of love from its beloved. For
if it reprehends, it is gently; if it burdens, it is delightfully; if it
detains, it is pleasantly; if it restrains, it is courteously; if it rewards,
it is bountifully. And therefore well may we with them conclude, that love is
the precious pearl mentioned in the Gospel, Matthew. 13.^6.
for which the wise Merchant sold all to buy it: as being of most value of all
other pearls, or heavenly virtues.

CHAP. XIX. God must be loved with the whole heart.
GOd requires the heart, 2. the whole heart, 3. that none other may have part
therein, 4. no, not man himself, to use his heart any way against, but
altogether as tending to Gods service and glory.

All that God courts, and wooes man for, is for his heart; Prove. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart, is the sum of his desire. Which in another word is
explained, by that of the King of Sodom to Abraham, give me the souls (of the
people,) the rest take to thy self. Genesis 14.21.
And for this, as in war for the Citadell, or chief place of strength, is all
the contention, that I may so say, betwixt the true husband and lover of the
soul, God, and the adulterous and false lovers, the world, the flesh, and the
Devil.

And God, to show how ardently he affects this, and how jealous he is of it,
he is not satisfied with thy heart, unless, as he has expressed himself under
the Law and the Gospel, Deuteronomy. ^.5.
Thou love him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, with all the
strength, and faculties thereof. For as a great Prince coming to an Inn, takes
up all the rooms in the house; not holding it to stand with his state, to have
any stranger a sharer with him: so is it, and much more, with God. And that
again, because as S. John says, 1 John 3.20.
God is greater then thy heart: so that all is too little for him, though he
has all. And if he will not endure, that one Temple shall receive both his Ark
and the Idol Dagon: will he be content, 1 Samuel 5*
in his bedchamber, which is man's heart, to endure his enemies, the World, the
flesh, and the Devil, to have their abode, or to lodge there? No, one says
Christ, cannot serve two Masters; I am sure not two such, that are so contrary
and opposite, as God is to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh: neither, says
S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6.14.
can light dwell with darkness, nor Christ with Belial.

The Prophet Elijah says unto the people, 1 Kings 18.21.
How long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God, serve him; but if
Baal, then follow him. God will not, cannot endure any corrivall, much less
any bedfellow with him in the heart of man. Moses tells Pharaoh, Exodus ^^
that God will not suffer him to leave so much as an hoof behind in Egypt,
when he goes to sacrifice to God: for the least possession is a kind of
engagement against God. The world or the Devil, like the counterfeit mother,
cries divide it, let me have a part, it is no matter which, living or dead, so
God has not all to himselt alone: whereas the true mother of the living child,
^ Kin. 3.
will admit of no division, but she will have all or none; and such is Gods
desire, for if the heart be divided, as H^sea speaks of Israel, ^os. 10.
it is as the child divided, which cannot live to the true Parent.

But O man, consider how reasonable and just God is, in requiring thy whole
soul: and how unjust and unreasonable thou art in denying it him entire, or
dividing it in parts, betwixt him and his enemies. Consider, I say, when he
created the goodly universe of this world, and so gloriously adorned and
furnished it, not only with the fruitful plants, and fragrant flowers, but
with those bright Lamps in Heaven; that he made all this, and gave it entire to
thee alone, making thee the sole Lord thereof, in respect of any other
creatures, over all which also he gave thee temporal power and dominion: and
as though in this he had showed but half, or indeed but the least part of his
love: consider, that God himself gave himself wholly to thee, was incarnate,
suffered, died, rose, and all only for thee, and not for any other. And is not
this argument sufficient, that the least thou can return in gratitude, should
be thy heart, entire, not to be cut into parcels or shreds; some whereof to be
given to the giver of all, and the rest to his and thine own enemies?

But some perchance may say, though this is just and reasonable, which is
required, yet it is most difficult, for man clothed with flesh, to perform
this duty so strictly commanded, to love God with all the affections and
thoughts of the soul, and these ever to be fixed on him, and nothing else;
neither on parents, friends, or things of this life.

In answer hereunto I must tell you, that God knows what we are, and whereof
we are made; and therefore in this strict command, or absolute request of all
our love, he prohibits us neither to love parents, children, friends, no nor
the things of this world: so we love them with these two rules or cautions.

1. That we love neither friends, nor things on earth, with such a degree of
affection as may alienate or divide our fouls from God. And therefore God
himself has not only commanded us to love our neighbors, all our neighbors,
of what rank or distance soever, so they be men: and to seek in the second
place, things necessary for the life and well being of our selves and those who
depend on us, and for whom we are to provide: but has figured the fame in
proportioning our heart; which though it has a large and broad superficies
upward, to look and dilate it self to Heaven: yet it has but a cone or small
point downwards, to the things beneath.

The second caution, in our love to any thing besides God, is, that whatever we
thus love, it must virtually tend and move to the service and glory of God. And
in this, our love resembles the point of the needle in the Sea-mans Card, or
the Geometricians pair of compasses; the former of which, though it be ever
moving, and as it were, casting about to several parts, yet it still returns,
and reteins its whole settled course to the true pole star: and the latter,
though the one foot of the Compass circuit and surround the circumference or
globe of the earth, yet the other stands ever firm and constant to the point,
which point here, as that star before, in this our application, is God.

So that God, who without any show of covetousness in himself, or wrong to
thee, might require all thy substance, all thy actions, and all thy time,
wholly to be dedicated and spent on his immediate holy service: yet grants rhee
the fruits of thy honest labor, thy wealth, and bids thee give his poor,
only th t which thou may well spare; and of the fruits of thy increase, he
takes only a tenth; and from thy worldly travails, only a seventh part: and
that Love which he wholly and entirely calls for, is the affection and love of
thy heart.

Shall I sum up all? There is none so ungodly in this world, but assents to
this general doctrine, that God is to be so loved as he requires; but all the
question and difference lies in the performance, and manner of loving; for the
most wicked, in some sort, may be said to love God. But how? and why? for it is
but with a carnal or worldly mind, and to their own end and behoof; as by him
to enjoy life, health, wealth, pleasure, and delight; and so they love God for
these things, that if he would confirm his letters patents unto them, that
these they might perpetually enjoy, they would readily release unto him all the
grant and interest made to them in Heaven.

On the other side, the true lovers of God so love the world, as that thereby,
and therewith, they may the better serve him, and promote his glory; without
which, they desire neither the things of the world, nor long to continue in it.
They love these things so, as a man does his horse, his cloak, or garment; the
one to carry him through his journey, to his Inn, and the other to keep him
warm, and to defend him from the hurt or violence of the weather: so that the
love of the first, is like that of the Strumpets, all for reward, or what will
ye give me? and by these means, he makes the principal of what he should love,
God, but the accessory to the thing he loves: and the accessory indeed, the
things of the world, and flesh, he makes the principal part of his love.
Whereas the true lover makes God the prime, original, principal cause, and
mover of all his love, and all things else, but subordinate and subservient to
this love.

The regenerate and unregenerate children of God in this world, make use of
Gods blessings; and so return their love to God, as Isaac blessed his two sons,
Jacob and Esau: where the father in blessing Jacob, ver. 28. begins with
heaven; Genesis 27.
God give thee of the dew of heaven, yet he after adds the fatness of the
earth: but in blessing Esau, ver. 39. he begins with the earth, Behold, thy
dwelling shall be of the fatness of the earth, and of the dew above. In like
manner God gives his truly beloved Israel, the dew, the desire, and love of
heaven in the first place: but to the Edomite, first the fatness of the earth;
and according as their desires are set, so also are their loves; this man's to
the world, and the others to God. And by these their loves, as by certain and
infallible rules, ye may know and discern what they are.

CHAP. XX. The love of the heavenly Angels unto man.
IN this Chapter of Angels, my Author is very large, and attributes mare unto
Angels, then I can find sufficient ground for; therefore I shall abbreviate*
and deliver no more from him, then I conceive is warrantable. Which is,

In Scripture we have no mention of an Angel, until the world was above
nineteen hundred years old; Genesis 16.7.
and who that Angel was, that appeared and talked with Hagar, is questioned By
the learned; among which, many are of opinion, that it was God himself, for
that he said, ver. 10. I will multiply thy seed; and that she answered, v. 13.
and called the name of the Lord that spoke unto her, Thou God see me.

But if this were not God, but a created Angel, the question may be, wherefore
Moses so faithfully and fully speaking of Gods works in that great Creation,
neither then, nor in all the time since, till this of Genesis, has any word of
an Angel. Some are of opinion, that Moses writing more especially to his
Countrymen the Jews, omitted the history of the Angels creation, lest the Jews,
over apt (as the most simple people are) to Idolatry, might by it have fallen
into such an esteem of them, as to have adored them. Or, Moses writing his
history of the Creation in brief, expressed only what more directly concerned
man to know concerning his duty and service to God; yet when he finds a just
and necessary cause, he then omits not to speak of them, as in this story of
Hagar.

Now what they are, though we have not in Scripture any exact discourse or
definition of their natures, yet the Psalmist has expressed the end and office
why they are created, when he says, God shall give his Angels charge over
thee, Psame 91.11.
to keep thee in all thy ways; and this that they may the better do, he adds
in another Psalm, He makes his Angels Spirits, Psalm 114.4.
his Ministers a flaming fire, or a flame of fire, as the Apostle renders it.
Which summed up, the result will be, Heb. 1.7.
that Gods good Angels are created for the good and benefit of Gods good
servants on earth; to whom, under, and from God, they are in a kind of
ministry or service, as is expressly spoken by the Apostle, Are they not all
ministering Spirits, Hebr. 1.14.
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? And Psa.
34.8. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him, and
delivers them And that they may do God service for man's good, God has made
them for their activenesse, agile and swift, as Spirits, and for their fervency
and zeal in discharge of their office, as a flame of fire.

The Scripture is plentiful in the confirmation thereof; therefore when Hagar
is blessed in the promise of a great issue, Genesis 16.
it is done by an Angel; and when she and her son were in a fami^hing
distress, they receive their comfort by an Angel; Genesis 21.17.
and they were Angels that brought and delivered Lot out of the fire in Sodom.
Genesis 19.^15.


When King Hezekiah and the people of Judah were in eminent danger to be
swallowed up and destroyed by the vast and potent army of the Assyrians, 2
Kings 19.
then the Angel of the Lord smote of the Assyrians in one night 185000. And we
find the three servants of God cast into the fiery Furnace, when God sends his
Angel, and delivered them that trusted in him; then Daniel cast into the Lions
Den; Dan. 3.28.
we see in the same place the Angel of God shutting the Lions mouths, Dan. 6.22.
that they cannot hurt him. And the blessed Babe Christ, his Mother, and
supposed Father, being in jeopardy of their lives, by that blood-sucker Herod;
Matthew. 2.13.
behold the Angel of the Lord counsels and guides them forth from the malice
and rage of that tyrant. And an Angel of the Lord did as much for Peter, Act.
12.8
when he was cast into prison, and ready the same night to have been destroyed
by another Herod.

Many rare examples have we of the deliverances of Gods servants out of great
and imminent dangers, and of other their helps and comforts, in time of need
and distress, by the hand and help of Gods ministering Spirits, the good
Angels. To shut up all, they were Angels who pronounced John the Baptist to be
the light and forerunner of the Messiah. (...). 1.13. Mat. 1.10.
They were Angels who proclaimed the birth of the Son of God, Mat. 4.11.
our for ever most blessed Savior. Angels they were, that ministered unto him
after his long fasting, Luke 22.43.
and that comforted him in his sad passion; Matthew. 28.5.
and Angels that preached the joy of his resurrection. Joh. 20.12.


Thus far we may safely go and with the warranty of Sacred writ pronounce to
Gods glory and his mercy, the loving offices performed by Angels to Gods dear
servants; but to say as my Author and diverse otherwise learned Divines do,
that every particular* man has his Tutelar guardian Angel to attend, guide,
and protect him, I cannot say; for the two places by them cited, to prove this,
where it is said of the little Ones, Mat. 18.1^.
Their Angels in heaven do behold the face of God which is in heaven, and that
where it is said of Peter, It is his Angel, Act. 12.15.
confirm not their Tenet; For by their Angels, and his Angel, in those two
Texts, may be understood these or such Angels as God had especially appointed
as helps for them, and yet not that thence it should necessarily and generally
follow, that every man has, and is to have his particular Angel; But in this I
will not be peremptory, but submit my opinion to the judgment of the better
learned, and so from the love of God and Angels I will follow mine Author to
speak of the love of man to man.

CHAP. XXI. Of the love which man owes to his neighbor.
WHen the Pharisee demanded of our Savior Christ which was the great
commandment in the law, Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, Mat. 22.36.
etc. This is the first and great commandment: and the second is like unto it,
Thou s;halt love thy neighbor as thy self: on these two commandments depend
the whole Law and the Prophets: whence it appears that the love of our
Neighbor is next unto and a declaration of that former of our love to God.

And that it is so far necessary, that when the Pharisee only asked which was
the great commandment, Christ not only answered him directly to that, but
thought it requisite to add what the hypocritical Pharisee least cared for to
know, or practice, namely what God had commanded touching his neighbor: yea
and S. Chrysostom adds, that in some respects preachers have more cause to
enforce this doctrine of love to our neighbor, then that of our love to God,
for that all things which we see, feel, have and enjoy, prompt and move us to
this, whereas there are many and several occasions daily offered through our
words, bargains, transactions, and private interest, to divert or lessen our
love to our neighbor, and therefore I shall set you down some reasons moving
to, and confirming the necessity of this duty.

And the first shall be, that our Savior Christ gave us this commandment,
which indeed is in the nature of an inestimable legacy, even then when he was
to depart this life, and to leave the world; and we usually say, and hold it
true, that the charge or gift of a dying friend sticks and works most in the
heart of the friend living, and therefore Christ at the last point as it were
before his passion speaks unto his disciples, and in them unto us, saying, My
time is short, and I find death approaching, Joh. 13.34*
before which, I have one especial remembrance to give you, that you love one
another, and that in no ordinary way, or according to the course of this world,
but so to love one another even as I have loved you, who conversed with you
kindly, communicated all to you friendly, and have truly laid down my life for
you; Therefore my last Will and Legacy to you is, that as I have loved you that
even so ye love one another.

And to strengthen, yea to sweeten this gift of command, Christ in the words
following gives a good reason; for, says he, by this kind of love among you,
as by a cognizance or badge all men shall know that ye are my disciples: and I
this will prove if not in the eyes and estimation of the world, yet I am sure
in the hearts of all good men, in the esteem of Saints and Angels, and in the
eyes of my heavenly Father, a piece of great honor unto you to be know through
your mutual love to be my disciples.

The brethren of Joseph fearing that he might call to mind and revenge the
injuries done unto him by his brethren, Genesis 50.16.
they sent a messenger unto Joseph, who said unto him, Thy Father did command
before he dyed; forgive I pray thee now the trespass of thy brethren and their
sin: which words of his dying Father when Joseph heard, he wept faith the
text, and spoke kindly unto them, and not only expressed his love by words and
tears, but he comfortted and nourished them and their little ones: and the like
love with Joseph, if we have any bowels toward so dear a friend, our Lord and
Master, as Christ was, we will show for his sake, who dying commanded us so to
love one another, as he loved us who gave his life for us.

And yet lest as Christ foresaw and foretold that in the last days, as iniquity
should increase, so charity would wax cold, and thereby both our love to such a
dead friend, and for his sake to our neighbor would grow faint and dye, he
therefore gives us a second reason to love our neighbors, which with man may
happily work more then the former, because it contains in it the unspeakable
benefit and reward acquired by this love to our neighbor, and this benefit is
no less then the kingdom of heaven, with the full fruition of all the
unutterable and unconceivable joys with Christ for ever. All which are
evidently and expressly promised and annexed to this love; for when God in the
Law and our Savior in the Gospel have pronounced life and the kingdom of
heaven to those that keep and fulfill the law, and their commands, the Apostle
as the Ambassador of God has plainly pronounced and proclaimed that love is
the fulfilling of all this law; Romans 13.10.
and indeed our Savior himself spoke no less (and from it this our Apostle
might take his Commission) when he said, Mat. 22.40.
on love depends all the Law and the Prophets.

Neither does the reward of our love to our neighbor terminate and end in
this great blessing declared, but it works before it comes to that, and
produces singular and infinite blessings, therefore our Savior before he
commends the keeping of this commandment of love to his disciples, Joh. 14.14.
he prefaceth, what ever ye shall ask of God in my name that will I do: then
in the next words he subjoyneth, as the means to obtain this wonderful grant
and blessing, saying, v. 15.
this is to be performed if ye love me and keep my commandments, that is, to
love one another. And yet as though this were not the half of that blessed
reward which Christ annexeth to this love, he goes on saying, it you love, v.
16.
I will give you the Comforter who may abide with you forever, even the spirit
of truth, intimating hereby, and that plainly, that as by love we receive the
comfort of the holy Spirit and truth, so without it, neither truth nor comfort
will or can dwell or abide with us.

And which is a third reason to incite and stir us to this love, nature it
self infuseth this love into the heart of man, which in this sympathiseth with
the sensitive creatures, that all so love and agree together according to their
several kinds, that they not only fall not out among themselves to hurt each
other, but feed, nourish, flock and herd together, helping and defending each
other against the assaults and hurts of other enemies to their kind.

And this reason of love drawn from common reason is and ought much to be
strengthened by that bond of natural propagation, for that what God vouchsafed
not to other creatures, no nor to his good Angels, he granted unto man as an
especial bounty and sign of his love, that all mankind should proceed from one
general Father, Adam, that so all his posterity as descending from one and the
same root, might all love, as being in or indeed as all but one.

I read that when Trajan the Emperor had sent to Pliny Praetor in Sicily to
destroy all the Christians there, the Praetor forbore the execution and
counseled the Emperor rather to cherish then extirpate them, for says he they
are a people, which live in obedience to law, they neither rob, nor kill, nor
injure any, but live as hating none, but loving all.

And when I read that of S. Paul, love is the fulfilling of the law, I find
that the Apostle in the same text by way of command bids to owe no man any
thing, but mutual love; Romans 13.18.
whence I conclude that love as it is a command from God, so from and by God it
is held as a debt, and so enjoined, as that though we daily pay it, yet we
should never be discharged from it, but that we should with our days and years
grow yearly and daily more in this debt of mutual love.

But there is a fourth reason persuading and urging this love, which is
stronger then that of nature, and this is our spiritual brotherhood, as being
not so much one from our natural parents, as one by our spiritual birth and
regeneration in our baptism, whereby being united to our head Christ, we are
all become members of Christ's mystical body, and this, if any thing, will
enforce our love; It was the argument which good Abraham used to Lot, Let us
have no breach nor difference betwixt us, but let us love and live in accord;
For, says he, (and he thought he could bring no stronger argument for it then
this) me are brethren. Genesis 13.8.


And we Christians may say we are all brethren, not by one Father in the flesh,
but by one Father which is in heaven, and by one Mother the chaste undefiled
spouse of Christ, and by these we become heirs, not of an estate got by force
or fraud and which may be taken away by fire, thieves, injustice or an usurping
power, but of an inheritance in the heavens, where neither thief nor usurper
shall ever come, to help himself or hurt us.

When S. Paul had showed how in Christ we are all become one body, 1 Cor. 1^ 1^.
he then inferres that no one part can pride it self over an other, saying, I
have no need of thee, but that as members in the natural body, so much more
being members in this mystical body of Christ, we should be tenderly
compassionate, and not only not to have Schisms and breaches, but much more
not to hurt or offend, but rather to help and defend each other from wrong and
oppression, and so far as the law will permit, to act as Moses did when he
saw his contreymen to be oppressed or wronged. Exodus 2.13.


S. Chrysostom uses an other metaphor to persuade this love, when he tells us
that this spiritual brotherhood is as the cementing stones together in an
arch, or other building, where as the one supports the other, so all united
bind and keep all fast and safe together: To which well may that of S. Paul be
applied, that love or peace is the bond of perfection, and therefore, Col. 2.14
Ephesians. 4.3.
keeps the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; In which texts as love is
the bond, ligament, or hold-fast of the Christians mystical body: so it is the
bond, uniter, and knitter together of all the perfection that man in this world
can attain unto.

You see the great, sweet and powerful effects of this spiritual love,
begotten by our baptism into Christ; which is much cherished, and increased by
the Sacrament of his body and blood. It was not only acted by Caliline, but
long before him, and since, (I would I could not say the like of Christians)
that they strengthened their leagues, and covenants of holding together, as it
were in one, binding each other to defend, and keep them, though they were
covenants with hell and death: yet these I say, they entered into, and
strengthened by drinking the blood either of themselves, or others; a covenant
we have taken, and received, the Sacrament of the blood not of beasts, or man,
but of God himself; that as we are all members of one body, which is Christ, so
we will love one another. In the real and true performance whereof if we fail,
S. Paul tells us that we have not only taken that Sacrament unworthily, 1 Cor.
11 27.
but therein we have taken our own damnation, because, says he, we did not
discern the body and blood of Christ, but did eat and drink these, as of
course and in ordinary, and not considering that if we kept and performed the
commandment and covenant of love, the seal whereof was the body, and the red
ink the blood of Christ, that then we should have life everlasting in him: but
otherwise nothing but infirmities, sickness and death. And whether we find
not these sad and deadly effects to have fallen upon us for the want or breach
of Gods commandments and our covenant signed and sealed in the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, judge and seriously think of it while I proceed to

The fifth reason why man should love his neighbor, which is grounded upon the
nature of the Lawgiver, God; for generally such as the legislator is, such are
his laws. So that be the lawmakers a bloody man, his laws savor of cruelty and
blood: whereas be he of a sweet meek disposition, his laws are full of mercy
and love. Now God being love it self, his law or command to man that he love
his neighbor relisheth of Gods own nature, as flowing from it. So that the
nearer we come to the fulfilling this law of love, the nearer we approach to
the nature of God which is love.

Christ therefore though at first he took not away all legal sacrifices, yet
he professed that he would have mercy and not sacrifice, Mat. 9.13.
or mercy rather then sacrifice: but so as in the sacrifice of Cain, if it were
mingled with the hatred of his brother Abel, he rejected it: and in this or
such a sacrifice he says, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: and accordingly
when the Scribe answering Christ according to his own doctrine, that to love
our neighbor as our self, Mar. 12.13.
is more then all sacrifices, Christ hereupon finding that the Scribe answered
discreetly, and to the truth, he said unto him, Thou art not far from the
kingdom of God: which is as much as if Christ had said, thus to teach and so
to do is the straight way to the kingdom of God, and without it there is no
other way.

In the Leviticall Law we read that God finding the Jews to be hard hearted and
merciless, to incline them to better and more loving dispositions he gave them
several Laws wherein he forbids them to eat blood, and to boil the kid in
the milk of the damme, and injoyns them to leave the gleanings after harvest
for the poor, and some grapes for the passenger, and that every seventh year
the land should have rest, and the benefit thereof to accrue unto the poor. And
although Christ was a zealous and strict observer of the Sabbath as consecrated
to Gods service, Mat. 12.27.
yet for the necessary relief of man he is content to dispense with some part
of that days service, and therefore concludes that the Sabbath was made for
man, and not man for the Sabbath.

And according to this law of God and Christ, Moses under the law, and S. Paul
under the Gospel were so zealous in their loves to their brethren, that the
former desires to be blotted out of Gods book rather then his countrymen
should be destroyed, Exodus 32
and the latter rather then his brethren in the flesh should not be saved, he
could wish himself to be separated from Christ, Romans 9.
or excommunicated from the Church.

Some ancient Fathers are of opinion that when Elijah labored to draw the
Israelites from their Idolatry to God, 1 King. 17.6.
and that himself was there involved and driven near to famme, that God sent
Ravens a kind of bird which leaves her young, featherlesse and meatlesse to
feed him, that thereby he might mollify the heart of the Prophet to be more
tender to his contrymen, and by his prayer to obtain rain, and the fruits of
the earth for them.

And without conjectures the text is plain, that the widow of Zarephah her
compassionate love in feeding the Prophet out of her small remainder of her
little meal and oil, is recompensed with such an increase, 1 King. 17.16.
that neither her oil, nor her meal failed so long as the famine continued. So
true is that of our Savior, Be merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful;
and, Give, Luke 6.37, 38.
and it shall be given unto you, good measure (as to the widow last mentioned)
pressed down, shaken together and running over: for with the same measure that
you mete with all, it shall be measured to you again.

A sixth reason for this law of love is drawn from the end of all good laws,
which are made that we may live in security, and enjoy our peace, which is
accomplished principally by this love to our neighbor. The old law given to
the Jews by which they conceived that they might hate and kill their enemies,
Gal. 5.1
S. Paul calls servitude or bondage, but the law of grace which commands love
to all, he terms liberty: because as by that law slavery, so by this, liberty
is acquired to every state. Again S. Paul building upon the same foundation
raises his work by bowels of mercies, Gol. 3.12
kindness, humbleness of mind, forbearing one another, if any man have a
quarrel against any even as Christ also forgave you, even so do ye; and above
all these things put on Charity which (as it is the foundation of all, so it)
is the bond of all perfection.

S. Jerome writes of S. John that being through age grown so weak that he was
carried by his disciples to the Church, he ever and anon repeated this saying
of our Savior, Love one another; and being asked by them why so often he
commemorated this text rather then any other, he answered, that in this they
should fulfill the whole law, insomuch as none could love God unless he loved
his neighbor. In which others agree saying, that the love of God is the center
of all our true love, on which the heart as on a point of the Compass being
set, the other point moves about the whole circumference of the world: and
indeed he that carefully observes the tenor of the Epistles of that beloved
and loving disciple S. John, he shall find this often insisted upon, that the
love of God and of our neighbor are so inseparable, that he that does the one
cannot but do the other: for that the love of God necessarily produces the
love of our neighbor.

And therefore when our Savior before his departure out of the world would set
a mark of distinction whereby his disciples should be known from all others,
the note or mark was not preaching or prophesying: for happily Judas, Hymeneus,
Philetus, Diotrephes or others might say as those of whom Christ speaks, Lord,
Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name? Mat. 7.21, 22, 23
nor was the note of distinction the working miracles or casting out devils:
for Simon Magus and others in Christ's name did the like, and of those and such
like Christ says, I take you not for my disciples, Depart hence, I know you
not; Joh. 13.35.
for my mark is love, and by this men shall know that ye are my disciples, and
such as for whom I have prepared a place in my kingdom.

CHAP. XXII. The manner how we are to love our neighbor.
THe Scripture has given us three rules by which we are taught how to love our
neighbor. The first is that of our Savior, Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self; Mat. 22.33.
the second is that which Christ likewise prescribes, as I have loved you, Joh.
13.34.1 Cor. 12 12.
so shall ye love one the other; the third is that of S. Paul comparing the
members of Christ's mystical body to the parts of man's body natural.

The loving our neighbor as our self is to be understood first as desiring
the same graces spiritual and eternal to thy brother as to thy self;
secondly, wishing in all things else the like to be done to thy neighbor as
thou wishest to be done to thy self.

And against this first rule of love we find in the world two offenders, the
one in the excess, the other in the defect, and among the former besides some
others whom I might touch, I may not amiss place some preachers in our times,
who, as some Physicians, through covet of gain or other respects so much intend
the cure of others, that they neglect the health of their own bodies: so these
by their preaching raise others and lie still themselves in their own sins; of
whom and such like I may use S. Paul's words, Thou art inexcusable O man: Romans
2.1.21.
for thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self'? and likewise wise
that of our Savior, Physician, thou that professest to cure others, heal thy
self.

The Defective Lover has one scale wherein to weigh himself, and another for
his Neighbor, which Moses tells us is an abomination before God; yet too many
such there are, Deuteronomy. 25.
who looking into their neighbors virtues or miseries, they see them with
diminishing-glasses, whereby they seem little or not considerable, the first as
not to be commended, and the latter as not to be pitied: but upon their own
sufferings or actions, they look with eyes like multiplying-glasses, whereby
their own actions seem unvaluable, and their sufferings intolerable. So that
what in himself he fees as a beam, in his brother it is looked upon as a gnat
or a straw: whereas did they state their Neighbors case and act to be as their
own, then they might judge the better and more uprightly; and this were to love
our Neighbor as our self.

But before I pass from the first to the second Rule in loving our Neighbor, I
must observe, that there be some who are not capable of this rule to love their
Neighbor as themselves, because themselves are such who love not themselves.
And if you wonder who these should be, being that S. Paul tells us, that no man
ever hated himself, I must answer you, that the sinners are the men that do not
love themselves: Ephesians. 5.29.
for he who loves and follows that which is his ruin and destruction, cannot
rightly be said to love himself; and therefore if he love his Neighbor as
himself, that is to make his Neighbor a sinner as himself: he may be rather
said to hate his Neighbor as himself, and not to love him, for that by his
wicked love he destroys himself and his Neighbor.

The second Rule in loving our Neighbor, Christ gives us, Joh. 15.12.
saying, Love ye one the other as I have loved you: and this is that new
Commandment which Christ speaks of, when he says, A new Commandment give I
unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you: and this is that makes
the Commandment new, not the loving of our neighbor, for this, as before is
showed, is as old as the Law of Nature; but to love our neighbor as Christ
loved us. Joh. 13.34.
This is new, and therefore by Christ called A new Commandment, because given
in this new manner of loving, as Christ loved us.

Now that we may love according to this rule, we must learn how Christ loved
us, and that is expressed in these words of our Savior, As my Father loved me,
Jo. 15.9.
so do I love you: So that now we are to know how God the Father loved Christ
his Son: and here we shall find the Father in his love to his Son (as Man)
conferring all blessings, graces, and endowments upon him, and so we shall
find him loving Christ his Son. 2. Not for his wealth person, or any such like
thing, but freely. 3. That he loved him not in a fit, or for a time, but as
Christ is said where he loves, Jo. 13.^.
to love unto the end. Lastly, though God thus loved his Son, and more then we
can express, yet he is content that this Son of his love should dye for the
good and salvation of his brethren. And thus as the Father loved his Son
Christ; so Christ has loved us: and as Christ has loved us, so he commands us
to love our neighbor: and this is the second Rule.

The third Rule is taken from the comparison made betwixt the members of man's
body, 1 Cor. 12.
and those of the mystical body of Christ: And here first we shall consider
that as in the former the members of man's body, so in the latter the members of
Christ, there should not be any envy or grudging in any one member, be it never
so loyw or mean, at the good or prosperity of the other: For as every member
has its particular office; so no one member can say to the other: I have no
need of thee: but God having given them distinct offices, whereby the one
serves and helps the other, there can be no envious or malignant humor among
them; neither if the members of Christ love as those of the body (as they
ought) can there be any grudging or repining betwixt Christians which are the
members of Christ; for the honorable and rich cannot say to the low and poor,
We have no need of you: for they have need of their prayers, their corporal
service, and other helps, and therefore are not to be proud over them: nor can
the low and poor say they have no need of the rich and honorable, for they have
need of their defense from wrongs, and relief in time of necessity, and
therefore small cause have they to envy that which affords them defense and
relief. The eye set on high, despises not the foot that goes on the ground:
nor does the foot that treads on the earth, envy the high place of the eye; and
so ought it to be with the rich and honorable, and with the low and needy.

Secondly, in our natural bodies the members each are subservient and mutually
assisting each to others; the eye by his light guides the foot from falling,
and the hand in working: and the foot and hand return a reciprocal office to
the eye, the one in carrying, the other in helping and defending the eye. The
like may be said of the head to the ear, and of the ear to the head, of the
stomach to the rest of the parts, and of the rest of the parts to the stomach;
and so should it be in the body mystical, that the members thereof may relieve
and help each other in all cases and kinds wherein the members are made or
become able to help each other.

Thirdly, in the body natural of man, where one member suffers, all the members
suffer with it; 1 Cor. 11.29.
and when one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it: and so should
it be among the members of Christ, that each may say as S. Paul, Who is weak,
and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? Naturalists observe, That
Hearts and Hinds swimming over a river or stream, the head of the follower is
laid on the hanches of the former, and this former being weary, turns about and
is supported by the latter. Nay, we daily see, that the Swine, yea and the
fearful Deer, if hunted or worried by a Dog, will shelter or strive to help and
defend each other: and shall these beasts, by the instinct of Nature, excel
Christians in the mutual help of each other?

CHAP. XXIII. That we ought to love our Enemies.
TO prove this, we need add no more to the former Chapter, then to show, that
under our Neighbor, Christ understands, and comprehends our enemy. And
that it is so, we need no further proof, then that which our Savior manifested
in the parable, where when the Lawyer asked Christ, Who is my neighbor? Luke
10.29.
Christ told him, that a poor Jew was robbed and wounded, who being neglected
by the Priest and Levite, yet was comforted and relieved by a Samaritan: now
the Samaritans and Jews being divided in their Religions, as another Gospel
has it, have no dealings together, witness the same Text, where the woman said
to Christ, How is it that thou being a Jew, Joh. 4.9.
should so much as ask a cup of water of me that am a Samaritan? upon this
Christ, by way of satisfaction to the Lawyers question, demands of the Lawyer,
whom he took to be neighbor to the wounded Jew? whether the Jew who passed by
not helping him, or the Samaritan who hated the Jew? and the Lawyer, as
convinced in judgment and conscience, readily and roundly answered, The
Samaritan, who helped the Jew whom otherwise he hated, was neighbor to the
Jew; and upon that verdict thus given by the Jewish Lawyer, Christ infers
this doctrine by way of exhortation, Go and do likewise; that is, have mercy,
and love ' thine enemy.

And what Christ preached here, he practiced to the full; for had Christ any so
great enemies unto him as the Jews, who notwithstanding all the good works that
he did among and for them, yet hated and persecuted him to his death: and when
they cried loudly to the Judge Crucify him, he more fervently prays to his
Father to forgive them, and when they madly wished, that his blood might be
upon them and their children, he mildly pronounced, that his blood should be
shed for them and their posterity. Could there be any greater signs of the Jews
enmity to Christ? and could there be any greater evidence of Christ's love to
the Jews? and according to his practice, he gives his law, As I have loved you,
even so love ye your neighbor, though he be your enemy.

Notwithstanding this so plain and evident truth, there have not wanted who
have urged reasons against this position, as the Rabbis masters or expounders
of the Mosaical Law, who feign, that though the Commandment of loving our
neighbor, was written by God in the Tables of Stone delivered unto Moses, yet
it was written in the heart of man to hate his enemy. 2. They urge that of our
Lord God to Solomon, 1 Kings 3.11.
saying, Because thou have not asked long life, nor riches, nor the life of
thine enemies, I have given thee a wife heart: whence they would infer, that
revenge on our enemies is as justifiably desired as long life. 3. They add,
that David, of whom not only himself, but God pronounced, that he had walked
according to his Commandments; yet David used many and bitter curses and
imprecations against his enemies. 4. To persuade us that this is natural to
man, they will tell us, that a child being offended with any, will soon be
pleased, if another will but strike and revenge him upon the person that gave
him the offense. 5. They urge some passages of ancient Fathers, who deem this
hate of enemies to have been permitted to the Jews, as that of Divorce, for the
hardness of their hearts.

To the first argument I may say, That such a Tradition as is alleged by the
Rabbis, is not to be regarded, but to be rejected as frivolous and falfe.

But if any add, that it should seem by the words of Christ himself, that in
Moses's time, or at least before Christ, there was such a Tradition among the
the Jews, as that it was permitted to them to hate their enemies, for Christ
says, Ye have heard that it has been said of old, Mat. 5.43.
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.

To this I may answer, That the words of Christ, It has been said of old,
might relate to the perverse interpretation of the Scribes, who argued, That
seeing we are to love our neighbors, that is, say they, our friends, therefore
we may hate our enemies: or because God commanded to make no peace with nor to
spare the Canaanites, but destroy them, therefore we might do the like to all
our enemies. But to this, or that old saying, we need say no more then what
Christ has said, Ye have heard it said of old, V. 44.
Thou shall hate thine enemy: but I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you.

But notwithstanding this, they urge, That by the Law of Moses as much is
employed as the hate of our enemies: for it is said, Thou shall not hate thy
brother: Lev. 19.17. Deuteronomy. 15.7.
and ver. 18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any grudge against the children
of thy people: from which Texts and the like they would infer, That they may
hate and avenge themselves on all but their brethren, and the children of their
own people, which were the Jews only, and therefore all the rest they might
hate as their accounted enemies.

But to this we answer, That it is an implication of their own making without
ground from the Text, which may be proved from other Texts, which command the
love of our enemy, and the Spirit of God does not, cannot command
contradictions: Now God commands, If thou meet thine enemies beast straying,
Exodus 23.4. Prove. 25.21.
thou shall bring it back to him, that is, to thine enemy: and Solomon, (which
words S. Paul, Romans 12.20 urgerh to our Saviors sense) If thine enemy be
hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he be thirsty, give him to drink, and the
Lord will reward thee. Here is no sign nor tittle of hate or revenge to our
enemy, but quite contrary, to show him the fruits of our love in doing him good.

And if to any the hate of our enemies seem natural, I must say, It must be to
such as are of a perverse corrupted Jewish disposition, and not to the nature
of a true Christian: for can any man conceive that God who is love, and is most
delighted with mercy and love, should infuse into the heart of man, created
after his own image, hatred and revenge, and that against his neighbor, his
brother, who likewise bears the image of his Maker, who is Love?

That David used imprecations against many, is not to be denied, but denied it
must be, that it was against them because simply his enemies, but rather
against them as Gods enemies, not his. 2. The imprecations were not against
their persons directly, as to the destruction of their soul or body, but
against them as they were sinners. 3. It was for the conversion of sinners, and
that Gods glory might appear either by their conversion or destruction, and not
to the satisfying his own revenge.

Observe I pray with me, That David in his Psalms is often said to hate, but
what? sin, not the man; for so Psalm. 101. v. 3. I hate the work of them that
turn aside. Psalm. 119. v. 104. I hate every false way. Ver. 113. I hate vain
thoughts. Ver. 163. I hate lying; and if once, as Psalm. 139. v. 21. he be found
to hate them, the persons, yet observe, v. 22. he is said to hate them with a
perfect hatred, which hate can only be such, when it is against that which God
hates, the sin, but not the person of the man, which is an imperfect hatred,
and against charity, and such an hatred God abhors: Hear David speak as to
his rebellious Son Absalom, his treacherous Cousin Joab, and foul-mouthed
Shimei, Psalm. 7.4, 5. If I have rewarded evil to mine enemy, let him persecute
my soul, tread down my life, and lay mine honor in the dust.

And to that of Solomon, because God commended and blessed him for not desiring
the blood of his enemies, from hence to conclude, that he might have hated or
revenged himself upon his enemies, is all one as to say, God loves and blesses
the humble, the chaste, and the sober: therefore a man may be proud,
lascivious, a glutton, or a drunkard.

But passing by what is, or may be argued in desence of hate, or revenge to our
enemies; it is easy to show, and prove that it is unnatural, and against the
law of God so to do: and that the contrary, to love them, is not only
commanded, and praised as natural, but easy to be performed even by the
Heathen.

The royal Prophet David says, Thy law is sweeter and more pleasant to me then
honey, Psa. 19.10.
or the honeycomb: and our Savior Christ speaking of his Law, which is this,
to love and not hate our enemies, Matthew. 11.30.
he calls it, though a yoke and a burden, yet such as he professes to be
easy and light. But we must consider to whom it is such, not to the carnal
worldling and mere natural man, but to his disciple, whom he understands to be
a new creature, born and begotten* by the Spirit of grace, and then to such a
nature it is as natural to love his enemy, as it is natural to the other to
hate him.

The reason is, for that as the Elements of Earth and Water, though of
themselves ponderous and heavy, yet while they are in their own place they
press not, nor are burthensom: So is the love of an enemy in an heart
spiritual: And as the armor of Saul before David was exercised in bearing
arms, was cumbersom unto him, but after much use and practice in the war, he
could wield the great Sword of the Giant Goliath, and say as he did to
Abimelech, There is none like unto that; 1 Samuel 21.9.
even so fares it with him who has practiced and exercised himself in this
holy duty of loving an enemy, which an humble spiritual use and exercise will
make not only tolerable, but joyous and delight-full.

May not this and much more be confirmed by the examples of Joseph, who being
sold treacherously by his brethren, Genesis 45.
wept over them, feasted them, and plentifully provided for them? of Moses, who
being murmured against by his Subjects, and grossly slandered by Corah, Numb. 16.
Dathan and Abiram, who endeavored to disgrace and dethrone him; yet then, even
then he ceased not to labor with God to preserve them, whom otherwise the Lord
in his just anger would have consumed? of David, who not only would not suffer
his Soldiers to knock down that railing Shimei, but forgave him; and when his
unnatural rebellious Son Absalom conspired not only the deposing, but the
killing him, yet he then cries, Spare the life of the yong-man: who being slain
against his will, he with floods of tears bewails his death, and as desirous to
have saved his life by the loss of his own, cries out, Absalom my son, my son
Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.
would God I had dyed for thee, O Absalom my son, my son. Now can we conceive
that more love then this in Joseph, Moses and David to their greatest enemies,
could have been showed by any other to their dearest friends? So true is this,
that love of an enemy in a soul purified and exercised with patience, proves
not only connatural to it, but most easy and delightful.

Nay further, if any shall say, these indeed were rare examples of men
extraordinarily endowed with heavenly gifts of faith, love and patience, and to
these, and such as these, it was no hard matter thus to love their enemies: To
this let me reply and tell you, that Heathens who, as S. Paul speaks of them,
know not God, yet by the light of reason, and by the help of humane patience
alone, have come near to these most illightned and sanctified men, and
therefore the art of loving your enemies, is not so hard a thing to the
natural man, if he would give his mind to it.

Augustus Caesar, that great Conqueror and Commander of the World, being in the
open streets called Tyrant by an unworthy fellow, returned no more then this,
If I were as thou call me, thon could not live to call me so a second
time. Zino, a Conspirator against Julius Caesar, was pardoned by him, and his
estate restored, and when he had fallen into the like again, yet Caesar again
pardoned him, saying, I will see which of us two shall be soonest weary, thou
in procuring thy own death, or I in pardoning thy life.

I confess there are ingraffed by God in man's sensitive Soul, the concupiscible
and irascible faculties, the one whereof is soon provoked, and the other as
soon desires and delights in revenge: but on the other side you must know, That
God has placed in the reasonable Soul the Understanding and Will; so that be
thy Passions as wild horses, or cursed and cruel as mastiff Dogs, yet these two
(the reasonable Spiritual Soul) like the skilful Rider, or the Master of the
dogs, can with the whistle or bridle retrain and keep them in, if they will use
their own power and authority over them.

If any ask me, May I not sue my neighbor or mine enemy, who has taken or
kept away my goods? or may I not implead him who has robbed me of my good
name? I briefly answer, Yes, so it be for restitution of the one, or reparation
of the other, and without hate or revenge to his person. Nay, this thou art
bound to do in a triple obligation; the one to God for the honor of his Power
and Justice in punishing violence and iniquity: the second to thy self, who art
bound to love thy self before thy neighbor: the third to thy neighbor, be he
in this case as in place of an enemy, yet thou are bound to sue and implead
him, that by a moderate and lawful chastisement, he may see his faults, repent,
and do no more so, and hereby thou shall in part, and as much as in thee is,
save his soul, which is no piece of hate, but a great part of love, that thou
should bear to thy neighbor.

If it be yet urged, that the voice of the blood of Abel cries to God for
vengeance; Genesis 4.10.
and that the Souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held, cry with a loud voice, saying, How long, O Lord,
holy and true, Rev. 6.9, 10.
do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?

The general answer to the cries of Gods Saints or holy ones (living or dead)
to God for vengeance, is, That these as holy ones and Saints, desire nothing
against, but according to his will. 2. Not so much, or not directly to the
torture of their persons, as to the destruction of their violence, rapine and
murder, under which the Saints and holy ones suffer.

And to that place more especially of the souls crying, How long, O Lord, do
thou not judge and avenge? know, that these souls in the 6th chap. v. 9. are
the same with them who chapter 7.9. clothed with white robes, and palm sin their
hands, cried with a loud voice, Salvation; and herein is no destruction. 2.
These souls being the same with them, cannot be deemed to pray, for ought more
then what is suitable to Christian doctrine, and the kingdom attained by it,
which cannot be revenge, or that such holy ones should desire it, but that
which they desire, is, 1. That Gods justice may be seen in his vengeance on
those persecutors of his holy Martyrs. 2. That God would shorten the time of
those ten Roman Persecutions, and of the suffering of those Martyrs, and hasten
his judgment. 3. That the kingdom of Sin may be the speedier destroyed, and
the bodies of the persecuted Martyrs be the sooner glorified, and in all this
there is nothing that savours of an uncharitable hate, or desire of revenge to
their enemies.

CHAP. XXIV. Motives and Reasons inducing love to our Enemies.
AND the first main reason may be drawn from the Author and Maker of this Law,
which is Christ, God blessed for ever. Who tells us, Matthew. 5.14.
Ye have heard of old that ye may hate your enemies: but I say, Follow not all
that you have heard, but that which I tell and instruct you, who am the Way,
the Truth and Life it self, and I say, Love your enemies.

Now concerning man's carriage or demeanor to his neighbor, we have three
several Laws and Lawmakers: the one Law is that of a friend to love his
friend, which though it may and should be from God, yet very often it is from
the world and worldly respects; Christ himself intimates little less, when he
says, When thou make a dinner, Luke 14.12.
call not thy friends, nor thy rich neighbors, as though this were the use or
law of the world, to love and make much of their friends. The second, is of an
enemy to an enemy, each of which hunt and take all occasions to prosecute one
another with vexatious lawsuits and quarrels; and the maker of this law is the
Devil, who, as Christ witnesses, is a murderer from the beginning. The third
and last law is this, not only of love to a friend, John. 8.44.
but to an enemy, and this is Gods, when he says, But I say, love your enemies.

It has ever held as just and reasonable, to give reverence and obedience to
good Laws; partly for the respect we show to the Justice, Wisdom and
Integrity of the Lawgiver. With the disciples of Pythagoras the Philosopher,
it was enough to say, he our master spoke it; and this with them was
confirmation sufficient of the saying. We read of the Rechabites, that because
they had obeyed the Commandment of Jonadab their father, Jer. 35.18.
therefore there should not want a man to stand before God for ever. And of
Laban it is recorded, that when he purposed mischief against Jacob, he
desisted, and changed his enmity into good: why? for says he, The God of your
father spoke unto me, Genesis 31.29.
saying, Take heed, that thou speak not unto Jacob either good or bad, or from
good to bad; and this authority Laban the Syrian, though an Heathen and an
Idolater, obeyed.

Now the Author of this precept is no less, but the same who spoke unto Laban,
who now says, I who am the King of kings, and Lord of lords, I who from the
beginning have created and made all, I who from the beginning to the end make
Laws, and punish the breakers of them; and none can deliver; I, even I give you
this law to be observed for ever, Love your enemies.

And this being the law of God, then whether the law of Duels, so understood,
and practiced in these latter and worser times, be the law of God or of Devils,
judge ye: and bethink your selves in time, whether he the same God that gives
this law of Love to out enemies, will not judge and severely punish the
despisers of his authority, and the breakers of this his just and sweet Law
with everlasting hellfire.

A second reason may be drawn from the love of this Lawgiver God unto his
enemies, and he says, Matthew. 5.45.
I that give my light to shine upon the good and on the bad, and send my rain
on the just and on the unjust, and so impartially, that if my rain of
afflictions fall first on the just, yet my Suns prosperity does first shine on
the bad. And again, I who not only pardoned my persecutors and murderers, but
dyed for all my greatest enemies; I who have done this and more, give you this
law, wherein if you have any thing of children, disciples, or Christians in
you, ye will imitate and obey me, for it is I who say and command, Love your
enemies.

And see further, that when this Lawgiver Christ had given this command of
love to our enemies but in general in the fifth Chapter of S. Matthew, in the
next Chapter he teaches the manner how we should love them, when in his most
divine Prayer he bade them to forgive them, Mat. ^.
as they wished and prayed that God would forgive themselves: and to give them
an example not only in the general, which was not yet so sensible to all, he
shows and gives us a pattern of this his love, when a night or two before his
passion, he not only washes the feet of Judas, but he feasts him with the
rest of his Apostles; and though he knew him to be a Thief, an Apostate, and a
Traitor, yet as though he had forgiven him, he calls him friend. And it is the.
reasonable conjecture of an ancient Father, That to the Thief who dyed with
Christ, and heard him pray for, and to forgive his enemies, it became an
especial motive to his belief, and thereby to his Salvation.

A third reason for this love to our enemies, is the benefits redounding thence
to our selves: For my Names sake (that is, Isa. 48.9
for mine honor's) and for my praise, says God, I will refrain (and not
revenge or punish) and man loving and pardoning his enemies, is made partaker
of this honor and praise with God. How often, Mat. 18.21.
says S. Peter to Christ, shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?
where the remitter of his enemies injuries is called by the Apostle a forgiver:
and is not this a great honor, and highly to be esteemed, to participate in
the like title with God, to be a forgiver? But (hear on) he that is out of
charity, and fostereth enmity in his heart, is like a man wounded or sick of an
hectic Fever; now the first means to cure and recover this infirm person, is
to wash away the corrupted blood, and to purge out the putrefied humor, which
is the rancor and hatred burning in the soul, and this is effected by love, for
love casts out hate and revenge; and herein thou do thy self, and not thy
enemy the good.

But again consider, if thou were to appear before a Judge whose Son thou have
killed, would thou show thy hands to that Judge all reaking in his Sons
blood? The case is much alike in him who prays for mercy and forgiveness from
Christ the great Judge, while his heart and hands are full of malice and
revenge to his brother, who is the image and Son of the Father which is in
heaven. I shall not need to add what Christ the Judge has determined in this
case, Mat. 18.33.
in that Parable of the merciless fellow servants, to whom when his Lord, which
is God, had forgiven him his debt of ten thousand talents, yet he would not
forgive his fellow an hundred pence. Now the sentence of this merciless wretch,
is pronounced by the just Judge of all the world in these words; O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all, not a part, but all thy debt, and should not
thou have had compassion on thy fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? but
sithence thou art so uncharitable, hear thy unreversible doom, Thou shall be
delivered to the Tormentors the Devils, till thou have paid all thy debt, which
thou can never do.

But notwithstanding all this, how many find we professed Christians, Romans ^.4,
5.
who despising the riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and
long-suffering, after the hardness of their impenitent hearts, treasure up unto
themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and all through their hatred, envy,
and revenge toward their brethren? For have we not many, too too many, who not
only practice, but profess their rancor to those that have offended them, or
to those whom without any just cause they love not, and not only profess this,
but have left it as apart of their last Will, as David did to his Son Solomon,
to punish such as Joab and Shimei, who had offended him? We have read of Esaus
malicious revengeful heart toward his brother Jacob, when he said, Genesis 27.41.
The days of mourning will come, and then will I slay my brother; and of Saul,
who so long nourished a malicious thought to destroy David, and that of
Absalom, who for two years space made fair professions, eating and drinking
with his brother Ammon, 2 Samuel 13.
whose direful soul never ceased boiling in revenge, until he had killed him at
a feast, perhaps when he was full of wine, and thereby as much as in him lay,
with his body, destroyed his soul also.

S. Paul gives better counsel, saying, Be ye kind one to another, forgiving
one another, Ephesians. 4.32.
as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. And not only this, but as a mean
hereunto, he premiseth, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor,
and evil speaking, be put away, with all malice: where you may by the way
observe, the generation, production and growth of this hatred to our neighbor;
where the last in the text, malice, is the feed and matter of clamor and evil
speaking; as evil speaking and clamor, arise from anger and wrath, and these
from a bitter sour ill-leavened soul. And why we should not be angry or
malicious, the Apostle gives us the reason, when he says, Grieve not the holy
Spirit, who is the Spirit of love, meekness, long-suffering, and hater of all
those that hate their brethren.

A fourth reason to quench this hatred and revenge against our brethren, may
hence arise, because God has openly declared and given sentence against the
same. Observe S. Paul, how large he is in one Chapter upon this Theme, who bids
us to Bless them that persecute us. Romans 12.
Bless, says he, and curse not; V. 14.
and not only this, not to curse, but to bless, which though they reach but to
heart and tongue, yet he goes further, and extends his Counsel of Charity to
the hand; first negatively, V. 17.
Recompense to no man, (not therefore to thine enemy, if he be a man,
recompense not to him) evil for evil; then affirmatively, and positively, In
stead of evil, do him good: and which comes full home to our purpose, If thine
enemy hunger: what? V. 20.
cut his throat? no, in no wise, but feed him: and why not rather cut his
throat, which is the roarers language? To this the Apostle gives answer,
saying, v. 19. Avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, Deuteronomy. 32.35.
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, therefore not to be usurped by any, nor
to be practiced, but where I have given Authority, And as it is my proper
prerogative, so I, and I alone will repay, says the Lord, for besides me none
have that Power, that Justice, that Patience, that Wisdom as I have, except
those whom I have constituted in my stead, and given them part of my Spirit for
the discharge of that office.

And this the Lord has not only spoken or threatened, but practiced and
performed. Cain we know was an hater and murderer of his brother Abel, and was
the blood of Abel unrevenged for this, because his father Adam would not or
could not punish and execute Justice upon him? no, Genesis 9.6.
but the same God that said, Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood
be shed, will by the hand of man revenge the cause of the murdered upon the
murderer. This Cain found, and said, It shall come to pass for this my
murdering my brother, Genesis 4.14.
that every one that finds me shall slay me; and so it came to pass that
Lamech killed Cain: for so that Text is interpreted, Genesis 4.23.
when Lamech says, I have slain a man; and though Gods vengeance did seem in
this act to sleep long, (for by computation Cain was the third great
Grandfather to Lamech) yet at last it did awake, to prove that vengeance is the
Lords, who in his time will repay: And I could be large in the proof of this
assertion, but I shall pass all by, with that one piece of Gods just vengeance
upon Amalek, concerning whom God says, I remember what Amalek did to Israel, 1 Samuel 15.2.
how he laid wait against him, (which was above 300 years before this was
spoken) now therefore go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they
have, and spare none of them.

CHAP. XXV. To pardon is a sign of honor, and of pusillanimity to revenge.
THis is seen not only in men and women, but amongst the beasts also: a Curdog
is sooner provoked, and follows the offender with barking and biting, then a
Mastiff, whereas the Lion, unless very hungry or provoked, seldom pursues a
man to destroy him.

Julius Caesar, that great Roman Emperor, excelled more in pardoning, then in
conquering his enemies, of whom Tully gave this high Elogy, That he forgot
nothing but injuries: and it is written of the Lacedaemonians, That they desired
of their gods not to be cruel to their enemies, for that they conceived a
vindicative and revengeful soul, never acted that which was truly glorious.

The Almighty God by his Prophets and Apostles is said to be rich in mercy,
Joel 2. Heb. 2. Neh. 9.16, 17.
but never in punishing; and richer in this then in any thing else, that when
the Levites had acknowledged what wonderful things God had done for the
Israelites, and that notwithstanding all his blessings to them, they dealt
proudly, and hardened their necks, and obeyed not his Commandments; yet for all
this they confess of God to his glory, That he is a God ready to pardon, or a
God of pardons, and not only not a punishing God: but (as it follows there)
God is gracious, merciful, slow to anger, and of great goodness; And indeed go
through the whole Book of God, and ye shall not find God so much extolled for
any attribute of his Power, Wisdom, or Justice, as for his Mercy, in pardoning
injuries done unto him. Numb. 14.17.
Accordingly when God was minded to have destroyed the rebellious Israelites,
Moses finds no stronger argument to incline him to mercy, then by praying,
Let the power of my Lord be made great, according as thou have spoken; Exodus
36.6.
saying, The Lord is long-suffering, and of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and
transgressions: Psalm. 10.3, 8.
Pardon (therefore) I beseech he, the iniquity of this people, according to
the greatness of thy mercy: So that by the greatness and riches of his mercy,
his Omnipotency is made most glorious.

And as God is most pleased with this attribute of Merciful, as conducing most
to his glory: so in imitating God herein, man most proves himself to be his
Fathers own child: for as our Savior spoke of the hard-hearted revengeful
Jews, Joh. 8.44.
Ye are of your father the devil, who was a murderer from the beginning: so
says he, Love your enemies, Mat. 5.45.
and do good to them that hate you, that you may be the children of your Father
which is in heaven; intimating, that by this act and disposition of the heart,
ye may prove your selves the true born Sons of God your Father.

And such as cross and oppose this doctrine of our Lord Christ, saying in heart
or tongue, it is baseness and cowardice to put up an affront without taking
revenge; I must pronounce that man not only a bastard, as S. Paul calls such,
and no son of God, but an heretic to Christ's doctrine, whose precept is, Love
your enemies. We read, that our Savior told his disciples, that for his sake
they should suffer, and forsake estates, wife, children and life, but never
that they should suffer for his name or doctrine, any loss of reputation or
honor: whence it will easily follow, that to obey Christ's command in pardoning
the offenses of our neighbor, and in loving our enemy, we lose not, but gain
that which indeed with God and good men is truly called and known to be honor.

To incline man's heart to this duty, is the consideration of that trouble and
torture which hate and revenge brings into the soul of man. This appears by
many instances in holy Writ: Cain, after the murder of his brother, became a
fugitive in the land of Nod, Genesis 4.14.
which signifies disquiet; and he is a vagabond not only to others, but to
himself, wandering with fear and torture of mind, as a man distracted and
ter^ified, fearing himself, or, as we say, his own shadow: and Lamech having,
as the general opinion is, slain his thrice great Grandfather Cain, he says, I
have slain a man to my wounding; Genesis 4.23.
though it were done ignorantly, and by a misadventure, yet that manslaughter
was a wound to his own heart. Good God, what wound must that be then to the
heart of him who meditates and uses all the means he can to destroy that image
of God which Christ the Son of God so loved, that he vouchsafed to dye for it!
When Abigail labored to pacify David, 1 Samuel 25.31.
incensed and purposed to kill the Churl Nabal, though a man of no worth or
esteem, she uses this argument, This shall be no grief nor offense of heart
unto my Lord, that thou have not shed blood, or that thou have not avenged thy
self; and David considering what a corrosive the act if committed would have
been to his conscience, V. 32, 33.
says, Blessed be the Lord which sent thee with this counsel, and blessed be
thy advice, and blessed be thou which have kept me from shedding blood.

It is observed, that the Be having shot her sting, and wounded what offended
her, she either soon after dies her self, or continues but as an half lived
drone, and as despised of others, so disconsolate and careless of it self: and
it can be little other, if not worse, with that man who seeks revenge on his
neighbor: for the edge or point of that sword which killed his brother,
pierces and wounds the soul of the slayer; and as the wiseman speaks of
sorrow and wrath, Ecclus. 30.23.
so may I of this, It shortneth the life, and has killed many.

Another reason to pardon the injuries done us by our enemy or neighbor, is,
that the stroke comes not so much from our enemy, as from God, and thereby that
we may reap benefit and no hurt, if we will our selves. Although Joseph had
said, Ye my brethren sold me to the Egyptians, yet in the same verse he adds,
God sent me into Egypt. Genesis 45.5.
His brethren sold him, but God sent him. And when Shimei cursed David, 2 Samuel
16.10.
David would not revenge himself on Shimei (this had been to have imitated the
dog who bites the stone thrown at him) but he passes by the reviler or railer,
not saying, Wherefore have thou done this? and he gives the reason for it, for
the Lord, says he, bade him curse David. The King of Assyria is called the rod
and the staff of Gods indignation; Isa. 10^. Psa. 37.14.
and the Prophet says, The wicked have bent their bow, and drawn out their
sword to slay the godly: what then are the godly to do? to draw their swords
and kill the wicked? (which in case of defense, and backed by lawful authority,
is justifiable:) no, but they are to consider what follows in the next verse,
Psa. 17.
Their bow shall be broken, and their sword shall enter into their own, hearts:
and when or how shall this be? see that where it is said ^he wicked, and so the
sword of the wicked is Gods sword, who cannot rise or strike, unless God speaks
as be does, V. 13.
Awake O sword and smite. Zech. 13.7.
Now thine enemies being Gods rod, his staff, his sword, what man is so mad as
to resist this sword, or to break this staff, and not rather to kiss the rod,
because it is Gods, and that it is not laid on for thy destruction, but
correction, and not to hurt and wound, but to chastise thee, and make thee
better?

Job, the upright and just man, when he was robbed of his goods and cattle, had
his houses burnt, his children slain, and his body filled with botches and
sores, neither charge these on the Chaldeans, Sabeans or Egyptians, nor on
the fire, no nor on the Devil himself, but acknowledging the hand of God in
all, gives God thanks for all, saying, It is thou Lord who gave all, that
have taken away all, and blessed be thy name; that is, the power and mercy of
the Lord: and in all this Job sinned not, Job 1.21.
nor charged God foolishly; but wisely and thankfully entertained these
sufferings, as great benefits and blessings from the Lord.

We find S. Paul vehemently afflicted, complaining of the thorn in his flesh,
2 Cor. 12.7.
and the messenger of Satan buffetting him; suppose these to be like unto the
wrongs and injuries done thee by thine enemies, and then learn by S. Paul's
example how to behave thy self in this case where we hear the Apostle praying
thrice, that is, earnestly and often, that it might depart from him: and though
his Savior had promised, that whatever he asked in his name, it should be
granted; yet in this case S. Paul is not heard, but his suffering is continued,
but know why; for though the thorn and the devil b^ not removed, yet they are
continued for his greater good; for by them he has the presence and assistance
of Gods grace, for so the Spirit of God answered, My grace is sufficient for
thee: V. 9.
and hereupon the Apostle in stead of grieving, or complaining, most gladly
rejoices, that the power of Christ may rest upon him; and for this cause he
not only rejoices, but, as there he professes, he takes pleasure in his
reproaches, necessities, persecutions and distresses, and he gives his reason
for all, When I am weak, says he, to the world and the flesh, then am I
strong, and comforted in the Lord; Can there be any greater benefit then this,
redounding to the heart of man, while he suffers and revengeth not the hate and
wrongs of his enemies? whereby, says our Savior, ye are not only made like
to your Father, Mat^. 5.^8.
but are made perfect like your Father.

And this may satisfy the question, Whether it be of more merit to love a
friend or an enemy? which is answered first by that of our Savior, to love your
friends, and those that love you, is to do no more then the publicans and
sinners do: and he that does but this, says our Savior, has his reward in
returning love for love: but to love our enemies, says Christ, is to attain
the height and perfection of love, and so be like, and perfect, as our Father
which is in heaven is perfect: The old Proverb with the Heathen, was, I am a
friend, till I come to be sacrificed for my friend, but then no longer a
friend: but God, says S. Paul, commends his love toward us, that he would
dye for us, Romans 5.8.
while we were yet sinners; that is, as in another place they are called,
enemies: so that the height, perfection and merit of Christian love, is seen in
the love of our enemies, more then of our friends.

We may urge this duty further, from the great and eternal reward held forth
and promised to the lovers of their enemies: in a tempest on the sea; when the
ship is tossed, the best way to keep thy brains steady, is to look up to
heaven, the application is ready at hand: and this course took that holy Martyr
S. Stephen, Acts 7.34.
who when his enemies gnashed upon him with their teeth as enraged against him,
be then, says the Text, looked steadfastly into heaven, where he ^^w the glory
of God, and Jesus on his right hand; and this caused him not only to pray for
himself, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, but to pray for his persecuting enemies,
saying, Lord, lay not their sins to their charge.

It is storied of Abraham, that his seed should be strangers in Egypt, where
they should serve, Genesis 1^.13.
and be afflicted 400 years, but that nation God, says be, will judge; and not
only so, but that his Israel shall go forth out of Egypt with great substance,
and after that shall go to their fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a
good old age: so that the patient suffering of the worlds injuries, is rewarded
with freedom, plenty of goods, long life, honorable burial, and peace, that
peace of God which S. Paul says passes all understanding. Christ, when he
gave this law of love to our enemies, has explained and made it Gospel-proof,
when he says, Hereby ye shall make God your Father: and if he be our Father,
then we are his Sons; and if Sons, says S. Paul, then also we are heirs with
Christ in the heavenly kingdom.

The last reason to, provoke us to this duty, may be the example of Christ, and
the holy ones, praying for their enemies, and the inevitable necessity, that we
cannot in this world live without enemies, and therefore are to make, as we
say, a virtue of necessity, and therein imitate God, who draws sweet out of
sour, and good out of evil, and by a godly alchymie, draw patience from their
persecution, and praise to God for granting us patience, and a greater reward
after all our sufferings.

If some Country, as Crete, Ireland or the like, want poisonous beasts, yet no
land or country is without contentious rancorous men, yea no village is
without some such: for, a^ David said, so may we, They have compassed me round
about, and are as bulls and lions, roaring and seeking where and whom to
devour. I have read of one who foolishly bragged, that be had never an enemy in
the world: to whom another more wisely replied, saying, Then I conceive you
have never a friend: for sure there is not a man living, that has any thing in
him worthy a man, but for his wisdom, his justice, his valor, his honor, or
wealth, he shall be envied, quarrelled with, pursued or persecuted: so that he
that will think to live free from these, must, as S. Paul, go out of this
world. In this world, says our Savior, unavoidably ye must and shall suffer
tribulation; only be of good comfort, says the same Savior, for I have
overcome this world, and that by my suffering, and leaving this act and
suffering of mine, as an example to you, that as I, so ye likewise should
suffer.

For so not only Moses, S. Stephen and S. Paul did suffer, and yet pray for
their enemies and persecutors; but above all let our Lord and Master Christ be
as our Lawgiver, so in this our pattern and example for imitation, who
descending from heaven and humbling himself to the ignominious death of the
Cross for his desperate enemies, yet then on the Cross, suffering under them,
prayed for them in these words, Father, forgive them, Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do; their malice, hatred and revenge is such, that
they know not what they do against themselves, nor what they do against me: yet
Father, for this and for this cause, that their malice has so blinded them, O
Father, forgive them. And if this cannot work and persuade you to love, and not
to hate and revenge your selves upon your enemies, I know not what to say, but
to leave you to Gods judgment, or which I rather desire upon your repentance,
to his mercy.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Friendship.
OUR Savior Christ commands us to love our neighbors; Ioh. 15.
and Matthew. 5. to love our enemies; but I read not that he ever counseled us
to love our friends, not that he thought them unworthy to be loved, as more
especially comprised under the title of neighbor, but he omitted this precept
or counsel, for that every one would, as most bound, love them of their own
accord; and indeed, Christ himself expresses so much, when be says, the
Heathen Publicans who are ranged with sinners, Mat. 5.^6.
these love their friends.

But because friendship has been used and worn as a Cloak, to do and cover
much deceit and iniquity, I will therefore follow the method of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 1.
where from describing the wicked, he makes his way to the godly: so here I
shall first note the disguises and falsities of counterfeit friends, that
avoiding these, we may the better choose and love the true and good ones.

And the first rank of these are like Simeon and Levi, Genesis 49.5.
Brethren or friends so made and joined together by the cords, as the Prophet
calls them, of iniquity: such are they of whom Solomon speaks, who cry, Come
let us lie in wait for blood, come let us fill our selves with strong drink,
and come let us take our fill of lust: the world has, and ever will be too
full of such conspirators, not friends. Such were Joseph's brethren, when they
sold him; such were the Scribes and Pharisees, Herod and Pilate, Jews and
Romans, made friends in a most wicked conspiracy to murder the anointed of
the Lord: of these I may say as Jacob, O my soul, Genesis 49.6.
come not thou into their secret; cursed be their wrath, for it was cruel:
divide them therefore, O Lord, in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

Another rank of false friends are such, who under the cover of sheepskins, get
in and play the Wolves to the spoil and destruction of the simple and
innocent-minded man; and of this sort was Cain, who as some Rabbis spoke, Genesis
4.^.
kindly entreated his brother to walk into the fields, and when he had him
there alone, he flew him; and such was Absalom to his brother Ammon, Joab to
Abner, the Pharisees and Judas to our Lord Christ: all which, under the pretext
and color of love, betrayed and murdered the innocent. With this rank of men,
as King David was too well acquainted, so he often complains of, and prays
against them, as being of his counsel, and eating of his bread; Psa. 94.
yet while they had butter and oil in their lips, their hearts and tongues
were spears, swords, and very poison. These to David were more dangerous then
his public enemies: for, of those, says he, I could have taken heed, but the
others I mistrusted not. The Thief, that robbed in the day, if he were killed,
Exodus 22.3, 4.
the blood of the killer was to be shed for him; but if he robbed in the dark,
and was slain, the killer was not to dye for it: so much are the disguises and
works of darkness abominable in the sight of God, more then apert and open
villainy.

Of these I might counsel, as the Philosophers and wisemen have done, Try
before you trust, and l^^rn to distrust; and seeing all is not gold that
glisters, eat a bushel of salt with that man whom you purpose to make your
friend: S^chem paid dear for trusting Simeon and Levi's friendship; so did
Sampson in relying on the love of Delilah, and Abner on the fidelity of Joab.
The counsel given by the Prophet is seasonable and proper, Jer. 5.4.
Take heed every, one of his neighbor, and trust not any brother: for they
will deceive, V. 7.
they will tell lies, and commit iniquity, therefore I will melt and try them,
says the Lord.

There is a third sort of false friends, who make show of love when all tends
to their own benefit or advantage. Such are they spoken of by the Prophet, Isa.
1.23.
Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards. Such were Jobs friends;
such the Prodigals lovers in the Gospel, who like Mice, Whores and Swallows,
make love, and frequent your house in the summer of prosperity, but in the end
prove like Acteons hounds to be your destroyers. The wiseman distinguishes
and rangeth this kind of friendship, into a friend for his occasion, Ecclus.
^. v. 7. v. 10, 11.
and to a friend at thy table, and to a friend in prosperity; these are to be
tried as metals, not by color nor weight, these are deceitful, but by fire,
and the hammer: by the fire of danger and adversity, and by the hammer of
trouble and persecution: If they will endure and burnish, and look bright under
these, take and hold them for good, if not, reject them as counterfeit.

The fourth kind of false friends, is that who loves for his own delight, be
it of thy beauty, feature, or other outward parts or gifts: and these are not
unlike to Lice, which so long as the body has sweat and foul matter, they
continue, but no longer: and their love is like the Apple of Sodom, or the
beast called Acucena, which in twice handling yields an ill savor. We have
Gardens, Parks and Chambers full of these, I would I could not truly say
Churches full of such, whose love is most seen in being seen, touched and
tasted. But as the flowers of the Garden hold not long their color or sent, so
nor this love. They cry, Let its crown our selves with roses, let us eat,
drink, take our fill of love; and suddenly they, as their love is, vanished,
and their place no where to be found. Psa. 37.


Betwixt these false vicious loves, and the true moral friendship, there is a
natural love, engendered, fostered and increased by a similitude in the outward
shape or inward qualities; and such is that whereof we say, Like loves its
Like, and Birds of a feather will fly together: But this being in it self
simply neither good nor ill, but may prove either as it is applied and used, I
will pass it by.

And tell you what the true moral love or friendship is, and what is required
to the birth and growth thereof. Some Philosophers have called a friend another
self, understanding thereby, that although friendship be betwixt two, yet that
these two had but one soul, that is, but one will and affection in two bodies:
so that Tully has more largely described friendship to be a mutual and
reciprocal will and desire betwixt two, in all good things divine and humane,
by which will and desire each studieth the others good, as earnestly and
affectionately as his own; yea and so far oft-times, than he prefers the
outward good of his friend, before his own: And that such friendship has been
found, they tell us of Pylades and Orestes, Damon and Pythias, Theseus and
Pirithous, who took upon them to be the persons of their friends imprisoned and
in danger of life, thereby to hazard their own liberties and lives, for the
freedom and preservation of their friends.

To the settling and confirming of this friendship, I shall lay down some
conditions, as necessarily requisite: First, that there be a kind of equality
betwixt friends, which though the learned Roman Tully allows not, yet with some
Grecians it passed as a Proverb, that Amity is Equality, which is to be
understood not so much in the outward estate and place of wealth, honor and
office, as in the condescension and submission of the reason and will of the
one to the other, with a due observation to the place and dignity of the other.
And so Jonathan, though the eldest Son of King Saul, became a friend to David a
shepherd: for, says, the Text, the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of
David, 1. Sam. 1^.
and Jonathan loved him as his own soul; and in this respect may a King be a
friend to his Subject: for Christ himself thus calls his disciples and true
followers friends, Joh. 15.^4, 15.
who although he never did nor could divest himself of the glorious Deity, yet
to the making good his friendship, he became in all things as man, sin only
excepted; yea, as he called these his friends Servants in the Text before, so
that he might prove himself the more their friend, he not only was found in
fashion as a man, and as they, to be a man of no reputation, but more, he took
upon him the form of a servant, ^hil. 2.
and accordingly showed it before his passion, when he humbled himself, to the
washing his Apostles feet.

A second condition requisite to this confirmation of friendship, is a
community of all communicable goods. Plato, the great Philosopher, held this so
necessary not only for friendship betwixt private men, but for the general
peace in a State, that he banished from his Commonwealth this thing called
Mine and Thine, as the only bane both of friendship and public peace; which
opinion some wise men have approved, with this small distinction of possession
and use: So that though the one friend, according to the Law, be the Lord and
Proprietary of his Lands and Moneys, yet the use and benefit thereof in case of
necessity or convenience, shall be enlarged to his friend. And surely, as the
Apostle speaks, if we have Christ, with him we have all things, for all things
are his: so he that has the soul and the heart of a friend, with and by these
he cannot but command for his necessary use his temporal goods; which, as
before, he that shall deny in so doing, he denies himself to be a friend.

And this condition has a great part of its ground from this, That betwixt
friends there must be, as before I spoke of Jonathan to David, but one soul or
the soul of the one so knit to tho other, that each loves the other as it were
with the same soul. This love is expressed to be betwixt the bridegroom and the
bride, Christ and his Church, where she says, My beloved is mine, Cant. 2.16.
and I am his: where first he is made hers by the love of his soul, and then, I
am my well-beloved, c. 6.3.
and my beloved is mine; she first returns her soul and love to him, and
confirms his to her self: and when love has thus united their souls, all the
affections and actions of the soul to say, will, and do the same thing, will
follow.

It is storied of two twins, That when the one laughed or cried, or the like,
the other did the same: and so it should be betwixt friends, and such
friendship or love is commended unto us in holy Writ, not only by the example
of Christ's disciples, who were said to be of the same mind, Acts 2. and 4.
Romans 12.15.
but by their precept to us, as when it is said, Rejoice with them that do
rejoice, and weep with them that weep: and then in the next words, which
causes this mutual compassion, Be of the same mind one toward another.

And not only have we this precept, but Christ has prayed, that we be enabled
to the performance hereof, when he speaks to his Father, Holy Father, Joh.
17.11.
keep those whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are one: and
thus the heart of friends being made one in an honest holy love, the one shall
not will, nor ever bear the sway, but they will in some things so submit to the
judgment and will of the other, that neither shall seem to overruled the
other, but at the most they shall seem to rule by turns.

And love being thus preserved by the unity of an holy soul, the fourth
condition must take its place, That friends must will and desire nothing but
that which is just and honest: Just betwixt man and man, and from man to God,
and honest, that is, of good report. I have read of one Pericles, who being
desired by his friend to speak in his cause more then was truth, he answered,
True, I am your friend, but no further then to the.Altar; which afterward
become a Proverb among the Grecians, and had this sense, that when they spoke
as Witnesses, they laid their hands on the Altar, which no friend should dare
do, no not for his friend, in a matter of untruth.

It Is true, that many held this too strict in friendship, when they say, So
much you will do for every man, and will you do no more, or have you not a case
for a friend? To which I must briefly say, He deserves not to be accounted a
friend, who of a friend requires, more then what is honest and just.

And from hence arises another condition in friendship, That the acts and
desires of a friend must not solely tend to his own interest and behoof, for
this is not just; but equally or by turns mutually to the good and benefit of
each other. A picture well drawn, looks from its self casting his eyes and
countenance, and as it were with them following the beholder which way foever
he turns: and a friend being the image or picture of his friend, should in all
good desires, wishes and actions, show himself like this picture; for
otherwise, he that loves another for himself, loves himself and not the other:
for the end of his love looks inward to himself, and not outward to him whom he
professes to love.

To the better cherishing friendship, this sixth condition is somewhat
requisite, That there should be as much and as often, as well may be, a mutual
interview and conference between friends. The Spouse (such is true love) was at
little rest while absent from her beloved: the whole book of Canticles proves
this, Where, Chapter 1.7.
O where art thou whom my soul loves? and, Chapter 3.1, 2.
by night I sought thee whom my soul loves; and, I will rise, and go about the
city, in the streets, and in the broad ways, I will seek him whom my soul
loves: and seeking, but not finding, how she bemoans her self to the
watchmen; and having found him, she holds him fast, V. 4.
and will not let him go, until she had brought him where she might enjoy him
whom she so much loved and desired. Absence and silence in friendship, are like
frost to the waters, which deprives them of their flowing and yielding their
comfort to those that need them; whereas the presence and speech of a friend,
is to a friend like the light and heat of the Sun.

I end the conditions requisite to friendship, with this, That friendship
should be without end. Enmities among all, but especially among friends and
Christian friends, ought to be mortal, every day dying; but their loves must
be, if true and from God, immortal: Such was Christ's love to us, Joh 15.
as himself professes, saying, Whom I love, I love unto the end; and then as
it were by way of Application, he says, This Commandment give I unto you, That
as I have loved you, so ye love one another: and where he finds not love thus
long-lived, but temporising, he blames it, as in the Church of Ephesus, with
which Church as he begins, so in it the only thing he finds fault with, Rev.
2.4.
is, That she had left her first love: for this is the love that he shows to
man, as by his Prophet he speaks, Jer. 31.3.
I have loved thee with an everlasting love. In conclusion, True love most not
be like those Creatures spoken of by Naturalists, that live and dye in a day;
or like your Pinks or Tulips, flowers of sight and smell, delightful but for a
few hours, but like the Oak, the Heart, the Elephant, which are long lived. In a
word, it should be as our wives, till death us depart.

CHAP. XXVII. The comfort and benefit of Friendship.
TO set forth the good redounding from friendship, Tully and others, as it were
in the manner of proverbiall speeches, used these, That we had not greater need
or use of fire and water, then of friendship; and to take this away, were all
one as to take the Sun out of the firmament: intimating thereby, That man
cannot live without friendship. Insomuch as what is generally spoken of health,
may as truly be spoken of friendship, That it is such a good, as without which
nothing can seem good.

And this good, among many others, alleviates and lessens our griefs, and
enlarges and extends our joys, by the participation and communication of each
of them with a friend. The wiseman therefore says, Pro. 18.
that a friend is better then a brother: and according hereunto, Christ calls
not his disciples brethren, but friends. And God himself, to express the great
love he bore unto Moses, though his servant, says, that he talked with him as
a friend. To sum up all, Exodus 33. Ecclus. 6.14.
the wiseman says, A faithful friend is a strong defense; and, he that has
found such a one, has found a great treasure: and in the next verse, A
faithful friend is the medicine of life, V. 15.
and his excellency is so unvaluable, that nothing does countervail it. But the
same wiseman in the same Chapter, having pointed out many kinds of counterfeit
friends, at the 7th verse counsels, If thou would get a friend, prove him
first; that is, says another Translation, Try and prove him in the time of
trouble, and be not hasty to credit him, that is, until thou have tried him.

And one thing wherein thou art to try thy friend, is his goodness and virtue:
For as the Prophet says, There is no peace to the wicked; so may I say, Ifa.
57.2^.
There is no good lasting peace nor agreement with the wicked, no more then
with a tempestuous Sea, to which the wicked is there compared, which is never
at rest within it self, nor suffers others to rest that sail in it. There were
Nations with whom God forbade his Israel to have any peace or league of
friendship: And some sins there are, which more especially and nearly strike
at, and destroy the root of true godly love, so that we cannot covenant or
unite with them. In the first Table the breach of the first and third Precept,
and in the second Table the violation of the sixth, seventh, ninth and tenth:
But in brief, beware of the man decyphered by the Prophet, who walks in the
counsel of the ungodly, and stands in the way of sinners, Psa. 1.1.
and sits in the seat of the scornful; that man, I say, whose study and
counsel is sin, and makes it a piece of his trade, so that he scorns all just
reproof, that man avoid, as in no condition fit to be a friend.

Now as Wisdom, Humility and Meekness are the virtues, in which, as in good
soils, we may sow the seed of love and friendship; so Folly, Pride and Anger,
are grounds that will never receive the seed of love to any good increase: not
Folly, for as a fool cannot judge, or rightly value the hidden parts of a wise
man, thereby to make him his friend; so neither can the wise man see any thing
in the fool wherefore he should choose to love him. A fool may, and so may a
wise man play and make sport with a fool, but a fool cannot love a fool, much
less can a wise man: for the Moon changes not so often as the fool does; for
his thoughts are as the spokes in the wheel of a Cart, ever moving up and down;
and the secrets which thou shall commit unto him, are, as the wiseman speaks,
Ecclus. 19.12.
as an arrow that sticks in a man's thigh, with which he travels to be
delivered of, as a woman in labor of a child.

Nor Pride, for this is apt to beget hate, envy and malice; whereas Humility,
as the low and fertile valley, is the best ground for friendship. Again, Pride
rejoices in it self, and as the Pharisee, despises others; and if he see a
mountain or beam of virtue and good in another, he would make it appear but as
a mote, or as a molehill: whereas on the contrary, the humble soul either
sees no faults in his friend, or he lessens it all he can to the world, and
thereby would make his friends errors to be but motes, and his virtues, beams.
And when the proud man speaks of his friends good qualities or endowments, he
does it with ^n if or a but, then the humble does it catego^^cally and
affirmatively, but never forgetting how our Savior commended John the Baptist,
which was not to his face: for this is the mark of a Sycophant or Flatterer:
but in his absence, when he shall hear least of it.

A third enemy to friendship is Anger; you may observe, that when God spoke
unto Elijah, 1 Kin. 19.11, 12.
there first came a renting wind, then a shaking earthquake, and after both a
burning fire: but the Text tells, that God, the Spirit of meekness and love,
was in neither of these, but in a small still or gentle voice. This, this, and
not rage or fury, is the parent of love, and therefore Moses, who was a meek
man, is the only man to be called Gods friend.

And yet S. Paul teaches us, that there is an anger that may not be sinful,
for so says he, Be angry and sin not; Ephesians. 4.26.
and anger sins not then, when it makes sin the object or butt of his
displeasure; and this anger Moses wanted not, when he brake the two Tables
wherein God himself wrote his Law; but if ye observe, this anger was not set
against the persons of the people sinning; for these be bewailed, these he
prayed for, and with a wonderful measure of love, when he wished rather that
himself should be blotted out of Gods book, then that they should be destroyed:
but all his anger was bent against sin, and that not against a petite; out
against a most heinous and abominable sin, gross Idolatry. So that there is an
anger in a friend which is not only tolerable, but commendable, and it is like
that of the Prophet, when he says, Psa. 141.5.
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a great kindeness, and let him reprove
me, it shall be an excellent oil, which will not break my head.

The Greeks, as the Latins, have distinguished anger by two words, the one is
called (...) and iracundia, by which is understood an ebullition or boiling of
the blood, which as it comes from a natural cause, so it oft-times, and in
many, is almost as soon gone as it suddenly came: and this usually is found to
be a consequent of the best dispositions: the other anger is termed (...),
which is a settled lasting wrath, arising from a malicious heart and a
revengeful stomach. S. Paul himself seems to allow or favor this distinction,
when he says, Be angry and sin not, Ephesians. 4.26.
let not the Sun go down upon your wrath, neither give place to the devil; and
this latter properly, and not that former anger, is it which we here speak
against, as being the deadly enemy to true friendship.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of Self-love.
WE read not that man is expressly commanded to love himself, because every one
is so inclinable to it, that the danger lies in our over-love to our selves:
yet it is employed when we are taught to love our neighbor as our self: and
under this command is likewise employed what we should not do to our neighbor,
as not to rob, not to kill him. We should not defraud our selves of what is
justly and necessarily requisite for us, much less should we destroy or kill
our selves.

And this tacit precept of loving our selves, is so much the stronger, because
it is natural, and arises from the first principles infused into man, and
never becomes vicious or sinful, until it transgress, or goes beyond the limits
prescribed unto it: which limits being to love God first above above all
things, (and for himself) for that he is the Alpha, the first of all, the first
by whom all things were made, and were all made for the exaltation of his
glory. And the second limit or bounding of our love, being to our neighbor,
who is Gods image, and our second self, and therefore to love him as our self:
now when man shall so love himself, as that he loves no other but himself, then
this love is corrupted and forbidden as sinful.

And into this sin, as the first and root of all other sins, did our first
parents Adam and Eve fall, when the devil tempting Eve, he told her, that by
eating the forbidden fruit she should be like God; the inordinate love to her
own so great a seeming good, moved her to desire what was forbidden, and
thereby to forsake God in disobeying his commands. Pride properly was not the
first sin in that Adam or Eve would be like God, but the love of themselves was
the cause of that pride.

And as Eve was the first that fell into the transgression of not loving God
through her self-love: so very soon after Adam dropped into the same
transgression of not loving his neighbor; for he, when God called him to an
account, took nothing upon himself, nor any way excused Eve, but laid all the
blame and sin upon her, which was not to love her as his friend or neighbor:
and all this came from self-love.

The devil accusing Job, asks God whether Job served or loved him for naught?
wherein his meaning was, That neither Job the upright, nor any other, loved God
as they ought wholly for God, but for themselves: Jacob vows unto God, Genesis
28.^0.
but hear his conditions, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way
that I go, and will give me food and raiment, so that I come again to my
fathers house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God. Might not the devil
interpose and ask, Does Jacob serve God for naught? the like may be said of the
mother and the sons of Zebedee, whose thoughts (when Christ drew near his
passion) were for honor and precedence above their fellow-Apostles; so that
self-love seeks primarily its own good, though at the cost and charges of
another.

And so tenderhearted and loving we are to our selves, that when God has
poured out all the vessels of wine and oil of his graces, mercies and
benefits, yet if he require but some small return of a thankful love, expressed
by some holy exercises in the Church or at home, how apt are we to say as the
Spouse, I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? Cant. 5.3.
I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? small things about our
garments, or our very feet, shall keep us from God: or else we will say as in
the Proverbs, There is a Lion in the way. In our way to God we feign and
suppose Lions, dangers of losing liberty or estates, and rather then we will
lose or hazard any thing for God, we will swear backward and forward, and serve
the devil rather then God, and we think we have excused all sufficiently, by
saying we were forced thereunto, for we saw a Lion in the way; when oft-times
this Lion is of our own making, or fear rather, then that there were any such
indeed: and all this is the bastard-brat of ^^lf-love.

And if you ask me what has been the Mother and Nurse of all Heresies, as that
first of Simon Magus, of the Gnostics, and Nicolaitans, who to be great, and
to enjoy filthy pleasure, were sometimes Jews, sometimes Christians, at other
times Gentiles in their Professions, but sure they would never willingly be
Martyrs, or suffer for any. May I not say, and say truly, self-love was the
mother of all? If you ask me how it came to pass that Diotrephes so loved to
have the preeminence among the Christians, that he received not the Apostles,
that he esteemed or reverenced them not, as they were indeed Bishops set over
and above him? Can I or you give any better reason for it then his self-love?
And if I yet be demanded, What stirred up Absalom, Jeroboam and Jehu to rebel
against their lawful Kings, and by treachery or force to usurp the royal power?
Can I give any other answer, then that it was their self-love?

Now if you ask me how it should come to pass that self-love should so far
blind and besot men, that by it they should fall into such horrid enormous
sins, the reason is at hand and plain: we say oft-times, that a man stands in
his own light, which makes him that he cannot see, no not the Sun, and if a man
puts his hand upon his eyes, no marvel if he cannot see either the object or
his hand: All this and more does self-love to the eye of the souls reason; for
it presents nothing to reason, but what it self desires, and reason seeing
nothing else, it offers nothing else to be desired and sought by the will, but
that which self-love affects.

Self-conceit, or an opinion of self-wit, knowledge or excellency, works in man
many and several errors, follies and enormities: so that the wiseman truly
said, There is more hope of a fool then of such a man, who is wise in his own
conceit; for, he thinking himself wise enough of himself, never desires or
studies to know more: but much more may be said of self-love, then of
self-conceit, insomuch as the Will, which is the Captain General and Commander
under Love, is stronger then Opinion, which is but a lackey to the Soul.

And from this poisoned spring of self-love, we have our eyes so blinded,
vitiated, or bewitched, that what we should see as to judge our selves we
ca^nnot, will not or do not; and what we should not see, that is to judge and
condemn others, that we do. So that, love spread abroad, which by the Apostles
rule should cover a multitude of sins in our neighbor, this love being locked
up in our own breasts, covers only that which is within our selves. The
righteous man, says the wiseman, is the accuser of himself; but the man that
loves himself, is never so just and upright to himself, as to accuse or condemn
himself: This judgment he keeps and executes wholly upon others; Judah, David,
and the Pharisees, while the case was put in the third person of their
neighbor, they are for the law, that woman, that man, that adulterer, must
suffer without mercy: Such was Judah his judgment, Genesis 38.24. such was
David's, 2 Samuel 12. such the Pharisees, who brought the woman taken in adultery,
in the act to Christ. But when David was found to be the person, and that the
Prophet told him Thou art the man; and when Judah by his ring and staff was
discovered to be the sinner, as was David, I warrant you have not the like
sentence given as (...) fore, but the case must be said to be altered (...) the
person, and it cannot be deemed otherwise, when the same person who commits the
fact shall be Judge.

And as self-love is no upright Judge, so it is ever querulous, and complaining
of other men's justice and good dealing to him: The Judge never does him right
enough, but either he takes that from him which was his, or gives him not so
much as was due unto him. True love and charity, says the Apostle, envieth
not, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5.
seeks not her own, thinks no evil, but self-love clean contrary, thinks no
good of others, envieth other men's good, and seeks not only her own, but all
that is another, thinking all too little for her self.

To sum up all: I will conclude with that of the Apostle, and judge ye how it
concerns us in these our Times; 2 Timothy 3.2.
Know, says he, in the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall be
lovers of their oven selves; where before I proceed, I pray mark, that the
Apostle in those perilous times wherein charity is grown cold, as our Savior
speaks, and sin abounds, has reckoned up twenty sins, some against God, such
are blasphemers, unholy, lovers of pleasures more then of God, hypocrites,
having a form of godliness, yet denyers of the power thereof. 2. Other sins
against themselves, such are proud, without natural affection, boasters,
incontinent, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures. 3. Sins against their
neighbor, disobedient, unthankful, truce breakers, false accusers, fierce,
despisers of others, traitors. Of these nineteen sins my question is, Whether
there be any one root or cause? and what that cause or root should be? and I
cannot uprightly say, that there is any other sin so properly and naturally the
cause of all the ninetine sins mentioned, as that Self-love, which is set as it
w^^^ on purpose in the first place, which justly she may challenge, as being
the mother or original of all the nineteen in this Chapter to Timothy, and of
all the seventeen fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5.19.
reckoned up by S. Paul to the Galatians, or of all the sins that have been, or
ever shall be committed, from the beginning to the end of the world.

CHAP. XXIX. Temporal goods cannot content and therefore deserve not man's love.
THe temporal things wherewith man is delighted as being good, are many,
almost infinite: out as all sublunary compounded bodies are made of the four
elements, so all the goods we speak of may be reduced to these four heads, 1
life, under which we understand health, strength, and beauty of body etc. 2
honor, under which may be comprised titles, offices, privileges, pomp and
retinue. 3 Wealth, where lands, moneys, revenues, have place. 4 Pleasure, which
is as various as there be objects of our senses pleasing to our eye, taste,
touch, hearing and smell.

Now, though all these in their kinds ordinately desired and moderately used
may be both useful and lawful, yet in that they are not able (...) content
and satisfy the soul longer then a ^^nd or lightning which vanishes with the
appearance, man should not, indeed truly he cannot set his love upon them.

What wanted Solomon of all the desirable things under heaven? He had 700 wives
and 300 concubines, he built himself stately palaces, orchards, gardens, he had
attendants answerable to his wealth and glory, which exceeded any King in those
parts: yet when he weighed all, instead of proclaiming himself happy in these,
he concludes, which are the words of the Preacher and the wisest man on the
earth, that all is but vanity of vanities, Eccl. 1.2.
vanity of vanities, all is vanity.

Will you examine King David the man after Gods heart, and ask him, now thou
have strength to kill the Bear, the Lion, and the Giant, art thou satisfied?
he tells you no, unless he be King over all Israel: and when he is so, is he
yet satisfied? He tells you no, until he has subdued the Rebels and all his
enemies: and will he be then satisfied? He tells you no; and in a word he tells
you no earthly thing can satisfy, nor will his heart ever be content, or at
rest until he leave all these; and enjoy heaven: Hear him speak his own
words, Ps. 16.
I have a goodly herilage, but the Lord is the portion of my inheritance in
whose presince is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore: and therefore, 73.24.
There is none o Lord upon earth that I desire in comparison of thee.

And that man may find the right way to this everlasting joy, he has left him
no delights here, but such as are mingled with vinegar and gall, and all his
paths, his labor and travail are full of stones and briers.

CHAP. XXX. Temporal and worldly goods deserve not man's love.
THe ancient Heathen called these temporal goods, the goods of fortune, and
this fortune they portrayed upon a wheel which is made to be in a continual
motion and change; others have compared them as man's life, so the things of
this life to a shadow, and this in three respects. 1 For the uncertain or small
continuance. 2 For that these when they are at their full growth or height,
they vanish and are gone. 3 And when all is past, if we consider them aright,
the content or delight in them was really nothing.

Some upon the words of the Psalmist, By the waters of Babylon we sat down and
wept, have compared these temporal goods and delights to those waters, not
only for their swift passing away and never returning, but for the trouble in
procuring, and sorrow in losing what we delight in, and therefore we may well
be said when all is well weighed to hang up our harpes, as all the joy we took
in them, and for all to sit down and weep while we live in this Babylon of a
golden captivity.

It may be observed that in the genealogy of our Savior, as it is expressed by
S. Matthew, the first of his progenitors were Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc.
shepherds, the second race were Kings, David, Solomon, etc. the third were
less, ^^^ill it came to Joseph his supposed Father and (...), both poor. Jud.
1.7.
And if I should tell you of Adonibez^k, who had 70. Kings gathering their
meat under his Table, who says, As I have done, so God has requited me: of
Dionysius the great King of Syracuse, who was driven to get his bread by
teaching School at Corinth: of Bajazet the great Turk, who was drawn up and
down in an iron cage, and served as a block by whose shoulders Tamberlan was to
mount his horse: or of Bellisarius, who after so many great victories and
conquests was constrained to beg in the open streets, Give an halfpenny for
Gods sake to poor Bellisarius: will not these and ten thousand more the like
examples, make proof of this, that our temporal goods are but of uncertain
continuance?

But say that some be so happy as to enjoy them to their lives end, yet longer
they cannot, but as they came into the world without them, so without them they
shall go naked and stripped of them. The Psalmist speaks that which we all know
to be most true, Though man be made rich, and the glory of his house be
increased; Ps. 49.16, 17.
yet when he dies he shall carry nothing away, and his glory shall not descend
after him; what is his conclusion upon all this? why says he, by this we
perceive that man that is in honor and understands (and considers it) not,
Ps. 49.20
is like the Beast that perishes.

And what then have we to do but to imitate the woman in the Revelations, Re.
12.1.
who having a Crown on her head, and being clothed with the Sun; say these are
as honor and wealth; yet she has the Moon the emblem of mutability and
change, under her feet, neglecting temporary things in respect of the Stars and
Sun, the significators of eternal joy; for therewith Go^ is content and
delights, without any chan^ or shadow of change, his word and motto being, I
am the Lord, Mal. 3.6.
I change not.

Our Savior Christ speaking of temporal goods called them not helps, Mat.
13.22.
joys, or contents, but the care, indeed the distracting care, of this world,
and the deceitfulness of riches; so that if to the uncertainty of our keeping
them we add the carefulness in getting, the little good they do us, with many
evils that also necessarily follow them, we shall soon conclude that they
deserve not our love.

We read in the Gospel that Christ preaching to the people, Luke 12.15.
thought the most proper subject to forewarn them of, was the desire of wealth
and worldly goods, and therefore begins his Sermon in these words: Beware of
covetousness. And to give strength and reason to this admonition, he tells them
of a rich man who having gained and purchased so plentifully, that he wanted
room wherein to lay his wealth, he resolves to pull down the lesser, and to
build greater barnes, and storehouses, and this done he sets up his rest,
saying, Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years; well, and what means
he to do with all? Intends he them to pious and charitable uses, whereby God
may be glorified, and the poor relieved? no such maatter: these never came into
his thoughts, but in stead thereof, he says he will take his ease, he will
eat, drink and be merry. This is his saying, but what says God to this? Thou
fool, this night thy Soul shall be required of thee, and then whose shall those
things be, which thou have provided? And here appears that deceitfulness of
riches, which Christ spoke of. 1 That man thinks himself (...) in carefully
gathering, whereas in this he (...) deceived: for, for this Christ called him
(...) 2 He intended these goods to have been his solace and comfort for many
years: but in this he is deceived too, for Christ tells him he shall not enjoy
them one night. 3 After his death perhaps he had bequeathed them as rich men do
to their children, allies, or friends; but in this also he may be deceived; for
not only David said, Ps. 39.6.
He heapeth up riches but knows not who shall enjoy them: but Christ says, he
knew not to whom they should come, or, not whose they should be, to continue
with him; David and Christ have confirmed this truth, and the best Lawyer
cannot contradict it.

To this deceitfulness of riches touched by our Savior, 1 Timothy 6.9.
S. Paul adds that they not only deceive us in our thoughts and intentions, but
that they pierce our Souls through with many sorrows. There is a comet called
the foolish fire, which appearing in the night like a burning taper leads men
out of their right way: the like says our Apostle do riches.

And yet, as if this were not all, they do pierce, the word imports that they
pierce through and all round about, leaving the Soul but as one wound: and that
with sorrows not ordinary, light ones, but with such sorrows as overtake
women in the bringing forth children, or such as Christ himself suffered in
that extreme agony of his last passion which were pains more then sorrows,
Act. 2.24.
and yet both unexpressible.

Will you hear a word more from Job, who telling that the covetous man
swallows down riches, Job 20.^5.
not that he takes them peece-meal to show them by little and little leisurely,
and to digest them, but by gobbets he swallows greedily: And what is the
consequence or fruit (...) of? that follows there in the next words, th^^ soon
as be has swallowed them he should (...) them up again, so that they should
never nourish or do him real good. But how comes this to pass? why, that Job
omits not to tell us, when he says, This meat of riches which he thus
gormandiseth, and greedily swallows, turns to the gall of Aspes within him: and
no marvail then that they do him not good, for they must needs turn to his
poison. Prove. 11.4. Ezekiel. 7.19. Zeph. 1.18.


Riches shall not profit nor deliver in the day of the Lords wrath, is expressly
set down and confirmed for an undeniable truth by three authentic witnesses,
Solomon the King, and the two Prophets, Ezekiel and Zephaniah: so that in this
they are like the Martyns, Swallows, and other such birds, which in the
summer, the time of our jollity, build with us, and seem to chirp in their
tunes, but when the winter of adversity and judgment appears, they leave us
with a foul house, but to shift for our selves.

And it were well did they only resemble those summer birds in leaving us
helpless, and that they were not more like the Screech-owle which at the time
of death makes a fearful hideous noise in our ears to the disquiet of our
souls; and if this were not so, what means the Prophet to denounce a woe to the
man that covets to set his nest on high, and adds the reason, Haba. ^.9.11.
for the stone out of the wall shall cry, and the beam shall answer against
him? and what means S. James to bid rich men weep and howl, but that as
follows there, James. 5.3.
their miseries shall come upon them? and if you ask what miseries, he tells
you that the rust of your wealth, which should (...) been employed and used for
God and his (...) ^^all witness against you, and the cries (...) ^^^e whom you
have defrauded, are entered ^^^o the ears of the Lord.

And if you ask what these will cry or witness? why, that the Prophets in part
have spoken, for your injustice, your oppression, your fraud in getting, and
your as base, and wretched hoarding up and not well employing the same: and as
though this were not all, our Apostle adds what few think on; These riches
says he, shall cry against you, because you have lived in pleasure on the
earth, and have for wealth condemned and killed the just, and him who does not
resist: So that here not only the golden vessels taken out of Gods temple,
shall witness and cry against Belshazzer, (though he were but the receiver, and
detainer, and not the immediate sacrilegious thief) nor Naboths vineyard
against Ahab and Jezebel, nor the blood of Ahab and Jezebel, though bad
Princes, against Jehu the traiterous rebel, but your fatted foul, your gilded
coaches, your pampered horses, your feastings, balls and revellings, your vain,
ridiculous fashions; yea, your very dogs fed fat, while Lazarus wants, shall
bark and cry aloud against you, for living in pleasure on the earth, and being
wanton.

Covetousness S. Paul calls idolatry: Col. 3.5. 1 Timothy ^.10.
now these gross idolatrous Israelites having made a calfe of gold, they said,
These ^re thy Gods o Israel which brought thee out of Egypt: Gold is the rich
man's God, and this he holds to be his deliverer, though indeed it prove as that
golden calf did, the hazard of their utter destruction; and for this many, too
many have cried out with the foolish perverse Jews, Not Christ but Barabbas:
Jesus we desire not, but Mammon to be delivered to us, and so thi^ (...) have,
crucify him.

And yet all riches at their best are but as (...) reed of Egypt, Jonah his
gourd, Absalons hair, or Sampsons lock; Is. 36.6. ^zek. 29.6^.
and that reed, says the Prophet, shalll go into the hand and pierce it: the
Apostle (as before is touched) calls riches piercers with a witness. And for
their short delight they are but as gourds or mushrums which rise and fall,
live and dye in a day: and besides this great pain and little content they
bring us, they often prove as Absaloms and Sampsons hair: that wherein we most
presumed, and what we esteemed our best support, shall become the occasion of
our ruin, and utter destruction: Remember the first words of Christ's Sermon to
the people, Luke 12. 15^
Beware of covetousness.

And this Christ did upon especial reason seeing man's heart above all other
things set upon his wealth; for ask the husbandman, the tradesman, the
Merchant, the Lawyer, the Physician, why he labors and toyleth in the world?
and ask the Seaman, the Soldier, the Digger in the mines, why he hazardeth his
life? yea ask King Solomon why he lays heavy taxes on the people, and why
Rehoboam doubles them? All they must tell you, if they will speak truth, it is
for their wealth. This, this is the Tradesmans Diana, Acts 19.24.
the Physicians Galen, the Lawyers Littleton, and would it were not too true in
many, that it is the Ministers Bible; and therefore S. Paul reckoning up twenty
sins, to which man is most subject, as he makes the first or leading sin
self-love: 2 Timothy 3.2.
so the second to it as on which his love is most set (...) places
covetousness, and accordingly in (...) place he calls it the root of all evil.
Col. 3.5.


(...) among the evils I Shall reckon you but (...) or four, for they all are
too many for one book, the grave or hell, which the more it has, the more it
craves, ever crying Give, give, and is never satisfied though it be full to the
brim and running over: yea though beasts are then only greedy and ravenous when
empty and hungry, yet the covetous man desires most when he is full gorged, and
when both men and beasts have less appetite to what they delight in, when they
grow old: yet this desire of wealth, by age waxes stronger, and when man is
drawing near to the earth, the grave, as though like were delighted with its
like, it then most desires the goods of the earth, and this desire is so
rampant in many, that I believe some there are, that so they might have all the
world to themselves: they would be content to be alone in the world, without
any society or solace but their wealth. For when all other creatures, Angels,
beasts, plants live and move as ministering Spirits, helps, and nourishments for
man: yet man as if he were made only for himself desires all to terminate and
end in himself, as though he desired to be the sepulcher or grave wherein all
the world should be buried.

I observe the subtle Serpent the Devil, Matt. 4. ^.9.
when he tempted Christ, he began his temptation on him, as on the Son of God,
and used two subtle arguments to work upon him thereby to show his power: but
when these weapons in the Devils hands were soon repelled by our Savior, the
Devil then sets upon him as a man, and though he knew well his several
batteries, yet at first that he might not be long about his work and be foiled
a third time, he used that which he knew seldom failed, and this was to show
him (...) kingdoms and glory of the world, and to (...) him all these: which
when the Devil (...) that Christ refused, he then perceived that Christ was
more then man; and then and not till then, the text faith, the Devil left him;
for he saw it was time to leave tempting him any further, knowing that if the
proffer of the worlds wealth would not persuade, that nothing could be able to
move him.

And being upon this temptation, I cannot but observe another thing in it, that
the Devil in his two former temptations laid the baits so, that they might
seem to be for Christ's good, as in the first to turn stones into bread, to
relieve his hunger, and in the second to cast himself down from the pinnacle of
the Temple, to manifest his power: whereas in this last temptation, when he
offers Christ the worlds wealth, he plainly professes it, that the end thereof
was and is only this, that he might be brought to worship him.

And when S. Paul says that Covetousness is idolatry; herein the covetous man
proves it, Col. 3.5.
that he does worship and adore as his God Mammon, which in the Syriack tongue
signifies riches: and see how in this worship the covetous man imitates, or
apes the right worshippers of the true God. For does the true worshipper of God
often fast and pray to God? Does he disobey the commands of Parents and
Superiors to gain God? does he suffer shame, labor, pain, loss of health and
life for God? Why all this does the covetous man for his God Mammon; and herein
has proved the Apostles words fully, in evidencing himself to be an (...) or a
worshipper of the heathens God (...) who having his name from riches, was (...)
^^m feigned to be the God of hell, and the ^^ch man's God.

Judas we know was Christ's purse-bearer, and is called in the Gospel the thief,
and the traitor; now when the Devil had an especial piece of service to be
performed, as the betraying the Lord of life to death, he surely bethought
himself, where to find out a proper and fit instrument for this damnable
design: and having thought probably on the other eleven Apostles, the seventy
Disciples and other followers of Christ; yet he pitched on none of these as fit
for his purpose but Judas, knowing him to wait on Christ only for profit, was
confident that this was the man for his turn, and therefore as S. John speaks,
(...). 13.2.
the Devil put it into the heart of Judas, to betray his Master, which he did
for thirty pieces of silver, as an other text has it, for so vile and base a
price, the covetous wretch would betray his Sovereign Lord.

And from this part of the story observe again, that as Judas carried his
Master Christ's purse: so he was purse-bearer to the Devil, and this purse of
the Devils was Judas his heart, and into this the Devil put the thought of
betraying Christ for money; so that this double purse, that I may so call it,
of Judas his heart, though it were carried by Judas, yet the Devil had both
power and a share in it; so that for the present the Devil and Judas might be
said to go halfes, though at the last and casting up the reckoning, the Devil
will have all; for in this point (the purse of the heart) the Devil is as
covetous as his servant the Idolater: for as the Covetous person desires all
the whole purse of gold, so the Devil not caring for the gold, (...) this to
the Covetous as his reward, but (...) that which pleases him, the whole purse,
(...) is the covetous man's heart.

Now to turn back, Can we say that the covetous man having forfeited and given
up his heart for the worlds goods, that he has, and injoyes the goods of the
world? we cannot deny but that he possesses much, but can we say properly that
he has them, but rather that he is had by them? for he is rather their slave,
then they his servants: but if he may in some sort be said to be master of them
in that he commands them to build him stately houses, and purchase ample
revenues, and they obey; yet I cannot say that he has them, as Lords of lands
are said to have them for ever; for the Psalmist tells us (that which we daily
see) I have seen these men in great power, Psalm. 37.35.
and spreading themselves like a green-bay tree. But how long sees he this?
truly no longer as we say then you may tell ten: for in the next verse, v. 36.
I sought him but he could not be found, for be was passed away, and lo he was
not; So that the man has resigned up his interest by death, and being gone
from his wealth, he has them not for himself for ever.

No nor for his heirs or assigns, has he them for ever: for that verse
before cited in the Psalm, which our translation renders, he could not be
found, speaking of the person: the other vulgar edition reads, his place could
no where be found, as though soon after his departure, his Mansion house and
land were sold or alienated to some other, and not to his heirs or assigns.
Christ when he asks the rich man, when thy soul is gone, Luke 12.22.
whose shall these things be which thou have provided? intimates that (...)
^ich man could not tell. Tell he might to (...) he intended them, but who
should have (...) hold them, neither the rich man, nor the best Lawyer can with
good assurance tell us.

And yet could we say that the man, the owner of his wealth may prove so happy,
as to have it for himself and his after him, yet the question may be whether
either of them may be strictly said to enjoy them; for the care in getting, the
fear in keeping, the sorrow in parting; but above all, the trouble of
conference for these cares, fears, and griefs are such, as well may be
thought to qualify or allay that which may be called the enjoyment of wealth.

Yea many have been known so overcome with the desire of having, that they did
not themselves desire to enjoy their wealth, but have lived as Tantalus,
feigned by the Poets to stand in a goodly stream of water, with a tree full of
pleasant fruit over his head, yet was ready to starve for hunger, and choke for
thirst: and such is that wretched man's estate who in his abundance can hardly
find in his heart to afford himself necessaries, but in stead thereof, he is
well pleased to live in the midst of all his wealth, as a rat imprisoned in a
trap standing in a room full of grain, or as a ferrit with his lips sewed up.
So that to such men their wealth is of no more use, then a shadow, whereof they
can make no more advantage then for sight to look upon.

And this is so far from giving joy to the possessors of wealth, that when
Christ pronounces his first blessing saying, Lu. 6.20.
Blessed be the poor, for yours is the kingdom of God: then as answerable
hereunto, he denounces his first woe to the rich, (...). ^4.
saying. Woe unto you that are rich, for you have received your cons^l^t^^^
(...) which last words may be understood Iro^ (...) by the way of a scornful
jeere unto them (...) call it a consolation to have riches, or at the most they
can intend no more then woe be to you hereafter, for here and only here you
have that you call consolation in your wealth.

And this is evident from that parable uttered by Christ, Luke 16.25.
where he says, (under the person of Abraham) to the rich man, Son remember
that thou in thy life time received thy good things: this was thy consolation,
the good things of this world in this life, and therefore now in hell thou art
tormented; where we see that as the poor Lazar that suffers here on earth,
shall be comforted in heaven, so the rich miser that comforts himself here in
his wealth, shall be tormented in hell: so that with these it fares, as with
the Hen that scratcheth hard to get her living, yet dead is served to the best
man's table, when the hawke a bird of prey well fed and attended on, once dead
is cast to the dunghill.

And this is the evil of all evils, or that may comprise all evils in it self,
that by the covetous desire of riches, the soul is too often in jeopardy of
being cast into utter darkness.

In the Gospels our Savior speaking of riches and cares of the world, Mat. 13.
Mark. 4. Luke 8.
which chook and hinder the growth of Gods seed sowed in man's heart. he calls
them thorns, and besides the reason here assigned by our Savior, riches and
worldly cares may be rightly likened to thorns. 1 They grow for the most part
in the worst grounds, so the love of riches comes up in the most sordid and
basest souls. 2 They draw and suck the juice and fat of the earth, from other
good seeds and plants, whereby they often times (to the (...) of the world) seem
near sterved; and so (...) it with the rich man and his poor neighbor. 3 If
the poor harmless sheep shall chance to fall among these thorns (the rich men)
he is sure to be fleeced. 4 Thorns hinder and often wound the poor travailer in
his journey: many a man to his sad experience has found the like in his way to
heaven. 5 Thorns are smooth and not discerned to prick or hurt save only by the
point and end: and so it fares with riches, which few men seem to be troubled
with till they grow to their end of death, or come to the end of judgment, and
then they prick and wound, or as S. Paul phraseth it, they pierce the soul
through, and round with torturing pains.

Now the same Lord who has compared the cares and riches of this world to
thorns, committed not the purse, the bag of these thorns to any of his beloved
Apostles or Disciples, save only to Judas, that miscreant wretch, because he
considered what a vexation and torture they would prove unto them. 2 He knew
that as the prodigal mentioned in the Gospel never returned unto his father,
until all his temporal goods were spent, so neither could he have had any
good, or comfort in his disciples company, so long as they had been entangled
therewith, as indeed he had not till they had left all and followed him.

And the leaving these Christ held so necessary toward the attainment of
eternal bliss, that he pronounces it as impossible for a rich man to enter
heaven, Luke 10.23.
as it is for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle; But lest these words
might have reflected upon holy men, then living and dead, yet rich, Christ
expounds himself to speak no^ simply of men that are rich, though at (...)
seemed to speak so, but of men that trust in (...) riches, and for such to
enter into heaven it is impossible: for God will admit none thither but such as
trust in him: and they cannot trust in him who trust in their riches.

To conclude this point in a word: ^ol. 3.5.
S. Paul in one place of his Epistles tells us that covetousness is Idolatry
and the root of all evil, and in another place that no idolater, unclean
person, or sinner, can enter where God is in heaven; now put these two texts
together, and it must evidently and necessarily follow from them, that the
covetous cannot possibly enter heaven, because he is an Idolater trusting in
his riches, and has moreover with it the growth of all other sins springing
from this one root.

But if I proceed any further in this Argument, I may fear to be taken for some
Scholar, that is poor and given to his book or contemplation: and therefore for
the prosecuting this theme so far I may expect the like entertainment as our
Savior Christ had, who twice, and but twice for ought I read, was derided and
laughed at, once was when he said that the maid who was really dead, was but a
sleep, and for this say the Gospels they laughed him to scorn: Mat. ^.24.
and the other occasion that moved the Pharisees with others to laugh at him,
was when Christ had Preached against such as pretended to serve both God and
Mammon, and hereupon the text says, that the covetous hearing these things
they derided him: Luke 1^.14.
so that although this sin of covetousness be the most large spreading,
ingendring, and corrupting sin, and therefore such as has been most severely
spoken against by Christ and his Apostles, yet so common it is to the ^^st, and
the most are so hardened in it, that (...) to speak against it, were but to be
la^ghed at.

And the rather say these worldlings, for that riches are the promised and
granted blessings of God, as in reward to the well doers, and therefore for
that most of the Patriarchs, good Kings, and holy men have been very rich, they
held it a ridiculous thing to declaim against riches, or rich men.

And indeed simply to declaim against either riches or rich men were a thing
ridiculous: but to say that it is hard for a rich man to enter heaven, is to
say no more then Christ in express terms has spoken, and hard it was that
Christ who cured all other corporal and spiritual infirmities, yet this of
covetousness, he cured not in the man who had great possessions, Luke 10.
who though Christ who spoke as never man did, preached and earnestly persuaded
this man to sell all, yet he was so far from obeying this command of Christ,
who professed that he had kept all the rest of the Decalogue, that without any
civility or good manners tendered unto Christ his Master, he rudely and
unthankfully departs, and never that we hear of returns again to hear him:
for which no other reason can be given, then that which is expressed in the text
which says, for he had great possessions. And indeed when Christ took Matthew
the Publican from the profitable trade of gathering custom, or to cure recover
the withered, that is the covetous hand, and these cannot be done but by the
great power of God, to whom alone all things are possible.

And yet for all this, as you tell me many Godly men have been rich, so I tell
you that so you may be rich and yet continue god (...) as you get and use your
riches in God (...) and in Gods name you may use and get them, so you get,
keep, and use them in a moderate and ordinate manner, by lawful means and to
the right end. Now the moderate and ordinate manner considers the action, and
the time; whereas to the action we may seek, and seek with care, so that this
seeking be not with a settling your hearts upon them, which the Prophet forbids,
or with a trusting in them reproved by our Savior, or with such a care as
distracts or divides the thoughts and desires of the soul betwixt God and
Mammon: For this is to serve two different discordant Masters says Christ,
which God never will like; And the time for this action, of your moderate
seeking worldly things, must be as not before, so neither joined with the
seeking of God (but after.) so Christ has taught, Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God.

Then for the manner, which must be moderate and ordinate and the means of
prosecuting must be answerable, that is, the means must not be by injustice of
fraud or force, not by violence or oppression, nor by circumvention of wit, or
tricks in law, but by just, lawful, fair, and clear dealing, and this will so
clear the means, as to make them lawful and just.

And the end of all your seeking and getting and keeping together worldly
things, must be not to grow proud, to be able to oppress and stifle justice,
nor to spend them on your lusts of the flesh, or purchasing honor; but that
God the Donor and giver of every good gift, may thereby be glorified, by
raising and propagating the more immediate means of his service, and s^^uants
in the Church, and by relieving the (...) stressed and oppressed members of our
head Christ. Thus by these means and to this end seek riches, and in Gods name
be rich, whereas if you fail in these or any of these, you neither love God
nor your neighbor, no nor your selves as you ought, but you love the world;
which is enmilie with God; who with the world will first or last destroy all
his enemies.

CHAP. XXXI. The brevity, frailty, mutability, uncertainty, and misery of man's
life; Abate the love thereof.
THe Philosopher has said it, and daily experience confirms it, that of all
things dreadful to nature, Death is the most feared, and on the other side we
speak it as a proverb, life is sweet. And the Devil knowing this to be most
desired by man, as most agreeing to his nature, when he would provoke God to
put the utmost of all trialls upon Job, thereby to prove his sincerity, Job.
2.4, 5.
he persuades God but to touch his bone and his flesh, for then, he will curse
thee to thy face; and the Devil gives his reason for this saying, V. 6.
skin for skin, and all that a man has will he give for his life: yea God
himself when he gave the Devil leave to touch (...), and his flesh, yet as
though he were not wining to put Job to the utmost trial, he enjoined the
Devil to save his life.

And that you may not think, this speech of the Devil proceeded more out of
malice to Job, then from the grounds of truth; hear the Preacher speaking by
the Spirit of God, who says, A living dog is better then a dead Lion, Eccle.
9.4.
and he gives his reason for this assertion, for says he, the Dead have no
more a portion for ever in any thing that is done under the Sun: so that as
this wise min prefers a merry life before a sad; for this (says he) dryes the
bones, and hastens death: so he prefers, as the wisest Philosophers have done,
a sad, yea a tortured life before an easy death, in as much as while there is
a being there is hope, but the not being at all, deprives us of all that can be
wished, and this is the general dictate or vote of nature in the best of men.

Now that some have, as the Apostle speaks, dared to dye for a friend, for God,
or for honor or the like; this proceeded from a higher cause then bare nature:
either it is from grace, as in the Christian, or their desire was urged and
heightened by some sting of ambition propounding to it self, an immortality of
name and honor, whereby they thought to recompense the mortality of their body
by a never dying glory in the world.

Yet notwithstanding this inbred desire of life, did man consider and rightly
weigh the brevity and shortness of his life, take it at the longest; 2 The
uncertainty thereof, caused through the frailty and brickleness of the
materials, and the many casualties, cutting off and shortning this appointed
brevity; 3 And then lay (...) the balance to these the infinite daily miseries
with which this short, frail, mutable, uncertain time of life is surcharged;
he would find little or no cause to settle his love and delight on this present
life, but to fix it wholly on that better life, which may be full of joy for
ever with God in heaven.

Now the term or bounds of man's life, we find in Scriptures to be diverse; for
before the flood we read that many lived above nine hundred years. Genesis 6.3.
In the next generation after the flood the Patriarchs and others exceeded not
much one hundred twenty years: for God says his days shall be a hundred twenty
years. And in the third generation we find this term shortened seventy, Ps.
90.70.
for so speaks that Psalm penned by David; The days of our age are threescore
years and ten (this in ordinary is the utmost) and if, says he, by reason of
strength they live eighty years, yet is their strength, labor and sorrow: and
although King David a man of an excellent constitution lived to seventy years
(as it is computed by the best) yet this says he, is but an hand-breadth, or
indeed as nothing before thee ( o Lord: Ps. 39.5.
) for would the God think of the everlasting joys in heaven, of the wicked of
their never dying torments in hell, they both might say that this hand-breadth
of time was as nothing.

We read of a beast called from the continuance of its life the Ephemeris,
which though it live according to his appellative name but one day, yet it
falls presently to provide for sustenance as though it might live years. Man's
life be it at the largest as in ordinary the term of seventy years, yet in
respect of eternity, or indeed of the frailty and uncertainty of the
continuance thereof, it is in (...) often called a day, and yet man much like
that beast labors, builds, purchases as though he were to live for ever, and
although he be here but a pilgrim, a stranger and travailer to another place,
yet like an unwise factor, he stores up all his goods here whence he is as to
morrow to depart, and never transports them whither he is to go, there to give
an account of his employment, and to enjoy his well spent travailes for ever;
and such is the folly and most deplorable vanity of man. Which error will
appear the greater to him that considers the frailty of man's life, in respect
of the materials whereof man's body consists. 2 Of the artifice and curious
workmanship whereby it is wrought. 3 How it is subject to the power almost of
every thing, to be broken and dissolved.

Now the best and strongest material of man's body is earth, and as Adam was
made out of it, so he and mankind is called from the earth Adam, and homo man;
so that man much resembles a swallows nest made of straw and dirt: such man's
bones and clay, such his flesh, and how frail and easily broken this or that
is, may appear when we see a little boy with a slick to pull that down in
pieces, and less then that, every nothing of violence to do as much to the body
of man; for what of earthly vessels account we more britle then a Venice
glass? yet this kept up and secured from violence or outward force, shall
outlast two lives of any man: a China dish so preserved shall endure twenty
men's lives. Whereas such is the materials of man's body that let him diet and
behave himself according to Galens best rules, let him lie warm and enjoy
himself a bed without spending his spirits, yet even in this diet, and
enjoyment without any hurt or violence done unto him, he shall consume and
molder away, unto that whence be was taken.

Now to the weak brittleness of man's materials, if you add the curious nice
composition and joining of his parts, you may rather wonder how he should live
a month, then to mervaile that he should die so young; the Psalmist to the
honor of Gods great power and wisdom acknowledged that man is wonderfully
made, Ps. 139.14.
and that so much beyond the art and skill of any the best workman in the
world, that when any piece, pin, or wheel in the most exquisite work of man may
be renewed if broken, repaired if worn, and put again in its place if out of
frame, yet to do the like in man's body exceeds the skill of all the best
Physicians that ever were; for be the heart, be the liver, be the brain
wounded, yea be they but pricked with a needle, be they putrefied or be they
displaced, all the work is spoiled and comes to nothing, and man's life is lost.

But if you consider how the least and weakest external things have power to
destroy this body of man, can you say less then that he is a frail and brittle
piece? I will not complain as some have done: yet I may tell you that God by
his journyman Nature has sent all other creatures some way or other armed, or
strengthened into the world against outward force or hurt, and man only is put
forth naked, weak unfenced, so that take him at his best growth and strength,
there is no element, nor any little part of any element, fire, air, water, or
earth, though man be made of these, but is able to undo him and take away his
life. Yea a fly, a kernel, a hair has done as much to many, and not only
the living in a corrupt air may do the like, but the sent of a little subtle
infection conveyed by a glove, a piece of linen or the like, may do the same
thing. But if to these we add that which both history and philosophy confirm,
that a man may de dissolved by extreme joy, caused by that which is good and
harmeless, how then may any man deny this certain and known truth, that man's
life is a frail thing, or rather nothing but frailty?

And not only thus frail, but a thing unstable and mutable, daily and hourly,
running on and making way to its corruption and dissolution. Therefore when you
see and observe the motion and going down of a watch, the running of the water
in a stream which returns not the burning of a candle which wastes in giving
light, of flowers, grass, leaves, which in the morning are green and
flourishing, and ere night are cut down and withered: or will you think on and
consider what is a vapor, a shadow, a dream, or the dream of a shadow. Thus
know, in seeing, thinking, and considering, these all or any of these, that you
see, think and consider the continual mutability and change of man's life
running and flying to its last end. Neither may we wisely wonder, or justly
complain, when we consider this, that Abel the youngest of all the world dies
first, or that in the bills of mortality we find more children die then old
men: for God in his wonderful wisdom and goodness has thus provided and
ordered it for man, that he may hence learn two lessons, that it is no argument
of Gods disfavour, but an evidence of his love to take us early from the worlds
miseries, and betimes to estate us in eternal felicity: and secondly, that man
considering what a chang^^ble thing his life is, he may provide against it all
he can or may, and the best that he may and can is to think on and labor for
an exchange of this mutable life for an unchangeable to come.

And to this end God has so fixed his greater and lesser lights in heaven,
that looking on them we may daily and hourly consider, that although to us they
seem not to move, yet they are in continual motion and tending to their
journies end, and that it is alike in man.

And further to these heavenly visible lessons he has joined his legible
instructions in his holy word, Eccles. 9.9.
there telling us that the days of the life of man are vanity, that is, subject
to change; and as though this expression had not sufficiently reached the
vanity of this life, he inlargeth himself, saying, vanity of vanities, vanity
of vanities, Eccles. 1.2.
all is vanity: which least some might apply to other worldly things besides
man, to clear this the Psalmist speaks plain, and says, Verily every man at
his best estate is altogether vanity, Psa. 39.5.
where verily, is set as an assurance to take away all cause of doubting from
this assertion, and therefore he says, verily man is, not a beast or any other
insensate creature, but man is vanity; and not only some or few or more men are
such, but, verily all and every man (none excepted) is vanity: and verily every
man is such not in his weak, sick or afflicted estate only, but in his best
estate, neither in his best estate is he such at some times or in some part,
degree, or measure, but verily every man at his best estate, is altogether
vanity subject as I said, to a change or dissolution of his earthly tabernacle,
his body.

When the great and wise Preacher had enlarged himself on this Theme by way of
doctrine in his eleven foregoing chapters, (...) at the end in his last chapter
by way of application to awake, stir and rowse men out of their sleep and
security, he calls upon them; and as though he thought that the old man needed
not this rowsing, having incitements enough besides, he begins with the youth,
and calls to him saying, Remember, not hereafter but now, Eccles. 12.1.
now remember in the days of thy youth, before the evil day come, that is
faith he, before the keepers of the house (the head and hands, as though
stricken with palsy) shall tremble: and before the strong men (the shoulders
and thighs) shall bow themselves: and before the grinders (that is, the teeth)
fail, because they are few: and before those that look out at the windows
(that is, the eyes) be darkened (or wax dim) before all these shall happen unto
thee, which will come to pass when old age approaches, young man, says the
wiseman, remember. Remember, but what? and when? why, now in thy youth remember
thy Creator to serve and fear him, and not to spend thy days in vanity; And why
now, and not hereafter as well? no, not so well hereafter, says he, as now,
because man (hourly) goes to his long home, which is the last house wherein he
must sleep, and this last house and long home is the grave.

But notwithstanding this frailty, brevity, and instability of life, it were a
great stay and comfort to man if he might know the certain period of his life,
and for this the holy Prophet earnestly prayed, dying, Lord make me to know
mine end, and the measure of my days what it is, that I may know how frail I
am. But this for ought we read was never granted him to know, nor to any in
mercy, save only to one good King Hezekiah, who ^^on his sincere repentance and
earnest prayer obtained the enlargement of his days to fifteen years.

It is a rule observed by Physicians, that when the Patient is most frollick
and thinks himself best in health and strength, that then he is nearest unto
sickness: and I am sure that this is a certain maxim in Divinity, that he
draws nearest unto God, who fears that he is farthest from him; and so it is
in this case that the further off we take out selves from death, that often
times the nearer our approach is to it.

For the key of the grave hangs, say the Jewish Rabbis, at Gods girdle, which
he trusts none with but himself: and as the day of Judgment Christ professes
that as man he knows not, so none but God knows certainly the day of our
death: and that which Christ answered his Apostles in another case, may rightly
take place here, Act. 1.7.
it is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father has put
in his own power.

Therefore as the beast in the toil, and the bird and fish are taken in the
net, whiles they were seeking or hunting for prey: so man while he is
meditating or committing adultery, rebellion or murder, is himself made the
slaughter; the Assyrians, Belshazzar, Zimri, besides many millions more prove
this position; for they the Assyrians intending the destruction of Judah, the
next night are suddenly dead they wist not how: 2 Kings 39.35.
for by an Angel of the Lord, says the text, were slain of them one hundred
fourscore and five thousand: the like we read of Heraclius his army, whereof in
one night were found dead fifty and two thousand: and of Belshazzar it is
recorded that while he was carrowsing in the sacred ves^^ of the Temple, Dan.
5.30.
the handwriting went out against him, so that the same night he was slain:
and we read that Zimri and Cosbi breathed their last being both taken away
while they were reaking hot in the act of beastly uncleanness: Number. 25.8.
when the young men of the Prophets were feasted there was found, 2. King. 4
says the story, death in the pot, and the pot has been the death of many
young and old and midse-aged: we read in the Gospel that the rich man said,
Take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12.19.
for thou have much goods laid up for many years, and yet all these years are
suddenly contracted into less then one day, and he called fool for his
presumptuous calculation of the time of his life, for the Lord says, Thou
fool, this night shall thy soul be required of thee; and what befell this rich
man may become every, man's case, and that as well the young, as the old.

The Prophet Jeremiah has this saying; Jer. 9.21.
Death is come up in our windows, (for though the windows be never so close
shut, Death will come in) and is entered into our palaces to cut off the young
men and the children, and least any might fool himself as the rich man did and
shall say, My wisdom, my strength, health or wealth shall defend me and keep
me from death, hear the Prophet. Thus says the Lord, Ver. 23.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in
his strength, let not the rich man glory in his riches, intimating hereby that
neither wisdom, strength, nor wealth, can save from death.

Our holy Leiturgy has taught us confidering the uncertain surprisall of Death
both in the time of health and wealth to pray, From sudden death, good Lord
deliver us: and if any over holy pretender object against this prayer, because
every man ought ever to be prepared to encounter death, let him answer why God
was pleased to give Hezekiah a forewarning of the time of his death, who though
he were a man who by Gods own testimony and elogy did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, yet because he might have been unprepared at that time,
therefore God gave him time to think and prepare himself, and that all things
were not so well in order for the soul of that good King, as they should have
been for a dying man, it appears by the message of the Lord sent unto him
saying, set thy house in order, for thou shall dye and not live.

They come short who say by house here is meant only household affairs: for can
we think that God had more respect or care to these, then to the soul of
Hezekiah, which is the Temple and house of God, though trusted to Hezekiahs
keeping: and when Hez^kiah is commanded to set his house in order before his
death, 2 King. 18.3.
it is apparent enough, that somewhat therein necessary to be put in better
order, was out of good order; and therefore as apparent it is that the very
best may pray if for no other reason, (though many more there are) yet for
this, that he may set his house in order before he dye; for as the best swept
house may gather some dust or uncleanness in an hour, so the purest soul of
man: and therefore as he is ever bound to pray, Lord forgive me, so he is ever
bound to pray, From sudden death good Lord deliver me, that he may before his
death say the same prayer which many suddenly surprised by death have not had
time to say, neither at their death to pray, or say as S. Stephen, or our most
blessed Savior, who though they were before their deaths approach as well
prepared for death as could be, yet even then and as blessing God for this
benefit and mercy, they prayed not only for themselves but for others: whereas
he who is suddenly stroke dead has no time with that blessed Martyr, or the
son of God to say, Father forgive them, or, Lord have mercy on me: The thief
that dyed near Christ found this as an especiallmerc y from heaven, that before
his death he had time and grace to say, Luke 23.42.
Lord remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, and this mercy was a
thousand times greater to the thief on the Cross, then if he had dyed on his
bed without prayer.

I am not ignorant that such seeming Saints as mislike of this prayer against
sudden death, reply that men are daily put in mind of their death by the
frequent preaching of the Gospel and the hourly spectacles of mortality, and
these are enough to prepare them against a sudden death; I know that the like
frequent preaching might be means enough and sufficient to prevent and resist
all sin, and is it therefore so effectual, but that notwithstanding all the
preaching sin continues? I would I could say it abounds not, for all the
preaching, and would I could not truly say that it more abounds by the latter
kind of preaching. But tell me I pray, did not Noah preach unto the old world
of the deluge which should destroy them, and therefore that they should repent
and be prepared for death? had not Sodom fair warnings in the like kind? and
had not Jerusalem caveats and preparatives given it by Christ himself to
prepare and prevent that which might suddenly fall on them? But did these
warnings and preachings produce the effect? and to tell us we should be ever
prepared for death, is no more then to tell us we should avoid all sin: but
this telling, this preaching works not ever the effect for which preaching was
ordained, and therefore in Gods name pray against sudden death.

In the Prophet Ezekiel and the Revelations of S: John, Ezekiel. 1^ Rev. 1.
we find the Beasts said to be full of eyes, as though they had eyes not only
in their heads, but in their hands, feet, tongues; that all should watch
against the approach of death, and for a preparation to Judgment: and not only
the Apostles, but Christ himself often preached this lesson to his disciples,
and lest they might forget it, three times a little before his departure out of
the world Christ bids his disciples watch, Mat. 26.
and in the parable of the Virgins, he gives the reason of this advise, for ye
know neither the day nor the hour, Mat. 25.13.
wherein the son of man calls either to death or judgment. For as it is in
another parable, he shall come secretly and closely as a thief that he may not
be discovered, Mar. 13.39.
but take thee unawares, he shall come in the night; therefore says he, that
you be not surprised watch. He that has any enterprise or great work to do,
and has but an hour, a day, or a week, or a short set time allotted for the
same, how careful he is to observe the time how it passes that it slips not
away before his work be ended? And can man be said to have any greater work to
finish, then so to negotiate and do his business here, that he may be ready and
prepared whenever he shall be summoned by death, to give an account of his
stewardship, and so not fear that doom, Go thou accursed into hell fire: but
rather that other, Come ye blessed of my Father, enter into the kingdom
prepared for you?

S. Peter for close of this point, 2 Pet. 3. 16, 11, 12
is most worthy our reading and best consideration, Seeing, says he, the Lord
will come (suddenly, unexpectedly, and to us uncertainly) as a thief in the
night, what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and
godliness? looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God.

And as the frailty and uncertainty of man's life should instrnct us to this: so
should the iniquity and misery thereof cure the itch of the desire of life,
which is no less to the best then what Job speaks: Job. 14.1 Ge. 47.9.
man is of few days and full of trouble, which is verified in Jacob who
pronounced his to be such when he said, Few and evil have the days of the
years of my life been: the years few, but all the days full of evil: of evil
either of sin to be lamented, or of affliction to be suffered; and for this
cause as many Philosophers blamed nature as a stepmother to man, so many
nations and people rejoice at their friends going out, but weep at their
coming into the world. And Tertullian has a conceit (call it a conceit
because I cannot warrant it) that male children as soon as born express their
lamentation by A A as sons of Adam, and the females by E E as coming from Eve,
the parents of all their misery and sorrow.

Yet this is apparent that when God had fashioned the earth, and the two great
lights, Genesis 1^
the Sun and the Moon, and after that he had made the waters and the beasts,
that after every days work of each of these it is said, God saw them that they
were good: which he forbeares to speak of man in special, foreseeing both the
evil that he would fall into, and that evil which should fall upon him.

And to the first evil man from the first was so prone and subject, that
before he was much more then a day old he fell into it, which like an ill weed
grew so fast that before the flood in the first generation God saw that the
wickedness of man (or mankind) was great, Genesis 6.5.
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually: If we consult with King David and Solomon, they will speak as much
for their times, and the like will S. Paul and the other Apostles for the times
wherein they lived, and as the ends of the world are fallen upon us, so have we
exceeded all that went before us in evi^l.

And for the evil or misery which man suffers in this life, I need say no more
then what Job and S. Paul have said before, who besides diverse others have
compared man's life to a warfare, or the life of a soldier, in which, if there
be any misery or iniquity to be found in any profession or trade in a small
quantity, then here it is bound up altogether in an huge volume: for all sins
in them are so rife and common from the least to the greatest, that you may
truly speak of it as is said in the Gospel of the unjust Judge, Luke 18.
he feared neither God nor man.

But that I may contract my self, and speak to the misery of man's life under
the comparison of it to the life of a soldier, I must necessarily tell you
what the enemies are, with which man in this life is to graple.

The first and chief of these is the General the Devil, who for his agility is
called a spirit, for his subtility and stratagems a serpent, and an old Dragon,
for his strength and power to devour a Lion, and in his band and under his
command are principalities and powers in high places, and legions of these
without number, Mat. 4.
and this enemy is of that undaunted spirit, that he durst encounter the Son of
God, as we read in the Gospel: and although he were foiled by him, yet in
revenge and with greater malice he never has ceased to war against the upright
Job, the chosen vessel S. Paul, Rev. 12.7.
against Michael and his Angels, yea we find him fighting with the Church and
Saints of God: Lev. 13.7.
and as he scratched, buffeted, and wounded Job and S. Paul, so the Church and
the Saints, in his encounter he overcame them, and yet continually this enemy,
as S. Peter witnesses, 1 Pet. 5.8.
walks up and down seeking whom he may devour.

The second enemy of man in this life, is the Devils Major general, or
Marshall of the Field the World, 1 Jo. 5.19.
which as S. John speaks like the General himself, is wholly set on to do
mischief, being the great Malignant, and in this company ye shall find Pharaoh
who injoyns Israel to continue their task in making brick, but takes away their
straw: like the Roman Conquerors to cense and number the people, to fight under
their banners; and to pay all taxes, and customs, though both against their
wills: and such are the slights of these soldiers that as Cain, Joab, and
Judas they will talk of peace, speak friendly and kiss whom, they mean to
devour.

And in their company they have the whore in the Revelations arrayed in purple,
Rev. 17.4.
and gilded with gold, having a cup of Gold in her hand full of all abomination
and filthiness, and with that she allures and deceives her followers, although
upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother
of harlots and abominations of the earth, V. 6.
and this woman ye shall find drunk with the blood of the Saints and of the
Martyrs of Jesus Christ.

The third enemy of man in this life, though not so cruel and bloody to man as
the former, yet as dangerous to him as being of his own family, and lying in
his own bosom, and this is his flesh; and this enemy is so dangerous to man
that when he may flee from the world or resist the Devil, as the Apostles
counsails against them, yet of this fleshly enemy we may speak as of the Sun
none can shelter or defend himself from the heat thereof, nor fly from it, for
it is man's self; Against this enemy called the thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7.
S. Paul though a chosen vessel strugled, fought, and prayed, yea he prayed
thrice that it might depart from him, but as to this suit he was not heard, and
therefore he cries out, Romans 7.24.
o wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of sin! For
though I find the spirit willing and resisting, yet this flesh I find weak and
yielding, in so much as we may here use the words of S. James, James. 1.14.
every man is tempted by his own lust: and to his enemies assaults every man,
noble, ignoble, rich, poor, young, old, more or less is subject, according to
the heat that is in him. For can a man carry fire, says the wise man, in his
bosom, and not burn? Amnon had often seen his sister Thamar, and was not
inflamed, but at the last he was tempted and overcome.

Will you now take the sum of all? Then know that this life of man is a Sea of
trouble, a school of vanity, an inticement to fraud, a labyrinth of error, a
dungeon of darkness, a den of thieves, a wood of thorns, a valley of tears, a
troubled stream of care and sorrow, a tale of lies, and a sweet poison. And he
that can delight himself in these may love this life, but not else: For though
man be as a soldier, who may not move out of his station until his General
God Almighty, who placed him here, call him, and bid him go; yet his love and
delight should not rest upon the place and employment, but upon him who placed
him here to fulfill his commands, and to fight for his glory.

CHAP. XXXII. The Honor of this world deserves not man's love.
When I speak here of worldly honor, Prove. 22.1. Eccles. 7.1.
I understand not a man's good name; or his godly, just, and honest life, which
the wiseman calls a precious ointment to keep man's name sweet and delightful
in life and after death: For this is to be desired and preserved by every good
and wise man.

Neither do I understand here such praise and glory which are the attendants
and followers of our good and laudable actions; But I understand by honor,
that exaltation or lifting up a man to some more eminent place, office, or
title of dignity, above others of his rank, for some excellency seen in him
above others; and this to be given him not as a summary reward of his virtuous
actions (for the true reward hereof is his blessedness, and felicity, and is
the gift of God) but as a testimony and sign of the favor of man: For this
kind of honor makes not a man more excellent or truly glorious, but shows him
to be such if he be in himself truly virtuous and excellent.

In the Greek, Latin and English (...) honestus and honest, some derive from
honor, intimating that the honest and the honorable are or should be all one,
and that he only should he honorable. That is as I before said honest and
virtuous: and such an honor as this should by every man be desired, as being
that which God himself has promised to give to all such as honor or glorify
his holy name, for so God himself speaks; 1. Sam. 2.30.
Those who honor me I will honor: yea more in the same chapter, the Lord
(oft-times) rayseth up the poor out of the dust, V. 8.
to set them among Princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory: and
to this honor of Gods giving, every one ought to aspire, and not simply to the
honor of the worlds giving: For the honor of the world, for the most part is
such as the world it self is, and the world says S. John, 1 Jo. 5.19.
is set, and lies in wickedness.

And so, and by the same means, is the honor of the world gained either by
serving the wicked turns of men, Acts 5.9.
or by money. Simon Magus desirous to be accounted some great one, and to that
end that he might as the Apostles did work miracles, he presently took the
course of the world, V. 18.
and offered the Apostles money: money thought he (and millions more think, and
have practiced the like) is the first step and readiest way to be great in
honor; Therefore to get wealth first, and then by it a gilded coat, a
Knighthood, a Baronie, an Earldom, to be a favorite as Haman, though after
all, as he to the gallows, is the worlds simonie or sorcery; What the chief
Captain spoke of his freedom in Rome, Acts 22.38.
may a Mercer, a Draper, an Usurer or Grasier say, with a great sum of money
obtained I this honor. And if a few can say as S. Paul, I was so born, yet not
the tenth man, that his honor was the reward of his virtue.

And yet would this were the worst: for as we read, when the Heathen people saw
Mordecai and Esther who were Jews honored by the King, Esther 8.17.
then most of the Heathen became Jews; for (says the text) the fear of the
Jews came upon them: for favor and honor, these, as thousands and millions
more, have changed their Religion.

And would it held so only with the Heathen who changed from the worse to the
better, and that it were not too frequent with Christians, and those not only
the Laytie, but such as would be ranked in the holy order: that these would not
only preach for honor, but that they would not as the Gnostick heretics side
with Jews or any religion, rather then suffer for their first faith and
profession, yea with Jews or any other, to prove seditious, rebellious,
murderers, that they may live happily and sit in the chair of honor.

Saul's word is become most men's desire, 1 Samuel 15
Honor me before the people, and to purchase this at what iniquity, villainy or
actions to be abominated have they stuck? Jud. 9.
for honor Abimelech the son of a whore will kill seventy of his brethren the
legitimate sons of his father, and Absalom will rebel against the crown and
life of his own father: 2 Samuel 15
Athalia will destroy all the royal seed for honor: the Romans often did so,
2 King. 17.
and before them to get the highest throne of honor it became frequent and
customary, as it were with the Kings of Israel to do the like: witness among
the rest Jehu who slew not only seventy of the royal seed of Israel, but as
many as he could lay hands on, of the other kingdom of Judah, to which he
could pretend no title. So true and general is that saying of the Poet; Honor
and the crown cannot be bought at too dear a rate.

And the Devil was so well acquainted with man's disposition in this case, that
being foiled in his former temptations of our Savior, yet he kept this as his
last card or engine to set him up aloft, and to show and promise him all the
glory of the world: For he was well assured that it this failed, nothing would
make him to fall down and worship him: for the Devil had found it hold, as in
those before mentioned, and that it did take and seldom fail.

In the Idol set up by Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.
find you of millions any more then three who refused to fall down and worship
the Devil in the idol, and all for the favor alone of the King? from whom as
generally all this honor flows (and so in the book of Esther is five times
related, whom the King shall please to honor) so for the most part, it is
oftener given to an Egyptian then to a Joseph, to an Haman an Agagite, then to
Mordecai the Jew, to an Herod then to a John Baptist, and the commission shall
be to Saul the bloody persecutor, and not to Paul the Apostle of Christ; So
that of the worlds honor we may speak as S. Paul does of members in man's body:
1 Cor. 12 23.
Those members which we think least worthy of honor, upon these we bestow more
abundant honor. And as in Jothams parable among the trees, Jud. 9.
so it mostly fares with the honor and dominion in this world, where the Vine
and the Olive which honor and benefit God and man, they refuse to be King over
the trees; But what the Italian has in his proverb, what Christ refused at the
Devils hand, the glory of the world, this the Pope readily and thankfully
accepted: so it falls out in the civil government, that what the merciful,
gracious, and good refuse, this the Bramble, the Exactor, the oppressor, the
tyrant embraces, whose language is as there, you that put not your trust under
my shadow, let fire come out of me to devour the very Cedars, the greatest on
the mountains.

And this honor and dominion has been so much observed to be generally given
to the worst of men, that it caused not only Philosophers and the Heathen to
think that the Devil reigned and ruled in this world, but even men well read in
Gods school, as Job, David, and other Prophets, it moved them to scruple and
take offense at this course.

But he that looks upon God as unequal, or unjust in this, cannot see
perfectly and aright into Gods ways: For though God advance these, men to high
places, yet it is not truly so much to blazon their honor, as to publish their
shame, both to the now living and to those that shall come after them. For to
set an Ass or a Bear to rule over the rest of the Beasts, were to proclaim the
sottishness of the one, and the ravenousness of the other: which two qualities
when seen and felt, what can they produce but the hate and conspiring of all
the beasts to tear and destroy them?

And so little is such advancement to the good of the wicked, that as the
Psalmist says, Ps. 35.6.
Their way is dark and slippery; the original says darkness and slipperiness
it self, and thereupon it follows that destruction shall come upon him at
unawares; V. 8.
nay to acquit God utterly that he advances not these for their good, the
Prophet plainly and to Gods honor truly piofesseth, that these and such men as
I here speak of, surely God does set in slippery places, Psalm. 73.18.
and he sets them there as it were on purpose, that they may fall as in a
moment, or if their place will not do it, then God himself will: for so it is
in the same verse, surely thou o God will cast them down into destruction: so
that Gods raising them higher, is but to give them the greater fall, and the
same the Prophet Jeremiah has in the person of God, Jet. 23.12:
I will make their way slippery, I will bring evil upon them.

And hear what Job more largely and plainly speaks for God in this case when he
says, Job. 12.17.
He leads counselors away spoiled, and makes the judges fools, V. 19.21.
yea he leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrows the mighty, he pours
contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the strength of the mighty: and this surely
cannot be construed co be done by God for the good of such wicked ones; and yet
a man would rather pity the madness, then admire the wisdom of these men that
greedily hunt for honor, when he does consider what pains, expense, hazard of
good name, goodness, life and soul, the ambitious man both gets and holds his
honor with.

It is observable that when Samuel according to Gods appointment was to anoint
Saul King, that he first invited him and set before him as a dish prepared and
reserved for him the shoulder, intimating therebythat upon his shoulders the
burden of the whole land was to be laid and born.

And we see that Christian Kings crowns, as Noblemens coronets, are set with
crosses, though those of Kings have the greater, for that herein they imitate
the King of Kings whose head was crowned with thorns; and not only crowns and
coronets, but all their robes are weighty and cumbersome, and made only
supportable by the honor they signify to the world; and so heavy are these
honors that if rightly undertaken and administered, the bearer may truly say
with S. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.29.
Who of my flock (and charge) is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, (or
wronged) and I burn not? (to right or revenge him) so that as S. Paul spoke of
the Churches, so may the King speak of his dominions, The care of them all
comes upon me daily.

And not only care to act and do for them, but patience to suffer from and by
them. King David shall be crossed and wronged by Joab, and he must suffer it:
nay he shall hear, whether he will or no, the revilings and curses of a railing
foul mouthed Shimei: so that as the Romans riding in triumph had some sat by
(...) derogate from their great achievements, and to revile them; so fares it
with the best Kings and rulers, do they what they can: when S. Paul was exalted
he then likewise was buffeted. 2 Cor. 12.7.


Nay further, to get and keep honor many an ambitious worldling does that
contrary to his disposition and desire which otherwise he would not do: for he
will make brick without straw, as the Israelites were constrained: that is,
for a time he will wait, serve, and work in base employment, and upon his own
pay and charge in hope of Pharaohs favor: nay rather then offend the superior
powers and so be cast out of the Council or employment, he will not dare to be
seen with his Savior Christ, nor will he come at him as Nicodemus did, not,
but by night; and if they of the great Council at Jerusalem shall say one by
one that the King must dye, these will be as forward to vote it as the rest,
Joh. 11.48.
lest the conquering Romans come and take away the honor and benefit of our
places.

And yet when places of honor are got by such means, they are as uncertainly
held as they were hardly gotten, tall trees, houses and steeples, we know,
stand most subject to the force and stroke of winds, thunder and other
tempests: and the fictions of Phaeton burnt with the ill guidance of the
chariot of the Sun, and of Icarus melting his waxen wings and breaking his neck
by soaring too high, what are they but mythologies and morals of the fate due
to high climbers in the world? So soon as Saul was anointed King he is sent
forthwith to Rachels Sepulcher: 1 Samuel 10.2.
sorrow, or death, or both, are pages to highest honor, and no sooner did our
Savior hear the joyful acclamations and triumphs of the people crying
Hosanna, blessed be the King in the highest, but the next day after follows
Hosanna, crucify, crucife him, with the basest.

Or if he escape death himself with his crown, 2 Samuel 1.19.
yet as David, he lamenteh the coming to the crown by the death of King Saul,
saying, v. 21.
the beauty of Isr^el is fallen, v. 24.
he is vilely cast away as though he had not been anointed with oil. Therefore
weep ye subjects over the King who clothed you with Scarlet and with other
delights and ornaments.

Or grant that he comes not in by blood, yet when he is possessed of the Crown,
his rest and content is little other then that of Damocles, who to try the
happiness of a crown was set in a throne of State with a rich feast, goodly
attendants and sweet music, but had withal a sharp pointed sword hanging in a
small weak thread, the fear of whose fall bereft him of all the pleasures and
content that all the dainties might hare otherwise afforded him: and such and
little else rightly and truly is the real content of a royal. throne.

Or yet suppose that he be of a spirit not easily daunted, with fear or subject
to discontent and passion, yet in so high a ladder as that which reaches to
the crown, be there but one rotten staff, be it blood, oppression, luxury,
this may fail and deceive his footing, and lay his honor in the dust; Read and
consider what is spoken of Antiochus; 1 Mac. 2. 62.
To day he shall be listed up, but to morrow be shall not be found: He shall be
turned into his dust and his thoughts shall come to nothing: for his glory
shall be dung and worms. Or will you rather take it in the words of the
Psalmist? Ps. 49.12.
Man being in honor abides not, (for) his way it his folly, and like a sheep
(not as an honorable person) he is laid in the grave, and his glory shall not
descend after him; where he sums up all in the last verse saying, Man that is
in honor and understands not, is like the beasts that perish. v. 20.


And now you have heard at what expense of travail, cost, trouble and danger,
this honor is purchased: now see what the thing called honor is, and whether
it be worth man's love or the half of that which man daily proffers for it; The
Psalmist says, Ps. 39.7.
He walks in a vain show, or as other translations have it, in a vain image
or shadow: so that honor being properly and causally in the affection of him
that gives the honor, and in the breath of the people, as in the trumpet that
proclaims it, what can this honor be in the person honored more then a shadow
of the Kings favor, or an echo of the peoples voice? and that this may appear
so, when you see the picture of a King and a beggar, if this of the beggar
though in rags be better drawn and shadowed then that of the King though with
a Crown and Scepter, yet this picture we commend and prefer before that, and
that only for the well laying on of the color and shadow.

Or if you will, you may liken this worldly honor to a man in a gilded or
laced coat, who to many may seem a noble man, yet indeed is but a lackey or a
page to run on his Masters errands, or to do base services for him, who thus
arrayed him: or compare this honor to a colored butterfly, after which
ignorant boys and silly fools hunt and tire themselves, taking many a fall
(and repulse) in the pursuit, which if they miss they lie down, and as Ahab
failing of Nabaoths vinyeard, they cry out and grieve, and if perchance they
get it, yet what have they in very deed more then a colored butterfly?

Or it is such a picture or shadow that the same hand that gave it the honor,
can with the turn of the hand dash it out again, and the same breath of the
people that proclaimed him honorable, can with another breach make him ugly
and cry, hang him.

What then shall we conclude of this honor other ways then the wise man
counsels us saying, ^^^l. 7.4.
Seek not pre-eminence nor the seat of honor from the King?

And yet, as I spoke in seeking riches, so I must say of honor. 1. So you seek
not more then is justly due to you or your abilities; 2. So you seek it not
inordinately by wicked and corrupt means; 3. So you seek it not thereby to grow
proud over others and to oppress them, or thereby to heap up unjust gotten
goods, and to spend them on your lusts, seek honor in Gods name.

First, for this seeking that, and only that, and so much as is due to you; 2.
that seeking it by just and lawful means; 3. that it may serve for the advance
of Gods glory and the relief of thee poor and oppressed, seek it in Gods name,
and as from God.

Who as he is the first spring and clear fountain of true honor, and so
proclaimed, 1. Sam. 2.20. 1 Chr. 16.27.
Those that honor me I will honor, and again, Honor and glory are from the
Lord; So he can and will when he sees time and cause, either immediately and
by his own hand, give thee honor as he did to Meses, the Judges, and the Kings
of Judah, or else mediately and by the hands of others, he will cause Kings
whose hearts are in his hands, as Pharaoh to lay honor on Joseph, and
Nebuchadnezar on Daniel; or rather then fail he will cause Ahasuerus to
dishonor his favorite Haman, and to double that honor on faithful Mordecai:
and he that seeks honor by that rule and means which S. Paul has prescribed,
that is by well doing, Romans 2.7.
either he shall receive it here on earth, or a far better in heaven, 2 Cor.
4.17.
which the same Apostle calls, a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.

And this many holy men not only in sacred order, but Nobles, Princes, and
Kings earnestly longing after and laboring for, have voluntarily and freely
either renounced the taking of honorable and royal places in Church or State,
or have resigned them that they might intentively pursue that other honor in
heaven above.

Yea not only these Godly and holy men prosessors of Christ's lowliness have
done this, but even many heathens, and among them as well Poets as Philosophers
have neglected and abandoned the golden fetters, and gilded rays of worldly
honor, and in stead thereof have betaken themselves to contemplative lives,
studious of virtue and well doing, which under God in a moral sense is the
right parent of all true honor.

CHAP. XXXIII. Pleasures and delights are not worthy of man's love.
NOt only the heathen generally were carried away with the sin of pleasure and
luxury, as Sardanapalus the founder of Tarsus (where S. Paul was born) upon
whose tomb it was written (that which S. Paul alludes unto) Let us eat and
drink, 2 Cor. 15 22.
for to morrow we shall dye, but some kind of Philosophers, as the Epicures,
placed man's chief good in the pleasures and delights of this life; Yea King
Solomon seems to join and close with these when he says, I commended mirth
because a man has no better thing under-the Sun, Eccles. 8.15.
then to eat, drink and be merry s^^^ that shall abide with him of his labor.

And to speak truth, though it redound to the shame of men, this sin has had
more followers then any other, exceeding covetousness or ambition; the woman
in the Revelation with a cup of fornication in her hand sits upon waters; by
which waters are understood multitudes of people: and that which some have
observed of the Diamond, that the hardest of them is mollified and broken by
the milk of the Goat a luxurious or lacivious beast, holds true often times with
the strongest and otherwise the wisest men; for not only Samson in holy writ,
Genesis 6.2.
and Hercules in profane writers, but the Sons of God and King Solomon have
been overtaken and carried captive herewith.

And no marvel, for the Heathen and their Philosophers, as the Sadduces, held
no resurrection, nor immortality of the soul, and therefore hoping for no joy
after this life, they would be sure to have it here. Yet I will not think that
Solomon, though his writings seem too much to savor of this leaven, was wholly
infected with this beastly opinion: but that his speeches may be taken
ironically by way of jeer and scorn, as that speech of God is, Behold man is
become like one of us: and this may appear to be so when you compare other
passages of Salomons, in the same book with this mentioned, as if he said, I
will prove thee with mirth; Eccles. 2 1.
therefore enjoy pleasure, but behold (says he) this it vanity, and vanity is
sin.

And that pleasure is such a vanity consider the little peace and content, but
the great disquiet, trouble, and torture that follows it. That grief follows
pleasure, as the shadow does the body in a sunshine, was the saying of Poets as
Philosophers. For as the itch in the flesh causes us to scratch, and the
scratching procures rawness with pain, and after all comes a scab: so after
fleshly lust succeeds both trouble and shame, and after this sin, more by many
degrees then after any other, be it cover of riches, honor, or the like, for
after these sins few cry out as S. Paul did, Woe is me wretched man that I am!
who shall deliver me from this body of sin, or sin of my fleshly body: whereas
this sin of pleasure resembles much the woman in the Prophet, Zach. 5: 7:
which in a similitude is said to be in a great pot, be it of pleasure or the
like, but there is a great weight of lead upon the mouth of the pot, not only
to keep her down in shame and pain, but also that she cannot get forth when she
is once in, and that must increase and double both her shame and pain; that
which the Prophet speaks of all sin, I say: 57: 21.
is most certainly of this, That there is no peace to the wicked, says my God;
whereas the fruits of Gods Spirit abandoning and mortifying these lusts are
peace and joy, Gal. 5.22.
present and aeternall.

It is storied of Socrates, that when he was to declaim against the foulness of
this sin of luxury, that he covered his face, as being ashamed to express that
in words, which men openly showed in their actions; and it is worthy our
observation, that the Spirit of God in the penmen of holy writ taught them to
speak of this sin in covert and modest terms, and sometimes by
circumlocutions, that the ears of the godly might not otherwise be offended,
or the hearts of the wicked be corrupted: for as our first parents seeing their
nakedness were ashamed: so if there be any shame left in man after this sin it
will appear. S. Paul by way of question proves this when he says, What fruit
had ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? To. 6.21
but more plainly saying, 1 Cor. 5.1:
There is fornication among you, and such as (for shame) is not so much as to
be named: but most plainly to the Philippians, Their God is their belly, Phi.
3.19.
and their glory is their shame.

But shame and pain are not the only or the least evil attendants of pleasure,
but there are worse that follow, as the loss or darkning at least of man's best
facul^ies, his understanding and reason: and not this to follow alone, but to
be accompanied with the worm of conscience, and after all hell fire.

Other sins, as covetousness, ambition, lying, quicken, but this sin being
gross and fleshly clouds and stupefieth the understanding; the Prophet speaks
it plainly, Hosea. 4.11.
whoredom and wine take away or robb man of his heart. The wanton Goddess
Venus, bath her name given by the Greeks as being without an understanding
soul, and the Philosopher gives the reason hereof, for that the immoderate use
of Venery sucks and draws away the purest blood and the cleerest spirits from
the brain, wherewith the understanding is made lively and quick; if you would
find an instance in holy writ, look upon Solomon, who being a man made by God
of the greatest understanding and wisdom, through this sin became in plain
English the greatest sool, which most of his actions after did plainly prove.

It is storied, or sabled if you will, but the moral will serve our turn, that
Ulysses his companions were by Circe a witch turned into swine, in which
condition of being they were so well pleased, that they refused to be changed
into men again: so much were they delighted with the habit and custom of
beastly delights; the thing applies it self, and of this picture of these
betwitched beasts let the Sodomites be the motto or word, who over swollen and
ready to break with this sin of fleshly uncleanness, are by the Angel of God
stricken blind, and so, as for ought we read, Genesis 19.11:
they never recovered their sight again; and what is spoken of their bodily
sight, may be as true of the sight in the soul, man's reason, which by this sin
more then any other, in all is darkened, in many for a time blinded, and in some
irrecoverably lost.

And would this were the worst: for in the (...) admit of a beastly or swinish
man into the place of purity? A cleanly man or woman will not suffer a durty
nasty clown, much less a beast or a swine to enter, and much less to stye
himself in his adorned chamber; and then how can we think that God will suffer
a man that walks after the flesh in the lust of uncleaness, 2 Pet. 2.10.
to enter and set up his abode and everlasting habitation in the throne of
heaven? No no, says S. Paul, let no man deceive you with vain words, Ephesians.5.6.
of pleading nature, natural infirmity, company, custom, the opinion of
Philosophers or practice of otherwise wise and great men: all these and the
like the Apostle calls vain words, which may deceive us but be assured, says
he, Notwithstanding all these, no unclean person has, or can have, any
inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God.

And yet after all this I shall not doubt to affirm, that as God has
graciously breathed into man a living soul, so he was and is as wonderfully
pleased co afford him all good means for the preservation of his life: and I
conceive no reasonable man will deny the use of honest delight, pleasure, and
recreation both of soul and body to be numbered among these. Provided that these
pleasures, delights, and recreations, be lawful and of good report, and that
they be used seasonably and with moderation, without which conditions syncerely
observed, those pleasures and delights which are otherwise lawful, yea and
necessary, will become sinful, and without the merits of Christ our Redeemer
and repentance by forsaking them, can be no less then damnable.

CHAP. XXXIV. The love of women and of their beauty has caused many evils,
and therefore for themselves alone they are not to be loved.
THe love of man to woman is naturally implanted, ever since God made her an
help meet for man: Genesis 2.20.
For man could not take any comfort and content in beasts, either by speech or
for procreation of children: but being she is bone of man's bone and flesh of
his flesh, as Adam spoke, Therefore, says God, A man shall leave father and
mother for her, Ephesians. 5.31.
and so says S. Paul they shall be joined or glewed together, and shall become
one flesh: Hereupon for a man to become a woman-hater, was among the heathens
as to be called a Monster nature, or an unnatural piece of flesh.

And this love is inflamed and increased by the beauty, comely proportion of
the body, and graceful demeanor of the woman, which has been and so proved as
a letter of recoramendation, and superscription of favor to man, and not only
Christians but heathens have called this a divine gift, as arising from the
most excellent temper of the soul, created and infused by God: and thereupon
they conjecture the internal disposition of the soul from the outward beauty
of the body, as judging Moses, David, Daniel, Rachel, Judith, Esther, all spoke
in Scripture to be fair and godly, accordingly to be fitted for great
achievements, or several excellent uses.

And this holds often times so true, that not only Poets seigned Ganymede the
beautiful to be the cup bearer and favorite of their great God Jupiter, but
the heathens, as the Lacedaemonians, held their great sights like those of the
Greek Olympiads, in defense of their greater esteemed beauties; and both Greece
and Troy can speak much to this, which lost so much blood about the beauty of
one loose Helena.

The Civilians have gone so far in the esteem of this beauty, that they say
if a man promise marriage to a fair woman, and she prove deformed before the
contract, that he may forsake her as though she were not now the same woman,
although only changed in countenance and complexion; and they add, that beauty
with graceful proportion and demeanor, in a poor man or woman, is portion and
estate sufficient to couple them to the less handsome, though rich.

And this, with other private thoughts and considerations, has taught women to
amend that by filthy art which has been denied them by God or Nature, and
accordingly to bestow much care and cost in waters, plasters, and paintings, to
cure, color and daube over scurvy faces.

If you ask me how this comes to pass, that beauty has gained such a powerful
working upon men and women; I confess I cannot readily say, whether this
arises from some secret disposition in the soul, some temper in the brain or
eye, but certain it is that the man who has the whole parts of a man, is
delighted with the beauty and comely composure of any creature, but especially
of a woman, though but pictured in lively colors, but then much more if her
beauty and motion be living; for her graceful moving her warbling tongue, and
her sparkling eye, often times gives hear, fire, and life to this beauty, but
above all the eye.

Philosophers searching how the sight is made, whether by the sending forth
light and spirits from the eye, or by taking the species and representations of
the thing to be seen into the eye, they conclude that it is done both ways:
and so indeed in this case of beauty and love the eye is the witch and the
thing bewitched: it is the inlet and outlet, the giver and taker of love upon
beauties score. In one word, it is as dry wood to take fire, and in an other
like fire to set the wood on burning.

Some have gone so far in the extolling of beauty as to call it the image of
God, which is true of the souls beauty, but cannot be so of the beauty
corporally save only in a double reflexed sense.

But many, and these not of inferior rank in the Church of Christ, have been
of opinion that the words in Genesis, The sons of God saw the Daughters of men
that they were fair, Genesis 6.2.
and they took them wives of all that they chose, were spoken of the Angels who
fell by the sight of woman's beauty, and hence they conclude how hard the
resistance of this temptation is, and teach us the more strongly to stand and
labor against it.

Now although we cannot say that by the sons of God in this text are understood
the created spirits in heaven, but the sons of Seth, who serving God are called
his sons, and that these saw and married the Daughters of men, that is, of
those who sprang from Cain and earthly ungodly men: yet this we may and do say,
that if sight alone (for the text speaks no more) wrought so much and so
strongly upon the sons of God, as to make such marriages, as soon after brought
the deluge and drowning of the whole world: Then what may we conceive that
talking, walking, conversing, dancing, touching and other dalliances with fair
women may work with the cumbustible matter or touchwood of fleshly man? my
counsel is, resist the beginning, shut the door or the windows; for Death,
Jer. 9.21.
as the Prophet speaks, enters in at the windows, the eyes; and it has been
the complaint of thousands, I had never sumed had I not seen. Thus fell our
first parents, and their whole race have tript, stumbled, and fallen in the
like manner.

And to strengthen thy self against this temptation, consider that as under
fair and sweet flowers you often times have found a venomous creature, and under
gilded pills a dram of poison, so under beauty there may be as much, which is
more to be shunned and avoided, then to be desired and embraced.

For first consider that though as Poets feigned, fair Narcissus, and so women
have fallen in love with their own beauty, which has cost them dear, loss of
modesty, reputation, honesty, life and soul, so it is of no worth or use to the
possessor or to the beautiful, but is as a picture or pageant made and set
only for the Spectator: so that if there be any real good in it, we may speak
of it as of that good, for which all creatures sensate and insensate were made,
which was for others and not for themselves.

But when both man and woman the possessor and beholder of this beauty, shall
consider the frailty and sudden fading thereof, he may as well fall in love
with a flower or shadow, as with it; for as it is like a tulip, which is of no
use, but only for sight, so is it often times of as small a continuance. So that
we may speak of it, as the Psalmist does of man's life, Ps. 90.
in the morning (about the age of sixteen or eighteen years) it is green,
about noon (thirty years of age) it begins to wither, but at night, at or
before fifty, it is out down and cast into the black smoaky oven, that some in
pity, more in scorn, may say as of Jezebel dead, Is this Jezebel, or is this
that lately admired piece of beauty? 2 King. 9.37.
so frail, so vain a thing is beauty, or a beautiful woman.

And not only is the beautiful woman frail herein, but as weak and frail to
that which is good, though strong and too strong, to that which is evil; For
the eldest child of this fair mother ( beauty) commonly is pride, which is as a
skin blown up with self-delight, and scorn of others, the two natural brats
or attendants of pride, as pride is of beauty.

And yet besides these fruits of beauty, there are others not a sew like them;
For beauty seldom begets the best housewives, but makes them gadders abroad;
For of what other use is beauty but to show it self, thereby either to inamour
or ensnare the beholders; or to gain some windy praise of their shadow of
beauty? fair Dinah will be gadding, and though she say it is to visit the
Daughters, it is to entangle and to be taken by the men of the land.

Again we say, as by way of proverb or common speech, fair and foolish, (or
ordinarily, not so wise at others) which proves natures equity, that if she
denies beauty to the hard favored, she makes her amends with wisdom, which
she denies to the fair; But indeed the fair piece so much confides in her
beauty, that she has neither time, wit nor will, to study the beauty of the
mind, which is judgment and discretion.

And for want of wit or judgment it often falls out with these fair snouts,
that if they have not what they long for or desire, they grow above others
impatient and impetuous; Rachel must have children, Genesis 31.
else she will dye: Herodias will not be pleased, no not with half a kingdom,
nor any thing can content her but the head of John Baptist: nor will our
grandame Eve be quiet till she have the forbidden fruit, though it be purchased
at no less rate then the death of mankind.

When S. Peter counsels men to honor women as the weaker vessels, some have
thought that counsel fit in this case, to temper such proud lust full women
with good words and gentle usage, as the best remedy: and I remember that when
Christ was plain with S. Peter saying, Come behind me Satan, though Peter
counseled his Master to be good to himself, yet when Zebedees wife
indiscreetly would require the precedence for her children above all the other
Apostles, yet Christ mildly answers her, You know not what you ask: and gives
her a reason for his refusal, adding, it is not mine to give; Fools and
children we see must be pleased or fooled with fair words, or else their
haughty beauty will make them above others mad.

That these kind of women are inconstant, fickle, and false, one day loving and
another hating, like the Chamaeleon or the planet Mercury, which are of that
color or disposition as is the plant or planet with which they are in
conjunction, is so ordinary a theme with Poets as other wise men, that they
have compared women to fortune which is said to be constant and certain in
nothing but levity, and inconstancy.

And if they be constant in any thing else, it is in coveting and ill getting,
that they may as vainly spend it, as. S. James says, on their lusts: and they
who would more exactly know in what kind these lusts are conversant, let them
read the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 3.16.
who in seven verses together tells us, and that in the first place of their
neeks ( bare and) stretched forth, with the bravery of their tinkling ornaments
about their feet, their caules, their round tires like the Moon, their chains,
bracelets and musters, the bonets, head-bands, rings, changeable suits of
apparel, the mantles, wimpels, crisping pins, the glasses, fine linen, hoods
and vailes; and to these, as additionalls of our later pride S. Peter has
added the plaiting of the hair, 1 Pet. 3.3.
wearing gold and rich apparel, and hence it comes that S. Peter speaks of
their eyes full of adultery, 2 Pet. 2
as though all this cost and wast were to show by their eyes what their hearts
desires.

You may read that Asa destroyed the stately and rich temple of Belphegor, 1
King. ^.15. 2 Chro. 2.
or Priapus, wherein were the most abominable uncleanness used and not to be
named by the most impudent and profligate men: yet this was built by women at
their cost and charges, and so was that golden calse (which the Isaelites
adored) made out of the car-rings and Jewels of the women, which though they
loved above all outward things of fortune, yet these they would part withal to
please themselves in Idolatry, lust and vain delights; yea the Prophet tells
us of women, who at their husbands costs give gifts to their lovers, and hire
them that they may come in unto them. Ezekiel. 16.33.


I would I could truly say that oft-times in these women's hearts malice, envy,
revenge, murder, were not lodged, though the face pretends and holds forth, as
many an house, the sign of an Angel, or a fair maid: the wiseman said, Ecclus.
25.15. 1 King. 17.9.
There is no wrath above that of a woman, if she be an enemy, the Prophet found
it so, who fled from Jezebel haz-arding death by famine, or wild beasts, rather
then to fall under her implacable anger and merciless revenge; and no less
did John Baptist see, when Herodias would rather refuse the half of Herod's
kingdom in Judea then not to be revenged on the head of John Baptist. So
immortal is their enmities when they hate, as their affections are mortal and
short lived where they love: King Solomon said that beauty in such a woman as
this, Prove. 12
is like gold or pearl in a swines snout, which defiles the gold and that which
is precious, her beauty by her routing and wallowing in the stinking dunghils
of uncleanness and filthy lusts.

A Legend tells us of a young child taken and kept by an Eremite in the
wilderness; at last when he grew to be a young man, he saw goodly fair women,
and asked the Eremite what they were; who told the youth as to dissuade him
from the love of them, that they were Devils: yet so it was that not long after
the Eremite asked the young man what pleased him best of all that ever he had
seen, who readily answered that those Devils which he lately saw, delighted him
most. That women known to be little better then Devils, or their Imps, have
thus overtaken men is not to be denied or doubted, and can any man conceive
that the man who has brains in his head, or an heart in his bosom, can be so
mad or destitute of all grace and understanding as to set his love or affection
on such a Saint-like Devil?

Which that they may not do, let me tell them, that as there has been virtuous
good women, such as Sarah, Rebecca, the widow of Sarepta and the old poor woman
that cast in the mite to the treasury, Mary Magdalen, Dorcas, with many others
in the new Testament, so there have been and are with us, Daughters of Sarah,
as S. Peter calls them, and such as are not taken with the outward adorning, in
plaiting hair, naked breasts and necks, gold and silken clothes, but in the
inward dress of a quiet and meek spirit, and these, these love in Gods name,
but of the other beware, and as we say (look before you leap) for a woman, if
good, deserves the love of all: if ill, of all creatures she is most dangerous
and oft-times worse then the Devil.

Genesis 6.2.
The Devil did not, but the daughters of men did tempt the sons of God, so did
Dinah the son of Sichem, Delilah Samson, Bathsheba David, and millions more
have done the like; for the eyes of such women are like burning lamps or coals
of fire to kindle, Prove. 6.24, 30.
her breath as bellows to blow, her lips like lime-twigs to ensnare, her hands
as manicles or bands to hold fast, Ecclus. 7.26.28.
and her belly like hell.

What the world could not do to Solomon the wise, a woman did, and what the
Devil could not by himself do to Adam, he did it by a woman. A Lady desiring a
religious man to think on her in his prayers he flatly answered that he did not
at all desire to think on her; for, says he, if Christ would not that May
Magdalen should touch him, because as himself speaks he was not yet ascended
into heaven, then sure the thought of a woman co me frail man may prove a
temptation to sin.

Ecclus. 7 26.
The wise Preacher says, I find a wicked woman to be more bitter then death,
and the wise man says, Ecclus. 15.13. Ecclus. 42.14.
Give me any wickedness but that of a woman, and again, Better is the
wickedness of a man thon a courteous woman, for says he, as from the cloth
comes the moth, so from a woman arises wickedness, and hereupon he counsels
man in the same place, Sit not in the midst of women, Chapter 9.8.
but rather turn away thine eye from a beautiful woman, for therewith love is
kindled as by fire.

The first part of this counsel was practiced by Joseph, who when his Mistres
cast her eye upon him saying, Lie with me, he cast his eye off her, and left
his garment with her, in stead of himself: and the later part was the act of
holy Job, Job 31.1
who made a covenant with his eye that he would not look upon a maid: for the
company and the sight of them are both dangerous, We read in the parable that
the worldly men desired to be excused for not coming to Christ's feast, but the
man that was joined to a woman makes no excuse but plainly and roundly says,
Iu. 14.20.
I am wedded to a woman, therefore I cannot come.

I shall end all in a word, favor and beauty are deceitful, deceitful in the
highest degree, Prove. 31 1^.
and to the greatest loss both to the possessor and to the spectator, so that
each may say of beauty as God does of Israel, Destruction is from thy self:
^os. 13.
first to thy self thy beauty being to thee as Samsons or Absaloms hair,
halters to the owners: and no less to the beholders, then as Tamar to Amnon
and Dinah to the Sichemites.

CHAP. XXXV. The immoderate love of eating or drinking.
THis Chapter leads us from the Chamber to the Close-stool, or from the beauty
of women to the beastliness of men, who like beasts tied to the manger put
their most delight in pampering the flesh, of which foul sin I shall need to
speak no more then what S. Paul has said, Their God is their belly, Phil. 3.18.
their glory is their shame, they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, and
their end is destruction, in which words you may discover the nature, Romans 6.21.
the fruit (as S. Paul elsewhere calls it) and the reward or end of this sin,
where the nature of it is expressed when the Apostle says, their belly is their
God, and to this as the Heathens did, so do they sacrifice as to their God,
which they only worship, with whom their temple is their parlour, their altar
is their table, the Priests are the cooks and butlers, their sacrifice the
daintiest of meats, and the richest wines, and all these are offered up with
incense oft-times, music, dancing and the like, as in the sacrifice to the
Calfe God, Exodus 32.6.
to their God their belly.

And such as the sacrifice and the God is, such we shall find the effect and
end of all to be, and these are such as S. Paul speaks of, Romans 6.11.
shame and destruction; for these gluttons and riotous persons glory in their
feeding and feasting, as the heathens did in their sacrificing, but says the
Apostle, their glory is, wholly is, or is built and settled alone in shame; and
in this shameful act they become the enemies of Christs-crosse, which cross
is an enemy to this excess, and their justly deserved end is destruction,
which S. Paul could not rehearse but with weeping: and I must desire you to
remember that whereas S. Paul is never found weeping in the setting down the
quality, effects or end of any other sin, yet this alone as the most deplorable
and most to be lamented of all sins he tells it even weeping.

And how could the blessed Apostle do less, considering that it besots a man
and deprives him of that which makes him a man, and is called the candle of
God? Prove. 20.27.
1. It robs him of his spiritual reason; 2. It fills him full of diseases, and
thereby deprives him of his health; 3. Often of his life, taking it away
untimely or before that time to which with sobriety he might have continued it;
4. It robs him of that precious balm which might keep him alive when he is
dead, it takes away his good name, making him as he lived to dye like a beast;
5. and which is the greatest theft or robbery of all, this sin robs him of his
soul, which as he enjoyed not while he lived, so less shall he enjoy it when he
is dead, for the weight and pressure of his meats and drinks offered to his
beastly God shall sink it down to hell.

I need not to prove the first, that excess in eating and drinking clouds and
besots the brain and understanding; for what the fume and stench of meats and
wines does to a parlour which stands with open chinks and crevises over a
wine-cellar or kitchen, the like does the vapors arising from the stomach to
the head, and much more, seeing that the passages from the stomach to the brain
are more open and nearer then those of the kitchen to any other place. But I
shall not need to illustrate that by similes, which the holy writ does most
plainly prove, for so the Prophet speaks, Hosea. 4.11.
wine robs the heart of man; and the Prophet Jeremiah having denounced a woe to
the drunkards, Jer. 51.13.
or drinkers of more then is sufficient, which are indeed drunkards, he adds
they have no knowledge, v. 17, 18.
or they are bereft of that they had, and in the same chapter, the same Prophet
calls this excessive drinking the cup of trembling, and such as makes the man
lie at the head of the streets as a bull (entangled) in a net. The Apostle S.
Paul says he keept under his body by temperance and abstinence, 1 Cor. 9.27.
from excess in meats and drinks, lest he became, our translation says a
reprobate, which word reprobate has the like sense here, which it has in
another of his Epistles where it is called a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.
and by the words preceding he means a mind void or bereft of knowledge. You
shall hear the wise man saying, that he who eats and drinks moderately has
his wits with him, Ecclus. 31.30.
from whence less cannot be concluded then he that does the contrary, eating
and drinking immoderately, is out of or in time will lose his wits; Jer. 25.16.
but the Prophet Jeremiah speaks it home and plain, they shall drink and be
moved and be mad.

Wine in former times in this as other nothern Countries, was sold only in
Apothecaries shops, and was drunk in small quantity to recover health, but now
being sold and drunk in large measures to the decay of our health and estate, I
could wish that the Vintners tavern might stand next to the house of madmen,
that thereby the Drunkard might either reel or be carried to his cure; for not
only Poets but Philosophers called Drunkenness no less then madness.

And such a madness it is that makes a man forget him self, in his two most
desirable things, in his health and life, which two while he is in his wits he
most highly esteems. Physicians not only declaim against excess in eating, and
drinking, as an enemy to health, but profess and maintain, that a simple
uncompounded or a spare diet, most conduces to the maintenance thereof. For
that heat which will boil or concoct a rabbet or pullet, will not do the like
to beef, mutton, capon, pie, custard, and other compounded meats made by the
saucy Cook: but much of these must lie raw on the stomach, and the crudities
corrupted and putrefied must necessarily turn to humors destructive to health;
Eccl. 31.20.
The wise man tells us that sound sleep comes of moderate eating, but
watching, choler, pains in the belly are with an insatiate man, and the same
writer says expressly, C. 31.30.
Excess diminishes health and makes wounds, and if you will hear it rather in
the Prophets words, Jet. 25.27.
Drink and be drunk, and spue and rise no more.

S. Paul knowing the manifold mischieses arising from excess in meat and drink,
uses a remedy which is worthily to be followed by all wise and good men, 1
Cor. 9.27.
I keep under, or more properly as the word imports, I make my body as my
slave, and I bringit into subjection; that is, as though by cudgelling, and
beating my dog, I make him lie down when I bid him, and run and go and do as I
command him; which otherwise my body would not do, but as an overfed colt or
pampered jade, it would kick against the feeder, and cast down and trample upon
the rider. The body we must remember is a good servant to the soul, thus kept
under and brought into subjection, as S. Paul dealt with his body, but it is a
most refractary and impetuous Master if by custom it get the dominion.

A wife, an host of an Inn or Tavern, and a Civet-cat have some resemblance in
this, that the wife if over cockered and too full fed is likely to fool or
cuckold her husband; the host if you ever give him his asking, and not sometime
find fault and rebuke him, will grow careless and use you ill; and the Cat
unless beaten will yield no musk: the application is easy and obvious to any
understanding, that the body will do the like, if over fed and not kept under.

And as it does in the point of health, so of life it self, for this life
depends necessarily on that health, a ship over-laden with merchandise, or
which has taken in too much water, will soon sink, it fares alike with man's
body; for as fevers and other diseases are generally cured by fasting, so they
are increased and death follows upon fullness. It is storied of a kind of Viper
that comes not forth of the womb but by eating out the damms belly: so that
belly which seems to give the body life, often takes away life from the body.
The wise man has said it, Ecclus 21.25.
Wine has destroyed many, and the Prophet likewise, for thy drunkenness
desolation and destruction are come upon thee: Isa. 51.1^.
and what they speak of drink is as true of meat excessively taken: So that as
before I wished that the Vintners house should be placed next the house of mad
men: so I hold it fit that the Cook should dwell betwixt the Apothecary and the
Sexton, for he makes work for these, for as he kills and coffins the bodies of
flesh and fish, so he endeavors to do as much for the guests that feed
thereon. The wise man's counsel is worthy our learning, Prove. 23 2, 3.
and imitation. If thou be a man given to thy appetite, put a knife to thy
throat, and be not desirous of dainties, for they are deceitful; and so
deceitful they are, that unless thou put thy knife to thy throat, as
affrighting thy throat from swallowing too much, they will prove as a knife to
cut thy throat and destroy thy life.

And not it alone, but thy good name and honor; S. Paul comparing man's life to
a race or fighting says, 1 Cor. 9.25.
every man that striveth for the mastery and the crown, is temperate in all
things, where as temperance gains, so excess loses this crown. S. Paul in the
place before mentioned speaks it plainly, Phil. 3.18.
their glory is in their shame. See Noah drunk and uncovered, Lot drunk and
lying with his daughters, and in them see the shame of this sin.

And when you hear the rich Glutton in the Gospel say, Soul eat, drink, take
thy rest and be merry, can you conceive it to be the speech of any but a beast
like man? and accordingly the Prophet comparing the earth to a drunkard, calls
it a field of beasts. Is. 24.20.
The wise man bids eat as it becomes a man, Ecclus. 31.16.
and leave off for manners sake, and devour not lest thou offend, and in the
same chapter he adds, Wine moderately drunk makes the heart glad; v. 28.
but immoderately taken makes bitterness of the mind, with brawling,
quarrelling and rage. S. Paul couples the drunkard and the rayler, and in
another Epistle the murderer and the drunkard: and King Solomon says, 1 Cor.
15 11. Gal. 5.21 Prove. 2^.21.
The Glutton and the drunkard shall come to poverty; and after poverty,
railing, quarrelling, rage, and murder, what can follow less then shame and
dishonor?

The old Testament mentions little more then bread in the feasts, so called, of
the Patriarchs and Godly men: and as Christ never invited or entertained any
with more then bread and fish, so he taught us to pray for all under bread: in
all which feasts as we read nothing of costly and daynty sauces, so neither of
pies, tarts, second courses; and in all the Gospel we read but of one that
fared sumptuously every day; and if we remember his end, I think we should not
desire to inherit his glory.

Excess in meats and drinks robbs us of our wits, health, life, good name, and
would it could stay there and not deprive us of our joy in heaven, but we find
that Eve lost paradise for an apple, that Esau sold his birthright for
pottage, and Rachel was content to part with her husband for mandrakes: the
souls husband is Christ, his birth right and paradise of joys is heaven, and
what mandrakes, pottage, and an apple, did to Rachel, Esau, and Eve, gluttony
and drunkenness must and will do the like and more to the soul of man.

It is storied by three penmen of God, Exo. 32. Ps. 106. 1 Cor. 10.
that when the Israelites had sat down to eat, drink and rose up to play,
that God was sore displeased and angry with them, and had not Moses earnestly
interceded, the Lord in his wrath ^ad utterly destroyed them. Holy Job
therefore, when the days of his childrens feasting were over, rose early and
speedily sacrificed unto the Lord; for he said, Job 1.5.
It may be my sons have sinned, (in this their jollity and feasting, which is
seldom without sin:) the wise man counsels well, Ecclus. 23.6.
Let not the greediness of the belly, nor lust of the flesh take hold of me:
and give me not over to an impudent mind; an impudent mind follows lust of
the flesh, as the lust of the flesh does the greediness of the belly, but after
these three follows the anger and wrath of the Lord, for so the Prophets have
termed the cup of wine the cup of the Lords fury, Is. 51.17. Jer. 25.15.
Let us therefore walk honestly or decently, not in rioting and drunkenness,
says S. Paul; nor be ye deceived, says he, Romans 13.13. Cor. 6.10
for drunkard (and riotous persons) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

What I have here spoken I desire may not be so taken, as that I speak against
all great solemn meetings or feasts; for as fasts, so feasts have been for good
ends and used under the Law. There were three great public feasts yearly to be
observed by all Gods people, the Passover, the feast of Tabernacles, and of
Harvest. And these were appointed and commanded by God himself; and besides
these there were public feasts ordained by man, as that instituted by Mordecai
yearly to be kept, Est. 9.21
and that they should make them days of feasting and joy for the deliverancce
of the Jews from their intended destruction, and such was that of the Encaenia,
the renovation or dedication of the Temple, instituted by the Maccabees after
the profanation thereof by Antiochus Epiphanes, 1 Match. 4 59.
and was honored by Christ's presence as S. John witnesses. John 1^.


And besides these yet we read in holy writ, of Private feasts allowed and no
way to be reproved, Genesis 19:
as that which Lot made to entertain the Angels: that which Abraham made at the
weaning his son Isaac, Genesis 21 and 43.
which Joseph made for his brethren though in a time of scarcity and famine,
which Samson made as for a wedding feast, ^.14
to which or the like Christ might allude in the parable of his wedding feast,
and in the primitve Church we read of feasts at the tombs of martyrs which
were yearly held to continue the memory of their persons, and for imitation of
their virtues, and therefore neither these or any such like are simply to be
reproved because feasts, without especial precept in holy writ against them,
Esthr. 1.4.8.
yea we read that Abasuerus the King made a feast for his Princes thereby to
show the glory and honor of his Majesty for 180 days, but no ill is reproved in
this because none were compelled to drink but every one might take or refuse at
his pleasure.

But as fasts have been instituted on ill grounds, and have been kept to as ill
or worse ends, so have feasts had the like fate; of such fasts the Prophet
speaks to the Jews, Isa. 58.4
Ye fast (says he) (and I would Christians had not imitated them herein) to
strife and debate (and not for peace) to exact and oppress (and not to relieve
and do justice) to smite and to shed blood (not to save and restore:) and such
was that fast practiced by Jezebel where a fast was proclaimed, 2. Kin. 21
and solemnly though most hypocritically and abominably performed to color
false witness, robbery and murder, and such was that of the Pharisees
mentioned by the Evangelist who fasted twice in the week, Lu. 1^.12.
but most probably for a show of holiness, or thereby to deceive and draw
others into the like ways of error, hypocrisy and iniquity.

And as fasts, so feasts have been alike instituted and practiced, the
Calfe-feast to eat, drink and play, Exo. 32. Dan. 5.
Belshazzars feast to carouse in the sacred bouls, Nabals feast to be drunk, 2 Samuel 13
Absaloms feast thereby to lie in wait to shed his brother Amnons blood, 1
King. 12.32.
and the feast of Jeroboam to continue and hold the people in their begun
rebellion against their lawful King, such feasts as these may well be compared
to those wherein the Jews blindly and most wickedly offered their sons and
daughters to Moloch the idol, Psa. 10^.
indeed as the Psalmist rightly terms him, to the devil.

And yet in these feasts of thanksgiving they would entitle God to be the
author of their Regicide and bloodshed, but hear what the Prophet speaks of
these feasts and such feasters and thanks-givers, where the prayers and
sacrifices thus offered one Prophet calls the dung of their feasts, Man. 2.3
Amos 5.2.
and for these dungy and stinking offerings, says another Prophet in the
person of God, Isa. 1.14
I hate and despise your feast-days, and therefore says the Preacher, Ecclus.
7.2.
It is better to go to the house of mourning then to the house of (such)
feasting, Joel 1.5.
and therefore says the Prophet Joel, Weep ye drunkards and howl ye drinkers
of wine, for the Lord has spoken by the Prophet Amos, Amos 8.10.
I will turn your feasts into mourning and your songs, (of triumph and victory)
into lamentation, and I will make it as the mourning for an only son, and the
end thereof as a bitter day.

CHAP. XXXVI. The immoderate love of Apparel.
THe clothing or apparelling the body has three lawful and justifiable uses
or ends, 1. to cover the shame of our nakedness; 2. to defend us from the
weather; 3. to distinguish persons in their several ranks and qualities.

And of this last there can be no doubt, considering that our Savior tells us
that they who are gorgeously apparelled are in Kings houses: Lu. ^.2^
and that S. James speaks that the man in authority is in goodly apparel,
James 2.
and the poor man in vile raiment: and that neither of these is spoken by way
of reproof simply to either.

But what is said in an other case, is true here, what ever is more (then for
these three uses) is of sin, 1. from the vanity of the mind, and such might
that be in the rich man clothed in purple and fine linen, Luke 16.17.
(who is not notified to be a person in place of authority:) 2. from pride, and
such might that be in Herod, who makes an oration to the people being arrayed in
royal apparel: Act. 12.21.
3. from lust, and such is the attire of the harlot so distinctly called by
Solomon, Prove. 7.10.
and accordingly Tamar intending to ensnare and entice Judah to lust, Genesis
38.14.
has her dress fitted for the purpose.

To these though men (as more effeminate then formerly) are become too subject,
yet not so much as women, whose dispositions being more inconstant and mutable
then men's, so they show it in their apparel and dressings, who change oftener
then the Moon, and are become like the spotted beast, the Panther, and as the
Chameleon or Serpent which changes according as her mode serves, of being
pleased or displeased, or according to that color or appearance which she last
looked on: and this if it proceed not ever from lust and pride (which may be
justly suspected in the most) yet undoubtedly it cannot proceed from less then
a vain mind, that is, from a soul which is like a vessel empty of any good
liquor, and therefore fills it self with windy matter, such as are fancy,
humor, and delight in toyish garish, indeed in ridiculous habits and apparel.

And though the man in the Gospel be not in in this kind so much for the
fashion (which is the folly of our times) as for the stuff, Luke 16.19.
yet it sounds no less then as a reproof or charge against him, that he beyond
or besides his calling (though probably not besides his ability) wore purple
and fine linen: but how conceive we then that Christ would have taxed him, had
he dawbed his clothes with laces, strewed them with buttons, and points, or had
hanged his linen out to be seen about his loins, or dragling it about his feet
almost in the dirt, and could Christ have pronounced less of him, then that he
had been a vain prodigal man, and such an one who probably as he had gained
his money by fraud or oppression, so he robbed the poor of what was due to them
out of this wast: remember what the Prophet speaks, in thy skirts (that is) in
thy garments and rich apparel, Jer. 2.34
is found the blood of the poor innocents.

I could wish that we (except the French) were not by all nations laughed at
and scorned, as the apes of all other parts of the world, imitating what ever
is most fantastical, absurd and scornful in them all. So that when the
people of other countries are for the most part portrayed in their ancient
native habits, the English man is set forth naked with a piece of stufte in the
one hand and a pair of sheers in the other as ever to be new shaping or
fashioning his apparel.

I shall not need to speak more of women's vanity herein, then to use the words
of Solomon, saying, Vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity; for
who sees not women veiled like Tamar, when she purposed to entice Judah? or who
sees them not wearing more spots on their faces then the Panther has on his
tail, wooing lustful youth with their prostituted naked shoulders and
out-thrust breasts? yea and as S. Paul says, on their uncomely parts, 1 Cor.
1^ 23.
more abundant comelines, of laces and the like, are bestowed.

But if to these you shall add what the Prophet speaks, of their stretched
forth necks wanton eyes, Isa. 3.16.
their mincing as they walk, discovering their naked parts, the bravery of
their ornaments, their networks and tires like the Moon, their chains,
bracelets, spangled dresses, the ornaments of the legs, the rings, earrings,
changeable suits of apparel, the wimples, and the crispin pins, the glasses,
fine linen, the hoods and the vailes, can you then say less then with Solomon,
vanity of vanities, all is vanity, or as S. Paul spoke upon an other occasion,
their glory is their shame, if such women were not already past all shame?
Phil. 3.18.


But many say, our estates will bear the expense of our apparel, and in it we
spend nothing but our own. And to this I may answer, that the sin lies not so
much in the expense of your money, (although part of this might and should
rather have been given to the poor and needy) as in the excess of apparel. 2.
But may you not as well say, I may play the Glutton and the Drunkard, for in
them I spend but mine own, and my estate will bear it; yet gluttony and
drunkenness you know are forbidden as sins. 3 But might not those Jews whose
excess in apparel the Prophet Isaiah taxed, and the Christians which S. Paul
and S. Peter reprehend, might not they have given the like answer as you do,
and can you think that this could have stood for good; as though you may sin,
so it be not at an others charge but your own?

And yet I have heard others say, May we not use those creatures as gold, silk,
and the like which God has given us? True, use them you may, for necessity and
honest ornament, but not abuse them to excess and superfluity. 2. God gives us
fire and iron, but not to burn or kill our selves or our neighbors and he
gives us tongues, but to praise him, and not to blaspheme. 3 That God who gave
us those creatures of wool, gold, silk, gave them not made into colors, laces,
and such or such fashions, this is the wit and often the wicked inventions of
men. 4 David when King Saul was slain, 2 Samuel 1.24.
bids his subjects to weep over Saul who covered them in scarlet, and put
ornaments of gold on their apparel, but he bids them not cover and adorn
themselves now their King was slain.

But you see that all or the most follow these, fashions, and why not I? all
sin, says the Apostle; and will you thence infer, and why not I? and the most
go to hell, so says our Savior, and will you then say, and why not I? Gods
Spirit has told us that we must not follow the multitude to do evil, for the
evil of punishment will follow the evil act, and I verily believe that
Epidemicall or national sin in apparel, in part has caused this national
punishment of the sword, which as the sin grows while the sword devours; so
the sword will devour till we destroy this sin.

2. For did we no^ promise to God in our baptism, to forsake not only the
Devil but also the vain pompes and delights of the world? and is not the excess
in apparel and dressing our bodies, to be reckoned among them?

3. But if you will be followers, why not to follow Sarah, and godly women whom
S. Paul and S. Peter commend unto us, and to be imitated rather then to tread
in the steps of Tamar the harlot, or the strumpet in the Proverbs? Prove: 7:


4. Read and consider what Esther speaks, and did when she resorted to the Lord
God to put up her prayers to him; and to receive his gracious answer; where you
shall find that she did not then as our women now do, deck or trim her self as
though she were going to the King or to allure him, but the text says when she
resorted unto the Lord, Esther 14 2.
she put away her glorious apparel, and put on the garments of anguish and
mourning, and in stead of precious ornaments, she covered her bead with ashes
(a sign of humiliation with the Jews) and she humbled (not prided or trimmed)
her self greatly; and thus attired, the text says she began to pray unto the
Lord God, and toward he close of her prayer she says. Thou know o Lord that
I abhor the sign of my high estate or pride as a menstruous ragg. And this was
a woman whom God raised and used as an isntrumental means of the Jews
deliverance, from their utter destruction intended them by that blood-sucking
Haman the Agagite.

But may some say, If this be a sin, how comes it to pass that it is become so
general and common? this comes to pass, 1 because the sensitive part or soul
in man has got the mastery over his reasonable part. 2 Because we look not up,
and set our affections on heaven as we ought, but we mind most the vanities
below. 3. We living betwixt heaven and hell, draw most to that which is nearest
us, which is not heaven but hell. 4 A strumpet told Socrates that she drew more
after her, with her apparel and wantonness, then he did with his wise precepts
and eloquence: to which Socrates as granting the thing and giving a reason for
it, says, Thou leadest them down the hill, and the descent is easy to sin and
hell, but I draw them up, and this is hard and therefore few follow me.

And a 5th reason is because we put the day of account and the evil day of
death and judgment far from us: and this may be the cause why the younger sort
are more addicted to this sinful vanity then the Elder, (although many old
ones offend herein, Ezekiel. 12: 27.
as though they were younger) for when the Prophet threatens the Israelites
with speedy destruction, uless they repent, then they answer, the days are
prolonged, and the times are, far off: and such or worse (though Christians) S.
Peter had to do with, who scoffingly said, 2 Pet. 3: 4.
Where is the promise of Christ's coming to judgment? for all things continue
as they were from the beginning. v: 11:
But these the Prophet answers. Thus says the Lord God, There shall none of my
words be prolonged any more: and so S. Peter does answer these, Know that the
day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, V. 10.
therefore what manner of persons, says he, ought ye to be in all holy
conversation looking for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of God?

And yet think not that all will be well with you till then, remember that when
the Israelites had dedicated their jewels to the dressing up their calf god,
Exodus 32 25.
that Aaron made them and so showed them naked to their shame, and this God
ha^^ done to many in our days,, and to our knowledge; and why fear we not the
like may befall us? remember what follows that apparel, decking and trimming
of the Israelites, in stead of sweets there shall be a stink, in stead of
well-set hair baldness, and burning in stead of beauty.

But if all this seems but spoken in a parable, then hear God by his Prophet
speaking plain and home. zeph* 182
I will visit and punish all such (none excepted) as are clothed with strange
apparel: and I think none can be so frontless, as to deny that our land yearly
is full of new and strange apparel, and that worn mostly by such as the
Prophet speaks of. Hab. ^.19.
They are idols not men or women, which are covered with gold and silver, for
there is no breath of life in them, or there is not that life in the soul which
God breathed into them, for they are, as Christ compared the Pharisees, Mat. 83.
like Sepulchers or coffins, which often times have a rich herse-cloth or goodly
ornaments set upon them; whereas within them (so in the gloriously apparelled
bodies of these living men) there is little more then rottenness, diseases and
filthyness.

Not withstanding all this the Preacher now may say as the others did. Ecclus*
10.15.
There is an evil and an error which I have seen, which proceeds from the
Rulers: folly is set in great height, and I have seen servants upon horses:
Prove. 19.^0.
that is, as Solomon expresses it in his Proverbs, Servants, (in royal robes)
ruling and reigning over Princes, Prove. 10.^2.
while the Princes (meanly attired) walk as servants upon the earth. This the
Preacher has seen, and he calls it both an error and an evil; and is it not
an error and an evil, to see trades-mens wives decked and mincing like the
women in the Prophet Isaiah, Is. 3.
and Ladies or gentlewomen in their apparel, to exceed Queen Esther? Lay the
words to heart which the Lord God has spoken by his Prophet, Zep. 1.3.
and in anger I will visit and punish all such as are clothed with strange
apparel.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Favorites to Princes and People, and of Generals and
Conquerors in war.
MAny towering and ambitious Spirits have made it the end of their study and
endeavor to become the favorites of Princes, or People in authority, or to be
Generals and Conquerors in war, that thereby they might attain to power,
honor, and wealth, though the success has seldom answered their
expectations, but have been rewarded according to their just merit, with,
dishonouoable and shameful ends.

In holy writ we read but of two eminent favorites, Joseph in Egypt, and
Haman in Persia; of whom we find that as the first came to that height by his
piety to God, fidelity to the Prince, and an honest care for the public, so he
continued that place of trust, and honor to his dying day, which was for
eighty years; and as his death was lamented generally by all, so he was as
honorably interred: whereas Haman through his power and greatness of favor
growing proud, bloody and destructive, climbs the gallows which he had prepared
for innocent Mordecai.

In the first time of the Roman Emperors, few were there of them but had their
favorites, who they for the most part gained their places by ill means, and
held them by worse, as by injustice, rapine and blood, so few of them but came
to ends well suiting with their rise and actions. Seiavus favorite to
Tiberius, declared by that Emperor his colleague and companion of his labors;
yet at length the day came, wherein the rising Sun saw him the second in the
Empire, and before its setting dragd by a hook through the streets of Rome, and
thrown from the Gemonies into Tibur, his only child ravished by the hangman and
killd, his adored statua made vessels for the basest use, his friendship
esteemed an honor and a crime, and his fortune both a blessing and a curse.
Norcissus the favorite of Claudius slain at the instance of Agrippina,
Tigellius favorite to Nero, Asiaticus to Vitellius, and Cleander to Commodus:
each had their shameful and ignominious ends.

The corollary from this consideration of favorites, shall be that of King
David, Put not your trust in Princes, Ps. 146. 3
(no) nor in the son of man, for it is better, Ps. 118. 8 9.
says he, to trust in the Lord, then to put any confidence in man, or in
Princes: and a reason of this again he gives when he says, Ps 107.40. Ps.
76.12 Ps. 148.8.
he powers contempt upon Princes, yea more, He cutteth off the spirits of
Princes: and will bind their Kings with chains: and their nobles with fetters
of iron, to execute upon them judgment.

And whether Generals and Conquerours have proved more happy then favorites,
see in Abner General to King Saul, Amasa to Absalom, and Joab to King David,
of which three not one came to his end in peace, but had their blood of war
shed in the time of peace. Might I not add to these in holy writ the ends of
Abimelech and Olophernes, the former of which was brained by a stone cast on
him by a certain unknown woman, and the latter had his head cut off by a widow.
So like is victory and conquest to a game at cards, where that which is now
turned trumpe, is at the next dealing cast to the lowest of all, or is
discarded as of no use. Generals and Conquerors remember this, when that air
which should be above is thrust into the earth, it casts the earth into a
quaking and trembling ague, but when earthly vapors ascend into the place of
the air above it begets some fiery meteor or a combustion.

It is fabled that when Perseus went out to fight with Medusa, his cause being
just, and hers wicked, each of the Gods assisted and furnished him with arms
and weapons, whereby he became the conqueror and cut off the witches head: the
fable will moralize it self into that which the blessed virgin Mary said, he
has put down the mighty, the unjustly mighty, from their s^ats.

So that if we look for success in war we must be sure not to enterprise it
without these four requisits or conditions; 1. that the cause be sincerely
just; 2. that the means be honest and lawsull; 3. that the end be purely good;
4. that the authority of the war be rightly vested in him to whom God either
immediately and extraordinarily has given the sword; as he did to the Kings of
the Jews, or ordinarily and mediately by the laws of man, in other states; and
if either of these be wanting it is not victory though ye overcome, but
treachery, nor conquest, but tyranny.

And therefore they who have used it, may deservedly expect the fate of those
in Israel who by unjust conquest gained the crown, the stories at large expressed
in the Book of Kings, I shall abbreviate.

Politic Jeroboam who by rebellion robbed Reboboam the King, of ten tribes,
and made himself King of Israel, had his debaucht son Nadab rooted out with all
his house by Baasha; this man's son Elah with all that family was made away by
Zimri, this Zimri was burnt by Omri, Ahab Omries son has his blood sucked by
dogs, Ahaziah son to Ahab dies by a fall, Jeheram his brother succeeds him, but
was flain by Jehu, who makes an end of all Ahabs line; Jehu imitates Jeroboam,
as his son Joash imitates his father, Shallum makes an end of Jehu's race. This
Shallum is taken off by Menahem, Pekaiah the son of Menahem is outed by Pekah,
and this Pekah is slain by Hoshea, who with the ten tribes is carried captive by
Shalmaneser of Assyria, which ten tribes never recovered the dispersion but
were thought to have peopled Tartary and the west* Indies.

Almost each of these usurpers, as he gained the Crown by the sword and
slaughter, so had each of them the Crown snatched from his head, and his life
taken away by the sword; yea and Jehu though he were appointed to be King by
God, yet because he ambitiously and bloudily invaded Ahahs Crown, shall find as
the Prophet speaks the blood of Jezreel to be avenged on the house of Jehu.
Ros. 1.4.


Who sees not in these passages the justice and revengefull hand of God on such
enterprises, though he suffered them, so long to continue, yet at last he
recompenseth his long abused patience with the severity of his judgments
pointing out by the stroke the concealed crime, so that we may truly say with
the Prophet, Ps. 9.16.
The Lord is known by the judgment which be executes, the wicked it snared in
the work of his own hands, the prosperity of begun rebellion encouraging their
trembling hearts to proceed, and the crowning success exciting others to
imitate that treason to the teachers destruction, so that each may say, verily
there is a God that judges.

The kingdom and people of Judah are likewise captived and carried away to
Habylon, and the temple of Jerusalem destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, but as God by
his Prophets foretold, after 70 years the people are brought back from Babylon
to Jerusalem, and the temple is reedified, dedicated, and the Passover
solemnized and in this who sees not Gods mercy to his people, who served and
called upon him, although for their great sins they long suffered under their
enemies? All which considered there remains little more for us then to believe
the Scriptures to trust in the living God, to possess our souls in patience, to
acknowledge, that for our sins we have deserved much more, and to call upon him
in prayer for a timely deliverance.

Remember but as yesterday Tomaso Anello, the fisherman of Naples, who for the
ease and relief of the peoples heavy taxes, was able on a sudden to raise an
Army great enough to subdue all the power of the King, yet at last failing to
perform what he engaged them for, he himself is as suddenly slain by the people
as he rose in their defense.

But to close all in one, remember that Andronicus who had formerly taken an
oath to be true and faithful to his Liege Lord the Emperor of Constantinople,
yet after under color of religion and pretense of freeing the people from the
maladministration of the Emperor, through his fair but false words and oaths,
soon gains so many of the people unto him that he as suddenly vanquished the
forces of the Emperor, whom he caused by the help of a most ungodly Council to
be sentenced to a most unjust and ignominious death: which done he imprisons,
drives away or breaks all that favored the Emperor or his cause, were they
otherwise never so good or well deserving, but when the people saw themselves
thus abused, and that their taxes and miseries were doubled upon them by their
pretended redeemer and savior, him they fall upon and having overcome him both
at sea and land, they make him fast in chains and fetters and first torturing
him with their tongues, calling him Dog of uncleanness, Goat of lust, Tygre of
cruelty, Religious Ape, and envious Basiliske, they first cut off his right
hand and pull out one of his eyes, they set him on a lean poor Mule with his
face turned to the tail thereof, and carrying him through the streets and market
places, men and women strove how to exceed each other in casting stones, dirt
and dung of men and beasts in his face, who after all being hanged up in the
theater by the heels with his head down-ward, some cut off his privities,
others slashed off his buttocks, and other fleshy parts, and thus half tortured
and half sterved to death he voided out his ambitious bloody irreligious soul,
after which the remaining parts of his carbonadoed and loathsome carcass were
thrown into a stinking vault there to lie and rot as the body of some wild and
noisome beast, after he had tyrannously reigned two years. And such ends may
all such Conquerors have, and let all those that think on him be wise in time,
and neither to put their trust in Princes nor in the sons of men, Ps. 146.2.
Ps. 145.20.
but in the Lord, that preserves all them that love him, but all the wicked he
will utterly destroy.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the mutual love, duty, and happiness of the married couple.
TO the discovery whereof I shall first tell you what marriage is; 1. According
to the name; 2. To the nature of it; 3. The causes necessarily required to the
making such a marriage; 4. The previous considerations, and the usual
consequents of marriage. 5. The duties necessarily and justly required of the
wife; 6. Of the husband. 7. From all which fully performed and accomplished,
will arise such holy fruits and happy benefits, that may fully and rightly
pronounce, that marriage, both before God and man, to be truly honorable. 8.
And therefore capable of a benediction, corporal, and spiritual, temporal
and eternal.

Some say, our English word Marriage comes from the Latin Maritus, which
signifies an husband, otherwise, most of our Latin words come from the woman's
side, as Matrimonium from matrona, a matron, or from matter a mother, as Eve so
called, because she was to be the mother of all; and Nuptiae from nubo, which
is properly spoken of the female to be married, as ducere is for the man to
lead, and nubo is to be veiled, and so Rebecca when she first appeared to Isaac
she put on her veil, Genesis 24.65.
as a sign of her modesty, and as a note and testimony of subjection.

And, to pass from the name to the nature of marriage, I hold marriage to be a
lawful and free conjunction of a man and woman in the Lord: for the
propagation of children, the avoiding of fornication, the mutual comfort of
each other, and all to the glory of God: wherein the material cause is, man
and woman, the formal, the lawful conjunction of them, the efficient, the
consent of the persons in the Lord, and the final, as is before expressed.

Where note that as marriage must, be of man and woman; so it must not be of a
man to women, or, of a woman to men, but of one man to one woman, as at first
it was betwixt Adam and Eve, so that if Polygamie were at any time permitted or
indulged, yet never was it authorized by the institution, or word of God, as to
be practiced; for it is said, both in the old Testament; that two, not more
then two, shall be one flesh.

Anciently, and among the Jews, they gave money for their wives: and we did
retain with us a small resemblance of the like at the time of marriage in laying
on the book, or giving money to the wife, though this was not as to buy her at
a price, which were beastly, and slavish; but to endow her (as in our Leiturgie
is well expressed) with all our worldly goods: but the best marriage is, when God
brings the woman and gives her: Genesis 2.22.24.
and when Adam freely takes her, not as a thing obtruded or forced upon him,
but freely: saying, this is now flesh of my flesh, then she is called a wife,
and when God is not the Contractor to espouse, the Father to give, and the
Priest to mary them, either immediately by himself, as in Paradise: or
mediately by his lawful Ministers, I cannot say, or promise that the marriage
is rightly performed, or that it shall well prosper.

Marriage then being a holy conjunction of man and woman in the Lord, and this
to hold for life; concerns it not each, as we say in our proverb, to look
before we leap, whether the ground we are to light upon, be firm, and good, or
a quackmire, and our ruin? Our most blessed Lord, by a parable, has taught
us, that no wise Commander will enter into a war, before be well has weighed,
and considered with whom he is to encounter, and what his strengths are; for as
we say of war, that a General can offend but once, (if for want of providence
and, foresight he lose the day,) so much more may it be said of marriage, then
that of war, for if a General has loft the day, and be imprisoned, yet there
may be an exchange for his person, and some remedy for his loss: but in the
miscarriage of marriage, there is no relief but death. For it is a conjunction
till death depart one party or the other, and this when the Apostles of Christ
heard their Lord to preach and forewarn, they concluded if the case be such,
said they, Then it is not good to touch a woman, Mat 9.10.
(that is) not to be married.

Some Philosophers treating of marriage, said that he that would have: a year of
content and pleasant life, let him mary; but he that would wish to have two
such years, let him not mary: intimating, as some other Greeks said, that the
married couple had but two merry days, the one in the bedchamber, the other in
the chamber of the grave, or the one, at the first of marriage which we call
hony-moon, and the other at the burial, so that with them married and marred
should differ but in a letter, and that as the aspirate h, taken from Sarah,
should be added to Abraham: and that she should be Sara, but he with the
aspirate to be Abraham.

Now though in the great pile or mass of women, there be many Sarahs,
Rebeccas, Abigails, widows of Sarepta, and Mary's; yet there being as many,
or, I fear, many more Eves, Delilahs, Jezebels, and Jobs wives, is there not
cause, that a great care, and consideration should be had, to make choice of
that woman, with whom we would be yoked, or joined in that estate of matrimony
till death us depart?

Now the sour especial, and usual promoters, or workers of marriage are; 1.
Beauty; 2. Wealth; 3. Honor; 4. Goodness or virtue: of which the first three
moderately desired are good requisites, for the better keeping up the
superstructure in this building: but the most necessary basis and foundation
(without which marriage can neither please God, nor benefit man) is grace, and
goodness.

And of these four promotors in marriage the 1. Beauty (for the most part) works
upon the carnal man, the 2. wealth on the worldly, the 3. honor on the proud,
the 4. grace and virtue moves the desire, and works the assent in the heavenly
minded, and spiritual man; virtue I say and not beauty: for first consider
what beauty is in its nature and being, 2. what it is in power; and then say,
whether beauty rather then goodness, should make the match. Now beauty, as to
its first being, whether in man or woman, is a delightful object of the eye,
appearing from the color and figure of the body; which color is as a fair
blush well mixed with white and red, clearly glimmering through a tender skin,
and arising from an equal temper of the humors, but especially of the blood
well tempered; and the figure is, that comely proportion of all the limbs, and
members in themselves, and with the rest of the parts each to other; so that,
neither are too long, nor too short, nor too big nor too little: but that all,
and each holds an equal symmetrie, which makes the parts, and members seem
goodly: and now though this beauty (in color and figure) may be accounted
among the common gifts of God, and therefore it may serve as often it does,
for a letter of commendation, and a superscription of favor, as being the
sign of a well tempered soul, and therefore it never satiates the eye of the
beholder, yet oftentimes like a tyrant, it is not long-lived, but short of
continuance; for if it be blasted with sickness, or buffeted by Satan, it is
soon withered like your fairest flowers. And yet oft-times beauty is not only
deceitful like a painted Sepulcher, or the apples of Sodom, which have only a
fair superficies (yet dust or rottenness within) but it is often dangerous,
both to the Spectator, (becoming an infectious Basilisk) and to the owner, as
a gilded poison. For in many, it is little more then a skin puffed up, with a
proud love of it self, and a base envy or contempt of others.

And yet these beauties, as colored flies, or well skinned beasts, are most
run and hunted after, though it prove to the ruin of the huntsman, as in
Samson, and the Son of Shechem: and to the hunted as Dinah, Lucrece, and
others. For as boys love to be running after colored flies, to play with them
to their destruction: so such colored flies delight to be flying abroad to
play in the Sun, or with a burning light. Dinah may serve for a motto of this
emblem, and David for the word of that. Beauty is, and has been both a
straggler, and a tempter to the destruction of others; and a restless piece
desirous to be tempted, though it prove to its own ruin. And besides all this,
you shall find fair Rachell to sell her husband for mandrakes: which such
women, oft-imes love as well as their husbands. Be therefore if you please a
well wisher to beauty; but the lover, and wooer only of grace and virtue,
without which beauty in an ill woman is like a ring of gold in a swines snout,
and therefore of it self not to be desired.

Neither is honor, to be loved whither traduced by descent, or conferred by
the favor of the Prince, for though these as branches of choice roots, are
left to be graffed on, and likeliest to bring forth the finest fruit; yet even
these by time, or taint are often so corrupted, that they become as blood in an
ill dieted, or surfeited body, which is good for nothing but the sewer; yea,
and take honor at the best, yet what is it more, then a splended phantasme? or
airy opinion floating, or warbling in the brain of the standers by? who one day
reverenceth the honorable person as thing sacred, while the next day perhaps
he scorns it as profane, yea and by a vote to be utterly cast away as a thing
both useless and dangerous.

And though money and lands have a more elementary stuff, and substance, then
either beauty, or honor; and are so far worthily called goods, as being
instruments to work, and do good; yet neither are they in themselves good, no
nor so well able to make or denominate the possessor good, as either honor or
beauty. I find not among all the marriages, whereof we read in the book of
God, that any of them were made for wealth, and for this and many other
reasons, I cannot but condemn the too too common senseless guise of our times,
which sends lands or moneys to be, or as it were, the chief Orators or
contractors of marriage; or as though the ironicall words of the Poet were now
verified ( Quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nummos) be he or she rich, it
is that we most look after, and let grace, wisdom, and other beautles of the
soul or body serve but as lackies, which we much regard not, whereas these are
not to be used as contractors of marriage, they being at their best, but
earthly, uncertain, deceitful, or dangerous; and such, as of which one may
say, when marriage is made for these winged creatures, that as these take wing
and fly out of the door, so love that was endeared for them, will soon creep
out at the window.

Mary not then for these, nor mary with one that is unequal to thy self. An
ox and a sheep, a lion and a calf will hardly yoke or draw together; choose a
wise according to thy self said Plutarch, and Pittacus the like, marry one of
thy own quality, for ((...)) equality it is, that begets love* and love to
continue and grow, is best planted with the like roots or branches. Where I
would not be understood, that the man or woman exceeding the other in wealth,
birth; or the like, is ever to be accounted above the other, that has not the
same in the like measure. But as the soul is to be preferred before wealth,
etc. so the extraordinary endowments thereof, make the persons so qualified,
superior to those that exceed in wealth, honor, or power.

For close, would thou man have a good wife? or thou wise have a good
husband? know that as at the first marriage, neareness of flesh begat affection
in the soul, Gen.2. Genesis 3.
(for Adam seeing Eve to be flesh of his flesh called her wife) so since that,
the affection in the soul has begot the nearness in the flesh. For first they
affected, and then they are made one flesh. So that all things considered as
premised, I would not wish the man to marry that woman that is confident of her
wit, beauty, or birth: nor the woman to match with him, that presumes on his
wisdom, honor, or power: for where these are overvalued in either man or
woman, each is apt to undervalue the other to contempt, or discontent.

In a word, the durable contractor in marriage is, the harmonious consent of
soul, manners, and love: and this will make and continue the marriage happy,
always provided that as in purchasing land, or lending your money, you look
well to get good security, and the best, is the honesty of the person with whom
we deal, and good sureties that will see all performed, as it is agreed.

Now the first part of this security in marriage is, the grace and virtue of
the espoused man, or woman, of which the wise Solomon speaks, Prove. 18.22.
He that finds a good wise finds a good thing, which good thing is her
inward goodness, and this, as in the words following, is the favor of the
Lord. And of all the virtues in a woman most to be desired, Prove. 19.14.
prudence and discretion are the chief: for this will keep her chaste and
modest, this will teach her reverence to her husband, and to give every one
their due, both within and without doors. And this prudence says the wise man
here, is the gift of the Lord. therefore let the wise sell all, as the Merchant
in the Gospel to purchase this pearl. For, without this jewel, wealth,
beauty, and such like are ( as I before cited) but as a ring of gold in a
Swines snout.

The other part of the security, for a good wife or husband, rests on the
Surety, and this is he, that is the only best match-maker, God the Lord.
Therefore be sure, before, and at the consummating the marriage, to invite and
get Christ, as he was at Cana, to the wedding, and then be as sure, that if all
the vessels be filled up to the brimme with water, which in Scripture signifies
afflictiton and sorrow, yet this guest Christ will miraculously turn them all
into wine, that makes the heart merry; which is consolation.

Which great change is instrumentally wrought by that great Mystery, Ephesians. 5.
v. 31.
as S. Paul calls it, where the conjunction is such, that it is said the man
shall be joined, the Greek is (as much as) he shall be glewed to her, so that
they two shall be, as it were made into, or be but one flesh and this is a
great mystery or secret, that as Christ and his Church: so man and his wife
shall of two be made one.

The Philosophers went further in their expressions when they said, man and
wife are not only one flesh, 1 Cor. 7.4.
so that each has power over the others body: but that they are but as one
soul, and but one fortune common to them both, one fortune in good and bad,
insomuch that the Civil law holds that, if the husband prove bankrupt, and be
cast into prison, the wife may be sold, if she be worth it, to pay and release
her husband: and as it was in the primitive Christian Church, Acts ^.
so here especially between husband and wife, all things are to be common; and
this is partly signified on the man's part, who is the chief proprietor, when in
our leiturgie, the husband tells her with all my worldly goods I thee endow;
where we must note that, although the Apostle and our Church speak it only of
the man, that he shall be so joined to the woman, and he shall endow her with
all, yet this is as truly, and more necessarily intended to be true of the
woman; who is, as it were, a subject to her Lord her husband. But expressly
charged on the husband, to take away all scruple from Jew and Gentile, who gave
themselves a greater liberty, and indulgence herein then Christ does.

But yet the greatest spiritual mystery in this marriage is, that between the
man and his wife who shall be but one soul: (that is) though two in substance
to animate two bodies, yet but one in affection and desire; or but one to
desire and dislike, to will, and to nill the same things; so that, what the
Holy Ghost spoke and made good of the Apostles, Acts. 2. R^m. 12. v. 10.15, 16.
that they were of one mind: and what the Apostle commands Christians, to be
kindly affectionate one to the other in love, and to rejoice and weep
together, and to be of one mind each to other, this and more, if more can be,
is here required in this conjunction, and mutual love betwixt man and wife:
and this completes the great mystery spoken of S. Paul in marriage, which
mystery, though it held good, and true from the beginning of the creation in
the law and gospel, and so is to continue, as long as there shall be man and
wife on earth; yet, as at the beginning that Envious one (so he is called in
the Gospel) the Devil seduced our firsts parents; so (soon after the Sunshine
of the Gospel, and to this day afresh) he works both on man and wife, infusing
into them foul and dangerous doctrines, which S. Paul therefore called
doctrines of Devils.

For in the Apostles times be taught Simon Magus, Acts 10.
and in and by him he taught all Simons scholars (therefore called Simoniani)
that women may be used promiscuously, and without difference, or respect had to
Gods precept relating to man and wife: after which filthy sect succeeded the
Saturninians (followers of Saturninus) who professed and practiced the like: then
followed the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2.
who used each others wife in commune: then came the Gnostics, living among,
and glanced at by the Apostles: after these the Adamites, who both male and
female read, prayed, and administered the Sacraments all naked. Soon after the
Apostolicks, called by themselves Eucratites, or Abstinents, who admitted none
into their assemblies who had wives. After these, were the Manichees, called
also Catharists, the Eunomians, Priscillianists, Jovinianists and the
Paternians, who, holding that the lower parts of man and woman were ^^de by the
Devil, indulged to themselves all license of uncleanness in those parts. These
and some more, though professors of Christ, grossly and filthily erred either in
the prohibition of marriage, or in the allowance of a beastly usage or gross
community of women, wives, or single persons; insomuch that I cannot say, that
there have been so many several sects or heresies since the Apostles times,
erring so grossly about any one subject, as these named about marriage, and
fleshliness, such and so great a power the Devil has over man, tempting him in
his weakest, and most sensual part of the flesh: which in the most, is so
predominant that some Divines think, that this was that which S. Paul meant by
the thorn in the flesh: and for that cause he bewailed his estate in those
words, Wretched man that I am, 2 Cor. 12.7
who shall deliver me from this body of sin, or sin (say some) in the body.

About the year 1533 arose in Germany one John Becold, better known by the name
of John of Leyden, a tailor, but a pestilent Anabaptist; who bewitched the
people by bis false visions, dreams, and prophesies to follow him. He taught,
and caused the Ministers publicly and commonly to preach it, that a man is not
bound to one wife, but that he may have as many as be desired; and he swore by
the holy Bible, that this doctrine was revealed to him from heaven. He and his
disciples being asked how they could defend so foul and gross a tenet?
answered, 1 That Christians must give up what they loved best, which women held
to be their bodies. 2 That for Christ's sake they are to undergo any infamy. 3
That Publicans and harlots shall enter into the kingdom of heaven. 4. Which
was the opinion and argument of the C^poc^atian heretics, that as all
Christians should be as one spirit: so they ought to be as one body each to
other. And this lying with others besides their wives, to color the sin, they
called spiritual marriages, as though there could be any thing spiritual, in
this so foul corporal beastliness.

The ground of these most wicked doctrines, in many of these recited heretics
was, and is, that most wicked tenet (now defended by the Antinomians, 1 Timothy
1.9.
and Adamiticall Ranters, so called of our times, viz.) Be, or believe in
Christ, and sin if you can: for being and believing in Christ justifies and
to, or against the Just there is no law. I might tell you, that such doctrines
and such doings cannot be the fruits of faith, or justification, and therefore
they neither rightly believing, nor being truly justified are condemned by the
sentence of Gods word, Exo. 20.14.
which says; thou shall not commit adultery, and no unclean person shall
inherit the Kingdom of heaven. Ephesians. 5.5.
But recitare (as S. Hierom: speaks) est consutare, to rehearse these damnable
doctrines, is to condemn them, in the judgment of all good Christians.

I leave them therefore, and shall touch upon the duties of man and wife each
to other, and in this, I shall follow the Apostles S. Paul and S. Peter's
method, who both begin with the duties of wives, as though these should provoke
the husband to his, or as though the wife could not so justly expect the
husbands duty (which is love) unless she first perform hers which is
subjection. And I find the Apostles insisting, urging and inculcating this
lesson, wives obey, 1 Cor. 14 34. Ephesians. 5: 24. Col. 3.18 1 Pet. 3.5
wives reverence, wives sear, wives submit, and wives be subject to your
husbands. Yea, it was Gods sentence from the beginning, and given to all women
even to the greatest and to the best, Thy desire shall be subject to thy
husband, Genesis 3.16.
and he shall rule over thee. And where God commands, there should be no
dispute, but simple obedience. And yet God, considering woman's backwardness to
this duty, is content to subject his command to reason, and therefore, by his
Apostle S. Paul, he gives one reason for this subjection of the wife when he
says, Adam was not deceived but the woman, 1 Timothy 2.14.
and therefore fit it is, she should be subject to the guidance of her head the
wiser; a second reason may be collected from S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.9. v. 10.
that the man was not made for the woman, but the woman was made for the man,
and for this cause the woman ought to be covered, which was a sign of
subjection.

A third reason is given by the same Apostle Ephesians. 5. Ephesians. 5 21, 22.
where having given the precept, Wives submit your selves to your own husbands
as unto the Lord, for says he the husband it the head of the wise, even as
Christ is the head of the Church. S. Paul commands wives not only to submit,
and be subject, but he says the wise must reverence; the word (...) there
implies a reverence proceeding from fear, v. 33
yet no servile base fear, but a loving, or a fear to give him offense, because
she loves him, as she is commanded. Tit. 2.4.
And this kind of reverence, fear, or subjection arising from, and coupled with
the mutual love of the husband to the wife, and the wife to the husband, makes
it such a subjection, as S. Paul speaks of though in another case, 2 Cor. 3.17.
says, where that the Spirit of the Lord is, I say where love in the Lord is,
there is Liberty. And such as Christ speaks when he says, Mat. 11.30.
my yoke, I may say the wives yoke thus fastened is easy, and the burden she
bears, by such her subjection, is light: for love makes all easy and light.

And yet that wives may not grumble, or dispute against their subjection, as
too unjust, servile, or hard, let them know that their subjection to their
husbands is but as to the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22.
which (...), as to the Lord, means not that the wife must be a subject to her
husband as to the Lord God, but it teaches, that she is to be subject to her
husband, according to the Lords command, Genesis 3.16.
or according to, and so far as the husband shall command agreeable to, and not
repugnant to the word, and will of the Lord. For if the husband usurp a power,
or command contrary to the Lords word, Act. 5.29
the wives answer and obedience is that of S. Peter, We ought to obey God
rather then men. And a subjection to the husband, if such as God commands, or
such as is suitable to the will of the Lord, should be willingly entertained,
and embraced by every good woman, who desires to be a wife; and yet to make
this subjection more readily to be embraced, let the wives know, that the words
which the Apostles use, when they call for this submission or subjection in
wives, signifies to be under their husbands will and power, according to just
and comely order; and not simply to the husbands unlawful, or unlimited will;
which orderly subjection of the wife, according to order, is that Political or
Oeconomicall disposure, by which the wife, according to Gods ordinance and
appointment is to be inferior, or under her husband, so that he, as the head,
is to rule, and she as the body is to obey her husband.

And, that wives err not, or come not short in the performance of this duty,
the Apostle has been very careful to set down the qualifications, and
necessary concomitants of this subjection, when he bids the woman submit, Ephesians.
5.22.
which teaches her it should be spontaneous and voluntary: and not a forced
subjection. 2. That it must not be a carnal worldly, but an holy submission,
for, as to, or as in the Lord. 3. It must not be a partial lame subjection in
some things which the wife likes, and not in others which pleases her not; but
it must be perfect and total, in all the husbands just and lawful requirings:
therefore, v. 24.
as the Church is subject to Christ, so let the wives be to their own husbands
in every thing. 4. It must not be a false eye-pleasing, or counterfeit
subjection before her husbands face only, or in his hearing; but as that of
Sarah who called him her Lord, 1 Pet. 3.6
and that as it is expressed to testify her sincere and hearty subjection, it is
said, Genesis 18.12.
within her self, or to her self, in her heart, she calls him Lord.

And all this ought to be as fully performed by every wife; as it is clearly
expressed by the Apostle: for it is not only the Apostle but the Lord that
commands this subjection, and obedience, and therefore, not the husband only
but the Lord God is disobeyed, when the wife submits not in all, as required
and expressed, to her own husband. I may, I must add that when S. Paul commands
wives to submit to their husbands, Ephesians. 5.22.
as to the Lord; it implies that, by this submission with love, fear,
reverence, and obedience, she should confide in, depend and rely on him, and on
no other earthly creature, before, or comparatively to him, for he is her head.

And certainly, when all this is required by S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.^3. ^ Pet. 3.1
and by S. Peter of evil and unbeleeving wives, much more ought the Christian
good wives yield to this doctrine, and be subject to their husbands, and this
as in Gods most holy word: so in our sacred Leiturgie is required of the wife,
that as the husband must love, comfort, and give honor to his wife: so she
must love, honor, I, and, which is no where required of the husband, she must
serve, and obey him.

And yet, lest any husband should force the words too far, he must remember
that, though the wife must be, as the vine on the side, and not on the top of
the house: so she must not be set in the Cellar or Cole-hole, this is not her
seat, but on the side of the house; And, as she was not taken out of the head
of man to rule, or to be a ruler: so she was not made out of the foot to be
scorned, abased, or to be trod upon: but out of the side, as to be cherished,
and made much of, as being in domestical affairs, in the Kitchen, Parlor, and
bedchamber, coequall, as taken out of the side of her husband, and set with
him on the side of the house.

S. Paul gives some additionall qualities requisite in a wife; Tit. 2.
as that she must be chaste, purely chaste, the word implies so much, and that
she must be devout, holy, and not fantastic or humorous in her habit or
dress of attire. Beauty in wives, oft-times, is a great enemy to those two: and
therefore though beauty be not to be despised or neglected, being it is the
gift of God; so great care is to be had, that this beauty prevail not over, or
against their pure chastity, and decently holy attire: for beauty oft-times,
and in too many, begets pride, pride costly dresses, costly dresses gadding
to be seen, not at home to please the husband, so much as to be seen abroad:
and this gadding is oft-times the mother of temptation, temptation of being
seduced to evil and lust: for as many beasts are hunted, taken, and destroyed
for their fair skins: so it fares with women. Bathsheba's words to her
Solomon, are worth the fair woman's remembrance and consideration: Prove. 31 30.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but the woman that fears the Lord
shall be praised: let the fear of the Lord be in her esteem her chief beauty,
and then the beauty of her body shall not suffer prejudice, but be as a
graceful outward ornament, according to our proverbiall word, ( gratior est
virtus veniens e corpore pulchro) more amiable is virtue which proceeds from a
fair body; and this may serve as a watch, and guard over the wives beauty.

And for her habit and attire, 1 Pet. 3.3.
S. Peter gives good instructions, and saving caveats, when he says, Let not
her adorning be that outward plaiting the hair, and wearing of gold, and
pulting on costly apparel, in which precept, the Apostle simply condemns, not
the wearing of costly rich apparel, or the most comely dressing, but the
excess herein; which discovers the vanity and disease of a soul distempered
with pride, profusions, superfluity, inconstancy, the too too much redundant
and luxuriant humors (to call them no worse) which abound in women, and the
old adage has a good reason in it, ex vest hominem, by a man's, or woman's
attire or dressing, you may give a great guess what their soul is. I would all
great, as good women, Esther. 14.16.
would remember the words of Esther, Lord, thou know my necessity, (that I
am to go so richly attired) for I abhor the sign of my high estate wherein I
show my self (before the King) and that I abhor it as a menstruous rag.

And if any tell me that such attire and dressings are not in themselves simply
evil, but things indifferent, I must tell them that, though the dressing and
attire be such, yet such attire and dressing mostly proceeds from a mind
tainted with pride, excess, affectation, or desire to satisfy lust: and these
are not things indifferent but evil; and such as the root is, such will the
fruit be, and if the root be only fit for hell fire, I know not how such fruit
should reach, or carry the body up to heaven. S. Peter therefore having taxed
the excess in outward apparel, he proceeds to teach women, wherein their
comely dressing should consist; 1 Pet. 3.^. 3, 4.
which says he, should be inward, in the adorning the hidden man of the heart:
for wise Cato has told us, long since, that they who spend too much cost, or
time in adorning the body; generally neglect the adorning of the soul, the
ornaments whereof S. Peter in the same place tells women should be of a meek
and quiet spirit, and this, says the Apostle, is of great price in the sight
of God, and closely he implies the reason hereof, when he adds, that this
ornament of the soul is not not like the beauty of a flower, or a beasts skin,
which soon fades or is destroyed; but it is says he, incorruptible, it cannot
be spoiled, or vanish, but will remain in esteem, and honor with God and man
for ever.

And S. Paul as he gives counsel to women from the same spirit, so it is very
near unto S. Peter in the expression of it, when he says, 1 Ti^. 2.9. v. 10.
women must adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and
sobriety, not with plaited hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but that
which becomes women professing godliness, with good works. I must not say
that here the Apostle forbids the wearing pearl, or costly array: unless it be
an enemy unto modesty, shamefastness, sobriety, or an hinderer of good works:
but, rather then any of these be hindered or diminished, away, in Gods name,
with pearls, and costly array.

The great Philosopher Aristotle, setting down the qualities and duties of a
good and fit wife says, she must be apt to rule within doors, according to
the will of her husband; 2. That she neither carry our, nor take in ought,
against her husbands mind; 3. That she be cleanly and handsome to please her
husband, and not fine and trim to please other men; 4. That she be no
busie-body in others houses, or affairs; 5. That she should observe her
husbands qualities and conditions, that so, if they be good, she may follow and
teach them: if ill, to avoid them her self, and, as much as she can, to weed
them out of her husband, or by little and little to wean him from them; 6. That
with a godly and loving fear she be careful, not to give her husband cause of
offense; and, if he be offended or troubled, with discretion and meekness to
pacify, and mitigate his passions; 7. To be a compatient or fellow-sufferer,
as a true yokefellow, in all estates: as well in adversity, as in prosperity.
We read that Admetus being sick, and the Augures inquired of how he might
recover, they answered, it could not be but by the death of his best friend,
which his wife hearing, answered, he cannot have a better friend then me his
wife, and thereupon to recover him, she killed her self. I propound not this,
as a thing to be imitated, but to show of what power the compassionate love of
a wife is, to which I might add that of Phinehas his wife, who, upon the
report of her husbands death, 1 Samuel 4.19.
fell in travail and died; and from these, and many the like instances, we may
conclude that the compassionate love of women to their husbands is, as Solomon
said, Gent. 8.6
as strong as death.

And now having touched some duties, and qualities of good wives, I shall add a
few observations, or exhortations if you please to call them so, whereby wives
may the better be enabled to perform those duties, and to make those qualities
be more gracious, and seem more glorious.



breath, although, by it, it is kindled. Nolo nimis facilem, says one Poet, I
refuse the too easy yeelder, and fugit ad salices, and se cupit ante videri,
says another, she fled to the covert and seemed desirous to be first seen,
both intimating, that a gentle and modest refusal provokes, and inflames
desires. I observe that Rebecca, when she had travailed many miles uncovered,
now approaching near the place where Isaac her husband was to meet her, that
she then put on her veil, that love, or desire in women is most to be
esteemed, when she seems to refuse with one hand, yet ready to entertain and
embrace her husband with the other.

Augustine to covetous fathers, (who pretend all their care is for their
children, says the father) vox pietatis, it is the voice of piety: but indeed,
excusatio iniquitatis, it is but an excuse or cover of their iniquity. For
observe when Jezebel paints, and when Esther puts on her bravery, the first
does it to appear, not to her husband but to Jehu, whom she would inflame; and
the other to Ahashuerus, whom she would inamour. I pray observe that, when you
would make the child leave the dug, you smear it with mustard, or the like:
such are Mercury waters, or such sl^bbers to a good and wise husband; neither
can this counterfeit beauty, or artificial dressing so much allure, or please
the husband for the time, as the wives ordinary familiar homeliness will
distaste, or take off at all times else.

The fourth observation is, that wives, as they are called, Thy wise sall be as
the vine about thy house, Ps. 128.
not in the streets, or fields, but on the sides of the house. The males only
were commanded thrice a year to go to Jerusalem to serve the Lord, Exodus 24
but not the wives, but the husbands were to go so far from their own homes.
And the spouse called his beloved a Dove, Cant. 2.
which delights her self only in her mate at home, and he courtech her to
solace her self in the clifts of the rocks, not in the markets, exchanges, or
play houses, yea when the Spouse invites her to recreate her self with the
flowers, figs, and pleasant fruits, her answer is, (Dilecius meus mibi,) all my
delight is in thee my Spouse. Armenia being asked by her husband Tygranes, how
she liked the King? answered, that she looked not wishly on him, for her eyes
were all the while on her husband.

A fifth, may be that the wife, though she be fair, Paul calling marriage
((...)) a yoaking together, 2 Cor. 6.14.
charges the man and woman not to be unequally yoaked. The Greeks, when they
would express a careless prodigal wife, called het Ocnus his Ass: for this
Ocnus being a rope-maker, that labored and wrought all day, yet, before night,
his Ass eat more then he got by his work: you may add that, if an Ox and
Ass be yoaked, if the Ox draw never so much, and the Ass hang back, so
little good will come of their yoaking, that, as a father said in another case
(non solum non trahunt, sed rumpunt quod junctu^ est) they not only draw not,
but break what was joined. I can conclude this observation with no better
counsel then that in the Proverbs Chap 31. from the 11. verse to the 25. which
I leave and commend to your reading, and meditation.

Prove. 15.1.
The wise man in general tells us that a soft answer ( frangit, reads the
vulgar) breaks anger, wherein is a mystery that, that which is soft can break;
and it can be no less then a secret in nature infused by God into the soul of
man: and note that woman though at first she were made out of a rib, yet that
is not so hard as some bones, and it was out of the husbands rib too, that it
should not resist him, who was the matter of her being. Fire we all know will
soon break out by the collision, or clashing of two hard matters, as iron
beating on flint: but rub a thousand weight of oil, or feathers against twenty
flints. no fire will issue: and lightning and thunder breaks the sword in the
scabbard. A woman, complaining, that her husband was so waspish and cross that
she could not contain, but reply; her neighbor taught her this remedy, that,
while her husband was chiding, she should hold water in her mouth, till his fit
was over, which with thanks the woman found to be an especial remedy. I have
red that anciently among some Gre^ks, the Bride on the day of m^riage, was
presented with a horse bridled and sadled; not to teach that she should be
ready to ride and gallop abroad, but that she should be, as that horse, with
her tongue bridled; and silent at her husbands command. In a word that I talk
not too much in an argument of silence, Prove. 31.26.
Bathsheba tells the wife that she must open her mouth in wisdom, and that in
her tongue must be the law of kindness, not sharpness, or replies, but what
ever the husband be, kindness must be observed by her as a law, and by this law
she shall find great ease and no small benefit to her self.

Paul to win the Thessalonians made himself like a Nurse, 1 Th. 2.7
which stills and gains the love of the Child by lullabies, a merry note, and
the dug; and not by curstness, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. Gal. 5.22.
or blows. And the servant of the Lord who desires to win souls, and bring
them to Christ, must be gentle, patient, meek, for this is the fruit of the
holy Spirit, which descended on Christ in the figure of a Dove; a Dove, which
as they say, has no gall, neither can she chatter though offended, but only
mourns. In a word, the Psalmist says, the wife must be as a vine, not as a
scratching bramble: no nor, though sweet as a rose, yet she must not be
pricking as a rose: but as the vine, which brings not forth sour but pleasant
grapes, to make her husbands heart not sad, but merry. For close of this, if
the husband be a Naball a churl, a fool, a distempered person, let the wife
learn to be an Abigail, who would not move or stir him to choler or grief when
he was in heat of wine, 1 Samuel 25 36.
but after his rest, when she found him well tempered then she speaks unto him,
and gently too.

I will sum up the duties of a wife with that precept of S. Paul which I will
read as the Hebrews, Tit. 2.5
backward, or beginning with the last first, and the last duty here expressed is,
that she be obedient to her husband: and that is to be wrought, or caused by
the next before it, when he commands her to be good, that is, benign, gentle,
courteous. The third duty ascending is that she be ((...)) like the tortoise
(except on sufficient cause) ever in her shell, (that is) an housekeeper, or
housewife. The duty preceding this, is that she be chaste; for this chastity is
a great preserver of retiredness, when on the contrary gadding abroad is no
great friend to chastity. The duty first here placed, and which is first in
repute and esteem is, that she be discreet and prudent. Which virtue is not
only a great help to preserve chastity, and to keep the wife at home; but an
especial cause or worker of the wives courteous carriage, and due obedience to
her husband: according to that of Solomon, Prove. 19.14. Ecclus: 26.14.
A prudent woman is the gift of the Lord, and a silent and prudent woman is the
gift of God. So S. Paul in setting down the commendable virtues and duties of
wives, begins with this, let them be discreet, or wise: for without this, they
will hardly be ch^st. Seldom housewives, and never good, and obedient to their
husbands.

To this observation I may add one more, as the last to this point; that
neither the Apostle, nor any other penman of God ever commended beauty,
wealth, honor, as to be sought after in the choice of a wife. But
house-wifery, chastity, gentleness, obedience, and the crown of all prudence,
and therefore I should never counsel any to make choice of a woman in marriage,
who is confident of her wit, wealth, beauty or birth: nor the woman to be
married to that man that presumes on his wisdom, wealth, power, or honor; for
when these are over valued in either, each will undervalue the other to
contempt, or at least to some discontent.

I have been long (I hope women will not beshrew me for it) in setting down the
duties of wives to their husbands. I shall be shorter, (and I wish that they
would not blame me for it) in the duty of the husband; because as Christ and
the Apostles spoke of the law, so the whole duty of the husband is comprised in
this one word love. So that though under love, both in the law and the husbands
duty, many things are required which are not simply and properly called love;
yet all these flow and stream from this one spring of love, and this is the
cause that S. Paul only says, Ephesians. 5. Col. 3.
husbands love your wives.

Now love being. 1. natural: 2. carnal: 3. political: 4. divine: I may say,
in a qualified sense, that all these loves are commanded the husband, under
this one word love. a natural love, because the woman was of, and from man,
being flesh of his flesh. 2. the carnal love, because thee shall be ((...))
into or one flesh. 3. political, for a sweet society, and peopling the world.
4. a divine love, (...) be in holi^^^^ such as C^^^^ ^hawed ^ compriseth all,
that possibly any woman can require, or desire from her husband. For if he love
her, he wisnes her well, he does well for her, he gives her what in justice and
reason she ^n desire, he suffers for her more then she would, he is careful
not to displease, and most willing to give her honor, and all good content.
God when he gives laws and precepts to man, he concludes them all in this,
Love the Lord thy God; and S. Paul, Romans 13 10.
love is the fulfilling of the law.

And to this love, as portrayed, the husband is bound: so says S. Paul, men
ought so to love their wives, Ephesians. 5.28.
and this expressly proves it to be the husbands duty to love his wife. Which S.
Paul barely says not, it is his duty (though his word as from God were a law,
and there needed no other confirmation for it) but he proves it. For the man to
his wife is, as Christ to his Church, and Christ loved his Church, and
therefore ((...)) so ye husbands ought to love your wives. Secondly, the wife
is not flesh of thy flesh, but is made one flesh, and one body, and as it were
one person with thee: Ephesians. 5.28.
so Ephesians. 5.28. and therefore man ought to love his wife.

And if you ask me, how he ought to love her, this the Apostle expresses too,
and most plainly, saying, 1. as Christ loved his Church:(...), so ye husbands
ought to love your wives. Where note, that the Apostle means not by this (...)
so, to tell the husband that he ought to love his wife in that high measure,
and degree as Christ did love his spouse, the Church, this is not possible for
man to do; but as Christ did truly and heartily love the Church, so ought m^n
to love their wives* And a second (...) should love his wife, the Apostle add
in the same place, when he says, he ought to love her as hit own, and as
himself; and be it that the man love his wife so, the woman covets too much,
that would desire more, then that her husband love her, as he does himself: for
no man, v. 29.
except a mad one says S. Paul hates, but rather cherishes, and nourishes
his own flesh.

Now S. Basil, (taking it for granted that the man, according to this duty and
rule loves the wife, more then the wife her husband) demands the reason for it,
and answers it thus. That woman was made subject to the guidance of the man,
and therefore to make a compensation, as it were, the man by his love is made
in some sort subject to his wife: so that the husband, though he be in his
natural capacity a Lord to his wife (as Sarah called her husband) yet in a
sweet manner he is, through his love, become her servant, so that though God
gave the woman long hair which might be as reins in the man's hand to guide
her: yet God gave her an eye, that her husband may say, as Christ to his
spouse, Cant. 4.9.
thou have ravished or taken away my heart with one of thine eyes. and be the
man the head of the wife, yet the wife by her ravishm^nt of the man, is become
(according to the place or part whence she was first taken) the heart of the
man. and hereby it comes to pass that as Christ taught, the man is to leave
father and mother, and cleave to his wife; and all this is wrought by man's love
to his wife.

Well therefore did S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.
speaking of this loving subject, call it a mystery; a mystery in nature, and a
mystery in grace, and each applied by the Apostle to the husbands love. for, as
Eve was taken out of Adam, so the Church from Christ: she from Adam cast into a
sleep, the Church from Christ sleeping in Death: Eve was from the side opened,
the Church from Christ's side pierced. Adam therefore was to to love Eve as his
flesh and bone: Christ his Church as his blood and life. and hereupon the
Apostle concludes, Men therefore love your wives, as Adam did Eve, and as
Christ did the Church. For man and his wife are coupled, as in the bond of
nature, so in the covenant of grace, and this is the mystery which S. Paul
calls the love of man to his wife.

And another mystery there is couched in the words of the Apostle when be
says, that the man and wife being two subjects or persons, are made and become
one. for though two, yet but one body, and two, but one soul and affection to
love each other, as himself: Ephesians. 5.28. v. 33.
so that two should be one in, and by love; and yet by the power of the same
love this one to become two to help each other against all enemies,
adversaries, or opponents: and here is the mystery, and such a mystery as
love only under God can, and should make between man and wife.

Which love as it is strong as Death, Can. 8.6,
so it fears not, nor stoopeth to death: but undauntedly encountered for the
object, be it the wife or the spouse beloved, S. Paul tells us, it was so in
that most divine love of Christ to his Church; who gave himself even to death
for her; and so has it been in many a man natural love to do the like for his
beloved. He touch but one example of Tiberius, who finding two snakes in his
bedchamber was told that, if he killed the female his wife must die, if the
male, himself; whereupon to preserve his wife, he chose rather to kill the
mal^^ and himself to die. and happy is that conjunction, which is so cemented
by love, that each can say (as Castor and Pollux as brethren) vive tuo Coujux
tempore, vive meo. live o my spouse thy term, and live thou mine.

The Greeks, though most abundant in expressions by words, yet in this case of
husband and wife seem defective and scanty. For as Ephesians. 5. and Col. 3. (...),
Ephesians. 5. Col. 1.
which is in general a man, stands for husband: so (...), which is in general
a woman signifies in the Apostle a wife: which defect, if it may be so called,
is supplied by our English, when we translate that man and woman, by husband
and wife: and not unfitly from the first creation of both; for as the woman was
made for the man, to be a comfort unto him as a wife, Genesis 2.18.
so the man being alone, and wanting any, under God, on whom to place his love
and delight, is to settle these on the woman his wife, therefore says the
Apostle, husbands love your wives, Ephesians. 5.22.
these being the objects of your solace, and delight, and as they were made,
helps to the husband. Which word husband as it notes the man to be the band of
the house, and all therein: so primarily and principally of his wife, by which
he is put in mind to keep her from shattering as the band in sheaves, or as
the band of an house to keep it from shaking and falling: and this is required
in the love, as in the name and title of husband.

And yet S. Paul inlargeth this love of the husband to his wife, Ephesians. 5.29.
when he tells the husband that he must ((...)) he must nourish, and cherish
her; not feed her only, for so he must do his servant, but the word minds
somewhat more, to feed her with the best, and so to nourish her: and not only
th^^ to nourish, but to cherish; which may be (...) ^etaphoricall word taken
from hens hovering over, and covering the young ones, defending them from the
sharpness of the weather, and warming them by her feathers, and the heat of
her body. The plain and full sense of the word you may find in the 1 King.
1.2. where the Shunamitsh damsel is said to cherish old David lying in his
bosom, and giving him heat: 1 K. 1.2.
and thus the husband, by the precept and rule of S. Paul, is to love his wife,
when he says he must nourish, and cherish her.

And to this end that the wife be not driven on all occasions to run to the
husband for her nourishment, our holy and wife Leiturgie has taught that, at
the marriage, the man is to endow his wife with all his worldly goods, and as a
token and earnest hereof, he usually gave her both silver and gold, which is
near to the Jewish ceremony, though far enough from any superstition or
Judaisme, for the Romans used this ceremony in their marriages, that the Bride
being brought home to her husbands house, she openly proclaimed, ubi tu Caius,
ego Caia: which Erasmus translates thus, Where thou art Lord, or Master, I am
Lady or Mistress; whereby she has an estate for maintenance, so far as the
husbands ability can extend both in his life and after his death.

The Apostle S. Peter has added another duty of the husband, as a fruit or
effect of his love to his wife; when he says, 1 Pet. 3.7.
Give honor to your wives. Whereby it appears that although the woman be in
her self, or otherwise honorable, yet by marriage the husband adds to her
giving her the honor of a wife, according to that, marriage is honorable in
all, even in the lowest, Heb. 13.
because God has sanctified and honored it by his institution, and blessing,
he being, as at first to Adam and Eve, the Contractor, the Priest, and the
Father to give the woman to the man: for so it is said, Genesis 2.22.
the Lord brought her to Adam.

Again, when the Apostle says, the man must give her honor as to the weaker,
may it not be fitly understood, that, if she has any defect, weakness, or
infirmity com^on to all, or some more then usual, yet the husband ^s to honor
the wife by concealing and covering them from others; and to cure and to
comfort her in and against these infirmities, as he would do his own body?
Which agrees with that of S. Paul Ephesians. 5. and with that other, Ephesians. 5.29. 1
Cor. 12 23.
1 Cor. 12. our more uncomely parts we adorn most. Another sense there may be
of this, which agrees with the words and form in marriage prescribed by our
Leiturgie, where the man says, with my body I thee worship: whereby he does
as it were appropriate his body to his wife in respect of all other women, and
this agrees with that of S. Paul, that men must so far as may stand with
chastity, modesty, and his ability, give her due benevolence; for he is not
sole Lord, or Master of his body, but his wife herein is copartner, or
cape-master, and this S. Paul speaks fully, 1 Cor. 7.4.
and plainly.

Other appendant or subordinate duties are required from the husband, under or
flowing from this great master duty love, 1 Cor. 7 3. Col. 3.19
as that the husband must yield his wife due benevolence; 2. That he must not
be bitter, or sharp, but gentle and apt to pass by infirmities and offenses of
his wife as of the weaker vessel; A 3. requisite duty of the husband is, that,
the husband live with his wife according to knowledge: 1 Pet. 3.9.
so that, as he is the head of his wife: so like an head he may be able to
guide and to direct, according to knowledge in Gods and man's laws. And this may
be one reason why S. Paul suff^rs not a woman to speak in the Church but to
learn of her husband at home; 4. When the Apostle tells the husband that he
must love his wife as Christ does his Church, Ephesians. 5.25.
it is hereby employed that as there can be no greater love then this, nor any
greater spur to this love then what the Apostle gives, that the wife is the
husbands flesh and body: that he is her head, and that God has commanded this
love: so that love to his wife being such as Christ's was to his Church,
therefore it must be a chaste, not a wanton and carnal love: an holy, not a
worldly or profane love: a sincere, hearty, not a feigned hypocritical love:
and lastly, not a temporary and fading, but a perpetual love, to hold as the
bands in wedlock, till death depart the one from the other, or both together.

And be thy love such, it will so help, at least, to temper and qualify all
straggling wild passions toward thy wife, that seldom, if ever, thou shall be
angry with her; but sure never to be jealous of her fidelity to thee. Which
jealousy, as it is like the Hemlock in the Prophets pottage, destructive to
all matrimonial peace and bliss: so is it often conceived without a father,
brought forth without a midwife, and cherished without a nurse; or, at least,
without any that thou can prove to be such, for if the woman be so wicked as
to play false, the Serpent is not more wily then she to conceal it. I observe
that when Christ told the woman that she had submitted her self to six men,
Joh. ^.
she concluded that sure he was a Prophet, and so when Christ's feet were washed
and wiped by Mary Lu. 7.3.
Magdalen: the Pharisees argued were he a Prophet he could have known that Mary
Magdalen was a loose woman. So from both passages it may appear, that it was
hard for any unless a Prophet, who had revelations supernatural, to discover
and find out, a false incontinent wife; and better I hold it, if the thing
prove too apparent, to dissemble it, as Jacob did his daughter Dinahs
wickedness, then to blow his horn at the door, or to proclaim it in the Market
place. I end all this in one word of exhortation, Pe not to thy wife as a Lion
in the house, Ecclus. 4.30.
but as a Lamb, or be, in this, as a Dog, that is cursed to strangers or strange
women, yet to be kind and affable at home, for this will beget, preserve, and
increase the reciprocal love of thy wife to thee, which is the key to thy
worldly bliss and happiness: and the fruit of a well grounded and holy
marriage.

Which happiness appears and is evidenced, on the man's part; 1. When it is
said, thy wife shall be as a vine; Ps. 128.3
which is both pleasant, and profitable; pleasant on the sides of thy house,
for shade and refreshment; and profitable, because fruitful. Fruitful two
ways; 1. Bringing that forth which makes thy heart merry, being as she was
made, a help and comfort unto thee; 2. Fruitful in children. And, not only
brings she pleasure and profit to her husband, but honor too, for so we read,
a virtuous wife is a crown to her husband. Prove. 12 14.
For, as the lewdness of the woman turns to the husbands shame; witness the
word Cuckold: so her discreet and good life becomes his honor, and as the
crown of gold is to the Kings head, such is a virtuous wife to her husband, for
an ensign of his honor, and not an external temporary, windy honor, placed,
begot, or settled in the opinion of men; but that intrinsic, during, real
honor which is the fruit of Gods favor, for, so Who finds a wife finds a
good thing, Prove. 18.22.
where good the adjunct to the subject wife is necessarily to be understood,
else the thing that he finds would scarce be good. And would you know how
this wife becomes such a good thing? then read Proverbs 19.14. where you shall
find that a prudent or good wife is from the Lord, and, Prove. ^^ 14.
if a present from God the Lord, then sure she is a good thing, especially if
ye add what is before to that of Proverbs 18.22. he that finds this good
thing the wife, obtains and receives her, not only as a gift, but as a gift
of honor, and favor from the Lord.

I might surfeit an husband with a glut of happiness, if I should here repeat
and enlarge the manifold blessings redounding to him from a good wife, of whom
I may speak as the Philosophers and Fathers did of health, saying, it is bonum
such a good, as without which there is scarce any sublunary thing good unto
him. God said, at the first, It is not good that man should be alone, without
society and company (that is, to be without a woman his wife) therefore good it
is to have her; 2. It was not good to be without an help meet for him, which is
man's case without a wife, therefore it is good to have her.

Thirdly, it is not good for a man to be without arrows, the weapons of
defense against his foes, now these arrows are his children, which honestly
cannot be had without a wife; therefore it is good to have her. I could add to
these 600 more goods attending an husband with a good wife. But that I may not
clog you, Ireferre you to that which I might here repeat and enlarge, Prove. 31.
from the 10. v. to the end of the Chapter, and to these places in
Ecclesiasticus chapter 7.19. chapter 25.8. and chapter 26. v. 1, 2, 3.13, 14, 15, 16.22,
23, 24, 25, 26. and chapter 36. v. 14. and chapter 40.23. so that I may say merrily,
yet truly, an egg is not so full of good meat, as a virtuous wife is of good
things.

And, as to the husband such a wife is a blessing and a good thing: so no less
good and bliss is acquired to the wife who has found a good husband. I have
heard women jestingly (I hope) say, that if the husband be the head, the wile
shall be the Cap: and surely, the wife has no readier means to attain this,
then by her discreet subjection to her husband, according to that of our
Savior (in several places repeated by the Evangelists) He that humbles
himself shall be exalted, and this accords with that (before mentioned) a
virtuous wife is a crown to her husband, Prove. 12.4.
now the place for a crown to be set, is his head, and as the crown is to the
bearer an ensign of honor: so honor we know is in honorante formally, and
efficiently in the giver of honor, which in this case is the virtuous wife;
and hereby she acquireth to her self the just title of honor, and this she
has gained by being a wise wife.

But, if this satisfy not all women, then let them hear and find other
blessings, and good things arising from marriage, which single, she neither had,
nor well could have, for hereby she has not only the society, but the love,
the union, the body, the soul, the all things of the man her husband, and what
greater or more good can she wish, or desire under heaven? Again, when Adam had
all the world given him, yet it was not said for these, or for all these thou
shall leave thy father and thy mother, but, when he had his wife, then and not
till then, was it spoken; Thou shall leave father and mother, and all things,
except God, and shall cleave to thy wife: and is not this a bliss, or a good
thing to a wife?

May I not without offense say, that a woman before marriage, was, as it were an
headless thing? for, as the man was said without her to be without an help, or
helpless: so she, without him, to be without an head, headless; for so S.
Paul speaks, The husband is the head of the wife. Ephesians. 5.28.
2. Whereas before marriage, she was but half an one, now by wedlock she is made
a whole and perfect one, for her husband and she (as Christ and his Church, so
S. Paul says) are made one; 3. S. Paul goes further when he says that he the
husband, as Christ, is the head, Ephesians. 5.23
and he is (...) the Savior of the body, which word Savior, Zanchius the
learned and judicious expositer doubts not to refer, as to Christ, so to the
husband; and if so, then the wife by marriage not only gets an head, but a
Savior, under which word, as in the Greek more is included, says Cicero, then
can well be expressed, yet so much at least is evident and easy, that the
husband may well be called the wives Savior, not only in that he labors and
travailes for her maintenance of life, and security against all harm and
danger; but because he it her guide and te^cher in the ways to her salvation,
for so much S. Paul implies, when he says, if the wife will learn any thing,
for the benefit of her soul, 1 Cor. 14 35,
let her ask her husband: who, as be is her head to guide, so he is, in part,
and in a saving sense, her isntrumental Savior.

And not singly in this, but that by this husband she may receive another
blessing, that is, children, Ps. 128.5, 6.
for so it is proclaimed, The Lord shall bless thee in seeing thy children:
where they are a blessing from the Lord, Ps. 127.3 ver. 5.
and children are an heritage and reward of the Lord; yea blessed is the man
that has his quiver full of them, in which blessing the woman has not the
least share, for she is the quiver, which keeps, and yields the blessing of
such arrows, as are children. Yea S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.15.
the woman shall be saved in childbearing, if she continue in faith, charity,
holiness and sobriety.

Yet, because simply and absolutely all children are not blessings, therefore
to make them such, Ps. 128.
the Psalmist says, they shall be as Olives, now the oil of Olives is not
only good to smooth the countenance, but to expel poison or poisonous cares
from the heart, and such shall the children be of the virtuous wife and the
good husband: and, though these Olives must not hold the like place with the
wife, to be on the side of the house; yet they shall be round about the table,
there ready to wait, and serve both father, and mother at their call or need in
all faithfulness and obedience, as they are taught by the Apostles S. Peter
and S. Paul. 1 Pet. 1.14. Tit. 1.6.


And yet I cannot promise that this blessing of having children, shall overtake
all good husbands and wives: no nor that all such as have children, shall be
blessed in them. For the Psalmist restrains this blessing of good, obedient,
and faithful children only to such Parents as fear the Lord, Lo thus says
the holy Ghost shall the man be blessed that fears the Lord: Ps. 128.4
and I cannot but observe, that King David's were good, till he became bad: but
when once he deflowred Bathsheba the wife, and murdered Vriah the husband; then
his children committed uncleanness, and rebelled against him. The fear of the
Lord in the parents, begets, and preserves the fear of the Lord in the
children. and this the parents ought to observe and do, not only for their
childrens good, but that their children may be good, and a blessing to their
parents.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the mutual love and duty between Parents and Children.
ONe especial end of marriage is the propagation of children, and therefore
from marriage, and the duties thereof we shall proceed to that between parents
and children: and herein considering whence children come, to see the love and
duty of parents to their children, and the return of honor, obedience and
other duties of children to their parents.

The Hebrews say, that God keeps the keys of the womb, and of the grave, which
agrees with that, that he kills and he gives life, or more nearly as to our
purpose, children are the gift and heritage of the Lord; but by the agency, and
instrumency of the parents: so that they are as slips or ciences taken from
them, and this makes the relation between them so near, that some have observed
that when God said, A man shall leave father and mother for his wife: yet he
says not he shall forsake children for his wife; for though the man and wife,
are as the Apostle phraseth it, joined or glewed together, as made into one
flesh, yet except Eve no wife is out of, or a part of, the man's flesh. But I
speak not this to lessen the relative love between husband and wife, so much as
to heighten that which is between parents and children.

And this is so great, even in all sensitive Creatures, beasts and birds, that
not only the Lion, Dog, and Bear, but the Do, the Ewe, and Hen; will oppose
the strongest creature, and interpose between them and their young, hazarding
their own lives to preserve that of their young ones.

And it has not been less seen among men, for so we read that Octavius
Albanius, keeping a castle beseiged when one cried out your son without is in
danger to be slain, he suddenly sallied out for his rescue, though with the
loss of his own life. an other hearing that his son was sentenced to death for
a murder, he appeared before Charles the great; swearing it was he that slew
the man, and thereupon was put to death, thereby to save his sons life. and
Agrippina mother of Nero, being told that it would cost her life to have her
son Emperor; answered, So he may be Emperor let me die, and how much short is
the affection of Jacob to his children Joseph and Benjamin; or that of David to
Absalom; Genesis 42.38.
when Jacob said, If mischief shall befall Benjamin, it will bring down my gray
hairs with sorrow to the grave, and he hearing that his son Joseph was dead,
he rent his clothes, put sackcloth on his loins and mourned for him many days
and would not be comforted, saying, I will go down into the grave unto my son;
Genesis 37.35.
and how much short of this was David's expressions for the death of a
rebellious son, who though he sought his fathers crown and life, yet the father
thus passionately laments him, 2 Samuel 1 33.
O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for thee, O
Absalom my son, my son?

It has been a question whether the love of the father or the mother, be the
greater to the child, and if we answer by the consideration of examples, we
shall leave the question unresolved. For as we found Jacob and David most
tenderly loving, so the like we shall see in Rachel, Ge. 30.1.
who sels her husband to Leah for mandrakes, whereby she hoped to get children,
which she so much longed for that she cries out, give me children else I dye,
and having lost them, she weeps for them, Jer. 31.15 Mat. 1.8.
and would not be comforted because they were not.

But if we consider the mothers pain in breeding, danger in bringing forth, and
her care and trouble in their first training up, we may conceive that her love
exceeds, especially if we add hereunto that which the Prophet says, if a
mother, (he says not if a father) but if a mother can forget the child of her
womb, which may seem to intimate, that a father may sooner forget the son which
he got, then the mother which bore him in her womb: which womb nature as the
Anatomists observe has filled with most tender affectionate baggs, membranes,
veins, and sinews; thereby to make her more loving to the child, Genesis 29.32.
and if to this we add what Leah speaks, who having born a son unto Jacob her
husband, she says now my husband will love me; Then we may conclude that the
mother for her own sake loves the child more tenderly or fondly, but the father
for the child's sake loves him more wisely and strongly; or we may say, that the
man and the woman, love their child, as Alexander was said to love his two
intimate friends, Ephestion and Parmenio, who loved the former as a fine
delicate man, and such women delight in, but Parmenio he loved as a brave man
for action, and such a wise father is pleased with.

And from hence we may assoile an other question, why both father and mother
oft-times loves one child better then an other, as Rebecca did Jacob the
younger, more then Esau the elder; I and Jacob affected his two youngest,
Joseph and Benjamin, more then his first born, Reuben and Simeon, and King
David placed the crown on the head of Solomon contrary to the Jews law and
custom, though he had six sons elder then Solomon; and a great part of this
act in King David we may ascribe to the affection, policy and power of Batsheba
the mother, as that other the like act of Isaac in preferring Jacob to Esau may
be attributed to Rebecca.

Now from this root of love in the parents, shoot out the branches of their
care in nursing, breeding, and providing for their children; all which are so
natural and necessary, that who neglects the performance of these duties
deserves not the name of father and mother, nor yet so much as to be called
Sire, or Damme, for beasts and birds generally perform these cares for their
young, until they are able to provide for themselves: for did we ever know or
read that an Ewe, a Do, or a Sow, put out her young to nurse, or would suffer
any other to give their young suck, but themselves so long as themselves were
able to do it? and must we conceive that nature has less power, or works less
in a woman which has reason then in a beast? or will ye have me think that
reason and grace which add unto, and strengthen the gifts of nature, do both
weaken nature in the woman? and if not, which indeed cannot be thought by any
endued with grace or reason, why then think we that nature has given the
mother breasts, and fountains of milk if not to suckle her young? or why think
ye that a strange woman's milk should be so naturally and properly good for the
child as the mothers which brought it into the world? and why rather consider
you not that as children with the milk, draw that humor which makes for the
good or ill of their bodies, so many by sucking cruel, drunken, unchaste women,
have become such in quality and condition as their nurses were? It may be
instanced in Tiberius, Commodus, Emperors of Rome, and diverse others: but not
to be long on this subject, remember that Sarah is said to have given her son
suck, from which act I shall draw no other inference but that of S. Peter, 1
Pet: 3.6
whose Daughters ye are as long as ye do well (doing as she did who gave suck
to her child.)

But the mothers duty ends not in this, but that she with the husband and each
and both must labor with the soonest to administer the spiritual milk of the
knowledge and fear of God, thereby to nourish the child's soul to everlasting
life; and this duty lies more straightly, and strongly, upon the parent in as
much as the soul the Temple of God is more excellent and of greater esteem then
the body, which is but an house of clay. The father and mother of Samson
inquire of the Angel of the Lord saying, Judge. 13 12.
How shall we order the child, and bow shall we do unto him? and that the child
Samuel may be ordered aright, his mother brings him very young to the house of
the Lord, and she lent, says the text, or returned him to the Lord, (...)
1.2^.8.
to be his as long as he lived, and what follows so good an entrance and
beginning, I Sam. 2.11.
as in the very next chapter, that the child according to his matriculation,
did ever after minister unto the Lord.

And what the further duties of parents are in this kind S. Paul intim^^es in
one place when he says, I These. 2.11.
I exhort; and not only so, but I charge you as a father does his children,
that ye walk worthy of God who has called you to his Kingdom: and in another
text he expresses it more plainly, as a precept to parents, fathers bring up
your children in the nu^ture and fear of the Lord. and if you will have a more
especial and particular account of the several lessons to be taught this
child, you may read them set down by the wise man in his Proverbs; ^^ov. 4.
where that whole chapter contains the full instruction of a child in the ways
of godliness, and the fruit thereof the parents shall find in the same book
where it is said, Prove. 23.^4.
The father of the righteous shall have great joy, and be shall rejoice that
has a wise son.

And that Parents may receive this joy, Prove. 22.^.
the wise man counsels them; Train up or catechize the child in his youth in
the way he should go, Prove. 23.13, 14.
and with hold not correction from the child, for if thou beatest him with the
rod he shall not die, but thou shall deliver his soul from hell: Prove. 29.^5.
Whereas a child left to himself brings his mother to shame.

I have read of a son who on the Gallows called to speak with his father, where
he bit off his ear telling him that if he had done the part of a Father in
training him up with due correction he had never come to that end. And was not
Eli to blame suffering his sons to behave themselves wickedly, when all the
correction he gave them was Why do ye so my sons? And what was it lest if not
more in Lot to drink immoderat^ly with his daughters, whereby he came to
uncover both their nakedness? and Jacob himself deserved to be reprehended for
suffering his daughter Dinah to ramble among the strange young men whereby she
caught that clap which caused so much bloodshed; the Apostle therefore says,
what son is he whom the father chastneth not? Heb. 12.7, 8, 9.
yea and if the son be without chastisement then is he a bastard and no son,
but if chastned he gives his father reverence, and the mother, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy 5.10.
that has brought up her children in the faith is well reported of, whereas
the Prophet tells us that it became a proverb, Ezekiel. 16.44.
as is the daughter so is the mother, which appeared true in David whose
children after himself had committed folly and murder were found loose,
rebellious and murderers.

And yet to this admonition lest Parents grow too severe and rigid I must give
this caution, that Parents be not like Rehoboam to threaten or use scorpions,
that is, whips having sharp thongs like points of thorns or stings of Serpents,
but ever that they remember the counsel of the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.4.
Fathers provoke not your children unto wrath lest that (as himself speaks)
they may be discouraged, Col. 3.21
correction with discretion and moderation is the chastisement required in a
father to his child, for that as S. Gal. 4: ^
Paul speaks, the heir as long as he is a child differs not from a servant.

And yet the duty of the Parent ends not here but extends it self to a further
point that he provide for his child, the Apostle is express herein when he
says, 2 Cor. ^2.14.
The parents ought to lay up for their children, which thing if they do not,
then says the same Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.8.
That man that provides not for his own has denied the faith, and is worse
then an infidel, (for the heathens and infidels do it) yea he is worse then
the very beasts, all which provide for their young, except the Raven, which as
some write forsake theirs featherlesse and meatlesse, leaving them to be
nourished either by the dew from heaven, from flies in the air, or from small
worms breeding in the nest: and this if the Naturalists observation holds
heightened the miracle that God wrought when he caused these Ravens such
unnatural birds to their own, to feed the Prophet Elijah.

But to this duty of Parents providing for children, I must give a memento or
two which may concern the parent and some other, that may respect the child; to
that which concerns the Parent, we have a proverb or byword, Happy is that
child whose father goes to the Devil, and I remember when Rebecca intended in
love to Jacob the younger to rob Esau the elder and and the heir of his
birthright, Jacob said to his mother, by this fraudulent and false way I shall
bring a curse upon my self and not a blessing, but what is the mothers reply?
upon me be the curse my son, so I make thee great and Lord of all; but worthily
deserves that Parent the curse, and justly is he rewarded with hell, who fears
neither the curse nor hell, so he can make his son rich and great.

A learned Father of the Church, August.
having reproved the immoderate raking together of riches in many men, was
answered by these men, that all they did was for their children, and every man
was bound by Gods law to provide for them: whereunto be replied, this seems to
be the voice of piety, but indeed it is the excuse of iniquity, and better it
were your children should want wine, then you water to cool your tongue, or
better they should want fire here, then you should burn in hell hereafter.

But certainly if Parents were so besotted with their love to their children as
to hazard their own everlasting damnation and torture for their children, yet
did they consider how little benefit these ill gotten goods bring to their
children and posterity in the end they would not be so hell-hardy as they are,
for hear what the Prophet speaks, Psalm. 37.35.36.
I have seen (and so have we) the wicked in great power, and spreading himself
like a green Baytree, yet he passed and lo be was not, yea I sought him but he
could not be sound; and the Egyptians when they would express such a father
and his son they portrayed one twisting a rope, and an other ravelling it ou^,
and indeed often it comes so to pass that the house reard by fraud and
iniquity, becomes like an house that is built of a liquid substance that the
sun will consume, or if not, yet God as the Lord of the earth may take his own
if ill gotten, from him where he finds it, and this without all or any show of
injustice.

Therefore Fathers that your estates may prove durable to your children and
comfortable to your selves, get them in the fear of God and by honest, and just
means, and in the distribution of them be just and equal, not giving all or
the most of all to one for the raising or propagating a name, and little to the
rest. I am not ignorant that diverse people do it and herein they do right
well, because herein they seem to imitate the Jews who indeed left those lands
in Canaan which came unto them and were divided by lot, these for the most part
as by prescription or law descended to the elder, and again because the elder
among them both in sacred and civil affairs and titles had the pre-eminence
before and above the younger. But neither before nor after the law given by
Moses did this hold as a law, that the elder should enjoy all the lands, except
as before, I say that which by Gods immediate prescript was so divided to them
by lot.

For before the law observe the eldest of Jacobs children, Reuben, Simeon and
Levi, and of the twelve Joseph and Benjamin the youngest, yet Judah the fourth
son he has the dominion, and Joseph and Benjamin, the greatest part in their
fathers blessing, but yet so that although be gave them most whom he most
aff^cted for the inward endowments and goodness of the soul, yet he gave them
all of his blessing from God liberally and proportionably to their several
abilities; And did not Isaac the like? and what did King David a man after Gods
own heart, who having had six sons elder then Solomon yet intended in their
life time and afterward actually settled the crown upon Solomon, the younger it
has been so much practiced by many that it bath almost become a proverb, Who
best deserves best have.

Yet so, that all may be as heirs of their Fathers spiritual, so of his
earthly and temporal blessing and that with some indifferent measure and
proportion. For although a river cut and divided into many streams runs not so
strongly nor makes so great a show or noise, yet thus divided it does less
harm by breaches or overflowings, and more good by watering and refreshing the
land. And I am sure, that an house, bridge, or castle, built or settled upon
most arches buttresses or piles of stone stands more firmly and for
continuance then that which stands but upon one; for if this one fails as often
it is seen in the heirs of England, all the house falls to decay with him and
is gone.

Now if two strings to the bow holds surest, then say I why not to have two,
three or four, rather then to trust all to one? but if you shall add hereunto,
the heart-burnings, contentions, troubles and wars not only between David's
children, or Isaacs, or between the Edomites and Israelites, the issue and
posterity of Esau and Jacob, but of thousands more upon unequal distributions,
you will soon conclude that it is neither wise, good nor safe to give all or
most of all to one because he is the elder, but either to give the most to the
best or proportionally to divide it among all.

And because the children of great men and gentlemen as well as of others grow
from good to bad, and from ill to worse, therefore it behooves parents as much
as in them is, and in their life time not to bring up their children to be mere
gentlemen, that is, to hawke, hunt, or to eat, drink and play, which was the
sin and destruction of the old world, and is taxed by the Apostles, which is
the same in our days, but as the Apostle wisely and holily has given us in
charge, 1 Cor. 7^.20.
Let every man abide in that calling wherein he was called, which words imply
no less then that every man should have a calling which is agreeable to the
first foundation and building up of the world.

Where at first no sooner was the stage of the world reared, but that our first
father Adam was set to acting, that is to speak plainly, Adam was set to dress
the garden, and not only the children of Adam, who were heirs of the world,
spent their time in tilling and sowing the earth; or in keeping and feeding
sheep, but the Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, though Lords of great
possessions, and masters of many servants, and powerful to fight with, and
conquer Kings, yet these (witness the holy writ) lived not as our Gentlemen do,
but as the Apostle counsels and commands us, they lived and exercised
themselves in honest callings; for they knew that as of idleness comes no
goodness: so he that lives idly, to eat, drink and play, must be sure as the
Apostle speaks, that the judgment of God is according to truth, Row. 2.2.5.
against them which commit such things, and therefore that they do hereby
treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the just
judgment of God, who will render to every man according to his deeds.

The Greeks as I am taught have a word which signifies to play the Stork,
whereby they understand, that the love of parents to their children should
beget in children a reddition and retribution of their duty to their Parents;
for it is storied of the Stork that as the old one has been loving and tender
to feed, defend, and cherish their young; so the young will feed, defend, and
carry the old when it is unable to help it self.

Now Christ himself, Mat. 6.26.
though in another case, bids us behold the fowls of the air, and accordingly
the Spirit of God, by his penmen grounds instructions to children, in their
duty to parents, as S. Paul does when he says, Children obey your Parents in
the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1, 2.
for this is right; and again, Honor thy father and mother (which is the first
commandment with promise) and he adds a reason to his counsel on the child's
behalf, That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long (and
happy) on the earth. The Parents of Tobiah called their son (implying what
children should be to their parents) the light of their eyes to guide and
direct them, Tob. 5.17.10.5.
and the staff of their hand in going in and out to defend them. and we have a
story of a godly Christian Daughter to this purpose, who in part robbed her
child, that with the milk of her breasts she might nourish her father
imprisoned and almost sterved by the merciless Tyrant.

Nor does the Child's duty here end, Ephesians. 6.1.
but goes on to what S. Paul taught, that children must obey their parents in
the Lord: that is, in all just and lawful things, what ever they command, so
it be not repugnant to the word, or law of the Lord, which the same Apostle in
an other Epistle commands saying; Col. 3.20
Children obey your parents in all things (that is, as before, in the Lord) for
this is well pleasing to the Lord: for obeying them in all things in the Lord,
in so doing the children obey the Lord, which commands this obedience.

And what the sin or punishment of disobedience is, Prove. 30 17.
the wise man in part has told us when he says, The eye that mocketh at his
father and despises to obey his mother, the ravens, those birds which of all
others are least regarded (as I told you) by the old ones, shall pick out, and
the Eagles shall devour them: but the Apostle saying, Obey and honor thy
father and mother, that thy days may be long (and happy) on earth, implies no
less then, that he who does not obey and honor them, shall have but few or
evil days while they live here, besides the evil which shall follow after,
Our blessed Savior has pronounced the same plainly and fully, saying, God
commanded, Mat. 15.4.
Honor thy father and mother, and he that does contrary let him die the death.

Prove: 30.11.
And yet such ungodly children have been found of whom the wiseman speaks, there
is a generation that curses their father: and such says the Prophet are those
who dishonor their parents; Mie. 7.6.
and such was the accursed Cham, Ge. 9.22
who proclaimed the nakedness of his father, yea monsters of men have there
been, whom I am ashamed to name; Nero, who in an inhuman manner ripped up that
womb of his mother, where himself lay, but I will tell you of the sons of
S^nacherth, 2 King. 15.37.
who fearing that their father would kill them in hope to prosper thereby, as
Abraham did in sacrificing his son, slew their father.

Against which sin of paricide or killing parents, the wise lawgiver Solon,
provided no law, because he thought no man could be so desperately wicked, as
to kill and destroy him, that under God gave him life, yet the Romans in
detestation of this so unnatural a sin, decreed a death unheard of until
their times, which was that such a parent-slayer should be closed up in a
leathern sachell, together with a viper, art ape, and a cock; and so to be cast
into the river to be gnawed upon, to be drowned, and to be sterved to death.

When God promised Abraham to be his exceeding great reward, he replied to
Godand said, Lord God wherein will thou reward me, or what will thou give me,
seeing I am childless? wherein he employed all temporal goods and blessings
were as nothing to him without an heir; and then the word of the Lord came
unto him saying, thou shall have an heir come forth of thine own bowels.
Hezekiah likewise when the Prophet told him, he should dye, wept that he should
dye childless. And barrenness or want of children is in holy writ often called
a reproach, yea, and pronounced by God as a punishment, but on the contrary a
great blessing to have children.

Insomuch that David repining as it were at the prosperity of the wicked, he
reckons this as one of their greatest, Psalm. 17: 24.
That they are full of children, and that they leave their substance to their
babes, and in another psalm, Ps. 115.14.
God will bless them that fear him, and will increase them more and more them
and their children; and again, Lo children are an heritage of the Lord, Ps.
127.3.5.
and the fruit of the womb is his reward, for they are as arrows in the band
of a mighty man, and therefore happy is the man that has his quiver full of
them, for they shall (be able to) speak with their enemies in the gate; that
is, in the gate where the Judges sat, where their children shall stand up to
plead for their father: and in the field they shall be as arrows to defend him
against his enemies.

It is storied that when Croesus was ready to be slain, that his son who till
that time was dumb and never could speak, yet now distracted with fear and
grief, arising from the love to his father, he cried out, O kill not my father
Croesus. And it is fabled that Gerion had three faces, the moral whereof was,
that he had three sons who lived so lovingly, and defended their fathers name,
and possessions so unanimously as though they had had but one soul, animating
and actuating in three bodies. Neither can I forget here that passage of
Scylurus because it comes so near to that quiver of arrows, which I mentioned
from King David, in his Psalms, who calling his sons unto him, compared them
to a bundle of arrows which says he, if ye sever you may easily break them
singly, but so long as they are thus bound and fastened together, they will hold
and be a defense both to your selves and your father; and thus happy is that
father which has his quiver full of such arrows.

Chap. XL. The love of our Native country.
NExt to the love of our Parents our Country challenges an interest in our
love, as being our common parent, and although one Philosopher would derive the
word from the mothers side and call our country Matria yet generally it is
called Patria, as from the father because though our country as the mother
bears us, yet as the father it nourishes, provides for, and defends us, which
most properly are the acts of the father.

And hereupon, both with Greeks and Latins these speeches became as proverbs:
The salt of our own country is more pleasant then all the dainties of strange
places, and of all sweets our country is the sweetest.

And this holding true and working by a kind of natural instinct, it comes to
pass that what ever our country is, though barren or unhealthy, yet we love and
prefer it before a richer and more healthy place; and were there not such a
working natural instinct in man, inclining his love and desire to his own
native soil, many a country would hardly be inhabited but be left desolate.

Ithaca the place of birth to Ulysses esteemed the wisest man then living among
the Greeks, though it were a poor rocky land, and the meanest of Islands
thereabout, yet it were worth your reading how that wise man bewailed his
absence thence but ten years, though employed abroad in his countries service,
and with what joy he welcomed himself home at his return.

And from the fervent love and zeal that some men above others, have born to
the honor and welfare of their country, they have deserved the highly priced,
and honorable title to be called Patriots, which signifies lovers and
defenders of their country.

And although all countries more or less, have abounded with such, yet Rome
(which by this means became the Mistress of the world) has exceeded all; with
whom it was common, and ordinary to prefer the good and glory of their country,
before parents, wife or children, or what ever was most dear unto them, even
before their own lives: holding that true which the Roman Orator said, It is
said a sweet thing, to dye for the good of our country. Histories that confirm
this among the Romans are obvious and innumerable: I mall therefore without
troubling you give but one, of those Lacedaemonians, who being sent to pacify
the enraged Persian, and finding that nothing but their lives could abate that
fury against their country readily yielded themselves to death, which gallant
resolution and zealous love, when the Persian considered, he gave them their
lives, and spared their country.

And so much were the holy Patriarchs affected which this love to their native
soil that when they were either sent or constrained through want or otherwise
to dye in other lands, yet as Jacob and Joseph they made it one of their last
and greatest r^quests among earthly things to be brought back and to be buried
in their own Countries.

I could add hereunto that among all punishments inflicted upon capital
offenders, that next to death was generally accounted banishment, by which I
mean not an amandation, sending away or sequestring a man from his own house
within his own country, which was not much feared or declined, but an exile,
casting out or driving away from his native soil.

Neither held this so among men alone, but it was denounced by God himself as a
most severe punishment and sign of his heavy wrath against the King Jehoiakim,
Jer. 22.
that he should not return home from captivity to bis own country.

Nay I could instance in diverse both wise and noble Spirits who have desired
rather presently to dye and so to be buried in their own then to prolong their
lives, and after it to be interred in a strange country, esteeming themselves
better laid in a grave in their own country and returned to their own house.

Dan. 6.10.
I cannot deny but when Daniel being in Babylon usually prayed three times a day
with his window open and looking to Jerusalem, that he much longed after the
Temple which once stood there, but I think no man can deny that his love and
desire was not the less to bis country, and the rather for that God himself
commands Jacob to return to his own country though it were from a richer to
the poorer place. Genesis 32.9.


A Philosopher being asked, what a man ought to do to a wicked rebellious
country answered you must deal with it as with your mother, whom you must never
despise but honor and make her better if you can, but never forsake her: and
accordingly we have read of diverse who have rejected parents, wives, children,
when grown to excess of impiety or iniquity, yet so it comes to pass that even
for the most crying sins few or none cast off their country. Think on Lot,
who rather then forsake his country he must be forced out of it by an Angel of
heaven, as rather hazarding to burn in his own country then to live in a better.

I could add to all this, that Christ himself so far testified the love he
bore to Bethlehem the village and Nazareth the region of his birth and
education, that he resorted often to them laboring their conversion, and
bewailed himself as it were for this, that through their unbeleef he did no
miracles among them.

But briefly to close all, I shall desire you to read two Psalms, in the one
whereof you may plainly see how the people of Israel though they enjoyed Gods
gracious presence and comfortable assistance in Babylon, Ps. 137.
yet how they mourned for the absence from their own country, and in the other
you shall as apparently discover the wonderful extreme joy they took in being
restored home again. Ps. 126.


For being out of their country, says the text, They sat down and wept when
they remembered Zion, yea they hanged up their harpes the instrumens of joy, and
music to the Lord, professing they could not sing the Lords song in a strange
land; and yet though this they could not do for grief, yet for loves sake they
wished to forget their cunning if ever they forgot Jerusalem, yea they wished
that their tongue might cleave to the roof of their mouth, and that they might
never speak if they did not remember, nay if they did not prefer Jerusalem
above their Chief or choice joy.

And as their grief was such for the loss, now see if as great joy were not
conceived by them for the regaining of their beloved country, for now they say
being returned we rejoice indeed, and not only rejoice, but our joy is such as
if it were a dream which coming suddenly and unexpectedly makes men l^ughor
sing or exult as not knowing for joy what they do; which we express when we say
mad for joy; and such was this joy of Gods Israel upon their return to their
own country, as the Psalmist there expresses.

If you believe not me, hear themselves speak their own joy when they say, Then
was our mouth filled with laughter and our tongue with singing, insomuch that
among the Heathen they said, The Lord has done great things for us, that is,
our return home to Judea, is such an act that none could have wrought for us
but the Lord, and thereof we are glad.

The Grecians held that to be their country where they thrived best and got
most, yea it was a Proverb among both Greeks and Romans, That is a man's country
where it is well with him, or where he does well. Now if this terrestrial
country of smoaky unsavory earth below be so sweet and pleasing to the
corporal, what then must that other heavenly glorious country above be unto
the spiritual man? for man as he consists of two parts body and soul, and in
that regard man may be termed a double, that is, an earthly and a spiritual
man, which agrees with that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 15
so he has two countries answerable and fitted to the double inhabitant;
therefore as for the earthly man God has prepared this ea^thly hab^^ation, so
for the spiritual he has p^^vided that heavenly and glorious country; for to
speak truth, and as the Scripture speaks, this below is not properly our
country, but as we are here but travelers, strangers, and pilgrims, so we have
here no abiding city nor place, and therefore this cannot be our country, but
our Inn or guest-ch^mber, wherein to lodge in the time of our pass or travail
from this place of traffic or trade to our own country whence we came.

All this and much more will be evident to any ordinary understanding that will
read the Apostle where he thus speaks: Abraham when he was sent by God from his
own to a strange country, Heb. 11.9
obeyed; for he looked for a city, and confessing himself a stranger and
pilgrim on the earth, ver. 10. ver. 13.
he declares plainly that he sought a country, and this country is called the
better and the heavenly country: and in this country God has prepared for
Abraham, and all his faithful seed, ver. 16.
says the text, a city, a City says the Apostle which has foundations (as
though this of the earth were instable) and such foundations as whose builder
and maker is God.

And if you will further know and see the glory of this city in this heavenly
country with the excellent company, and joy there to be found, then read
forward where the Apostle faith, Ye are now in the City of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22.
where you shall find an innumerable company of Angels, the Spirits of just men
made perfect, yea God the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the new
covenant or testament, whose blood speaks better things for us (to the Judge)
then the blood of Abel.

And this being our country indeed, and that we may express our love
thereunto, Let us, says the same Apostle, go forth (out of this vale of
misery, Heb. 13.13.
iniquity and country of Devils) unto him (Christ Jesus) For here we have no
continuing City but seek one to come: And that this we may seek aright, and so
find, God of his infinite mercy grant unto us for Jesus Christ's sake, to whom
be all glory and honor, Amen.

The End.
ERRATA.
PAge 39. Line 14. rea. 3000. p. 115. l. 25. dele above. l. 31. for to love
him, r. be loved. p. 123. l. 18. for as r. for. p. 125. l. 16. r. matter. p.
126. l. 23. r. show. l. 34. r. no p. 129 l. 27. r. it is like the grav^. p.
138. l. 19. r. he did cure and. p. 142. l. 7. r. to seventy. p. 156. l. 13. r.
to this. p. 168. l. 17. r. for. p. 170. l. 5. r. certain. p. 183. l. 10. r.
have. p. 203. l. 16. r. who as. p. 210. l. 1. r. and the new; that. p. 240. l.
21. r. man.


