Five special Passages: viz. TWO PETITIONS OF THE COVNTIE OF YORK.

The one Presented to the Kings most Excellent Majesty at York the third of
June, 1642.

The other, to the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.

With the Additionals thereunto annexed.

Die Lunae Jun. 6. 1642. Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, that
these Petitions, together with the additions, be forthwith Printed and
Published.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentor.

The Petition of the Kingdom of SCOTLAND, to the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council of that Kingdom.

ALSO His Majesty's Letter to the Lords of his Privy Counsel of the Kingdom
of SCOTLAND.

AND A Letter from Sir Io. Bourchier to Sir Thomas Barrington Knight and
BARONET.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Blackmore, 1642. May 8.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, Freeholders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of York, Assembled by his Majesty's special Summons
at Heworth Moore; near the City of York, on Fridy the third of June, 1642.
Shows,

THat this particular County, most affectionate to your Majesty's service, has
well night for these three years last past been the Stage, whereon the
Tragical miseries, which necessarily accompany War and Armies, have been
presented and acted, whereby the general wealth and plenty of this County is
exhausted and brought very low: Which weight of miseries are sensibly become
much more heavy, by reason of your Majesty's distance in residence, and
difference in Counsels, from your great Council the Parliament; begetting
great distempers and distractions throughout the Kingdom; and have, specially
amongst us, produced factions and divisions, drawing into these parts great
numbers of discontented persons, that may too justly be feared do affect the
public ruin, for their private advantage. All which evils are daily fomented,
and made more formidable, by your Majesty's drawing together (as we conceive
not according to Law) many Companies of the Trained Bands, and others both
Horse and Foot of this County, and retaining multitudes of Commanders and
Cavaleers from other parts, and by the daily resort of Recusants, and persons
disaffected in Religion, to your Majesty's Court at York; and by the great
preparation of Arms, and other warlike provisions, which begets in us fears
of Wars, to the great terror and amazement of us your Majesty's peaceable
Subjects, and to the great decay of all Commerce and industrious courses, for
the wealth and prosperity of the Country, especially of Clothing, which is the
maine subsistence of this County, and is since your Majesty's residence amongst
us, and the following distractions thereupon, suddenly obstructed; insomuch
that many thousand Families, who are of, and have their livelihood by the Trade
of Clothing, are now at the point of utter undoing; which inevitably will prove
to be of dangerous consequence, and will be the inlet to our approaching and
unavoidable ruin, unless your Majesty please graciously to give redress, by
removing the causes which produce these miserable effects; it being too true,
that very many in these and other parts of the Kingdom, do wholly withdraw
themselves from their former Commerce and Dealing; and others, both Merchants
and Chapmen, do generally refuse to make payment for Goods long since sold and
delivered; alleging, that others refuse to pay them for any Commodity formerly
sold, till the fears and distractions of the Land be settled: Which if not
suddenly prevented, will fortwith over-turn all such ways of advantage and
comfort as have formerly made this Kingdom (and this County in particular)
prosperous and happy.

We do therefore in all humility and duty, in the sense of our present
deplorable condition, beseech your Majesty to pardon Us, if We importune Your
Majesty more than others, since We have endured, and are in hazard more than
any; and that from these apprehensions, We may offer to Your Majesty our
earnest Petition, for redress and prevention of these evils daily threatening
danger to Your Majesty, and destruction to us; which we conceive is impossible
any other way to be effected, than by Your Majesty's entertaining a right
understanding betwixt Your Self and Parliament, and affording Your Gracious
ear and consent to such counsels and Propositions, as shall be tendered by
them to Your Majesty, for the honor and greatness of Your Majesty and
Posterity, and the good of this Church and Kingdom, and by Your Majesty's
declining all other Counsels whatsoever, and uniting Your confidence to Your
Parliament: And that Your Majesty would in no way think fit to put us upon that
Rock of dividing the duty we owe to Your Majesty, Your Parliament, and the
whole Kingdom, to which we are so deeply engaged by our Protestation, which
Your Majesty (to our knowledge) never dissented from, nor declared against; and
that whilst Your Majesty expects our performance in one part thereof, we may
not (being equally engaged) impeach at all, or in the least degree do less
than our duty in the other, which (we stand resolved of) by no means either of
fear or favor to be drawn to do: and that Your Majesty would take into
consideration, that Your Parliament being the supreme Judicatory of Your
Kingdom, the very essence thereof must of very necessity be destroyed, if
their Counsels and determinations be subjected to alteration, or reversall, by
the Counsels or opinions of any private persons, how learned or judicious so
ever; and seeing your Majesty has passed an Act, that this Parliament shall
not be dissolved, or adjourned, without consent of your Majesty, and both
Houses, We humbly beseech your Majesty to take into your gracious and
provident thoughts, that nothing may be done tending thereunto, and that the
Lords and great Officers now called hither by your Majesty's command, may
speedily return to the High Court of Parliament, whereby it may be evident to
the World, that your Majesty intends not to decline the Law so enacted; and
that since your Majesty has graciously declared your confidence in the
affections of this County, Your Majesty would not think it fit an extraordinary
Guard should be raised thereour, and the Cavaleers, and others of that quality
still continued about your Majesty, as men most useful, and as if kept for
some d^signe; they not having (for ought we know) either interest in, or
affections to the public good, their language and behavior speaking nothing
else but division and war, and their advantage consisting in that which is
most destructive to others.

And lastly, that since your Majesty has called in this County to attend your
Majesty this day, your Petitioners do most humbly supplicate, that none, either
Cavaliers or others, (who in truth have not present fortunes in this County)
may be admitted into any meeting this day, concerning the public business
thereof, or hereafter into any present Vote, or Consultation, when any further
meeting may be, to prepare and consider of some fit answer to what your Majesty
shall propound; we humbly conceiving it neither just nor equal (but a thing to
be protested against) that any whosoever should be thrust upon us, as men of
this County, that are not either by their fortune or residence, any part of us.

And now your Petitioners do even heartily pray, that the God of Heaven (in
whose hand are the hearts of Kings) would this day incline your Majesty's heart
seriously to consider these present and imminent miseries that this your
Kingdom now groans under; in the peace whereof (visibly under God) consists
the preservation of the Protestant Religion, the redemption of our Brethren in
Ireland, and the establishment of that Kingdom to your Majesty and Posterity,
from those desperate and unparaleld Rebels; that so your Majesty might
graciously grant these your Petitioners humble desires; which (whatsoever will
be said to the contrary) your Petitioners are well assured would abundantly
redound to the glory of God, the honor and safety of your Majesty, the good of
your Posterity, and the only probable means, under God, with peace and plenty
to make this your Kingdom happy; besides the acquisition of your peoples
hearts, the greatest treasure of Princes: all which will gloriously represent
your Majesty a lively portraiture of him, who is the fountain of Wisdom and
Piety: To whom we shall ever pray for your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign.

To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons in the High Court of Parliament
assembled.
The humble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, Free holders, and other
Inhabitants of the County of York, assembled there at his Majesty's command,
the 3. of June, 1642.
We being resolved humbly to petition His Majesty for the redress of those
grievances which we now lie under, did desire to have met in the Castleyard at
York, we conceiving it the fittest place to consider of such public affairs
as concerned the County; which we were not only denied of, but charge was given
to the Officer there, that we should not have admittance; and when we assembled
upon the place appointed by his Majesty, and did acquaint the County there met
with the form of a Petition, the sense whereof they formerly approved of, and
then upon the reading thereof, generally consented to, and desired the same
should be presented to his Majesty, we were violently interrupted by the Earl
of Lindsey, who with a great Troop attending him, in an imperious way, snatched
out of a Gentleman's hand of good quality, a copy of the fore-names Petition,
which at the desire of the Country he was reading to them, and some of his
Lordships company laid hold of his Bridle and Cloak, haling him in great fury,
and said, you are a company of traitorous Rogues and Villanes, and often lifted
up his Cane, as if he would have struck him. And also a Knight of this County
was affronted by the Lord Savile, upon his reading the draught of a Petition to
himself, upon the place aforesaid, the day above: First, his Lordship told him
it was a Pamphlet, which he denied, thereupon the Lord Savile demanded it of
him, which he refusing to deliver, his Lordship laid hands upon his sword, and
almost plucked him from his Horse; upon which the said Knight, fearing some
mischief would be done him, delivered the same: And then the said, Lord Savile
told him, he labored to sow seeds of Sedition, and if he would fight, there
should be fighting enough, and many of the said Lord Savil's company held up
their Canes at him, and one of them said, hold your prating, it were good to
Cane you: Which provocations, had not the people been peaceably inclined, might
have produced bloody effects. Notwithstanding all which, and diverse other
insufferable injuries, so confident were we, of his Majesty's former
professions, never to refuse any Petition presented by his people to him in an
humble way, that we desisted not to wait our best opportunity, to present the
said Petition to his Majesty: (A copy whereof we here humbly present unto your
grave considerations,) which his Majesty notwithstanding pleased not to accept
of.

We therefore humbly desire these Honorable Houses well to weigh these
particulars, and to take such course therein as may tend to the preservation of
our Liberties, and the peace of the Kingdom. And that you would please to
address your selves to His Majesty on our behalf, that through your wisdoms
our Desires may find better acceptance with his Majesty.

And we shall heartily pray, etc.
Monday the 6. of June, 1642. P. Merid.
THe Lords and Commons observing not only the wisdom, but the affections of the
County of York expressed in these Petitions, and likewise that they cannot be
discouraged from their constant fidelity to the laws and government of this
Kingdom, which have their life and being from the Parliament, have thought it
fit to declare their good acceptations of their affections, assuring them that
they will interest themselves in this their Demands, which tends to the honor
and safety of his Majesty, the peace of his Kingdom, and may prove an
effectual means to keep us from the desperate mischiefs those Lords that
opposed this Petition, would have brought this Kingdom into.

The PETITION of the Kingdom of Scotland, To the Lords of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council of that Kingdom: Declaring their loyalty to his
Majesty, and sincere affection and love to their Brethren of England, And the
Parliament now Assembled.
^resented by two Earls, two Knights, two Burgesses, and two Ministers, in
behalf of themselves, and the well affected of the whole Kingdom,
^o the Right Honorable, the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, the
humble Petition of many Noblemen, Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Ministers
occasionally meeting at Edinburgh.
Most humbly showing,

WHereas they upon the report and sight of great Convocations suddenly
endeavored and unexpectedly brought into this great Counsel day, for the most
part by those who have been esteemed by the Country and challenged by the
Parliament, as Incendiaries, plotters, and enemies to the peace of this
Kingdom, have ^ccasionally conveened at Edinburgh. And having heard of Letters
from His Majesty, and Declaration from the Parliament of England anent the
present distractions of that King^ome, they have reason from bygon experience,
and present presumptions, to fear the inten^ions and endeavors of these evil
affected persons and their adherents, lest by their convotations and
solicitations they take occasion of these differences to raise jealousies and
divisions betwixt these Kingdoms. And considering the common interest of all
the Subjects of this Kingdom to preserve the late peace, so happily concluded
betwixt these Nations, by the providence of God, His Majesty's goodness and
wisdom, and the moderation of the Parliament of England, and so solemnly
established by the late Treaty, oath of Parliament, public faith, and the
great Seals of these Kingdoms; as in all other points, so especially in these
Articles (whereunto the rest are called but prefaces) for settling and
entertaining a solid peace betwixt these Nations in true union; lest upon any
pretense they should be dashed one against another. Wherein it is declared the
duty of the estates, yea of every subject for to conveene and suppress any
evil affected persons who would raise Arms against the subjects of the other
Kingdom without consent of Parliament, as traitors to the estate, much more to
Petition against it; and wherein there is appointed a Commission of the estates
for the conservation of this peace in the interim betwixt Parliaments. All
which the Petitioners, amongst the rest of the good subjects of this Kingdom,
did hazard their lives and estates to obtain: And did demand in the Treaty
upon their dangerous experience of the Council of England there meddling in the
affairs betwixt His Majesty and this Kingdom, to the engaging of the Nations
in War, which is so often condemned by the estates of this Kingdom in their
Remonstrances, pressing that common rule of Equity, To do as you would be done
unto; which now is and may be retorted on this Kingdom. Like as desiring
earnestly, that your Lordships in these public resolutions of so great
consequences to these Kingdoms, may carry along with you the hearts and
consciences of the body of this Kingdom, and prevent that the breaches grow not
wider by false confidences grounded upon sudden undertakings of any persons, as
also their natural affection and duty to their gracious (...)

Die Lunae 6. Junii 1642. The copy of a Letter sent from Sir Io. Bourchier to
Sir Tho. Barrington Knight and Baronet, from YORK.
Sir,
YEsterday being at Heworth-Moor, I observed one reading something, so as I
drew nee to him, and by enquiry I found that it was a Petition, that was to be
presented present to His Majesty: those that heard it read, approved of it.
Meeting with a friend, I enquire of him if he had not the Petition, or a copy
of it; which he told me he had: I entreated hi^ that he would lend me it; which
accordingly he did: And having read part of it, my Lord Savill came with a
great company in a furious manner, and demanded what I did ther^ and told me
that I was reading some Pamphlet to the People, and that I was laboring t^ sow
some seeds of Sedition, to seduce the Kings Subjects: Whereupon I told him that
it wa^ a Petition that I was reading privately to my self, which I upon his
approach put in my pocket. My Lord Sav^ll in an imperious manner demanded of me
to deliver it to him; which refused: Then his Lordship laid his hand on the
belt of my sword, and almost pulled me of my horse, and forced me to deliver
the Petition to him; lest otherwise some greater mischie^ might have come to
him; for his Lordship told me, If we loved fighting we should have fighting
enough. I told his Lordship, I came this day to labor for peace. And
immediately before his Lordships departure, he told me that he knew me well
enough; then I told his Lordship, that I hoped he knew no ill by me. Many that
were with his Lordship held up their Games in a terrifying manner; and one of
them said, Hold your prating, it were good to cane you: and when his Lordship
and the rest were gone, one of them turned back, and bid me be quiet, or else I
should be caned; and that it were a good deed to set me in the stocks.
Afterward there was one Captain Blague, who was one of my Lord Savils
company, came in an intruding manner into my company, and I being discoursing
with Sir Richard Darley and some other, and telling them how I was affronted
even now by my Lord Savill, and formerly having fire thrown into my Coach, and
some other affronts done unto me, which I have formerly told you of; this
Captain told me I did ill to lay aspersions upon persons of Honor: Whereupon I
told him I did not lay it upon my Lord, but that I was so abused and affronted:
upon due consideration, I verily believe he came to make some quarrel.

Sir, upon my parting from you, you desired to hear from me; here I thought
good to let you know thus much concerning my self. Thus with my service to you
and my Lady, I rest

York 4. June 1642. Your affectionate Cousin to serve you, JO. BOURCHIER.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith Printed and
published.

JO. BROWN Cleric. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

