THE SOVNDING OF THE LAST TRUMPET OR Several Visions, declaring the universal
overturning and rooting up of all Earthly Powers in ENGLAND. With many other
things foretold, which shall come to pass in this Year, 1650.

Lately showed unto GEORGE FOSTER, who was commanded to Print them.

Printed in the Year 1650.

The Epistle to the Reader.
O Earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord, and tremble thou earth, at
the presence of the mighty God of Jacob; for behold, he comes to take vengeance
on his enemies, and they that have exercised oppression shall be by the All of
all, things confounded and brought to nothing, whether they be outward powers
that have their fellow creatures in bondage to them, or the powers of flesh,
ruling and domineeering in them, Isay both powers shall be brought to nothing,
and shall not be able to stand any longer; for his excellent Majesty appearing
in brightness, will be a terror to all flesh and all powers shall become as
weak as water before him; and Lucifer that has made the Nations to tremble,
shall be brought to nothing, even all the power, strength and glory of man
shall be but as grass, and as the flower of the field that is soon cut down,
and then comes to nothing, and is as if it were not; even so at the appearing
of the Lord of hosts, shall all powers of what sort or under what notion s^ever
be, in a very little while, as if they were not, and God alone, even the
eternal God appear to be King and Lord over all the Earth; at whose
appearance all things besides himself shall be brought to nothing, even all
POWERS shall become as nothing: and the mighty men, and great men, as Kings and
Lords, for fear of the Lord of Hosts, shall run into the holes of the rocks,
and into the Dens of the Earth to hide themselves for fear of his Majesty,
for he does now arise to shake terribly the earth, and all the earth shall
become dung before him; and all the powers of the earth shall be as dung before
his Instruments whom he has made choice of, to do his great and terrible work:
for he has now a strange work to do which will not be done by the powers of
the earth; but the mighty Jehovah will do his strange work by po^r, weak, and
despised instruments, even by those that are as nothing in themselves, that the
All of al things may appear to be their power and their strength, and so
through the stength of the mighty God, level and lay mountains and hills low,
and make plains n^d valleys equal with them: add so I will leave you to the
ensuing Treatise, there to see what Gwd has purposed to do: the which he has
been pleased to reveal to me by v^sions, which power as I a^ a creature ha^h
so powerfully appeared in me, as I have not been able to resist, but must send
it forth th the public view, as being one that that been made for a figne and
wohder amongst men, and so for my own puietnesse sake, and qeace of Spirit, I
am made to put it to thy view, and so am contented to be a fool, and to
undergo the hard and harsh censures of many, leaveing it to thy serious
consideration, or to thy malicious spirit, which may bite against it, and say I
am deluded, and the Devil has power over me: I Will leave it to you that see or
hear of it; for time to make manifest what it is, and I Will wait upon the
mighty God of Jacob, being confident he has made out himself unto me by
Vision and Revelation; and has set me as a Wonder in the eyes of men: but
wonder not as to mock and laugh at me least your hearts be hardened, and so you
be one of the vessels whom the Lord will power out the fiercenes of his wrath
upon; for surely my God has not set me as a sign for nothing; if he has, I am
contented to be nothing, that he, the Lord of hosts, may appear to be all: yea,
I am confident the All of all things has a very great work to do, and he has
made use of me, as of one that am a poor creature, purposely to s^t me a sign,
for some to be forewarned that the Lord of hosts is coming to destroy all
things beside himself; that they may be willing when he appears to forsake
all, and to count that which for the present is their God, as gold and silver,
as nothing that they may cloth and feed the hungry, and so escape the day that
shall burn as an Oven. But for others to be a stone of stumbling; a gin and
snare at which they shall stumble and fall. And so Reader that thou may
understand by reading of this treatise what God is now a doing: and how
powerful he is. For I have seen him to be very strong, for these things
following; I did much question whether they were not a delusion of the Devil,
by reason of the strangeness of them, and so did by questioning of them bring
my self into a restless condition: as several times to be tempted to make
away my self. For these things says the tempter, if thou publish them will
make you a hissing and a laughing stock: and flesh being willing to be at ease,
I could have bin contented to have buried them in the bed of oblivion, and so
thought to have hid them and not to have brought them forth, but the voice of
the Lord came to me saying, that thou may know that I the Lord of hosts, I
have made out unto the by vision, and revealed things that shall surely come to
pass, and that I have commanded thee to put them in print, and therefore to go
to London, thou shall be dumb (and so I was for ni^ hours) as a token to
convince thee of thy unbelief.

And the next day, the voice of the Lord said I should be blind, as a token to
convince me of my unbelief, which I was for eleven hours. And at the same
time, the voice of the Lord said: (for to hasten me away for to be a wonder in
London) I should be deprived of the use of my hand until I did go up to speak
with Fairfax; and being thus taken speechles and blind and my right hand closed
up, that I could not open it; I'did come up to London, and being in London I
did go to the Generals house for to speak with him, but could not, then I went
again, and could not; and the third time; but could not be admitted for to
speak with him: And all this while my hand was closed up so fast that several
that saw it did not conclude it was by a supernatural power: and I did tell
them that I had a message to deliver to the General: but for the present I
knew not what it was but I never did tell any that it could not be opened by
force and strength: but did tell them that I my self could not open it: but as
soon as I did speak with the General it should open, which was now so closed
for a sign to convince me of my unbelief, and also a stumbling block for
those that did by violence open it; as a Priest for one, who was the chief
cause of it, I being then in the Generals house intending for to have spoken
with him, as to deliver to him what God should have made out to me. But I see
it since to be the wisdom of my God that I did not speak with him, and
likewise the wisdom of God that my hand was opened by violence, that it may
prove the fall of the enemies of Sion, and give them cause to mock and laugh at
me; that so they may be for the slaughter when the Lord arises to sh^ke the
earth terribly.

And this I writ^ because I would not have you wonder why I do not go to the
General for to speak with him, and so conclude that I am deluded, as they
that open^d my hand did; for the ways of God are past finding out, and my
message is done for the present in that I have endeavored for to speak with
him, and I am as much satisfied with my condition as if I had spoke with him,
for I see an overruling power and so am made for to wait upon that power that
made all creatures (knowing that he will do his pleasure) until he does in a
more powe^full manner carry me forth in such a way to act, which as I am a
creature I am dead to, and when he appears in power in his own time for to
make use of me or a^ any other of his creatures, they shall not be able to
wi^hstand him, as I f^r my own part have not been able to withstand. So with
this caution to you all, not to mock at me lest you mock not only me, but the
All of all things, and so dash your selves against that rock which will beat to
powder all other powers besides himself that he may be all and in all, I am
willing to be silent, leaving my God to do with me, and all creatures, what he
pleases.

GEORGE FOSTER.

January 14 1650.
THe first day of the appearing of the eternal God in me, so as to make his
excellent Majesty most illustriously to shine in me as the most excellent and
most glorious object, was by declaring himself to be my God, and that he was
come to make himself known unto me; who had a long time been in me buried
under the clouds of proud flesh, and I was ignorant of him, and though I was
ignorant of him [of the eternal God dwelling in me] yet he did dwell in me,
and was the life of me, which is a great mystery, and unknown to most
creatures, though most profess they know God, that God, even the eternal God
dwells in them, by which they live and move and have their being.

But it has pleased the infinite Jehovah [who is the fullness of all, and
fills the Creation with his grace] to appear most gloriously in me, stripping
and robbing me of all my former glory, that he alone may appear to be my all
and in all, and so to declare and make himself manifest to me, that he the
eternal God does dwell in me, and is the life of me, and that he will no
longer be buried in me, but now will arise like a man of war, tearing and
destroying all proud flesh which has covered him, that he alone may appear to
be my eternal King, and so to take me up into the full enjoyment of himself,
by declaring in me, saying, I the Lord of hosts am come, which voice was the
most joyfullest voice that ever sounded in mine ears, though it was a terror
to my flesh, yet I may say with the Prophet, this is the day which the Lord
has made, come let us be glad and rejoice in it. The Prophet was not ignorant
that the Lord did make all the days, for he knew well enough the Lord did make
all, but this day wherein he says, he will rejoice; was that day, even that
day as the eternal God did appear to be his God; and so apprehending him
self by the manifestations of God to him, to be one with God, and no longer at
a distance from God^, did cause him to rejoice and be glad.

But who shall abide the day of his coming? or who shall be able to stand when
he appears? Surely no flesh shall be able to stand in that body when the
mighty God of Jacob appears, neither shall any flesh abide there, neither
shall that creature in whom he is pleased to manifest himself, be able to
oppose him, for the Lord will do all his pleasure; He is like a refiners fire,
and fullers sop. The eternal God by his bright appearing in his sons, he will
purify and refine them, by destroying that which has troubled them, and has
kept them at a distance from him, and cause them to see evil no more, and to
see former things to pass away, and all things become new: And thus it has
pleased my excellent Majesty who dwells in me, to make known himself unto me,
that so J may see former things, or old things pass away, and all things
become new: And as the eternal God caught Paul up into the third heaven, and he
heard there words not fit to be uttered; because if he should have made them
know, they could not understand them, by reason of the difference of
dispensations wherein they lived, Paul being a father, and all they babes and
children. So my excellent Majesty the eternal God, having taken me up into
himself by his appearing in me in such a high discovery of his love unto me,
as to make me see himself in me, and I to have no life but he to be my all;
yea, my life, and that I can do nothing without him, who has caused me to
deliver my Kingdom, all my strength [he being now the end of it] to my Father,
that he may be all and in all: yea he has [even my eternal God] so powerfully
overcom me, that whether I was welling or no, destroyed my flesh (for God is a
consuming fire) that he may take the kingdom to himself, and so to be all, and
in all in me: even thus it pleased my eternal God even in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye to strike me dead, and likewise to raise me from the dead;
and to cause me to hear the Angel sound the last Trumpet, and so to take me
up to meet the Lord in the air, and so to be ever with the Lord, sounding the
tune of the seven Trumpets always in mine ears, and causing me to hear the
noise of the last trumpet, even the mystery of God, saying, it is done, it is
done, and time shall be no longer; making me to see seventy weeks, spoken of in
Daniel, to be at one end, and so to see sin and transegression to be finished,
and to hear a voice within me, saying, everlasting righteousness is brought
in: This is that voice which has already shoke the earth, but yet once more
(says my excellent Majesty, who does most gloriously shin in me) that he will
shake not only the earth again but the heavens also: for it is not the work of
God only to destroy the earthly powers and to bring them to nothing, though he
will do it, but he will also destroy the heavenly powers, even that welfavoured
harlot: even those that think themselves to be Jews and are not, as well
Independency and Baptism way as he has done Episcopacy and Presbytery, and
so to bring all flesh in to confusion, and to destroy the wisdom of man that
he alone may be exalted, and then will the lord make a way in the wilderness,
and paths in the deserts. for to give water unto his people. And when the Lord
has done this great work, as he will do, to cause the poor creatures as think
themseves as lights and stars, and have taught otheres, to be nothing but in
confusion, then will they appear to be the wilderness and deserts barren and
empty; and that nothing will satisfy them but the pouring of the spirit from
on high, which is no other, but God appearing in them, and making himself known
to them that he dwells in them, which dwelling in them will be as water of life
unto them, and so will the Prophesies be fulfilled; I will do a new thing,
which new thing willbe the depriving of the creature of all his
selfe-righteousnesse or holineste, and will make him to say, in the Lord have I
righteousness, which righteousness will be God alone appearing to be the old
way, and so will make them hear a voice behind them saying, this is the old way
walk in it O the abundance of joy that is contained in these words: O it is
the unspeakable Joy which the Apostle mentions, to hear God Preaching and
speaking to us, yea, in us: what a deal of labor will this save poor
creatures, this will stay them from running to broken cisterns that can hold no
water, this will take them off from Idolizing Priests, when the voice of God
speaks in us behold, this is the mystery that is to be made manifest to the
sons of Sion in these later days, Christ in them the hope of glory, that so in
seeing God in them, and they to be in God, are the new jerusalem that is com
out of heaven, and so are the guests of that joyful wedding, hearing those
joyful w^rds, the marriage of the Lamb is ready, and so loose themselves to be
married to the eternal God, and they to be the Lambs wife, and so by the power
of the eternal God dwelling in them, they overcome and do inherit all things,
by being brought into the enjoyment of God, and so inherit all things in God;
for God being theirs, all things are theirs, whether things present or things
to come so that they shall now see weeping and sorrow to be fled away, and so
to go with everlasting songs to Sion, in singing and dancing to the house, of
the Lord; Beloved this is that feast of fat things upon the mountain, wine
upon the leaves, even God the eternal King dwelling and manifestling himself
to you as he has done to me, whereby I see by the excellent Majesty, the
eternal God in me, that crooked ways are now made straight, and rough places
made smooth; high places made low, and low places made high; flesh brought to
nothing, and God to be all and in all; all my life joy and strength, and so no
longer to labor and travel with child, but to bring forth, or declare that
this eternal God is in me; and that he has manifested himself unro me, in a
more extraordinary manner then ever before he did which extraordinary manner
was as follows.

As I lay awake in my bed between three and four a clock in the morning Ian.
14. 1650. the Lord caused me to hear a pleasant fit of music or melody, which
music made me much admire, being so early in the morning, and one being with
me I would feign have asked him if he heard or knew where it was; But as J was
thinking to know where it was, I was taken in a strange manner, with trembling,
shaking; burning, and groaning, which made the party which lay with me much
wonder and speak to me, but J could not make him any answer. And after J had
lain trembling and groaning [being full of pain within and without] for half
an hour and upwards: J began to have abundance of inward joy and consolation,
even so full of joy was J that I was not able to contain my self, or express
that comfort I had within me; but J did at length break forth in laughter, so
heartily that I scarce ever laughed so heartily before, and did utter these
words, the Lord of hosts is come, and the most joyful day that ever came is
now, and no joy like unto this joy: and then afterward was J taken with
trembling and Groaned as I did before; and then afterward I brake forth with
laughing, and thus I did for four times in the morning useing, the same
expressions as J did at first: all this while beholding nothing with my outward
eyes: for they were shut up that J could scarce open them, but beheld a
glorious object within me, which made me much rejoice; and so I continued
sometimes rejoicing within my self, and sometimes full of trouble, until
about twelve a clock at noon. And then was I taken in the same manner as
before, and had three more fits; and in the last of the three, I being filled
more with joy then in any of the rest; J lifted up my hands and cried out, the
Lord of hosts is come: And it is done, it is done, being so filled with joy as
if it was the most joyfulls news which ever came to me; which since I have
found it to be and that never no joy was like this joy to me, if I may speak
the truth and lie not. And afterward I passed the day and night, sometimes
being full of joy, and sometimes full of sorrow; and the next day being
thursday, J passed that with joy and went to bed, finding my self prittie well
satisfied (but not quite satisfied) and slept a while, but awaked about 2. a
clock; and being awake I was much troubled in my self and perplexed in my
mind, but at length I heard a voice within me saying, hear my voice; and I
cried out, who art thou that I should hear? and I was answered with these
words, I am the Lord of hosts the holy one of Israel: and I was presently, yea,
of an instant taken with shaking and groaning; and being tormented in my mind;
I then heard a voice saying to me, I am now come to torment thee, to consume
and burn thee up to nothing; and I did then apprehend a bundance of misery and
sorrow, crying out I was in hell: and presently I was as full of joy in
apprehending a glorious God within me, which made me as much rejoice and laugh
within my self, as if I had bin in no misery at all. yea, though I was in hell,
and among all the Devils, I cried out, sorrow and sighing shall fly away. Some
5, or 6. of these fits, in my misery, I cried out I was in hell. In my joy I
cried out, the Lord of hosts is come: and sorrow and sighing will now fly
away; and that the Lord of hosts will not shake the earth, but the heavens
also. These fits being over; there did appear to me four black horses all in
harness, drawing and tugging as if they had bin in a cart that was set, and
strived harder then ordinary to get out: And I said Lord, what is the meaning
of this (sighing and groaning until I had an answer) and I was answered, that
these do represent the powers of the world that do oppose God in his people,
and all powers [that they are now ready to be drawn in pieces and these being
vanished: There appeared four horses al' read, and I said Lord what is the
meaning of this, and the Lord said, these do represent all powers to be in
blood ready to be strangled: and these being gone, there appeared 4. pale
horses like unto death (for J looked much upon them) for they looked very pale,
yet not withstanding they did brance up and down and kept a vaporing about. But
presently death seized upon them, and I beheld till I saw all powers thrown
down, and covered in the earth that they should rise no more. And after these
4. pale horses were covered under the earth, there appeared one white horse
without spot or stain, and one upon him all in glory, having a sword in his
hand, and he rid from East to West and from North to South, and he said, the
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of the Lord, and he does reign
and Isaid Lord, what does this mean? and the Lord said, That I the eternal God
will appear so glorious in my people to the burning up of flesh and sin, that
they shall appear Conquerours and Kings; and I the Lord God am and will appear
to be all and in all to my people. And as he prances from East to West from
North to South, without any let or hinderance: so shall my people live in the
enjoyment of me; and nothing shall make them afraid, and a little while after,
I beheld an Angel coming from God and having in his hand abook, and it was
open. And he came to me and bid me put forth my hand and take it, and eat it
and I did put forth my hand and did take it, and (I said) Lord what means this,
and my God said that this is a testimony or a seal to you that I am come to
you, and have put my law in your heart, and have writ it in your inward parts,
and you shall sin no more; and I was made to bow seven times to this Angel and
my father said, even so shall all flesh bow to me in my people: and as the book
was open in his hand, it shows that the mystery which has bin his is now to
be made manifest and the everlasting Gospel to be preached.

And on the thurseday morning between 5. and 6. a clok, I was taken with
trembling and horror, and was struck dead for a while so as I drew no breath at
all, and at length I heard a great roaring of waters, which made a great noise,
and when I came to my self, I groaned, and sighed, and said, Lord, what means
this noise, and my excellent majesty which dwell in me, said, that as you
hear the roaring of waters and none is able to still the noise? so shall my
people, even my sons come with singing and rejoicing to Sion and none shall
make them weep any more: hearing of this, I was much taken with joy even
overcome with joy, and continued full of joy I was taken as I was before, and
my breath being gone from me again. I lay as dead for awhile; And did at length
see a company of men and women standing upon Sion, having harpes, and made
music; and then came some others and they danced; and there was one more
glorious then the rest in the midst of them. And I beheld till he that was in
the midst of them did go into them all and they became all as one.

And on Friday morning about five or six a clock, I was taken with horror and
fear, and was much perplexed (in my self) in mind and at length J heard a
voice, saying, hear me, and observe what I say and write: That as I have
tormented and plagued thee, so will I torment and plague all powers besides my
self: And J said, Lord, will thou torment and destroy this Parliament? and the
Lord said J will destroy and consume and bring to nothing the Parliament and
all power that have exercised cruelty upon my people; and will give the glory,
and honor and strength of Kingdoms to my people, that there may be universal
liberty and freedom, and will make the Wolf and the Lamb lie down together,
and be at peace one with another; and as you did see a white horse, and one
upon him all in glory the night before last night, with a sword in his hand,
riding from East to West, and from North to South and none to oppose him and
none to help him but that he did destroy all his enemies himself: So I will
(even by my own power and by my spirit) bring to nothing all the glory, honor,
and power of all fleshly powers that J alone may be and none besides me, And J
said, Lord, how long will it be first? and the Lord said, in a very little
while, and J will overturne, overturne, overturne, and will appear in my Temple
to the effecting of mine own work.

And on the 25. of January in the night, J was taken in the same manner as
before, but only my fit of trouble was lesn'd and my fit of laughter more then
any J had before: and after my mirth was over J was caused to lie still. And J
heard a voice of very great waters, which made me greeve within my self,
until I had an answer what they should mean or what the noise should signify.

And at length my God within me told me, that the waters does signify the
persons of Sion singing and rejoicing in Sion; and as the noise of the waters
was great, so should the joy and gladness of Sion be great, and as I heard a
noise and did not know from whence it came; so should their joy and gladness
come from God, within them and not from Creature objects. And I said Lord they
rejoice and sing already; but my eternal God within me told me, that their
joy now is mixed with sorrow, and so is not perfect joy. But they shall ere long
be brought into a full enjoyment of me, and then shall cease from sorrow.

And presently after J beheld two Armies of men, one coming out of the North,
and the other out of the South a little Westward. And the leader of them that
came out of the South did seem to be a very solentary man, and the other
leader a fierce man, and J beheld till they met one another, and had a sharp
bout of fighting one at the other. But at length the horse belonging to those
that came out of the South (there being one very glorious amongst them) broke
in amongst the foot and routed them and took their General, and so had the
disposing of the Field; and marched away presently to London, and searched a
great house; pulling those that were in it out of it. And I said Lord what
means this? and the Lord said. That these be my instruments to destroy all
powers, and to bring to nothing those that are in power. And so to take the
Kingdoms of this world, and to give them to the Saints. And moreover the Lord
said, that these his instruments by which he has done this, he will so
overpower that they shall not be like others, as to be a self seeking people
(no) but he will make them to be bright. That there may be no complainings in
our strees. And so restore the creation from the bondage it now groans under,
into the Glorious liberty of the sons of God. That there may be universal
liberty and freedom; and moreover the Lord said: that the fashion of this
world goes out, or is now a destroying; and that the men of this world shall
now use it as if they used it not; and that I will (says the Lord) make those
that have riches dispearse them abroad. That that saying may come to pass, and
that my instruments by which I will do these things, shall confess that it is
not by power or strength of men; but that it is God that is in them that does
these things. And so shall wholly deny themselves from usurping a power over
others as to make Laws for others to walk by. But as I have taken the power
to my self, so shall they leave me (says my God) to do what I see good to all
people; and my work will be (says God) to bring in universal liberty. And I
said how long Lord? And the Lord said, within a month or a very little while,
and it shall come to pass.

And in a little while after I saw a company of men and women singing and
dancing, and they had every one of them a book open in their right hand. And I
said, Lord what means this? and my eternal God within me said. That these
represent my sons and daughters that shall sing and dance in Sion, and go up to
the mountain of the house of the Lord with everlasting joy: and as they had
every one of them a book open in their hands: it sets forth that the mystery
which has bin hid, is now by me (says the Lord) made manifest, even Christ
within them. And so shall be as my Thundering Angels crying out it is done, it
is done, and time shall be no more (says my God) and so shall se transgression
finished, and everlasting righteousness brought in. And all things with them to
become new; former things be passed away. And so to be married to me the Lord:
to be one with me. God living in them and they in God; and indeed are the new
Jerusalem that comes out of heaven, and the Tabernacle of God with men. These
fits being over, I was wrappped up in silence for a while: And the condition
that I was in afterward, was not a condition of horror, of trouble or fear,
for about three nights before this, I heard a voice within me say, I am come,
and will declare unto you, and I did wait for to have some thing from my God
(by the working of my spirit within me) which having now, I was taken in a most
pleasant manner, and was forced to lie singing and whisling; and then to rise
out of my bed between one and two a clock for to dance I and so continued
singing and dancing near upon two hours by the clock, singing in this manner
as follows, or the expressions which I used some of them I will here relate,
though I am not able to remember a quarter of them. The King, the everlasting
King, the King of glory comes; Halelujah, Halelujah, Halelujah, the Lord God
omnipotent reigns: Sing, sing, be glad O Sion! for behold thy King, the
everlasting King, the King of glory comes: shout, shout O Sion for behold thy
King, the holy, one of Israel is in the midst of thee; and thou shall se sorrow
no more: now ore the kingdoms of this world becomthe kingdoms of the Lord, and
of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever. Sing, sing, and rejoice for behold
thou shall no longer have need of the sun of moon to give thee light, that is,
outward ordinances, no but says the Lord, I will be thy light and glory. Sing
and rejoice, and go up with joy and rejoicing to the mountain of the house of
the Lord; for now shall the light of the moon be as the light of the sun. and
the light of the sun shall be seven fold more now then has bin. Shout and be
glad, for behold, I come; and he that is weak and feeble amongst you shall be
as David, and David shall be as the Angel of God, even as God: Sing and rejoice,
for behold you shall now say, this is the Lord our God we have waited for him,
and he is now come; therefore let us be glad and rejoice in his Salvation. Sing
and rejoice and be glad, for now the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will
dwell with them: Shout, shout, cry aloude, spare not, lift up thy voice like a
trumpet. And say unto Sion, thy King comes: prepare, prepare, make ready, the
marriage of the Lamb is now come. For behold, I come as a bride adorned for her
husband. Sing and rejoice for now Jerusalem comes out of heaven: and former
things shall pass away, and now shall all things become new: Sing and make
ready, for the marriage of the Lamb is come: Shout and be glad for the water of
life does now appear for to heal the Nations.

Cry. Cry, what shall I cry? Cry all flesh is grass, the grass withers, the
flower fades and comes to nothing, but ^od abides for ever: Cry, Cry, the
spirit of the Lord blows upon flesh, that so flesh may come to nothing: I have
a long time holden my peace and have bin still, but now will I arise (says the
Lord) like a man of war and will tear and devour in pieces and none shall
deliver.

And now will I appear to be (says the Lord) the stone cut out of the
mountain: Cry, cry, what shall I cry? the Lord of Hosts will overthrow the
strength of Kingdoms. And will appear to be an Iron rod that shall break in
pieces all powers like a potters vessel. And will make every one to throw their
Idols of Gold and Silver away: money which men have made Idols of, shall now by
the bright appearing of God, be counted nothing, but shall be thrown from one
unto the other: And they that have abundance shall hide themselves for fear of
the Lord of Hosts. These and such like expressions by way of singing I did
utter: and why I count it singing, is because I did (as being overpowered with
joy) cry ha ha tall toll lall derah la loll la dero tall derall tall toll dero
tall aroll atoll loll loll dero, in such a way I did break forth between every
4. lines I have writ or oftener.

And on the 29. day of the same month about 7. a clock in the night I saw in a
vision two armies of men one a coming against the other; the same Leaders that
were in the vision before, concerning the last two armies mentioned, and I
beheld til they were drawn up in a body, seeing their drums beating and their
colors flying; their muskets charged, and the soldiers with lighted matches
in their hands: and I beheld till J saw that these two armies did meet, and the
musketeers fired and fell off, and J saw men sometimes drap down: But at
length J saw the Generals horse (which came out of the South) break in amongst
their enemies and utterly routed them, and took the General and killed him,
and so had the field to themselves. And J said Lord, what is the meaning of
this? and my eternal God within me told me. That the General and his army
that came out of the South, are instruments which J have chosen to do my work:
and the other General and his Soldiers are for the Parliament: and J beheld
til the General that overcame marched with all his army to London, and entered
the City, and went to the Parliament House. But they were dispersed, and I saw
the General and his Officers sit as a Parliament in the room of the other, and
did promise that they would now restore freedom to the people: and I saw the
General and his Officers go into the Halls where money was and threw it to the
Soldiers, and the Soldiers had so much, that they gave it away to the poor;
and I heard the poor say one unto the other, these are joyful days.

And I desired the substance of it and it is this (as my Lord has revealed it
to me) That the General and the people with him are the instruments of God. And
he has chosen them for to beat in pieces all powers; and to thresh mountains
and hills to chaff^, that they may be no longer: and so to give the power to
them that they may (or God in them) restore England from bondage: and by their
giving of money away so freely, it shows that the time is now come, that the
Lord will redeem the creation from bondage, and that I will (says God) so
break that domineering self that has bin in man: That he shall now throw away
his Idols of Gold and Silver: that there may be universal love and freedom,
and war shall cease.

Well, afterward I had much joy within my self, so much that I am not able to
express, and which caused me to break forth in singing and dancing; and
afterward I was taken in a shaking fit, and after the fit was over, I was
forced to give my money to them that were with me, and did give them all that I
had.

So by the appearing of me (says the eternal God) shall all mighty, great and
rich men, throw and disperse their silver and gold to them that have need, that
there may be no complaining in our streets.

And after this, I beheld a company of men and women with Crowns of gold upon
their heads; and I asked my God, what means these to have Crowns upon their
heads? and my God said, these Crowns betoken victory, for these are they that
have overcome all things by my power, and have come out of great tribulation,
and now have I wiped from their eyes, all sorrow and weeping, and they shall
reign with me.

On the next morning about six a clock, as I was in my bed, I saw the same
vision as I did before, as soon as I saw the Army routed, and the General
slain, I cried out, they are now cut down; and so I did at the night before
twice or thrice, I cried they are cut down, and did afterward express a
bundance of joy, both as it appeared by singing and lifting up of my hands; and
in this fit, I was commanded to declare it to the General, and was told me by a
voice within me, that I should have no rest until I had declared it. And I
asked who it was that commanded me to declare it? and the voice said, I am that
I am, the Lord of hosss, the King of Israel, and thou may know I have made
choice of thee to reveal these things, and that I have commanded thee to
declare it to the General, and that my purpose is now to destroy all powers;
yea, the Parliament, and that this vision is from God: thou shall be presently
taken in a shaking fit, and in a very little while I was taken so; and I
desired my brother that lay with me, to lie upon me, and so he did, to try
whether I should then shake, and I did tater him up and down and shake so much,
that he could not make me lie: and about two a clock at noone, and on the
morrow morning, I heard the same words as I did relate; that I have made choice
of thee to reveal these things, and that thou may know that I have commanded
thee to declare these to the General, and that this vision is from the Lord of
hosts, and that thou shall have no rest until thou have done it; thou shall be
taken in such a shaking fit, as thou shall be shaken more then ever thou have
been yet, and so I was of a sudden: thus perceiving I should be shaken, I laid
me upon a bed, and called a man that was in the room to lie upon me, and so he
did lie upon me, and I shook him as if he had been in a Cradle, and rocked by
a man: And I desired to know what I should declare to the General, and my God
told me, I should declare that it was his determination to bring to nothing the
Parliament, and so destroy all powers besides himself, that he may be all in
all.

On the fourth day of the second of February in the morning between five or six
of the clock, at the appearing of my eternal God to me; and indeed I had great
cause for to rejoice: for my father within me, told me saying, I thy comforter,
thy Redeemer and Savior will declare some things unto thee: and after my flesh
left trembling: I heard a voice saying, behold, behold, what do thou now see?
and I beheld, and lo there appeared a company of men, and I told them and
there were seven, that were very gallant, some of them had Satin clothes, and
some of them were in clothes that were laced with Gold and silver lace: and
they had each of them two or three men a piece waiting on them, and they were
merry: and I said, Lord, what means these? and the Lord answered me, and told
me; That these does represent the Parliament; and as the were very merry
amongst themselves, I beheld and there appears a hand upon the wall and writ
these words, Mean, Mean, Tek: Peers: and I asked the meaning of this writing:
and I was told that they were weighed in a ballande and were found too light:
and their Kingdom shall be taken from them and given to others: and I beheld
them that they were very sad and hung down their heads at the appearing of this
writing: and I heard a voice say, cry, cry, and I said, what shall I cry?
cry that the Lord of host will bring down the Power, strength and might of
men, and will lay their honor ie the dust: for my determination is to powere
out upon them the fierceness of my wrath and indignation, and all the earth
shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy: for the day of the Lord is
come that burns as an oven and all they that do wickedly shall be as ashes
under the sools of my feet; and I will take the Kingdom to my self and give
it to my Saints: and after this was over: within a very little while my
eternal God within me, uttered these words again: behold, behold, what do
thou now see? and lo I beheld a company of men and women Singing and dancing
together with Crowns of gold upon their heads: and I looked on them, and did
see them put their hands in their pockets, and they pulled out their money and
gave it to one another: and presently after this I saw a company of men which
were verry gallant (with their men waiting upon them) come to them and bowed to
them: And I said, Lord what are these that dance and sing together? and the
Lord said, that these are my Sons and daughters, and three crowns betoken
victory: that they have through the strength of me overcome sin and flesh,
and now are come to Sion with everlasting joy and rejoyceing, and sorrow and
sighing is fled away; and these shall reign with me. And whereas thou see
Lords and Knights and their men come with bags of Gold and silver, bowing and
presenting their money to them that were danceing: these show the fullfilling
of Scriptures: "that the sons of them that afflicted thee shall come bending
down to the soles of thy feet and shall call thee the blessed of the Lord, the
Sion, the holy one of Israel, and that the Kings, and the fulness of the
Gentiles shall bring their glory and honor to it: and as thou see my sons
receive their treasure, and upon the reciving of it they became one, and their
men put on their Hats, and were no longer SERVANTS but Fellows with them: the
time is now at hand that J will be such a terror to all men that they shall
throw away their idols of gold and silver one to the other, for fear of the
Lord, and for the glory of my Majesty, when I arise to shake terribly the
earth: that they will no longer assume unto themselves, such a Pre-eminence as
formerly they have done.

And after a little while I heard these words uttered within me again: behold,
behold, what see thou now? and lo I beheld an Angel with a sickle in his
hand come into a field of wheat; and I heard a voice say, thrust in thy sickle,
for the harvest is ripe: and I said, Lord, who is this that has a sickle in
his hand? and the Lord said, this is my messenger that I have sent; and the
sick'le in his hand is my power; by which he shall reap the harvest withal,
And lo I saw him thrust in his sickle, and cut down all those that were higher
then the rest, and so made all equal; and all the field became as one, in
greatness none bigger then another. And I said, Lord, what does this field
represent? and the Lord told me, That the field of wheat are men, and as you
see the great ears cut from the little ones until they were all alike; so will
I by my own power and by my bright appearing in my sons and daughters; Cut down
the loftiness of men, and bring low their haughty looks: and I like a mighty
Leveller, will lay low-the mountains and hills, and make them as a plain; and
will make crooked paths straight, that I alone may be exalted: and so will
take away that stumbling block of private intrest, that men shall no longer
seek for honor, as to war one with another: but I will make them beat their
swords and spears into plowshares preuning and hooks, that there may be
universal peace and freedom, and all dwell in love together.

But in a little while after this, I heard the same words within me uttered.
Behold, behold, what see thou now? and lo I beheld a mighty Angel going from
one end of heaven to the other, crying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen,
and is thrown into the Sea, that it shall never rise more. And my excellent
Majesty within me (which is my eternal God) said, by Babylon is meant all
forms of governments and ways of worships which men have set up, and all Laws
which men have made to keep their fellow creatures in bondage and slavery: but
as thou see this Angel throw a stone into the sea and the stone never rise
more: so will I by mine own power take away the power of man for ever making
any more Laws (to hang men) e^e long, and so will destroy the searletcollour'd
whore, and will slit her nose and burn her flesh with fire; for the heaven and
the earth shall now fly away and there shall be no more place found for it.

And after this J heard the same words uttered within me again. Behold, behold,
what see thou now? and lo I beheld a mighty Angel crying aloud, the Kingdoms
of this world are now become the Kingdoms of God, and he shall reign for ever
and ever: and now the mystery of God which has bin hid shall be made manifest;
and time shall be no longer; and now are former things passed away, and all
things become new. And J said, Lord, what is meant by this Angel? and the
infinite God (by whom we live and move and have our being) said that this Angel
holds forth my servants crying against the powers of this world, and crying me
up as the only power that they will set up: and as he cried the mystery of
God is now finished and time shall be no longer, it shows that my sons and
daughters shall see and know the mystery of God; which mystery is, God in
them: and that they shall now say, time shall be no longer: by Gods working so
powerfully in them burning up sin and flesh, that so sin and flesh or Satan,
shall no longer have any power over them; but God will be their all and in all,
and they shall now se it and know it too; which will occasion them to cry time
shall be no longer. And thus by the strength of me (who am the Alpha and omega)
they overcome all things, and so all things are become new: and so my sons and
daughters shall inherit all things: for the Angel after he had cried all things
are become new: so he cried, they shall inherit all things: for my sons and
daughters (says my God) shall now see me to be all and in all, and so shall
see and inherit all things by the enjoyment of me: for the mystery being
finished in you, and all things become new: it is such a change in you, that
those things that you thought were unlawful before, will now appear to be
lawful: for this is the new thing, you will now see and know that all things
are Gods, and so will see and know that as God is yours, so all riches, as
houses or Lands, are as much yours as any man's; for says God; time shall be no
longer. You shall know this (says God) that sin and transgression being
finished with you, and everlasting righteousness brought into you, and so
swallowed up with righteousness, living in God, and God in you, you shall know
that my work, my strange work which I will do, is now to break in pieces al
things, and to make all things become new: which change is to restore the whole
creation from bondage and slaverie, into the glorious liberty of the sons of
G^d; and so to take off the curse that is upon all crearures, and to restore
the creation to the first estate, as Adam was set in; that as I made Adam Lord
over all creatures, and all creatures were for the use of Adam (says the Lord)
so now shall all the creatures men and women, have that privilege (which by
reason of the curse) have a l^ng time bin deprived of as to have the enjoyment
of the outward creatures, which now they shall have: for as the appearing of me
in one single person Jesus Christ my anoyted Son, did cause a communion to be
among my Saints in those days; so at the appearing of me in my sons and
daughters now, I will cause union and fellowship to increase, first amongst my
sons and daughters, and then will burn up some by my spirit in them, and will
confound others by might and power; and will make such a strange work, that I
will make all sorts and degrees (some for fear of me, and some from the
enjoyment of me) give up give up, and relieve one another; that there may be
universal love, peace and freedom; all enjoying the work of my hands without
let or hindrance,

And being carried above my self (or taken out of my self) with joy, I burst
forth crying Halelujah, Halelujah, the Lord omnipotent reigns: but could not
rest my self contented until I did burst forth with singing, because of the
abundance of joy I was in.

And on the 5. day of the second month in the morning, came the word of the
Lord unto me and said,, I come: which made my flesh to tremble: and at length I
heard these words within me, behold I come to reveal unto thee things that
must shortly come to pass: therefore behold what thou now see. And lo, I
beheld a great water, for the bigness of it I could see no earth or ground;
and in the midst of it a woman gloriously araied, sitting on a throne with a
Crown upon her head, and presently there came one with a sword in his hand,
and cut off her head, and she and her head tumbled into the sea: and I said
(Lord) what means these waters and this woman that sits thereon? And the
man that came with a sword in his hand and cut off her head; and my eternal
God (within me) said: that the waters and multitudes of people: and the woman,
is the Queen or the whore of Babylon, mentioned in the Revelations, that has
made all nations drunk with her fornication; and this Queen, or lady, that
says she should see no sorrow: is Governments, and worships, and laws which
men have made and set up; and the man that came with a sword in his hand and
cut off her head; is my messenger which J have sent, or my self appearing in my
sons and daughtera, which will cut off all power, as Kingly and Parliament
powers, and so will destroy all Governments and forms of worships. And when her
head was cut off: I heard a lamentation, men and women weeping and grieving,
and some I saw were laughing and singing, crying Halelujab, Halelujah; for thou
art worthy to receive Glory, and Honor, and praise; for thou have Judged the
great whore, and taken vengeance on her for shedding the blood of the Saintt.
And I said (Lord) who are these that weep? And who are these that rejoice? and
the Lord said that these are the Priests and those that have bin made rich by
her fornications that weep and howl: as the Priests that have made merchandise
of souls of men: but now their trade is destroyed, and they shall no longer
preach as to receive money for it; therefore they weep: but these are my sons
that sing and rejoice; and indeed they have now great cause for to sing and
rejoice, because that which has troubled them (as forms and worships) are now
destroyed: and I said Lord, will thou destroy the Parliament? and the Lord
said, I will begin first in this nation, and will by my bright appearing burn
up some, and destroy others: that there shall (to men's apprehension) be nothing
but confusion; for I will make great and mighty men run into the holes of the
rocks, and throw away their Idols of gold and silver for fear of me, that there
may be universal love and freedom. And I will be such a terror to the great
men, they shall hide themselves for fear of me. And I said (Lord) will thou do
this by thy own power without making use of any Instruments? and the Lord said
no: but I will harden the hearts of the Parliament, and they shall raise an
army for to fight with the General, whom I will stir up to oppose their
cruelty, and their actions, and so will destroy their power by my Instruments:
and I said Lord, shall I go and declare this to the General as yet or no? and
the Lord said wait upon me as yet and thou shall know more, for I have
somethings else to reveal unto thee.

And at night about eight of the clock on the same day, being in my chamber,
the word of the Lord came unto me saying, behold, behold, what do thou now
see? And I looked and lo a white horse and one upon him with a sword in his
hand ready drawn: and he rid from East to West, and from North to South,
cutting down all men and women, that he met with, that were higher then the
middle sort, and raised up those that were lower then the middle sort, and made
them all Equal, and cried out epqualitie, equality, in that I have now made
all men alike: and he lifted up his hands to heaven, and did swear by him that
lives for evermore, time should be no longer; and so did thrust his sword into
his scabberd again. And I said, Lord, who is this that makes all alike? and my
glorious God within me said: that I the Lord of hosts have done this: and I
said, without any instruments Lord? and the Lord said, no: but by instruments
which I have chosen to do this strange work: which shall cut down all powers,
even the Parliament, and I said Lord, shall the Parliament raise forces against
thy instruments to fight with them? and the Lord said they shall, but they
shall be destroyed by Fair. (whom I have made choice of, and his Army: and
whereas he cried, time shall be no longer, and so put up his sword into his
sheath again: the meaning is: that when the time appointed is come, all
visible powers shall cease: and I alone will be all and in all, both King and
Parliament, and Governor; and then wars shall cease. And as you see him make
all alike; so will I destroy some, and burn and consume others, and be as a
terror to the rest; that there shall be none greater or richer then others. And
I said, how long will it be first? and the Lord said, in a very little while it
shall come to pass, but wait thou upon me and thou shall know; upon this I
desired of my God, that if he had judged me worthy to reveal this vision to
me, and that it shall come to pass, and that it was from the Lord of hosts: I
might have some token that I may know it to be from God: and my God said within
me. That I should be presently shook as if I should be shoock to pieces, as a
token that he had made choice of me to reveal this vision and the rest to, and
that it should surely come to pass: which token proved true, for I was
presently shoaken, even so much that two men (which were in the room with me,
that I desired to lie upon me or hold me from shaking, which they did) could
not keep me from shaking.

But before this fit came on me one hour and half or such a matter, I saw a
company of men and women, singing and dancing, giving away their money one unto
the other: and my God within me, told me, that these were my sons and daughters
that were come to Sion; and that he had now wiped all tears from their eyes:
and that self-seeking is now ended with them: and instead of it there shall be
universal lvoe, or a community, like unto the community of his Saints
mentioned in the Acts: whereupon I was forced for my own rest, to give away
that little money I had, about me: which thing others shall be made to do
hereafter.

Again the word of the Lord came unto me saying (about one a clock on the 6.
day of February) Behold, behold, what do thou now see: and lo! I beheld an
Army of men with their drums beating, and their colors flying, and they were
upon their march: And I beheld till there came one to their General, being all
glorious: and gave the General a sword, and said take this sword, for with it
shall thou beat down all thine enemies: and I said Lord, what is this Generals
name? and the Lord said his name is Fairfax; the Army that are with him are my
instruments whom I have stirred up to hate the oppression, covetousness and
cruelty, of the Parliament. And whereas thou see one give him asword. It is
I the Lord of hosts, that have given him power to beat down all those that are
coming to fight wi^h him: and presently I beheld another Army of men coming to
fight with them: and I said, Lord, who does this Army fight for? and the Lord
of hosts said, they fight for the Parliament: and the Lord said, I sti^red him
up to oppose the Parliament, because they have exercised cruelty upon my
people: and I beheld so long, that at length I did see both these meet together
and did fight; and I beheld some now and then dropped down of Fair. his men;
but they fell apace on the other side: but at length Fair. horse routed the
other horse, and followed some of them in pursuit; and some of them came and
fell upon the foot, and at length broke in amongst them and routed them, and
took the General and killed him, and so had the field.

And I said Lord, will thou also destroy the Parliament? and the Lord said he
would do it. for says the Lord, I will now ^urne Leveller, and will level
mountains and hills, and will make them equal with low places and valleys;
that there may be universality. And I said, how long will it be first? and the
Lord said in a very little while and it shall come to pass, and I said, Lord,
shall I go to the General and tell him of it? and the Lord said I should go:
but should stay a little longer first. And says the Lord, whereas I said (when
I showed thee this vision at the first) that thou should have no rest until
thou had done it: so I have troubled thee ever since day by day, and will
till thou have done it: but thou shall stay a little longer and wait upon me;
and that thou may know, I the Lord of Hosts the mighty God of Jacob, by whom
thou live, ^ovest, and have thy being has done this, Thou shall be presently
taken in a shaking fit: that thou may know I have made choice of thee: which
fit of shaking came on me as soon as the words were ended: which terrified my
flesh, but my Spirit rejoiced within me for joy.

And in a little while after: the Lord within me said; behold, behold, what
see thou now? and lo, I saw the heavens roleld up together as a Scroul: and
figs fall off the fig tree before they were ripe: and I said Lord, what is
meant by the heavens rolling thus together as a scroule? and the Lord said, by
the heavens, is meant, all outward administrations or forms of worship;
preaching and baptizing: and I saw one throw the srcoule into the fire, and it
was consumed; so says the Lord, shall all outward heavens be burned up; and
the figg tree is the Parliament in this nation, and it represents all powers
which are a bringing forth some young figgs, which are some new forms or ways
of worship, or a doing some new thing, but before they can bring them to
perfection, the day of the Lord overtakes them, and shakes them, and causes the
figgs to fall off before they be ripe: and so I the Lord destroy the things
that men would do.

And the Lord again said: behold, what see thou now? and lo, I beheld four
men stand upon the four corners of the earth; which is East, West, North and
South, and they held the wind in their hands that it could no longer blow upon
the earth or Sea: and I said Lord, what means these four men to do thus as
they do? and my excellent Majesty the Lord of hosts said, these four men are
my sons and daughters in whom I have spread my self through out the world. And
by the wind which they hold in their hands, that it should blow no more upon
the earth or Sea: is meant all outward forms or ways of worship, which of one
kind or other have bin in all places, set up by men: but now I have taken their
power from them, and have given it to the Saints; and by my bright appearing in
them, they shall not suffer any forms or ways of worship to be set up.

And again the Lord said: behold, behold, what see thou now? and I beheld a
Throne and one that set thereon; before whose face heaven and earth fled away,
and there was no place for them: and I said what is meant by this Throne? and
the Lord said, by this Throne is meant my sons and daughters: and as you saw
one that sat thereon: it is I the Lord of hosts who^ rule and reign in my sons
and daughters; and they are my temple and house wherein I dwell: and by the
heaven and earth that fled away is meant: all earthly powers, Governments and
forms and ways of worship, all outward administrations, which by the
appearing of me the God of Gods, shall be consumed and burned up; that they may
never be more: but that I the God of Gods, may appear to be their teacher and
ordinances, and so all and in all: and so my Covenant of grace spoken off by
Jeremiah my son, be fulfilled: you shall not need to say, know the Lord: so
they shall know me from the least to the greatest: and that other Prophecy, ye
shall be taught of God.

And on the seventh day of February, The word of the Lord came unto me, and
said behold, behold, what see thou? and lo, I beheld, and there appeared a
table and a cloth laid upon it, and trenchers and napkins upon it, and stools
pulled out for men to fit upon them: and one cried with a loud voice, come all
ye fowls of the heavens to the supper of the great God: and presently there
were dishes of all sorts of meat set upon the table: and after this I saw three
froggs creeping up and down, and at length they entered into Kings and Lords,
and great men; and presently they gathered themselves together and their
armies; and I said Lord, what is the meaning of this Table; and of the things
that are there on? and my God said, the table is the earth: and the things
thereon being of all sorts, represent, all things in the earth: and I said,
what is he that makes the supper? and calls all the fowls of the heaven to
come to it? and my eternal God within me said: it is I the Lord of hosts that
make this supper, and invite the fowls to it: and I said, what fowls? and the
Lord said: by fowls you must understand; my sons and daughters who live in the
heavenly enjoyment of me: and they have all sorts of things here to supper: I,
even the flesh of Kings, and Lords, and mighty men, and captains, and of all
both small and great, bond and free: it shows that the day is now a coming
that they shall have the full enjoyment of all creatures, and so shall inherit
all things: the flesh of Kings and great men which they eat, is the ways of
worships and forms of governments which they have set up: their eating of
them, shows a final consumation of them, as that they shall be consumed and
never be more: the three froggs that went into the King and great men of the
earth; are the spirits of devils, which is the proud flesh domineering over
the spirit of God, and so ruling in their hearts, maks them raise armies of
men, and gather their forces together to resist the appearing or coming of me
says the Lord of hosts: And thus through the pride of their hearts and
loftiness of their spirits, they gather Gog and Magog together, to compass
the Saints round: But I said, what is meant by Gog and Magog? and the Lord
said, by Gog and Magog, is meant, all the wisdom, power, and strength of proud
flesh, which the great and wise men of the earth have invented, as their power
on one side, and their false ways of worships, and forms of governments on
the other side, and Laws which they have made, to make the Saints and people
submit unto, are the great armies that compass the Saints round, or make war
with me, says God: But you see fire come out of heaven and burn them up; so
by the bright appearing of me, says the Lord of hosts, shall all the enemies
of my Saints (which have deceived them) be consumed and burn^d up; as forms,
and governments, and ways of worships, that they may be no longer deceived by
them: and I beheld the Devil that had deceived them; and I did at length see
him thrown into the lake of fire that burns with brimstone, there to be
tormented with the false Prophet day and night: and I said, what is meant by
the Devil thrown into the fire? and my God said, by the Devil is meant all the
wisdom, cunningnesse and craftiness of proud flesh, which has invented
forms, and ways of worships to deceive the people: they are all now burnt up
and consumed by the fire of my jealousy, says the Lord of hosts, and are to
be day and night tormented by me: That is, all proud flesh and false Prophets
(which is the wisdom of the flesh) shall from day to day, and from night to
night, be under my wrath, and afraid to look me in the face: and so by my
appearing (says the Lord of hosts, who am a consuming fire) shall they be
tormented: who? all flesh and filthiness, the power and wisdom of men Gog and
Magog: that I (the Lord of hosts) may be all in all: For this lake of fire, is
my w^ath (says God) into which I have judged and sentenced proud flesh (that
opposes me and thrown it; that so I may consume proud flesh, and bring it to
nothing.

And again the Word of the Lord came unto me, saying, what see thou now? and
I looked, and presently I saw a great City, which to me did appear to be very
gallant, as if there were none like it: and I said, Lord, what means this
City, or what City is this? and my Eternal God within me said, this great City
is spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where the Son of God was crucified: and I said,
Christ was crucified at Jerusalem: though he was (says the Lord of hosts) put
to death by the Jews, yet he was also crucified in Sodom and Egypt; that is,
the Laws, and forms, and customs of the Jews, is Sodom and Egypt; because
their Laws and forms did slay my Son; and though he was put to death
literally a^ Jerusalem, yet he was perpetually slain by the filthy
abominations of Sodom and Egypt, as Rebellion and disobedience against me the
Lord of hosts: and so (says the Lord of hosts) all forms, Laws, governments,
and ways of worship opposing me, is spiritual Sodom: and Egypt, that put to
death my Son Christ, and has from time to time, been the great whore that has
shed the blood of my Saints. But as thou saw one set it one fire, and the
people which thou saw running to quench it, as Kings, and Lords, and great
men, and of all sorts of men, with buckets of water, and hooks, to pull down
some of it, that was on fire, but they could not quench it, as thou did see
until the tenth part of it was consumed: I the Lord of hosts (by my appearing
in my sons and daughters) have set this City on fire, and it has been burned a
long time; by my manifesting my self to them to be their all in all: and now
the day of my judgment is at hand; I have sentenced this City to be burnt, for
I the Lord of hosts, do burn up and consume all forms and governments of men
by my self, I being a consuming fire: and I said, Lord, what means that, that
the tenth part of it and not all, is consumed? and the Lord said, by the tenth
part is meant all: for ten is a perfect number; as ten horns mentioned, that
sets forth a perfect strength, or all their strength, or all their power: and I
said, Lord, it has been generally understood, to be Nations, as our Nation for
one, that shall fall off from Rome first, to be the City: but I the Lord of
hosts say, this City is forms and Laws, Governments, and ways of worship,
which is in all Nations, and so is the spiritual Sodom and Egypt that
crucified my Son; and has from time to time, murdered my Saints: But the time
of her power is almost at an end, and she must be destroyed.

And whereas you see all sorts of people run to quench the fire that it did not
burn: It shows the unwillingnesse of all sorts of men and women to have that
which has most deceived them, to be burned up; because some, yea most, have
made the observations or traditions of men, to be their rule to walk by: and
so have walked more by form and custorne then by any thing else: But now I
come, I come, says the Lord of hosts; and I will take from men, and from the
powers of the world, those things which they have gone a whoring after: and
they with all their might shall not hinder me from doing my work.

And the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, Behold, behold, what
do thou now see? and lo, I beheld a Temple, and it was full of smoke; and
there appeared one in this temple with a crown of gold upon his head; and his
raiment was of all colors, like unto a rainbow: and I beheld that he stretched
forth his hands; and as he stretched them forth, the smoke vanished away: and I
beheld that after the smoke was gone: there went out of his mouth flames of
fire, and burned up the pictures that were in the Temple: and after they were
consumed he cried with a loud voice that the forty and two months and the
time, times and half times, is now come to an end and then the temple and holy
city which for 42 months was given to the Gentiles to be trodden under foot;
shall now no longer be trodden under foot: But I will redeem it and deliver it
from the bondage and slavery that it has bin subject unto: and after this I
beheld seven lighted torches brought into the temple. And said, I Lord whose
temple is this? and the Lord said, it is mine: and I said, what does this
temple set forth? and the Lord said; this temple are my sons and daughters: and
he whom you see in it, is I the Lord of hosts who am come to take possession
and to make them my dewlling place: But as you see it was full of smoke: this
smoke is darkness, and gloominesse, and cloudinesse, and such a mist, that
until it be consumed, my people are not able to know me: but I said, Lord it
is said, that no man was able to enter into the temple for the smoke: which
seems to hold forth the temple to be somewhat else then thy Saints: and the
Lord said; that is a metaphor which seems to hold forth some thing else, that
is, my sona and daughters are not able to come to the true knowledge of me, as
to see and know that I live in them, without a more fuller discovery of my
self to them, says the Lord of hosts: but as you see me spread forth my hands;
and the smoke vanished away, that they come to have some knowledge of me: but
as you see flames of fire issued forth from me that burned up the pictures:
these flames are a full manifesting of my self to my sons and daughters: and
the pictures, are all the ways of worship, forms and governments which by the
wit of man are set up: and as pictures resemble something else besides what
they are; so these forms, and ways of worships, and governments, and all
outward administrations, have seemingly appeared to be the way which I would
have them observe: Though indeed it has been but a picture of me. Or my way:
and not my right way, or mine own way, but a way of confusion So that when I
shall fully manifest my self to my sons and daughters: my spirit shall burn
up all their pictures; that is, all their ways of worship and forms of what
sort soever, and consume them to nothing: for I the Lord of hosts am a
consuming fire; and will ere long appear to be so: that they may see me to be
forms and ways of worships, and see me all and in all: and so to see that they
shall have no need any longer of outward administrations: But to see me to be
their teacher: and I said, Lord what is meant by the temple or holy City that
has been trodden under foot 42. months? by this temple or holy City; is meant,
my sons and daughters which for the time of Antichrists reign has bin kept in
darkness, or in forms or ways of worships which men have set up, and by his
crying with a loud voice, he was come to deliver it from bondage or from the
Gentiles, and so from them both: it is I by my coming to Judge all the powers
of proud flesh which has been an Alien and Gentile to me; and to destroy them,
burn and consume them up; as the forms of men and worships set up by them: that
so I may deliver them from bondage, says the Lord of hosts, for the days of
my coming is at hand.

What does these seven torches or lamps signify? And the Lord said: the seven
lamps burning, shows a perfection of light that shall be. When the forty and
two month (that are spoken of) shall be at an end: for these forty two months
are a certain time, says the Lord of hosts, that I have suffered my self to be
hid: and my glory hid from the Temple: but now the set time is at an end; and
my light and glory shall shine: and as you see the lamps burning and none put
them out: So will I appear burning up flesh and sin, and none shall hinder me
from doing my work; says the Lord of hosts, that will reign in mount Sion for
ever.

And again the the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, what see thou now?
And I beheld, and saw the Moon, and the Sun, and the Heavens, and the Stars,
and at length I saw them turned into blood, and they fell from the place that
they were in, and fell to the earth: and I saw a company of Swine and Dogs lick
them up; they being like unto blood, and with their falling upon the earth, the
earth was changed: And I said, Lord, what is this Sun, and Moon, and Heaven,
and Stars, which is changed into blood? is it the material Sun that gives light
by day, and the Moon that give light by night? And the Heaven; the Heaven that
fouls fly in? and my eternal God, within me, said, No: but by these is meant
other things: as the Moon is a borrowed Light from the Sun, and not a
perfect Light it self, so by the Moon is meant outward Ordinances that People
have and are under, by which they have received some Glympse of Light: but not
the Light it self: by the Sun is meant a more glorious Dispensation of outward
Ordinances, or Ordinances in a more higher Nature: As the one, being a
Baptizing of Infants; and so they in this Dispensation, fetch Light from
Creatures, or from the Men of this World, which seemingly have light, but have
not: So the other which is of a more higher Nature: as the Baptizing of
Believers, is a Sun-light (as they call it:) and so the Baptisme-way of
Baptizing Believers, and breaking of Bread together, is a way wherein,
according to the Scriptures, they seem to be more like the Sun, than the
other: but yet is not the way which I approve of, says the Lord of Hosts: and
the Heaven, is the Heaven of outward Dispensations, and Forms, and ways of
Worships, Governments, and Rules to walk by; that so long as People living
under these, and do observe punctually to fulfill these, as the observing the
Sabbath Day, Praying, and Preaching, and going to Church, as they call it; and
others meeting in private Places, as they think fit to meet in, and so to
hear a Man speak something of God; this is Heaven which People live in, and
meant by this Vision, says the Lord of Hosts: and the Stars is their
professions of God according to the several Dispensations they are under: and
so this Heaven, and the Stars therein, and the Sun and Moon mentioned in
Scriptures, turned into blood, is meant, all outward Administrations, as
Forms, Governments, and Rules, and ways of Worships, which have been as
lights that People have seen something of God in, and so have seen God at a
distance from them, are now changed from light to blood: and so are fallen from
their places that they may no longer be as lights: and by the Dogs and Swine
licking them up: is nothing else but a total Distinction of them, that they
may never be more: and the People may from hencefortb loath them: and see me
the Lord of Host, to be all, and in all, for my great and notable Day which
these shall be turned into blood: my coming to my sons and daughters, and so
judging all these things in them; and making of them darkness; is the Earth
that they fell upon: and was changed, and the Dogs and Swines (as is set forth
by them a total fall of Worships) by licking up the blood: so by them is set
forth the most greatest and most wickedst Men: which have by their power set up
these things, a change in them, that they shall no longer do so any more: but
shall become new; for I have taken their power from them; and they are become
new, says the Lord of Hosts; and as thou see a new Heaven, and a new Sun
and Moon in the place of the former, and a new earth; is but the fulfilling of
Prophesies; that have a long tine since been spoken of; and now are come to
pass; this new Heaven is the enjoyment of me; they living in me, and I in
them; so they shall have no need of Heaven, of Ordinances or ways to walk by;
but I will be their light; both Sun and Moon; and so that they shall have no
need of these lights to walk by: but I will be the glory of them: and as you
see former things passed away and all things become new, it is the passing away
of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Heaven; which are outward Administrations and
Forms of Worships, Teachers of Men, that, I the Lord of Host, may be both
Heaven, Sun, Moon, Stars, and Teacher to, and in them, that they may hear a
voice, saying, this is the way, wallk in it: and the new earth is a change of
Men, which have had power over their fellow Creatures, and did desire to have
so, that they may be accounted great: but this was not an Earth wherein
Righteousness dwelt: and so must pass away; that there may be a new one; which
new one is an alteration or change of Men's minds; that as they have desired a
superiority, and have strived to cozen and cheat others, for to make themselves
great, they shall no longer strive for these; but instead of them, shall humble
and abase themselves, and throw away their Idols of Gold and Silver: their
money, I mean, which they have made gods of, to them that have none, that there
may be equality and universality, all enjoying the fruit of the Earth, says
the Lord of Host, who has commanded the Writer hereof to write it, as my will
and not his, that so all things may become now, and there may be an Earth
wherein Righteousness shall dwell.

And again, the word of the most high, came unto me, saying, behold, behold,
what see thou now? and low! I beheld something almost in the fashion of an
house; but it was not an house: and I said, Lord, what is this? and my God
said, it is a tabernacle: and as you saw one with a Crown of gold go into it:
it was I the Lord that went into it: and I said, is this the tabernacle of God,
that is said to be with men? and the Lord said, it is: and this tabernacle is
my people wherein I will dwell: and as he had a Crown of gold that went into
it: it betokens a victory, that I have taken it to be my possession: and as
soon as I was in it, you saw flames of fire burn up the gold, pearls, and
precious stones, and the wood hay and stubble; and presently the Tabernacle
that stood upon a foundation, had none: but hung only by the power of him that
went into it: this glold, pearls, precious stones, wood, hay, stuble, which
was burnt up: are all manner of outward administrations that ever were, or is
now at present; as forms, and laws, and Governments, and rules of worships to
walk by; which in one kind or other have been highly esteemed of all sorts of
men, according to the dispensation they have been under: and though they have
laid Christ for a foundation, yet these has been, in one sort or other, the
work which they have built upon: which work is to pass under the fire, for the
Apostle says, every man's work shall be tried by fire: and if any man's works
suffer loss, it will be by burning; yet he shall be saved so as by fire: which
fire is my self even I the Lord of hosts) appearing in this tabernacle spoken
of: which as soon as I did appear or entered in, all was consumed, and burnt up:
all the most glorious dispensations and forms of worships which in my absence
they have received comfort from: though all these outward administrations are
consumed, yet the creatures remained, saved by fire: that is, by my self says
the Lord of hosts, who am a consuming fire: and as you see the temple as soon
as these outward things? (gold, silver, wood, hay, stubble, were consumed) It
had no foundation: but was held up only by the power of him that was in it
between the heaven and the earth: so this is the ultimate end of my burning up
all the forms and ways of worships and rules of men, that they may see that
they have not had me to be their foundation: for if they had, and had built
right upon it: the dross would have been burnt from it, and they would have
stood fast, and not have been removed which now thou see they are, and have
no foundation: their worships and ways being taken from them, they fall, if I
by my own power, do not hold them mp: but I have to this end destroyed them all
and routed them of their forces; that they may now stand by my power alone; and
see me to be their lives, and their all and in all. and that I would have them
no longer receive comfort from streams; but from me their fountain of life: and
as thou herds me say, I was a Alpha and Omeg. and they that overcom shall
inherit al things; and I will be their God, and they shall be my people: if
nothing else but a declaration that I am all and in all: and he that over comes
must be by my power (who am the all of all things) that he does overcome some;
flesh, and Devil, and so by his overcoming he shall inherit all things; he
shall inherit me, or enjoy me the Lord of host; and I will in love communicate
my self unto him; and by enjoying me, he shall enjoy all things, for all the
beasts of the field, and all the houses, and lands, and money in the world is
mine, says the Lord of host: so shall they be my sons and daughters, and they
shall have a full enjoyment of them all: for as I made Adam Lord over all
creatures, and made all creatures to be for the use of Adam; and Adam, so long
as he stood, he did enjoy them all: so will I now, says the Lord of hosis,
recover my wool and my flax, and redeem the creation from bondage, and make
such a work in the earth, by my bright appearing, that the rich misers shall
howl and weep for depriving my sons and daughters of the outward creatures;
and their rusty gold and silver shall so much rise up in their consciences,
that they shall no longer sayts theirs, but its the Lords; and so shall suffer
my people, and all other poor creatures that want the outward goods of this
world, to have what they please, that there may be universal love, says the
Lord of host.

And the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, what see thou now? and
lo I beheld seven men, and each of them had a trumpet; and one of them seven
sounded his Trumpet, and the rest did not; and as soon as he had done sounding,
there appeared one with a book open in his hand, and lifted up his hands to
heaven, and did swear by him that lives for ever, time should be no longer;
but now the mystry of God is finished as he has declared by the voice of his
former Apostles: And I said, Lord, who be these Trumpeters? and my eternal God
within me said, these be my sons which have from time to time sounded an alarm
to the world, and as you see but one sound, and the rest did not: It shows,
that they that did not, had sounded already: That is, they according to their
light, have preached and spoken against Antichrist; and have given Antichrist
warning of what the seventh was to sound; but now the seventh sounds, the
mystery of God is finished; that is, a great and glorious discovery of light is
now made manifest, more thensever has been, by the appearing of one, says the
Lord of host; which makes my sons and daughters know the mystery which has
been hid, and so cry a loud that time shall be no longer: not only cry, but
through their knowledge, swear by God, that lives for evermore, time shall be
no longer: And I said Lord, what is this mystery that has been hid and now is
made manifest? and God said, this mystery, is my own self making out of my
self to be all and in all: and that I do not dwell in a place afar off, that
is, only Heaven, and only there; but that my dwelling place is now in my
Temples, which Temples are my sons and danghters: and that I, who am the life
and fullness of all things, have been always the life of all creatures, and the
life of man, and have been in man, but not known to be there: but have been
covered under the clods of proud flesh, but now the day of my appearing is
come, that proud flesh shall be destroyed; and all that have kept the creature
from looking after me the Lord of Host, within them: but have caused the
creature to look after me afar off: But now by my bright appearing, the book
which thou see in the Angels hands being open, will cause the mystery to be
known that I am in all men, and the life of all men: for this book is the
mystery, which mystery is I the Lord of host: and as the book is opened, so I
the Lord of Host, have made my self, by my coming to judge proud flesh, to be
God in all men: manifesting my self in love to my sons and daughters; and
appear in wrath to mine enemies. And I said, Lord, what is meant that time
shall be no longer, is it judgment? a dissolation of the world? or that time
shall be no longer to them that thou have manifested this mystery to? or that
time shall be no longer for the beast to reign? or the whore that has shed the
blood of Saints? And the Lord said, that by my appearing in my sons and
daughters, I will burn up sin and flesh, so that time shall be no longer with
them; for they shall sin no more, nor see no evil: which mystery is a riddle to
most men, that the Sains sins and transgressions should be finished: but though
it be a riddle and few know it, that the seventy weeks (for to make an end of
sin, and to bring everlasting righteousness) is at hand; yet the sounding of
this Trumpet will make more know it: I mean the Saints, I mean that the Saints
shall see that they shall now no longer commit sin; for transgression is
finished, and everlasting righteousness brought in, says the Lord of host: and
by time that it shall be no longer, is meant, that set time which I the eternal
God have allotted Antichrist the man of sin or the beast to reign, which was
for forty and two months, but now the forty and two months being expired, and
come to an end, all the powers of flesh, Devil and sin, and that have been set
up by the powers of this world, by Kings and Lords, and great men, their power
shall be taken from them, and so shall all time be at an end with them; I mean,
their powers shall be destroyed, when the time is come as it is now, that the
beast shall be destroyed: By the beast is meant, all forms and ways of
worships, rules and Governments which is the wisdom of the flesh, as teaching
and praying by the wisdom of the flesh, and living in outward administrations
at a distance from God, and so thinking to make I the God of gods, in love with
you for your observations and traditions: Time is come, and time shall be no
longer for these things, but all these I have judged to be burnt up as being
the Beast and flesh of the Word: for the mystey of God is now finished and time
will cease; that I the Lord of Host may be all in all.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: behold, behold, what
see thou now: and lo I beheld a woman and she was all in white, and not one
spot to be seen about her: and she had a Crown of gold upon her head, and in
her right hand she held a Scepter: and I did see men with Crowns of gold upon
their heads, and other Gallants, and of all sorts, come to her with presents:
and some brought gold and silver, and some pearls, and some jewels, and some
precious stones, and some one thing, and some another: and presented them to
her with bowing and bending. And one I did behold that proclaimed with a loud
voice, that Jerusalem was come down from heaven: and that the marriage of the
Lamb is now come: and presently I beheld one all in glory to come to this
woman, who had a crown upon his head, and he went into the woman, and they
became one, and the woman delivered her Crown and Scepter to him that came to
her, and presently there cried out to make supper ready: and presently I beheld
a long table and table cloth laid upon it, with trenchers and napkins, and
stools pulled forth; and I beheld the dishes brought to the table; and there
was set on the table all manner of varieties that could be; and the guests were
all in white: and there I saw them eat and drink, and were very merry together.
The time being come that all sorrow and sighing shall fly away: and I said,
Lord, what woman is this with a crown upon her head and a Scepter in her hand?
and the Lord said: this woman is the Jerusalem that comes out of heaven, the
Lambs wife: and as she was all in white without spot: it was the righteousness
of I the God of gods; and her Crown and Scepter shows, that she does by the
power of me, overcome all her enemies, as sin; flesh and hell: and by the great
men, as Kings and Lords, bringing presents to her: it shows that I the Lord of
host has set my house above all mountains: and that my people shall suck the
riches of the Gentiles: and that those, as Kings and Lords, that have
persecuted her by the names of horeticks and sectaries, and have laughed at
her, shall now come, bowing and bending at the sols of her feet; and shall a
knowledge of a truth, that the God of gods is in them. And as thou see one
come to her, and entered into her, and she gave him her Crown and Scepter: it
shows that I the Lord of hosts, and my people, shall no longer be two but one:
and that I shall no longer appear to be in heaven a great way from them: but in
them and one with them, married to them, their husband and joy: and as she at
his coming to her, delivered her Septer and Crown to him: it shows that by my
manifesting my self in them, to dwell in them, and to be one with them: will
make my sons and daughters resign up all unto me: that so I may destroy all
their proud flesh, and cover their nakedness with my righteousness, says the
Lord of hosts: and as you saw a table and all things thereon, as napkines and
trenchers, and all manner of varieties, and the guests all in white: is nothing
else but I my self says the Lord of hosts: wherein is all manner of
plentifulness; and that my sons and daughters are here set forth to be the
guests all in white: That is, washed and made clean by my righteousness; are
now come to the feast of fat-things, of marrow, and wine on the lees: where
they my eat and drink and be satisfied with the fulness of me. Therefore eat
and drink, yea drink abundantly: and as they were at supper they were merry
together, that is nothing else, but I enjoying them, and they enjoying me: I
did fill them so full of joy as to make them merry, that I told them sorrow and
sighing should now fly away: for my sons and daughters that have been at this
banquet and see themselves married to me to be one with me: and so feed
continually of the bread of life, henceforth not knowing sin, nor hunger any
more, but being satisfied in living in the enjoyment of me, says the Lord of
hosts, who am life and joy, and time, as to sin, shall be no longer: and so
knowing no sin: shall have no cause to see sorrow, or to weep any more; for all
thine enemies both within and without shall be destroyed: that thou may come
with everlasting joy and rejoicing and singing to Sion, says the Lord of hosts
the holy one of Israel, who is in the midst of thee, and the days of thyweeping
shall be at an end.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me saying, behold, behold, what see
thou now? And lo! I beheld, seven Angels (mentioned in the Revelations) one
more glorious then the rest, and he had some thing in his hand, which I did not
know, till I asked God: And then it was told me it was a vial: and he poured it
forth upon great men, As Kings and Parliaments, and all sorts of men, and on
the beast that comes out of the bottomless pit, and on the Locust, and on the
scarlet colloured whore that is decked with all manner of precious things: and
they all became dead: and the remnant were affrighted and gave glory to God:
and I said Lord, what is the meaning that but one of them powered forth his
vial? and the Lord said, that the rest had powered forth their vials and had
tormented the men of the earth already: but this one that powers forth his vial
now, does not only torment but destroy the men of the earth: and I said Lord,
will thou take their lives from them that they shall be no longer? and my God,
said, I; I will take from them that which has bin their life: but yet I will
not take from all of them their natural life: but from Kings, and Parliaments
and great men; I will take from them their power, which they have had, and they
shall instead of having power become humble and submissive and be as lowly as
the poor: for this vial is my wrath, that shall burn and consume all fleshly
powers: and as he that powers it forth is more glorious then the rest: it
shows my sons and daughters shall have more glorious discoveries and
manifestations of me their God dweling in them, says Lord of host; and through
the fullness they have of me (I being in them) they shall now say, time shall
be no longer: and I said Lord what is the meaning of the bottomless pit: and
the Lord said, by the bottomless pit is meant the heart of man: and by the
beast that rises out of it is not meant the Pope and Emperors: but is meant,
all the wisdom of the proud flesh, that has and does still invent all the
wicked actions of men that have murdered the Saints: as forms and governments:
and from this bottomless pit arises threatenings and malicious words, even
such there is hatched within it as a man is never able to know from whence they
come, or whether they go. For the putting to death of Saints, is first
contrived here in this pit; which I the Lord of host does say, is the heart of
man: and then according as they have invented how and after what manner they
shall put them to death, they put their power in execution to do it: and by the
Locusts, is meant the Priests; for as Locucts destroys and devours the fruits
of the earth, so have these Priests from time to time been the chief actors and
setters on of the Kings and great men of the earth for to make Laws for them
to worship God by, as they call it; and so poor creatures have been deluded by
them to worship something, but they nor the Priests knew not what, instead of
me says the Lord of host; and so have destroyed the earth, tha^ is, their
bodies; and being Spiritual Merchants, they have not only destroyed the bodies
of men, but have also made Merchandise of the souls of nem; and all this they
have done pretending they did preach to bring them to heaven: when indeed they
rather did the things that was a cause of ignorance and darkness (by telling
them they were the ministers of God sent to Preach, and that none was to preach
but they, and so did keep them from the enjoyment of me, says the Lord of
hosts) and to throw them into hell: so their preaching of me was more for their
fat Benefices then to bring souls to me, as they made it appear to be: for if
at any time any did outstrip them, or did do something tending to the setting
forth the glory of me, or had some discoveries of me, and so would teach for
nothing; they must be heriticks and so must he cut off; and thus these
priest-like Locust, have devoured men and kept them in bondage by their
philosophy and cuning craftiness: but time shall be no more. And the woman
which thou faw'st arrayed with all manner of precious things, is the whore of
Babylon: and her Scarlet Colloured clothes and precious things, sets forth her
forms and ways of worships, decked with outward zeal of professions, so that
they seem to the eye of men to be my way, says the Lord of host: for she being
so gloriously arrayed, sets forth all outward administrations of what sort
soever: but time shall be no longer; for the vials of my wrath is now powered
forth upon them all, and they shall all be consumed and brought to nothing: and
all these outward administrations, which seemed before to have life; shall now
be slain and appear to be dead: that I alone may be all and in all: such is
the work that I will now do that those that shall be left alive shall be
affrighted and give glory to me; for the remnant were affrighted and they gave
glory to God: these of the earthly powers, as Kings and Lords, and of all sorts
of men that does escape with their lives as they be not taken away, shall give
glory to me: some of them by being purified and my sons, and some of them by
bringing their riches to my sons and daughters: for those that know not me I
will be a terror to them and will make them throw away their Idols of Gold and
Silver, and in so doing they shall glorify me: and I said, are these that
powered forth thy vials Angels that are invisible, or be there no Angels but thy
servants and sons here below? and the Lord said, that they that power forth my
vials are my sons, and my sons are Angels, and ministering spirits: they are
Angels: and the Angels mentioned in Scriptures, are no other but my sons and
daughters: and those two Angels that came to Lot in Sodom, where two men: but
because I made them my messengers, they were called Angels: and the Angel that
smote the Assyrians and slew so many thousands. Was a man whom I appointed to
do that work, and so was called an Angel of the Lord, because he did my will
says the Lord of hosts: and for those that think Angels are invisible spirits,
and so cannot be seen; and so does likewise think, that I am in a place above
the skies called heaven, and so think I have invisible Angels to keep me
company, are out of the way, and have missed of the mystery; which I will now
make manifest, says the Lord of host.

The word of the Lord came unto me saying, behold, behold, what see thou now?
And lo, I beheld a woman clothed with white, and black spots upon her Gown;
and I beheld, and there came one with fire and laid it upon her clothes, and
the fire burned all her clothes: and upon her breast were knots of several
ribons, but they were all consumed: and so I saw her naked stripped of all: but
presently he that burned her clothes (and she was not hurt in her body)
brought her clothes again to put on her all white without spot; and she, to my
thinking, was then far more glorious then she was before: and I said, Lord,
what woman is this? And my eternal King said: it was his Church: and as she was
in white it did show that she did apprehend her self to be clean by Christ: as
she had black spots, it does show that she is not so pure as to be free from
imperfection: and as she had knots of several ribons on her breast: it does
show, that she (the Church) has several outward ordinances or dispensations,
forms by which she does worship me, says the Lord of Hosts: but as you saw
one came with fire and burnt all her clothes and all her ribons; and yet did
not hurt her body, it shows, that I the Lord of host who am a consuming fire,
will burn all her dross, or consume all fleshliness and dross from my people,
or Church; and so will strip her naked of all her administrations, and outward
ordinances, and Church-fellowships, and pastors, and teachers, and of all
though it seems never so glorious. And as you saw he that burned up her
clothes, bring her new clothes to put on all white without spot or wrinkle: it
shows that I the Lord of hosts: after I have burned up and consumed all the
flesh and fleshliness of my Church, as all her outward ordinances and
dispensations, as forms of worships; and all her pastors and teachers and
Church-fellow-ships, and so they striped her naked of all, that then I will new
cloth her, that she shall (the Church) appear far more glorious then ever she
was before; for when she is thus striped of all and is naked in her own
apprehensions; she shall be clothed with the Sun mentioned in the
Revelations: and the Moon shall be under her feet: this Son is my
righteousness: which will make her (the Church) all in white: as you see the
woman after she had lost all was clothed in white, and all outward Ordinances
(represented by the Moon) under her feet: that when my church is stripped of
all outward excellencies, then shall I appear to be excellent: as to be her
pastor, and teacher, and ordinances, and so her all and in all, and then shall
she be more free and at more liberty, when these shall be taken from her, then
she has been yet: for then my Church shall not run after men and so go gadding
about for food: but shall quickly rest her self contented, with me the bread of
life: and so shall worship me in spirit and in truth: and so my Church shall be
compacted of living stones, that the prophecy may be fulfilled: there shall
not be a Cananite in the house of the Lord any more: but she shall now wholly
throw away that which she has highly esteemed of, as outward means: which
has been but streams, which have flown from me who am the fullness of all
things: and shall now wait only to hear the voice within her saying, this is
the way walk in it: and so heard this voice, which voice (is I the Lord of
hosts speaking in her) she shall have more satisfaction and rest in her spirit
then ever she has had as yet: for she thus waiting upon me; shall speak the
pure language, which none shall have but those my sons and daughters that I
make out my self unto: for the effect of this language (which is the spirit of
me) will cause all difference and confusion to end, that some shall no longer
worship me the Lord of hosts one way, and some another way: but being possessed
of me and hearing me teaching in them, I will make them all to serve me with
one consent, which cannot be, so long as they worship me in several forms:
therefore do I this says the Lord of hosts, to strip my people of all forms:
that some might not run one way and some another; but that all may serve me in
one way: which way is only to wait on me, says the Lord of hosts, who will
bring it suddenly to pass.

And as thou saw one bring a book and it was sealed: and he that brought it
opened it and gave it her in her hand: this book is the mystery of me which is
now to be finished: and as you see it was sealed up: it shows, that this
mystery (which is I the Lord of hosts in my people) have been hid and none has
been able to look into it: but as he that opened it and gave it to her does
show, that though it has been hid, yet (I the Lord of hosts) will now open it
and make it known to all my sons and daughters; as the woman does represent, by
having it open in her hand, and when they shall see this mystery, I the Lord of
hosts to be in them; then shall they know how to worship me, which will be
without ordinances or forms, only waiting for me to teach them, and no longer
to wait upon the teaching of man; for man has teached them to look for me in
heaven, or that I do dwell in heaven in a place above the skies, but they know
not where, not teaching them to look for me within them, where they now, in
waiting upon me, shall know that I do dwell says the Lord of hosts.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, behold, what
do thou now see? and lo, I beheld a beast that had upon his head one horn,
and he continied pushing until there came one and cut him down, and burned his
body: and I said, Lord, what beast is this? And my eternal Majesty the King of
eternal glory within me said: this beast is that beast with one horn mentioned
in Daniel: and yet is the same beast mentioned in the Revelations: That made an
Image like unto the former beast: that had a wound and did live: which caused
all both small and great bond and free, to receive a mark in their foreheads or
in their right hand, that they might live and have a being amongst them: but
here is wisdom: let him that has understanding count the number of the beast
for it is the number of man: and his number is six hundred threescore and six:
And I said Lord what does this Beast represent? That proceeds from the Kings,
and does think to change laws and times: and had power given him until a time,
and times, and dividing of times? And my eternal God within me said: that this
beast is, the Parliament: who have their poewr by reason the 10 horns are cut
down: that is by reason Kingly power, as the name of it is cut off with the
late King that was beheaded: and likewise these forms of worships as the
Episcopal Government for matter of rules of worships to walk by; as to do as
the Bishops was pleased to have people do; they are all cut down by the
Parliament: which the beast as thou saw did set forth: for as the beast that
was to rise after the Kings, should be diverse from the rest: even so has the
Parliament been diverse from King Charles; for though King Charles did oppress
the people with ship money, which he should not have done, and so did show his
cruelty and tyranny: yet the Parliament has exercised as much cruelty upon the
people as he did: for as Charles laid his little finger upon the people, the
Parliament have laid their loins: and for matter of oppression to the people
have been far more cruel then Charles that was before; and so have been Diverse
from Charles: which word Diverse shows more then one, though called by one: as
the Parliament are more then one: yet being compacted together they are but one
in respect that what is done, is done by consent of all or most of them, and
not by some few. And as the beast did think to change Times and Laws, they
being given into his hands: so the Parliament has pretended to change times,
that is, to take off the oppression of people and Laws; that is, to alter the
Laws of the Land: for the Parliament have had power to do so: and the
Parliament have done these in some sense; as the taking away the high
Commission Court and Star Chamber, instead of being Governed or having Bishops;
we must have classes and Presbyters, or at least they have declared that we
should have: but though the first beast in the Revelations, had a wound with a
sword and did live; though high Commission Court and Star Chamber, I mean the
oppression that was used by them, though the name be taken away; yet in regard
of oppression they live: for the Image of the beast, is nothing but the same
oppression: as to have a new name, as not to be the same: but by this new name,
and so under this new name exercising cruelty and oppression, is to make an
Image, and so to represent the former: and though the Parliament have given
themselves a new name, by stiling themselves a Free State, yet they are but the
Image of the former beast: in regard as the former exercised cruelty upon the
people, and the Parliament does the same: and as the beast mentioned in Daniel
had power, and likewise in the Revelations, for to cause all both great and
small, to worship the Image of the beast that they might live. Even so the
Parliament: by the setting forth their Engagement (as they call it) and by
forcing all to take it (which was their intents when they set it forth) and so
to deprive them of the benefit of the Law, for denying submission to this power
or Image which they have set up, and so the mark which the Image of the beast
has set forth, and caused all to receive, does represent the Parliament, who
have set forth their mark, the Engagement (as they call it) for people to
receive it, in their foreheads; that is, to profess them to be the supreme
power, and that they ought to worship them, and submit to their Laws: and on
their right hand, is meant, the aiding and assisting of them with power and
with money; that the former, which was Kingly power, might not rise again: but
that they might be now adorned and have the honor: even the Parliament, seems
to be the Image of the Beast, and the Engament the mark of the Beast but the
Beast, or Image of other, is but for a time, times, and dividing of times,
mentioned in Daniel, and also in the Revelations, to be the forty and two
months, which is a set time that this Image of the Beast shall have power; and
when that set time is at an end, which I have appointed, this Beast shall be
destroyed and burned to nothing; all their powers, and all their Laws and
forms, and ways of governments and worships, and shall never rise more, nor
any like it, says the Lord of host: here is wisdom! this wisdom is I the
Lord, and let him that has understanding count the number of the Beast, and
let him that has my spirit and this wisdom revealed from me to him count, for
the number of the Beast: is the number of a man, the number of a man is his
continuance, or abiding here in this earthly body before it returns to the
earth which number is set forth or appointed by me the Lord of host, for his
time here, before he be brought to the dust of the earth; which number being
accomplished and come to an end, man must come to the grave: so the Beast is
numbered, his days are set down how long he shall have Power, or how long he
shall continue.

By the Beast that is numbered here, is meant the Parliament or powers of the
earth, which (I tell you) is the Beast that must be burned or destroyed so soon
as his time which I have let him, shall come to an end: for his number is six
hundred threescore and six: which I the Lord of host, tell you they are so many
days that this beast shall have the whole power to himself: that the
Parliament shall have for their time to reign, from the day that they beheaded
Charles six hundred and threescore and six days: and I said, Lord, shall I
take them to be litteral days, as fivescore to and hundred and so seven of
them to make a week as we call it? and my God said, you shall take them to be
litteral days, and so count them from the day that Charles was beheaded: for
that is and shall be the time of their power: and before these six hundred and
sixty and six come to an end, the Parliament shall be consumed and destroyed
and brought to nothing: and I the Lord of host that has revealed this vision
to thee, will surely bring it to pass; and that thou may know that it is I
the Lord of host that have revealed this to thee, and that this is truth, I
will presently shake thee in a strange manner more then ever I did at once, as
a token to satisfy thee that these shall come to pass: and as soon as the
voice which spoke these words ceased, I fell a shaking, and was so shook that
I made the bed I lay in tatter, and was lifted up as if some body had took me
up, and threw me down again, which one that lay with me can tell; for I told
him before I shook, I had received words that I should be shaken, which proved
true, and I am satisfied in my self, that that which I now write, will (to the
terror of Great men, and to the amasement of all sorts) prove very true, and
that it is the pleasure of the Lord of host to bring to nothing all earthly
powers, that the Lord may be all and in all: and who shall hinder him from
doing his pleasure, for he will work and who can let?

And the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying, what see thou now? and
lo, I beheld a house by a great mountain, and there came one and removed this
house and set it upon that great mountain as was by it; and I saw men and women
come from East, West, North and South to this house: and I said, Lord, whose
house is this? and my God and Father said, it is my house, and the Sion spoken
of in Scripture; and as you see it carried by one and set upon the top of a
great mountain: it shows that I the Lord of host have removed sorrow away
from Sion by my own power; and this mountain that you see the house set upon,
is but the fulfilling of the Sciptures, that the Lords house shall be set above
all mountains: for this mountain which you see is set an, is the powers of the
world; and by its being set on it, shows that it is above them: above great
mountains, which are great men as have had the power, but now have not; and
the mountain being under it, it shows that great men have not power over Sion
as they have had, but are rather Sions footstool, and so bend to the soles of
Gods feet in Sion: and I said, Lord, is this house Sion, and the place that thy
sons and daughters shall come out of all Notions to? and the Lord said, this is
Sion, or it does represent Sion; and by people coming to it out of all
Countries; it shows, that I the Lord of host, have people in all Countries: and
this house does only show, by standing in a place as you see it does, the
place that my sons and daughters shall make merry in: and where they meet
together, if two or three of them, they shall be Sion; and they shall come to
Sion with everlasting joy upon their heads; and sorrow shall fly away; for
their going to Sion with joy and rejoicing, and their singing in the height of
Sion, and making music as they go to Sion, is not their going to one place to
worship, but they are glorying and rejoicing in me, because those that formerly
were their enemies, are now cut down, so that they may speak of me without any
fear; for a Law shall go forth of Sion, which Sion is my Church, and the Law is
my self that they shall declare and speak abroad: for all the enemies as
Antichrist and the beast, and the Whore, and forms and governments, and rules
of men, being destroyed: there shall be now no other law then what shall come
forth of Sion: I will now appear to be teacher, and Law, and rules, and
worships, and all in all: and this Sion are my Church, or sons and daughters
unto whom I have made forth my self; and appeared now by manifesting my self
unto them, that I dwell in them, and am a Law in them: and unto this Sion shall
people say, come let us go up to the house of the Lord, and he will teach us
his ways: and the God of grace will be our teacher and instructor; and when he
teaches us, we shall have no need of men to teach us: for he will write his Law
in our hearts and in our inward parts, and we shall sin no more: and I said,
Lord, shall there be no Law or forms to walk by as has been formerly? And the
Lord said, there shall be no other law but I my self will be all the Law: and
if any offend me, I my self will terrify him and not man: for I will be a
terror to them that know not me, and a joy to them that know me: and when I
have thus set my house upon the top of all mountains: then shall war cease: and
then shall stony hearts be taken out of men, and instead of them they shall
have hearts of flesh: and so I will says the Lord, make men to beat their
swords into Plousheers, and their spears into pruning hooks; and the nation
shall not learn War any more: for when I have taken the power from great men,
and likewise their self interest: that so he that labored all the day and he
that labored but one hour in the vinyard, had both wages alike: so it shall be
that they that have strived for honor and greatness and have laid up baggs of
Gold and Silver, for five, or two, or twenty, or thirty, forty years together,
shall have no more then he that has not laid up any thing at all, or else has
laid up but a very little but in one year: and whereas he that had wrought in
the heat of the day, did murmur and thought it harsh that he should have no
more then he that works but one hour: the Lord of the vinyard told him, it
was his own he might choose whether he would give any thing or no: and what I do
give thee I do it out of mine own free will: for all is mine says the Lord of
hosts, all the beasts of the field, and all the riches of the world is mine,
and not thine; and though I have lent thee them: and thou having not made a
right use of them, I take them from thee and give them to thy fellow creatures
for their use as well as thine, for when thou hadest these things as I have now
taken from thee, thou madst them but instruments of cruelty to thy fellow
creatures: and so did not use this world as if thou used it not, but used this
world as if thou should never part from it: but I have taken these things
from thee that thou should use this world as if thou used it not: for the
fashion of this world passes away, and all things shall now become new: and
these your Idols, of gold and silver, I will be such a terror to you, that if
you do not throw them away, ye shall be consumed in my wrath. Now I arise to
shake terribly the earth, and I will do this my act my strange act: as to make
the low and poor equal with the rich, that they may every one sit under his own
vine and none make him afraid: but all enjoying the fruits of the earth and so
no longer to work for others, or others to have the benefit of their labors:
but every man shall now enjoy the fruits of his own labor: and if any be
servants it shall be those that know not me, says the Lord of hosts. Thus will
I stain the pride and glory of man, and will bring down the haughtiness of
menand will lay low the mountains, and will exalt the valleys, and then both
oppressors and oppressions shall cease: that the creation may be restored from
bondage: and this is the time of the restitution of all things, whom the
heavens must retain: but the time being now come that the heavens cannot retain
me any longer: therefore I come for to restore all things and the creature man
from slavery and bondage, into the liberty of my sons: that they may now no
longer be in subjection to their fellow creatures; but shall now see themselves
to be equal with them: and the fat swine, to be but men whose breath is in
their nostrils: that I may appear to be all and in all: that so universal
freedom may be in your streets, and nothing but peace within your borders; that
righteousness may now cover the earth, and the emnity of all creatures be taken
away: that the ground may now be freed from the curse; and the earth bring
forth her increase, that I alone may be and none besides me, says the Lord of
Hosts, who is the life of all creatures.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of Man behold,
behold, and lo, I looked and there appeared Chariots in Heaven running up and
down, and I told them, and there were seven of them, and one that led them
about and was before them, cried with a loud voice to them that were in the
Chariots, come let us go down and destroy the earth, before this year be at an
end: and I beheld that he that said so, drew his sword and gave it to a man;
and said: go thou and do the work of the Lord, and I will be with thee, and
thou shall prosper.

And I said Lord, what means these Charriots, there being seven of them? and
the Lord said, the Charriots set forth those whom I have appointed to do my
work; and there being seven of them, shows a perfect and complete number that
shall accomplish and do all my pleasure: and one being before: shows that I,
the Lord of host, have stirred them up and will lead them on and be with them:
and as thou see them in heaven; it shows, that I have retained them in my
favor: and one with them, it shows that I have been kept in heaven, until the
time of the restitution of all things, or I have not made my name known: and
whereas he cried come let us go down and destroy the earth before this year is
at an end: it shows the time of restitution is now at hand that I the Lord of
host, will recover my wool and flax, my glory and honor; and I thus
appearing; earthly powers, which robbed me, must be destroyed: and I said,
Lord, by earthly powers do you mean the Parliament? and by the year, do you
mean, a year as we call it, as from Jan. to January? and the Lord said, by the
earth, is meant the Parliament which shall be destroyed: and as he said, before
the year is at an end: is meant that the Parliament shall be destroyed and
brought to nothing before January next; and so the year, to be a year as you
account years: and some of them I will bring into me, to be in my favor, and
others shall be devoured in my wroth: for I will make a short work on the
earth: and as thou saw one that drew his sword being before them, he does
represent me, and as he gave his sword away to that man that stood by him, and
said, take this sword and do my work. It shows that I have made choice of a
man to lead my Instruments on to do all my pleasure: and whereas he gave him
the sword and bid him prosper: so I will, by my own power in you and by you,
effect my strange work: and I said, Lord, what man is this whom thou have given
thy sword to? and the Lord said, it is him whom I have chosen and stirred up to
do my work, as I have allreadie decleared to you: and the set time or the
Longest time of the being of the Parliament is but six hundred threescore and
six days as I have shown to thee already,

And the Lord within me that has shown me these things, told me that for the
truth of what I had seen and had revealed, as that the Parliament should be
brought to nothing in such a short time, he the Lord of host within me when he
revealed it to me and commanded me to write it, and told me, as soon I had done
writing of it, I should be taken in a shaking fit: which proved very true: and
it came upon me as soon as I had done writing of it, before I could speak to
them as was with me, or before I could rise from the stool I sat on; in which
fit of shaking, I was by a power taken off the stool and lifted up; though one
did strive to hold me down: whereby I see it is the Lords time to confound all
things besides himself; that he may have the glory of all, and he only be
honored: unto which I say amen, amen.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: behold, behold, what
see thou now? and lo! I beheld a bush about seven foot high all on fire: and
I said, Lord, what means this bush to be of a flame and not to consume? and
the Lord said, by this bush, is set forth my people, and by the fire, is set
sorth I the Lord of host; and as the bush was all on fire, so will I be a fire
to my Church; as the bush was not consumed, but rather more fresher, so will I
burn away the dross and filthiness of my Church, and make them more pure then
ever they were; and as the bush stood still: so will I by my burning away their
filth, make them (the Church) stand still and wait upon me, and so make them
leave of running after any outward teacher or outward means by which they have
received some comforts, as from streams: but will make them to come unto me,
the fountain where they shall have their filland be satisfied: and as I did in
old time appear to Moses my servant in a burning bush, so have I appeared to
thee now in a burning bush: and as I sent Moses to Pharaoh to tell him I will
have my people out of the Land, and so Redeem them from their bondage and
slaverie, so my time is now at hand that I will Redeem my sons and daughters
from their heavy Taskmasters, as the powers of this world: but as Pharaoh was
so envious against my people as to gather an army to follow them for to destroy
them: ye read that instead of destroying my people, they were all drowned in
the red Sea: even so all those that will not grant my sons and daughters
freedom and liberty as to enjoy the fruits of the earth, that they may
glorify me: shall have their hearts hardened to war against them: but as I
appeared for Moses and the children of Israel and gave them deliverance, So
will I now appear against all those that appear against me the Lord of host, or
against my people: and will destroy them and consume them that they may never
be more: for I have spoken and it shall surely come to Pass; for I will do all
my pleasure says the Lord of host. And again the word of the Lord came unto
me, saying, behold this man and see what he does: and lo, I beheld a man in
gay clothes: and he had a bag in his hand; and he put his other hand and
took all the money that was in it and threw it about so long as any was in it:
and thus shall all Misers in time throw away their money that they have horded
up and bring it (their gold and silver) out of their chests, and baggs out of
their places where they have laid them, says the Lord of host, for I will make
them do it: that they that have gathered much may have none over: and they that
have gathered little may have no lack: says the mighty God of Jacob.

And presently after this: I saw the appearance of a man: his raiment was of
all colors like a rainbow, and it came down to his feet: and I looked and
could see no seem upon it, for it was without seem, and he had on his head a
Crown of gold, and in his right hand a Scepter, and I saw him coming to me, and
I cried out, in the name of the Lord of host come not to me: but he came to
me, and told me, that he was Jesus Christ; the mighty Angel of the Lord of
host; and that he must come into me: and then he would declare unto me things
that must shortly come to pass: for now the Lord of host had done speaking to
the outward ears and appearing to the fleshly eyes: and will deal inwardly;
both appear and speak to the spiritual eyes, and he entered into me which made
me tremble and quake: and then I heard a voice within me, saying, harken to
this noise that I will make, and I harkned: and lo it thundered, and I said
Lord, what is the meaning of this, and the Lord said: these are the seven
thunders that uttered their voices to John; and he would have writ the meaning
of them and I commanded him that he should not, because the meaning of them
would have made my servants not to search so much into this Revelations which
were written by John? but now I will declare them unto thee: these seven
thunders show a perfection, or a completing of my determination. Which I have
set; before I will begin to take the powers from the earth, and the last of
these thunders or all in one shall take effect according to my determination
(as I showed it to my servant John) in the year one thousand six hundred and
fifty, but I would not have him write it: though I have now commanded thee to
write it; and that I will begin my work in this year, as it was showed to John
in this Island of England: and I will bring to nothing the Parliament: but will
stir up their hearts and the wicked to join with them against Fairfax, that
so I may destroy them whom I have appointed for the slaughter, and so to be a
terror and a dread to the others; and will make them be quiet.

But presently after this the word of the Lord came again unto me, saying,
behold, this that I present to thee: and I looked and lo, a tree that had on
it twelve sorts of fruits, and the Lord said, the fruit of this tree is for the
healing of the Nations: and I said, Lord, what does this tree represent? And my
eternal God within me said, it does represent me the Lord of hosts; I am the
tree and only that which can cure the Nations; and the fruits of me or of my
work which I am now a doing;

Is First, to destroy earthly powers and so to bring down their strength.

Secondly, I will make those that have drawn their swords to make war (if they
be not destroyed) beat their swords into plowsheers, and their spears into
pruning hooks.

Thirdly, I will be a terror to those that have opposed me, that they shall be
afraid of me; and instead of gathering themselves together as they have done:
they shall hide themselves in holes of the rocks.

Fourthly, I will destroy self-interest, that so there may be no striving for
riches.

Fifthly, I will destroy ambition, that there shall be no striving for honor.

Sixthly, I will take away the pride of the heart, that there shall be none
that shall think themselves better then the rest.

Seventhly, I will take from man that presumption, as to think to have one or
two men to wait upon him.

Eighthly, I will make those that have riches, give them to them that have none.

Ninthly, I will make every man to be at peace one with the other.

Tenthly, I will make all my sons and daughters, to be of one heart and mind.

Eleventhly, I will take away the curse of the earth, that with a very little
labor it shall bring forth its fruits.

And Twelfthly, I will make that which one has, to be another, that so the
naked may be clothed, and the hungry fed: and if any have any thing better
then others, it shall be my sons and daughters, for I will make all work in one
way or other a little, for to keep themselves out of want, says I the Lord of
hosts; for I will take the curse from off the earth, that the earth may be
fruitful; and I will take the enmity from all creatures, that they may be at
peace with each other: and I will make them to be fruitful and multiply that
they may be strong to work and bring forth thousands and ten thousands, and so
will make working a pleasure and rejoicing, that I may be glorified and have
the honor, says the Lord of hosts.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, behold, and lo,
I looked and there appeared a river running up and down on the earth: And I
said, Lord, what earth is this, and river that runs up and down thus? And my
God said, this is your body, and the bodies of my sons and daughters, which the
earth sets forth; and the river is the river of life mentioned in the
Revelations; and this life is the pouring forth of my spirit upon this earth of
men and women; and as you saw the living waters run about, it is that living
waters, which are the fullness or flowings forth of my self in such a clear
discovery and manifestation, as to overpower the earth man, with my glory as
it is written, he that believes on me, says God, out of his belly shall flow
forth rivers of living waters: which water of life proceeds from the throne of
God; that is after my bright appearing, and filling my sons and daughters with
my fullness, from them shall flow forth the water of life; that is, a discovery
of me, or making me known to others, that I am the Alpha and Omega, that I am
all and in all; that I will now take the power into my own hands, and will be
glorified: for my people are my throne, and the place where I dwell, says the
Lord of hosts; and as there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father,
Word, and the holy Ghost, and these three are one: the Word is the Father, and
the holy Ghost is the Father, and so I bear witness to them that have but a
small discovery of me; that is they living in some light, and so have some
knowledge of me, they are said to be witnesses to his soul, even the Father,
holy Ghost and Word, which is all but I the Lord of hosts; witnessing to them
that I make forth my self unto them that they are mine: and the three that bear
record in earth, the Spirit, Water, and Blood, and all agree in one; the Spirit
is the Lord, and the Water, the water of life mentioned, to proceed from the
throne; and the Blood, is the Blood of I the Lord of hosts; and so all these
three that witness in the earth, which is the bodies of men and women, to whom
I have made forth my self, is I the Lord of hosts, witnessing that I am theirs,
and so sealing them up to be mine; and those whom I have, and will make the
water of life to run from them: that is my self so to overpower them, that I
may appear to be all and in all, and so will I have the glory, says the Lord
of hosts; for the time is now at hand these Scriptures shall be fulfilled, and
there shall be no more curse; there shall not be any wicked flesh or sin that
shall hinder my servants from the enjoyment of me, says I the Lord of hosts,
but the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it: There shall be no power
to rule and domineer in my City where I rule, which City is my sons and
daughters, but I will be all in them, and they shall see my face, and my name
shall be in their foreheads: I will speak in them and manifest my glory in
them, which shall be as a mark on their foreheads, that they are the seed which
I the Lord of hosts have blessed; and there shall be no night there: they shall
have no need of a candle, neither the light of the Sun; that is, my sons and
daughters shall have no need of any outward administrations, ordinances, or
ways of worships which they have had, but my river of life (running in them,
that is my self dwelling in them) shall give them life and make them to reign
over sin, hell, and death, and all enemies; so they shall reign with me for
ever, says the Lord of hosts.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, behold, that
which I will now show thee; and lo, I beheld one with a vail over his face so
that none could see his beauty, but only some glimmering light of him: and I
said, Lord, who does this set forth that his face has a vail over it, that his
beauty cannot be seen? And my eternal God, said, this sets forth me the eternal
King of Glory, who have hid my glory and beauty from the children of men, and
also from them who have been my dearest servants; that they have seen but very
little of my beauty and also I have been silent and have not made out my self
in any full measure or discovery of my self as yet: but as you saw him throw
away his vail, and did behold him in his beauty: so will I now make out my self
in the fullness of my self to my sons and daughters that they may now see and
behold my beauty and the glory of me, that they may no longer go a whoring
after other Gods: but that I the King of glory might have them come running to
me to be taught by me, the Lord of hosts, who am the King of glory.

And again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, behold, and observe, and
I will show thee that which shall suddenly come to pass: and ^o, I looked and
there appeared a man with a sword in his hand ready drawn; saying, I am now
come to cut down that time may be no longer: I have a long time been silent,
but I am now risen like a man of war, and will cut down and devour at once.
And I beheld: and presently he fell to cutting off the heads of men that were
together: and then he said, I will not only cut off the heads, but I will cut
up the root too; that there may not be left root nor branch. And I said, Lord,
who does this man represent? and my God said, it represents me the Lord of host
who am now risen to cut down and destroy all my enemies: I have along time bin
silent, but I will no longer be so: for my time is now come that I may make a
short work: and I said, Lord, what does time mean as he said, it should be no
longer? and the Lord said, by time is meant the set time of my determination
which is now in this year 1650. but the meaning of time shall be no longer,
and time, times, and dividing of times, in Daniel, and the forty and two months
spoken of, are now in this year 50. a beginning to be accomplished in this
Land, to the cutting down of the Parliament and all powers besides my self in
this Land, as was showed thee by the cutting off of heads with my sword: and as
he said he will cut down the roots too; and he thrust the sword as he had in
his hand into the earth, and did cut off the roots, and said, he will neither
leave root nor branch, but I will cut off the Parliament and all the powers
here in England first, and they shall never rise more on the earth: the roots
being cut up, it shows the Parliament who are a power chosen by earthly men,
shall in this year be cut down, and there shall never be any more power; but I
will be the power that shall rule here, says the Lord of Host: And after I had
writ this, I heard a voice within me, saying, I will shake thee that thou may
know it shall come to pass, and that I have commanded thee to write and print
this says the Lord of host, who will be all and in all: and I was presently
taken with shaking, so that I was not able to hold my self still.

And the word of my God came again, saying, Behold, and I will show thee those
things that shall come to pass, and lo, there appeared to me a field of Corn,
and Reapers, with their sickles ready to reap it down; and presently, I heard
a voice say, the harvest is ripe, cut it down: And I said, Lord, what does his
field hold forth? and the Lord said, the Parliament and all earthly powers: and
the harvest, shows the time appointed that they are now ripe for the slaughter:
for thrust in the cickle the harvest is ripe: this harvest sets forth that I
had a set time for earthly powers to continue before I would destroy them: but
the harvest is now ripe, in this year 1650. Therefore as you saw these reapers
cut down the wheat, and made the others stand bowing and bending; they
represent my instruments being seven; shows they are a perfect number, which I
have chosen in this year, now the time of the harvest being come: that they
shall cut down and destroy all powers whom I have appointed for the slaughter,
and make the rest stand bowing to me in my sons and daughters, who am the
mighty God of Jacob.

And the Lord spoke again unto me, saying: behold, behold, and lo: I beheld a
beast with one horn push down men and kept them under, and some he killed of
them. And I said Lord, what does this beast mean? This beast is the powers
(says the Lord) as I have already told thee: the men are my Saints, which he
has pushed down and kept under, as the men that did appear firm against
oppression and cruelty: and as he the beast killed some: so have the Powers
killed some as Locker and Thomson; but as you saw some ancient men come
together, the ancient men, are they that are mentioned in Daniel, that are
called the ancient of days: which is only a set time for this beast to push
down the Saints and to keep them under; which time is now at an end in this
year one thousand six hundred and fifty: and these ancient men all in white,
are my servants, that judge this beast to burned; or I appearing in them, to
cause them to give judgment against this beast; and in giving judgment against
him, you saw one cut off his head and burning his body; which does show that
the ancient of days is now come, and that my set time for him to have power is
at an end; therefore I the Lord of host will now arise and destroy the powers
and bring them to nothing before the year one thousand six hundred and fifty
one, and burn them, that no other power besides my self may be.

And the word of the most high God came unto me, saying, behold, behold, and
lo, I beheld, and there appeared one like a man, and also there was a picture
of a man whose head was gold, breast silver, thighs brass, and feet, part iron
and part clay, and I beheld till the man break in pieces the Image and stamped
it under his feet: and I said Lord who does this man set forth? and the Lord
said it sets forth I the Lord of hosts: and this Image sets forth all powers,
as the Pope, and the Emperors, and Kings, and Parliaments, and as the man
brake in pieces the Image: so will I the Lord of hosts, break in pieces all the
powers and bring them to nothing, for the time is now come that I will cut the
stone out of the mountain, which stone is my instrument which I have chosen to
cut down and break in pieces all other mountains, the instrument which I have
chosen and cut out of this mountain (which shall be broken to pieces) is
Fairfax, and those whom I shall stir up to be with him: and the mountain is
this power that is now on foot in the land, which shall be destroyed; for I the
Lord of hosts, have purposed it, and it shall come to pass.

Having received those things and written them down; about two days after I
also received a command to go to London and put them in Print, for they must
shortly come to pass; and I also with this command received this motto, that I
should have no rest until that I did get them printed; but that I might know
that the Lord of hosts, by whom all creatures are made, has now commanded me,
and has appeared to me and that they shall come to pass, I shall be
exceedingly terrified; at which present I had some thing (which was told me it
was bread of life) thrust as I thought into my mouth, which was told me should
be bitter in my belly; and in truth I had a bitter fit of shaking and
trembling, and in my belly an extraordinary working, so that I have had but
little rest: but as I saw the appearance of a man which told me that he was now
come to tell me what I should do; and as he had a sword in his hand, so me
thought I saw the same appearance terrifying me, and telling me I shall have no
rest until I do it: which through abundance of trouble and sorrow of mind; as
I have now for two days under-gone) the third night I had some music which
was very pleasant: and afterward the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,
behold, and there appeared a company of women dancing and singing; I said, Lord
what does these mean to dance and sing thus? And did also throw away their
money: and my God told me, that as I saw them sing and dance and throw away
their money; so before the first of January next shall all my sons and
daughters sing and rejoice, for joy, and throw away their money, as you saw
them throw away theirs, and so shall it be in that time that men shall use the
world as if they use it not: and I said, Lord, shall it be before the
Parliament be destroyed? and the Lord said, the Parliament shall be destroyed
first. And I said, Lord, shall there be no power, and so no law? and my God
said, there shall be no power besides my self, so no other law: but I will be a
power and a law to keep the wicked under; and if any have any power, it shall
be my sons and daughters; for they shall have of the best, and shall reign as
Kings: but not as to usurp any authority over the rest: but I will make the
rest come bowing and bending to them, and be afraid of me the Lord of host in
them, and so will make men to care for nothing but for things that are
necessary; as for riches, they shall not strive after it: and then I said,
Lord, the men will be idle if they may have it for fetching it, as clothes and
victuals, and other necessaries: but the Lord said, that he would make all men
work as to provide things necessary for them: but I will take the curse of
their labors away; and then their labors shall he pleasanter to them then
ever they have been: but as for drunkards and such as have wasted my creatures,
in vain, There shall no longer be any such: but I will be such a terror to the
wicked that they shall be afraid of me; and shall howl for sorrow and grief,
when my sons shall sing and rejoice for joy; and I said, Lord, is this all
their torment as they shall have? and my God, said, will not this be torment
enough to be cast out of my love and favor, and so to lie under my wrath, I
plaguing of them for their wickedness, and making them servants to my sons
and daughters; yea, they shall think it happy to do any thing for them: but I
said, Lord, it is said, that in the last day the wicked shall receive this
sentence, go you cursed into everlasting fire; and the Lord said, that this
fire is his wrath, which the wicked shall be thrown under, and he will be as
fire in their bones which shall burn them: and I said, Lord, is there no hell
for them to be thrown in? and my God said, all the hell is, they shall be cast
out of my love and favor, and so in stead of enjoying me they shall be
terrified by me; which hell shall be here on earth, for when my sons and
daughters shall sing and rejoice, they shall howl and weep for sorrow: and I
said, Lord, it is said, that thou will separate the sheep from the Goats; and
set one on the right hand and the other on the left hand, and that in the world
to come: And the Lord said, I will make a separation, and such a separation as
is spoken of; and that I will now set the one, of my sons and daughters on my
right hand, which is my love and favor to them: and the other; to wit the
wicked, shall be on my left hand: that is under my wrath: and I said Lord,
what is become of the wicked that have ceased: if there be no hell nor no other
life? and the Lord said, their bodies are returned to earth from whence they
came, and so shall ever be, and never be more: but their spirits as soon as
they go out of their bodies being not made of the four Elements as fire, water,
earth and air; neither is it the soul, which is their life: for I the Lord is
their life and soul: and so soon as I draw my self, which is the soul out of
the body, the body returns to the earth and there it continues: but the soul,
which is the life of the body, which life is my own invisible being returns to
its center, as the body does to his, and there remains; which center I the
Lord of host am: and so the soul which is the life cannot suffer any torment
after it is out of the body: but returns to me to be at rest with me: but the
spirit, and the soul being two distinct, the spirit of a man, it is that is and
shall be tormented. When the body shall rest and the soul be also at rest: I
mean the body of him that is deceased, when his spirit (which is his
conscience, that is compounded of reason, wisdom and knowledge, and so
proceeds from man) and is called the spirit of a man: shall be tormented for
ever, and that in a body, though it be not in the same body; for this spirit
which is compounded of reason, wisdom, and knowledge, is that which exalts and
sets it self against God; and so is the utter enemy to God; it being some thing
which proceeds from flesh, and proceeds out of man, and yet it is not flesh nor
man: and as soon as it comes out of one man where I the God of gods do not
rule, it goes into another wicked man, and there acts the same things which it
did in the first; and so as Cain killed Abel, the same spirit is in wicked men,
killing the Saints: which spirit of man being all that shall be tormented, I
suffer it to embody it self in man, until it becomes a legion of Devils; and
there they remain in man, until I by my spirit cast them out: or till I
withdraw my self, and so let the body go from whence it comes: and so the
Devil which my Son Christ cast out of the man, which man was tormented by it,
it being in him (for so long as it was in him it did keep him from enjoying me)
and so did torment him; is the spirits of wicked men transfused into one, and
so rules in a man: and as it spoke and desired Christ to let it go into the
herd of swine, it shows, that it was not able to a bide in that place were I
would not have him tarry: neither can it go into any, but to those that I give
it a commission to go into, and as it chose to go into swine; the swine sets
forth wicked men: so that the Devil that was cast forth and went into the herd
of swine, went into wicked men: and as the swine ran into the Sea and were
drowned; so those into whom I do suffer the spirit of a wicked man to go into
and remain and not cast it out, that man is tormented by that spirit and
drowned in a Sea of misery. But as the spirit cried out, art thou come to
torment me before my time? it shows, that a spirit is not capable of torment
out of a body, but in a body: which bodies shall now be, that the spirits of
all wicked men shall be tormented in, and they shall for ever as one Devil and
his Angels, be burning in my wrath; that is, those wicked men that remain,
shall be the places wherein all the spirits of wicked men, and their spirits
shall be tormented day and night; that is in bodies, wherein nothing but
wickedness dwells: so that all might be tormented and destroyed, but I the Lord
of host: and I said Lord, there are some things in likeness of hens, or dogs,
or any any thing else, that can speak: and my God said that these are the
spirits of wicked men: whom I can make in any shape, and can give them power to
speak to other wicked men, or their spirits in them: which spirit works in
the children of disobedience, in this form and shape: and so these spirits are
witches so called: because I suffer them in whom they remain to have power,
and so to bewitch them, that they come not to the knowledge of me: that is
those in whom this power of darkness rules, are so overpowred with darkness,
that they become fit subjects or bodies for me to execute my wrath upon them:
which bodies being sensible of me the Lord, and of the glory, and happiness of
my sons and daughters, shall gnaw their tongues for pain, even in this world:
so that the resurrection in Scripture mentioned is not a resurrection of the
body out of the earth: but a resurrection of the the body from darkness to
light, and from the wrath of me, to the love and favor of me. For says
Christ, I am the resurrection and the life: so that the resurrection and life
is Christ: that is so to be raised from the body of death and sin as to be
anointed with the spirit of God: and so to become new being dead before, and
now to be alive, and ever to be with God. Free from apprehending God to be
angry with us: but always feeling his divine power ruling in us and causing of
us to see and look upon him as one that is well pleased with us.

FINIS.

