The Kings Majesty's PROPOSITIONS TO THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in
PARLIAMENT; CONCERNING His Majesty's coming to White Hall, and giving His
Royal assent for settling of the Presbyteriall Government, within the Kingdom
of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Also, His Majesty's Desires, concerning the Liturgy of the Church of England,
and Episcopacie.

Published by Authority.

Febr. 22. Printed, Anno Dom. 1647.

Another MESSAGE FROM HOLMBY.
Most honored Sir.
HAving long expected the arrival of his Majesty, whose Royal person, is now
come near us, I cannot choose, but give you a salutation of my real affection,
both in respect of the great favor, which (formerly) you were pleased to
vouchsafe unto me, and likewise (in part) to answer your expectation, in things
of high concernment, and the whole Kingdoms Object.

Sir, Since the coming of the Kings Majesty to Holmby, there has been a great
dispute between his Majesty, and the English Divines, strong Arguments were
held by the King, in defense of the Liturgy and Episcopal Government; but many
gallant Reasons were propounded to his Majesty, (for convincing of his
conscience, and clearing of his Judgment) by that Reverend Divine, Mr. Stephen
Marshal; giving many learned and strong Reasons, in defense of the Government,
now established within the Kingdom of England, by the Authority of both houses
of Parliament: But (as yet) the business lies in dispense, and his Majesty
has further declared, that he cannot give his Royal assent, for the
confirming and enacting of the Presbyteriall Government; until such time, as he
has conferred with some of his own Chaplains, about the same, his Conscience
being tender (in every respect) for the preservation of the Protestant
Religion; And to that end, has sent a Letter to both houses of Parliament,
signifying his Majesty's gracious will and pleasure therein; wherein be
propounds, several Propositions, concerning his Desires in Religion. viz.

1, That they would be pleased, to grant, that a competent number of his
Majesty's Episcopal Divines might be sent down to Holmby, for the exercise of
his Majesty's Conscience, and clearing of his judgment, concerning the present
differences in Religion.

2. That his Majesty desires the honorable houses of Parliament, that they
will be pleased to condescend, to these his Desires, and grant, that any two
of the Episcopal Divines, which he has formerly mentioned, may be sent to
Holmby.

3. His Majesty conceives this to be the best and likelyest means of giving
him satisfaction; without which, he supposes, the distractions of the Church
of England, cannot be settled.

Thus, according to your expectation, I have briefly given you the substance of
His Majesty's Propositions to both houses of Parliament.

In the next place, I shall endeavor to satisfy your desires, concerning the
manner of his Majesty's entertainment at Holmby, and his welcomming into that
County, by the Gentry of Northamptonshire, which I will briefly intimate, as
follows:

There were great triumph at Northampton upon Tuesday last, when the tidings
were, brought, that his Majesty were near Holmby, the Bells rang, and the
great Guns went of, insomuch, that a gallant echo made its appeal at Holmby,
and the sound thereof did much rejoice his Majesty's heart; who little thought,
that the joy of his subjects would have been so great at the arrival of his
Royal person.

Multitudes of people resorted to welcome his Majesty, the Road from Harborow
to Holmby being adorned with thousands, and thousands of spectators, crying
with a loud voice (God bless your Majesty) the King smiling upon them, passed
along cheerfully, saying, he hoped this Journey would prove a prosperous
voyage, both to him and his Posterity.

Many hundreds of the Gentry of Northhamptonshire, me this Majesty two miles on
this side Harborow, and accompanied his Majesty to Holmby.

The bells rang in every town that his May. passed through, which annexed a
double joy to his Royal heart, causing many a smile from his Princely
countenance.

At his arrival at Holmby, there was a gallant guard appointed for his Majesty
to pass by, who entered in at the great Court Gate, being accompanied by the
Commissioners of both Kingdoms, who deport themselves with much gallantry,
performing the trust reposed in them faithfully, and their obedience to their
Liege-Soveraign most loyally. He entered the house in great triumph, and in a
most sumptuous manner, taking some delight in conferring with the Commissioners
about some points concerning the Directory; they leave no means unassayed,
that may any ways prove effectual, for the persuading and gayning of his
Majesty's Royal assent, to sign the Propositions, and take the Covenant;
which we hope, will, ere long prove effectual, desiring to hear that tryumphant
sound, and comfortable echo, of the uniting both of Prince and Subject, that
so peace and truth may flourish within his Majesty's Dominions.

His Majesty is very pleasant and cheerful, only he desires to come to, or
near the City of London. But he has gallant quarrers, and excellent
accommodation, there being plenty of provisions, both for his Majesty, and his
attendants. Sir, no more at present, but that I subscribe my self,

Yours, to his power. W. FURNACE.
Holmby-house, Feb, 19.

