Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Letter or Summons sent to Sir JOHN BERKLEY For the
surrender of the City of Exeter.

With his Answer, and the transaction of the Treaty, and the Names of the
Commissioners on both sides.

As also The Summons sent into NEWARK, and their Answer.

With the routing of 900. Oxford Horse at Faringdon: 500 Horse, prisoners, and
Arms taken by the Abbington Forces.

Also other news from Oxford, and taking of Portland Castle by Captain BATTEN.

Printed by the several original Papers, and published according to Order of
Parliament.

Imprinted at London for Matthew Walbancke 6 April 1646.

The Copy of a Letter from Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Quarters.
Sir;
BEfore our departure from Oakhampton the Lords day, March 29. the General (at
the request ^f the Inhabitants) gave order for the slighting of some
Barricadoes, which the Enemy had made about the Town, to prevent all
inconveniences hereafter; That day the Army marched from Oakhampton to
Crediton; and had a Rendezvouze near Bowbridge.

Monday March 30. we stayed at Crediton, had intelligence of the Enemies
resolutions in Barnstable, to quit the Town and betake themselves to the great
Fort and Castle, which probably before this time is effected: And the speech
is, That upon the coming of Colonel Blake with his Regiment from Dunster,
about two days since, they left the Town, only some few for a Guard, which
our men beat off, killed seven, with the loss of four; the Skirmish is
certain, but whether our men are in possession I cannot yet assure you, we
having as yet received no Letters thereof. It is generally believed that Sir
Allen Apsley is willing to surrender the Town, Fort and Castle, but that his
desperate Brother swears he will cut him to pieces if he offer to surrender
the Castle.

Tuesday, March 31. The General marched to Crediton, in the way had a
Rendezvouze, near Newtusyres, and afterward the General, Lieutenant,
General, with other Field Officers, rode round about the City of Exceter,
within Musket shot, and the rest of the Army, Horse and Foot, drew up upon an
Hill near the City, in the sight thereof: The Guards and several Garrisons
round about the City, were drawn forth in a complete manner, and still as the
General passed by, gave a loud shout and a Volley, that so the Enemy in the
City might take notice thereof; notwithstanding which, they discharged not one
Piece of Ordnance at the Generals Company, but one or two from the Castle at
the Horse and Foot on the H^ll, which makes us believe they have inclination
to surrender, in regard, as they confess themselves, they have notice of Sir
Jacob Ashleyes defeat, and so their hopes of relief are quite frustrate. The
General sent in the enclosed Summons yesterday by a Trumpeter, to which we
expect an Answer this day: The Enemy in the worning before the General came,
drew forth 500. Horse and Foot in a bravadoe, made a flourish, but our men
drawing toward them, they retreated; some of our men passing over the River Ex
in a Boat, wherein was some store of Gunpowder, one of them with his lighted
Match (unadvisedly) went to fill his Bandaleers, set fire to the Powder, blew
up himself (who died presently) and the rest were miserably hurt, being about
seven or eight in all. The last night we came to Columb John House; Master
Vragge is not yet returned from the Convoy which was to bring the Lord Hoptons
Forces to Charde. With my respects to all our friends, I rest

Columb John, April 1646. in the morning. Yours to command* W. C.
POSTSCRIPT.
THe Army is yet quartered about Bradmuch, Sitonton, Columpton, and the
Villages adjacent; since the writing hereof, (the Messenger yet staying) Sir
John Berkleyes Trumpeter came out of Exceter with an Answer to yesterdaies
Summons, expressing his willingness to a Treaty, desiring it might begin
Friday next, and sent the names of term Gentlemen he desired to be
Commissioners, (whose names are enclosed) to which his Excellency returned this
enclosed Answer, with the names of his Commissioners.



The Copy of a Letter or Summons sent to the Governor of Exceter by Sir Thomas
Fairfax.
Sir;
BEing returned with my Army from the West, where God in his wisdom saw it
good to bestow a dry and bloodlesse Victory upon me, to the great peace and
quiet of these parts; and conceiving it my duty likewise to endeavor the good
of this County, which by the occasion of your Garrison is necessarily
obstructed, I thought fit once more to send you a Summons to deliver up to me
the City of Exceter, with the Castle, Forts, Arms, Ammunition and Magazine,
belonging to the the same; believing that by this time you are satisfied of the
relief you expected from the Princes Army, and may equally be of all relief to
come from any other place, if your Intelligence and knowledge were the same
with ours: There is nothing more induces me hereunto then an unfaigned zeal
toward any further bloodshed, and as much as in me lies, to preserve that City
which has already suffered deeply in these unnatural distractions, from
further or greater misery. Though I shall not boast of my numbers or strength,
yet I must needs tell you, that I doubt not but the same power which has
formerly made difficult things easy, will answer this, and will acquit me from
being accounted the occasion of those inconveniences and miseries which
necessarily will ensue upon your refusal. Sir, I shall expect your speedy and
positive Answer herein, and rest

March 31. 1646. Your Servant T. Fairfax.


Sir John Berkeleys Answer.
SIR,
upon your Summons I called this day a Counsel of War, where after some debate
it was determined to treat with you, or with whom you should appoint, and to
conclude upon just and honorable terms; and to that purpose I desire a safe
Conduct for the persons to repair to your head Quarters with their servants on
Friday morning, and to return at their pleasure. I remain. Your servant.

April 1. 1646. Io. Berkley.

Those first named by Sir John Berkely were:
Sir Hen. Berkely. Mr. William Ashburnham. Sir George Carry. Mr. John Were. Col.
Godilphin. Cap. Fitz-Garret. Mr. Robert Walker. Mr. Thomas Knight. Mr. Tho.
Kendall. Mr. Tho. Forde.



The Generals Reply to Sir John Berkely.
SIR,
I have received yours, whereby I understand that in pursuance of my demand in
my Summons you have determined to treat with me by Commissioners, and in order
to that have sent a List of ten Gentlemen which you desire for Commissioners on
your behalf, of which although there is none in particular that I take
exceptions unto; yet because I desire to carry on the business with clearness
and expedition, which by so great a number cannot so well be effected, I
thought fit to propound unto you the number of six, that being as many as
conveniently can be used in a business of this nature; upon your consent
hereunto, and answer, I shall according to your desire send you a safe Conduct
for a proportionable number of Commissioners, and in the mean time shall rest,
your Servant

April 1. 1646. T. Fairfax.
I agree the time to begin on Friday next according to your desire, the place
Poultimore house: I have sent a List of the Commissioners on my part.

The names of the Commissioners.
Lieut. General Hamond. Col. Sir Fardresse Valleri. Col. Lambert. Col. Harley.
Col. Fry. Comissary Stane.



SIR,
this night the General has written to Commissary Genesis Ireton (who is by this
time with the Convoy about Chard) that in regard (since the defeat given to
Ashly) those broken forces do in small parcels steal into Oxford, which
probably may not only enable that Garrison to range abroad in the county, but
endanger our Horse, and disturb the Siege of Banbury, he should therefore
advance with three of those Regiments of Horse, and the Dragoones now with him
toward Oxford, and that he take care for the prevention of the escape of any
of the disbanded Officers or Soldiers to the Enemy, which it is probable they
will endeavor to do. It is likewise referred to the Commissary Generals
consideration, if he think fit to make use of Col. Cooks Horse, for the more
full accomplishment of those ends, in respect he will have with him Major
General Massies Regiment, his own Colonel Fitz Ianises, and Sir Francis Drakes
Regiment, which may be spared, and to desire him to send the Liev. Genesis
Regiment into these parts, in regard his Major is in Cornwall, and if he think
fit to have Sir Robert Pyes in their room; that and the Dragoones remaining
here shall be sent unto him, and the General himself with a party of Foot
will ere long march that way.

April the 1. 1646. at night. Your Servant. W. C.


A Letter from the Leaguer before Newark.
SIR,
I have sent you here enclosed the several Copies of the Summons to Newark, and
Bellassis answer; wherein you may see how he complements with us, but we shall
not do so with them if they be not of more flexible temper, which we doubt not
but to mould them in; we gain upon them every day, and doubt not but very
suddenly to be Masters of the place, either by having it surrendered, or
forced; the former we most desire, but doubt not to effect the latter if
constrained; for which we make all preparations, and have gained much
forwardness in the works: by the next I doubt not, but you will hear of
something done, active or passive.

Balderton the 1. of April, 1646.

The Summons sent into NEWARKE.
WE, the Committee of both Kingdoms, being sent and Authorized, to use our
best endeavors for the Town and Garrison of Newarke do hereby, in the name
of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and for the use of the King and
Parliament, demand of you, that you forthwith Surrender the same into their
Hands. It is the pious care of the Parliament to prevent the effusion of
Christian blood, the wasting of the Countries, and the destruction of Towns;
we shall esteem our selves happy in being instruments to avert those miseries;
and shall therefore grant to you, the Gentlemen, with you, and the Town;
honorable and fair conditions, which if you shall now neglect, and will let
nothing but experimental sufferings declare unto you your unavoydable ruin;
you are to give an account to God, to this present age and to posterity, for
all the blood that shall from henceforth be shed, for wasting your Native and
Neighbouring-Counties, and destruction of so considerable a place. You may not,
nor can any (in reason) expect, and most assuredly, on the faith of honest men,
you shall not hereafter observe from us such terms as we are now willing to
afford you. We sent no Summons until you, and all with you, might see we
were able by force to obtain what we may rather defend by Treaty. The
Parliament have at present 16000 horse and foot before your Town, Soldiers of
experience united, and in health and courage: This is no ways mentioned, as if
we trusted in the Arm of flesh; (God the Lord of hosts has manifested that
we fight his battles) but to show you the vast expense which will be
occasioned by the continuance of this Siege, for which your estates must
answer, and that your holding out may no further tempt the Almighty. And
though you should not regard, your own ruin, though some others should be of
that your opinion; shall yet that wealthy Town be sucked, and others perish
with you that see their own misery, and would avoid it? A prudent man, a
Soldier cannot live or dye, in reputation or peace of spirit, to maintain a
place not so long tenable, as till it can be relieved, of which you cannot have
the least hopes. Flatter not your selves, relief is not to be had; Chester was
nearer succors, and considerable Armies for them in the West, and in Wales,
now scarce seen what remains of either: was not that strong City of most
great importance? were they not very often promised? did not all assurance to
be relived come to them? they had none, that place is surrendered. Your wealth,
if you rightly consider in what state you are, promoves your sudden and certain
destructions. You are prepared in some things for defense; you know (and we
know) you are not for some other. Consider these things seriously, and you
cannot out through them, see your ruin to be inevitable if you do not avoid
it, by attempting what is now offered. We will expect your answer on Monday
next, by seven of the clock in the forenoon at Balderton.

Balderton, 2^ March, 1646. For the Governor of the Town and Garrison of
Newark the Gentlemen there, and the Major, Aldermen, and Burgesses of that
Town. Signed in the name, and by the Warrant of the Committee of both
Kingdoms. Rutland Lothdam.

A Copy of the Governor of Newarks Answer.
HAving received a Paper, subscribed by the Committee of both Kingdoms,
directed as to a Committee-Governour, by putting the Gentlemen and Corporation
in equal balance with me (though the joying us together was the intention to
divide us) I shall in answer thereof, desire you to reflect upon the Kings
Letter of the 23 of March, sent to the two Houses of Parliament, which I
received from your own Quarters, wherein a full compliance with all their
desires, upon the most gracious conditions that ever Prince propounded: he
offers to disband his Forces, and to dismantle his Garrisons; to what end then
do you demand that of the stewards, whereof the Lord and Master maks a
volentary tender? I conceive it my duty to trace his commands, not to outstrip
rhem; so that though honor and conscience would permit the delivery, yet
cruelty would retard it, least his Majesty's act of Grace be frustrated by my
overhasty speed. I shall wait the arguments wherewith you endeavor to win
my consent, I am neither to be stroked into Apostasy, by the mention of fair
Conditions in a unjustly motion, nor to be frighted into dishonor by your
ruing division upon the fate of Chester, for as I do not measure my allegiance
by my intrest to the former, so I deserved that poverty of spirit, as by
resemblance of Chester to suffer by example, I can be loyal without that
Copy, and I hope this Garrison shall never be the transcript of their
calamity, you may do well to use your fortune modestly, and think not that God
Almighty does applaud your Cause by reason of your victories, and that he has
not a blessing in store for ours, whereas you urge the expense of the siege,
and the pressures of the supporting your charge, since occasioned by your
selves, I am not concerned in it, yet in order to their ease, if you will grant
a Pass to some Ge^tlemen to go to the King, and return, I may then know his
Majesty's pleasure, whether according to his Letter he will wind up the
business in general, or leave me to steer mine own course, then I shall
know what to determine; otherwise, I desire you to take notice, that when I
received my Commission for the government of this place, I annexed my self as
a labell to my trust.

J. BELASSYSE.
Newark, 31 March, 1646.
To the Commit of both Kingdoms.
A letter from an Officer at Abingdon.
SIR.
LAst night we drew out, and this morning fell into the Enemies Quarters at
Faringdon, where we routed the whole Body of the Kings Horse, and took about
300 Horse and Prisoners, diverse Officers, with others that we took on Sunday,
and at other times this week, and some that have come in, will amount to 500
Horse, Prisoners, and Arms, and the Enemy so routed and dispersed, that of 900
Horse none dare appear in sight, they in Oxford are so distracted hereat, that
they know not what to do; we here that Portland Castle is surrendered to
Captain Battaime, there were some 80 men it, who are gone home, Ordnance,
Arms, and Ammunition there were good store: I hope now the Wars are near an
end, so prays your Servent

Abingdon, this April the 3. 1646. J. T.

FINIS.

