Four True and Considerable POSITIONS for the sitting MEMBERS, the New Court
of Justice, and New Judges, Sheriffs, Officers, Lawyers, Justices, and others
to Ruminate upon.
1THat the whole House of Commons in no age had any Power, Right or Lawful
Authority to make any Valid or binding Act or Ordinance of Parliament; or to
inpose any Tax, Oath, Forfaiture, on capital punishment upon any person or
freeman of this Realm, without the Lords or Kings concurrent assents: much
less then can a small remnant only of the Members of that house do it,
sitting under an armed force (which nulls and vacates all their Votes and
proceedings, as the Ordinance of 20. August 1647. declares) whilst most of
their fellow members are forcibly detained and driven thence, as Master St.
John prooves in his Speech concerning Ship-mony. p. 33. and in his Argument
concerning the Earl of Straffords attainder, p, 70, 71. 76, 77, 78. and Sr.
Edward Cook in his 4 Instit. chapter 1.

2 That the few Members now sitting in, and the House of Commons being no Court
of Justice of it self, and having no power to hear and determine any civil
or criminal causes, nor to give an oath in any case whatsoever, cannot by the
laws and statutes of the realm, nor by any pretext of authority whatsoever,
erect any new Court of Justice, nor give power or authority to any new Judges,
Justices or Commissioners to arraigne, try, condemn or execute any subject of
meanest quality, for any real or pretended crime whatsoever; much less their
own Sovereign Lord the King, or any Peers of this Realm; who ought to be
tried by their Peers, and by the Law of the Land alone, and not o^herwise. And
that the condemning and executing the King, or any Peer or other Subject by
pretext of such an illegal authority, is no less then High Treason and
wilful murder, both in the members, the Commissioners, Judges or Justices
giving and executing sentence of death in any such arbitrary and lawless void
Court, or by virtue of any such void and illegal Commissions.

3 That the House of Commons and members now sitting, have no power, nor
authority to make or alter the great Seal of England, or grant any Commissions
to any Commissioners, Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, or any other.
That all the commissions granted by them, under their New, or any other Seal,
are merely void and illegal; and all the new writs and proceedings in Law or
Equity, before any Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, or other Officers made by them,
merely void in Law to all intents, and coram non judice.

4 That the denial of the Kings title to the Crown, and plotting the means to
deprive him of it, or to set it upon another head, is High Treason, within the
statute of 25. E. 3. ch, 2. And that the endeavoring to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of the Realm of England (by King, Lords, and
Commons) and to introduce a tyrannical or arbitrary G^vernment against law, is
High Treason at the common law (especially in Judges and Lawyers) not taken
away by any statute. Both which Mr. St. JOHN in his Argument at law, concerning
the Bill of attainder of high treason of Thomas Earl of Strafford, published
By Order of the Commons House. Anno 1641. p. 8. 14 to 33. and 64, to 78. And in
his Speech, at a conferrence of both houses of Parliament, concerning shipmony
Anno 1640. has proved very fully by many reasons and presidents, and Cook in
his 7 Report f 10 11 12; and 3 Institutes ch 1. That the commons now sitting,
in making a New Great Seal, without the Kings image or style, in granting new
illegal commissions to Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, and other
Officers in the name of Custodes Angliae in the general, in omitting and
altering the Kings name, style and title in writs, process, inditements, and
proceedings at the common law, and thereby endeavoring to dis-inherit the
Prince, (now lawful King by and since his Fathers bloody murder,) and to
alter and subvert the fundamental laws and government of the realm, by such
commissions and proceedings, and by the power of an Army to enforce them; and
the Judges, Justices, Sheriffs and other Officers who accept of such
commissions, and all those (especially Lawyers) who volentarily assist,
consent, and submit to such commissions and alterations by such usurped
illegal authority, and the commissioners sitting in the new courts of Justice
are most really guilty of both these high Whereupon six Judges refused to accept
any New Commissions, or to act as Judges,
Treasons (in which there are no accessories) and less excusable then
Strafford or Canterbury; whom some of these new Judges and sitting Members
impeached and prosecuted to death, for those very Treasons themselves now act,
in a more apparent and higher degree then they, and (in respect of their
Oaths, Covenant, callings, and places) are more obliged to maintain the Kings
title, the fundamental laws and government, the rights and liberties of the
Kingdom and Parliament then they; and therefore (if they persevere therein)
may justly expect the self same capital punishments they underwent, if not
far worse: especially since they attempt to reduce the antientest Kingdom of
all Christendom, into the puniest and most contemptible state in all the
World; and thereby to render us the most infamous, perfidious, and
dishonorable Nation under Heaven, both to the present and all succeeding ages:
which must needs make the contrivers and abetters thereof, the most detestable
traitors and public enemies to their King and native Country, that ever this
realm brought forth in any age Repent therefore of these your treasons, and
amend your lives, if you expect the least hope of pardon from God or Man: And
expiate all your former high misdemeanors; by engageing all your power and
endeavors to settle all things in Church and State, according to your
primitive engagements; instead of accumulating one sin and Treason to
another, which will prove your certain ruin in conclusion, not your safety.

FINIS

