THE FORM OF THE COMMISSION FOR A NEW VALUATION.

4. August, 1649.

EDINBURGH, Printed by EVAN TYLER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, 1649.

4. August, 1649.
THE Estates of Parliament taking unto their consideration the many complaints
and grievances within the Kingdom, against the unequality that has been in
bearing public burdens, and being desirous that all the shires of the
Kingdom, and every person within the same, may bear an equal proportion,
according to the true worth of their Estates. Therefore they do nominate and
appoint for the Sheriffdom of or either of them conveeners for the first
meeting, and which Commissioners for the said Shire shall meet on Thursday the
thirtieth of August next, or sooner, as the Conveeners shall appoint, and
choose a Clerk and other members of Court necessary, and the Estates of
Parliament do Ordain the said conveeners, or either of them to take the
solemn oaths of the said Commissioners, that they shall use their best
endeavors for a right and true information of the whole rents of the said
Shire, and that they shall proceed faithfully and impartially in prosecuting
their Commission, and the Instructions relating thereunto: With power to the
said Commissioners, or the major part of them as a Quorum, and if the major
part exceed five, five to be a Quorum, to rectify and improve to the best
avail the former valuations; And for that effect, to direct our summonds
against such person or persons within the Shire, as they shall think fit to
compeir before them, and to declare upon Oath the true Rents of any Paroch or
place of the Shire, according to their knowledge, and in case any shall contemn
or refuse to compeir and depone, to imprison or fine them into a pecuniall
sum, not exceeding one hundred pounds, and to take all such further
Information, as they shall find necessary for getting knowledge of the true
worth of the whole rents within the said Shire, as well casual rent of all
sort, as constant rent in stock and teinds, and the true value and worth of
every land and rent set in tak or Rentall, and what the true yearly worth
thereof is, by and attour the rentalled, or tak-duty thereof payable to the
Master, (respect being had to the gressum or entresse, if any was paid by the
Taksmen or Rentaller at his entry; And of all Few, or Tak-duties payable to
any person, his Majesty's duties excepted) and of al other casualities paiable
for stock, or teynd according to the table annexed. All which they are to value
exactly, by converting the victual into money, according to the respective
prices set down in the said table, and by converting casualities into money, at
the just rates which they give for the time in that Shire where the said
casualities and commodities are valued. Withpower likewise to the said
Commissioners, or the major part of them as the Quorum, and if the major part
exceed five, five to be the Quorum, to take all former valuations into
consideration, and rectify the same where they have been unjustly valued, and
where they find that any person has been undervalued, to augment the valuation
of their rent to the true worth, and add the same to the total of the rent of
the Shire, and thereby bring the whole rent of the Shire to the full value, and
also reduce the whole Shire to an equality and proportion among themselves. And
in the forming their report, the said Commissioners shall set down a Roll for
every Paroch, which in the first place shall contain the money rent of the
Paroch. Secondly, the quantity of the victual paid in the Paroch, and the
several species thereof; and what measure, and how much the same does amount
unto, being converted into money. Thirdly, the kind of casualities or customs
paid for stock, or teynd, the number thereof, and the price of each casuality
distinctly, and how much the same does extend to in whole, being converted into
money. Fourthly, the casual rent according to the table, and what it does
extend to. Fifthly, the Few and Tak-duties, (his Majesty's excepted) and what
the same does extend to. Sixthly, the mortified rent, and how paid in money,
victual, or casuality, and what the same does amount to. Sevently, the duties
paid to his Majesty's Exchequer, and the sum thereof; And after the Roll of
all the Paroches are set down, then they are to cast up the total of the
valuation of the whole Shire, by and attour the mortified rent and duties paid
to the Exchequer, which are to be summed in an Article a part, and in a third
Article they are to set down the total of their former valuation, which is
herewith delivered to the Commissioners for ilk Shire, under the Clerk
Registers hand, and lastly they are to set down what this present valuation to
be made, does exceed the former valuation; In all which, the form and pattern
subjoyned, is to be observed. And the said Commissioners are to subscrive the
Report formed as aforesaid, and to deliver the same to the Clerk Register or
his Deputes, betwixt and the first of November next to come, and in case any
Shire shall fail therein, or shall bring in a Report not agreeable to the Rules
and Directions now prescrived, they shall pay the half more of maintenance
then they are appointed to pay by the present Act of Mainteance, ay and while
they produce and report their valuations in manner before prescrived, and if
the failie shall be on the part of the valuers, or any of them; the rest of the
Shire shall have their releif off them. And further, the Comissioners are to
send one from each Shire with the said valuations against the first of November.
which Commissioners shall meet with the Committee of Estates for comparing the
said valuations, and perfecting the same, that they may be a Rule for the
future in imposing all public burdens according to an equal proportion, and
if there be any difference which cannot be settled by the Committee of Estates,
and the said Commissioners, that it be referred to the Parliament: And it is
hereby declared, that no respect shall be had to any valuation to be reported,
that shall be under the total of the former valuation, which is herewith
delivered to the Commissioners of ilk Shire by the Clerk Register, Extractum.

The total of the former valuation of this Shire is, --

Form of the Report to be made by each Shire.
THe Roll of the Rent of the She^iffdome of A. made and set down by the
Commissioners under subscriving, appointed for that effect by Act of the
Estates of Parliament of this Kingdom, holden at Edinburgh the fourth of
August, 1649. which Commissioners having met on the day of August last, and
having judicially given their oaths to use their best endeavors for a right
and true Information of the Rents of the whole Shire, and to proceed faithfully
and impartially in prosecuting their Commission, and Instructions relating
thereunto, which they have carefully performed in every point; After serious
and mature deliberation, they have made and set down the Roll following in
Articles according to the number of the several Parishes within the said
Shire, and have cast up the sums according to the direction of the Parliament.

I. A. B. For himself and remanent Heretor, Fewers, Life-Renters, proper
Wood-setters, and others within the Parish, of their money rent, does extend to.

II. Paid of wheat in the said Parish Chalders, and Bolls according to the
measure of Lynlithgow prick met, which being converted into money at the price
of for every Boll extends to Of Bear in the said Parish Chalders and Bolls
according to the measure of Lynlithgow prick met, which being converted into
money, at the price of for every Boll extends to

Of Meal in the said Parish, etc. as before concerning the Wheat and Beer.

Of Rye in the said Parish, etc.

Of Pease and Beans in the said Parish, etc.

Of Oats in the said Parish, etc.

The Sum of the price of the whole victual, and money in each Parish, to be
set down at length, and also in figures on the Margin, on the right hand. III.
Paid of casualities or customs in the said Parish.

IV. Paid in casual Rent, for Coal.

For Salt.

For Fishings.

V. Paid in Few, and Tak-duties to other persons beside the duties payable to
his Majesty.

VI. Paid in mortified Rent to the Minister and Schoolmaster, to the College
or hospital of in money. Paid in victual and here to set down the several
species, the quantity and price, and the casualities, if any be with the kind,
number and price, and to convert the same into money, as before Sum of the
mortified Rent of the Parish.

VII. Paid to his Majesty's Exchequer in money Paid in victual or
casualities, which being converted into money, extends to

The total of the present valuation of this Shire, beside the mortified Rent,
and what is paid to the Exchequer extends to

The mortified Rent, and what is paid to the Exchequer, extends to

The total of the former valuation of this Shire, extends to

The present valuation does exceed the former.

Table of the prices of Victual in the Respective Shires of the Kingdom
THe Wheat generally throughout the Kingdom, of Lynlithgow measure, price of
the Boll thereof. 6. l. 16. s. 8. Beer, Rye, Pease, of Lynlithgow measure in
the Shire of Lithgow, Edinburgh, and Haddington. 5. l. 6. s. 8. Oats and Meal
there, of the measure foresaid. 4. l. 13. s. 4. Beer, Pease, and Rye, of the
foresaid measure, in Teviodail, Merse, Selkirk, and Lauderdail. 5. l. Oats and
Meal there. 4. l. 6. s. 8. And because Teviodail has five furlots in their
Boll, therefore the fourth part of five pound ought to be added to the price of
their Bowl, which is, 6. l. 6. s. In Peibles, Lanerk, Air, Renfrew, Dumbartane,
and Bute, the Beer, Pease, and Rye, of the foresaid measure of Lynlithgow. 4.
l. 13. s. 4. And if the measure be more that it be augmented, conform, Meal,
and Oats there. 4. l. 10. s. Wigtoun, and Kirkcudbright, Beer, and Meal. 4. l.
16. s. 8. Of Lithgow measure in respect there single Bowl, is a Boll and a
half of Lithgow measure, and there double Boll, is three Bowls of Lithgow
measure, and therefore to be priced accordingly. Dumfreis, Annandail, Beer and
Meal of Lithgow measure, 4. l. 16. s. 8 And because their Boll is two Bolls and
a half of Lithgow measure, the same is to be priced accordingly. In Fyfe,
Angus, Pearth, Clakmannan, Stirling, Kinros, Beer, Rye, and Pease, o^ Lithgow
measure. 4. l. 16. s. 8. Meal, and Oats there of the said measure; except
Angus. 4. l. 5. s. And Angus Meal, 4. l. 10. s. Kincairdine, Elgine, Nairn,
Innernes, Ross, Cromarty, Sutherland, Beer, Pease, and Rye, of Lithgow measure.
4. l. 10. s. Meal and Oats there, except Kincairdine. 4. l. 10. s. Meal in
Kincairdine, of the measure foresaid. 4. l. 6. s. 8. Aberdeen and Bamff, Beer
of the measure foresaid. 4. l. 6. s. 8. Meal and Oats there, of the measure
foresaid. 4. l. Orkney and Carthnes Beer, 3. l. 10. s. Meal there of Lithgow
measure. 4. l.
By Casualities and Customs mentioned in the third Article of the form of the
Report, is to be understood Marts, Wedders, Lambs, Swine, Butter, Cheese, Oil,
Linen cloth, Salmond, and Wool.

By Casual Rent mentioned in the fourth Article, is to be understood, Salt,
Coal, Salmond-fishing, and other fishings in proprrtio, whereby there is
yearly benefit.

FINIS.

