The FORM of a CERTIFICATE To be used by Justices of Peace and others, through
England and Wales, in the case of Popish Recusants refusing to take the Oath of
Abjuration, and neglecting to appear before the Justices to take the said OATH.
We C. The County of Buckingham.
B. and G. F. Justices of the Peace for the County of Buckingham, whose Names
are subscribed, In pursuance of His Highness the Lord Protector His
Proclamation, published the Twenty sixth day of April, One thousand six hundred
fifty five, Entitled, A Proclamation declaring His Highness Pleasure and
Command, for putting in Execution the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances made
against Jesuits and Priests, and for the speedy Conviction of Popish Recusants
according to an Ordinance of Parliament in the said Proclamation mentioned, do
certify to the Right Honorable the Lord Chief Baron, and the rest of the
Barons of His said Highness Court of Exchequer, That the several and respective
persons, whose Names, places of Abode, and Titles or Additions are particularly
mentioned in a certain Schedule Or Schedules.
hereunto annexed, attested under our Hands and Seals, being suspected to be
Popishly affected, were therefore Required to attend Us at (...) in the said
County of Bucks, and upon their Appearance before Us the (...) day of (...) in
the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty five; We the said Justices
did then and there tender unto them and every of them, the Oath of Abjuration
in the said Ordinance and Proclamation mentioned, in these words following
(that is to say;)

I A. B. do Abjure and Renounce the Popes Supremacy and Authority over the
Catholic Church in general, and over my self in particular; And I do believe
that there is not any Transubstantiation in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
or in the Elements of Bread and Wine after Consecration thereof, by any person
whatsoever; And I do also believe that there is not any Purgatory, and that the
Consecrated Host, Crucifixes or Images ought not to be worshipped, neither
that any worship is due unto any of them; And I do also believe that Salvation
cannot be merited by Works, and all Doctrines in affirmation of the said
points, I do abjure and renounce, without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation,
or Secret Evasion whatsoever, taking the words by me spoken, according to the
common and usual meaning of them: So help me God.

Which said Oath of Abjuration being so tendered, they and every of them did
refuse to take.

And We the aforesaid Justices further cer^ifie to the said Lord Chief Baron,
and the rest of the Barons above mentioned, That the several persons whose
names, places of abode, and Titles or Additions are likewise specified in
another Schedule Or Schedules.
hereunto annexed, being also suspected to be Popishly affected; and they and
every of them being legally required (as by Oath made thereof before Us
appears) to attend Us the aforesaid Justices at (...) in the said County of
Bucks, the (...) day of (...) in the Year of our Lord One thousand six hundred
fifty five, then and there to take the said Oath of Abjuration, in the said
Ordinance and Proclamation mentioned, but they and every of them did refuse and
neglect to attend Us accordingly. In witness whereof We the aforesaid Justices
have hereunto set our Hands and Seals this (...) day of (...) in the Year of
our Lord One thousand six hundred fifty and five.

The Title of the Schedule to be
Bucks.
THe names of the several persons suspected to be Popishly affected, who upon
Summons appeared before Us Justices of the Peace named in the Certificate,
whereto this Schedule [ or these Schedules, if there be more then one] is
annexed, and refused to take the Oath of Abjuration in the said Certificate
expressed tendered to them.

That is to say, A B. of (...) in the said County of Bucks, Esquire. Mary House
the Wife of Robert House of (...) Gent. Alice Turner of (...) Widow. Anne
Sympson of (...) Spinster.


The Title of the other Sch^^ule^.
Bucks.
THe names of the several persons suspected to be Popishly affected, who being
legally Required to appear before Us Justices of the Peace mentioned in the
Certificate, whereto this Schedule [ or Schedules] is annexed, to take the Oath
of Abjuration, in the said Certificate expressed, did neglect to attend Us
accordingly.

That is say, C. D. of (...) in the said county of Bucks, Gent. M. O. of the
same, Yeoman.




Memorandum, The Certificate and Schedules truly and fairly written, and signed
by the Justices, to be made in Parchment, and to be sent Sealed up, to the
Barons of the Exchequer, delivered upon Oath, That they are as they were
received from the hands of the Justices that sign the same.


