A LETTER From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, TO Mr. SPEAKER; CONCERNING,
The Forces of the Northern Association, and Nottinghamshire Horse joining with
the ARMY.

With their several Declarations and Representations*

ALSO, Two Petitions from the Nottinghamshire Horte; The one to both Houses of
Parliament; The other, to His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Imprinted at London, for George Whittington, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Blew Anchor in Cornehill July 19th near the Royal Exchange,
1647.

Mr. Speaker,
HAving this day received these enclosed Papers, from the Northern Forces,
under Col. Genesis Poyntz his command, with some other Papers from Col. Thornhaghs
Regiment (which is already marched up to Buckingham) wherein they express their
resolutions to associate themselves with this Army, for the more speedy and
happy effecting a true, lasting, and well-grounded Peace, to the King
Parliament, and Kingdom; and in order to that, have delayed obedience to the
command of many of their Officers, who for some reasons best known to
themselves, have refused to join with them in their just desires; and have
also, as formerly, now again petitioned me to exempt them from further
obedience to any other command, then what may conduce for the obtaining of the
just desires, and establishment of the peace of the Kingdom, as in the enclosed
Papers is more fully expressed, and further desiring to march up speedily to the
Army. All which being of so great concernment to the Kingdom, and not well
admitting delay, I thought fit to represent untoyou with speed, their several
Papers and Desires, that I might receive your pleasure concerning the things
they desire, and your commands for their present disposal; to the end, they
may be better kept in Discipline and obedience, and such disorders prevented,
as by reason of their want of Officers they may be subject to run unto; and
likewise to continue them in the North, least by their motion to the Army, they
might draw a greater concourse and burden of Soldiers Quarters upon these
parts, then they will be well able to bear, and thereby the disaffected in those
parts (during their absence) may take that advantage to make insurrections, or
any disturbance of the peace there: For the prevention whereof, and disposition
of the whole, as well in order to the peace of this Kingdom, as speedy relief
of Ireland, I shall humbly make bold to offer my opinion, that since there are
many several distinct, and (through these late distractions) disj^ynted Forces
within this Kingdom, which were sufficient, together with this Army (being
united and w^^l ^annaged) both to preserve the peace of this Kingdom, and give
present relief to Ireland (without putting this Kingdom to the charge of
raising new Forces at present for that Service) That the Parliament would
speedily put all the Forces under one and the same Command, Discipline, and
equal establishment for future pay and maitenance, which being done, it would
give much encouragement to some of the Forces that may be spared out of all the
Forces mentioned from England to go more cheerfully into Ireland; and if with
this there were some present course taken to provide for Arreares, for such
Forces as might be spared for Ireland, there might in probability be an
effectual relief sent over into Ireland before this Summer be quite spent.
All which I humbly tender to your consideration, and desire your speedy Answer,
that no time may be lost in so good and necessary a work, both for the quiet
of this Kingdom, and relief of Ireland, wherein none shall be more ready to
express their for, wardnesse, then

Redding July 16. 1647. Your most humble servant, T. FAIRFAX.

The humble Representations of the Soldiers of the Northern Association,
presented first to his Excellency Sir T. Fairfax, to be by him presented to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament.
Humbly requesting,
1. THat the Honorable Houses of Parliament would be pleased to look upon the
Representative Desires and Grievances of his Excellencies Army, as our Desires
and Grievances, which we humbly desire may be fully (not fainedly) granted and
redressed.

2. That whereas the Parliament was pleased to declare against their just
desires contained in their Representation, and proceed to disband before
redress of the Grievances, we humbly desire, That the Representations of the
aforesaid Desires, and obstinctive of the just satisfactions (their Desires and
Grievances being ours) may be brought forth to a legal trial.

3. That the illegal imprisonment of several Officers, and the endeavors
used by some to imprison others, for speaking in behalf of his Excellencies
Army, and their just dues may be repaired, and the occasioners thereof dealt
with according to their deserts.

4. That those who endeavored to render his Excellencies army odious by
aspersions, and thereby to deprive them of that honor, which they have so
dearly bought, and to incense the kingdom and soldiers against them, may be
proceeded against according to justice.

5. That such provision may be made for better supply of us for the future,
whereby we may be enabled to discharge our quarters, that so we may not for
necessary food be beholding to the Parliaments friends (who have spent their
estates in the service) whose preservation is in the things we desire, and in
whose happiness we rejoice.

A Declaration of the free consent and coherence of the Soldiers in the
Northern Association With the Army now under the Command of His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax.
WHereas there has been an express of the real and honorable intentions,
and grounds of and from the Army manifested (in most just and honest terms to
the houses of Parliament and Kingdom) clearing to every indifferent and sound
judgment the cause of their proceedings, for the Kingdom and in it their own
dues, and interessed satisfaction, we having, by Good providence, this
opportunity to show our affections no less ready, and our selves, to maintain
and confirm the lawful obtaining and keeping our right and just privileges by
themselves so declared to be: we therefore declare as in duty bound, for our
mercies received from God and the faithful service we owe to the Kingdom, to
join and associate our selves with the Southern Army, under the command of his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the speedy and happy effecting, a true,
lasting and well grounded peace, wherein may consist the pre-eminence of all
honor and welfare, both for the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and that there
may be no misapprehensions, as usually publik resolutions and resolves are
liable unto at the first, appearing in the eyes of men un-acquainted with the
business, and in the eyes of those (who being pre-possest with guilt cunningly
oppose) we further declare our selves free from any secret intentions in
reference to the proportion of any particular designs, or our own particular
interrests, but are absolutely raised and moved to a necessary compliance with
the Army to those good and infallible principes, which tends to the promotion
and protection of just lice, and the liberty of the Subject, but hitherto (by
the management of the affairs of so great importance) have appeared; and we
shall no less endeavor to defen^ with our lives and estates, the lawful
designs of those truly well-affected Soldiers then we would oppose a foreign
invasion or prevent an indirect or unwarrantable war, our warrant being the
same for either nature or law, and our Covenant binding thereunto.

We shall therefore prosecure the discovery of all persons complotting and
combining against us, that we may keep our friends and Nation free from any
inforcement injury or prejudice especially we giving to understand that we
have not any intentions to spill the blood of any man, or to wrong their
propriety of goods or entrench upon the conscience, of any, our chief care
being in this our Declaration and intention, at present and for future, to
provide for a correspondency with that army, to live or dye, rejoice or suffer
with them, as we are mutually engaged, our expectations of reward being no
other then the salving of those griveances published from that Army (with our
own) the Soldiers, honor and livelihood repaired; their service thankfully
requited, and all corrupt avthority in Courts of Indicature and Offices of the
Kingdom expunged, and all those several good Acts for the present and future
concernment, of the Kingdom established, which as they were most satisfactory
to the generality, so we desire not to require an addition of redress of any
particular men's wants or sufferings, but attend to the general business in
hand with the accomplishment of the Army, and our candid and just demands, the
justice, and sincerity whereof, we desire to vindicate as our lives.

Pontefract July 5. Colonel General Poyntz Regiment of Horse.
Robert Bradley, Nathaniel Croft.
Colonel Bethels Regiment.
George Issot. Thomas Iackson,
Colonel Copleyes Regiment.
Nicholas Baker. William Bates
Colonel Orvertons Regiment
John Bennington William Wren
Colonel Brights Regiment
John Mark Edward Field
Colonel Ponsonbyes Regiment.
Thomas Hunter Thomas Wharton
Colonel Collenwords Regiment.
Robert Shayre Thomas Shacklock
Colonel Legards Regiment.
Robert Tod. William Blanchard.


Agitating in behalf of the several and respective Regiments.
This to be subscribed by all the Officers, and Soldiers in the Regiment, etc.
Whereas the Officers and Soldiers of several Regiments of the Army, under
the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, did on the 5. of June last past, at a
general Randezvouze near Newmarket, enter into an engagement, to and with
each other, and to and with the Parliament and Kingdom, which engagement,
having been since printed and published, has now been read unto us: We the
Officers and Soldiers, under the Command of Colonel Thornehaghs, do hereby
declare our selves to enter into the same engagement, with the Army, and to and
with each other, and to and with the Parliament and Kingdom: In testimony
whereof we subscribe our hands.

Nettingham July 7. 1646. George Palmer Captain, Rich. Frank Quarterm. Edward
Kirk Quartm. Francis Sutley. John Pinerder. John Cock. William Roof. Robert
Marshall. William Royston. Robert Alfiet. Robert Hide. John Brittan. Thomas
Pond.


To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Forces raised by
Authority of Parliament.
The humble Petition of Nottinghamshire Horse, etc.
SHOWS,
THat although we the Regiment under the Command of our honored Colonel, Col.
Thornhagh, never had so much our own desires as to serve under the immediate
command of your Excellency in that your gallant and faithful Field Army; yet
having received a resolution next to the Justice of our Cause, by your
Excellencies virtuall presence in the Commissi^ns of our honored Commanders,
we may without vanity profess, That in our Orbs we have moved for the
advancing and procuring this Kingdoms peace and liberty, so cheerfully, that
we cannot doubt your Excellencies countenance and assistance, which we humbly
implore in our humble addresses to the Parliament, professing that such is our
resentment of the injuries done unto you as done unto our selves, neither will
we hope to stand, if you fall; nor fear we falling, if you stand, when nothing
is controverted, but the same for which we first engaged, and dare not recede
from, viz. The privilege of Parliament. Of Free born Subjects, and Reformation
of Church and Commonwealth; And as to the better effecting all these, the
necessary and just vindication of the too much slighted Soldiery, amongst we
your humble Petitioners, who have from the beginning of our engagements, which
bear date almost with the beginning of these wars, served the Parliament
these five years, and have not received for our service past 6.8. per week in
money, nor free quarter one week wish another; and that there is at this time
due unto this Regiment in Arreares 40000 l. and upwards, that we have not
received above one Months pay these 50 weeks; and having for our present
accommodation and maintenance no other subsistence, then what a small and
harrassed County of Charity (which is malignant) will afford in meat and drink:
A slender requital, as we conceive, for our loss of blood.

Our humble request unto your Excellency is, That you will recommend our
further addresses unto the consideration of the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, whereby we may obtain the wages of our blood, our Arreares, and
such present maintenance, as first when we engaged under their service were
promised; and yet that we may not hereby be understood, to be unconcerned in,
or disingaged from the past or future necessity of the Army in the plain and
honest prosecution of their Proposition and Desires in the late Declaration,
and that we according to our proportion of time and arreares may be satified,
as the Army shall be for their proportions.

( Subscribed George Palmer Captain, and the rest, as in the next Paper before.)

To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Nottinghamshire Horse, etc.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas we the Regiment under the command of our noble and ever honored
Col. Francis Thornhagh (a Member of the House of Commons) have for the space of
five years or thereabouts with faithfulness served the kingdom by the
Authority and Command of the Parliament against theirs and the Kingdoms
enemies, having bin according to our employment accessaries to what ever harn
bindon as to the dear purchasing of Peace and liberty to the poor (yet
freeborn) people of this Kingdom, and are notwithstanding in Arrears at the
least forty thousand pounds for that voluntary (yet conditional) service
which with the expense of some blood, we have performed, neither have we ever
received our moneys or free quarter, in a sum (if the total of all was here
remised, as might computed make every week worth 6 s unto us, since we have
borne arms our present quallity now being such as renders us unable to
subsist, or compel a livelihood by any regular way or our poor exhausted
County, neither are we assured of the wages of our blood, our just, well
deserved and often promised arrears.

We therefore humbly pray, that whatsoever shall be granted (in relation to
the soldiers and peoples good) to that faithful Army of yours, under the
Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, (who have bin alike faithful to their trust)
according to the propotion of their Arrears, and time and in the mean while,
that such pay as by the new Model was allowed to all, (but never paid to us)
may be duly deposited for our present maintenance.

And we shall pray, etc.
Subscribed as the former.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1647.


