A SOBER ANSWER To an angry EPISTLE, Directed to all the public Teachers in
this Nation, and prefixed to a Book, called (By an ANTIPHRASIS) Christ's
Innocence pleaded against the Cry of the Chief Priests. Written in have By
THOMAS SPEED, once a public Teacher himself, and since revolted from that
Calling to Merchandise, and of late grown a Merchant of Souls, trading
subtly for the QUAKERS in Bristoll. WHEREIN The Jesuiticall Equivocations and
subtle Insinuations, whereby he endeavors secretly to infuse the whole Venom
of Quaking Doctrines, into undiscerning Readers, are discovered; a Catalogue of
the true and genuine Doctrines of the Quakers is presented, and certain
Questions depending between us and them, heartily disputed, By Christopher
Fowler and Simon Ford, Ministers of the Gospel in Reding,

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Gellibrand, at the Ball in Paul's Church Yard, 1656.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Colonel WILLIAM SYDENHAM, One of his Highness
Council, and one of the Commissioners for the Exchequer, and Captain for the
Isle of WIGHT.
Right Honorable,
THe Author of the Paper we herein deal withal, having by his Apostasy to the
damnable Doctrines of the Quakers, and written Apology for them in the said
Paper, endangered diverse of our Town, and the parts adjacent, where he was
formerly in some esteem; and withal in the same Paper, formed into the model
of an Epistle directed to them, insolently challenged all the Public Teachers
of this Nation; and particularly us, who now appear against him, by sending
two of the Pamphlets to us by name; we dared not betray the Truth and Glory of
our Lord Jesus, nor the precious Souls of the People, by neglecting to publish
a timely Antidote against the Poison of such a subtle and insinuating piece,
as your Honor, if you will vouch-safe to look on it, and compare it with this
Answer, will easily discern it to be. We perceive the design of the Author,
is by false suggestions to reproach the Ministry, and by Jesuiticall
Equivocation, to sweeten the Doctrines of the Quakers to the Public
Magistrates. And upon that account, we thought it meet to present this our
necessary vindication of that, and discovery of these, to some Person in
Authority, of Honor and Conscience; that under such a shelter, we might gain
it a more facile admission to others, of those unto whom we are necessitated to
appeal. And because we can assuredly suite that Character to your self; and
withal are persuaded, that by reason of your equability of carriage to
dissenters in late times, our Adversary himself cannot reasonably quarrel at
us, for our choice of a Patron; and lastly because we have both of us in some
measure (but one of us more largely, by diverse years experience) known you a
cardial friend to a Godly Ministry, and the Doctrine which is according to
Godliness; we therefore humbly put it into your Honors hands. Sir, as to the
Cause we maintain, we need not any Creatures Patronage, nor dare we submit it
to any Creatures Umpirage; for we are assured it (mainly) concerns such
foundations of Religion, as deeply engage the honor of our Lord Jesus, and
therefore we are assured, he will not suffer them to be moved; and such as will
stand, when all Persons and Doctrines shall be judged finally, and
everlastingly according to the purport of them. But as to our candor and
integrity in the managery thereof, and the proportion of satisfaction which we
give therein, we are contented to stand to your Arbitration, wherein however we
may fare, yet it shall suffice us, that our Consciences tell us, that we have
done our endeavor to defend the Truth, and that with meekness and moderation,
beyond our Antagonists deserts, or the merits of his cause; and our experience
tells us, that you will not disdain to accept from us this small Testimony,
that we are very much,

(Right Honorable) Your Honors affectionate Servants for the Interest of
Christ our Master, Simon Ford. Christopher Fowler.


AN ANSWER TO AN EPISTLE OF THOMAS SPEED, Directed to all the Public TEACHERS
in this Nation, and prefixed to a Book of his called by an ANTIPHRASIS,
Christ's Innocence pleaded, etc.
SIR,
NOT many days since, we received each of us a Book as from you, by the hands
of a Friend of yours, living in this Town, Entitled Christ's Innocence pleaded,
etc. which although it be particularly directed to a Godly and able Minister of
the Neighborhood, yet it seems you thought fit to disperse it into these
parts, as well as over the rest of the Nation, in Print, to confirm those that
are already gained to your belief, and reduce others either to an entertainment
of, or moderation to, the principles thereof. And we must confess, that you
have acted the last part of this design with a great deal of Artifice, not
without (as we conceive) a concurrent aim of your own, to show how much credit
your wit could give to an evil cause, and how (if not amiable, yet) tolerable,
you could render an ugly face, by a decent dress.

For our parts, we are sorry you can find no better exercise for your parts,
then the maintaining of absurd Paradoxes in Civility, and blasphemous Heresies
in Religion; for so we dare call the Doctrines you undertake to shelter under
the wing of your Patronage; and make no question but that Judge, who, we are
assured, will one day make that written Law, which you refuse to own as the
rule of your lives, the ground of his proceedings upon you, and all others that
live within the sound of it, after death, will then call them so too, when all
the rhetorical vailes you put upon them, will be pulled off, and you be found,
except you repent, one of those that dawbe a rotten Sepulcher with untempered
Mortar, and cover Violence with a Mal. 2. 16.
Garment of subtle and Jesuiticall equivocation.

And indeed, that which makes us the more compassionate toward your self in
this sad delusion you are under, is the repute which you have had (till of late
days) for soundness and Orthodoxy in Doctrinals, and some kind of moderation,
beyond others of your Brethren in separation, toward those you separated from:
And this, because we fear that the influence of your Apostasy may occasion the
ruin of many others, whose former esteem of your person endangers them to
follow you blindfold into your Errors.

This, we assure you, is not the least cause (together with the preservation of
those of our own charges from the infection likely to be spread among them by
your name, and the reducement of those of them who may (we fear) call you
Father, in other respects, as well as the relation of Affinity) which induces
us to put Pen to paper in this Quarrel. Not that we intend hereby to take the
Cudgels out of the hand of that Reverend man who is more nearly concerned, and
better able to manage them then our selves; for (as to that concerns his
Papers so brokenly quoted by you) we believe his own publication of the entire
Copies (which you think fit to conceal, not without some ground of suspicion,
that you were rather willing to pick out what you could best sport your self,
and your credulous Reader withal, then to give a solid answer to his Arguments
as they come from his hand) with such animadversions, as he is sufficiently
able to make to the disingenuities of your reply, will abundantly vindicate
him, and the Truth. Only, we cannot but acquaint you, that you have mistaken
the mark very much in the arrows of bitter words, which your discourse levels
with too much virulency against that holy man. Had you dealt with one of those
sorry things in black, whose Doctrine and life are scandals to the Gospel; and
blemishes to their holy Profession, you might have promised your self an easy
belief from the Readers of your Book, to whatsoever load of reproaches, you
should have laid upon him: but the man you deal withal, is so well known for
Piety, Meekness, Humility, Heavenly-mindednesse, tenderness of conscience,
and all other Ministerial Qualifications, that you may as well persuade them
the Snow is black, as fasten those reproaches upon him with any hope of gaining
credit to your self, or your book, except amongst those who are either totally
strangers to him, or given up to so potent a prejudice against all that bear
the name of Ministers, that they can easily admit into their Creed, whatsoever
evil can be said of them. But to more sober Readers, and especially those of
the parts where he lives, you might be easily convinced (had you any principles
left to bottom a conviction upon) that the unjust imputations you every where
bespatter him withal, will render you suspected, in all the rest of your book,
for the falsehood detected in them. And we must tell you withal, that we cannot
prevail with our reasons or consciences to persuade themselves that you have
that infallible Spirit, which you pretend to dictate to you; seeing we know you
to be so grossly mistaken in the censures you spend upon him, and diverse of his
fellow laborers. Nor can we judge that language inspired by the holy spirit of
God, when we consider, that there is no Gall in that Dove, and that those holy
men of God who wrote as they were moved by the H. Ghost, tell us, that Saints
must put away all clamor and bitterness; and evil speaking, Ephesians. 4. 31.
and wrath: That the wisdom that is from above is gentle; Ja. 3. 17. Ja. 1. 16.
and that if any man bridle not his tongue, his religion is vain.

And lastly, that if you be not a better Master of Language then Michal the
Archangel, or we deserve worse usage then the Devil himself; the light in
which the Apostle Jude spoke, will tell you (but that you think him too low a
Scholar to instruct you, that have gotten through the School, wherein he was a
Disciple) that it ill becomes you to bring against your Antagonists a railing
accusation. But if that convince not you Jude 9.
and your brethren of the incivility and irreligion of your tongues and pens in
this way, we shall refer you from Michaels Dispute to Enochs Prophecy, wherein
you will find, that hard speeches will bear an Indictment at the last Assise,
as well as Verse. 14.
hard blows: And in the mean time, we hope God will hear our prayers, and
free us from the mercy of your Hands, who find what cruelty there is in the
tender mercies of your Prove. 12. 10.
Tongues

Mean while, in hope that a soft answer will turn away wrath, Pro. 15. 1.
and that we may set you a fairer Copy to write after, when you next put pen to
paper, we shall endeavor by Gods assistance, Pro. 26. 4, 5.
to answer so much of your papers, as concerns us in common with other
Ministers, without answering your passions.

And Sir, upon our first view of your Pamphlet, we cannot Sect. 1.
but tell you, that if your Title Page were calculated for the Meridian of your
Book, you mistook your self extremely: For Tituli remedia, pixides venena.
(to let pass the Title it self, wherein you abuse the glorious name of
Christ's Innocence, to patronize your own guilt) we cannot but wonder how Seneca
(an Heathen) comes to be so great in your esteem, that you that will not allow
us to quote Hierome, Augustine, Calvin, or Luther, yet think your Book Epistle
p. D.
credited by the wrested Testimony of a Pagan Philosopher prefixed thereunto.
Sect. 2.


But to let that pass, and proceed to your Epistle, which only because you
direct it to the whole body of the Ministry, we suppose our selves concerned
in. The rest of your Book, because we are assured from your Adversary that he
will speedily take it in hand; we suppose you will give us leave to be so
ingenuous as to leave to his able Pen, without interpreting it any wise to
proceed from any consciousnesse of our own weakness, that we meddle not with
it.

And here in the first place, we con you many thanks for the charitable advice
you begin withal, and assure you, that the more we think of the day and hour,
which in your entrance you mind us of, and that account we must hereafter
therein give to the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, the more are we
excited to the conscientious discharge of that office, which (however you
revile) we are sufficiently assured he will own at that day to be held by
commission from him: and the more are we encouraged against all that evil
entertainment, which (for the discharge thereof) we meet withal, from men of
corrupt minds, 2. Tim. 3. 8.
reprobate as concerning the Faith. And we hope, we shall take warning (even
from an Adversary) to walk worthy of our high and holy calling, and not wear
our Livery to the disgrace of our Master. But we are jealous, that whatever use
we may make of your counsel, you intend it to far another purpose; to wit,
rather as a slye way of casting reproach upon us, by insinuating that we stand
in need of being so advised, then out of any intention to do us good by that
advice. [I wish you were] (in your language) is no other, then [I proclaim
your are not:] Sect. 3.
And although you tell us immediately after, that you will not undertake
Epistle, page 2.
rashly to judge us, or accuse us to the world (from which crime of rash
judgment you think your self sufficiently secured by comparing our works with
our rule, the Scriptures) and then proceed (as you think cum privilegio) to
misapply Scriptures, to slander us, yet we must retort upon you that which you
give in way of advice to us, that the hour is coming, when all coverings shall
be removed, and the vailes plucked off from Ep. p. 1.
all faces; and then we doubt not but you will be found, not only a rash, but a
false accuser, and that to the world (in Print) notwithstanding that color and
covering which you hide it withal.

For do you believe in earnest, that those Prophets of whom Sect. 4.
Micah speaks, that teach for hire, and divine for money, or those Mic. 3, 11.
Mar. 23. 5, 6, 7.
whom our Savior notes, for doing their works to be seen of men, for standing
to pray in the Synagogues and the corners of the streets for loving the
uppermost rooms at Feasts, etc. are characters suiting the men of your
indignation, whom you endeavor to degrade from the esteem they have, as
Ministers of Christ, by such intimations as these? You pretend to something of
Scholarship and reason, and cannot but know, except your new light have quite
put out the old, that the Priests and Prophets that Micah speaks of were such,
as made their hire the end of their teaching and prophesying, and accordingly
accommodated their Doctrines to the corrupt humors of those, from whom they
expected their reward; a thing which a fixed maintenance, by Tithes, or
otherwise by Law established, secures our Ministers from the tentation of.

It is you, and your brethren that would make us such as you slander us to be,
by reducing us to voluntary contributions, which would be quickly detained from
us, as often as we should dare to differ from the opinions, or reprove the
Vices of our Neighbors.

And who are you, Sir, that judge our hearts, when you tell Sect. 5.
us, what we aim at, and set up as our end in teaching, which you do more then
once, and twice in your Epistle, and Book? How long have you been seated in the
Throne of the most high God, and made a Judge of the secrets of men's hearts,
that you tell us that we preach for hire, and do our works to be seen of men,
and that we love the upper-most rooms, etc. As for standing to pray in the
Synagogues, if you consult the place whence you pretend to draw that parallel
between the Pharisees and us, you will find that the action is not condemned,
but the end, to be seen of men; they neglecting in the mean time to pray in
their Mat. 6. 5.
Closets, where man could not take notice of their devotion. And so this charge
(except you will say, with some of your companions, that you know the heart)
comes under the same G. Fox see the perfect Pharisee, p. 49. and 4.
condemnation of slander with the rest.

The corners of the streets, if they be used by any persons in these days, for
religious uses, we know not who herein resemble the Pharisees, more then those
of your own Fraternity (and Sisterhood too) who, though they meddle little with
prayer, (it is to be seared) any where, yet choose the streets, and
Marketplaces to vent their pretended Declarations from God.

Your next Paragraph endeavors to fasten upon us the imputation Sect. 6.
of Persecuters, and upon your selves the character of Christian sufferers. To
which, we shall say only thus much in this place, That we adore that gracious
Providence which keeps us out of the reach of your malice; otherwise we are
assured we should not be long without that persecution which you make the badge
of true Ministers, for better Doctrines and practices, then those, which some
of yours suffer for.

In the mean while, we have our shares sufficiently in the persecution of your
tongues, and hands, as far as you can, by impoverishing us, and our Families,
by detaining our just and legal subsistence, disturbing us in the exercise of
our public worship, etc. which we suffer constantly from those of your
fellowship and communion. What further needs to be spoken to this head, as it
concerns your usage from us, will be taken up in its due place, and more
largely debated with you hereafter See Sect. 9, 10.


That we are not the Ministers of Christ, because we indent Sect. 7.
for our maintenance, where we sit down in a charge, and that we sue for the
tenth of their increase, those that own us not for their Pastors, is the sum
of your charge. To the first branch whereof, we can, diverse of us, reject it as
a mere slander: many Ministers in this Nation living upon as free a
contributionmaintenance, as any of your selves, but in a more orderly way;
Their people contribute to those Pastors that reside among them, and not to
wandering Preachers, whose faces they seldom see, and from whose standing
converse with, or inspection over them they can receive no benefit. And others
of us maintain many Lectures, either simply, or jointly, for which we receive
as little, as the Quakers themselves would wish. And as for those that either
indent for maintenance, or enter upon the maintenance already settled by Law; we
are sure they are not blameworthy, for that, to gain the repute of Ministers,
they do not prove themseles worse then Infidells, in not providing for
themselves and their Families, which the Apostles light makes a badge of one
that has denied the faith (the proper 1 Timothy 5. 8.
character of some of yours, who wander up and down to the manifest and
apparent ruin of themselves, and those that they are bound to provide for.)
Nor are we at all startled at the practice of the Apostles under an
extraordinary command, so confessed (in effect) by your selves in your own
practice, (for why else do you not travel about to declare without Purses, or
Shoes on your feet, or Staves in your hands, commands immediately subjoyning to
that of giving freely what they had Mat. 10. 8, 9, 10.
freely received, in the same place of Scripture) and appearing to be such; if
we compare Luke 22. 36. where Christ in another exigency of time allows them
to make that provision for themselves, which in the former command he forbad
them. For we are sufficiently assured, that the Apostles themselves were
maintained by the Church in which they labored, excepting only the Apostle
Paul, and his companion Barnabas, and that only Act. 20. 34 See 2 Cor. 11. 7.
v. 9. and 2 These. 3. 8, 9.
at Ephesus, Corinth, and Thessalonica, where (little to their credit too, if
we mark the tart reflections of the Apostle upon their sordidnesse) they wrought
with their hands, for special reasons assigned in the Texts themselves; yet
withal the said Apostle asserts it as an Ordinance of God (and that founded
upon reason, and Scripture too) that they that preach the Gospel should live by
the Gospel; and withal affirms his own and his brethrens power to have
claimed the same from them, which they received from other Churches. We
forbear transcribing Texts, you may find this and more, 2 These. 3. 9. and 1
Cor. 9 from verse 6. to the end of the 14. which Scripture we observe in most
of the Pamphlets published by the Adversaries of Ministers maintenance, is
passed over with deep silence; and so expect it will be by you and your
brotherhood, or answered by (the common refuge of Heretics) the decrying of
interpretations, and inferences upon Scripture. When you further urge the same
Apostles practice, against coveting other men's silver and gold, or apparel; We
have nothing to object against you, provided that you will not call requiring
that which is legally our own, a coveting that which is another: Surely no man
holds the nine parts, by firmer Law in these Nations, then the Minister claims
his tenth by: And how can it then be more covetous in a Minister to sue for
that which is his by Law, then in others to detain it from him without Law? so
that we fear the coveting other men's silver and gold will lie at yours and
your brethrens doors, and you will never be able to sweep it away.

The claiming a maintenance from those without, and exacting it of those that
never hear us, which you further object against us, as a disparagement to our
Ministerial calling, comes under the Sea Sect. 18, 19, 20, etc.
consideration of maintenance in the way of Tithes, which we refer to its
proper place, where it falls in your discourse.

That some who bear the name of Ministers (and such Sect. 8.
as we no less disown, then your self) live in darkness, swearing, etc. (the
declaiming against whom is the substance of your next Paragraph, and your fifth
proof against our Calling;) we confess and bewail, and did the anger that
dwells in you and your brethren extend to none but those, who may justly come
under that charge, we should willingly join with you in the prosecution of
them; and do it where any such come within our reach. Yea we further must
profess, we should be very glad, that some men in power among us, who are
very favorable to your party, were as zealous against them as we. We must
freely declare that those that are indeed such, have been sheltred (upon
prosecution) under the vvings of some such among us, and we verily believe it
is in their hearts to vvish us all such, that they might have some color to
strike off the neck of the whole Ministry at a blow.

But we must tell you (whilst we are not all such, and now fewer such then
formerly) that it is an injurious procedure in you, to reflect disparagement
upon a whole Profession, for the fault of some that against their wills join
themselves to them: Should all the swearing, drunken, and otherwise disorderly
companions, that frequent the Quakers Assemblies, be reckoned among them, and
all be judged by some, you would think it hard usage. We hope you will be
contented to buy by the same Bushel you sell withal.

But you are fain to come off from this charge as too gross to be generally
laid upon the whole Ministry, with [are there not a great sort of you such?]
and [are your hands all clean from this filth?] only you come in with an
after-charge against the rest in another Quaere, Viz. Among those of you that
have escaped that open pollution of drunkenness with Wine, are you not yet
intoxicated with wrath, and rage against the innocent. And you proceed,
enquiring, Whether in the Prisons and Dungeons of England, Jesus Christ does
not as truly lie bound by our instigation and procurement (to wit, in those
dear Servants of his the Quakers, who account it no robbery to be at least
equal with their Master) as he did by the procurement of Saul in Damascus? And
yet further, Whether if any poor Jeremiah came from the Lord to bear witness
against our abominations (to wit, in those abominable practices of instructing
the people against the delusions of the times, which is the greatest Antidote
against that Plague of Error and Heresy, that is dispersed over all the
Nation; and worshipping God according to the rule of his blessed word, and the
light of our own consciences) Whether there be wanting among us a Lordly
Pastor, who (in case the Magistrate be so honest, (to wit, through cowardice,
or luke-warmnesse) as to refuse) will not with his own hands put his feet in
the Stocks? To which we say, we know none of our Profession that take so
much upon them, if you do, you may do well to discover them; and we should be
well contented for their pains, to see them set there a while themselves,
till they learn to do their own business. And then you catechize, us further
in our rule (as with scorn enough you often call the Scriptures, for which we
must reckon with you at large anon.) Whether ever the true Prophets of the Lord
did persecute or imprison any that were differing from them in matters of
Religion? And Whether they be in Christ's esteem Shepherds, or Wolves, who
worry the Sheep instead of feeding them, etc? After which you spend a great
deal of rhetoric in anticipating the Judgment of Christ at the last day, as
if you were already bespoken to be Clerk of the Arraignments against that
Assise: In answer whereunto we say no more but this; Judge not, that ye be
not judged: And we make no question, that if no better evidence be brought
against us at that day, then any you yet offer, to prove those high
Criminations; that our Not-guilty will be as good a plea (though without a
distinction) as your charge of Guilty will be an Indictment without a proof.

But supposing we were (indeed) the Persecuters, the Worriers, the
Imprisoners, of those men of your right hand, provided, we were legally
commissioned thereunto (which we hope we shall never desire for our selves, nor
allow in others of our Function) yet why all distinctions should be a plea so
inconsistent with the Justice of that Court (as you intimate to us it will be)
we know not. Nay, we have a little light from (our low rule) the Scripture,
that persuades us there P. 4, 5.
may be some use of them then. For in that short description of the last
Judgment, whence you draw out a Copy of our Arraignment, not without some
aggravating expostulations (viz. Mat. 25 41, 42. etc) we find the Judge
distinguishing upon the Bench, to conclude the Offenders within the reach of
the Law; For the wicked there indicted are brought in pleading their Not
guilty, as to the neglect of relieving and visiting Christ in his own person.
To take off which plea, and clear the equity of his condemnatory sentence; he
distinguishes between himself in his person, and himself in his little ones,
or Members; and granting their plea as to the former, rejects it as to the
later. Now, surely we cannot believe that the Judge of the whole World will not
at that great and solemn day, give us the latitude he takes to himself. If he
distinguish upon the Law, he will allow us to distinguish upon the Indictment.
We know not if we be indicted for worrying the Sheep; why we may not plead the
Scripture distinction between Sheep indeed, and Wolves in Sheeps clothing; and
if we can indeed prove that we worry no other, but disguised Wolves (upon which
proof indeed we are contented to lay the whole stresse of our present, and (we
hope) future justification in this whole matter now in debate between us) we
cannot but expect the same discharge at the Bar, which we should not doubt from
humane equity, in case, being indicted for assaulting and beating a true
Subject upon Salisbury plains, we could make it appear, that we beat only a
Thief, and that upon our own necessary defense: So that indeed, all that
outrageous cry which you afterward make against the poor Presbyters for
justifying the Scribes and P. 5.
Pharisees, and the Lordly Bishops in former times (who, you persuade your
self) had the same distinction to plead, for crucifying the Lord of Glory, and
his precious Saints, and persecuting the Puritanes, etc. to wit, that they used
them thus under the notion of blasphemous Heretics and Deceivers) falls to the
ground, if we can prove those whom we are charged to persecute, such as we take
them to be. And this we doubt not to make good against you, and your brethren
in the way of Quaking, in the process of this our book, and then shall leave
the whole matter to our Lord, and yours, to judge between us at the great day
of his appearing. But then you will allow us phrase your own Indictment, as you
do very dexterously and artificially, in favor of your self and your
Generation, in the following Section of your Epistle; wherein you make your
self, and your Reader pretty sport, by drawing up a ridiculous charge against
your selves, and then set our names to it, as if we had made so great a cry (as
you mention) for so little wool, and had no matters of greater moment to
exhibit against you, then those which you will confess against your selves.
And yet we must tell you, that you were not very well advised (if you meant
wholly to clear your selves from those imputations) to confess so much as you
do in many passages of your Book, which we shall deal with anon. Mean while we
dare not let you alone to cosen the World into a good esteem of your opinions
by your ambiguous expressions, and therefore we must crave your patience, if we
come after you, and sift you, that by being first in your own cause, Pro. 18.
17.
you may not seem uprighter then indeed you are.

First, you take it ill to be charged as Blasphemers, for that Christ is the
light that enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, and that he that
follows that light (your Jo. 8. 2.
Text (by the way) says, He that follows me, and the words [that light] are
your interpretation and meaning, which (were we as peevish as those of your
way) we might reject) shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life; adding further, that that light is sufficient to teach them and guide
them to the Father: and thence ask for a close, What need then of our teachings?

We hope (seeing you stand upon your purgation) you will give us leave to ask
you a few questions upon this Article.

1. Q. What light is that with which Christ enlightens every man? It is Christ
himself (we would say, if you would give us leave for distinction sake)
personally, or is it a light infused in him? If so,

2. Q. It is the light of bare reason in a reasonable Soul, or is it the
discovery of himself by supernatural revelation?

3. Q. Whether the mere light of reason be sufficient to lead all men, Heathens
and all, to the Father savingly; or only (as the place partially quoted in
your next Article has it) to that which may be known of him, by the things
that are made, that they may be without excuse? or

4. Q. Whether if any mere Pagan live up to the natural light of his own
reason or conscience, God be bound to bestow upon him that farther light, which
is sufficient to bring him to salvation?

Q 5. If Christ be (in your sense) the light of every one that comes into the
World; why is it that Judas says Jo. 14. 23. Lord, how is it that thou will
manifest thy self to us, and not to the World?

And when you have answered (plainly and without equivocations) to these
quaeres; possibly you may retort your closing Quaere upon your selves: What
need then of our teachings, as well as the Priests?

You would feign make us believe (in your next Article) Heathens light, then
the Apostle does, Romans 1. 19. 20. which is (as you render it) That that which
may be known of God is manifest in their consciences (where again, though we
contradict it not, yet we observe you can interpret, and give your meanings
upon Scripture, though in us it be adding to the Scripture; for the Text says
no more but in them, or (as in your Margin) to them. (God having, say you
farther, revealed it to them) [shewed] says the Text, [revealed] is your
meaning, because it makes more for your own turn; so that they not having a Law
without them (interpretation again) they are a Law to themselves, etc. Romans 2.
14, 15.

Now you would insinuate, that you hold forth no more then the Scripture does
therein: Which whether you do or no, will appear by your plain and ingenuous
answer to the former Quaeres. Mean while, we desire you to take notice. 1 That
the words in the Text [That which may be known of God] implies, that there is
something of God which may not be known to Heathens, as such; which is the way
of being reconciled to him, and justified in his sight, through Christ Jesus,
and other like Gospel discoveries of him, necessary to salvation. (2.) That the
knowledge they have of him, is by the Apostle affirmed to be a light without
them, as well as within them, for God shows it to them by the things that are
made. (3.) That if the Heathens (as you say) have only a Law within them, and
none without them, we are little beholding to your principles, that would
reduce us to the condition of Heathens, by setting up a light within us to the
exclusion of a light without us. As also, (4.) That Quakers and Heathens may
shake hands, seeing both of them live by the same Law, and the same light too.

You further insinuate (Artile 3.) that in the Doctrine Sect. 14.
of perfection here below; you are falsely accused by us for blaspheming:
Whereas you say no more then our Savior himself commands, when he bids us be
perfect, as our Father in Heaven is perfect; which commands, you say, is not
given in Mat. 5. 48.
mockery, or requires an impossibility. You add, that the same Christ spoke
truth, when he bore witness of Nathaniel, that he was an Israelite in whom was
no guile: and that Paul did not Io. 1. 47.
design an impossibility when he labored to present men perfect in Christ
Jesus. And you would suggest that you affirm no more: Col. 1. 28.
We answer, whether this be all you your self hold of perfection, or no, we
will not judge. But we shall show you anon, that those of your persuasion are
not altogether so modest. It is well if your self be so, when you will please
to speak out, which we scarce believe you will do, in a charge against your
self of your own drawing up. But we hope, you will allow us to ask you a few
questions upon this Article also, seeing you stand upon your justification.

Q. 1. To what purpose is all this? Did any of your pretended Accusers ever
accuse our Savior Christ, for mockery or commanding impossibilities, in this
command of perfection? or for falsehood in his commendation of Nathaniel? or
the Apostle Paul for designing an impossibility.

2. Qu. Whether the perfection commanded by Christ, or that which is commended
in Nathaniel, or aimed at by Paul, be a perfection of degrees, and that as high
as that of God himself; or a perfection of kind, truth, or sincerity? Say not
that we coin distinctions of perfection out of our own brain. Does not the
Scripture call Job a perfect man, Job 1. 1. and yet chap. 3. gives us a sad
instance of his imperfections, and Job himself renounceth perfection in
himself, chap. 9. 20, 21. Does not the Apostle Paul himself, in one chapter,
affirms and deny himself to be perfect, Phil. 3. 12. 15. And therefore (seeing,
as we hope, you will not allow any contradictions in Scripture) there a
necessity to distinguish of different senses, wherein they affirm and deny.
And if we distinguish amiss, we wish you, or your companions would do it
better. Nay, we suppose both these sorts of perfection necessarily held forth
in the Scriptures of your own quotation. For the command of our Savior says
not, Be ye as perfect as your Father which is in Heaven, but Be ye perfect as
your Father in Heaven is perfect. [Perfect as] does not imply more then a
perfection of the same kind, which perfection we profess, a perfection
consisting in truth and sincerity of holiness, the perfection of Nathaniel [as
perfect] denotes a perfection of degrees, which (in the comparison with an
infinitely holy God) we deny to be attainable by any Creature, or to be
asserted concerning any Creature, without highest blasphemy. But a perfection
of degrees suitable to the capacity of finite Creatures, we hope for in Heaven;
and a perfection of degrees suitable to the capacity of mortal creatures, we
press toward your selves, and endeavor with Paul, to present all our hearers
unto Jesus Christ in the same at the last day.

4. About your forth Article concerning rejecting all meanings Sect. 15.
and interpretations of Scripture, we shall take a more convenient time to
reckon with you in a distinct Question subjoyned hereunto. Only we make bold to
ask you here also.

Qu. Whether [to interpret Christ's and the Apostles sayings] be not injuriously
reflected upon by you as a denial that they meant as they spoke? and whether a
man may not mean as he speaks, and yet not to be understood without
interpretation? we are so charitable to think that diverse of the Familists and
Quakers mean as they speak, and yet we cannot understand their meaning by their
speaking, in diverse odd phrases used by them, without interpretation; would you
would give us a Lexicon of them.

5. Your fifth Article, we shall speak more largely to in Sect 16.
this place. You say, that you and your Accomplices assert, that Christ did not
speak one thing and intend another, when he commanded men not to swear at all,
but to let their yea, be yea, and nay, nay: Whereas we that are (scornfully
enough) by you called Orthodox, do both swear our selves, and teach others so
to do. And you add the reason (as good a one as you please to allow us) because
otherwise we might happily go without our maintenance, for want of swearers in
Courts of Justice, against those Heretics that refuse to pay us Tithes. And in
your Margin (to give us a touch of your learning, that we may take it for an
act of self-denial in your after-declared contempt thereof, and not an act of
envious declaiming against the Grapes you cannot reach) you quote the Original
in that prohibition, (...), with this note, That it is a prohibition so
universal, that it admits of no exception. Upon which Article we first
observe two things.

1. That it was very warily done of the Founders of the Quaking Religion, who
are by many judicious men supposed to be Papists, to insert an Article in their
new Creed, to excuse them from being discovered, by refusing the Oath of
Abjuration, which they may (under the shelter of your Principles) do, and yet
pass undiscovered. Secondly we quaere,

We observe secondly, that the Quakers refusing to swear according to the
Ceremony now required in England, of kissing the Bible, and swearing by the
contents of that Book, is suitable to their Doctrine; that the Scriptures are
not our rule, and (by consequence that God will not judge us according to the
contents of the Bible; so that to call God to witness according to the
contents of that book, according to which they conceive he will not judge, were
absurd. It may be if a new form of an Oath, such as by the light within them,
were required, they might be persuaded to swear.

Qu. 1. Whether our Savior Christ spoke or intended any thing which might
clash with the express command of God elsewhere? And if not, then surely
Christ's words in this place must not be taken so unlimitedly as you say, seeing
we find a command Deuteronomy. 5. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and swear by
his name. So also Deuteronomy. 10. 20.

Qu. 2. Whether our Savior Christ forbid any part of Gods moral Worship, or
no? If not, then we are assured he forbids See Jer. 4. 2. and Is. 45. 23. which
peculiarly concerns us, as referring to Gospel times, and is therefore quoted
by the Apostle, Romans 14. 21. with such a variation of the phrase swearing, into
confessing, as plainly proves, that to swear by God is sometimes a necessary
part of our confession and acknowledgment of him.
not swearing without any exception. For we find it frequently made a part of
Gods moral Worship to swear by his name, and it is also joined in the
mentioned Scriptures with fearing and serving God.

Qu. 3. Whether our Savior Christ cut off by this command any necessary means
of deciding controversies between man and man, or confirming truth in matters
of testimony? If so, surely he would thereby have rendered his Doctrine justly
obnoxious, as being destructive to humane society: If not, we are certain he
forbids not all swearing without exception: for the Epistle to the Hebrews
tells us that an Oath of confirmation is an end of all strife, Heb. 6. 16.

Q. 4. Whether the Author in his former Article, setting forth God as a Pattern
of perfection to us, does not therein allow us in some Cases to swear? seeing
we are told, Heb. 6. 17. that God himself allows himself to swear for those
ends, for which an Oath is legally used by men, viz. for confirmation of his
word.

Q. 5. Whether without swearing upon the call of a Magistrate, all men's estates
be not as liable to prejudice, as the maintenance of the Ministry? And whether
cheating companions will not be as prone to take the same advantage against
other men, in case there was no judicial Oaths required, as it seems (by the
Authors confession) Heretics would against poor Ministers? except we must take
it for granted, that every man's yea, yea, and nay, nay, is as a sufficient
security in this case of testifying the Truth judicially, as a solemn Oath.

Q. 6. Whether Abraham did well or ill, to require an Oath of his Servant, Genesis
24. 3. Jacob of Joseph, 50. 5. Nehemiah of the Jews, Neh. 13 25. Or (if you
evade these examples, as being before Christ) whether the Apostle Paul did well
or ill to swear, Gal. 1. 20. etc.

In a word, this Doctrine of the unlawfulness of swearing in Germane
Anabaptists, a Generation of men against whom the Magistrates saw sufficient
cause to dispute with the Sword of Justice, for being public enemies to humane
Society: and it concerns you to take heed that the Magistracy of England may
never have the like provocation to follow their example against their genuine
issue, the Quakers, and other Sectaries among us.

But (least you should seem justly to charge us with swearing our selves, and
teaching others to do so, contrary to the command of Christ) we must, in the
close, let you know how we swear, and allow others to do so; and what swearing
we forbear our selves, and preach down among them, in obedience to Christ's
command: We must tell you, that being lawfully called to witness to truth upon
Oath, before a Magistrate, we shall not our selves refuse to swear, that is
(according to the form required in Law) to call God to witness that we lie
not: But in our communication, or ordinary discourse, we desire, both we and
our hearers, may keep to our yea, yea, and nay, nay, as Christ commands, and
not to swear at all, because we dare not take, or allow others to take the
name of God in vain. And this we suppose to be all that our Savior intends in
that Prohibition, that in our communication we should not swear at all. If any
one be not convinced hereof by what we have said, let him reconcile our
Saviors Prohibition, to the precepts and examples before pleaded some other
way, and

-- Phyllida solus habeto,

He shall gain the cause in this point.

Your following three Articles, viz. 6. 7, 8. are all concerning Tithes and
forced maintenance, wherein the sum and upshot of all, shows your charity to
the poor Ministry, that you would feign have them reduced to the condition of
the unjust Steward, that is, either to work, or beg. For working, we suppose
(in such a Generation, as God has now east us into) we shall not want) whilst
besides the ordinary attendance upon our charges, which the Apostle Paul
accounted a work, and a great one too, 1 These. 5. 13. Ephesians. 4. 12. and such as
none will be too forward to intrude into, that sufficiently understands the
weight of it, 2 Cor. 2. 16. The work of a Builder, a Sower, 1 Cor. 3. 10. Mar.
4. 13: 1 Cor. 3. 6. 2 Timothy 2. 6. Jo. 21. 26. Heb. 13. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 3 P. 40.
a Planter, an Husbandman, a Shepherd, a Watohman, a Soldier:) We are called
upon to answer every idle railing Paper, that you, and your companions send us.
But (seeing you account this no work) it seems you would have us work with
our hands, or beg: An hard Law, for men that have been bred in a way of humane
Learning, which elsewhere, you seem to allow some use in the World, it may
serve to tile the house, you confess, and in that place you are content it
shall stand. But surely should this Law of yours take place [that those that
have been bred to study, must have no subsistence but by handy work, or
begging] I fear the next Generation would yield few Tiles to keep the house in
repair, so that it would quickly drop through, and you, as well as others,
would not be able to lie dry in it: For who will give his Children ingenuous
Education at the Schools of Learning, and set them there to spend the flower
of their youth in acquiring humane literature; when the highest preferment they
could expect after ten or twenty years Study, would be either to work, or beg?
would not, every one conclude it better to set their Sons to some Trade or
other, in their youth, that so at the end of seven years they might be able to
get a livelihood at their fingers ends, or turn them a begging in their
Childhood, rather then maintain them twice seven years at School, and
University, to come thence to be preferred to a certain beggary, as being the
only lot of the two, like to befall them, who are utterly to learn to work,
having never been bred thereunto?

But the measure you mete unto us, is harder yet: You that will have us work,
or beg, will not allow us to carry so much as a Purse to put our Wages in, when
we have earned it, nor a Scrip to put our Alms in, when we have begged it; but
to live as the Sparrowes do, that digest one meals meat in seeking where to
get another. I suppose, should God call us to that condition either by an
extraordinary command, as Christ did his Lu. 10. 7.
Apostles in the place you quote, or by an extraordinary providence (as we
suspect in case you can compass your fifth Monarchy, it would befall us) we
should not want faith to trust him, who feeds the Sparrowes, and clothes the
Lillies; whether in a way of working, as we are able, or asking the charity of
others, when disabled: We have learned a distich of learned and honest
Musculus, which he made when the fury of the Germane Anabaptists (your
Predecessors) turned him out of his Pulpit, and maintenance, and enforced him
to weave and dig for a subsistence for himself and his Family.

Est Deus in Coelis, qui providus omnia curat,
Credentes nunquam deseruisse potest.
Which for the sake of your Brethren, who (whatsoever you are) are no great
friends to Latin, we shall english.

A God in Heaven lives, whose care extends
To all, and therefore will not fail his friends.
But we question yet further, whether you, that would require Purse, and beg
without a Scrip at your command, what security will you give us, that you will
not make us work, and beg barefoot too. For if your Text concern us, we cannot
see how we may be allowed Shoes to our feet, more then Purses and Scrips; and
then possibly we might please you better, seeing we should be more like your
good friends, the Franciscan Friars, who are the only men that we have heard
of, since our Savior sent out the Apostles upon that extraordinary errand, who
have thought themselves concerned to walk by that rule: Wherefore if you must
have Ministers of that character, you are most likely to fit your selves among
them.

For our parts, we bless God that yet provides better for us, and whilst he
continues to do so, we shall not think a profession of voluntary Monkish
poverty, our duty to undertake, seeing we dare not take Gods Gifts, and throw
them back into his face, by contemning the gracious allowance of his providence.

As for the way of our subsistence by Tithes and forced maintenance, Leviticall
Ordinance, and (as you add in your Book, where P. 13.
you again serve in this Crambo) appointed as an inheritance to the Priests
and Levites for their service in the Tabernacle and Temple: and thereupon you
proceed to ask these Quaeries in your Book.

1. Whether Christ was not the end of the Leviticall Priesthood? 2. Whether he
that upholdeth that which was to have an end in Christ, do not deny Christ to
be come in the flesh, and consequently is Antichrist? 3 Whether they that
claim Priests and Levites Maintenance ought not to do their work?
And this indeed is the sum of all that you say to this point; (for as to
forcing the payment of maintenance by Law, it will stand or fall with the
maintenance it self:) Concerning this we shall have a little debate with you.

And first, we desire you to understand, that Tithes were paid before ever the
Leviticall Priesthood was appointed. Surely Abraham's Victory over the Kings,
and Jacobs Vow were before the Leviticall Ordinances were set up, many hundreds
of years.

If you object (what we frequently meet withal from the men of your principles)
that these were voluntary Acts in those Patriarchs. However we observe it was
lawful to give and receive them then; and it lies on you to prove when it
became unlawful.

But further, we demand by what light they walked in so doing? was it by a
Light without them, some traditionall rule received from their godly Ancestors?
If so, then it was a voluntary obedience to a Law; Tradition being their Law:
If by a light within them, some immediate motion from God so to do; then we
say; that by the same inward light, were those Kings and Princes, and other
Proprietors of Lands that gave Tithes in this Nation, long before Popery began,
moved to dedicate the Tithes of their Lands to God for ever. And so we receive
them by the same Title with those to whom they were then paid, excepting the
consideration of Melchizedeck as he was a Type of Christ, which yet confirms
our Title, as you shall see anon.

And moreover we must tell you, that the very reason which God gives for his
making that allowance to Levie's Posterity afterward, is the Title that he had
to them precedent to Levi's, whence the Levites themselves were first to offer
them to the Numb. 18. 24, 25, etc.
Lord, and then they were to enjoy them as from God; and therefore Mal. 3 8. 9.
when the people through covetousness then withdrew them, as now some do, God
himself enters an Indictment against them: Ye have robbed me, says he, in
Tithes and Offerings; not Levi, but Me: So that they were Gods by a peculiar
claim and Title, and the Levites held them from him, not from the people; and
therefore they were to bring them into a Storehouse in the Temple; as Mede a
learned Mede on Act. 5. 34.
Antiquary well observes, and gives the reason from Philo the Jew, to wit, that
he might thereby take away all occasion from the people, of upbraiding the
Priests, as if they were maintained at their charge, God first claiming them,
and then demising them to the Priests, their maintenance became (as Philo
says) (...), A Gift that reflected no shame upon the receivers, who thereby
became Gods Eleemosynaries, or Almes-men, not the Peoples.

But it may be you will say, that the first claim which God Levi, and so they
were not more anciently Gods, then the other Leviticall Offerings. So that God
claiming them then first, that he might bestow them on the Jewish Priests, they
are since the abolishing of that Administration no more due then Sacrifices.

For answer whereunto, we refer you to Mr. Ainsworth, a man very well versed in
Jewish Antiquities (and one that should be Answ. on Genesis 14. 19.
more esteemed by you being a friend to separation) who tells you expressly,
that Abraham's and Jacobs payment of Tithes was but according to their duty; as
a sign of Tribute and Homage to God, as Sovereign Lord and King. And Abraham
particularly in his payment of Tithes to Melchizedek, walked by the equity of
that rule, which the Apostle afterward left on record, in express terms,
Romans 15. 27. That it was but meet, that he being made partaker of Melchizedeks
spiritual things, should minister to him in carnal things. And he further
gives us some light to conclude that this Custom of Tythe-paying, was by
nature implanted in the hearts of men, or at least derived by Tradition from
the Patriarchs. Because even the Heathens (who you say, have the light of
Christ in them) paid Tithes to their Gods, which practice surely they did not
take up of the Jews (they did not love them so well) but from some higher
Original. He quotes the Athenians from Diog. Laertius, and the ancient
Latins, from Pomponius Loetus, and Macrobius, for instances.

Sir, we had not suffered our Pens to expatiate into this field humane
Learning, but that we deal with you, who profess an allowance of it in its
place; and we suppose it is not out of place, in the search of Antiquities,
especially when the question is concerning the Origin, or beginning of Tithes,
which you say (at least as commanded) is in the Leviticall Priesthood, we,
before it.

But we do not lay the weight of our dispute in this particular your own
Chapter which you appeal to in this case, viz. Heb. 7. And because the strength
of all the Quaeries thence lies in v. 12. which asserts a necessary change of
the Law, upon the change of the Priesthood from the order of Aaron, to that of
Melchizedek; we desire you first to consider, that it is not necessary to be
granted, that by the Law there said to be changed must be meant the Law of
Tithes, but the Law of Priesthood; that Law, that set up Levi's Posterity for
Priests, which Law differs from that of Tithes very much. However, that
Scripture will not stead you without interpretation, and that you renounce.

But to gratify you, we will suppose your meaning and interpretation, with
you, and that is this.

If the abolition of the Law of Tithes depend upon the abolition of the
Priesthood, to which they were due; then (we hope you will allow us that) if
the Priesthood to which Tithes were once due (and that before the Leviticall
Priesthood) be not abolished, the Law of Tithes to that Priesthood is not
abolished.

But we shall prove that the Priesthood to which Tithes were once due, and that
long before the Leviticall Priesthood was in being, is not abolished, which if
we do, we hope we may be allowed to conclude

Therefore there is no abolishment of the Law of Tithes, but it is still in
force.

That the Priesthood to which Tithes were originally due is not abolished,
we prove thus from the same Chapter.

The Priesthood to which Tithes were (before the Leviticall Priesthood) due,
was the Melchizedekian Priesthood. But the Melchizedekian Priesthood, or
Priesthood after the order of Melchizedek is not abolished, For it is Christ's
Priesthood, Heb. 16, 17, verses. Therefore the Priesthood to which Tithes were
originally due, is not abolished.

All that we suppose herein is to be proved, is, that Tithes were due to
Melchizedeks order of Priesthood, and so still remain is a Priest for ever
after that order.

Now for proof of this, we refer you higher in the same Chapter, viz. to v.
4. and thence down to the 10. And we desire you to consider with us these
three reasons from the Text, to prove that Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedek
as a due.

1. You pretend to skill in the Original Tongue, and therefore you will not
be offended if we argue from it, as you do more then once, or twice. Abraham
(in the Apostles phrase) (...), v. 9 (...), v. 6. (...). v. 5.
is said to be Tithed by Melchizedek, and Melchizedek to tithe him, v. 6. 9.
which is the very same word Originally, with that which is used in the Sons
of Levi's tithing of the people by commandment, v. 5. Now if the word as
applied to the Levites, signify to require Tithes, as it does, it seems
unlikely it was used with relation to Melchizedek, to denote a receiving of
Tithes by way of gratuity only.

2. We desire you to consider the scope of the Apostle in that place, which is
to advance Melchizedeks Priesthood, as an Order superior to Levi's. This the
Apostle proves, because Levi himself in Abraham's loins paid Tithes to
Melchizedek. v. 9. Now had Melchizedek received Tithes from Levi, in Abraham's
loins, as of courtesy only, and not of debt; it would have been a poor
argument to prove Melchizedek a greater Priest, which will as well prove a
Beggar a greater man then a Prince, because the Beggar receives from him, it
may be, a sum of money out of his courtesy.

3. We desire you to consider that Abraham paid the Tithe to Melchizedek, with
relation to his blessing of him, which was an act of his Priestly Office, and
showed Melchizedek to be Abraham's, and so Levi's superior, v. 6, 7. So that
Melchizedek as a Priest, received tithes of Abraham, and Christ in Melchizedek,
received them from both Abraham and Levi: which (possibly) may be the reason,
why God reserved (even under the Law) the tenth of the Tithes, as an
acknowledgment or high rent to Christ, the Priest, after the order of
Melchizedek, to show that Levi held them of him. Numb. 18. 26, 27, 28. which
tenth therefore was to be given to Aaron the high Priest, who was a Type of
Christ.

Possibly you may (according to the garb of your Generation) dark reasonings.
But seeing your own Assertions and Quaeres lead us hereunto, we hope you will
take them into your consideration; at least; so far as to show us the darkness
of them. In a word, you may here gather our Answer to your three Quaeres before
mentioned, viz. to the

First; That we grant an end of the Leviticall Priesthood in Christ.

To the second, That in upholding Tithes, we uphold not that which was to have
an end in Christ. Tithes being no necessary appendant to that Priesthood, but
Christ's.

To the third, That we receive not Tithes upon that account, but as Ministers
of Christ, live upon Christ's portion; which, till our former arguments be
answered, we suppose Tithes to be: and therefore are not by receiving them
obliged to Leviticall service, but Gospell-administrations.

These things we have a little enlarged upon, to let you know even in kind, as
you (insultingly enough) insinuate us to be: Whether these arguments conclude
the divine right of Tithes, or no, deserves the consideration of abler men,
then you, or we, to whom we humbly submit our conceptions herein. However,
supposing the Law of Tithes be as you say, Leviticall, and merely so, in its
original and rise; yet how you will prove that Law repealed, so that it
becomes unlawful for any Proprietor of Land since that administration ceased,
to set apart the same proportion of the incomes and profits thereof, for the
maintenance of a Gospel Ministry, we know not; we are sure the Apostle Paul
did not think the maintenance of the Leviticall Priesthood so Jewish as you do,
when he makes it one of the grounds of that Gospel-ordinance for Ministers
maintenance, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Do you not know, that they which Minister about
holy things, live of the things of the Temple? etc. Even so has the Lord
ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; and
that is neither by working, nor begging.

But then say you, this maintenance should not be compulsive, to be recovered
by Law, especially from the poor and needy, etc. For the true Prophets and
Ministers of Christ mentioned in Scripture, did not so live on forced
substance, but ate and drank what the people gave.

We answer (1.) That any of us should force maintenance from the poor and
needy by Law, we confess it in matter of fact, blameworthy, because in cases
of indigency, and necessity, it is every man's duty to relax and remit a just
debt; but in matter of right, no man's legal Title falls, because of any such
inability. So that you must first prove, that Ministers have no legal right to
their Tenth, and then to force it from any, were sinful; till which, we shall
conceive it in it self as lawful for a Minister to sue for his Tenth, as for
another man to put in suit a just Bond.

2. That the Ministers of Christ mentioned in Scripture, did not thus, was,
because they had not the same legal right, backed with the power of a
Christian Magistrate: or, because they were enforced to forbear that claim
among sorbid people, who loved their Purses better then the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.
12. and truly some of us, to sweeten perverse Opinionists, are feign to remit
much of our legal due to those that are able to pay well enough.

3. What you call forcing by Law, if you mean it of the Law of man, you
condemn not us, but the public Justice. If you mean it of the Law of God, you
had best ask the Apostle Paul, what he means in the same verse, by using, or
not using a power of claiming maintenance from the people. If others be
partakers, says he, of this power, Viz. Of requiring maintenance for teaching,
are not we rather? nevertheless, we have not used this power. And when he
tells the Thessalonians, That he might have been burdensome to them, as the
Apostles of Christ, 1 These. 2. 6.

As for your other objection against us, that we do not trust Gods providence,
but indent for a maintenance. We answer, That we do not understand, how
dependence upon divine providence comes to be inconsistent with using humane.
You will think it an hard case, if all the poor in the Country should come
about you, and require you to lend your Estate among them, hoping for nothing
again (which is as plain Scripture Luke 5. 34, 35.
as that you urge us vvithall in this case) and if you should deny them so
unreasonable a request, they should tell you you are no Christian, because you
do not trust Gods providence; we doubt in such a case, you would take shelter
under some distinctions or other, as ill as you like them in the men of your
scorn and wrath, the poor Ministers.

In the ninth Article, you excuse your bold censures of our Hypocrites, upon
some pretended reasons, as your self calls them, and we for our parts believe
them no other.

In the first reason, you justify the charge with a mere slander, Viz. That
we preach against pride, and yet live in it, and covetousness, and yet are
greedy of filthy lucre, etc. Those that do so, we disowne, and those that do
not so (as thousands in this Nations do not) you belie.

Secondly, You say, we are Hypocrites, because we often tell people, we should
have proceeded further if time had not prevented us, when as indeed we have no
more to say. How many Ministers have told you, they have been drawn so dry,
that you thus charge us? It may be you did so when you were a Preacher, so
you measure other men's Corn by your own Bushel.

Your third reason is, because in our prayers before Sermon, we frequently beg
that he would put words into our mouths, and teach us what to say, where as
even then we have our Sermon-notes either in our Pockets, or our Bibles, or the
platform of our discourse prepared in our heads.

As for our Sermon-notes, those of us that use them, are feign to do so many
times, when they would not, because they have to do with such a captious
Generation as yours, who would make no conscience of making them say, what
they do not, by mis-reports, had they not their own papers to justify
themselves. And yet we know not why we may not write Notes, as well as you
write Books; we suppose that posterity is no less beholden to some Ministers
Notes, then to yours.

But your quarrel is not against Sermon-notes only, but against all
premeditated discourse. Indeed those that can give themselves liberty to talk.
at the rate that your companions do, need not meditate much for what they say;
A man may safely say that hears you, that you are not guilty of premeditated
discourses. But we for our parts conceive Meditation a very Ministerial
exercise, else Paul would not have required it from Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 15.
Immediately after his charge, v. 13. to give attendance to exhortation,
doctrine, he subjoynes, meditate on these things. It seems the Apostle and you
are of several minds in this particular, as well as in point of Ministers
maintenance.

But we wonder (whatsoever may be said against those that have, and use
written-notes) how this reason of yours militates against those that have only
the platform of their discourse prepared in their heads, that they must needs
be judged Hypocrites for praying to God to put words into their mouths. May
not a man that pre-meditates his matter, sometimes be at a loss for words? And
may he not pray, that God would furnish him with expressions, who finds himself
so, without hypocrisy?

And as for those that use Sermon-notes, might not they express themselves
more aptly sometimes then they write? And why then may they not pray, that God
would supply them with apter language, upon the service they are called unto,
then they have prepared of themselves? We believe there are no godly Ministers,
but find this assistance frequently, God directing their tongues to
considerable alterations, and enlargements beyond what they have before them,
and bringing many things to their memories, concerning which they had no
actual pre-meditation.

Your tenth Article brings in an Indictment of Felony against quoting of the
Fathers and Expositers of the Scripture; and this you think will justify you
against an action of slander, for calling us Thieves and Robbers. But we desire
you to consider,

Q. 1. Whether Augustine, and Hierome, and Calvin, and Luther, be more
unlawful to be quoted by us, then Seneca, an Heathen Philosopher, by you.

Q. 2. Whether our Savior Christ quoting Moses and the Prophets, Peter quoting
Paul, and Jude, Enoch, yea Paul himself quoting Aratus, Menander, and
Epimenides, Heathen Act. 17. 28 1 Cor. 15. 33. Tit. 1. 12.
Poets, do not as much fall under your charge of Thievery, as we, for quoting
those you mention?

Q. 3. Whether a man may not receive that from the Lord, which he gathers from
the writings of other men? Surely you suppose the Readers that can find leisure
enough, to look over your Pamphlet, will receive some light thereby. If not,
why do you publish it? If so, is that light from God, or from your self, or
from the Devil? We suppose you will not say, you write either your own
Dreams, or Satanicall suggestions. And if you say, from the Lord, then we hope
the Lord may as well speak to us, by Austine, Hierome, Calvin, or Luther, as by
you to your Proselites.

Q. 4. Whether we may not as well quote the words of these men, and yet say,
hearken to the word of the Lord, as you receive your principles, railings,
evasions, modes, and practices, from George Fox, and James Naylor? and yet cry
the word of the Lord to your Proselites?

Q. 5. Whether you be not your selves under the same condemnation, who
superscribe your Quaeres (which you send us now and then) from the spirit of
the Lord, and call them the word of the Lord to us, when we can produce the
printed Books of others of your Fraternity, whence they are most of them
stolen word for word. T. C. his Quaeres to one of us, borrowed to a Title out
of a Book directed to all that would know the way to the Kingdom, Excepting
false english.


To your eleventh Article, wherein you justify your confidence, in advising us
to preach no more to the people, then the Lord has spoken to us, and then we
our selves witness the life and power of in our selves. We say, that it is true,
your are noted for confidence enough, and none more then your female Declarers,
who for such a scolding religion, as yours is, are very well furnished with a
Billingsgate confidence. Concerning whom (by the way) we will be bold to
examine you upon a few Interrogatories.

Q. 1. Whether the Spirit of God ever did act any persons with a boldness and
confidence, that breaks the Laws of Nature, and Civility?

Q. 2. Whether your Prophetesses that come to declare in public Assemblies,
and some of them sometimes naked, As at Whitehall not long since, and
elsewhere. Jer. 3. 3.
do not break the Laws of Nature, and civility.

Q. 3. Whether such immodest practices, be not too great evidences against many
of them, that they are so far from Religion, that they have much corrupted the
principles of common honesty? And whether such brazen-faced impudency in such,
be not in the language of Scripture, an Whores forehead?

Q. 4. Whether Paul's light or yours be better, who says, Let the woman learn
in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in silence, 1 Timothy 3. 11. 12. Whereas you
allow your women to teach in our Assemblies, and your own, and in the very
Streets and Marketplaces, and to usurp Authority over us, who take our selves
to be men, charging us to speak no more in the name of the Lord, etc.

And what confidence emboldens the rest of you to come into our Assemblies, and
against the wills of the Officers, to deliver your railing charges there, to
the disturbance of whole Congregations, your selves best know. Only this we
desire to know of you,

Q. 1. Whether Christ, or his Apostles ever practiced the like liberty, in the
Synagogues of the Jews, without leave first obtained from the Rulers? We find
not that our Savior Christ at Nazareth, opened his mouth to speak to the
people in the Synagogue till the Minister delivered him the Book, in token of
the liberty granted him to teach there, Luke 4 17. 20. And we find the Apostle
Paul, and his companion Barnabas at Antioch, sat down and were silent, till
the Rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them and gave them liberty, Act. 13. 14,
15. And yet supposing they did; their miraculous gifts were a sufficient
demonstration that they had an higher authority. We see no such in any of you.

Q. 2. Whether you be not herein so confident, as to offer violence to that
very Article of the Government by which you yourselves claim liberty; in
disturbing those, who (as professing faith in God by Jesus Christ) are
worshipping him according to their Consciences?

Q. 3. Whether it be not an apparent design of Satan, to employ such confident
men and women, to make such disturbances at such a time, when people should go
home and meditate upon what they have heard, to hinder and divert them.

But you think that you have warrant for all this confidence, advise us to
preach no more to the people then the Lord has spoken to us, etc. Which advice
of yours, were it delivered in a sober, private, Christian way, we hope we
should take well at your hands, and do assure you, that we will (to our utmost
ability) practice accordingly. But we doubt, that so much will not satisfy,
except we renounce what God speaks to us in the written word, and hearken for
Gods voice in unwritten revelations. In which sense, we must profess, we think
it were great boldness indeed in you, to require us not to preach more then
God has spoken to us: Seeing you undertake to forbid what God requires, and
our Savior Christ and his Apostles accordingly practiced. The Apostle to
Timothy tells him and us, that, the Scriptures are given by inspiration of God,
and are profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction, etc. To what purpose is
the Scripture avouched to be profitable for Doctrine, if we may raise no
Doctrines from it? for reproof, correction, and instruction, if we may not lay
it as the ground of all these, 2 Timothy 3. 16. And in the same Epistle chap. 2.
2. he commands Timothy to commit what he had heard of him to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also. Had your quaking Generation been on foot
then, would they not have had the confidence to charge Timothy to speak nothing
to the people but what he had heard from God immediately? and those that
received Paul's Doctrine at the second hand, from Timothy much more? But whether
the Apostle Paul, or you be to be obeyed, let sober men judge.

Sure we are that our Savior Christ himself took for his Text, what the Lord
had many years before spoken to the Prophet Isaiah, Luke 4. 17. 18. And for the
Apostles and Apostolical men, we find them preaching those things which they
learned from the Scriptures: Apollos, Act. 18. 28. showed by the Scriptures,
that Jesus was the Christ. And when the great question concerning Circumcision,
and the Mosaicall observances, was started among the Apostles and Elders, Act.
15. James quotes the word of the Lord to Amos, v. 16, 17. in that Assembly. And
the Apostle Paul, Act 26. before Agrippa and Festus professes, He in all his
Doctrine, witnessed, saying none other things, then those which the Prophets
and Moses did say; So that he preached the word that was spoken to Moses and
the Prophets, and yet none that we read of, charged him to cease from preaching
more then God had immediately spoken to him. And we hope, we may safely disobey
your councels or commands herein, under the protection of such great examples.

As for the other part of your advice to us, that we preach no more then we our
selves witness the life and power of, within our selves: We would hope you
mean Orthodoxly in it; to wit, that we practice what we preach; which if it be
all you intend herein, we assure you we do, and we hope shall be enabled by
grace to do so more and more. But when we look upon the papers of others of
your brethren, we doubt you mean, we must not preach any thing of the Histories
and Prophesies of the Scripture See faith full discovery of mystical
Antichrist, page
in their literal sense, but only the experiences of the Allegorical senses
their teachers fasten upon them, within our selves. A brief Scheme of which
Allegorical experiences, we find in two Quakers discourses, related at large
by John Toldervy, Foot out of the snare, p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, etc.
out of which, that it may be known, what the Quakers your brethren would have
us witness in our selves, and then preach; we shall draw a short Catechism,
as faithfully, as according to our understanding we can.

Q. 1. What is the word? P. 5.


Answ. Life, or the substance whence the Scriptures are spoken.

Q. 2. What are the Scriptures?

A. A declaration from the word of life.

Q. 3. What is this substance the word of life?

A. The measure of God manifested in man; the Gift of the holy Spirit
manifested in flesh, made known in all.

Q. 4 What is the Garden of Eden? P. 1. 1


A. The World.

Q 5. What are the Trees of this Garden?

A. All living beings.

Q. 6. Why so?

A. Because they have their being of God by somewhat of himself that
proceeds out of the earth, God the life.

Q. 7. Where is Paradise?

A. In man.

Q. 8. How did man fall?

A. By harkening to the weaker.

Q. 9. What is that weaker?

A. The fleshly mind.

Q. 10. Did not the Woman tempt him?

A. Woman is that silliest and weakest part.

Q. 11. What was Adam?

A. The earthly nature in man.

Q. 12. What is the Redeemer of man?

A. The light by which he is given to see sin, and enabled by it, if obeyed, to
be redeemed from sin.

Q. 13. Where is this Redeemer?

A. In every particular man.

Q 14. Is not that person the Son of God that died at Jerusalem, this Redeemer?

A. No.

These and the like are the Doctrines which in the sense of some of your
companions we must witness the life and power of in our selves, i. e. These
Allegorical experiences of the mystery of Scripture, as they call it, before
we preach to others. Whether you be of this mind or no, we know not. But we
fear you deal as partially and subtly in drawing up this Article, as you do
in many of the rest, to hide the grosenesse of your Doctrines from the people.
What follows in this Article is a consequence fancied by you, that would
follow, if we should herein follow your advice; Viz, That either constant
silence or rare preaching would be found in our Congregations, etc. And we
think so too, if we have hit upon your meaning in that advice: For we have no
warrant to expect immediate revelations at all, much less constantly; and
less warrant to allegorize Scripture into such odd and wretched conceits, and
then preach them to the people.

If your meaning be as you speak, and as at first sight we Luke 18. 9. There
are that preach down persecution, and yet are to their power the most malicious
Persecuters of all that are not as themselves; diverse of you that preach down
idleness, and tell poor Ministers, that if they will not work, they must not
eat; yet themselves walk up and down the Land, and like lazy Lurdens, or
Drones, eat the fat, and drink the sweet at the charges of their deluded
Entertainers, till (as we have had upon credible information, a sad example
lately not far from this place) they eat their Wives and Families out of
doors: So that if you preach no more then you witness the life and power of
in your selves, we should hear fewer declamations against the pride, and
tithes, and persecution of the Ministry, and then what would your praters do
for matter to entertain their Hearers withal?

Your twelfth Article sets up (plain enough) the revelation humane studies,
but especially to those which are used in our Universities. We for our parts,
judge they may very well go hand in hand. We do not find but that learning and
grace together, make the best Preachers. We do not say, that learning alone is
sufficient to discover the mind of God; but yet we believe that (if his mind be
to be understood by his words) the understanding of his words, may be some help
to the understanding of his mind. And surely, some parts of his mind are not to
be understood without the help of that Learning which we call humane learning,
either infused, or acquired. He that can understand Paul's Epistles without
Logic, diverse parts of Ezekiell, and the Revelation without Mathematics;
diverse pieces in Moses and Job without natural Philosophy; Isaiah, or the
Psalms, without Rhetoric, etc. we will believe is indeed inspired by God. But
we consider your Generation allow no discovery of the mind of God by
Scriptures, and therefore it is no wonder if you will not allow any use of
learning to draw that thence, which you will not believe was ever there.

But whereas you appeal to the practice of Paul and Peter, Vniversity-learning
in this way. We know (for one of them) Paul he was bred at the feet of
Gamaliel, and made good use afterward of the great learning he got there, not
only in his Epistles, which indeed exhibit the marrow of polite learning, as
well as Divinity; but also in his discourses sometimes, as in that of his
before Agrippa and Festus, which provoked Festus to cry out, that much Learning
made him mad, Act. 26. 24. And therefore we suppose, we shall find him at least
indifferent in this business.

And as for the Apostle Peter, we gather this Testimony from him to the
usefulness of Learning, that in the very reading of Paul's Epistles, and other
Scriptures, it may keep a man from 2 Pet. 3. 16
wresting them to destruction, which many that want it he tells us, too often
do.

We disparage not the revelation of the Spirit, we acknowledge men; nay carnal
reason backed with learning will dispute the light of the most glorious
Doctrinall Truths of the Gospel, out of men's judgments (as is seen daily in
the mysteries of the Person, natures, Incarnation, satisfaction,
righteousness, merit, of Christ without us: which first heathen Philosophers,
and Gnostics, and after them the Arians, Socinians, and Papists, and last of
all, by the weapons borrowed from some, or all of them, the Familists, and
their offspring the Jusuited Quakers, or Jesuits, and Franciscans under the
disguise of Quakers, have endeavored to dispute, and rail out of the World)
and the most glorious practical Truths of the Gospel out of men's Consciences,
as appears daily in those, whose learning Satan makes use of to defend and
patronize their lusts: So that there needs another kind of learning to settle
these Truths savingly in the minds and hearts of men, which the Scripture calls
the revelation and demonstration of the Spirit. But yet we must own Learning
sanctified by the Spirit of God, as a precious help and furtherance to the
understanding of the Letter of the Scripture, confuting Heretical wrestings of
them, and convincing gainsayers. And we wonder, whence all these that dispute
against Learning from the Scriptures, received those Scriptures whence they
dispute, but from the help of humane Learning. Surely those holy men who
brought down the Scriptures to our capacities, by translating them into our
Mother Tongue, were not immediately taught the knowledge of the Original
Tongues, by the revelation of the Spirit; but learnt it in Schools and
Universities, and most of the truths of the Gospel which have been preserved to
us, from the violent hands of Heathen Philosophers, and Heretics, have been
very much (as to means) preserved by the disputes of learned men. Julian the
Apostate knew well enough that Schools of Learning were no small props of
Christian Religion, and therefore when he had designed a total abolition of
Christianity out of the world, he attempted it by two ways, which your
Generation unhappily follow him in, suppressing Schools of literature among
Christians, and taking away Ministers maintenance.

And whereas you say, that the Apostles and Ministers of Christ in Scripture
did not serve an Apprentiship in any University to learn the Trade of
preaching (as you scornfully call it) we answer they needed it not, for they
then received that by immediate inspiration, which since that time we know no
person, Quaker, or other, ever attained in that way; they became Linguists, and
Disputants, per saltum, which others since are feign to grow unto by degrees.
If you say the same Spirit dwells in you, we say, look you to that as to the
sanctifying and saving graces of that Spirit, for he that has not the Spirit
thus, is none of Christ's, Romans 8. 9 But as to gifts of Tongues, and other parts
of learning, which were then by that Spirit, bestowed in an instant on the
first Planters of the Church, we want an instance of any of you, that can say
so much of himself. If you know any, let us hear from you in the next, who it
is, and if he be able to make it out to us, we will believe him.

You say further, that they preached but the Gospel which Christ by his Spirit
revealed in them, and you quote two places of Scripture which speak of
revelation indeed, but not such as is exclusive to humane learning, which is
your drift. Indeed, in the first Paul says, that God revealed those things
which eye had not seen, etc. to him by his holy Spirit. And in the other 1 Cor.
2: 10. Gal. 1. 16.
he says, that God revealed his Son in him; but it is not proved, that in the
last of those places the Apostle speaks of the Doctrine, much less the holy
Doctrine of the Gospel that Paul preached, as if his humane learning
contributed nothing to that; but only of those inward operations that Paul
experienced; and therefore he shows the effect of the revelation, that it took
him off from consulting with flesh and blood, which we before acknowledge as
well as you.

In the former of them, the Apostle speaks of such a revelation of the Gospel,
as savingly enabled him to receive it, feelingly to preach it, as appears; by
v. 14. where he opposes the knowledge of a natural man, which is by mere
learning, to that of a spiritual man, which is by revelation, yet not
excluding learning. For by the way, you may observe that he does not oppose a
spiritual man, and a learned man [Paul himself was spiritual and learned too]
but a spiritual man, and a natural, or unregenerate man, who has nothing but
natural faculties, and humane learning to improve them.

And (as to your assertion it self) that they preached only that Gospel,
which Christ by his spirit rovealed in them; if you mean thus, that they
preached nothing but what was immediately revealed from the Spirit without any
external help, the plain Scripture will give you the lie. For how often did
Christ instruct them, during his bodily presence among them? And how did he
expound the Scriptures to them, going through all the Books then penned, even
from Moses to Malachi, immediately before his Assention? Luke. 24. 27. So that
whatever may be said of Paul, who was called and enabled to his Apostleship in
a singular way, untrodden by any of the rest, we are sure, all the rest were
taught, otherwise then by the immediate revelation of the Spirit only.

But we doubt yet another Snake in the Grass of this fair [which Christ by
his Spirit revealed in them] and suspect it bears some analogy with that in
your former Article, of preaching no more then we witness the life and power
of in our selves; and which you call afterward, witnessing the condition of
the Saints, whose words we preach, of which anon. The best sense therefore,
which comparing your words with each other, and all with the language of your
other Brethren, we can pick out of your expressions here, is, that you suppose,
they preached no more, then what by spiritual experience the Spirit revealed
in their hearts: Which if it be that you herein intend, we desire you to
consider whether the Apostles did experience in themselves the Histories of the
old Testament, which yet they preached, and whether they did experience in
themselves the resurrection of the body, the general judgment, and eternal
damnation which they preached? Whether John experienced the Prophesies of the
Revelation in himself, or no; as some of Foot out of the snare, p. 6. 13.
you cant, that the witnesses are slain in us, and must be raised to life in
us, and Babylon in us, etc.

And of this stamp, we doubt, is that uncouth and odd expression of witnessing
the Saints conditions (which is one of the in these parts, with what you here
say.

But we will take you in the best sense, and so to witness, we suppose in your
sense, is, to feel by inward experience the Saints conditions, whose words we
preach. And without this qualification (in your judgment) we must pass for
Ministers of the Letter only. We doubt you understand not, what a Minister of
the Letter means. We are sure, by a Minister of the Letter, the Apostle means
not such an one as expounds and applies the written Word, but either one that
preached up the Jewish ceremonies according to the Letter, which were the veil
that hid the Gospel, instead of Christ the substance of them; or else, that
preached the duties of the Law for justification, and so your generation are
the Ministers of the Letter, who preach up a righteousness of works, under
the notion of Christ in us, to the decrying and blaspheming of the
righteousness of Faith, in Christ's person without us. And you your self
speak scornefully enough of it, though covertly, p. 55. of your Book, as of a
righteousness beyond the Stars, and a far off from us; so that we fear your
heart is the same with them, though you be more wary in your expressions.

In a word, if we mistake you, you must impute it to your darkness, and
ambiguity of expression, which you affect in this Epistle, that you may (like a
Carp) by running your head in the mud of uncouth and ambiguous language, avoid
the Net of a just discovery and confutation: and to your undertaking, which
being the justification of the people called Quakers, we are necessitated to
interpret you by what we know of them.

To your thirteenth Article, concerning the unprofitablenesse talking and
professing Christ in Orthodox notions, except we witness (we will suppose you
understand, find, and feel by experience) the life of Christ in us: We would
hope you mean as you say, and no more; and if so, we mean and say as you do,
that it will not avail us or our hearers to talk of Christ's dying for us, and
our being justified by his righteousness, except we receive a spirit of
holiness from him, and be taught by the grace that appears to us, to deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present world. But we Tim. 2. 12.
must tell you, that we do not make our mortification of sin, or resurrection
to newness of life; or any of the fruits growing upon those roots (though we
could be as holy as ever any Saint was upon earth) any part of our
righteousness in the presence of God, but in matter of justification, we
renounce them all as abominable and filthy rags, dross and dung to the
righteousness which is of God by faith, and desire to be found in him alone,
who Isa. 64. 6. Phil. 3. 8, 9. Jer. 23. 5. Gal. 2. 16.
is the Lord our righteousness. We say with the Apostle, Knowing that a man is
not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even
we have believed in Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ,
and not by the works of the Law. Whether you be of this judgment or no, we
desire to know more fully in your next. Those of your generation are not, as we
shall show anon, from their own papers, which speak out, what we see you have a
mind to conceal.

In your fourteenth Article, you confess that you both publish practice, an
unmannerly disrespect of all persons, in which (because you scruple swearing)
we would (as well as we may) credit you without an Oath. And that you publish
and practice it as truth, we will believe. But Omne simile non est idem, as you
may very well know. Many of your quaking doctrines (as you color them) are
very like truth. But we have in part shown they are not what they show for, and
shall do more ere we have done with you: Mean while we will a little dispute
it with you; Whether Religion destroy civility and good manners? For our
parts, we humbly conceive, that the fifth Commandment is not yet repealed,
that commands us to honor our Fathers and Mothers. And Solomon we suppose
walked by that Law when he bowed to his Mother, 1 King. 2. 29. Nor do we dare
condemn the bowing of Abraham before the Sons of Heth, Genesis 23. 7. 12. Nor do
we think that cursed Canaanites are more capable of civil honor and respect,
then civil Magistrates. And how far the examples of Luke, dedicating his Book
to the most excellent Theophilus, Lu. 1. 3. Paul's Titles of [King Agrippa and
most Noble Festus] and Act. 26. 7. 25. 1 Pet. 3. 6.
Sarahs calling Abraham Lord (practiced in the old, and commended in the new
Testament) will justify the practice of those who bestow Titles upon men
according to their quality, from that respecting of persons which the Apostle
James condemns, it Jam. 5. 1.
may be your own second thoughts will better inform you. Surely, the Apostle
James does not deny the distinction of Magistrates, and others in their Seats
and Benches. We do not find the Apostles when they were called before
Magistrates, justle with them for their Chaires and Cushions, or set themselves
down cheek by joule with them upon the Bench. Nor was 1 King. 2. 19.
Solomon to be charged with respecting persons, for calling for a Chair for his
Mother Bathsheba, and not for all others as well that came to present Petitions
to him. For a close, we are persuaded; that this levelling humor never lasted
longer in any person, then till he himself got into the Chair of Magistracy: We
know no Prince in Europe that ever King'd it with that state as John of Leyden
did, when he acted his part at Munster, and yet he and his Generation were as
much against respecting of persons a while before, as any of our Quakers at
this day.

In a word, we are no friends to that great distance which mere wealth makes in
the esteem of the world between man and man, especially between godly poor,
and ungodly rich men. And we hope we can say in the sincerity of our hearts,
that we know no godly poor man whom we would not, and do not prefer in our
esteems and respects, as we have opportunity to show it, before any wealthy
men, that are not so. But where the goodness is equal in both, we suppose the
modesty of the inferior will not suffer him to be agrieved, if his Superior
in any sort sit above him, or go before him; nor do we think it any token of
humility (which is one of the most eminent graces in true Saints) for such an
one to justle for the wall with another, to whom in common courtesy and
civility, founded upon the Law of God, Nature, and Nations it is more due.

We shall not dispute against you the consequences of this Titles of Doctors,
or Divines; we persuade our selves (as well-pleasing, as you think they are to
us) we have learned of our Master to be contented to be made of no reputation,
and if God think fit to abase us among those with whom we have to do, that we
should receive as little respect from others, as we do from you; we are able
through grace, to contemn those poor things as dirt and dung: And if instead
of Doctors and Divines, we meet with the Titles of Serpent, Cain, Esau,
Satan, yea, Beelzebub himself (which are the honorable Titles your Generation
in their great civility, or Christianity afford us.) In a word, should men call
us Dolts instead of Doctors, and Devils instead of Divines, we hope we can say
without vanity, we should esteem it our Crown, so the name of Christ might be
exalted by the fall of our own. The Titles that men give us, we hope some of
us can say, we procured without ambition and receive without pride, and can
lay down without discontent.

But we vvonder however, how the name of Doctor, or Teacher Ephesians. 4. 11. And
why your brethren should quarrel so unmercifully against the name Master, or
Sir, when they might know how often it is given and taken by the Apostles of
Christ, who, surely, knew their Masters mind in that prohibition better then
they, and why (if Titles be thus unlawful) do your self give the Sirs, to your
Readers, and Sir to your Antagonist, which is all as much as Master? Nay, why
your Son should call you Father, any more then our Hearers call us Masters,,
seeing one Text prohibits Both, we cannot imagine: And we know not whether
it was upon this account, that a Son of yours lately told one of us, that he
disowned you.

But (to let this pass, and shut up this Article in a word) We suppose your
other consequence of this Doctrine which you Magistrate of his Titles of
honorable, and worshipful, shows some worse blood then that that boyles in
your Veins against the poor Ministers. We doubt that you that would strip
them of their Titles, have no great (or it may be too great) mind to their
Offices. For surely, there is less express Authority in the new Testament for
Christian Magistracy it self, then for the Titles bestowed upon them? What
security then will you give them that you will not quarrel with their Robes
and Maces, and afterward with their Offices as well as with their Titles. We
read of most excellent Theophilus, and most noble Festus, Titles as high as
honorable and worshipful applied to men in Magistracy. But of Christian
Magistrates, not a word of Precept or practice; would you dared speak out!
why do you nibble at Titles? tell us plainly, you aim at the thing it self,
most think you do.

And now we are arrived to the last of your Articles, wherein you take some
pleasure to show how you can criticize on the words Thee and Thou, which you
would feign justify to be the only proper terms to any single person A
doughty undertaking! and very fit for your learning to manage: We should
scarce think it vvorth the while to dispute such a trifle with you, but only
to let you know, how unfit you are to dispute down Universities, that manage a
Grammatical Question so childishly: Should a School Boy of ten years old be
bid translate, How do you Sir into Latin, would he not render it Quomodo
vales tu? It seems your new Grammar would correct him with a Quomodo valetis
vos? A learned piece of Pedantry! Are you so silly as not to know that
Translators respect the usage of words in the Tongues they make use of: If the
Translators of Hebrew or Greek, had rendered (...) or (...), by you, as well as
thou, to a single person, might they not have done as well to an English ear,
seeing both words are used indifferently by English men? you should not be
ignorant of the old Rule, Loquendum ut vulgus. And Horace (if you have read
him) tells you, that it is use (Quem penes arbitrium est, and vis, and norma
loquendi.) that words are to be regulated by.

But why then do we not (say you) use the word you to the Words are proper, or
improper, as use makes them. And yet we conceive we well vary the phrase to God
upon this account, because in our prayers we address our selves to God in the
Unity of his nature, and therefore we use a word that is not capable of
importing plurality, as you is. [And whereas you add lastly, that the rich
think it proper to say [Thou] and [Thee] to a poor man, whereas we condemn
the poor man for saying [Thou] or [Thee] to a rich man.

We answer, for our parts, we our selves can say, we know not our selves guilty
of often making any such distinction, and when we do, it is rather in a way of
familiarity, then otherwise, seeing we have used in common custom of speech,
to look upon the word [Thou] spoken to men as the more familiar word. But we
insist not much upon these things, as supposing them beneath our study or
notice, but that you will engage us in them whether we will or no; only we
must tell you at parting, that you may do well (in your great acuteness) to
correct French Tongue, whence we suppose this manner of speaking came into
England, as well as our own, for the French use [vous] that signifies [you] to
a single person, as well as we. And you after that to exercise your pedanticall
Ferule upon the royal style of most or all the Princes in the civil World,
who (with as great a Grammatical impropriety) write in their own persons
[Nos] and [Wee] instead of [Ego] and [I] which is the style of ordinary
persons. And we suppose you may maintain as learned a dispute with the Lord
Protector about [Nos Oliverus] [We Oliver] as you do with Mr. Thomas, p. 58.
of the Book about the Nominative case, and the Verb.

These are all the Articles, it seems you will confess against Io triumph,
the day is our own; for These (say you) are the horrid blasphemies and
damnable Doctrines against the abettors of which you do at this day discharge
so much passion and rage, both from Press and Pulpit; calling upon the civil
Powers for Bonds and Prisons, nay Fire and Faggot, against all those who
(fearing the Lord) do fear to call darkness light, and light darkness.

But stay, Sir, we have some other matters then these to charge upon your
Generation, which we will in the next place give you a short Catalogue of,
collected out of such books as are either published by your selves, or justly
charged upon you by those Witnesses who we are assured will stand to their
words vvhenever they are called to make them good.

[The Quakers Doctrines.]
1. That they are equal with God, as holy, just, and good, as God himself.
Affirmed by G. Fox, and J. Nayler, before Witnesses Perfect Pharisee, p. 3. See
also the Relation of the irreligion of the Northern Quakers.
who attest it, in a Book called the perfect Pharisee, published by five
Ministers of Newcastle.

2. Suitable hereunto was the blasphemy of one of your Shee-Quakers lately in
hold in this Town, who being convented before the Major of this Corporation,
and asked what she was, and what was her name, roundly answered (and stood to
it again the next day) I AM THAT I AM, which will be attested upon Oath, by
the Major and one of the Constables.

3. Suitable to this was the blasphemy of another of your Brethren, who meeting
with a godly Londiner occasionally being in this Town on a Lords day lately,
and asking him the way, as he met him, to one of our Churches, answered him in
these words, The Church is in God, and the Church is God.

4. That the being of God is not distinct from them that are begotten by him.
[Sword of the Lord by James Atkinson Quaker.]

5. That the Nature and Glory of the Elect, differ not from the Nature and
Glory of the Creator. For the Elect are one with the Creator in his Nature,
enjoying his Glory. That the Elect is not distinct from the Creator. [Howgill
and Buroughs two Quakers in an answer to Reeve.]

6. And that God is not distinct from living Creatures; for in him living
(reatures lives, moves, etc.

7. That God is three persons, or subsistences (they say) is a lie. That there
is no distinctions of persons in the Godhead. [Sword of the Lord by J.
Atkinson: G. Fox Errand to Damascus.

8. That the Soul is a part of the Divine Essence. [See perfect Pharisee, p. 6.]

9 That Jesus Christ is God and man in one person (they say) is a lie.

10. They deny and detest this Doctrine, That Christ being the only God and man
in one person, remains for ever a distinct person from all Saints and Angels,
notwithstanding their Union and communion with him. [Sword of the Lord by James
Atkinson.]

11. That the person that Son of God which died at Jerusalem, is not the
Redeemer of man from sin; but the Redeemer is in every man, that light by which
he is given to see him, etc. [The discourse of a Quaker with Jo: Toldervy.
Foot out of the snare, p. 7.]

12. That Christ is in every man, even Heathen Indians, and in the Reprobates
he is held under corruption. [J. Nayler. See perfect Pharisee; p. 7

13. That Christ was a man, had his failings, for he distrusted God upon the
Cross. [Rob. Collison. See Gilpins Book, p. 2.]

14. That we are not justified by that Righteousness of Christ which he in his
own person did fulfill without us. And that whosoever expects to be saved by
him that died at Jerusalem, shall be deceived: For Christ in the flesh was in
all, that he died and suffered a Figure, and nothing but an example.

15. That we are (therefore) to be saved not by the righteousness of Christ
imputed to us, but by the righteousness of Christ inherent in us. [See both
these in the perfect Pharisee, with their Testimonies, p. 9, 10, 11. And
Howgill and Buroughs Answ. to Bennet Q. 9.]

And another to the same purpose says, That the faith and justification which
stands in the comprehension of Christ without, will stand us in no stead. [Fr.
Gawler to Mr. Miller of Cardiff.]

16. That God and man cannot be perfectly reconciled till he be brought into
the state of the first Adam, and able in his own power to stand perfect. And
that holy works and lives of Saints are not excluded from justification.
[Howgill, etc. Answ. to Bennets 11, 12. Quaeries.]

17. That no man that is not perfectly holy, or commits sin, can ever enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, except there be a Purgatory. And there is no Saint
but he that is so perfectly holy in this life without sin. [Nayler perfect
Pharsee, p. 1. 112. 13.]

18. That to preach the impossibility of such a freedom here on earth is to
preach up sin while the world stands, and to bring men into Covenant with the
Diuill for term of life. [See also J. Parnell Shield of faith. p. 29. to both
these Nayler in his answer to Mr. Baxter, p. 28.]

19. That Christ took not humane flesh upon him at any time, otherwise then he
daily does; and that Christ is now conversant on earth among men since his
ascension, as he was in the Apostles times. It is the sum of Howgills and
Buroughs answer to two Quaeres of Mr. Bennet. [See Howgill, etc. in their
answer to Benets 18, and 19. Qu.]

20. That the Scriptures are not the word of God. This is their constant
judgment though they dare not profess it for fear of the Law, as one of the
most eminent in these parts, confessed before the Magistrates here, in the
hearing of one of us; asking Whether if the Bible were burnt, the word of God
were burnt? or words fully to this purpose. [See the proof, Perfect Pharisee,
p. 23. T. C. Parnells book, p. 10. says, He that says, the Letter is the
word, is a deceiver.]

21. That they had a light in them sufficient to lead them to salvation, if
they had never seen or heard of the Bible. The substance of this was affirmed
before some Magistrates of this Town, and one of us by the same party. And
this light extended to Heathen Indians, by him. Suitable to the assertions of
James Nayler in a discourse of his in the book quoted here. [And he that says,
the Letter is the rule and guide of the people of God, is without, feeding upon
the Husk, etc. p. 11. See way to the Kingdom, p 8. See perfect Parisee, p. 17.
18]

22. That the Scriptures are not the Saints Rule of knowing God, and living
unto him, but that which was before the Scriptures were written. This is also
your own, concerning which, anon, more at large. [Atkinson ubi supra., p. 1.
Parnell, p. 11.

23. That there is no need of outward teachings by reading or hearing of the
Scriptures opened and applied. [See perfect Pharisee, p 20.]

24. That no men's interpretations of the Scripture, or Arguments from them are
to be received, except those that give them be infallible. [See Quakers Cat.
published by Mr. Baxter, where the Quaerists require Infallibility in a
Minister. And Perfect Pharisee, p. 27.]

This is generally their strain. We renounce and deny all your meanings,
interpretations, arguments, calling them adding to the Scriptures. And
concerning it we must have a brush or two with you anon.

25. That the light in them is the Gospel, and the more sure word of Prophecy;
so sure, that some of them say, That it is a like for to take a sentence out of
their Letters, and preach from it, as to take a sentence out of Paul's Epistles.
[Discovery of mystical Antichrist displaying Christ's Banners, p. 15. and 33.]

26. That there is no call to the Ministry but an immediate Call, which is
generally proclaimed by them. [See perfect Pharisee, p. 29. J. Parnell, p 16.]

27. There is no Baptism of Christ, but with the H. Ghost and fire. And no
Supper of the Lord, but in the spiritual part: for as for the visible part,
The bread which the world breaks is carnal and natural. See perfect Pharisee,
p. 28. and J Parnell, p. 12. 13.]

28. That singing David's Psalms in English Meeter, is to sing the Ballads of
Hopkins and Sternhold King James his Fiddlers. And to sing them is to turn the
Scriptures into lies and blasphemies. [One of them in a Letter here at Reading.
Henry Clark in his description of the Prophets, p 9.]

29. That God made not man to be Lord over man, but over other Creatures; and
therefore amongst them there are no Superiors after the flesh. But are there
any Superiors over them (then) that are not among them? See in the next
article. [J. Parnell, p. 22, 23.]

30. That Christ comes to fulfill and end all outward Laws and Ja. Parnell p.
18, 19.
Government of man. The righteous are from under the outward Law, for they are
a Law to themselves. Especially if Magistrates be wicked (that is, not of them)
the Author quoted in the Margin denies them utterly.

31. That there is no Sabbath now, but an everlasting Sabbath, and that our
Sabbath is but a shadow of which they have the substance. Ja. Parnell p. 37.
And that the first day in the week is no Sabbath.

32. That we may not pray before and after Sermons, or at set times, days, and
hours, because these things were in the Generation which were enemies to
Christ. [Quaeres sent to the Congregation at Stopport, printed in a Book of Mr.
Eaton.]

33. That the Ranters themselves had a pure convincement which did convince
them. And what their convincements were, most men know. To wit, that there is
no Heaven, Hell, Resurrection, Judgment to come; that there is no sin, but what
a man thinks to be so; that all that they did was done by the Eternity in them,
etc. [G. Fox, and J. Nayler in a book called A word from the Lord, p. 13.]

34. That that word, 1 Jo. 1. 8. If we say we have no sin we deceive our
selves, was spoken by the carnal man. [Fr. Gawler. See Antichrist in man by
Mr. Miller of Cardiff. p. 7. Idem. ibid.]

35. That if a man has sin in him he has none of Christ.

36. They will not acknowledge that Christ ascended with his body into Heaven.
[Idem. ibid.]

THus you see, Sir, how much pains we have been at to satisfy you, that those
men you join your self unto, have matters of greater moment, then those you
mention, justly chargeable upon them: So that we are no way in fear of the
judgment you pronounce against the Offenders of Christ's little ones in your
next lines. For if such as these be Christ's little Ones, we know not who are
the Devils great Ones. And when you have any such things justly to charge upon
us, we shall not cry out of hard measure, although we suffer more then any of
you yet do. Let the Magistrate do so to us, and more also, if we thus deserve
it.

As to what we lay to your charge, whether he will take notice of it or no, we
have learned not to be over sollicitous, seeing we are not out of hope that
deliverance will arise for Gods reproached Ministers, Truths and Ordinances,
some way or other: And yet we cannot but desire he would vouchsafe this honor
to those that are now in Authority over us, that Truth and peace might flourish
together in our days under their wings. And truly, Sir, did you know our
hearts (whatsoever Monsters of persecution and blood you judge us to be) you
would see, that as it is no private interest of our own, that draws us out to
appear against you, but the mere concernments of Gods Glory, and precious
Truth; so we desire nothing more then the conviction and reduction of you, in a
Gospel-way. And this we can clearly say, that of all those that have suffered
any thing, in, or near the places where we live, we know none of them, but have
drawn it upon themselves, by first making such public disturbances, as brought
them within the reach of the Law, and then refusing to give bail, out of a
fond ambition they had to be imprisoned, when they might have avoided it.

And yet we cannot but wonder, how an handful of you, England, and blaspheming
it publicly where ever you come, we suppose it will in reason be required,
that you show some extraordinary Authority or commission from God, testified by
some real sign to convince them that it is not counterfeit; and yet even
then, as you shall see anon (your Doctrines being such as they are) they may
see just cause to lay some restraint upon you therein.

In the mean while, we must tell you, that however you may please your selves
in your sufferings, and vent your passions against the men from whom you
conceive they arise, as so many Saul's and bloody Persecuters, yet God judges
not Martyrs by the suffering, but the cause; and you had need examine in whose
Errand you go, when you run your selves upon suffering, as well as others to
examine upon what Warrant they inflict it upon you. If every one be a Martyr,
who makes a loud cry of Persecution, surely the Jesuit will not be behind
hand, in putting in for his share, as well as you; and if every one be a
Persecutor that curbs and restraines unruly and disorderly Consciences, woe be
to those Judges who arraigne, and condemn Fauxes and Ravilliac's, who plead
conscience for what they do, as well as your selves. The truth is, both you,
and we, and all persons, must be able to plead, that we suffer not as evil
doers, and then suffering will be a comfort and a crown; otherwise what we
suffer we suffer in our own wrong, and shall when we have suffered our Estates
out of our Purses, and Souls out of our bodies, meet with no other
entertainment, then an Who has required these things at your hands? And we
desire you particularly to consider what the Apostle Paul tells you, that if a
man give up his very body to be burned, and have not charity, 1 Cor. 13. 3.
it profits him nothing: And surely if your generation be sufferers, you are
the most uncharitable sufferers that ever were; and Martyrs, that have been in
the World, from Christ's time till the starting up of your new Apostles, within
these 3. or 4. years; and are so far from that charity which other sufferers in
Scripture have had to their bloodiest Persecutors, that your mouths are full
of railing, reviling, cursing, and bitterness, to those that do not meddle
with you further then it concerns them in their places, to preserve others
under their charge from the infection of such abominations as those
forementioned. However We have not so learned Christ, as to render evil for
evil, but desire to suffer under the sharp Arrows of your tongues, as he gave
us an example, not reviling again when we are reviled by you, but committing
our Cause, Callings, and Maintenance to him that judges uprightly. And to
instruct even the worst of Opposers in meekness, trying if God will at any
time give them repentance, to 2 Timothy 2. 25. 26.
the acknowledgment of the Truth; and that they may recover them out of the
snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, which we yet
(with pity toward, and prayer for you) are assured to be the condition of your
self, and your Clients in this Cause.

ANd now, Sir, after a tedious pursuit of you, through all

First, Because a great part of it has been once served up in the Epistle, and
because we found it not seasoned with salt, by us already discovered and
rejected as unsavory. So that we shall not cloy the Reader with a second
course of it.

Secondly, Because that we find that it is wholly made up of personal contests
with Mr Thomas, and insolent reflections and reproaches upon him, into whose
harvest we desire not to thrust in our Sicle; besides that we are advertised,
that he intends to take that task in hand himself, and we are assured that he
will not need any assistance from us, or any other, to answer it as it
deserves. Only because you so often call the Scriptures (in scorn) [our Rule]
in your Epistle, and therein expressly reject all Interpretations and deductions
which we draw from them in preaching, or dispute; we will here subjoyne these
two questions.

Q. 1. Whether the holy Scriptures be the Saints ground, and rule of faith, and
practice?

Q. 2. Whether it be lawful without an infallible spirit, to interpret
Scripture, or draw consequences and deductions thence?

In both these you defend the Negative, we the Affirmative.

As to the first of them in your Book, you stand only upon Thomas; concerning
which we leave you to his second charge, wherein we doubt not but he will fetch
them off without loss. Mean while, we cannot but take notice of the Artifices
of your self, and others of the generation you close withal.

(1.) We observe, that in most or all matters of difference betwixt us, you put
us upon the proof of our Principles and practices, and offer none for your
own; which is a slye way of hiding your own weakness, and discovering our
strength, that so you may make your advantages of it: Which is, as if a man
should sue another at Law, to produce his evidences by which he holds his Land,
to be canvassed by his own Counsel, without exhibiting any thing in his own
behalf, to justify his claim to it.

(2.) We observe also, that you reserve to your selves a liberty of excepting
against the Jurisdiction of the Court, in which the cause is depending; not
allowing it a power to decide the case, if you see you selves likely to be cast
in Judgment, although you will own it so far as you suppose it may serve your
turn against us. For you call us forth to a trial by the Scriptures, and yet
will not allow them to be the rule to decide the controversy.

(3.) We observe thirdly, that you will have the choice of the Weapons in this
encounter, not only for your self, but us also, setting up a Star Chamber
Court of your own first, to damn our Evidences, and then, forsooth, you will
fight with us when you have disarmed us. You will dispute with us from the
Scripture, and yet will allow us no Arguments to dispute withal. A valiant
undertaking, and worthy piece of Chivalry, for which you deserve to be recorded
among the chief Champions of the Quaking Knight Errantry.

But we hope, upon second thoughts, you may be persuaded Irish bogg, where it
is harder to come at you, then conquer you, and come forth into the plain
field, where we may encounter you upon even terms. If otherwise, we shall take
it as an Argument of your Cowardice, and yet rather swallow any inconvenience,
then not dislodge you, and set up the Banners of Truth upon your own ground.

And first we will try you with a few Quaeries, which (seeing

Q. 1. Whether you will receive the Scriptures Testimony concerning it self,
or no? If you will, then Q. 2. Is it not the rule of faith by your own
confession? For it is that to which you submit your says in this question. If
you will not, then Q. 3. To what purpose do you require of Mr. Thomas to
produce a Scripture P. 4.
that says, in Terminis, it is the rule; when if he do, the question is as far
from being decided as before?

In the next place, we will state the question between us, that

First therefore the question between us is not, Whether the Scriptures, or
written word, have been the ground and rule of faith and practice, in all ages
of the World, but whether in every age of the World, since any part of them was
written, so much as was written in any age, were not the rule by which those of
that age were to be regulated? and consequently, whether to the ages that have
been, and shall be, since the whole was completed, the whole be not so, and to
continue so to the Worlds end? So that you are quite besides the Cushion and
the Question, in the instances of Abel, Enoch, and Ahraham, and all the
Patriarchs before Moses, who wrote the first Scripture. We are not so silly as
to affirm the word as written, to have been a rule before it was written.
Although we shall not doubt to prove, that those Patriarchs had the same
foundation to build on, and the same Law or Rule to walk by, though they were
not then committed to writing. The Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 8. that the
Scripture preached the Gospel to Abraham; where it is observable, that Abraham's
light was Scripture light, before the Scriptures were written.

2. The question between us, is not, whether the Scriptures be the personal or
real ground of faith; but whether (as Mr. Thomas well distinguishes) it be
the Doctrinall or declarative ground, or foundation of faith? This distinction,
whether you will admit or no, we must premise, because we would not be engaged
to fight with a mere shadow. If you will own the Scriptures to be a doctrinall
foundation or ground of faith, i. e. to hold forth from God those Doctrines,
which, and which only we are bound to believe, our dispute is at an end, for
we are of a mind; we own Christ alone to be the foundation or ground of faith,
personal or real; that is, to be the person, or thing, that our faith is
built on; and the Scriptures to be the only ground and foundation, by way of
Doctrine or declaration, what we are to believe concerning Christ, and how to
believe on him. We hope you will understand us, we speak as plain as we can to
avoid cavills about terms.

All therefore that we are to prove in this question is, that all things which
we believe and do, as necessary in order to salvation, are to be such as are
contained in the Scripture, and to be judged by it, whether they be so or no.

We say, All things which we believe and do as necessary in order to the
salvation of our Souls, are to be such as are contained in Scripture.

If not (because to please you, we must not argue from Scripture) we desire you
to satisfy us.

Q. 1. What thing necessary to be believed or done, in order to salvation there
is, which we may or must receive from any other Rule, or build on any other
foundation, and what is that Rule or foundation. We suppose you are bound
either to allow our rule, or show us a bettor. Or,

Q. 2. Whether what the Scriptures contain, be sufficient to guide us to
salvation, or no? If you affirm it; then we shall think our selves well enough
with our old Rule, seeing we may be saved, and yet admit no other.

If you deny it, you must out-stare these plain Texts, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16, 17.
From a Child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee
wise unto salvation. And all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness. That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
every good work. And that of John, wherewith he closes his twentieth Chapter.
These (speaking of the signs which Christ did) are written, that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that beleiving, ye might
have life through his name. Say not, that this concerns only the Gospel of
John, or if more, only the Histories of the Evangelists. For then we shall
make bold to conclude our Position a fortiori. If there be enough in one, or at
most four Books to work faith, and thereby bring us to salvation, much more in
all the Scriptures.

Q. 3. Whether the Scriptures of the old and new Testament be the word of God,
or no? or do you own no word of God, but Christ? We suppose here you will
answer us, as your brethren here do: We dare not deny it for fear of the Law;
we dare not affirm it, for then we deny our own principles.

We know not how you will answer it: But we must tell you, if you deny it, we
are sure the Scriptures affirm it of themselves; else we desire to know, what
it is that is called the Word of God in the places following Mar. 7. 13. 2 Cor.
2. 17. 4. 2. What it is that David so often calls by the name of thy word, Ps.
119. whether Christ spoke himself, or the declarative word of God, Lu. 5. 1.
If you affirm it, We ask further;

Q. 4. Whether it be not the duty of the Creature to believe and be guided by
the declared word of God, rather then by any others word whatsoever?

Q. 5. Whether there be any such thing in the World as Heresy, or Error? If
there be not, to what purpose are all those Prophesies that foretell, and
Cautions that forewarne Gods people against them in the Scripture? If there be,
may they be discovered, or no? If they may not, how can it be a duty incumbent
upon Saints to avoid them? is there any avoiding of an undiscoverable evil? If
they may, by what rule but the written Word?

Q. 6. Whether there be any duty, or sin in the World, or no? The affinity your
Sect has with the Ranters in Principles (which G. Fox acknowledges) makes
us believe, that some of you, would they speak out, must answer, No, but what
a man thinks to be so. We will not judge the thoughts: But if you be more
sober, we only ask you?

Q. 7. What rule we have to judge of what is Duty, or Sin, but the written
Law of God?

Is it the light of every man's private bosom? This is the forementioned
Ranting Principle.

Is it immediate Revelation? For to this your brethren incline (as may be seen
in the Quaeries sent to Mr. Baxter of Kiderminster, one of which was, Whether
he owned Revelations, or no? And Naylers Answer to his Quakers Catechism) and
that very strongly; yea, they pretend to the same mission from God to this or
that place, to do this or that errand, which the Prophets had of old, and to be
limited in their stay in, and departure from such places, by the immediate
commands of God See Deusberies discovery, and his own confession therein, That
at Derby he answered the Major, that he would stay there till the Lord ordered
him to go out of Town, and when he was put out, returned, and staid till he
was free in his spirit to depart, p. 8, 9.


If you be of their mind, we further enquire.

Q. 8. What certain token you have to know the commands of God from the
commands of Satan, seeing he can easily insinuate his suggestions by inward
voices, as commands of God. According to the old Law of God to his people the
Jews, Pretenders to a Spirit of Prophecy, though they gave evidence of their
pretended mission from God by signs and wonders (and those coming to pass
too) yet were to be discovered and judged by the written word, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2,
3. etc. And in the new Testament, the Doctrine of an Angel from Heaven is
submitted (under a curse) to the Doctrine preached by the Apostles, Gal. 1. 8.
And we desire to know whether you will submit your Revelations to this
Touchstone, or no? If so, you yield the question: If not, then whatever
Commands or Prohibitions you receive in the way of revelation, you must obey,
whether agreeing, or disagreeing to the written Law of God. And then how far
the examples of Abraham offering up his Son, and Phinehas executing vengeance;
yea (and when time serves) Ehuds message from God to Eglon, may be witnessed
in you (as you speak) we know Judge. 3. 19
not, and shall pray we never may, by experience.

Q. 9. Whether the Scriptures do not establish it self as the rule of Faith,
in referring all pretenders to new light, to the Law and the Testimony, and
telling us expressly, That if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in Isa. 20. 8.
them. And whether the light in you and in your companions be not darkness,
that will not undergo this trial?

Q. 10. Whether the phrases of walking in the Law of the Lord, keeping Gods
Testimonies, taking heed to a man's, way according to Gods word, not wandering
from Gods Commandments, Ps. 119, 1, 2. 9, 10. 21. 30. 35. 51. 102. 110. 133.
157.
laying Gods Jugdments before him, going in the path of Gods Commandments, not
declining from Gods Law, not departing from Gods Judgments, not erring from his
Precepts, ordering his steps in Gods word, not declining from his testimonies;
Are not clear evidences, that David made the written word that then was, his
Rule? And you own David's Rule for yours, p. 8.

Q. 11. Whether you think in your conscience, that Deuteronomy. 5. 32, 33. does not
convincingly prove the Scripture to be the Saints rule? The words are, Ye
shall observe to do therefore, as the Lord your God has commanded you (and
before we have the repitition of the written Law) You shall not turn aside to
the right hand or to the left, etc. Your answer in your book, is in sum, P. 7.
that all the Scripture was not then written. But did not Moses therein
establish as much as was then written, for the rule the Saints of those times
were to walk by. Besides these words immediately refer to the Moral Law, before
repeated in the same Chapter. And will you exclude that from being the Saints
rule, as well as other Scriptures? Then indeed there will be no duty or sin,
but as a man thinks.

Q. 12. Whether you deal honestly with Calvin in that P. 20.
Scripture, Ephesians. 2. 20. whilst you tell your Readers that he says in
Terminis, That the Apostle does in that Scripture intend Jesus Christ to whom
the Prophets and Apostles did bear witness. Whereas Calvin says expressly, It
is without doubt that the [foundation] in this place is taken for the
[Doctrine] of the Prophets and Apostles. And therefore Paul teaches, that the
Quin fundamentum hic pro doctrina sumatur minime dubium est. Et itaque docet
Paulus, fidem ecclesiae, in hac doctrina debere esse fundatam Calv. in l.
Churches faith ought to be founded on this Doctrine. And there is not any
mention at all of those words in Calvin, which you quote from him. To say the
truth, we much vvonder how you could have the brazen face to father a saying
upon Calvin which he never said: till we looked upon Marlorate, whose
mis-quotation, or rather the fault of his Printer (it seems) deceived you, for
there we find among other things there ascribed to Calvin, this passage you
mention. But it concerned a man of your acuteness, not to have taken up a
report from another, when Calvin's works are so common in every Shop and
Study, that with a little pains more, you might have conversed with the
Original Author, whence Marlorate makes his collections. But it seems you
were vvilling to snatch at any thing that seemed to support your cause, where
ever you found it. And yet you showed no part of ingenuity in your usage of
Marlorate himself, who together with that passage which you quote, and under
the same note by which he distinguishes Calvin's words, cites Calvin point
blank against you, saying, that the Apostle shows in that place how the
Ephesians were made fellow Citizens with the Saints, Nempe si fundati sint in
Prophetarum and Apostolorum Doctrina, to wit, If they be founded on the
Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles.

These words and others to the same purpose immediately precede your own
quotation, which renders your dis-ingenuity the more culpable, as showing a
vvilfull design of abusing so reverend a name to delude your Readers.

Q. 13. In a word, tell us ingenuously, Whether we must, or must not believe
the Doctrines which the Scriptures lay down upon their own authority? If we
must, why do you quarrel at those that call them the rule, ground, foundation
of faith; seeing every intelligent man will tell you, that it is the same
thing, to believe the Doctrines of the Scripture upon the Scriptures authority,
and to make the Scriptures the ground, rule, foundation of faith.

If we must not, then tell us, what, superadded to the Scriptures own
Authority, renders their Doctrines more credible? We observe the Papists state
this question as you do. But they will answer us ingenuously, That they
believe the Scriptures, because the Church has confirmed them. And the
Socinians are of your mind also; but they deal fairly too, and speak out,
That they will believe the Scriptures as far as reason votes with them. Would
you speak out, we doubt you must confess you are very near these last in your
judgment: Why do you not tell us plainly; that you believe the Doctrines laid
down in the Scripture, as far as the light within you concurs with them? And
then we shall know what you mean, in denying the Scriptures to be the rule
and ground of faith, Viz. That as much as pleases you you will believe, and
what dislikes you, shall be cashiered as an old Declarative, or an Almanac
out of date, as some of your Cater-cosins, the Familists have blasphemously
called the Bible.

Q. 14. Lastly, Whether God will not judge every man, who lives within the
sound of the Gospel, by the written word? If not, what means the Apostle
Paul, when he says, that as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be judged by
the Law, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ
according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 12. 16.

And seeing we are upon this subject, give us leave to enquire yet a little
further; what are those Books out of which the dead shall be judged, and whence
one day God will draw the rule of his proceedings in the day of Judgment, as
you may find, Apoc. 2. 12.

If God will judge us out of the written word after death, surely, we are not
to be blamed, if we study that Statute Law, and labor to conform our belief,
and practice thereunto whilst we live, which must judge us when we dye. Or
else, we pray you tell us, whether we must live by one rule here, and be judged
hereafter by another?

In your answer to these Quaeries, we must desire you not to play Child's play
with us, and endeavor to put us off with trifling fallacies, which every
Sophister can discern, as you do frequently in your particular contests with
Mr. Thomas, which we doubt not you will here of with both ears, when he is at
leisure to reply upon you: but deal heartily and positively as becomes a
Scholar, and a Christian, with those who assure you they will with all possible
fairness examine whatsoever of that nature you shall think necessary to
rejoyne hereunto.

And here we shall put a period to our first debate with you, Rule, ground, or
foundation of faith: Which we say is the Scriptures, you (that we can find) yet
say not, what it is, but say roundly it is not they.

Our next friendly collation is about the way of drawing those Doctrines from
the Scripture, which are to be believed and practiced. Concerning which, your
declared judgment is (as P. 5, 6. 19. etc.
well as we can gather it from your own expressions) That it is unlawful to
interpret, or give any meaning of Scripture, or to draw any deductions and
conclusions from it; but that we must rest satisfied with the bare words of
Scripture, insomuch that nothing (according to you) is proved from the
Scripture, but what is there in so many words.

Concerning which Tenet we have a little knocked Shins with you before at
arms end, but we shall now wrestle a fair fall, and come as close as we can,
to give you a downright Cornish hugg.

First, therefore we must inform you, that your Generation French, or no, but
if you do, we refer you to a discourse of Mr. Daille, as learned a French man
as any this latter age has bred; who in a Book Lafoy fondee sur les S.
Escritures, par Jean Daille.
printed about sixteen years since, has a large dispute with certain Popish
Methodists, who undertook to teach their deluded Proselites, the same way of
confuting the French Protestants, which you now principle your Disciples
withal, to gravel those of this Nation. They deem (says he) that there needs
no more ado to baffle us, but to demand of us an express formal Text for
every Article of our confession. This facile way (says he further) has
produced a rabble of Disputants among them: and whereas at first they fled and
declined all conferences of Religion, and permitted none but their Clergy to
speak of it; now all sorts of people will adventure to engage with us, even
Seamsters, and Carters Boys, being created Doctors in an instant by this
handsome Method.

The same Author derives the rise of it higher then that age too: But from such
a Family, as neither they nor you have much cause to boast of. Eutiches the
Heretic, that confounded the Natures of God and man in the Lord Jesus Christ,
Act Council. chalcedon (...), Athanas. Ep. de Synod. Arim. and Seleuc. (...). Et
Dialog cont. Arianum. (...). Aug. Ep. 174. and 178. Id. Contra maxim? T. 6.
fol. 144. G.
required an express Scripture to affirm, that in Christ there are two
Natures. The Arians in Athanasius his time and after, denied the
consubstantiality of the Son of God; Viz. That he was of the same substance
with the Father (asserted by the Council of Nice, to express the Eternal
Deity of the Son) as you do the word Sacrament, because it is not in so many
Letters found in the Scripture. And concerning the very Godhead of Jesus
Christ, in a Dialogue between Athanasius and an Arian, Let alone Syllogismes,
says the Arian, and show it us written that the Son is the true God.

So Pascentius an Arian requires of Augustine to show him the word
consubstantiall in Scripture, without Argument. And in a like dispute between
him and Maximinus, concerning the Godhead of the H. Ghost, when the Father
proved it from the Scripture, that tells us, He has a Temple, the proper
adjunct of Divinity; the Heretic replies, Truth is not concluded by Argument,
but proved by certain Testimonies. These things we have the more largely
transcribed out of that learned Author, to let you know, out of what Forge that
Weapon is hammered wherewith you encounter us. Follow you now (if you please)
the ancient Heretics, and modern Papists. For our parts, we are glad that we
insist upon the same way and method of disputing, which the sounder part of the
Church has ever used to encounter them withal.

Surely our Savior Christ better knew the way of proving express Texts, but
allowed himself the liberty of the interpretations and deductions. When Satan
tempted him to turn stones into bread, he thought it sufficient to repel the
Tentation, by that Text of Moses, Man lives not by bread alone, but by every
word that Mat. 4. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
proceeds out of the mouth of God. The force of which Answer lies in this
Syllogism.

If God be able to supply the want of ordinary food, that a man's life shall be
sustained without it, whilst God has work for him to do, then should I do
ill, if (in distrust of him) I should command these stones to be made bread.

But God is thus able; for man lives not, etc. Therefore I should do ill, if I
should command these stones to be made bread.

Had one of your Brethren been at the Devils elbow, he would have taught him
more wit then to take such an answer, and have turned him to put our Savior
upon the producing of an express Text of Scripture that forbad Jesus the Son
of Mary to command stones to be made bread.

So in the second Tentation, both our Savior and the Devil meanings or
deductions be allowable in urging of Scripture) might have gone to School to
you. The Devil urges Scripture to our Savior, to conclude the lawfulness of
his casting himself down from the Pinnacle: For (says he) it is written, He
shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, etc. We do not find our Savior
so well versed in your way of disputing, as to deny his proof, because it was
not expressly, God shall give his Angels charge over Jesus the Son of Mary, and
in their hands shall they bear him up, etc. But answers by another Scripture,
to show that that Text was not to be understood of protection in ways of
tempting God, by running our selves upon unnecessary dangers.

Nay, when our Savior had answered him with that place, Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Thou
shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Satan also was to seek of that plea which you
could have suggested to him, Viz. That that Scripture did not expressly forbid
Jesus of Nazareth to throw himself down from the Pinnacle.

And in the third Tentation (according to your Tenet) our Savior had been hard
put to it, to prove that it was unlawful to worship the Devil himself; had
Satan been disciplined by your principles, and required of him an express
Text, That it is not lawful to worship the Devil. Whereas it seems for want
of your Artifice, the silly Tempter was put off with a Scripture that requires
us to worship and serve God only, and concludes the unlawfulness of
Devill-worship by this Argument,

If we must worship and serve God only, ergo not the Devil.

But we must worship and serve God only, therefore not the Devil.

And the Sadduces afterward were very silly animalls, that Savior go away in
triumph for putting Mat. 22. 32. Exodus 3. 6.
them to silence, by so weak a proof of the Resurrection, as the words of God
to Moses in the Bush, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob. Why had they not required (in so fundamental an Article of faith
especially) a positive and express Scripture, affirming in so many words, that
the dead shall rise again.

But you think our Saviors example will not bear us out in interpretations
and deductions, because he was infallible in P. 6.
what he spoke, and neither did nor could err in what he said; which, you
suppose, cannot be said of us, or our meanings, and arguments. To which we
answer, we do not compare our selves with our Savior in point of infallibility
(although your generation do, who account themselves equally perfect with him.)
But this we say, that our Savior in these places and others, where he argues
from the Scriptures, does not urge his own infallibility, as the ground upon
which he requires belief, neither did Satan or the Sadduces acquiesce in the
acknowledgment thereof, but in the conviction wrought in them by the strength
of his Arguments. And we must tell you, that any one who can draw an Argument
rightly from Scripture, is no less infallible in the conclusions so deduced
thence, then our Savior was in his. The question therefore will be, Whether
any person in interpreting and arguing from Scripture be infallible? but
whether such interpretations and deductions be truly, and bona fide according
to the mind of the H. Chost in Scripture, whether they be drawn by a person
that is fallible or infallible? For be the person never so fallible that gives
the interpretation, or draws the argument, yet if the interpretation be sound,
and the argument rightly concluded, he is therein infallible: For you cannot be
altogether ignorant of that common Maxim, That nothing Ex veris possunt non
nisi vera sequi.
but truth can rightly follow from truth, and a false conclusion can never be
regularly drawn from true premises.

So that all that flourish which you afterward make, is but a mere rhetorical
vapor, and signifies just nothing to an understanding either tell the people
P. 6.
plainly, that we are infallible, that they may receive our deductions from
Scripture, for true Doctrine, nay Scripture it self; or else say, that we are
fallible, that so they may take liberty of proving our actions and doctrine.

We answer, we need not tell the people we are infallible; and yet they are no
less bound to receive our deductions (if rightly drawn from Scripture) then
if we were indeed so. Because although we be not infallible, yet so far as we
regularly argue from Scripture, we are not deceived, nor can deceive them. The
authority of our deductions from Scripture, depends not on our fallibility or
infallibility, but upon the evidence they carry in them, of their necessary
connection with the truth we argue from. And this because we own our selves
fallible, we allow our hearers to use their own judgments, and consciences to
prove and try whether it be so or no. God forbid but they who (as you say) must
dye for themselves, and account to the Lord for themselves, should interpret
for themselves and believe for themselve? But what then? will it therefore
follow that they must not receive our interpretations, or believe our
deductions? Or that we may not help them to interpret, or draw deductions,
which they cannot so well do themselves? They interpret for themselves, that by
the light of the Scriptures, and their own Judgments led by them, see cause to
own our interpretations. And they believe for themselves, who are (upon a
serious weighing of our Arguments) convinced that they ought to admit them as
just and lawful deductions from Scripture.

What you add in the close of that Paragraph, that it may so fall out, that six
of those that esteem themselves the ablest Doctors, if shut asunder, shall so
vary in the interpretation of one Scripture, that scarce two of the six shall
agree in the same interpretation; Whence you would infer how little credit is
to be given to our deductions: we might take for an unsavory scoff. and so
pass it by. But we shall forgive you this, and many more such, if it will do
you any good, and vouchsafe to answer, even where you deserve no answer but
silence and scorn. Be it therefore as you say (which yet in Scriptures that
contain matter of says and practice, we cannot suppose; most of us, we
conceive, in such, are, at least (till the newfangled conceits of these times
infected some of the Ministry, as well as others) were, of the same mind in
most of them) yet herein we are no more to be blamed then the Apostles and
other primitive Teachers themselves, who differed as much in those times of
clearest light about the Scriptures that enjoined the observation of Jewish
Ceremonies; whilst some of them earnestly contended, that they extended to
converted Gentiles, and others affirmed the quite contrary. And will you thence
conclude, that there is little credit to be given to any of their deductions,
because they disagreed among themselves? All that can be hence solidly
inferred, is no more but this, that therefore it concerns Gods people to
search (with the Noble Beroeans) whether the things, the one or the other
says, be most consonant to the Scriptures.

But you that will not believe our interpretations, or deductions, all things
agreed; will you believe them in those things wherein we are all, or the
greatest part of us of a mind: Surely, if so, most of the quaking Doctrines
will fall to the ground; for very few, if any of us, shall dare to interpret
Scriptures to the countenance of those horrid Doctrines before mentioned.

In a word, this whole discourse about infallibility, and differences Popish
Baxtet, Quakers Catechism.
Tutors. For are they not the very same things which they object against us?
That we have not an infalliable Spirit to interpret Scriptures, and that we
differ among our selves in our interpretations; and therefore when we appeal
to Scripture, as the only Judge of Controversies between us; they (as you do)
deny it upon this account, because we have no infallible Spirit to interpret
the Scriptures controverted, and thereby give an Authoritative decision of
them. And what we answer to them, we therefore say to you in a word, The
Scripture we own as our only Rule, and Judge in matters of faith; and we own
no interpretation of Scripture, nor desire others to own any, but such as hold
proportion with other Scriptures; and such interpretations and deductions are
so far infallible, as they do necessarily agree to them, or follow from them.

But (say you further) You have some of you been Teachers in this Nation, ten,
twenty, thirty years: were those things that you have taught so many years
together, necessarily deduced from Scripture? What then? If not (say you) then
by your own confession you have taught falsehood. But stay, Sir, every
deduction that is not necessarily drawn from Scripture, is not falsehood. A
true conclusion may have but a probable consequence sometimes to infer it from
the premises. Its truth is never the less for that, but its evidence. But
suppose we should confess (for once) that all which we deduce from Scripture
is not true? We know not what use you will make of it, except this, that those
that do not always speak truth, are not to be thought at any time to do so.
And if so, we know whom this inference will hit as well as our selves. What
think you of the Apostle Peter, whom Paul withstood to his face, Gal. 2. 11.
for countenancing the false brethren in the Doctrine and practice of the
Mosaicall Ordinances among the Gentile Churches, and compelling the Gentiles to
live as the Jews? was he never in the right, or not to be believed to be so,
because he was then in the wrong? Nay, does not God himself suppose a
possibility of being deceived in the best of his Ministers, when he bids
hearers prove all things, 1 These. 5. 21. and commends the Beroeans for
searching the Scriptures, whether the things that Paul and Silas preached, were
so or no? Act. 17. 11. We suppose that no godly Minister will preach that,
which he knows to be false. But if without his knowledge (yea, or with his
knowledge) any one should do so; it is the hearers fault if he be deceived
thereby, because he has a certain rule whereby to examine what he teaches;
and we profess we desire no further to be credited then the Scripture will
bear us out in what we say.

But suppose there be some of us possibly to be found, who all that they have
preached for so long time, to be truth necessarily deduced from Scripture: What
of that? Why? then (say you) all that is so taught is infallible. True; And
what then? Forsooth, then (you add) why do you not then adjoyn all your Sermons
to the Scripture; for if necessarily deduced from Scripture, they are
Scripture, and a part of the Saints rule: And so (you go on) it would become so
voluminous a Book, that many poor Souls Estates would not buy a Bible. We
shall give you a brief account why we do not, if it may do you service, And
that is, because we do not judge our selves so immediately inspired in our
Sermons (although we deliver the same truths) the holy Penmen of God were in
penning of the Scriptures. The sacred Writers of Scripture, did not only write
the things they left upon record to the Church, by immediate inspiration, but
the words and phrases in which they expressed them. Whereas the best Ministers
that since have been, have been feign to express those truths in notions and
terms of their own; yea, and the Apostles themselves in their popular
Sermons. And therefore, we suppose, the H. Ghost thought not fit to record all
the popular Sermons which were preached by the Apostles themselves, but only
appointed them to draw up the sum of the Doctrine they generally taught in
expressions of their own, into a form of sound words of his own inspiration,
to be a Standard of Doctrine and expression to succeeding ages.

And yet, supposing the Apostles always preached as they wrote (by immediate
inspiration) as to matter and form; then we ask you, Why they did not bind up
all their Sermons with the Canonical Scriptures, seeing all they taught was
infallible? Whatever you answer hereunto, will be applied to our case. But we
suppose John gives you a sufficient reason in the close of his Gospel, There
are many other things (says he) which Jesus Jo. 21. 25.
did, which if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the World
it self would not contain the Books that should be written. So that God
therefore thought fit to keep from after Ages, part of the History of Christ,
that the Bible might not be too voluminous. And we hope, the same reason will
serve for us, if we do not bind up our necessary and infallible deductions with
the Bible.

In a word, this question is proposed with no greater measure Whether all the
Bushells, and Yards, and Pints in every man's house or shop in Bristoll be exact
measure, or no? If all, say ye: then you further enquire; Why they do not all
bring them into the Market-house, or public place appointed for that purpose,
and chain them all to the common Standard, seeing they are all alike exact
with it? Surely to such a wise question, the answer will be easy, Viz. Because
one public Standard is enough to measure private Measures by; and the several
Tradesmen according to their several employments, having once had their
private Measures tried by that, can make profitable use of them at home. We
shall leave you to make the application to the Question in hand.

But before we dismiss this captious Argument of yours, retort it upon you,
and then see whether you can give a wiser answer to your own question in your
own case, then we have done in ours. We ask therefore. Is all that George Fox,
James Nayler, or your self teach, write, and pronounce as from God (For from
Scripture you will not say you speak, seeing that it is not your rule of
Doctrine) necessarily true, or no? If not, then (by your own confession) you
have (if your own Argument be good) taught falsehood; if so; then all you and
they have taught is infallible; for you say, it is dictated by the same Spirit
that indicted the Scriptures, and so equal to them (your Epistles are as good
as St. Paul's is before-said by some of you.) And then why do you not adjoyne
all your Preachments and Pamphlets to the Bible? etc.

Thus you see the practice of our Savior Christ (notwithstanding
infallibility, which we pretend not to) is and ought to be herein our example.
But we need not defend our practice with so great a name, having the examples
of so many Apostles, and other primitive Teachers to plead for us. We pray you
tell us (otherwise) how the Apostles proved by the Scriptures that Jesus was
the Christ? Did they, or could they bring any one Text in all the old Testament
that says so in terminis, That Jesus the Son of Mary, berne in Bethlem, is the
(...). Act. 17. 2.
Messiah? No, but the Text tells us; that they opened the Scriptures, and laid
them one by another in a way of reasoning, (as the word rendered alleging
signifies in the Original) and so convinced the Jews. How will you dispute
with a Jew, that ownes not the infallibility of the Penmen of the New
Testament, and so will question the truth of what is there affirmed, that this
Jesus is the Christ? you have no Weapon to encounter him withal, but Argument
and deductions from the old Testament: For did the old Testament expressly say
so any where, the question were at an end between us and him.

We entreat you further to tell us, how the Apostle Paul Barnabasses requiring,
and receiving maintenance out of the Law, 1 Cor. 9. 8. Say I these things as a
man, i. e. by mine own private judgment, or says not the Law the same also. We
pray you tell us where the Law says in so many words, that Paul and Barnabas
might lawfully forbear working, and expect to eat the fruit of the Vineyard
they planted? etc. Sure we are, the place quoted by him out of the Law, says
no more but this, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out
the Corn, v. 9. Here is not a word of Paul and Barnabas, except Paul and
Barnabas be Oxen (would a Quaker reply.) But though the Text speak expressly of
Oxen, yet the Apostle finds Paul and Barnabas, in the reason and equity of that
Law; and so makes a strong Argument of it, verse. 10.

And surely it will prove an hard matter to your self, or your Dectrines of
election and reprobation, out of Genesis 25. 23. and Mal. 1, 2, 3. quoted for the
proof thereof by that Apostle, Romans 9. 11, 12, 13. and the righteousness of
these decrees out of Exodus 33. 19. and many other Doctrines of affinity with
them, in that Chapter, out of the rest of the old Testament Texts there
alleged, without consequences; We are sure none of them all are in express
terms in those Scriptures brought to prove them. We might add the proofs that
the Author to the Hebrews brings for the Godhead of Christ, from Psa. 45. 6, 7.
102. 25. and 110. 1. quoted, Chap. 1. 8. 9. 10. 13. and the Eternity of Christ's
Priesthood from the History of Melchizedek, and Psa. 110. 4. quoted Chap. 7.

But we foreseee, that the question will still be between us, Whether we be
infallible (as the Apostles are supposed to have been) in our interpretations
and deductions? For answer whereto, we refer you to what was even now said on
this point. Only here we crave leave to add, that we have reason to think our
infallibility and yours is much at a rate: And yet we find you very frequently
taking that liberty which you deny us. For how do you conceive the Prophesies
of Micha against those that taught for hire, and the woes of our Savior,
against those that do their works to be seen of men, and stand praying in the
Synagogues, and love the uppermost rooms at Feasts, and greetings in the
Markets, etc. and the commands given to the Apostles of Christ that then were
sent by him upon a special errand, of giving freely what they freely received,
etc. concern us, whose names are not expressly mentioned in those Texts, but by
deduction or argumentation, such as it is? Nay, how do you bring down the
prohibitions of calling men Masters, respecting of persons, etc. to be obliging
to you, and your Proselites, but by consequence? Were it not easy for us (were
we minded to play the same Child's play with you which you do with us) to
require of you an express place of Scripture, forbidding Thomas Speed by name,
to do thus and thus: or at least every Christian or Disciple? and yet then you
would need a deduction to bring down the prohibition to your self in
particular, such as this,

No Christian, or Disciple of Christ must call men Masters. But T. S. is a
Christian. We wish he were.

Therefore T. S. must not call men Masters.

Nay (to go yet further with you) we might very well require That Christ is the
light that enlightens every one that comes into the World; and that Christ is
the word of God, and not to the Scriptures. A good friend of yours in a
discourse T. C.
with one of us, having before denied all consequences and deductions from
Scripture, as you do; was pitifully gravelled, when he was required to produce
express Scriptures to prove these propositions, and was told that the Texts he
produced, which were Jo. 8. 12. I am the light of the World, and Jo. 1. 9. That
was the true light which enlightneth every one that comes into the World, had
not the name of Christ in them, but it was to be concluded by Argument, that
those words are spoken of Christ; and that the place, Jo. 1. 1. did not
expressly affirm that Christ is the word: but is only inferred thence by
deductions. And (as for meanings and interpretations) it was none of the best,
which the same party gave of that Scripture, which forbids the Disciples to
carry shoes, as well as a Purse or Scrip (whence he was told, that it as much
concerned G. Fox to go without shoes, as us without Purse or Scrip) Viz. That
the Text forbids to carry shoes, but not to wear them. A learned
interpretation, and such as becomes your infallibility! And your self, however
unlawful you judge it in us to interpret Scripture, yet Dictator-like; as p.
8. where you interpret the word Rule, Gal. 6. 16. for the rule of the new
Creature, not the Scriptures (as if the Scripture, and the rule of the new
Creature were opposites:) and so p. 19. where you interpret the Record spoken
of 1. Jo. 5. 10. to be eternal life, not the Scriptures: and again, p. 20.
you interpret the foundation spoken of, Ephesians. 2. 20. to be that same Jesus, who
was preached by the Prophets and Apostles. So hard a matter it is for men that
undertake to give Law to others, not to transgress it themselves; and not to
conceit the case altered in their own concernments, from what they rigorously
pronounce concerning others!

We have not yet quite done with you, and therefore we must Questions upon this
subject now at hand.

Q. 1. Sir, you will admit of no interpretations of Scripture, we entreat you
therefore to tell us. Christ says, he is the true Vine, and his Father an
Husbandman, Jo. 15. 1. Are they properly so, or Metaphorically? If you say
metaphorically, or improperly, you interpret; for the Texts express words are
not, I am a metaphorical Vine, and my Father a metaphorical Husbandman. If
you say properly, you blaspheme.

Q. 2. Christ says, I am the door, Jo. 10. 9. You believe, you Epistle, p. 7.
say, that Christ means as he speaks, and therefore you deny our meanings and
interpretations as needless. Is Christ then that which we in propriety of
speech call a door? If you say, he is in a spiritual sense a door; who
interprets now? Do we offend, if we interpret this Text, of a spiritual door
to a mystical building, and you though you give the same sense, not so?

Q. 3. Nay, what say you further to those two places of Paul and James, which
in words flatly contradict one another. Ye see, says James, that by works a
man is justified, and not by faith only, Ja. 2. 24. But we know, says Paul,
That a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, Gal. 2. 16. You will allow (we hope) that the Scriptures are truth,
though they be not the word of God. Now truth, and truth, contradict not each
other; so that we must find a different sense from the contexts of both
places, wherein the one affirms that works justify not, and the other that
they do.

This reconciliation is usually made by our Divines thus; St. Paul denies works
to constitute any person just before God, and James affirms, that works
declare a person just. How you (without interpretation) will reconcile them,
we know not; especially when we consider that you are a greater friend to
constitutive justification by works (if you be of the mind of your fellow
Quakers then we believe James was, and so are more concerned to study how to
come off fairly with Paul then we.

Q. 4. And now we are upon the point of reconciling Scriptures, we shall make
you a little more work in this kind. Christ says, The Father is greater then
I, and yet he says again, I and the Father are one: And Paul says of him,
That he accounted it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 9. The Apostle
John says, There are three that hear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the H. Ghost, and these three are one. Show us (without interpretation) how
Christ can be equal with the Father without robbery, and one with him, and yet
the Father greater then he, how the Father, the word, and the H. Ghost can be
three and yet one.

And we might here also put you the question that our Savior put to the
Pharisees. Mat. 22. 41. How Christ, is David's Son, and yet David's Lord? and we
suppose with the same success that you will never be able to Answer us a word,
if you hold your Principle of denying all interpretations, but that your
forehead possibly may be harder then the Pharisees.

Q. 5. What will you say to a Papist, (but that you own not the Scripture, as
a rule of Doctrine, which indeed is a quick way of Answering all difficult
Texts) when he tells you that he finds Transubstantiation in this is my body?
Is the expression proper, or figurative? was the bread his body indeed, or a
Sign of it? if you say his body indeed, you are a Papist, if not you
interpret.

Sir to be short, we shall take leave to mind you of these particulars, and we
have done.

1. As to that un-christian passage of yours [viz. a righteousness beyond the
Stars, a Righteousness far above us] as you call the Righteousness of Christ
in a slighting manner (and we have just ground to fear, some of those you
plead for speak to that purpose in a spighting way) we heartily advise you to
take heed what you do, that you may not be found in the number of those who by
wicked hands labor to pull the Crown from the Head of Jesus, and destroy the
very being of Holiness amongst men, for all the works of such Persons at the
best are but beautiful deformities, and although they may be highly esteemed
amongst men, yet they are abomination before the Holy God; for our parts we are
not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, and have (through mercy) determined not
to know any thing amongst our People but Jesus Christ, and him crucified: and
we judge it a special duty in this season (the Lord help us in it) that the
more you and your accomplices do either wretchedly reflect upon, or down right
Blaspheme and speak against that Glorious Righteousness, the more to exalt,
and make mention of that Righteousness, even that only.

2. Whereas you say [could the Scripture be a rule before it was Scripture?] We
answer, the word now written, even the self same word was the very same, and
had the same Office viz. to be a Divine ground of faith and rule of life before
it was written; as for instance, Enochs Prophecy quoted by Jude 14. 15
concerning the judge, the attendants, the Persons to be judged, the judgment
it self, the deeds and words for which they are judged, is the very same with
the written word; and Gods word to Abraham Gen 17. 1. I am God all-sufficient,
waelke before me, and be upright, is the same with, nay is the sum of the
written word, yet this was spoken four hundred years before a word was
committed to writing, it being generally agreed upon, that Moses was the first
holy man that did write by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost Pray Sir tell us
what difference was there between the Law as spoken by the mouth of God, and
afterward written by the finger of God? When Moses being provoked in the
business of the Golden Calfe had broken the two Tables, God commanded him to
make two Tables of Stone more, and the Text tells us that God did write the
very self same words that he had written before in the first Tables Exodus 34.
1. the Truth is you do but trifle in your Quaerie, yet we fear you border not
far from Blasphemy, you nusle up your quaking friends in their horrid rejecting
of the Scriptures to be the rule, and so make them listen after inspirations,
you would make void the word of God through your pretended Revelations, and
pull that pure and perfect clear Light out of the Firmament of Assembleis, that
men might follow the ignis fatuus of their darkened minds, and deceitful hearts.

3. You quaere, Whether our Sermons are infallible, and if so, why they are not
bound up with the Bible, and if so, how huge a Volume would it make, and how
few could buy it? we reply, the Doctrine which we Preach is not ours, but Gods,
and therefore infallible, but must they therefore be bound up with the Bible.
what think you of the Sermons of Jesus Christ Luke 4. 21. Luke 5. 3. were they
not infallible? or the Sermon Philip Preached to the Eunuch out of Esaias 53.
Acts 8. 53. or that Paul Preached at his farewell Acts 20. 7. were they not
infallibly true? yet these were not bound up with the Bible, why do you thus
from your inward darkness cavil at outward Light? we call it your darkness,
hoping that you do not knowingly oppose the truth.

4. As for Ministers Maintenance, upon which you harp so much, as knowing the
sound to be very welcome to the ears of your gang and others, we desire this
favor at your hands, either soberly to answer our reasons, or else to be so
ingenuous as to forbear your scoffings.

5. As for your defense of the Language [thee and thou] we referr you to what
is said a bove, we shall only add this, we cannot think it to be any such great
Crime to speak in this one case the plural you for thou, for the singular, as
when Saint Paul says we for I, as Heb. 6. 9 we are persuaded better things of
you, and though we thus speak, and again, we desire v. 11. (...).

Lastly, whereas as you say in favor of your dear Quakers [these are the
Practices for which they are hated] as though they were so innocent: we reply,
besides their Blasphemies, of which before, and their railings, cursings,
slanders, untruths, we desire to know what you think of four or five instances
we shall propose; first, what do you think of the Quaker that acted that most
abominable, unnameable sin with a Mare? what do you think of it, was it not
from his light within? or what is your opinion of another poor wretch, that
hanged himself? these two you may find at large added to the relation of
Gilpin of Kendall, and confessed by the Prime of that way to be true; what may
be your thoughts of those Quakers that killed their Mother? it was thus, they
were taught to harken to, and follow after the Light within them, this Light
taught them they ought to destroy the Original of Sin, and by the said Light
they apprehended their Mother to be the Original, and from thence still by the
said Light they most wickedly embrued their hands in the blood of their Mother,
this you may read in Mr. William Keys Minister of Stokesly his Answer to
eighteen Quaeries who was with them in Prison.

What may be your judgment of Nicholas Kate of Harwell in this County of
Berks? who about ten months since came into Newberry between eight and nine in
the Morning on the Lord; day, stark naked in a most immodest manner, even
beyond the Pagans, and so walked through a long Street, only with an enchanted
belt about him (which belt we have ground to call enchanted,) this man did not
converse or live as a Husband with his wife for many months before this, we
will tell you what his Doctrines were.

1. That Marriage was made by man. 2. That Christians were worse then Beasts.
3. That any woman was as free to him as his Wife: 4. That his wife was no wife
of his, she was a limb of the Devil. 5. That he was holy, and all things that
he touched were holy, as his very Hatchet, his pot, his knife. 6. That when the
fulness of time was come he should work miracles.
This man has left his own family his Land and stock of a very considerable
value, entered upon by Persons whom the Country esteems Ranters, his wife a
weak diseased woman, who brought him a valuable portion, left to the mercies
of these Persons, which are cruel enough to her, the farmer Kate himself
since his departure was never heard of by his wife or any of her friends, if
any Person can tell where he is, or what is become of him, they may do a
charitable Christian Office to inform his much distressed Wife. Lastly, what
do you think of one of your neighbors of Bristoll who lately even the 29. of
April last at Marleborough in the County of Wilts in a discourse with a Godly,
discreet, and Learned friend, held out this Light,

1. He knew no such thing as the resurrection of the body. 2. That the body of
Christ was not in Heaven, neither should he come thence with a body. 3. He
defended those that went naked, but as yet, he had no command to do so. 4.
That of late he went to bed with a woman who was not his wife, and that he did
it without Sin. 5. That that very Christ crucified at Jerusalem, was indwelling
in him. 6. That he was confident of his perfect holiness, and on that account
went to bed with the woman, and yet afterward excused himself saying, there
was a necessity for it, there was no other spare bed in the House.
Sir, these, with those before recited, are the Doctrins and Practices that we
according to the measure received contend against; all the hurt we wish you is
this, that God would give you the spirit of truth love, and of a sound mind,
that you may not go on to vilify the Lord of Glory, to slight the word of life,
truth and salvation, and shoot your Tart, indeed bitter speeches like darts
against men that fear God, and desire to prize and keep close to the word of
his grace; for our parts we have a witness within, that what we have done, is
for the truth, which we pray, that you and we may receive in the love of it,
and in so doing, we shall subscribe our selves,

Reding this 12 of May 1656. Your Friends, Christopher Fowler. Simon Ford.


FINIS.

