A True RELATION Of a great and wonderful VICTORY OBTAINED By Captain ASHTON
and the Parliaments Forces, Against the Earl of DERBY at Whalley in Lancashire.
As it was certified in a Letter from a Gentleman there, to a Member of the
House of COMMONS. For which great mercy they have appointed a day of
Thanksgiving.

London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. May 8. 1643.

A TRUE RELATION Of a great and wonderful VICTORY, etc.
SIR,
THough I be from Manchester, yet having this convenient Bearer thither, I
thought good to give you a Relation (in which I desire not to exceed) of Gods
great preservation of us, which was greater then I mentioned in my last (...)
That the Earl of Derby, the Lord Mollineux, Sir Gilbert Hoghton, Colonel
Tildesley, with all the other great Papists in this County, issued out of
Preston, and on Wednesday noon came to Ribchester with eleven Troops of horse,
700 foot, and infinite of club-men, in all conceived to be 5000. We lying at
Dunkenhalgh-hall with out two Troops hearing of his great force retreated to
Padiham, having before sent to Colonel Shuttleworth, to raise the country
which he did, all the firemen came in the next morning (though they have had no
pay this 5 weeks) and some few club-men: I did compute us to be 60 horse, and
some 400 foot, not above five hundred I am sure at the first: we marched with
our horse toward Whalley, where we took a man and 2. geldings of Mr. Lathams
the great Papist, and retreated to Read-bank, here we discovered above 150
horse to follow us, and when our foot was come thither to us, our horse
retreated more, our foot advanced close under a wall, only my self stood and
faced the enemy: I made as though I fled, they pursued me, when I knew they
were in the command of our men, I advanced again and shot off my pistol (being
the sign for our foot) whereupon our men discharged with a great showt, the
enemies horse fled in great disorder, we wounded many, took forty prisoners,
some horse and 60 Muskets, our fire men pursued them to Whalley, where the
Earl of Derby and the rest were in the Abbey, much a do we had to keep our
Soldiers back, the enemy (who were ten for one to us) discharged his Cannon 5.
times, but hurt not a man of us, (blessed be our good God) he drew into a body,
we being out of order ran under hedges, played upon them with our Muskets, and
routed their foot, which fled over the Water, their horse still facing us, our
men still pursued them to Lango-green, where Captain Ashton and my self with
much a do caused our first men to stay till more came up, then our men shot;
their horse fled; then all our horse came up and pursued them through Salisbury
Park, and to Ribchester, and most of their great ones had some touch, or some
narrow escape, as themselves report. And having thus driven them out of the
Hundred, we retreated to Padiham, where having a good Minister, some hours were
spent in thanksgiving for this great deliverance, and be assured it is to be
taken (next the first great bout at Manchester) the greatest deliverance we
have had. We had one day last week, and on Friday next we are to observe a
Thanksgiving both in Salford Hundred and this, with praises to our God. The
intent of the enemy was to overrun this Hundred, and so to Bolton and
Manchester, (as upon examination appears by the prisoners) and be assured if
the Lord had sufferd this part to fail, we had in all probability bin utterly
undone. The enemy stole all horses and beasts as far as they went; I hope our
Gentlemen in this county will consider to join and clear the county; This part
which before was dejected, is now through Gods mercy united and raised, and
the common people never more forvvard, and the soldiers more courageous, but
the Lord is our preserver; So desiring still to hear from you, I rest

Your loving Friend, E. F.
Padiham, 24. April. 1643.
FINIS.

