Four strong Castles TAKEN By the Parliaments Forces: with the Copies of the
several Articles, and Letters of the Particulars thereof.

1 Titbury Castle (in Staffordshire) taken by Sir William Brereton,with all the
Arms and Ammunition. 2 Dunster Castle (in the West) taken by Col. Blake, with
all the Arms, Ammunition, and other furniture of war. 3 The copy of the
Articles for the surrender of Barnstaple, with all the Ordnance, Ammunition,
bag and baggage. 4 Abarastwith Castle (in Wales) taken by Col. Powell, with all
their Arms, Ammunition, bag and baggage.
ALSO The Agreement for the sleighting of Barton Garrison in Derbishire near
Titbury, and Sir William Breretons proceedings against Lichfield Close, with
the copy of a Letter from Sir William Breretons Quarters.

Being the true Copies of the Originals, published according to Order of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke at Grayes Inn Gate. April 27. 1646.

Articles of Agreement between Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the
Parliaments Army, and Sir Allen Apsley Knight, Governor of the Garrison of
Barnstaple, as follows.
I THat all Officers and Soldiers, without exception of any persons
whatsoever, and all other persons within the Garrison and Forts, may have leave
to march forth both Horse and Foot, with their complete Arms, flying Colors,
Matches lighted, with their Muskets laden, and twelve shot apiece in their
Bandaliers, with the like proportion to the Troopers, for their Carbines, and
Pistolls, to any Garrison in England, where His Majesty shall be in person,
and that they shall have a safe Conduct to the same and free quarter in their
March, and be not forced to march above ten miles a day. II. That in case they
shall not be received by the King, they shall have free leave to pass quietly
to their own homes. III. That no Gentlemen, Clergiemen, Officers, Citizens, or
Soldiers, or other persons comprised within these Articles, shall be
questioned or accountable for any Act past, or by them done, or by any other by
their procurement, relating unto the unhappy differences between His Majesty,
and the Parliament, they submitting themselves to reasonable and moderate
Composition for their estates, which the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall
really endeavor with the Parliament, that it shall not exceed two years value
of any man's real estate respectively, and for personal according to the
ordinary rule, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid, which Composition being
made they shall have indemnity for their persons, and enjoy their estates and
all other imunities. IV. That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation, or Subscription
(relating thereunto) shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever comprised
within these articles, but only such as shall bind all persons aforesaid, not
to bear arms against the Parliament of England now sitting at Westminster;
nor wilfully do any act prejudicial unto their affairs, whilst they remain
in their Quarters, except the persons aforesaid shall first render themselves
unto the Parliament, who shall cause them to be secured, if they think fit. V.
That all persons comprised in these Articles shall have leave to continue in
the Parliaments quarters for the space of four months, or to go beyond Sea at
any time in the said space of four months, with such goods as they have now in
their possession, both parties engaging themselves as before. VI. That any
Officers, or others comprised in these Articles, not exceeding the number of
eight persons, shall have free leave to go to Oxford, or to any other place
where the King shall be, and to return to their own homes at any time, or
where else they please. VII. That all goods now in possession, or of right
belonging to any within the Garrison, may have a free protection for their
safety, and leave either to send them beyond the Seas, or to any place within
the Kingdom, within three months after the surrender of the same. VIII. That
the town be not plundered, or fired, and that both they, and all other persons
comprised within these articles, shall enjoy the benefit of such articles as
were granted by the General to them at Exon. IX. That such goods as shall be
remaining in either of the Forts at the surrender thereof, which belong to any
in the town, shall be restored to the several Owners. X. That such Prisoners
of ours, belonging to the Garrison, which have been taken since the beginning
of the Siege, may be forthwith released, and enjoy the benefit of these
articles. XI. That the Castle and town, with all the Ordnance, ammunition, and
other warlike provisions therein, be surrendered to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, General
of the Parliaments Army, or to whom he shall appoint, on Tuesday the 14 of this
instant April. XII. That the Fort with the Ordnance, ammunition, spare arms,
and all other warlike provisions therein, be surrendered to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX,
General of the Parliaments Army, or to whom he shall appoint, on Monday the 20
of this Instant, by twelve of the clock at Noone. XIII. That there be a
Cessation of arms during these eight days following; the Soldiers of both
sides continuing within the limits agreed between Sir Allen Apsley, and
Lieutenant Colonel Ashfield: and that such Soldiers as shall come away during
the eight days, shall not be entertained, but may be sent back again. XIV.
That the sick and wounded Soldiers belonging to Sir Allen Apsley, may have
liberty to continue in their Quarters at Barnstaple, till they recover their
health, care being taken for them on that behalf, and then to have Passes to
return to their Colors, or to their homes, at their choice.
The Copy of a Letter from Sir William Breretons Quarters, of the agreement for
the surrendering of Tytbury Castle in Staffordshire, to Sir William Brereton,
for the use and service of the Parliament.
Sir,
IN my last I gave you account how far we had proceeded against the Enemy in
Litchfield Closes, and gave you the Copies of our Summons, and their Answers,
and the manner of our playing against them with our Pieces, upon their refusal
to surrender, our Line and Fortifications being all finished, we shall, it is
hoped, in short time bring them to a reducement, our controversy is already
over, Tytburie cannot any more obstruct us: I have sent you the Copy of the
Articles of Agreement for the surrender thereof; it was thought fit to give
them these Conditions for many reasons, without which they would, as well they
might, have held out as long as any of their holds in those parts: and diverse
of them, if I mistake not, are of those who have already the right of
Ashby-de-la-Zouch Articles, from whence they came: Others of them are desirous
to live quietly for the future, and we have all our men there at liberty for
other services; had we stormed the Castle we might have lost many of our men,
much gallant blood might have been spilt in such a knotty piece of service; and
those who were in the Castle, will find that all the benefit they can make of
the conditions they have gained to be very little, only that they may live in
peace and quiet (if they will) the only thing we fight for in our Countries
behalf; and we are to agitate another design, which I hope we shall be able
to effect, which may be of great use to these parts, whereof I shall give you
account in my next (God willing;) I do believe that when the enemy here have
certain information of Sir Yhomas Fairfaxes being before Oxford, they will be
more willing to hearken to us; in the mean time we have played often upon
them, and have received information of some execution. The Country are very
joyful that they are freed from the great oppressions they have long suffered
under the power of the Tytbury Garrison.

Litchfield the 22. of April, 1646.
Articles agreed upon for surrender of the Garrison of the Castle of Tytburie
for the Service of the Parliament, April ^0. 1646.
1 THat all the Fortifications in and about the Castle of Tytburie be
slighted, and the House made incapable of being made a Garrison, and delivered
into the hands of them, who had the keeping thereof in times of peace: And that
Barton Garrison be also slighted in like manner, so soon as possible, and
delivered to the late Owner thereof, he making his peace with the Parliament. 2
That all Commanders, Gentlemen and Officers, in Commission, may march away mith
their Horses and Arms, and their own proper goods; and the Common Soldiers
with their Swords, and Arms, and proper goods, to any of the Kings Garrisons
unbesieged, they marching eight miles a day, and Carriages to be provided
accordingly. And all those that desired, may have liberty to live at home, and
enjoy their Estates, submitting to the Ordinance of Parliament; and to be
secured in their persons and Estates from violence and plunder. 3 That all
Officers and Soldiers that desire to go beyond Seas, may have liberty so to
do; Provided it be within six weeks time next ensuing, and in the interim be
protected, doing nothing prejudicial to the Parliament, and no Oath to be
imposed, hut an engagement never to bear Arms against the Parliament. 4 That
all that desire their Sequestrations taken off may have liberty to go to
compound with the Parliament, and to have three months time for that purpose
without interruption. And after Compositions made, and Pardons sued out, they
may have liberty to dispose of their Estates as freely as formerly. 5 That the
sleighting of the said Garrisons shall be begun to morrow, or upon Wednesday
next, and that all those that are to march from the said Castle, according to
the aforesaid Articles, shall begin their march upon Wednesday next.
Signed by Sir William Brereton, and the Commissioners for the Parliament. John
Bowyer, Henry Pernon.

Signed by the Governors and Commissioners of the Castle. Peter Kniveton, John
Fitzherbert, John Gerrard, William Brown.


The Copy of a Letter from Major General Laughorns Quarters.
SIR:
THough we have lain long before Abarustwith Castle, which is a place of great
strength, yet it has pleased God now at last to give it into our hands; I have
sent you here enclosed the Copy of the Articles of Agreement between Colonel
Rice Powell, and Col. To. Whitney for the surrender thereof: when you read then
you will find we have gained good terms from them, so that now we are ready
to be put into a capassity for further service, either for Carnarven, or to
assist against Ragland, or what other service shall be thought meet if the
Soldiers have but money.

April 14. 1646. Your Servant. E. L.

For the Right Honorable the Committee of the West.
Right Honorable,
IT has pleased God this day in the progress of his mercy to the West, to
deliver up into the power of the Parliament the Castle of Dunster, whereof
(according to my duty) I have sent you this short account, together with a Copy
of the Articles, being induced by the exemplary clemency of his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, although probably it might have been obtained upon other
terms; if the price of time and blood had not prevailed above other Arguments.
The place is strong, and of importance for the pass of Ireland, and may in due
time deserve your honors considerations, whereto I leave it, and remain

Tanton 21. of April, 1646. Yours Honors most humble Servant: Rob. Blake.

Articles agreed upon by, and between Sir Robert Blake, Governor of Tanton,
and Colonel Francis Wendham, Governor of Dunster Castle the 19. of April,
1646. for the surrendering of the said Castle on Tuesday the 22. of April
following, by nine of the Clock in the morning.
I. THat the Castle, together with all the Arms, Ammunition, and other
furniture of War, (except what is here under excepted) be delivered up into the
hands of the said Colonel Blake, for his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the
use of the King and Parliament. II. That all Commissioners, Officers in the
Castle, shall march away with Horses and Arms, and all other necessary
accouterments appertaining. III. That the common Officers and Soldiers, both
Horse and Foot shall march away with their Arms, and either three Charges of
Powder and Bullet, with three yards of Match for those that have match-lockes,
together with Colors and Drums. IV. That the said Colonel Windham shall carry
with him all that is properly his, and what does properly belong to the Lady
Windham to be sent to her. V. That all Officers and Soldiers, with all
particular Persons of the Castle shall march forth secure, as many as will to
Oxford without delay, and those that are otherwise minded shall forthwith lay
down their Arms, and have Let-passes to their homes, or to any other places
they shall desire, with protections against the violence of the Soldiers. VI.
That Prisoners to either party be released. VII. That the said Colonel
Windham, and his Soldiers march to Oxford in twelve days.
Articles agreed on the 12. day of April, 1646. between Col. Kice Powell,
Commander in chief under Major General Laughorne there, and Colonel Robert
Whitby, Governor of Abtrist with the Castle.
I. That the Officers and Soldiers are to have 300. l. if their stock do
amount to so much, and that every Officer and Soldier give a List of what
moneys he has. II. That for the certainty of the said sum, six men are to be
chosen by Col. Powell for the searching of them. III. That the Officers shall
march with their Swords by their fides. IV. That the common Soldiers shall
march without Arms. V. That Col. Wbitby shall withdraw the present Garrison as
soon as the botes are brought to receive him. VI. That the Colonel shall have
Hostages for the same. VII. That the prisoners which belong to the Garrison,
and are now at Haverford-West, or else where, be set at liberty and sent with
Passes after their Col. to Carnarthan. VIII. That the Hostages left have civil
usage, and be sent to Carnarhtan immediately upon the return of the Boats with
safe Conduct. IX. That the sick men have civil accommodation until they be
able to travel, and then with Passes be sent after their fellows, or to their
own Country. X. That the Col. and five more in his Company, with their Horses
and Swords may have safe Conduct to his Majesty. XI. That these Articles be
inviolably observed, without fraud or equivocation, upon the honor of
Soldiers.
Robert Whitley. Jo. Whitley. John Bellay. Miles Somner, Charles Hanghtley.
Will. Vives. James Plot. Io. Win.


FINIS.

