A LETTER Sent to the Right Honorable the Lord Chamberlain, FROM JOHN Lord
FINCH, late Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, from the Hage.
My most Noble Lord:
THe interest your Lordship has ever had in the best of my Fortunes and
affections, gives me the privilege of troubling your Lordship with these few
Lines, from one that has now nothing left to serve you, but with his Prayers,
these your Lordship shall never fail of, with an heart as full of true
affection to your Lordship as ever any was. My Lord, it is not the loss of my
Place, and with it of my Fortunes, nor the being exiled from my dear Country
and friends, though any of them were cause enough of sorrow, that afflicts me,
but that which I must suffer under, is the displeasure of the house of
Parliament conceived against me. I know what a true heart I have ever borne
toward them, and yor Lordships can witness in part, what way I have gone in,
but silence and patience best becomes me, with which I must leave my self and
actions, to the favorable construction of my noble friends, in which number
your Lordship has a prime place. I am now at the ( Hage) where I arrived on
Thursday the last day of the month, and where I purpose to live, agreeable to
the poorness of my fortune: For any tumbling in the world, I have utterly
cast off the thought of it, and my aim shall only be, to number my days,
that I may apply my heart unto wisdom, which will wipe all tears from my
eyes and heart, and lead me by the hand to true happiness, which can never be
taken from me. I pray God bless this Parliament, with a happy both progress
and conclusion, and if my Ruin may conduce the least to it, I shall not repine
at it. I truly pray for your Lordship, and all the noble family, that God would
give you an increase of all worldly blessings, and in the fullness of days,
receive you to his glory. If I were capable of seeming any body, I would tell
your Lordship; that no man should be readier to make known his affection, and
true gratitude to your Lordship, Then

Your Lordships most humble and most affectionate poor kinsman and servant,
JOHN FINCH.
Hage, January, 3. 1640.

