A LETTER From his Excellency the Lord Fairfax General of the PARLIAMENTS
FORCES: Concerning the surrender of COLCHESTER, THE Grounds and Reasons of
putting to death Sir CHARLES LUCAS and Sir GEORGE LYSLE; with the Articles and
Explanation of the same.

Together with a List of all the Prisoners taken, their numbers and qualities
therein expressed.

Read in the House of Peers upon the 31 of Aug. 1648. And commanded to be
printed and published.

Imprinted at London, for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley, 2
September. 1648.

For the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers Pro Tempore.
My Lord:
I Have herewith sent you the Articles, with the Explanations annexed, upon
which it has pleased God in his best time to deliver the Town of Colchester,
and the enemy therein into your hands without further bloodshed, saving that
(for some satisfaction to Military Justice, and in part of avenge for the
innocent blood they have caused to be spilt, and the trouble, damage, and
mischief they have brought upon the Town, this Country, and the Kingdom) I
have with the advice of a Counsel of War of the chief Officers both of the
Country Forces and the Army, caused two of them who were rendered at mercy to be
shot to death before any of them had Quarter assured them. The persons pitched
upon for this example were, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, in whose
Military execution I hope your Lordships will not find cause to think your
Honor or Justice prejudiced. As for the Lord Goring, Lord Capell, and the rest
of the persons rendered to mercy, and now assured of Quarter; of whose names I
have sent your Lordships a particular List. I do hereby render to the
Parliaments judgment for further public Justice and Mercy to be used as you
shall see cause. I desire God may have the glory of his multiplied mercies
toward you and the Kingdom in this kind, and in the condition of instruments
as to the service here, the Officers and Soldiers of Essex and Suffolk (who
in this time of so dangerous defection have adhered constant to yours and the
Kingdoms interest) for their faithful demeasnour and patient indurance in the
hardships of this service are not to be forgotten.

Hieth 29 Aug. 1648. Your Lordships most humble Servant T. Fairfax.

Articles agreed upon the 27 of Aug. 1648. by and between the Commissioners of
his Excellency the Lord General Fairfax on the one part, and the Commissioners
of the Earl of Norwich, Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas on the other part,
for and concerning the Rendition of the Town and Garrison of Colchester.
I. THat all the horses belonging to the Officers, Soldiers, and Gentlemen
engaged in Colohester, with Saddles and Bridles to them, shall be brought into
Mary's Churchyard by nine of the Clock to morrow morning, and the spare
Saddles and Bridles into that Church, and delivered without wilful spoil to
firch as the Lord General shall appoint to take charge of them.

II. That all the Arms, Colors, and Drums belonging to any of the persons in
Colchester above mentioned, shall be brought into St. James Church by ten of
the Clock to morrow morning and delivered without wilful spoil or imbeazlment
to such as the Lord General shall appoint to take charge of them.

III. That all private Soldiers and Officers under Captains, shall be drawn
together into the Friars yard adjoining to the East Gate by ten of the Clock to
morrow morning with their Clothes and Baggage, their persons to be rendered into
the custody of such as the Lord General shall appoint to take charge of them,
and that they shall have fair Quarter according to the explanation made in the
answer to the first Quaere of the Commissioniers from Colchester which is
hereunto annexed.

IV. That the Lords, and all Captains, and superior Officers, and Gentlemen
of quality engaged in Colchester, shall be drawn together to the Kings Head,
with their Clothes and Buggage by eleven of the Clock to morrow morning, and
there render themselves to the mercy of the Lord General, into the hands of
such as he shall appoint to take charge of them, and that a List of the names
of all the general Officers, and Field-Officers now in command in the Town be
sent out to the Lord General by nine of the Clock in the morning.

V. That all the Guards within the Town of Colchester shall be with-drawne
from the Line, Forts, and other places by eight of the Clock to morrow morning,
and such as the Lord General shall appoint shall thereupon come into their
rooms.

VI. That all the Ammunition shall be preserved in the places where it lies, to
be delivered to the Comptroller of his Excellencies Train by ten of the Clock
to morrow morning; and all the Wagons belonging to the Souldery, or persons
engaged, with the Harness belonging thereunto, shall be brought to some
convenient place near the Ammunition, to be delivered to the same person by
the same hour.

VII. That such as are wounded and sick in the Town shall be there kept and
provided for, with accommodation requisite for men in their condition, and not
removed thence until they be recovered, or able without prejudice to their
healths to remove, and shall have such Chyrurgions allowed to look to them as
are now in the Town.

VIII. That all Ordnance in the Town, with their appurtinances shall without
wilful spoil be left at the several Platformes, or places where they are now
planted, and so delivered to his Excellencies Guard that shall take the charge
of those places respectively.

IX. That from henceforth there shall be a Cessation of Arms on hoth parts, but
the Forces within the Town to keep their own Guards, and the Lord Generals to
keep theirs until they shall be removed according to the Articles afore-going.

Signed by Us The Commissioners on the behalf of his Excellency the Lord
Fairfax.
THo. Honywood H. Ireton Tho. Rainsborowe Edward Whalley Will. Bloys Bram.
Gurdon J. Sparrow Isaac Ewer Tho. Cook G. Barnardiston
The Commissioners on the behalf of the E. of Norwich, the L. Capel, and Sir
Charles Lucas.
WIlliam Compton Ab. Shipman Edw. Hammond. S. Tuke William Ayloffe


Heith, August 27. 1648.
Quaeries propounded by the Commissioners from Colchester, to the Commissioners
of his Excellency the Lord Fairfax, upon the Conditions sent into the Town.
1. WHat is meant by fair Quarter?

2. What by rendering to Mercy?

To the first. BY fair Quarter we understand, That with Quarter for their
lives they shall be free from wounding or beating; shall enjoy warm clothes to
cover them and keep them warm; shall be maintained with victuals fit for
prisoners while they shall be kept prisoners.

To the second. By rendering to mercy we understand, That they be rendered or
render themselves to the Lord General, or whom he shall appoint, without
certain assurance of Quarter, so as the Lord General may be free to put some
immediately to the sword (if he see cause) although his Excellency intends
chiefly and for the generality of those under that condition, to surrender them
to the mercy of the Parliament and General. There has been large experience,
neither has his Excellency given cause to doubt of his civility to such as he
shall retain prisoners, although by their being rendered to mercy, he stands
not engaged thereby.

Upon return of these Answers the Commissioners from Colchester propounded
these two further Quaeries.
1. Whether these that were surrendered to mercy, shall enjoy their wearing
clothes, as well those on their backs, as what other change they have.

2. Whether the Noblemen and Officers shall have use of their own Horses to
the places where they shall be confined.

To which was answered by his Excellencies Commissioners.

To the first. IT is intended that those who shall be tendered and received to
mercy, shall enjoy the wearing clothes on their backs; but for more the
General will not be engaged.

To the second. It is expected (in case of surrender upon Treaty) That all
Horses as well as Arms be delivered up, and for circumstances thereof there is
to be an Article yet for the Gentlemen and Officers under this condition in
question, (when any of them shall be removed to the places of confinement) his
Excellency will take care for Horses to carry them (with respect to their
qualities,) but for allowing their own Horses he will not be engaged.

A List of the Prisoners taken at the surrender of Colchester the 28 of August.
1648.
THe Earl of Norwich Col. The Lord Capell The Lord Loughborow Sir Charles
Lucas Col. Sir William Compton Col. Sir George Lysle Sir Barnard Gascoyne Sir
Abraham Shipman Sir John Watts Sir Lodowick Dyer Sir Hen. Apleton Sir Dennard
Strutt Sir Hugh Oriley Sir Richard Maulyverer made an escape, but since taken.
Quartermaster General Carter Col. Gilburne Col. Far escaped and taken Col.
Hammond Col. Chester Col. Till Col. Heath Col. Tuke Col. Ayloffe Col. Sawyer.
Lievt. Col. Culpepper Lievt. Col. Lancaster Lievt. Col. Gough Lievt. Col.
Powell Lievt. Col. Ashton Lievt. Col. Baggley Lievt. Col. Wiseman Lievt. Col.
Smith. Major Aescot Major Smith Major Armestrong Major Ward Major Bayley Major
Read Major Scarrow Major Blyncott Major Genings. Capt. Wicks Capt. Pits Capt.
Buley Capt. Burdge Capt. Bartrope Capt. Lynsey Capt. Myldmay Capt. Osbolston
Capt. Estwick Capt. Lovell Capt. Cooper Capt. Blunt Capt. Snellgrave Capt.
Dynors Capt. Dussen Capt. Lievt. Caninge Capt. Ward Capt. Busbey Capt. Pain
Capt. Hemor Capt. Smith Capt. Kenington Capt. Heath Capt. Rawson Capt. Bayley
Capt. Stephens Capt. Gennings Capt. Lodge Capt. Lynn Capt. Lievt. White. Edw.
Goodyeare Marshall Genesis Commissary General Trouley Fran. Lovelesse Master of
the Ordnance VVaggon-master Genesis Gravisden Servants attending upon the Lords
and Gentlemen 65. Lievtenants 72. Ensigns and Cornets 69. Sergeants 183.
Private Soldiers 3067.
FINIS.

