Truths Vindication OF Election, and Reprobation. Wherein is showed, CHRIST the
cause of Election; Sin the cause of Reprobation. The Justice of God is likewise
cleared from that which is laid upon him by many; (namely) That some shall one
day be damned for Unbelief, and yet he never gave a CHRIST for them to believe
in. Most of the strongest Objections that Scriptures or Reason can make,
Answered. By WILLIAM FOULER Minister of the Gospel at Ingworth in Norffolk.

Try all things, hold fast that which is good.

God is not willing that any should perish, but come to life and be saved.

For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God:
Wherefore turn your selves, and live ye.

London, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Thomas Mathews at the
Cock in Paul's Churchyard. 1652.

The Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THat which causes me to bring forth these few lines to public view, is
these Reasons: First to clear the gracious God (so far as he has enabled me)
of Heaven and Earth, from that which poor dark creature lay upon him, which is,
that he will (as most say) condemn some one day for not believing in his Son
Christ, and yet never gave a Christ for them to believe in, but without
reference to sin or transgression, has left most of the sons and daughters of
men from all eternity in a perishing condition. Secondly, I have published
this, because poor sinners may see there is mercy yet for them in
Gospel-declarations; what the Gospel speaks it is truth, there being in God no
contrary desire or end. Thirdly, that those souls which find experimentally
these truths of God within them, they might advance the glory of God and the
riches of his Grace in Jesus Christ, and walk up unto him with holy lives and
conversations. Fourthly, to satisfy several Christian friends which are
importunate that others may feed of the same Bunches of Grapes as they do, that
they may long after that spiritual Canaan which bears sweet fruits, giving
forth its fruit in due season. My desire is, that all to whom this small piece
shall come, they would with a single eye weigh what is laid down for Grounds,
and how proved. I know it will be under the censure of some, but it matters
not, it is not he who man approves, but whom God approves, the spiritual,
will be able to judge of it. And thus, Reader, I commit thee to the great God,
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, desiring this may be profitable for the
comfort of thy soul. Resting

Thine in every Office of the Gospel, WILLIAM FOWLER.

Truths Vindication OF Election, and Reprobation.
GOd the Father has been pleased to make forth himself a God of great love to
Mankind, having bowels of compassion to poor sinners, tenders of Mercy toward
them when the creature durst not look the Father in the face, having sinned
against him, I mean when we were in Adam, he being a public man, that is, the
whole Creation being in him, his sin became ours, Romans 5. 18. and we became
noxious before the Father, and in a naked condition, sewing Fig Leaves together
to cover us: In this estate did the Fathers great love appear, by sending of
his Son Jesus Christ to Redeem these poor fallen ones, John 3. 16. God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Quest. Did Christ redeem all those that were last in Adam?
Answ. Yea, Romans 5 18 So likewise then as by the sin of one condemnation Thus
Mr. Tindales translation reads it.
came on all men, even so by the Justifying of one comes the righteousness
that brings life upon all men. That is, Christ being Justified and Righteous,
did undergo for the lump of Mankind, bearing that was due unto man in his own
body, Isa. 53. 4. He has borne our griefs. And upon this account he brought
life upon all; that is, by his sufferings did satisfy divine Justice Isa. 53.
11.
for the sin that Adam brought upon us, whereby life came in; I say, by his
death came life, as many as dyed in the first Adam, are made alive in the last
Adam. 1 Cor. 5. 22. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

Quest.
But it is commonly said, that it were just with God to take and cast into hell
so soon as they are born into the World.

Answ. I say that punishment which was due unto us by the sin of the first Adam
is taken away by the death of the second Adam, Heb. 9. 15. That by the means
of death for the redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first
Testament, compared 2 Pet. 1. 9. Now if any say damnation in hell shall be
given for Adams sin, I demand where that Scripture is to be found?

Quest.
But is it not said by David, that he was shapen in iniquity, and in sin his
mother conceived him, Ps. 51. 5? And we are by nature the children of wrath,
Ephesians. 2. 3. And Job querieth, Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? therefore sure there is original sin?

Answ. David (I suppose) speaks of the sin of his mother, he speaks not of
damnation, neither does Paul nor Job. But the blessed Apostle Paul says,
Ephesians. 2. 23. They were by nature the children of wrath: that was when they
walked according to the course of the world, when they walked acording to the
Prince of the air, when their conversation was after the flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and mind: In this estate he, and all that are such actors
are the children of wrath: now until the creature comes to maturity they
cannot walk according to the course of the World, or the Prince of the air;
these cannot fulfill the lusts of the flesh and mind: So that you see this
makes not for damnation, as being simply born into the World, neither does
that blessed man Job affirm any such thing: I will not deny but that we by
nature are unclean, and stand in opposition against God, but there is of God
given forth to the creature (through Christ) to change nature, and to bring the
soul home to himself; as I shall show afterward. By this, I hope, you see that
none shall perish for Adams; sin take some ground from Scripture, Ezekiel. 18. 4.
20. nay most of the Chapter is to this purhose.

Object.
But God says in the 20 Exodus 5. That he will visit the sins of the father
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation.

Ans. I grant it, but see the same Text tells you who they are, they are the
haters of God; that is, if the father and the son are both haters of God, both
dye for it; but he will show mercy on thousands that love him: the 18 of Ezekiel.
does clear this.

Quest. But if this be so, then all children that die in their infancy are
saved?
Answ. It may well be so concluded upon; for I do not find any condemnation in
Hell fire, but for refusing Christ; the Kingdom of God being made up of
children, Mark 10. 14.

Quest.
Sure it cannot he that Christ should dye for every man and woman in the world;
for then all should be saved, or some may have sin pardoned, and be damned,
which would be absurd to affirm: or if it were the intent of the Father that
his Son should dye for all to save them, and all not be saved, then the Fathers
ends were frustrate, which could not, nor cannot be.

Answ. That Christ dyed for all, and every man and woman in the world, these
Scriptures will make it appear, Heb. 2. 9. He tasted death for every man, 1
John 29. for the world, 1 John 2. 2 1 Timothy 2. 6. Romans 5 18. By these it is
evident that he laid down his life for the whole lump of Mankind; and whereas
you say that then all shall be saved, I demand where that Scripture can be
found, that all that Christ dyed for shall be saved? this is but an Argument
that flesh and blood makes; for it is evident that some which Christ dyed for
shall perish, those which deny him, 2 Pet. 2. 1. Even denying the Lord that
bought them: Now either Christ did buy them, or he did not buy them; if he did,
then is the thing granted which I labor to prove; if he did not, then what
means this Scripture? further, Whereas then you say sin may be pardoned, and
yet the creature perish, which would be absurd; I say it is no absurdity to say
that Christ has taken away sin; nay it was the first doctrine Paul and Peter
did preach to unbeleevers, 1 Cor. 15. 3. Acts 3. the last verse, Luke last, 47.
Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in the name of Christ. And
is it to be thought, that all those to whom Repentance and Remission of sins
were preached did believe? Surely no, for he says Romans 10. 16. Who has
believed our report? with the Prophet Esaias 53. 1. And most sure it is that the
blessed Apostles did not preach forgiveness of sins from qualifications, if you
will do so or such things, then Christ will pardon; but he, or they preached
what Christ had done. And this was the issue, that whosoever believes are
justified from all things, Acts 13. 39. Not only from Adams transgression, but
from all things: Now Christ did take away the sin of Adam from al (as has been
showed) And he that believes not shall be damned. And for that of the Fathers
intent in sending his son to die for all to save them; if not saved, then his
ends were frustrated. Consider this was the ultimate end of the Fathers sending
of his Son, John 3. 16. That whosoever believes should be saved, he never
intended that those which refuse, and rebel, and spurn at Grace and the Gospel
should be saved And would it not be as absurd to say, that the Fathers intents
are frustrated by waiting patiently on poor sinners, drawing of them, and using
means of Grace toward them: And yet they are very enemies to him, see Romans 2.
45. Not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance, but thou
after thy hard and impenitent heart treasurest up to thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16.

Quest. I desire you would make it clearer, that Christ dyed for all, surely
the scripture is very dark for that purpose?
Answ. The Scripture is not dark in that thing, it is men's judgments that are
dark

Quest. But there are many Objections against it in Scripture?
Answ. There are more Objectors against it: indeed some places of scripture
before they are well weighed, seem to thwart it; but being well considered, they
uphold it. I desire what can be objected against it may be brought forth.

Object, 1.
The World, and every man, and all men, must not be taken so largely as you
have laid down; but some of all forts, and every believer, and the world of
believers, these Christ died for it is evident.

Answ. I grant that all and every man, in some places of Scripture does not
mean, all, and every Individual, but in the forenamed Scriptures it does mean
all and every Individual: for these Reasons, as Heb. 2. 9. John 1. 29. Rom 5.
18. 1 Timothy 2. 6. 1 John 2. 21.

First Reason is, because God commands the Gospel to be preached to every
creature, Mark 16. 15. Now Gospel is glad-tydings, and this glad-tidings is,
that there is peace and remission of sins by Jesus Christ, Acts 13. 38. Luke
last 47. Romans 10. 15. Christ crucified, and dead, and risen again, and
whosoever believes shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned, Mark
16. 16. And surely God would never have commanded glad-tydings to be preached
to all, if Christ had dyed but for some: Therefore without controversy, these
Scriptures mean every Individual. Further consider, if Christ did not dye for
all then what glad-tydings can be preached to all? There is no glad-tydings to
that man which Christ did not dye for, nor any salvation, Acts 4. 12. There is
no name under heaven by which any can be saved, but by the name of Christ.

Second Reason. God commands all men to believe and repent; The time of
ignorance God winketh at, but now commands all men every where to repent, Acts
17. 30. Therefore it must needs be, that these Scriptures do mean Christ's
death for all, and every Individual. See how I reason.

If God commands all men to believe and repent when Christ dyed but for some,

Then God commands some to believe and repent which his Son did not dye for.

But God commands all men to believe and repent.

Yea it is granted by those which hold forth that Christ dyed for none but
Believers: and it is a truth whether any should grant it or no; and it is most
sure that God will command no man to believe an untruth.

Third Reason God does declare, that those that believe not the Record of his
Son make him a liar, 1 John 5. 10. Now that man that Christ did not dye for,
does not make God a liar, although he never believes; but the unbeleever
makes him a liar. I reason thus.

If the unbeleever that believes not God, makes him a liar,

Then there was a Christ which did die for the unbeleever, or those that perish.

But the unbeleever that believes not makes God a liar.

Therefore there was a Christ which did dye for the unbeleever, or those which
perish.

Fourth Reason. God in the day of judgment will condemn those souls that have
not believed on his Son. Now if there was no Christ that did dye for them, what
shall they be condemned for? For God will do that which is right, Genesis 18. 25.
Surely he will not condemn such without a just cause.

If God will damn those that believed not the truth,

Then there was a Christ which did dyed for those that are damned.

But God will damn all that believe not the Truth. 2 These. 2. 12.

Therefore there was a Christ which did dye for those that are damned.

And thus you see that it must needs be a Truth, that Christ dyed for all, and
every man, and this must needs be the meaning of the Holy Ghost in these
Scriptures.

Object. 3. But if Christ dyed for all, why are not all saved?
Answ. Because all do not believe; although God did reedeem all Israel out of
Egypt, yet none entered Canaan but those that believed, Jude 4. ver. So
although Christ redemeed all out of Egyptian darkness, yet none shall be saved
but those that believe.

Object. 4. It is said Romans 5. 9. That many are made righteous; and in John 10.
I lay down my life for my sheep.
Answ. I believe that in one sense there is but few made righteous, that is,
through Faith, and the application of the blood of Christ, but in that sense
which I conceive the Holy Ghost to speak by the Apostle, All are righteous,
that is, by having the sin of Adam pardoned: And for the word many, it
signifies all; many being in opposition to a few; and this may be cleared by
the twelfth Chapter of Daniel, where by many are to be understood all; Many
shall arise, some to everlasting life, and some to everlasting contempt. Now if
many here be not all, then some shall lie in the dust for ever; which must not
be admitted: So that you see, many is all in this Scripture and others: for if
Adams offense reached to all (as it did) in the former part of the Text (many)
then why not the latter as well as the former. As for Christ's laying down of
his life for his Sheep, this is truth he did so: but they were not Sheep when
he laid down his life, but Goats. The Text does not say he did not lay down his
life for the Goats. So the Apostles words, Gallat. 2. 20. Christ gave himself
for me; Did Christ give himself for none but for the Apostle Paul?

Object. 5. Surely Christ would not dye for those he would not pray for; but
Christ would not pray for the World, 17 John 9.
Answ. I believe Christ did not dye for any more than he prayed for; but Christ
prayed for believers, but Christ prayed for unbeleevers, and there is not any
other in the word. In this Text he says, he prays not for the world; but in
the 20 verse, there he prays for unbeleevers, compared with Luke 3. 34.
Father forgive them for they know not what they do. Thus you see Christ prayed
for the World, although at that time he did not; yet it does not follow that he
never prayed for the world; for you see the contrary: Further know, that it is
one thing to pray, and another thing to dye.

Object. 6. If Christ died for all, then men must have free will to take and
refuse good and evil as they please.
Answ. And why so? It does not follow, that because Christ dyed for all, any
has free will, I see no such thing can be inferred from it.

Object. But surely it connot be that Christ should die for all; Did he die for
Judas?
Answ. Yea, he died for Judas. If for every man, then for Judas; but for every
man, Heb. 2. 9. therefore for Judas.

Object. 8. But Judas was a Devil, and surely the Psalms says of him, that he
should betray Christ, as he did; would Christ die for a Traitor?
Answ. That Judas was a Devil I grant, but he was not so from the beginning;
see the 9. Chap. of S. Luke, there Christ calls twelve to him, (Judas being
one of them) and gave them power over all Devils, and to preach the Gospel,
and to heal diseases; surely Christ never gave Commission to any Devil to do
these things, and sure it is, that his own corruption and covetous heart to
betray his Master Christ for money, that made him a Devil.

Object. 9. But was he not ordained of God, that he should betray his Master
Christ?
Answ. No, he was not ordained of God; for then (if granted) see what will
follow, That men may do that which God ordains them to do, and yet perish;
and surely no man that does that which God would have him to do, shall perish,
but shall be saved. True, God did know that Judas would betray his Son, and God
sent his Son into the world that he should die for Sinners, but that God
intended that his Son should be betrayed and murdered in that barbarous
manner, I cannot see it will hold; for see the blessed Apostle Peter, Acts 2.
22, 23. Ye men of Israel, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
of God among you, v. 23. him have ye taken, and by wicked hands have crucified
and slain: And ver. 36. and chap. 3. ver. 14, 15. Ye denied the holy one and
the just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you, and killed the Prince
of life. Now if God made them on purpose to do these things, why does Peter so
sharply reprove them? Thus you see that Betrayers and Murderers are reproved,
and not without cause, The Son of man goes about as it is written, but woe unto
that man by whom he is betrayed. As if Christ had said, Woe to Judas that
Traitor, woe to Judas that delivers the Son of Man into the hands of men to be
crucified, woe to Judas for his covetous heart, to betray his Master for thirty
pieces of silver, (a goodly price that I was valued at of them, Zach. 11. v.
13.) woe unto Judas that ever he was born, good had it been for him if he had
never been born: And thus Christ would never have said, if God had made him on
purpose to betray him, and consequently Judas doing the Will of God.

Object. 10. But it is said, whom God loves, be loves to the end.
Answ. Indeed men often say so, but I see no Scripture say so; that in the 13.
Chapter of S. John and the first verse, is urged to that purpose, the Text
says not so, it reads it thus, Having loved his own which were in the world,
he loved them unto the end. Now all true Believers are Christ's own which he
loves for ever; and to say any other thing from the words is to stretch it on
the Tenters.

Object. 11. If Universal Redemption be granted, it will overthrow Election
and Reprobation.
Answ. It will not overthrow Election although it be granted, I desire you
would open your self concerning Election and Reprobation, and I shall give you
my judgment, and I hope satisfaction, by the Word which must be our Rule.

Object.
I believe that God from all eternity did choose some to be Vessels of glory,
which can never perish, and did reprobate others, leaving them to their selves,
which cannot be saved.

I Answer. I am persuaded that it was the purpose of God from all eternity,
that all that believe should be saved: Nay further, he chose them to believe,
to be obedient, but it was through his Son, he did not choose any because they
would believe and repent, but they therefore believe and repent because he
chose them; indeed Christ is the cause of salvation, Sin the cause of
Reprobation, and for Reprobation without reference to Sin, I see not how it can
be admited, for see what will follow if otherwise considered.

First, They were never righteous, I mean in Adam, those which were reprobated,
for either they were, or they were not; if (...) righteous, how could they be
called sinners by defiling themselves? and then what means that in Eccles. 7
29. that God has made man upright? In this place the whole Creation of mankind
is to be understood.

Then secondly, If they were made righteous it seems they were reprobated, and
then afterward made righteous, and who will own this? And here I desire to
state some Questions.

1. Quest. First, if any were reprobated from eternity, whether or no that
those did fin in Adam, if reprobated, surely they could not be worse after than
before, they were Vessels of wrath after, so they were before.

2. Quest. Secondly, I demand whether or no that all that were in Adam (which
were the whole Creation of men and women) had power from God to stand, yea or
no.

3 Quest. I demand whether or no that there is any Gospel, any glad tidings
for that man or woman that was reprobated from eternity?

4 Quest. I demand whether or no that such Reprobates are commanded to believe
and repent? either they are, or they are not; if they are commanded to believe,
then I demand what it is that they must believe? sure there is no Christ for
them to believe in; if they are not commanded to believe and repent, then I
say, where there is no Law, there is no transgression, Romans 4. 15.

5 Quest. I demand whether or no that such that are so reprobated, whether
there is any possibility for them to be saved, if there is, then Christ must
needs die for them; for Acts 4. 12. There is no other Name under heaven by
which men can be saved: if no possibility, then to what end do Ministers give
such exhortations? it is all one as if they should say nothing to them; for
they cannot be better or worse, perish they must without remedy, because
reprobated from eternity.

12 Object. Then (it seems) you hold, that there is no Reprobation.
Answ. I do not hold that there is no Reprobation, but I hold that none are
reprobated but for sin.

13 Object.
But was not Esau reprobated, being hated before he was born, and Pharaoh made
on purpose to be hardened, Romans v. 9. and see the Apostle Peter in his first
Epistle, chapter 2. v. 8. and Jude 4. and in the 11 th. to the Romans it is said,
God gave Israel the spirit of slumber, compared with John 12. ver. 40. He has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts: and the Wiseman says, Prove, 16.
v. 4. That the wicked are for the day of evil, and is reserved to the day of
destruction, Job. 21. v. 30. and that vessels of wrath are fitted to
destruction, Romans 9. 22.

Answ. Truly these Scriptures, and some others, do seemingly make for that
purpose, I shall by the assistance of God clear and reconcile them by other
Scriptures. Consider that of Jacob and Esau, Romans ^. the Text does not say he
hated Esau before he was born, but he says, v. 11, 12. that the elder should
serve the younger, as you may see, Genesis 25. v. 22, 23.

Now dear friends, consider there cannot be love and hatred in God, yet I grant
that God did hate Esau, but not before he was born, but it must be considered
what it is for God to hate, I say, what it is for to hate and harden, for I
will put them together: Now God is said to hate and to harden when he leaves
the creature to himself; but I affirm, that God never leaves the creature
until the creature first leaves him; see why God left Esau, Obadiah v. 10.
for thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover thee, and thou
shall be cut off for ever, compared with Heb. 12. 16, 17. and the causes why
God left Pharaoh, were,

First, he did consult against the people of God, Exodus 1. v. 10. Secondly, he
did afflict them with burdens, v. 6. 11. and 13. 14. Thirdly, he commanded the
Midwives to kill the male children, he was a murderer, v. 13, 16. Fourthly, he
would have killed Moses, chapter 2. v. 15.
And thus you see that God does not hate nor harden without a cause: I demand
whether or no that it was an evil in Pharaoh to have an hard heart? if it
were, who was the cause of it? surely not God, but himself. And truly Jacob and
Esau seems to me to type out the two seeds of Abraham, as the 9. of the Romans
will testify, which two seeds the Apostle makes forth, Gal. 4. 19. to be law
and grace, flesh and spirit, in Isaac shall thy feed be called; all that is
Regenerated in Christ is that spiritual Jacob of Gods love, and that Mystery
of Iniquity is working Esau, (so the word Esau signifies working) it was said
to Rebecca that two Nations were in her womb, which two Nations were types of
Flesh and Spirit. God having purposed from Eternity, that the younger Jacob or
new spiritual Jacob should be beloved evermore, and old working fleshly Esau
should be destroyed. And for that in Pet. 1. 2. 8. It cannot be inferred from
thence, that they were made on purpose for destruction, being unbeleevers they
are appointed for destruction; for thus reads Mr. Tindall, And a stone to
stumble at, and a rock to offend them which stumble at the Word, and believe
not that whereon they were set: And what can be said against this? If any shall
say that some are appointed of God to stumble at Christ his Son, then I affirm
those whosoever does that which God appoints him to do (whatsoever it be)
shall be saved, he cannot perish that does the will of God, or else it will
follow, some may do the will of God and be saved; and some do his will and be
damned: And how this can hold, I leave it to the spiritual to judge; for those
Scriptures in Job 21. 30. Prove. 16. 4. Romans 9. 22. Jude v. 4. one Answer to
them all (to avoid prolixity) the texts will clear it. Who are reserved for
wrath? wicked men says the Text: so that you see they are wicked men that are
made for destruction: they are wicked men that are ordained of old for
condemnation, those says Jude, that turn the grace or God into wantonness,
now how vain would it be for any to say that the grace of God may be turned
into wantonness before they were born. Now I demand who made those wicked men
vessels of wrath? did God, or sin? surely who dares be so bold as to say God
did? if themselves, then where is Reprobation from eternity? for men from
eternity were not made. And to that John 12, 40. he has blinded, he has
hardened; And Romans 11. 8. he gives the Spirit of slumber, does God do so by
men? yea assuredly he does, but consider three things.

First, what the Spirit of slumber is that God gives to some. Secondly, to
whom he gave it. Thirdly, wherefore he gave it.
1. The Spirit of slumber is for God to leave the poor creature to himself,
this is the Spirit of slumber (I have showed before that he leaves no man, nor
forsakes none without cause) And truly, when God is departed from a soul, oh
what a slumbering, what a slecpie condition will the poor creature be in!

We will join the two next points together, who and wherefore. 2. they are
ungodly men, for sin they are given over, see Mat. 13. 15. they have closed
their eyes says our Savior. Oh deer friends, I humbly beseech you in the
bowels of Christ take heed how you infer that on the Creator which belongs to
the creature: I will speak plainly, take heed you lay not men's sins upon our
good God, I know all or most men will be ready to say, God forbid we should do
so; why let me I beseech you once more speak a few words in plain terms,
whosoever holds that God never intended mercy to some of the Sons and
daughters of men, but did without Reference to sin and Transgression Reprobate
them from eternity: ah friends how can such poor creatures but sink under every
burden? how can such hear when God says harken? how can they see when God
says behold me, behold me? how can such be converted when God never intends
it? And friends, do you think that God will declare himself to be a gracious
God, pardoning sin, and forgiving iniquity, when he has reserved the
greatest part to be damned? see the 34 of Exodus 5, 6, 7. compared with 2 Chronicles.
last 15. 16. verses, Micha 7. 16. Who is a God like unto thee that pardons
iniquity. Jonah 4. 2. And see what the Prophet Jeremiah says in his Lam. 3.
33. For he does not afflict willingly, nor greeve the children of men, see Jer.
13. 27. says God to Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall it
once be. And in Hosea 11. 8. How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I
deliver thee Israel, my heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. Now do you think that God will use such speeches unto those which he
never intended should be brought home unto him by the word? surely no; O I
beseech you take heed, take heed.

14. Obj. Has not the Potter power over the clay to make one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor? as says the Apostle Romans 9. verse 21.
Answ. God has power to do what he pleases, but I demand a question; Is
Gods will the rule of his power, or his power the rule of his will?

Answ. It must be granted that his will is the rule of his power. Ephesians. 1.

For who dare deny, but that God has power to destroy all the sons and
daughters of men in a moment? but we see (blessed be his name) that he wills
it otherways, waiting at the door of poor sinners heart to bring them to
repentance. Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock.

15. Ob. But none can come to Christ except God draws him. John 6. 44.
Answ. I grant that none comes except God draws, it is the drawing of God
which makes souls to come, to Christ, but the Question is this, Do all that
God draws come to Christ? If the Answer be Yea: Where is that Scripture? For it
is evident that God draws all, see John 12. 32. If I be lifted up I will
draw all men after me. Now God draws these ways:

First, by the works of Creation, Psalm. 19. The heavens declare the handyworks
of God.

Secondly, he draws by Gospellmanifestations, it is to be declared to every
creature, Mar. 16. 15.

Thirdly, God draws by his Spirit in the Gospel, the Gospel being the
instrument to convey the Spirit of God to a soul; see the Promise, Acts 2. 17.
translated out of Joel 2. 28.

Now this Spirit begets Faith, Romans 10. 17. therefore is this Word of our God
to be higly prized, see Jer. 23. 29. Heb. 4. 12. Is not my Word like a hammer?
Joh. 6. it is spirit and life. And thus you may see how God draws by his Word
and Spirit.

Object. 16.
But surely if God draws, the creature must come; Has any soul power to
resist God? And is it not said in the 110. Psalm. Gods people shall be willing
in the day of his power?

Answ. I have sufficiently. proved, that God draws all; to that of men's power
to resist God, I answer, Men do not resist God by power, it is weakness to
resist God, and that men may resist God, see Act. 7. 51. compared with Zach. 7.
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. compared with Prove. 1. 21, 22, 23, 24. 25, 26. And for that
of Gods people being willing in the day of his power, I grant his people shall,
that is, Believers, where Christ has prevailed by his love, These, and only
these shall willingly follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes in the day of Gods
power, as willingly to suffer, as to be free from suffering.

Object. 17.
It cannot be that God draws all men, for the Heathen have not the Gospel,
and you said before, that the Gospel is the way to convey the Spirit to souls,
which the Heathen have not.

Ans. Who says they have not? To this Objection, this I shall say, that God
has given forth so much of himself to every creature, to leave the creature
without excuse, and to clear his own just proceedings, see what is said of the
Heathens, Romans 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. to the latter end. See Romans 10.
18. Have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and
their words unto the ends of the world, compared with Col. 1. 23. says the
blessed Apostle, it has been declared (meaning the Gospel) to every creature,
or as the word is in the Greek, in every creature. And what might be spoken
from Job and the Queen of the South? but I forbear; where much is given, much
shall be required.

Object. 18.
But if it should be granted that Christ did die for all, as I believe in some
sense he did, yet none has any ability to believe except it be given of God.

Answ. I am glad to hear that it is believed that Christ died for all; but
consider, it must not be made forth in man's sense, but in Scripture-sense,
according to the mind of the Holy Ghost in Scripture; and for any ability in
the creature, I mean naturally to believe in Christ, we agree: For no one in
the world has free will, but as I have showed, God gives forth of himself to
the creature, to cause the creature to believe, Acts 17. 31.

Object. 19.
If those which believe not shall be damned, as now I see they shall, then you
have contradicted your self; for in your former discourse you said, that all
children that die in their infancy are saved, they cannot believe, therefore
they must be damned from your own words, Mar. 16. 16. he that believes not
shall be damned.

Answ. I grant that children cannot believe; for believing is faith, and faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. and yet they cannot be damned, because where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression, says the blessed Apostle, Romans 4.
15. But God made no law with children, (as infants in the Cradle) Deuteronomy. 11. 2.
And know you this day, for I speak not to your children, which have not known,
and which have not seen the chastisements of the Lord: And when the Lord says,
hear or behold, as in Ezekiel. 18. 25. with Mich. 6. 1, 2, 3. he speaks not to
those which are small children, but to those which are capable of the voice of
the Lord; so that you see it does not contradict what was said before.

Object. 20.
What need is there for Gospell-Ministers to tell men Christ died for all? is
it not enough to tell them that he died for sinners, for the ungodly, and for
the worst of sinners?

Answ. For these reasons they must needs declare it.

First, because it is truth to tell them that Christ died for all, and
Gospel Ministers must needs declare Truth.

Secondly, because if it be not declared that Christ died for all, but for some
few only, then what man can have a sure ground that Christ died for him? For
if any be left out (I mean that Christ died not for) most men have reason to
doubt that Christ died not for them; and indeed if there were but two in the
whole world which Christ did not die for, every poor soul might question it
self, that they were the man, the woman, that he died not for.

Thirdly, the third reason why Gospel Ministers must needs declare Christ died
for all, else they preach but a piece of the Gospel; nay if those which preach
do not believe Christ died for all, and so preach, then they have no good news
for some poor souls, and (in plain terms) they say thus, Friends, there is good
news from heaven for sinners, but it is but for some sinners, take it amongst
you, Christ died for some of you, but I cannot tell who you are, you shall know
when you believe; for I will tell you, you that believe, whosoever you are,
shall be saved, and you which believe not shall be damned. Nay further, these
men tell their hearers, that they cannot escape if they neglect so great
salvation. Now what can this Doctrine beget in a soul, but a supposed hope?
Nay, why does the Minister so charge many a poor soul with that which is not
true. As thus, if you believe not, you shall be damned, when he believes there
was no Christ died for him; and take heed you despise not Christ, then you
cannot escape, when he is persuaded that Christ dyed not for him: for either he
did, or he did not; if he did not, why does he charge him for an unbeleever?
there was no object for him to believe in; if he did die for that unbeleever,
its more than the Preacher knows, for he believes Christ dyed but for a few,
and whether he be one that he dyed for, he must leave it.

Ob. 21. Does God give all power alike?
Ans. No, to some more, to some less, to one he gives five talents, to another
two, to another one; where much is given, much is required.

Ob. 22. Surely Christ dyed for some, but only for a temporal being.
Ans. Where is that proof? what Christ did for any one must be believed and no
more.

He that is commanded to believe more than Christ did for him, is commanded to
believe an untruth.

Ob. 23. Surely it must needs be if Christ dyed for all men, then all must have
free will?
Ans. And why so? why must men have free will if Christ dyed for all, more than
if Christ dyed but for some? I have proved before that God gives forth of
himself to the Creature to leave the Creature without excuse: but I deny any
Creature to have power of himself. (that is by nature) to believe in Jesus
Christ, neither does it follow that it must be so because Christ dyed for all,
yet I confess men would lay it on the necks of those that hold this point, to
make the way odious.

Ob. 24.
We all had power and will in Adam to stand, he abusing his power, all mankind
became sinners: Now God might justly make choice of whom he pleased in this
condition, not being bound to restore any again.

As for example, some man gives his servant a sum of money to trade withal,
whereby he might (if improved) be enriched, this servant wilfully spends this
his sum of money, his Master is not bound to restore him again, neither is God
bound to restore any.

Ans. From this objection several things are considerable, which will help to
clear our former discourse; indeed this is the judgment of most men, that all
fell in Adam, and God then was pleased to make choice of a few to become his,
sending his Son to die for those few, leaving the other to themselves in their
lost estate. I desire now from what is laid down to take these into
consideration.

First, it is granted by the Objector that all had power in Adam to stand (as
indeed they had) then the Reprobate had power to stand.

Secondly, by Adams sin all were made sinners, then it seems all were
righteous before: then the Reprobate were righteous in Adam before he sinned.

I am forced here to speak other men's words, for I deny that any were
reprobated from eternity: but to answer the Objection, I grant all sinned in
Adam, Rom 5. 18 and that it is just with God to restore whom he pleases: nay
God had been just if all had perished. It is granted likewise that God was not
simply bound to restore man again.

But God has bound himself to restore man by promise, see the second of Joel
the 28. Acts 2. 17. I will power out my spirit upon all flesh. Thus you see God
has bound himself; if the Master does promise to restore the servant that has
spent all, he is bound by promise, so God by promise in the 3. of Genesis 15. That
the seed of the woman should break the serpents head; now faithful is he that
promised, who has done it through his own grace and love in Jesus Christ, John
3. 16. God so loved the world (that is the lump of mankind) that whosoever
believes should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Ob. If Christ has taken away the guilt of Adams sin from all, then, what
shall any he damned for?
Ans. For unbeleef.

Ob. 25. Unbelief cannot be the condemning sin only, for it is said in the
first of the Cor. 6, 4. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God, neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor Drunkards,
nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God? compared with
Ephesians. 5. v. 5, 6. Let no man deceive you with vain words, for because of these
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience. From these
you see that condemnation is inflicted for these as well as unbelief.
Ans. How is it possible that men should be Teachers in Israel, and know not
these things? I grant the wrath of God, nay condemnation comes on those that
commit those things, but these are the works, of Unbelievers; I say unbelief is
the cause that such sins are committed, for which things sake comes the wrath
of God on the children of disobedience, that is, unbelief: where the soul is an
unbeliever, there such sins are committed; But where the soul is united to
Christ through the Spirit, that soul is a true believer, that soul is born of
God, that soul abides in God. See 1 John 3. 9. he that is born of God sins
not, that is, does not wittingly and wilfully rush on sin; or thus, that which
is born of God does not nor cannot sin, v. 6. but the unregenerate part is
warring against the Spirit, so in many things we offend all; so by this you see
who they are, and for what men are damned, namely, for unbelief, see Joh. 3.
18, 19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, but men
love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil, compared with
the 36. verse. He that believes on the Son has life, he that believes not the
Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him likewise: In the 8.
chapter of John ver. 24. says Christ to the Jews, if ye believe not that I am he
ye shall die in your sins. And that is full for this purpose Mark, 16. 16. He
that believes not shall be damned. And this must needs be the sin against the
Holy Ghost, spoken of Matthew. 12. 31, 32. I mean final and total unbelief, he
that never believes. Indeed I know there has been abundance spoken and
written about the definition of this sin against the Holy Ghost, what it
should be; some say this, some that, and most say it is to sin against
knowledge, which cannot be; for then who would be saved? for the Lord knows
that both Ministers and People have sinned against knowledge, that has been
acted by both, which the conscience has been persuaded ought not to be done.
But thousands can now speak experimentally, that there is remission of sins,
yea can behold a reconciled God through Jesus Christ, for what has been acted
by them wilfully: But those that persist in unbelief, and despise the Gospel,
shall find no mercy, these are said (Heb. 16. 29.) to do despite to the Spirit
of Grace. And thus much to prove unbelief the condemning sin, much more of
this nature might be said, but I forbear, and proceed to the fourth Reason.
Indeed some of these Objections should have been placed before.

Fourthly, Gospel Ministers must needs preach Christ dyed for all:

First, because it sets forth the great love of God to poor sinners without
respect of persons, Romans 2. 11.

Secondly, thereby the creature is left without excuse, having a Christ to
believe in that they might be saved, Joh. 3. 17. For God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved;
compared with Joh. 1. 9. he is, (that is Christ) the true light that lights
every man that comes into the world.

Thirdly, Because this being a truth, that Christ dyed for all, does clear the
Eternal Father, condemnation being of man's self, Hosea 13. 9. O Israel thou
have destroyed thy self; and our blessed Savior says, to the Jews, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest, etc. how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as a hen does gather her brood under her wings, and ye
would not, Luke 13. 34.

And how is condemnation of man's self, but for refusing of their own mercy.
Jonah 2. 8. verse. And how does the soul refuse its own mercy, but by slighting
of Jesus Christ, but by spurning against the Gospel, Prove. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25. And truly this is the condemnation of most in the world, to despise
the Gospel, to refuse Christ in the Gospel, loving pleasure and sin more than
the wages of righteousness, counting the ways of God even strange ways,
according to that saying by the Prophet Hosea 8. 12.

The sum of all is this, that those that one day perish (as many shall) shall
not perish because Christ dyed not for them, but because they have refused,
despised, and stood in opposition against him. Salvation of God, and
condemnation of man's self.

FINIS

