A LETTER SENT FROM HIS EXCELLENCY SIR Thomas Fairfax, AND The chief Commanders
in the Army.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of LONDON.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.

For the Right Honorable the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of LONDON.
Right Honorable and Worthy Friends,
HAving by our Letters and other Addresses, presented by our General to the
Honorable House of Commons, endeavored to give satisfaction of the clearness of
our just demands; and also in Papers published by us remonstrated the grounds
of our proceedings in prosecution whereof; all which having been exposed to
public view we are confident have come to your hands, and at least received a
charitable construction from you; The sum of all which our desires, as
Soldiers, are no other then a desire of satisfaction to our demands, as
Soldiers, and repatation upon those who have to the utmost improved all
opportunities and advantages by false suggestions, misrepresentations, and
otherwise for the destruction of this Army, with a perpetual blot of ignominy
upon it, which we should not value, if it singly concerned our own particulars,
being ready to deny our selves in this, as we have done in other cases for the
Kingdoms good; but under this pretense finding no less involved in it, then
the overthrow of the Privileges both of Parliament and People, wherein rather
then they shall far in their designs, or we not receive what in the eyes of
all good men is just, endeavors to engage the Kingdom in a new War, and this
singly by those, who when the truth of these things shall be made to appear,
will be found the Authors of these evils that are feared, as having no other
way to protect themselves from question and punishment, but by putting the
Kingdom into blood, under pretenses of the Honor of, and their love to the
Parliament, as if that were dearer to them then us, or as if they had given
greater proof of their faithfulness to it then we: But we perceive that under
these veiles and pretenses, they seek to interest their design in the City of
London, as if that City ought to make good their miscarriages, and should
prefer a few self-seeking men before the welfare of the Public; and indeed we
have found these men so active to accomplish their designs, and to have such
apt instruments for their turn in that City, that we have cause to suspect they
may engage many therein, upon mistakes, which are easily swallowed in times of
such prejudice, against men that have given (we may speak it without vanity)
the most public testimony of their good affections to the Public, and to that
City in particular.

For the thing we insist upon as English men, and surely our being Soldiers
has not stripped us of that interest, although our malicious enemies would have
it so; we desire a settlement of the Peace of the Kingdom, and of the
Liberties of the Subject, according to the Votes, and Declarations of
Parliament; which before we took up Arms were by the Parliament used as
arguments and inducements to invite us and diverse of our dear friends out,
some of which have lost their lives in this War; which being by Gods
blessing finished, we think we have as much right to demand and desire to
see a happy settlement, as we have to our money, and the other common interest
of Soldiers which we have insisted upon: We find also the ingenuous and
honest people, in almost all the parts of the Kingdom where we come, full
of the sense of ruin and misery, if the Army should be disbanded, before the
Peace of the Kingdom, and those other things before mentioned, have a full and
perfect settlement.

We have said before, and profess it now, we desire no alteration of the
civil government.

We desire not to intermeddle with, or in the least to interrupt the settling of
the Presbyteriall Government: nor do we seek to open a way to licentious
liberty under pretense of obtaining case for tender consciences; we profess
as ever in these things, when the State have once made a settlement, we have
nothing to say but to submit or suffer, only we could wish that every good
Citizen, and every man that walks peaceably in a blameless conversation, and
is beneficial to the Commonwealth, may have liberty and encouragement; it
being according to the just policy of all States, even to justice it self.

These in brief are our desires, and the things for which we stand, beyond
which we shall not go, and for the obtaining these things we are drawing near
your City; professing sincerely from our hearts we intend not evil toward
you, declaring with all confidence and assurance that if you appear not against
us in these our just desires to assist that wicked party that would imbroyle
us and the Kingdom, nor we nor our Soldiers shall give you the least
offense, we come not to do any act to prejudice the being of Parliaments, or
to the hurt of this in order to the present settlement of the Kingdom; We
seek the good of all, and we shall here wait, or remove to a further distance
there to abide, if once we be assured that a speedy settlement of things be
in hand, until they be accomplished; which done, we shall be most ready
either all of us, or so many of the Army as the Parliament shall think fit, to
disband or go for Ireland; And although you may suppose that a rich City may
seem an enticing bait to poor hungry Soldiers to venture far to gain the
wealth thereof, yet if not provoked by you, we do profess rather then any
such evil should fall out the Soldiers shall make their way through our blood
to effect it, and we can say this for most of them, for your better assurance,
that they so little value their pay in comparison of higher concernments to a
public good, that rather then they will be unrighted in the matter of their
honesty and integrity, which has suffered by the men they aim at, and desire
justice upon, or want the settlement of the kingdoms peace, and theirs with
their fellow Subjects Liberties, they will lose all; which may be a strong
assurance to you, that it is not your wealth they seek, but the things tending
in common to your and their welfare that they may attain, you shall do like
fellow Subjects and Brethren if that you solicit the Parliament for them, and
on their behalf.

If after all this, you, or a considerable part of you be seduced to take up
Arms in opposition to, or hindrance of these our just undertakings; We hope
by this brotherly premonition, to the sincerity whereof we call God to
witness, we have freed our selves from all that ruin which may befall that
great and populous City, having thereby vvashed our hands thereof, we rest.

Your affectionate friends to serve you. Thomas Fairfax. Oliver Cromwell.
Robert Hamond. Thomas Hamond. Hardresse Waller. Nath. Rich. Thomas Pride.
Francis Ireton. Robert Lilborne. John Disbrowe. Thomas Rainsborow. Lambert.
Harrison.

Royston June 10, 1647.

