THE FOUR PETITIONS OF HVNTINGTON SHIRE, NORFOLK SVFFOLK, AND ESSEX.

Jointly concerning the liberty of the Subjects, to the Honorable Assembly of
the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

Unanimously concurring to the rooting out of Papists, and their Religion from
our Kingdom; and the removing of the Popish Lords, and Bishops from their
Votes in the House of Peers: and that there may be a speedy Reformation of
Religion in our Church, according to the Word of God.

The Petition of Huntington-shire, particularly containing the behalf of the
Lord Kimbolton.

LONDON, Printed for John H^^mond. 1642.

To the right Honorable THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, AND BVRGESSES of the House of
Common now assembled in Parliament. The Petition of the County of Huntington.
Shows,

THat Your unwearied labors, and indefessive endeavors for the public good,
and safety of the whole Kingdom, have exstimulated us not only to
acknowledge, obsequiously the same, but also have respectively induced us to
present, our lives and estates at your command, and Order. The grievances,
which for a long-time hitherto have sorely oppressed us, have partly been
cleared by our endeavors, and partly remain still to the great mollestation of
us all; which we really suppose to be retarded by a malignant patty, which are
acknowledged to be the sole obstacles of your proceedings. Our humble address
is therefore to Your Honors, that You would be graciously pleased to devote
the Popish Lords, Bishops, and others from the House of Peers, and exenterate
those evil Councillors from that Illustrous Assembly. For we find that by
their mischievous designs your endeavors are not only frustrated, but the
very privileges of the Parliament broken, and the liberty of the Subjects
debilitated, and the Members of both Houses unassured of their lives, to the
great prejudice of the whole Kingdom, especially a Religious member of the
House of Peers, the Lord of Kimbolton in our Shire, who was impeached by his
Majesty of High Treason; but we are confident of his Loyalty, and have so
absolute an opinion of him, that he is not guilty of the least of these
Articles wherein he was arraigned. Wherefore we humbly implore your Honors,
that he, and the orher may enjoy the freedom, and liberty of the Parliament,
according to the legal progress of Law, and the ancient customs and Rights
of Parliamentarie trials. To the granting of which Petitiory desire we
recommend our Service and Zeal unto your Honors, humbly beseecning you to
reflect upon our Petition.

To your Petitioners will be bound to pray. etc.
THE PETITION OF THE COVNTIE OF NORFOLK To the Honorable House of Commons,
etc.
Shows,

THat the manifold pressures, and multiplicity of grievances which have
disturbed our County have been intolerable, and almost insupportable: and
whereas we have presented our many Petitions to your Honor, we have been
frustrated, and have had little or no redress from you, the cause whereof we
neither judge nor imagine to be retarded by you, but we absolutely believe
that it appertains rather to the Popish Lords, and Bishops in the House of
Peers, who hinder and nullify many things, which are endeavored by your
Diurnall vigilance. To the avoiding of which future hindrance, and obstacle in
your pious determinations, we do now make the humble tender of our service and
devotion unto you, beseeching with all humility and ardency of affection, ^o
the universal good of this Commonwealth, that those aforementioned Lords and
Bishops may be devoted from the upper House, that the clear spring of your
sacred and unanimous resolulutions may run like a pure fountain of Justice,
without either the hindrance or let of any, as also without the corruption of
any malignant, or illaffected member, to the prosperous alacrity of this whole
Nation.

And then your Petitioners shall be for ever bound to pray, etc.
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF the County of Suffolk, To the Right honorable Court
of Parliament
Humbly shows,

THat where is, infinite pressures and grievous impositions have for these many
years been urged upon us, to the great grief and disturbance of the Kingdom:
the redress where of we impartially confess, has been with excessive labor
endeavored by you in the space of the fourteen months past, to bring all
thing to a regular reformation: yet notwithstanding your endeavors have been
contrariwise frustrated, and our servent expectations retarded, by the
ill-disposed-members of some in the House of Peers, where the Popish Lords and
Bishops having their vote, do repercusse those good determinations which are
intended by the House of Commons: Our humble supplication is therefore, that
you would be respectively pleased to remove these dusturbers of the
Commonwealth, that do not only hinder the zealous laffected Commons from
their demonstration of vigilant, sedulity, but d^^ also procrastinate and
defer the common safety and prosperity of the whole Kingdom: in the name of
which in genera^l, and not in the behalf of our selves in particular, we
dev^^^ly present our Petition unto your Honors, umbly claving your assent and
consent thereunto.

And your Petitioners shall be ever bound to pray, etc.
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF the County of Essex: To the right Honorable the
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in the House of Commons now assembled in
Parliament.
Shows,

THat the preposterous divisions of our Religion have been so confused amongst
us, and the numerous grievances of our County, have been so voluminous, that
they could easily be expressed. And although we have daily waited in
expectation of a reformation; yet we have been frustrated, and nothing but
incivility, disorder, and profaneness is introduced into the distracted Church.
Our humble request is therefore that you would expel those, who are the cause
of our miserable calamities, from your Assembly, viz. Popish Lords and Bishops,
with others, that Religion may be piously confirmed, sacredly established, and
respectively embraced by all people, according to the decency of the Church,
and as the holy Scripture requires: that the consciences of men may be
disburdened, the various distractions in the Church mitigated, and the
regularity of pious devotion instituted, to the immortal honor of the
Parliament.

And your Petioners will be bound to pray, etc.

