Fourteen ARTICLES OF PEACE.

Propounded to the King and Parliament by the Gentry and Commonalty of the
County of York: being subscribed to by these Knights and Gentlemen, whose names
are here specified, in the name of all the Gentry and Commonalty of the said
County.

Wherein is contained their Resolution to maintain the peace of that County
against all those that shall endeavor to disturb it.

Also the Copy of a Letter sent from Prince Robert to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for E. Blackmore. Octo. 4. 1642.

Fourteen ARTICLES OF PEACE.
1. THat all Forces assembled together in any part of Yorkshire, our County or
City of York, shall be disbanded, and all those under the conduct of Cap.
Hotham, now in Doncaster, and all other Forces in any other part of the
County, under any other Commanders, belonging to the Garrison at Hull, shall
retire to Hull with all speed possible, and the said Cap. Hotham shall begin to
march from Doncaster toward Hull on Saturday next.

2. It is agreed that no hostile or violent act shall hereafter be done by the
Garrison at Hull, either directly or indirectly, by pretense of any aid or
assistance whatsoever, upon the persons of any men within the County of York,
or within the County or City of York, either upon the goods either in the
County aforesaid, or in the County of Kingstone upon Hull.

3. It is agreed the Commission of Array and orders or ordinances of Parliament
for the Militia, be wholly suspended in this County, until such time as some
course be agreed upon for the ordering of the Militia for the King and
Parliament, and this without disputing the legality or illegality of either,
but as finding neither of them so necessary at this time as for the setting
them on foot to involve this great County in blood.

4. It is agreed that no Commission be imposed upon this County, but such as
are legal, and presented in good terms.

5. It is agreed that no Ammunition, Forces whatsoever, shall be suffered to
enter the County in a hostile manner, by virtue of any Pretense or Command
whatsoever; and they who shall attempt to do it, the whole County shall rise
against them with force, as enemies against Peace, to be suppressed.

6. It is agreed that if any carriage for the Household either of the King or
Queen be to pass this County, that to prevent all other armed Forces under
pretense of such a conduct to come amongst us, we shall take order to see them
quietly conducted by the Sheriff of the County with such a Convoy as he shall
appoint, and we like, and with no others. And if it shall happen the Queens
Majesty shall return out of Holland through this County, that we shall humbly
beseech her Majesty to forbear bringing with her any multitude of armed
Forces, but to believe we shall wait upon her Majesty with such a safe,
honorable, and quiet Convoy, as shall befit our duty and her honor.

7. It is agreed that if any warlike provision be desired to be passed this
County, that he would be pleased to convey the same some other way, being it
may be an occasion to interrupt our peace.

8. It is agreed that none shall be arrested in this County as delinquents for
either party, but a legal, peaceable, and quiet way, that is, by the legal
officers, and their Assistants only, and not by armed men and soldiers, who
may be an occasion to bring fire amongst us.

9. It is agreed that whosoever in this County shall be made appear, either
to be the author, contriver, or assisting to the burning or pillaging Sir
Edward Roods house, or any other man's house in the County, we shall see them
if they be able to make reparation, and however to be brought to justice.

10. It is agreed that a general amity be made beween all the Gentlemen and
others of this County of all former unkindnesses and differences that have
been bred by these unhappy distractions, and that we hereafter will all be as
one man to defend one another according to the Law, against all others, leaving
all offenses to be punished by the law of the Land, and not by force or
violence.

11. It is agreed that it is intended by disbanding of the Armies, that his
Majesty shall have all liberty for the removing all Canons and Ammunition, as
he has in this County.

12. It is agreed that all the Arms which do belong to any of the Trained Bands
of this County, which have had taken from them since 21. of this instant
September. by either party, shall be presently restored, and that Cap. Hotham
shall leave behind him, and when he returns into Hull all those Brass Pieces
belonging to his Majesty, which is now in Doncaster, excepting such as he
himself brought thither from Hull.

13. It is agreed that no further Forces shall (during this difference betwixt
the King and Parl.) be either raised in or paid by this County for this war,
other then such as shall be already levied or really raised, and as such also
presently to go out of this County without raising any more.

14. It is agreed that a humble Remonstrance and Declaration of these our
Resolutions be presently sent both to the King and Parliament, accompanied with
a humble Petition from us all, that according as we have all unanimously agreed
for our particular peace, so they would be pleased so far to commiserate this
distracted Kingdom to do the same for the peace of the whole.

Henry Bellace. William Savill. Edw. Osborne. John Romsden. John Hopton.
Francis Nevill Tho: Fairfax. Tho: Maliverey. Will. Lyster. Tho. Stockdall.


A True Copy of a LETTER sent by Prince RUPERT to His MAJESTY.
SIR,
THe Bearer will with all the Circumstances tell Your Majesty our Proceedings
at Worcester I shall only say this, That upon Your Majesty's Commands to
succor the Town, we went thither with our Forces and found the Rebels on both
sides of the Town, no Ammunition, nor nothing fitting to entertain so great a
Force as the Lord of Essex would have brought that Night. But all things in so
great a disorder, that certainly we had all been lost, had we not by a great
chance met with 10. Troops of their horse, and five of their Dragooners; which
we did entirely rout, and killed most of their chiefest Officers. The Manner
and the Names, I leave for the said Bearer to tell you. Your Majesty will be
pleased to accept this, as a beginning of Your Officers and my Duty; and I
doubt not, as (certainly) they behaved themselves all very bravely and
gallantly, that hereafter Your Majesty shall find the same behavior against a
more considerable number. Of this Your Majesty may be very confident, as also
of the endeavors of

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Obedient Nephew and humble Servant, RUPERT.
From Bobfort this 24. of Sept. 1642
Sir,
This Gentleman has behaved himself so gallantly, That I must needs humbly
desire your Majesty, to Knight him; which will encourage him and all others to
continue the Affection for Your Service.

The Circumstances Related by Master CRANE who is Knighted. He is (I hear)
Prince RUPERTS Cornett.
THat at the first Charge, Prince Rupert, Prince Maurice, Master Fox, and two
more, charged and defeated a Troop, whom they knew not to be enemies till they
were upon them, by their Orange color Scarfes.

That seven Cornets are taken, some I saw.

That several Officers are killed on their side, particularly, Douglas and
Sandis; that the last repented before his Death, for having borne Arms against
the King.

That several Men are taken: as Captain Wingat of the House of Commons, and
others.

That we have but three killed in all.

That but three of ours of quality have been hurt; Mr. Welmott in the back,
and the worst of any: but yet he marches in a coach and is merry, Sir Lewis
Dives through the Shoulder. Mr. Byron (a Brother of Sir John's) over the Face. I
hear he has said, That Prince Maurice is a little hurt, but I understood him
but those three.

That Brown, who commanded in chief as Colonel of Dragooners, was one of the
first that ran away.

That our men are very hearty with their Victory, and the spoils of the killed
(as Horses, Arms, Buff-coats, Money in their pockets) and the Enemy (as they
hear) much disheartened, and not likely to make so great haste from about
Worcester as they meant.

THE CORNETTS MOTTOES.
PRo Rege and Regno.
Exurgat and Discipabuntur.
Pro Rege and Religione,
Si pro Patria Morior non Moror.
The rest so torn, the Mottoes could not be Read.

FINIS.

