Virtus Rediviva A Panegyric On our late King CHARLES the I. etc. of ever
blessed Memory. ATTENDED, With several other Pieces from the same PEN. Viz. I.
A Theater of Wits: Being a Collection of APOTHEGMS. II. Foenestra in Pectore:
or a Century of Familiar LETTERS. III. Loves Labyrinth: A Tragi-comedy. IV.
Fragmenta Poetica: Or Poetical Diversions.
Concluding, with A PANEGYRIC on His Sacred Majesty's most happy Return. By T.
F.

Varietas delectat. Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham, at the
Sign of the Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North door; and
Thomas Basset, in St. Dunstans Churchyard in Fleet Street. 1660.

VIRTUES REDIVIVA: OR, A PANEGYRIC On the late K. Charles the I. Second Monarch
OF GREAT BRITAIN. By THO. FORDE.

Honoris, Amoris, Doloris ergo.

Propositum est mihi Principem Laudare non Principis facta, nam laudabilia
multa etiam mali faciunt.

Plin. Panegyric* in Trajan. Emblems of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham at the Black Bear
in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1660.

The Preface.
XEnophon charactered his Cyrus, not as he was but as he ought to have been:
making him rather the subject of a brave Romance, than a true History.

But such is the advantage of our Charles his Virtue, that when I have said all
I can say, it will be infinitely beneath what I should say, I shall do truth
no injury to confess the weakness of Art to represent a person so admirable,
without diminishing his glories, whose Fame surmounts the most daring
Hyperbolies of Rhetoric; and to praise faintly (in Seneca's opinion) is a
piece of slander.

I must be forced to imitate the Cosmographers, who describe a large Kingdom
by a little point, and confine the whole world in a small circle: whereto when
I have done all, I must subscribe this Motto, Intelligitur, plus quam pingitur.

Alexander the Great gave straight commands, that no Painter should dare to
make his Picture, but Apelles: I know no Pensill fit to draw great Charles, his
Picture, but his own, Ipse, ipse quem loquar, loquatur. And well it is he has
done it in his divine Portrayture, that Aureum flumen orationis: a piece
wherein Learning and Language, Reason and Religion, speak him at once a Solomon
for knowledge, and a David for piety and devotion.

Timanthes that rare and ingenious Artist (as Pliny tells the Story) divising
in a little Table to represent a Cy^lop^s sleeping, because he would seem in
that little Compass to show his Gyant-like bigness, he painted little Satyrs
hard by, taking measure of one of his thumbs with long perches. Our
insufficiency to represent his sacred Majesty to the full, may perhaps be none
of the least Arguments to evince the greatness of his merit, who (as Pindar
said Elegantly of Heiro) cropped the tops and summities of all virtues, which
dispersed among all others, met in Him, as in their proper Center.

The Coloss at Rhodes, one of the wonders of the World, was no less admired
being beaten down, than when it stood, when as they saw that with one of the
fingers they might make many great Statues: Nor can Great Charles his Fall,
lessen our Admiration of Him, when it shall be considered that from His
incomparable Actions may be drawn perfect Images, and assured Examples of the
greatest and most noble Virtues.

It is the privilege of Virtue to give a new Life after Death.

Chi Semina virtu, racoglie fame,
e vera Fama supera la morte,
Says the Italian Proverb; He that sows virtuous Deeds, reaps Renown, and true
Fame out-lives death.

How many have we read of who have been buried with ignominy and obscurity; yet
in a short time, the Sun of their virtue has risen out of the dark grave of
prejudice and slander, and shined with more luster than before! Benedet^o
Alberti was banished by the Florentines, and yet after his death, they
confessed their error, and fetched home his bones, burying him with solemn pomp
and honor, whom being alive they had persecuted with slanders and reproaches.

It is said of our English Edward the 2d, that they who despised him being
alive, so much honored him being dead, that they could have found in their
hearts to make him a Saint.

The grave which buries a man should also bury all his enemies, it being
unnatural to hate the dead* whom we cannot hurt, for the utmost that malice
can do is to kill; and therefore it is noted a prodigious and unexampled
hatred between the two brothers of Thebes, E^ocles and Polinices, as Statius
tells us,

Nec furiis post fa^a modus, flammaeque rebels
Seditione rogi, etc.
Their furies were not bounded by their fate,
One's Funeral flame the others flame did hate.
Solon made a Law that none should speak evil of the dead, and his reason was,
for fear of immortal enemies.

Livor post fata quiescit. Envy sleeps after death; says the Poet, as
confidently as if it were not to be questioned. Only our Charles has found it
false, and the men of our Age alone have made an exception to this general
rule of charity. There have been found those who have persecuted his Ghost, and
committed Treason against his Memory; like those chief Priests in the Gospel,
who consulted to put Lazarus to death, after his resurrection. But his Virtue
has survived their malice, and he Lives in spite of Fate or envy.

Haec est CAROLI gloria, ut nullius laudibus crescat, nullius vituperatione
minuatur; as Macrobius says of Virgil. This is CHARLES his Glory, that as the
praises of his friends can add nothing to him, so the slanders of his enemies
can detract nothing from Him. His Virtue needethnot our Encomiums, His Memory
contemns their scandals, and his Merits Surpass all Discourses.

Vivit post funera Virtus. VIRTUES REDIVIVA: OR, A PANEGYRIC On the late K.
CharlstheI. Second Monarch of Great BRITAIN.
TO praise the living, although never so deserving, is not seldom suspected of
flattery, and design: Therefore say the wise Italians, La lode nascer deve
quando e morto chi s^ h^ da lodar; Praises ought not to be born, till the party
praised be dead: when both envy in the Reader, and flattery in the Writer are
useless: when the Writers Pen is neither bribed by favors to a mercenary, and
sordid* adulation* nor frighted by the frowns of greatness into a Paral^^ick
and shaking cowardice.

I have undertaken a Subject which will (...) me from the guilt of fawning
flattery, as being so far above all praises that I fear not to be guilty of
saying too much, but too little in his commendation. The richest colors of
Rhetoric are too dark to represent a life so transparent, so full of worth, so
full of wonder. The brightest language will prove but a dark shadow, to that
shining merit* which exceeds all apprehension, much less expression; well it is
if it do not spoil, what I confess I am not able to adorn. Materies tamen ipsa
juvat. Charles the First, whom but to name is to cast a cloud upon all former
Ages, and to benight Posterity; In taking of whose Picture, I shall not need to
do as that Painter did, who drew Antigonus* imagine lusca, hal^ faced, that so
he might hide his want of an eye from the view of the beholder. There is
nothing in Charles, but what is lovely* and admirable* no deformity, or
imperfection. I shall rather choose to imitate the famous Apelles; who to
express his art to the full in the picture of Venus rising naked out of the
Sea, assembled together all the most beautiful women of the Island of Coos
(his native place) uniting in that piece all their divided perfections. There
is nothing eminent, or excellent in all the deservedly admired ancients, that
is not only met, but outdone in Charles. It is affirmed by the learned Raleigh,
that if all the pictures and patterns of a merciless Prince were lost in the
world, they might all again be painted to the life out of the Story of Hen. 8.
But I shall with as much truth* and perhaps more Charity, maintain, that if all
the Pictures, and Patterns of a merciful Prince, of a courageous and constant
King, of a virtuous, and brave Man, were lost* they might be repaired, if not
infinitely excelled in the Story of Charles the First whose life needs no
Advocate, whom detraction it self cannot mention without commendation. I find
not any man in all the Records of the ancients, or the Writings of the more
modern authors, over whom he has not some advantage; nor any ones life, taken
altogether, so admirable as His: nor any thing admirable in any, that was not
in Him: Qu^ simul omnia uno isto nomine continentur. In Him alone are to be
found all the virtuous qualities of the best Princes in the world, without the
vices of any of them: for he only has made it appear, that great virtues may
be without the attendance of great vices.

It was said of our Hen. the 5th. that he had something in him of C^sar, which
Alexander the Great had not, that he would not be drunk, and something of
Alexander the Great, which Caesar had not, that he would not be flattered. But
Charles had the virtues of all; without the vices of any, tam extra vici^, quam
cum summis virtutibus. He as much exceeded all other Kings, as other Kings do
all other men. In a word, he was what ever a good Prince ought to be, and what
others should be, yet was this Lilly born in the land of thorns and briers,
this Rose sprang up amidst a field of thistles; I presume the description has
prevented me saying it was Scotland.

A Land that calls in question, and suspense
Gods Omni-presence, but that Charles came thence.
In quo* nihil praeter unum Carolum est, quod commendemus. A Nation famous for
the birth of Charles, but infamous for their treachery and disloyalty to so
brave a Prince. But the happiness of a brave and incomparable Father, did
sufficiently recompense for the place of his birth: So that I may say of him
what is said of Lewis the 8th of France, father to St. Lewis, that he was Son
to an excellent Father, and Father to an excellent Son; a Son only worthy of
such a Father, a Father only worthy of such a Son. A Father so admirable that
Sir W. Raleigh has left it upon Record to all Posterity, that if all the
malice of the world were infused into one eye, yet could it not discern in his
life, any one of those foul spots, by which the consciences of all foreign
Princes (in effect) have been defiled; nor any drop of that innocent blood on
the Sword of his justice, with which the most that fore-went him have stained
both their hands and fame. This Encomium of the Father, may justly descend to
the Son as Heir apparent to his virtues, as well as his Crowns.

In his Childhood, the weakness of his lower parts which made him unapt for
exercises and feats of activity, rendered him more retired, and studious, and
more intent upon his Book then perhaps he had been otherwise. So great a
Student was he in his younger days, that his Father would say, he must make
him a Bishop: Providence then seeming to design him, rather to the Crosier then
the Crown. By his great study he became a great Historian, an excellent Poet, a
great lover and Master of Music, and indeed a general Scholar. This rare Cien
was not grafted upon a wilding or crab-stock, but an innocent and studious
youth, was the prologue to a more active and vigorous manhood. For being grown
in years, and state, he shook off his former retiredness, and betook himself to
all manner of man-like exercises, as vaulting, riding the great Horse, running
at the Ring, shooting in Cross-bowes, Muskets, and great Ordinance, in which he
became so expert, that he was said to be the best Marks-man, and the most
comely Manager of a great Horse, of any one in his three Kingdoms. Nor were
these excellencies ill-housed, but his fair Soul was tenant to a lovely and
well proportioned body. His stature of a just proportion, his body erect and
active, of a delicate constitution, yet so strong withal, as if nature had
designed him to be the strife of Mars, and Venus. His countenance amiable and
beautiful, wherein the White Rose of York, and the Red of Lancaster were
united: his hair inclining to a brown, till cares and grief changed them into a
white, at once the Emblem of his innocence, and his fortune; clear and shining
eyes, a brow proclaiming fidelity, his whole frame of face and favor, a most
perfect mixture and composition of Majesty, and Sweetness.

Thus long have we beheld him as a Man: Let us now view him as a Husband, as a
Father, as a King; and we shall find him alike admirable in all relations.

As an Husband* he is a rare Example of love and chastity; at his first
receiving of his Queen, he professed* that he would be no longer Master of
himself* then whilst he was a Servant to her; and so well did he make his words
good, that on the day before his death he commanded his Daughter, the excellent
Princess Elizabeth, to tell her Mother that his thoughts had never strayed from
her, and that his love should be the same to the last. And indeed no man more
loved, or less do^^^d upon a wife.

As a father, how tender was he of his children, without a too remiss
indulgence! how careful of their education in the true Protestant Religion,
which he always professed, and learnedly defended, advising the Lady Elizabeth
(and in her the rest) to read Bishop Andrews Sermons, Hookers Ecclesiaistcall
Polity, and Bishop Laud's book against ^isher, to ground them against Popery.

Let us now view him as a King, and we shall see him as the Soul of the
Commonwealth, acting vigourously, and regularly every particular member in its
several place and office. Behold him in his royal Throne, and thence
dispencing his sacred Oracles of Law and Justice, to the admiration of all that
had the happiness to see and hear him. Witness Mr. Speaker^ Speech to his
Majesty on the 5th of Novem. 1640. I see before my eyes with admiration (says
that then eloquent Orator, as the mouth of all the Commons of England) the
Majesty of Great Britain, the glory of times, the history of honor, Charles the
First, in his forefront placed by descent of antiquity, King, settled by a long
succession, and continued unto us by a pious and peaceful government;
concluding with this serious and loyal promise; And all our Votes shall pass,
that your sacred Majesty may Long, Long, Long reign over us. To which, no
doubt, all that heard him said, Amen. Such was his pious and paternall care
over his people, that the most ^ullen ingratitude could not but acknowledge him
the Father of his Country: teaching his people obedience to his Laws, not so
much by Proclamation, as Example; as he was Imperio Maximus, so he was Exemplo
Major, as Paterculus says of Tyberius: or as it is said of Lycurgus, that
famous Lawgiver, he never ordained any thing to others, which he did not first
exactly observe himself.

So chaste was he in his embraces, so pious in his devotions, so just in all his
actions, that the Law-maxime of Rex non peccat, was never more true of any
King, than of Him. Behold him at the Council Table, and there we shall find
him (by the testimony of one of his greatest enemies) principal in all
transactions of State, and the wisest about him but Accessaries: for he never
acted by any implicit faith in State matters; He had more learning and
dexterity in State affairs, undoubtedly (says that Cook russian) than all the
Kings in Christendom. And herein, if ever, the good words of an enemy are true.

It is reported of our Henry 4th. that he stood more upon his own legs than any
of his Predecessors had done, in cases of difficulty; not refusing, but not
needing the advice of others, which might confirm, but not better his own
judgment. But this is far greater and truer commendation in Charles, who
succeeded so wise a Prince as James the first, the greatest Master of
King-craft (as he used to call it) that ever swayd the English Scepter.

But as our Charles his wisdom was great, in that he was able to advise, yet
was it greater in that he was willing to be advised: being never so wedded to
his own opinions but that on good grounds he might be divorced from them; for
though some of his enemies have reported him wilful, and too tenacious to his
own resolves; one who knew him bettet then all of them (though perhaps their
malice was greater than their ignorance) affirms, and that without suspicion of
falsehood, that though in his childhood he was noted to be very wilful, which
might proceed from that retiredness, which the imperfection of his Speech, not
fitting him for public discourse, and the weakness of his limbs and joints (as
unfit for action) made him most delight in; yet afterward, as he shaked off
his retiredness, so he corrected in himself the peccancy of that humor, which
had grown up with it, there being no man to be found (says my Author, and it
is verbum Sacerdotis) of an evener temper, more pliant to good counsel, or less
wedded than he was to his own opinion. Indeed as he was long and serious in
deliberating, so was he just and true to his resolves, and resolute in the
execution of them.

Let us attend him to the Chapel, and there we shall see him, so pious and
devout in prayer, so reverend and attentive in hearing, that we may justly
conclude his piety to be as a rich Diamond in the Ring of his royal virtues.
Constantine always heard Sermons standing, acknowledging thereby what
reverence is due to the Word of God, the irreverence that has since crept into
our Churches, may well make us bewail the loss of that laudable Example of our
English Constantine, who always bare a great regard to the Church and Church
men; whom he reverenced for their function, and loved for their fi^^l^^y; so
much a friend was he to all Church men, that had any thing in them beseeming
that sacred Function, that he hazarded (as he says himself) his own interest,
chiefly upon conscience and constancy to maintain their rights, whom the more
he looked upon as Orphans, and under the sacrilegious eyes of many cruel and
rapacious reformers, so he thought it his duty the more to appear as a father,
and patron for them and the Church.

He was at once a dutiful Son, and an indulgent father of the Church,
esteeming it (with that good Emperor) a greater honor to be a member of the
Church, than Head of an Empire. Nor was he only a gracious Patron of the
Church, but also a resolute Champion in behalf of the Hierarchy, as well
remembering that Prophetic Apothegm of the King his father, No Bishop, no King;
his own experience being too great a Comment upon that truth to be by him
neglected, or by us forgotten.

Bassianus the Emperor refusing the name of Pius, would be called Foelix: on
the contrary our Charles chose rather to be informiatly Pious, than
irreligiously prosperous, well knowing that piety shall not want its reward in
a better place. A King so religious, so devout, that if all his subjects had
been like the King, we might then indeed have had a Kingdom of Saints.

If we enter his Courts of Judicature, there shall we behold Justice with her
sword and balance, equally dividing, and impartially weighing out the rewards
of virtue, and punishments of vice: poverty never excluding the Innocent, nor
power absolving the nocent; and though the Asylum of his mercy was never shut
to the meanest supplicant, whom the rigor of the Law had cast, yet was he
always inexorable to the supplications of the greatest offender, if found
guilty of wilful murder. Agesilaus wrote to a Judge in behalf of his
Favorite, Si causa bona, pro justitia, sin mala pro amicitia absolve. But has
not our Charles delivered up the greatest of his favorites to the sentence of
the Law? did his power ever shield the most powerful offenders from the stroke
of justice, though himself were wounded through their sides? As his justice was
blind to all relations, his hands were continually open to receive the
Petitions of his meanest subject: not like Demetrius who threw the Petitions of
his people into the water; He was always ready and expectant to receive them,
and never better pleased than when he took them from the hands of the poorest
Petitioner; justly meriting the style of James the fifth of Scotland, who was
called, The poor man's King.

Worthy was the Speech of that Goth, a King of Italy, who speaking of his
Subjects, said, Messis n^stra, cunctorum quies: Our harvest is their rest. Such
was the vigilance of Charles, whose waking eyes secured all his flock from being
a prey to any subtle Mercury: No foreign invasion daring to land upon our
coasts; no homebred broils frighting the Husbandman from his Plough, or the
Tradesman from his Shop: but peace and plenty crowned all their endeavors,
they being married in our Kingdom, as nearly as in the French Proverb. Every
man sat under his own Vine and Fig Tree, eating the fruit of his own labors.
No loading taxes made their trade move slowly, or clogged the wheels of their
honest industry. No polings, no plundrings, no spies to catch at every whisper,
and make a man an offendour for a word; but Law was duly administered, Religion
maintained, Learning encouraged, the arts liberally professed and rewarded. Our
Merchants traffickt with safety and honor wheresoever the necessity of their
employments lead them; and no corner of the world so barbarous, but the name of
an Englishman was welcome and pleasant.

It is reported that Henry the 8th confessed on his death bed, that he had
never spared man in his wrath, nor woman in his lust: But of Charles let me
ask, whose house did he plunder? whose wife did he abuse? whose right did he
wrong? may it not be more truly affirmed of him, what the Historian
flatteringly spoke of Livia, the wife of Augustus, Ejus potentiam nemo sensit,
nisi aut levatione periculi, aut accessione dignitatis? No man felt his hand*
unless in raising the oppressed from the pit of misery, or advancing the
deserving to the hill of honor. To such a pitch of felicity were we then
arrived, by the virtues and indulgence of a gracious Sovereign, that nothing
could render us more happy, but a continuance of our happiness. Never was
Prince more beloved, or better obeyed by loyal Subjects. Nothing but the want
of him could render him more glorious, or desired.

But the greatest felicities are shortest lived, and the most glorious summer
is followed by the sharpest winter; the clearest sky is not without its
clouds, the longest day must have a night. The sun of our glory was arrived
to the Meridian and Vertical point, it must now decline, labor under a sad
and almost total Eclipse; and at last set in a cloud of blood, darkness, and
confusion. O nulla longi temporis foelicit as! But as the sun is no less
glorious in it self, when laboring under the darkest Eclipse, nor leaves his
wonted course, for all the clouds and vapors that fly in his face: So neither
was our Charles less great and admirable under the most fatal Ecclipses of his
glory, nor less constant, and unwearied in all the royal Offices of a King,
when the clouds and vapors of calumny and sedition endeavored most to obscure
and darken his brightness.

As he was a lover of Peace, he was no less valiant in War, if we confess at
least valor consists not only in doing, but also in suffering. As he was
moderate in prosperity, so was he courageous and patient in adversity: his
virtue, courage and Christian patience having carried him with an unwearied
course through both the Hemisph^res of prosperity and adversity, compassing (as
I may say) the whole globe of both fortunes, and rendering him an unparalleld
pattern of such virtues, as were formerly undiscovered to the world, and had
still remained as a Terra incognita to all other Princes, had not his admirable
example taught them, and all others, that no Cross is too heavy for a Christian
resolution, nor any difficulty too hard for virtue to conquer.

On the Sepulcher of Possenius Niger was placed this Epitaph, Here lies Poss.
Niger, an ancient Roman, who in merit was equal with the virtuous, but in
misfortune exceeded the most unfortunate. We may affix the same with very
little alteration to the Statue of Charles the first, second Monarch of Great
Britain, That he was equal in merit with the most virtuous, but in misfortunes
exceeding the most unfortunate: yet did the brightness of his virtue shine
through, and his piety gild and enamel the darkest clouds of his afflictions,
baffling all the daring mists of malice and envy, and converting them into
well-placed shadows, which rendered his Picture more lively and admirable.

Naturalists write of a precious stone called Caraunias, that it is found only
in a day of thunder, glistering when the Sky is overcast with darkness: such
are the virtues of faith, hope, charity, patience, and magnanimity of Charles,
which perhaps had never so gloriously appeared, had not the darkness of his
fortune brought them to light: and being like winter flowers produced between
storms and tempests, and grown up like the noble Palm under the pressures of
weights and burdens.

Prolixum est enumerare omnes, cognoscite aliquas, as St* Ambrose said of
Judiths virtues; I shall only cull out some few of those many rich jewels, to
adorn his Panegyric, and leave the rest to be collected by his Historians, and
thredded by their more diligent hands upon the string of their more lasting
stories.

The eye of mine observation fixes first upon the orient gem of his Patience
in affliction, which made him so ductile and plyant to the will of Heaven, that
he willingly exchanged his Crown for the Cross, and made his Scepter stoop to
the Rod of affliction.

In his March after Essex to the West, it happened that one of the carriages
brake in a long narrow Lane, which they were to pass, and gave his Majesty a
stop, at a time of an intolerable shower of rain which fell upon him, some of
his Courtiers and others which were near about him, offered to hew him out a
way through the hedges with their Swords, that he might get shelter in some of
the villages adjoining; but he resolved not to forsake his Canon upon any
occasion: At which when some about him seemed to admire and marvail at the
patience which he showed in that extremity; his Majesty lifting up his Hat made
answer, That as God had given him afflictions to exercise his patience, so he
had given him patience to bear his afflictions. A Speech so heavenly and divine
(says my Author) that it is hardly to be paralleled by any of the men of God in
all the Scripture. We may observe him in his divine Meditations, like the
industrious Be, sucking the Honey of comfort and consolation, out of the bitter
flowers of his unequal fortune.

An Ancient said, he that can bear an injury, is worthy an Empire; But if we
consider with how even and equal a temper, with how constant and Christian a
fortitude his Majesty bore all the injurious insolences, and insolent injuries
which the tongues and pens of his malicious adversaries continually loaded him
withal, we must be forced to confess, that if merit herein might have won, or
justice have been Elector, he had not been King of an inconsiderable Island,
but Emperor of the whole world. So far was He from repining at his afflictions,
or being angry at the injuries of his ignorant and insolent enemies, that he
never esteemed himself more glorious, than when dressed up in the robe o^ their
scorn and mockery: always fencing himself with that royal Maxim as with a
shield, Bona agere, and mala patiregium est. Nor could the injuries and
affronts of some, force him to a retaliation, being often angry at, but never
pleased with those satyricall invectives against his enemies which a just
indignation sometimes forced from the sharper Pens of some of his friends.

As his losses could not make him despond, his victories never made him
insolent; though the one rendered him more humble, the other could not make him
proud; He was rather like Fenugreek, which (says Pliny) the worse it is
handled the better it proves.

It is said of that mother in the Maccabees, who saw her seven children slain
before her eyes, and last of all was her self slain; Octies passus est
Martyries, that she suffered Eight times over: and can we think that so
indulgent a Father of his people, did not suffer as many several martyrdomes,
as his subjects sufferd miseries and destructions.

Non placet vindicta, sed victoria, was the applauded speech of the conquering
Caesar; but we may hear our victorious Charles profess, He never had any
victory which was without his sorrow, because it was on his own subjects, who
like Absalom, died many of them in their sin: and yet (says he) ^ never
sufferd any defeat which made me desp^^r of Gods mercy and defense. And that he
might convince the world that he loved not war* nor delighted in the ruin of
his subjects, he ever sought for peace, after his greatest victories; The
highest tide of success (as he says himself, who could best tell) set him not
above a Treaty, nor did any success he had, ever enhance with him the price of
peace, though he was like to pay dearer for it than any man.

It is Recorded to the honor of the Roman Scipio Africanus, and will be to the
glory of our English Charles, that he had rather save one friend, than kill a
thousand enemies. But to such a height were our sins, and the guilty malice of
some particular men amounted, that rendered all his Royal endeavors and tenders
of Peace unfortunate and fruitless; So true is that observation of the grave
Tacitus, Inviso semel principe, seu male, seu been facta praemiunt: A Prince
once distasted is ever suspected, and his actions misconstrued; it then
appearing plainly, that whatever pretentions palliated the designs of some, yet
their intentions terminated in a Nolumus hunc regnare; nor was it hard to
prophecy that such Recusants then would in time appear Ravilliac's: and some
there were, who though they could not but admire ^harles, yet they hated the
King.

Others there were who too well knew the Maxim of their Countryman Machiavel,
that a succession of two or three virtuous Princes works strange effects, and
therefore feared to be at the cost of the experiment, lest it might have proved
to have been at no cheaper ra^e than the ruin of their design, the erecting of
their Babel of confusion, thereby to make way for their Catholic Monarch. But
to their wonder and their envy, when all his forces were defeated, and his
sword fallen out of his hands, Charles alone maintains the Combat, and singly
duels (like another Athanasius) the whole world, in defense of his Conscience
and Religion, which were all the wealth his shipwrackt fortune had left him,
and which, ma^gre the malice of his fate, he carried safe to shore.

The victories he then gained will remain as Eternal Trophies of his honor,
and undeniable arguments of his vast abilities in matters of Controversy: Let
his Conference with the Marquess of Worcester, the papers which passed betwixt
his S. Majesty and Mr. Henderson, and those other with the Ministers in the
Isle of Wight, testify how great a Master he was of reason, how well read in
the Fathers, the Councils, Ecclesiastical History, and the customs of the
Church in all Ages. By all which it will plainly appear that he was as well the
scholar, as the Son of K. James, by whom he was so well instructed in the
controversies of Religion, that when he was in Spain, D. Maw, and D. Wren, two
of his Chaplains being appointed to follow after, came to K. James to know his
pleasure and commands: the King advised them not to put themselves upon any
unnecessary Disputations, but to be only on the defensive part, if they should
be challenged; and when it was answered that there could be no reason to engage
in such disputations, where there could be no Moderator, the King replied, that
Charles should moderate between them and the opposite party. At which, when one
of them seemed to smile on the other, the King proceeded, and told them, that
Charles should manage a point in Controversy with the best Studied Divine of
them all. He was without question Master of an Imperial pen; His Eagles
feathers (upon all occasions) devoured his adversaries goose-quils, and
infinitely recompensed the impediment of his speech, with the advantage of an
inimitable style.

Spartianus reports of Trajan, that after his death he triumphed openly in the
City of Rome, In imagine, in a lively Statue, or Representation, invented by
Adrian for that purpose. But Charles triumphs more nobly in his Royal
Portraicture, drawn by himself, with such curious lines, and lively colors, as
no hand but his own could draw. There is he seated more gloriously than ever he
was on his Royal Throne, or in his Royal Robes; there shall he live and reign,
and be as immortal as his enemies malice. Never was devotion clad in a more
rich, or more modest dress. There does he make it appear that his soul was free
and unconfined, though his body were a prisoner, and that he could exercise the
office of a Priest, when he was deprived of that of a King. Such was the power
of his noble and commanding Soul, even then, that he made his Conquerors his
captives, and subdued the hearts of those to love him, who had deprived him of
all other weapons.

Such was the Princely carriage of Francis the First, King of France, that he
thereby so won upon the hearts of Burbon, and the rest of his enemies, to whom
he was a prisoner, that they honored him with no less observancy, than if he
had been on the top of his prosperity: and Homer much commends his Ulysses,
that when by shipwreck he was cast on shore, he had nothing to commend him but
his carriage. Had Homer had Charles for his subject, or Charles Homer for his
Historian, what an admirable strife would there have been betwixt the workman
and the matter, and yet the matter would have exceeded the workmans art.

Paterculus says of Tyberius, Quod visus praetul^rit principem, his
Countenance proclaimed him King: So Majestic was the Countenance, and so
winning the carriage of Charles, that his enemies became his converts, and his
very Gaolers his Confessors: some of them having ever since exchanged their
former Masters and Estates, for a prison, and banishment, to expiate their
former injuries to so good a King.

And now we have brought him to the last, and most glorious act of his life,
wherein we shall see him outdo himself, as he had done all others in his
former actions; God fitting him with a Courageous and Christian patience, as
much above all other men, as his case and condition was transcending all former
examples.

Trees that grow on the tops of rocks (they say) have stronger roots than other
trees, because they are more exposed to the boisterousness of the winds and
weather. His Sacred Majesty was now to act a part beyond all president, and God
fitted him with a virtue and constancy beyond all parallel.

En horret animus, and pavor membra excutit.
-- refugit loqui
men's* ^gra, tantis at que inhorrescit malis.
My thoughts are distracted, and my pen falls out of my hand with amazement, I
must theretherefore draw a veil of silence over, and Comment upon this Tragical
Scene with tears instead of words. I will only adventure to draw the curtain
so far, as may let in the Readers eye to discover the King singly maintaining
his own Innocence, his Successors Rights, and his peoples Liberty, against a
Legion of his adversaries, who were at once his Judges and Accusers. Scipio
being one day accused before the Roman people of a capital offense, instead of
excusing himself, or flattering the Judges, turning to them, he said, It will
well beseem you to* judge of his head by whose means you have authority to
judge of all the world. Private persons have many Judges, Kings none but God,
said M. Antonius. But our King had to do with people of another principle, who
too well knew that politic maxim of Monsieur de Foy, That a man must not
trust a reconciled enemy, especially his King, against whom, when he draws his
sword, he must throw the scabbard into the river.

It was not enough that he had granted whatever they desired, which his
conscience and the safety of his subjects would permit, or that his Royal
Concessions went beyond the foremost of their hopes and wishes, or that his
reasons were unanswerable, and that they had no greater plea against him, but
that of the rapacious wolf to the innocent lamb, Thou have the better cause,
but I have the better teeth. Though Charles was innocent, it was crime enough
that he was King, and stood in the place that ambition aimed at.

Semiramis (as Aelian tells the Story) was an humble Petitioner to the King of
the Assyrians, whose Concubine she was, that she might take upon her the
government of A^sia, and command the Kings servants, but for the transitory
space of five days; it was granted, she came forth wit^^ a Princely robe, and
her first words were (ungrateful wretch!) Go take the King, and kill him: and
so by one venturous step climbed up to a settled state of Imperial Government. I
leave the parallel to the readers thoughts, and go on to observe what is truly
observable, that notwithstanding the natural impediment of the Kings Speech,
God at this time of his extremity so loosed his tongue, that he delivered his
thoughts without the least stammering or haesitation; enough to have convinced
any but a Pilat, and a Jurie of Jews, that by that miracle God seemed to say
to them, in the language of that dumb man, Rex est, ne occide. But it was
argument enough to them to cut off that head, that it wore three Ctowns. A
thing so strange and unheard of before our times, that though they made a
President, they could never find an Example for it in all the Histories of the
world. So sacred and inviolable was the Person of the Prince amongst the
Romans, that when Nero (made valiant by his own fear) ran himself through,
Epaphroditus his Secretary, at his request, helping to dispatch him the sooner,
for that service was afterward put to death by Domitian, who thought it not
meet to suffer any man to live, who had in any sort lent his hand to the death
of a Prince.

The Kings of Peru were so reverenced by their subjects* and so faithfully
served, that never any of their subjects were found guilty of Treason. Indeed
the people of Nicer a gua in America, had no law for the killer of a King, but
it was for the same reason that Solon appointed none for a man's killing of his
Father; both of them conceiting that men were not so unnatural, as to commit
such crimes. But such is the miserable condition of Princes, as the Emperor
Domitian complained, that they cannot be credited touching a Conspiracy,
plainly detected, until they be first slain. More strange and sad it is, that
men should commit murder with the sword of Justice, and treason execute
justice as a malefactor. Such actions seldom want their reward, and many times
receive it from the Actors own hands.

It is the observation of Causabon in his Annotations upon Suetonius, that all
they who conspired against Caesar, slew themselves with the same poniards
wherewith they had stabbed the Emperor. Such a death (says he) may all have
who so wickedly and disloyally enterprise upon the lives of Princes. For a man
to attempt upon the life of a foreign or neighbor Prince, may perhaps pass
with the guilt of simple murder; but for a subject to assassinate his own
native King, is no less than Paracide in the superlative degree.

At the Solemn Coronation of the Prince, every Peer of the Realm has his
station about the Throne, and with the touch of his hand upon the Royal Crown,
declares the personal duty of that honor which he is called unto, namely, to
hold on the Crown on the Head of his Sovereign, to make it the main end of his
greatness, to endeavor the establishment of his Princes Throne. Justly may
those branches* wither* that contrive the ruin of the Stock that feeds them:
and well may they prove falling stars, who endeavor the ecclipsing of that Sun
from whom they have received their light and luster.

Rodolphus D. of Suevia, having usurped the Empire of the Romans, in a Conflict
with Henry the right Emperor, his right hand was struck off in battle, which
being brought to him lying upon his deathbed, in the horror of his guilt he
cried out, This is the hand wherewith I confirmed my promised loyalty to the
Emperor. Such as repay hatred where they owe love, and return disloyalty where
they owe allegiance, may expect a payment in their own coin from the hand of
Divine Justice.

But to disguise Majesty into an habit of treason, and to dress up treason* in
a robe of justice; to place guilt on the bench, and set innocence at the bar,
and by a mockery of Law to condemn the Fountain of Law, is like the Italian
Physician, who boasted he had killed a man with the fairest method in the
world, e mort^ (said he) canonicamente, e con tutti gli ordini; He is dead
(says he) regularly, and with all the rules of art.

To dwell no longer on this unpleasant subject, we had sinned, and Charles must
suffer. Dilirant Archivi, plectun^ur Reges. He who had worn a Crown of Gold,
must now admit a crown of thorns, that might fit him for the Crown of Glory.

They had promised to make him a glorious King, and now was the time come; Sit
divus, modo non sit vivus, say they. His Kingdom was not to be any longer of
this world, and therefore he prepares himself with humility, piety, charity,
and magnanimity, to bear this earthly cross; that he might attein his heavenly
crown: His enemies curse him, he prays for them; they slander him, he forgives
them; they load him with affronts, he carries them with patience. And now his
pious soul is on the wing, and makes many a sally to the place where she longed
to be at rest: and in the fire of an ardent devotion, he offers up himself an
Holocaust, being kindled with the flames of Divine Love, and is filled with a
large measure of celestial joy, and holy confidence; witness that admirable
Anagram made by himself on the day before his death,

Carolus Rex* Cras ero Lux. Hermigildus Son of Levigildus King of the
V^sogoths, forsaking the Arrian Heresy, which his Father maintained, and
embracing the Catholic truth, was threatened by his Father with death, unless
he returned to his former errors: To whom the pious Son, Poteris (says he) in
me statuere pater quod lubet; regno privas? sed peritura tantum: immortale
illud eripere non potes. In vincula me rapis? ad coelum certe patet via;
ibimus, illuc ibimus. Vitam eripit^s? restat melior and aeterna. Such were the
pious resolves of the most Christian Charles: You may do with me what you will,
ye may deprive me of my Kingdoms, alas! these are perishing things; but mine
immortal Crown ye cannot reach. If ye confine me to the narrow walls of a
prison, my soul will mount to Heaven; thither, thither will we* go. If ye
take away this life, I shall but exchange it for a better and eternal one.

Thus prepared, he with all humility and Christan resignation, offers up
himself the peoples Martyr; to the grief of his friends, the shame of his
enemies, and the amazement of all the world.

Quis talia fando temperet a la^hrymis! Many wiped up his blood with their
handkercheifs, which experience proved afterward an admirable Collirium to
restore the sight even to those (I could name some of the recovered patients;
from whom I received the relation) who were almost blind: this wants not truth
so much as a Roman pen, to make it a miracle* Sure I am his death opened
thousands of eyes, which passion and prejudice had blinded: and those who
whilst he lived, wished him dead, now he was dead wished him alive again.

That so great a Prince (who yet chose rather to be good than great, to be holy
rather than happy) might not die unattended, many loyal subjects left this life
with the very news of His death: as it is reported of Hugh Scrimiger, servant
to S. W. Spotswood, beheaded by the Covenanters of Scotland, passing by the
Scaffold before it was taken down, fell into a swound, and being carried home,
died at his own door. The truth of this Relation I leave to the credit of the
Historian; the former I attest upon mine own knowledge, my self being assistant
at the Funeral of a Kinsman, who (with diverse others) died of no other disease
than the news of the Kings death; on whom, as I then bestowed, I here deposite
this Epitaph.

Here lies a loyal member dead,
Who scorned to survive his Head.
Thus died Charles, Aliorum majori damno, quam suo: It being hard to determine,
whether the Church and State were more happy to have had, or more miserable to
lose so incomparable a King; who wanted nothing but to have lived in an Age
when it was in fashion to Deifie their Worthies, or in a Country where it is a
trade to be Sainted. But alas! He lived in an Age when vices were in fashion,
and virtues accounted vices. Of whom, his worst enemies (says one who was none
of his best friends) cannot but give this civil, yet true Character, That he
was a Prince of most excellent natural parts, an universal Gentleman, very few
men of any rank or quality exceeding him in his natural endowments, and the
most accomplished King this Nation had ever since the Conquest.

FINIS
Doloris nullus.
Oweni Epigr. in Regicidas.
Si manus offendat te dextra, abscindito dextram,

Offendat si pes, abjice, Christus ait.

Corpus in errorem dexter si ducat ocellus,

Ipse oculus peccans, effodiendus erit.

Quaelibet abscindi pars corporis aegra jubetur,

Excipiunt medici, Theologique Caput.

An Elegy on Charles the First, etc.
COme saddest Muse, tragic Melpomine,
Help me to weep, or sigh an Elegy;
And from dumb grief recover so much breath,
As may serve to express my Sovereigns death.
But that is not all; had Natures oil been spent,
And all the treasury of life she lent
Exhausted: had his latest sand been run,
And the three fatal Sisters thread been spun;
Or laden with years, and mellow had he dropped
Into our mothers bosom; not thus lopt,
We could have born it. But thus hewed from life
B'an Axe, more hasty than the cruel knife
Of grisly Atropos; thus to be torn
From us, whom loyal death would have ^orborn,
This strikes us dead. Hence Nero shall be kind
Accounted, he but wished, and that wish confined
Within the walls of Rome; but here we see
Three Kingdoms at one blow beheaded be:
And instead of the one head of a King,
Hundreds of Hydra-headed Monsters spring.
Scarce can I think of this, and not engage
My Muse to muster her Poetic rage,
To scourge those Gyan^s, whose bold hands have rent
This glorious Sun from out our Firmament,
Put out the light of Israel, that they might
Act their black deeds securely in the nigh^:
When none but new and foolish lights appear,
Not to direct, but cheat the traveller.
But biting births are monstrous, Ours must be
(My Midwife Muse) a weeping Elegy.
Well may we, like some of whom Stories write,
From this Sunset in mourning spend our night:
Until we see a second Sun arise,
That may exhale those vapors from our eyes.
Since the breath of our nostrils we have lost,
We are but moaning statues at the most,
Our wisdom, reason, justice, all are dead,
As parts that lived, and died with our Head.
How can we speak him praise, or our loss, when
Our tongue of language silenced is with him.
Or can our fainter pensils hope to paint
Those rays of Majesty, which spoke him Saint?
In mortal weeds, not man; As great a King
Of virtues, as of men; A sacred thing,
To such an height of eminency raised,
Easier by far to be admired than praised.
'Twould puzzle the sage Plutarch now to tell,
Or find on earth our Charls's parallel.
Let Rome and Greece of Heroes boast no more,
To make our One, would beggar all their store.
Weep ye three Orphan Kingdoms, weep, for He*
To you was truly Pater Patriae.
Mourn too Religion, Liberty, and Laws,
He was your Martyr, and died in your cause.
Levy a tax of grief, for who will deny,
For this so general loss, a general cry.
Though to bear arms be, yet I know no reason
That loyal tears should be accounted treason.
Let not thy grief be small, I thee entreat,
Britain, for him who only made thee Great.
An Anniversary on Charles the First, etc. 1657.
PArdon, great Soul, the slowness of my verse,
Who after eight years sing thine Anniverse:
Since he who well would write thine Elegy,
Must take an Ages time to study thee.
Nay must be you, for none but you can tell,
Or measure the just height from whence you fell.
We know not how to estimate thy loss,
Nor can we feel the weight of thy sad cross.
If we should rack our fancies, to invent
Mischiefs, and plots far worse than hell e're meant
To best of men (when men with hell combine)
They all would prove faint Metaphors of thine.
He who once ^old his Kingdom for a draught
Of running water, and then perish't strait,
Had much the better bargain; thou did lose
All men could wish, for miseries and woes.
Saints (like their Savior) when for drink they call,
The world presents them vinegar and gall.
What monstrous sins of ours made Heaven to frown,
When Virtue met an Axe, and Vice a Crown!
Thrones, Scepters, Crowns, and all the gaudy things,
That use to deck and load the heads of Kings;
Who now will value you, since you have bin
Rewards of vice, and recompense of sin!
Thou better knew'st (blessed Martyr^) to slight those
And leave them as revenges to thy foes.
These, like the Prophets mantle fell from thee,
When thou, like him, did climb t'Eternity.
Poor Princes thus to others leave their own
Small states, when called to a richer Crown.
As when a jewel's taken out the case,
Attoms and air usurped the jewels place;
Or as the Sun leaving one Hemisphere,
Darkness and night presume to revel there.
So is thy place supplied, the Sphere which thou
Were wont to fill, we see invaded now
By a wild Comet, whose blaze does portend,
If not a sudden, yet a certain end.
Though dead, thou still upon our hearts do gain,
And so more nobly and more truly reign.
Those blessings which we prize not, whilst possessed,
Their worth our want of them d^scovers best.
Night makes the day, and darkness gilds the Sun,
Thus things grow greater by comparison.
We envy not thy glory, nor bemoan
With tears thy sad misfortunes, but our own.
Whilst thou with an immortal Crown do shine,
The woe is ours, the happiness is thine.
Thou have attaind'd the Haven, we are tossed
Upon a sea of woes; our Pilot lost;
Driven by th'winds and waves, distressed, forlorn,
Our lading shipwrackt, and our tackling torn.
Clothed with a long white robe of innocence,
Thou walk'st; in blackest mourning ever since
Our hearts are clad. To rid us of our pain,
We Will die, so be thy subjects once again.
Second Anniversary on Charles the First, 1658.
THe year's returned, and with the year my task,
Which to perform no other aid I ask,
No Muse invoke, but what my grief affords,
Grief that would fill a dumb man's mouth with words.
A King's my subject, and a King whose name
Alone, speaks more than all the tongues of fame.
Charles, good as great, whose virtues were his crimes,
The best of men duell'd the worst of times.
But by his sad example we may know,
Excess of goodness is not safe below.
It Was too much worth just Aristides sent,
(By a wild ostracism) to's banishment.
Oh! had thou lived when virtue was in fashion,
And men were ruled by reason, not by passion,
How had thou been adored! Thy actions had
Been the just Standard of what is good or bad.
Thy life had passed for law, and the whole Nation
Might have been virtuous by imitation.
To have been good, and in the best degree,
Had been no more but to be like to thee.
Thou art all wonder, and thy brighter Story,
Casts an Eclipse upon the blazing glory
Of former ages; all their Worthies, now
(By thee outdone) do blush, and wonder how
They lost the day, beclouded with a night
Of silence, rising from thy greater light.
Their moral deeds are of too faint a dye,
If once compared with thy piety.
Be dumb ye lying Legends, here is a Reign,
Full of more miracles than ye can feign.
Here is a saint, more great, more true than e're
Came from the triple crown, or holy chair.
We need no farther for Example look,
Than unto thee, thou art the only book;
Thou art the best of Texts, hereafter we
Expect no more, but Comments upon thee:
Thou art the great Original, and he
Who will be famous now, must transcribe thee;
Spite of the Sword and Axe, you found a way
To win the field, although you lost the day.
In thy rare Portraicture thou live still,
And triumphst more by thine all-conquering quill;
There shall thou reign, and as immortal be,
As was the malice of thine enemy.
Thou have outwitted all thy foes, and by
Thy Book thou gain'st the greatest victory.
That has enlarged thine Empire, and all men
Stoop to the Scepter of thy Royal Pen.
Thy Virtues crowd so fast, I cannot tell
How to speak all, or which does most excel.
All I can say is but Epitomie,
A life's too little for thy History.
I can but write thee in Stenographie,
The whole of others is but part of thee.
But thou have spoke thy self in such a strain,
Our wits are useless, and endeavors vain.
Silence and admiration fit me best,
Let others try to write, I Will weep the rest.
FINIS.
T. F.

A THEATER OF WITS, Ancient and Modern. Represented in a Collection of
Apothegmes. Pleasant and Profitable. By THO. FORDE.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit utile dulci.

Habent enim Apothegmata peculiarem quandam rationem, and indolem suam, ut
breviter, argute, salse, and urbane cujusque ingenium exprimant.

Erasmus. LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham at the
Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North Door. 1660.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Here present thee with a dish of Apothegmes, pulled from the leaves of many
Authors; if they please thee in the tasting, but as much as they did me in the
gathering, I shall not doubt their entertainment. Amongst those swarms of books
which our age is daily glutted with, there is not one Author has traveled in
this road, nor any one book of this nature (that I know) in our Language,
except a Manual of that great Advancer of Learning, Sir Francis Bacon, which
has long since been out of print. I had therefore some temptation to have
added mine as a Supplement to his; but upon second thoughts, considering none
ever attempted to add a line to that piece Apelles left imperfect, I have
chosen rather to erect a new frame by his model, than to build upon another
foundation.

That the Volume is small, my diligence has been the greater, for I have
labored to substract, rather than multiply them; not putting in every one I
met with, but what was best, at least in my opinion. These are but the first
fruits, your acceptance may ripen them into a larger harvest, if God shall lend
me time and opportunity.

I have waved any particular Dedication, as not willing to entitle any man to
the Patronage of my weaknesses; nor am I of that vain humor of Appian the
Grammarian, who promised immortality to those to whom he dedicated any of his
Works.

And they who write to Lords rewards to get. Donnes Sat.

Are they not like singers at doors for meat?
There is a Vine in Asia, that brings forth Burnt-wine, so excellent (says
Johnston Hist. Not.
mine Author) that none exceeds it. Such is the nature of these short
sentences, they are ready dressed and dish'd out to thy hand; like some
Diamonds, which grow smoothand polished, and need no farther labor to fit them
for use, but using. As it is said of Isidore the Philosopher, that he spoke not
words, but the very substance and essence of things. They contain magnum in
parvo, much matter in a few words. Significant potius quam exprimunt. You have
here much gold in a little ore, easy for carriage, ready for use. We have many
things to learn, and but little time to live; I know not therefore any kind of
Learning more pleasant, or more profitable than this, which teaches us many
lessons in a few lines. But I will not waste thy time (Reader) whilst I study
to improve it, and to approve my self

Thy servant, T. F.

Apothegmes:
AN old Mass-Priest in the days of Hen. 8. reading in English after the
Translation of the Bible, the mircale of the five loaves and two fishes, when
he came to the verse that reckons the number of the guests, he paused a
little, and at last said, they were about 500; the Clerk whispered into the
Priests ears, that it was 5000; but the Priest turned back, and replied with
indignation, Hold your peace, sirrah, we shall never make them believe they
were 500.

Aristides said, concerning the Elegance of the City of Smyrna, that no man,
except he which shall see it, will be drawn to believe it.

The Savages, an English Family, held Ardes (in Ireland) long in possession,
amongst whom there goes a great name of Him, who said no less stoutly than
pleasantly, when he was moved to o build a Castle for his defense, that he
would not trust to a castle of stones, but rather to a castle of bones. Meaning
his own body.

Columbane, a Monk of Ireland, when Sigebert King of the Frankners, dealt very
earnstly with him, and that by way of many fair and large promises, that he
should not depart out of his Kingdom: Answered him, That it became not them to
embrace other men's riches, who for Christ's sake had forsaken their own.

Porpherie, in regard of the many tyrants rising up in his days in Britain,
cried out in these terms, Britain a foolish Province of tyrants.

St. Ambrose in his Funeral Sermon of Theodosius, cries out in these terms:
that Eugenius and Maximus (who had five years usurped the Empire) by their
woeful example, do testify in hell what a heavy thing it is to bear arms
against their Natural Prince.

Of this Maximus it is said, that he was a valiant man, victorious, and worthy
the title of Augustus, but that against his allegiance he had by way of tyranny
and usurpation attained the place.

Homer says of one that had a misfortune, It was because he did not honor his
Parents.

Upon a triumph, all the Emperor Severus's Soldiers, for the greater pomp,
were to put on Crowns of Bays; but one Christian there was amongst them which
wore it on his arm; and being demanded the reason, boldly answered: It becomes
not a Christian to be crowned in this life.

Arnobius was wont to say, that persecution brings death in one hand, and life
in the other; for while it kills the body, it crowns the soul.

The Empress Eudoxia, sending a threatening message to Chrysostom, (for boldly
reproving her) He answered, Go tell her I fear nothing but sin.

Justus Jonas said of Luther, that he could have of God what he pleased.

Epaminondas being asked what was the greatest joy he ever had in the world, He
said Leutrica Victoria, the Battle of Leutrick.

Rocardus, King of Frisland, being by Wolfranius persuaded to be Baptized,
having one foot in the Font, the other out, asked Wolfranius where went the
most part of his Predecessors that were not Baptized? To hell, said Wolfranius;
then Rocardus drew his foot out of the Font, saying, It was best following of
the greatest company.

The Devil meeting with a devout Hermit, asked him three questions: First, what
should be the strangest thing that God made in a little frame? He answered, a
man's face. The second, Where was the Earth higher than all the Heavens? Where
Christ's body, born of the Virgin Mary, was adored of Angels and Archangels. The
third, what space was between Heaven and Earth? Thou know best (said the
Hermit) which wast from Heaven thrown down to the Earth.

L. Silla finding his soldiers timorous, and fearful to fight with Archelaus,
M^^hridates General, drew out his sword, and said, You soldiers that mean to
fly to Rome, tell them at Rome, that you left Silla your General, fighting in
the midst of the Battle, with the enemies in Boetia.

Philipides the Poet, refused to be of King Lysimachus Counsel, that when the
King said to him, What will thou that I give unto thee? Nothing (said the poor
Poet) but only this, that I may not be of thy Council.

In a public meeting with all the Princes of Germany, at Wormatia; where the
Duke of Saxon first preferring his metals, and rich veins of earth: the Duke
of Bavaria much commending his strong and brave Cities and Towns: and the Duke
Palatine of his wines, and fertility of his lands: the Duke of Wittenbergh
said, I can lay my head, and sleep upon the lap of any of my subjects I have
abroad in the field, every where. Huic facile concedite palmam (said Maximilian
the Emperor) Give him the palm.

Themistocles being asked whose Oration he would hear? Even him (said
Themistocles) that can best set forth my praise, and advance my fame.

Isocrates repeating an Oration of Demosthenes his adversary, at Rhodes, they
of Rhodes much delighting therein, and much commending the Oration that
Isocrates made, though he was enemy to Demosthenes, was forced against his will
to say to the people, What if you had heard the beast himself pronouncing his
own Oration?

Julius Caesar seeing certain men of Apulia, in Rome, carrying Apes upon their
arms, playing, asked the men, If they had no women in Apulia to get children to
play withal.

Diogenes, when he saw mice creeping for some crumbs to his table, would say,
Behold, Diogenes also has his parasites.

Lewis the 10th. was wont to brag of his own Kingdom of France, that it far
exceeded all other Kingdoms, wanting but one thing; and being requested to know
what that was, he answered, Truth.

The great Antiochus brought Hannibal to his treasures, and showed him his
gold, his silver, his wealth and treasures, and asked him if all that would not
please the Romans? Yea, said Hannibal, it would please the Romans, but not
satisfy the Romans.

A Councellor of State, said to his Master the King of Spain, that now is, upon
occasion: Sir, I will tell your Majesty thus much for your comfort, your
Majesty has but two enemies; whereof the one is all the World, and the other
is your own Ministers.

Domitian perceiving many of his Predecessors in the Empire to be hated, asked
one, how he might so rule, as not to be hated? the party answered, Tu fac
contra: By not doing what they did.

When M. Cicero stood for the Consulship of Rome, Q. Cicero wished him to
meditate on this, Novus sum, Consulatam peto, Roma est.

Alexander having a soldier of his name* that was a coward, He bad him either
leave off the name of Alexander, or be a soldier.

A brave Roman Captain told his soldiers, That if they could not conquer
Britain, yet they would get possession of it, by laying their bones in it.

It was a smart answer which Mr. Durant, a witty and learned Minister of the
Reformed Church of Paris, gave a Lady of suspected chastity, (and since
revolted) when she pretended the hadness of the Scripture: Why, said he, Madam,
What can be more plain, then, Thou shall not commit adultery.

It was the saying of the dying Emperor Julian, He that would not die when he
must, and he that would die when he must not, are both of them cowards alike.

Aristippus told the Sailers, that wondered why he was not, as well as they,
afraid in the storms, that the odds was much* For they feared the torments due
to a wicked life, and he expected the rewards of a good one.

It was cold comfort Diogenes gave a lewd liver, that banished, complained he
should die in a foreign soil. Be of good cheer man, wheresoever thou art, the
way to hell is the same.

It was the admonition of dying Otho to Cocceius, Neither too much to remember,
nor altogether to forget, that Caesar was his Uncle.

Isocrates, of a Scholar full of words, asked a double Fee, One, he said, to
learn him to speak well, another to teach him to hold his peace.

Euripides, when he brings in any woman in his tragedies, makes them always
bad: Sophocles in his tragedies makes them always good: whereof when
Sophocles was asked the reason; he made this answer, Euripides, says he,
represents women as they be, I represent them as they ought to be.

Sir Henry Wotton was wont to say of Sir Philip Sydneys wit, that it was the
very measure of congruity.

Having in Italy acquaintance with a pleasant Priest, who invited him one
evening to hear their Vesper music at Church; the Priest seeing Sir Henry
standing obscurely in a corner, sends to him by a boy this question writ in a
small piece of paper: Where was your Religion to be found before Luther? To
which Sir Henry Wotton presently under-writ, My Religion was to be found then,
where yours is not to be found now, in the written word of God.

To another that asked him whether a Papist may be saved? He replied, You may
be saved without knowing that; look to your self.

To another that was still railing against the Papists, he gave this advice,
Pray Sir forbear, till you have studied the points better: for the wise
Italians have this Proverb, He that understands amiss* concludes worse.

To one being designed for the office of an Ambassador, requesting from him
some experimental rules for his prudent and safe carriage in his Negotiation,
Sir Henry Wotton gave this for an infallible Aphorism; That to be in safety
himself, and serviceable to his Country, he should always, and upon all
occasions speak the truth; for, said he, you shall never be believed, and by
this means your truth will secure your self, if you shall ever be called to
any account, and it will also put your adversaries (who will still hunt
counter) to a loss, in all their disquisitions and undertakings.

He directed this sentence only to be inscribed on his Tombstone; Hic jacet
hujus sententiae Author. Disputandi pruritus fit Ecclesiarum scabies.

Bolislaus the 4th. King of Poland, who bearing the picture of his Father,
hanged about his neck in a plate of gold, when he was to speak, or do any
thing of importance, he took his picture, and kissing it, said, Dear Father, I
wish I may not do any thing remissly, unworthy of thy name.

A gentile spirit said to an old man, who caused his grisly hairs to be painted
with the luster of green youth: Poor fool, although thou could deceive the
whole world with thy hair, yet death well knows they are gray. Sit te
Proserpina canem.

It is said, a French King enquiring one day of a Wiseman, after diverse
instructions to govern himself, and guide his Kingdom, this Wiseman took a
fair large sheet of paper, and for an infinite number of precepts, which others
use to produce upon this subject, he only wrote this word: Modus, measure, or
mean.

One who having lived free from the bonds of marriage, caused to be set on his
Tomb, Vixit sine impedimento, He lived without hinderance.

A mother grieving for the death of her son, said, That all her evil came from
loving too much what she might lose. Amabam miser a periturum, etc.

An old humourist vapouring once that women had no souls, was answered by a
modest Lady: Sure, Sir, you are deceived, for I can produce a good text to the
contrary, My soul does magnify the Lord: and it was a woman that spoke it.

Isocrates had an excellent wit, notwithstanding finding himself destitute of
countenance, gesture, and confidence, he never durst to speak in public,
contenting himself to teach, even to his decrepit days, and commonly saying,
He taught Rhetoric for a 1000 Rials, but would give more than 10000 to him who
would teach him confidence.

It was the saying of Lewis the French King, to Henry the third of England, who
asking him (in those times of implicit faith) whether he would go sooner, to
the Eucharist, or to a Sermon? He answered, I had rather see my friend, than
hear him only spoken of.

One said that Aristotle's School was a great Scold.

It was not said improperly of him, who having passed his grand Climacterique,
That he was got loose from his unruly passions, as from so many lions and
wolves.

A French Baron, not long since, meeting two Capuchins going barefoot in cold
frosty weather, with their scrips upon their backs a begging, and knowing them
to be Gentlemen of a good Family, he said, How grossly are these men cozened if
there be no heaven.

An Italian Prince being upon his deathbed, and comforted by his friends,
touching the joys of the other world, whereunto he was going, he fetched a deep
sigh, and said, Oh! I know what is past, but I know not what is to come.

There is a saying fathered upon Paul 3d. when he lay upon his deathbed, that
shortly he should be resolved of two things, Whether there be a God and Devil,
or whether there be a heaven and hell?

When a rare Italian Statuary offered Rh. 2d. of Spain, that without expense to
the King, he would set up his Majesty's arms and portraicture over the gates of
every City in Lombardy, the King commending the man's good will, answered, He
had rather have a workman, that with any expense whatsoever, could set up his
image in Heaven.

When the soldiers demanded a donative of Galba, he answered, That he used to
choose, not to buy soldiers.

Vespasian was not moved with the scoffs of Demetrius Cynicus, but slighted
them, saying, I use not to kill barking dogs.

Domitian punished Informers, saying, That not to punish such, was to encourage
them.

Trajan delivered his sword to the Captain of the Guard, willing him to use it
for him, if he did well, but against him, if otherwise.

Antonius Pius, Emperor, coming to see Omulus his house, he enquired whence he
had his marble pillars? Omulus answered, that in another man's house he should
be both deaf and dumb.

When Julia, Mother-in-law to Caracalla (whom he married) told him he was too
prodigal, he laid his hand on his sword, saying, I shall never lack money, so
long as this is with me.

Julian robbed the Church of her Revenues, telling the Clergy that they should
be the fitter for Heaven, because it is written, Blessed be the poor.

Tyberius Constantinus, Co-Emperor with Justin, when Sophia the Empress
reproved him, as being too prodigal in his bounty to the poor: He answered,
that he should never want wealth on earth, as long as he had laid up treasures
on earth, by relieving the poor.

Maximilian the Emperor, was wont to say, to compel the conscience, is to force
heaven.

It was not ill answered of Merope, to King Polyphontes, who therefore killed
his brother, because he had entertained a purpose to have killed him: You
should only have done the same injury to him, which he did to you; you should
still have had a purpose to kill him.

Aquinas was once asked, with what compendium a man might best become learned?
He answered, By reading one Book.

A great Italian General, seeing the sudden death of Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara,
kneeled down instantly, saying, And shall not this sight make me religious?

When the Duke of Candia had voluntarily entered into the incommodities of a
Religious life, and poverty, he was one day spied, and pitied by a Lord of
Italy, who, out of tenderness, wished him to be more careful, and nutritive of
his person. The good Duke answered, Sir, be not troubled, and think not that I
am ill provided of conveniences; for I send a harbinger before, who makes my
lodgings ready, and takes care that I be royally entertained: The Lord asked
him, who was his harbinger? He answered, the knowledge of my self, and the
consideration of what I deserve for my sins, which is eternal torments; and
when with this knowledge I arrive at my lodging, how unprovided soever I find
it, me thinks it is ever better than I deserve.

'Twas a reasonable answer of Pericles to one that asked him, Why he being a
severe and Philosophical person, came to a Wedding trimmed and adorned like a
Paranymph* I come adorned to an adorned person, trimmed to a Bridegroom.

The Emperor Ferdinand the 2d. had wont to say to those that brought him any
ill news, it is good, it is Gods pleasure, I am contented.

Sir Thomas Moore, somewhat before he was made Lord Chancellor, built a Chapel
in his Parish at Chelsey, where the Parish had all ornaments belonging
thereunto abundantly supplied at his charge; and he bestowed thereon much
plate, often using these words, Good men give it, and bad men take it away.

The King of Sweden, to the Dutch Ambassador, persuading him to a care of his
person, answered, that his hour was written in heaven, and could not be altered
on earth.

Sir Jervis Ellwis, when executed on Towerhill for Overburies death, left these
two Items to Posterity: 1. Not to vow any thing but to perform it. 2. Not to
take a pride in any parts, though never so excellent.

A Lord Mayor of London (in K. James his time) stopping the Kings carriages as
they were going through the streets with a great noise in time of Divine
Service, and the King being told of it, he, in a rage, swore he thought there
had been no more Kings in England but himself, and sent a warrant to the Lord
Mayor to let them pass, which he then obeyed with this answer, While it was in
my power, I did my duty; but that being taken away by a higher power, it is my
duty to obey.

Demodocus said of the Milesians, they were no fools, but they did the same
things that fools did.

Vincentius Lyrenensis says of St. Cyprian, who had before the Council of
Carthage defended re-baptizing, the Author of this error (says he) is, no
doubt, in heaven, the followers and practisers of it now go to hell.

A Gentleman having by fatherly indulgence tolerated the humor of gaming and
wen^hing in his son, dis-inherited him for drinking, saying of the first, If he
had wit, he would not lose much by it; and of the second, that in time for his
own case he would leave it; but of the third, he said, he would prove, the
elder, the viler, and hardly ever amend it.

A certain man coming to Athens, meeting one of his friends in the street,
desired him to show him the rarities of the City: His friend carried him to
Solon; but the man having viewed him some time, would have gone farther: no,
said his friend, You have seen all. Vidisti Solon, vidisti omnia.

It is said of the Germans, that they understand more than they can utter, and
drink more than they can carry.

A certain old man, being asked why he wore his beard so large and long? that
beholding those gray hairs (said he) I may do nothing unbeseeming them.

Cyrus was wont to say, that a good Prince was like a good Shepherd, who can by
no other means grow rich, than by making his flock to thrive under him.

A maid (in Plutarch) being to be sold in the Market, when a Chapman asked her,
Will thou be faithful if I buy thee? Yes (said she) ^tiamsi non emeris, whether
you buy me or no.

Demosthenes said to him that objected that his Speech smelt of the candle; I
know my candle stands in your light: The man being suspected for a thief.

Melancthon was used to say, He that deals with some men, had need to bring a
Divine, a Lawyer, and a Soldier with him to get his right.

St. Bernard coming to the great Church of Spire in Germany, he was no sooner
come into the Church, but the Image of the Virgin saluted him, and bad him,
Good morrow Bernard: whereat, he well knowing the juggling of the Friars, made
answer again out of St. Paul, Oh (said he) your Ladyship has forgot your self,
it is not lawful for women to speak in the Church.

John King of England, being wished by a Courtier to untomb the bones of one,
who whilst he was living, had been his great enemy: Oh no (said the King) would
all mine enemies were as honorably buried.

The Egyptian Calyph, offering an English Ambassador his hand in his glove, the
Ambassador answered, Sir, we come not to treat with your glove, but your self.

When a Pyrate said to one of his fellows, Woe to us if we be known: an honest
man in the same ship replied: And woe to me if I be not known.

Luther was wont to say, He would be unwilling to be a soldier in that army
where Priests were Captains, because the Church, not the Camp, was their proper
place.

Plato being demanded how he knew a wiseman, answered, When being rebuked he
would not be angry, and being praised, he would not be proud.

Marquess Pawlet, there being diverse factions at Court in his time, yet was he
beloved of all parties; and being asked, how he stood so right in the judgment
of all? He answered, By being a willow, and not an oak.

Diogenes was wont to say, when the people mocked him, They deride me, yet I am
not derided: I am not the man they take me for.

Rather than want exercise of his patience, he would crave alms of dead men's
Statues; and being demanded why he did so? He answered, That I may learn to
take denial from others the more patiently.

Marius was never offended with any report went of him, because he said, If it
were true, it would sound to his praise; if false, his life and manners should
prove it contrary.

A Steward once replied to his passionate Lord, when he called him knave, etc.
Your Honor may speak as you please, but I believe not a word that you say, for
I know my self an honest man.

Philip of Macedon professed himself much beholden to his enemies (the
Athenians) for speaking evil of him; For (said he) they made me an honest man,
to prove them liars.

When Diogenes was told by a base fellow, that he once had been a Coiner of
money, He answered, It Is true, such as thou art now, I once was, but such as I
am now, thou will never be.

Socrates, when one asked him why he took such a ones bitter railing so
patiently? Answered, It is enough for one to be angry at a time.

Dion of Syracuse, being banished, came to Theodorus Court suppliant, where not
presently admitted, he turned to his companion, with these words, I remember I
did the like, when I was in like dignity.

Socrates, being persuaded to revenge himself of a fellow that kicked him,
answered, If an ass had kicked me, should I have set my wit to his, and kicked
him again?

Another time, being told that one spoke evil of him* He replied, Alas! the man
has not as yet learned to speak well, but I have learned to contemn what he
speaks.

Diogenes, being told that many despised him, answered, It is the wise man's
portion to suffer of fools.

When Dionysius the Tyrant had plotted the death of his Master Plato, and was
defeated by Plato's escape out of his Dominions; when the Tyrant desired him in
writing not to speak evil of him, the Philosopher replied, That he had not so
much idle time as once to think of him, knowing there was a just God would one
day call him to a reckoning.

When once an hot-spur was persuaded to be patient as Job was, He replied, What
do ye tell me of Job? Job never had any suits in the Chancery.

Mr. Bradford was wont to say, that in Christ's cause to suffer death, was the
way to heaven on horsback.

Jugo, an ancient King, set all his Nobles, being Pagans, in his Hall below,
and certain poor Christians in his Presence Chamber with himself; at which all
wondering, he told them, this he did, not as King of the Drones, but as King of
another world, wherein these were his fellow-Princes.

It was the saying of a merry fellow, That in Christendom there were neither
Scholars enough, Gentlemen enough, nor Jews enough: because if there were
Scholars enough, so many would not be double and treble beneficed; if Gentlemen
enough, so many peasants would not be ranked among the Gentry; and if Jews
enough, so many Christians would not profess usury.

Socrates was wont to say to Alcibiades, when he met him among gallants like
himself, I fear not thee, but thy company.

Alexander, when a Commander of his in the Wars, spoke loudly, but did little,
told him, I entertained you into my service, not to rail, but to fight.

Illyricus, when one asked him why the old Translations (of the Bible) had no
vowels? I think (says he) that they had no consonants, for they could not
agree among themselves.

Doctor Reynolds his Lecture in Oxford ceasing, by reason of his sickness, some
desired him to read* before he was well recovered* The Doctor said, He desired
so to serve God, that he might serve him long.

Erasmus was wont to say in his time, That to Preach, with many Ministers, was
but Perfricare frontem, and linguam voluere.

Epiphanius, having stayed long at Constantinople, and being to take ship to
return home again, said, He was leaving three great things, a great City, a
great Palace, and great Hypocrisy.

Charles the Great, when he was showed by a Duke a Royal Palace, and all the
rings, and sumptuous ornaments and jewels, said, Has sunt qui nos invitos
faciunt mori. These are the things that make us unwilling to die.

Erasmus was used to say, That the dunsery and idleness of the Monks of his
time, made him a Student.

The Athenian Commander, being asked what God was, said, He was neither
bow-man, nor pike-man, nor hors-man, nor footman, but one that did know, istis
omnibus imperare.

A noble Commander, in the Wars having taken great spoils, said to a soldier
behind him, Toll istos, Ego Christianus.

When Cajetan told Luther he should be banished, Luther answered, Si non capiat
terra, capiat coelum,

A great man coming to Aquinas, and offering him a Bishopric, he leaning on
his elbow in his Study, replied, Mallem Chrysostomum in Matthaeum.

The ^ame Aquinas, when he was entreated to take a Cardinals place, answered,
Sepulchrum cogito, non gradum sublimiorem.

Luther and his Wife, with four children, were in a boat, and being in a great
storm, were like to be cast away, Luther laughing aloud, said, Oh how the Devil
would rejoice, if we were all drowned.

Plato, discoursing unto one of the contempt of death, and speaking strangely
upon it, was answered, That he spoke more courageously than he lived: To whom
Plato replied, that he spoke not as he lived; but as he should live.

Caesar Borgia, being sick to death, said, When I lived, I provided for every
thing but death; now I must die, I am unprovided to die.

Gerson brings in an Englishman, asking a Frenchman, Quot annos habes? His
answer was, Annos non habeo, I am of no years at all, but death has forborne me
this 50 years.

A man (said Luther) lives forty years before he knows himself to be a fool;
and by that time he sees his folly, his life is finished.

Anaxamander said of the Athenians, That they had good Laws, but used ill.

Augustus lamented for Varus death; being asked why? He said, Now I have none
in my Country to tell me truth.

A certain King of Tartaria writ to the Polonians, then wanting a King, that if
they would choose him their King, he would accept of it upon these terms,
Vester Pontifex, meus Pontifex esto, vester Lutherus meus Lutherus esto. But
the Polonians rejected him with this wise answer, Ecce hominem paratum omni a
sacra, and deos deserere regnandi causa.

Marius, being accused by the Senate of treason, tears open his garments, and
in the sight of them all shows them his wounds received in the service and
defense of his Country, saying, Quid opus est verbis, ^bi vulner a clamant?

Sir William Stanly, railing against his native Country, a Spanish Verdugo gave
him this answer, Though you have offended your Country* your Country never
offended you.

It is storied of a wicked City, which fearing the invasion of a potent enemy,
sought relief of a neighboring Prince, charging their Ambassadors to relate
unto him what forces they were able to levy of their own: The Prince replying
to the Message, demanded of them what coverture they had to defend their heads
from the wrath of heaven? telling them withal, That unless they could award
Gods anger, he durst not join with them, God being against them.

The Mother of Peter Lombard, when having transgressed her vow of Continency,
she told her Confessor plainly, that when she saw what a Son she had brought
forth, she could not repent that she had sinned in having him: But her
Confessor sadly answered her, Dole saltem, quod dolere non possis.

Caracalla said to them that desired that some honors might be spent upon his
brother Geta, now dead out of his way; Sit divus (says he) modo non sit vivus.

Edward the Third of England, having sent to France, to demand the Crown by
Maternal Right, the Council there sent him word, That the Crown of France was
not tied to a distaff: which scoffing answer he replied, That then he would tie
it to his sword.

Scaliger said, He had rather have been the Author and Composer of one Ode in
Horace, than King of all Arragon.

Cato would say, He wondered how one of their aruspices could forbear to laugh,
when he met with any of his fellows, to see how they deceived men, and made a
great number of simple ones in the City.

King Lewis the 11th. looking upon a Tapistry, wherein a certain Nobleman (who
from a mean Clerk of the Exchequer, was advanced to be Lord Treasurer of
France) had portrayed the steps and degrees whereby he had ascended, himself
represented sitting on the top of Fortunes wheel: Whereupon King Lewis told
him, He might do well to fasten it with a good strong nail, for fear lest
turning about, it brought him to his former estate again. Which proved a true
Prophecy of him.

One who before he was Pope, was the most crouching submiss Cardinal that ever
was: His manner was to eat upon a net, as it were in a way of devout humility;
but after he had obtein'd the Popedom, he commanded them to take away the net,
saying, He had caught that which he fished for.

When a French King, seeing the Persian pomp of the Popes Court, and pride of
the Cardinals, asked a Cardinal of Avinion, Whether the Apostles ever went with
such a Train after them? He answered, No verily: but you must consider, Sir,
that they were Apostles the same time that Kings were shepherds.

It was the saying of Rabbi Gamaliel, He that multiplies servants, multiplies
thieves.

Melancthon said, when he furthered the Edition of the Alchoran, that he would
have it printed, Vt videamus quale poema sit: That the World might see what a
piece of poetry the Alchoran was.

Artabazus, a Courtier, received from King Cyrus a cup of gold: At the same
time Chrysantas, the beloved Favorite, received a kiss from him; which the
other observing, said, The cup which you gave me, was not so good gold as the
kiss you gave Chrysantes.

It was the Speech of an ancient Rabbi; I learned much of my Rabbis, or
Masters, more of my companions, most of my Scholars.

The Emperor Sigismond, demanding of The^doricus, Archbishop of Collen, the
directest course to happiness: Perform (says he) when thou art well, what thou
promisedst when thou were sick.

A certain King of the Lacedaemonians being one day private in his garden, was
teaching one of his children, of five years old, to ride on a stick; and
unawares a great Ambassador came to speak with him in that manner, at which,
both the King, and the Ambassador in the Kings behalf, began to blush at first;
but soon after, the King putting away the blush and the hobbyhorse together,
and with a pretty smile, asked the Ambassador, if he had any children of his
own? He answered, No. Then (said he) I pray you tell not what you found me
doing, till you have some little ones of your own, and then tell it, and spare
not.

The Scouts of Antigonus, relating unto him the multitude of his enemies, and
advising by way of information the danger of a Conflict that should be
undertaken with so great an inequality, He replied, And at how many do ye value
me?

A West-Indian King, having been well wrought upon toward his conversion to
the Christian Religion; and having digested the former Articles, when he came
to that, He was crucified, dead, and buried, had no longer patience, but said,
If your God be dead and buried, leave me to my old god the Sun, for the Sun
will not die.

Pythagoras said, He that knows not what he ought to know, is a brute beast
among men; he that knows no more than he has need of, is a man among brute
beasts; he that knows all that is to be known, is a god among men.

The Lord Treasurer Burleigh was wont to say, That he used to overcome envy and
ill will more by patience than pert^nacy.

The Ambassadors of the Council of Constance, being sent to Pope Benedict the
11th. when he, laying his hand upon his heart, said, Hic est arca Noae, they
tartly and truly replied, In Noah's ark were few men, but many beasts.

When one seemed to pity an one-ey'd man, He told him he had lost one of his
enemies, a very thief, that would have stolen away his heart.

The King of Navarre told Beza, He would launch no farther into the Sea, than
he might be sure to return safe to the Haven.

A clown said to the Bishop of Collen, praying in the Church like a Bishop, but
as he was Duke, going guarded like a Tyrant, Whither think thou the Bishop
shall go, when the Duke shall be damned?

King Edward the 3d. having the King of France prisoner here in England, and
feasting him one time most sumptuously, pressed him to be merry. The French
King answered, How can we sing songs in a strange Land?

Calvin answered his friends with some indignation, when they admonished him,
for his healths sake, to forbear studying so hard. What? said he, would you
that my Master, when he comes, should find me idle?

Spiridion, a godly Bishop in Cyprus, having not what else to set before a
guest that came to him in Leut, set him a piece of pork to feed on; and when
the stranger made a scruple of eating flesh in Lent, saying, I am a Christian,
and may not do it: Nay, therefore thou may do it, said he, because to the
pure all things are pure.

Dr. Preston on his deathbed, said, He should change his place, not his
company.

A certain stranger coming on Embassage to Rome, and coloring his hair and
pale cheeks with vermilion hue, a grave Senator espying the deceit, stood up,
and said, What sincerity are we to expect at this man's hands, whose lo^ks, and
looks, and lips do lie.

Sir Horatio Vere, when in the Palatinate a Council of War was called, and
debated whether they should fight or not? Some Dutch Lords said, That the enemy
had many pieces of Ordnance in such a place, and therefore it was dangerous to
fight: That Nobleman replied, My Lords, if you fear the mouth of the Cannon,
you must never come into the field.

Sir John Buroughs, receiving a mortal wound in the Island of Rhees, and being
advised not to fear death* but to provide for another world. He answered, I
thank God I fear not death, and these thirty years together, I never arose in
the morning, that ever I made account to live while night.

A learned Friar, at a Council, complaining of the abuse of the Clergy,
Preaching before the Emperor, wished him to begin a reformation of the Clergy a
minoribus: The Emperor thanked him for his Sermon, and said, He had rather
begin a majoribus, from the better sort of the Clergy.

Aristippus being told that Lais loved him not; No more (says he) does wine,
nor fish, yet I cannot be without them.

The Lord Burleigh being at Cambridge with Queen Elizabeth, viewing the several
Schools, said, Here I find one School wanting, and that is the School of
Discretion.

Henry the 4th. told the Prince his Son, Getting is a chance, but keeping is a
wit.

A Philosopher, that hearing his creditor was dead, kept the money which he had
borrowed without witnesses, a night or two; but after some struggling with his
conscience, he carried it to his Executor, saying, Mihi vivit, qui aliis
mortuus est; though he be ded to others, he is still alive to me.

Severus the Emperor, having passed through many adventures, at last died in
our land, overladen with troubles: weighing with himself what his life had
been, he brake forth into these speeches, I have been all that might be, and
now am nothing the better.

Scipio viewing his army, said, There was not one who would not throw himself
from the top of a tower, for love of him.

Hildebert, Bishop of Mentz, said of the Roman Courtiers, Employ them not, and
they hinder you: Employ them in your causes, and they delay them; if you
solicit them, they scorn you; if you enrich them, they forget you.

When Antonius had made away his brother Geta, after the first year of their
joint Empire, he entreated Papinianus (a famous Lawyer) to plead his excuses:
Who answered, It is easier Paricidium facere, quam excusare; thou may (said
he) command my neck to the block, but not my tongue to the bar; I prize not my
life, to the pleading of an evil cause.

Simonides, being asked what did soonest grow old among men? Made answer, A
benefit.

Apollonius Thianaeus, having traveled over all Asia, Africa, and Europe,
said, There were two things whereat he marvelled most in all the world: the
first was, that he always saw the proud man command the humble, the quarrellous
the quiet, the tyrant the just, the cruel the pitiful, the coward the hardy,
the ignorant the skilful, and the greatest thieves hang the innocent.

A Philosopher being asked, how he could endure so ill a Wife as he had? The
answer which he gave, was, I have hereby a School of Philosophy in my house,
and learning daily to suffer patiently, I am made the more milder with others.

Alexander seeing Diogenes tumbling among dead bones, he asked him what he
sought? To whom the other answered, That which I cannot find, the difference
between the rich and the poor.

Demonax asked one a question, who answered him in old obsolete affected words.
Prithee fellow, said he, where are thy wits? I ask thee a question now, and
thou answerest 400 years ago.

Albertus Duke of Saxony, was wont to say, that he had three wonders in one
City, viz. three Monasteries: For the Fries of the first had children, and yet
no wives; the Friars of the second had a great deal of corn, and yet no land;
the Friars of the third abounded with moneys, and yet had no rents.

A Captain sent from Caesar unto the Senators of Rome, to sue for the prolonging
of his government abroad, understanding (as he stood at the
Council-chamber-door) that they would not condescend to his desire, clapping
his hand upon the pummel of his sword: Well, said he, seeing you will not grant
it him, this shall give it him.

When Anne Bolen, that virtuous Lady, had received a message from Henry the
8th. that she must instantly prepare her self for death, answered, That she
gave him humble thanks for all his favors bestowed upon her; as for making her
of a mean woman a Marchioness, of a Marchioness a Queen, but especially, seeing
he could not on earth advance her to any greater dignity, that he would now
send her to rest, and reign upon Gods high and holy throne.

When Tully was asked, which Oration of Demosthenes he liked best? He answered,
The longest.

Diogenes said of one, That he cast his house so long out at the window, that
at last his house cast him out of the door, having left nothing rich, except a
nose.

There are two saying fathered on two great Counselors, Secretary Walsingham,
and Secretary Ce^il, one used to say at the Council Table, My Lords, stay a
little, and we shall make an end the sooner. The other would oft-times speak of
himself, It shall never be said of me, that I will defer till to morrow, what I
can do to day.

Adrian the Sixth said, A Physician is very necessary to a populous Country; for
were it not for the Physician, men would live so long, and grow so thick, that
one could not live for the other.

It was a bold answer Captain Talbot returned Henry the 8th. from Calais, who
having received special command from the King to erect a new work at the
Watergate, and to see the Town well fortified, sent him word, That he could
neither fortify, nor fiftifie without money.

An Italian Vineyard-man, after a long drougth, and an extreme hot Summer,
which had parch't up all his grapes, complained, For want of water, I am forced
to drink water; if I had had water, I would drink wine.

Andrea Doria, being asked by Philip the 2d. which were his best harbors? He
answered, June, July, and Carthagena; meaning, that any Port is good in those
two months, but Carthagena was good any time of the year.

A Gallego in Spain, in the Civil Wars of Arragon, being in the Field, he was
shot in the forehead, and being carried away to a Tent, the Surgeon searched
his wound, and found it mortal; so he advised him to send for his Confessor,
for he was no man for this world, in regard the brain was touched; the
Soldiers wished him to search it again, which he did, and told him, that he
found he was hurt in the brain, and could not possibly escape; whereupon the
Gallego fell into a chafe, and said, he lied, for he had no brain at all: If J
had had any brain, J would never have come to this war.

A Spaniard having got a fall by a stumble, and broke his nose, rise up, and in
a disdainful manner, said, This it is to walk upon earth.

Alexander quintus, Pope of Rome, said of himself, That when he was a Bishop,
he was rich; when he was a Cardinal, he was poor; and when he was a Pope, he
was a beggar.

King Darius, by chance opening a great pomegranate, and being demanded, of
what he would wish to have as many as there were grains in that pomegranate?
answered in one word, Of Zopiruses.

It was the answer of an undaunted captive, who slighting the insulting braves
of him who took him: Thou hold thy conquest great in overcoming me, but mine
is far greater in overcoming my self.

It was the saying of a judicious Statesman, he that knows to speak well,
knows also where he must hold his peace: Wisely concluding, think an hour
before you speak, and a day before you promise.

It was an excellent speech of a famous Historian, who being demanded by one
who had reduced his Empire to a mere Tyranny, why he remembered not him in his
Writings? Because (said he) I read nothing in you worth remembering. Why do
thou not then (replied he) record my vices? Lest others (said he) should err
by your example, and so imitate you.

It was the saying of a famous Orator, I never knew any Poet (yet was I well
acquainted with many) who did not think his own doings better than all others.

Zeno's servant Bruson, being taken in theft, and alleging for himself, that
it was his destiny to steal. His Master answered, and thy destiny to be beaten.

Antigonus observing a sickly soldier to be very valiant, procured his
Physician to heal him* who afterward began to keep himself out of danger, not
venturing as formerly; which Antigonus noting, demanded the reason: The
soldier answered, O Antigonus, thou art the reason; before I ventured nothing
but a diseased corpse, and then I chose rather to die quickly, than to live
sickly: I invited death to do me a courtesy, now it is otherwise with me, for
now I have somewhat to lose.

The Lydian Croesus, enthroned in his Chair of State, asked a wise Sage, if
ever he beheld a more beautiful, or graceful Spectacle? Yes, said he,
dunghil-cocks, pheasants, and peacocks; for those are clothed with native
beauty, but yours is but borrowed glory.

Carfitides being asked his opinion* what he thought of the Sea, and Seamen?
Answered, That there was nothing more treacherous than the first, and that the
others were it is comrades.

It was a wise answer, that is reported of the best and last Cardinal of this
Island, who, when a skilful Astrologer, upon the Calculation of his Nativity,
had told him some specialties concerning his future estate, answered, Such
perhaps I was born; but since that time I have been born again, and my second
Nativity has crossed my first.

Valentinian, when his soldiers had chosen him to be Emperor, they were
consulting to have another joined with him: No (said ^^) It was in your power
to give me the Empire while I had it not; but now when I have it, it is not in
your power to give me a partner.

Epaminondas, the Theban Ruler, when the people made merry with banquets and
dances on a Solemn Feast Day, went up and down the City in his worst array, and
sadly (as it were) mourning: And being demanded why he did so? His answer was,
That therefore was he sad, because they should with more security be merry.

The grave Cato, when one asked counsel of him in sober earnest, what harm he
thought aboded him, because rats had gnawn his hose? He merrily answered, That
it was a strange thing to see that, but it had been much more strange if his
hose had devoured the rats.

Tully likewise, when one to enforce the verity of Divination, said, that a
Victory which ^ell to the Thebans* was fore-shewed by an extraordinary crowing
of cocks: He replied, that it was no miracle cocks should crow; but if fishes
had so done, that had been wonderful indeed.

Apollonius being very early at Vespasian's gate, and finding him stirring,
from thence he conjectured that he was worthy to govern an Empire; and said to
his companion, this man surely will be Emperor, he is so early.

One being demanded what Caesar whispered in his ear? Made answer, That Caesar
told him he would invent a very strange punishment for such as pried into his
words and actions.

Ferdinand the Emperor, making a Speech in a public Assembly, by chance gave
Priscian a fillip or two, which a Bishop hearing, started up, and said, Caesar,
You have forgotten your Grammar: To whom Caesar, and you have forgotten your
Ethics, Bishop.

Aexander, being desired to see Darius daughters, who were fair and young, made
answer, I will have a care not to be vanquished by women, seeing I have
vanquished men.

Some entreated Cyrus to see Panthea, which he refused to do; and being told
that she was very fair, It is for that reason (said he) I may not see her; for
if I do visit her now that I have leisure, she will bind me another time, when
I shall be full of affairs.

Priscus Helvidius was advised not to come unto the Senate: He answered, It is
in the Emperors power not to make me of the Senate, but while I am a Senator,
he shall not let me from going to the palace. You shall be suffered to go, said
the other, so you speak not: Helvidius answers, I will not speak a word, if
they demand nothing of me; but if they ask me, I will answer what I think fit.
If you speak, said the other, they will put you to death. He replies, And when
did I brag that I was immortal? You shall do your duty, and I mine; it is in
you to kill me, and in me to die without fear; it is in you to banish me, and
in me to go to it cheerfully.

When Athanasius was banished by the Emperor Julian, he said unto his friends
that came to sorrow with him in his disgrace: Courage^ my children, this is but
a little cloud, which will vanish presently.

Fabius Maximus having spoiled Tarentum, and made it desolate, with all kinds
of cruelties; when his Secretary came to ask him, What shall we do with the
enemies gods? He answered, Let us leave the angry gods unto the Tarentines.

Scanderbeg had it in particular in all his encounters and military actions,
always to begin his first Stratagems of Victory with the death of the head,
saying, That the head should be first cut off, and the rest of the body will
fall alone; and that he knew no kind of living creature that could survive, the
head being taken off.

It was a witty speech of him that said, That men's actions were like notes of
music, sometimes in spaces, and sometimes in lines, sometimes above, and
sometimes beneath, and never or seldom straight for any long continuance.

Rubrius Flavius, being condemned by Nero ^o lose his head; when as the
Executioner said unto him, that he should stretch forth his neck boldly, he
answered, Thou shall not strike more boldly, than I will present my head.

Croesus, King of Lydia, seeing Cyrus's soldiers running up and down the Town
of Sardis, he demanded whither they did run? They go to the spoil of the Town,
answered Cyrus. They take nothing from me (replied Croesus, all they carry away
is thine, and not mine. Signifying, that the spoils of soldiers are the losses
of the Conqueror, rather than the conquered.

One demanded of Sym^nides, why he was so sparing in the extremity of his age?
For that, said he, I had rather leave my goods after my death to my enemies,
than in my lifetime to have need of my friends.

When Antisthenes the Philosopher was in extreme pain, he cried out, Who shall
deliver me from these miseries? Diogenes presenting a knife unto him, said,
This, if thou will, and that soon. I do not say of my life (replied the
Philosopher) but of my pain.

One demanded of Cercidas the Megalapolitane, if he died willingly? Why not
(said he) for after my death I shall see those great men, Pythagoras among the
Philosophers, Hecateus among the Historians, Homer among the Poets, and Olympus
among the Musicians.

A Babbler demanding of Aristole, if his discourse were not strange? No,
answered he, but yet a man having feet, should not give himself so long
patience to hear thee.

The Ambassadors of Lacedemon being come to the King Lygdomnus, he making
difficulty to hear them, and feigning himself sick, the Ambassadors said, We
are not come to wrestle with him, but to speak with him.

Lewis the 11th. of France, one day went into the kitchen, whereas he found a
young lad turning the spit, he demanded his name, of whence he was, and what he
did earn? This turn-spit, who knew him not, told his name, and that though he
were in the Kings service, yet he got as much as the King: For the King (said
he) has but his life, and so have I; God feeds the King, and the King feeds me.

The Emperor Maximilian answered a Merchant, who besought him to make him a
Gentleman: I can make thee much richer than thou art, but it is not in my power
to make thee a Gentleman.

Pope Julius the 2d* having had a long feud with the Emperor Frederick (against
whom he had fought 12 Battles) being one day gently admonished by the
Archbishop of Ostia, how St. Peter his Predecessor was commanded to put up his
sword. It Is true said Julius, our Savior gave the prime Apostle such a command,
but 'twas after he had given the blow, and cut off Malchus ear.

Diogenes said, That Troy was lost by horses, and the Commonwealth of Athens
by asses.

Alva^o de Luna, whom John King of Castile advanced, and loved above all men of
his Realm, said to them that admired his fortunes: Judge not of the building
before it be finished. He died by the hands of Justice.

Lewis the 1^th. King of France, being but a child when crowned, tired with
being so long (eight hours) in the Church, and bearing the Crown on his head,
with diverse other heavy vests upon his body, was asked, what he would take to
take the like pains again? He answered* For another Crown I would take double
the pains.

Those of the Religion, petitioning Lewis* 13. for a continuance of holding
their cautionary Towns, as Hen. 3. and Hen. the great had done: He told them,
What grace the first did show you, was out of fear; what my Father did, was out
of love; but I would have you know that I neither fear you no^ love you.

The Marshal de Saint Geran, coming to Sir Edward Herbert (then Ambassador
from the King of England for the Rochellers) after a counter-buff with Luynes
the Constable, and told him in a friendly manner, you have offended the
Constable, and you are not in a place of security here: Whereunto he answered,
That he held himself to be in a place of security wheresoever he had his sword
by him.

The Duke of Suilli was a Favorite to Henry the 4th. whom he had reduced from
a Roman, to be a Reformist, when he was King of Navar only; and persuading him
to become Roman again, the Duke bluntly answered, Sir, you have given me one
turn already, you have good luck if you give me any more.

Lewis the 13th. when but a youth, he went to the Coutry of Bearn, at his
entrance to Pan, the Inhabitants bringing a Canopy to carry over his Head, He
asked, whether there was ever a Church in the Town? And being answered, No: He
said, he would receive no honor in that place, where God himself had no house
to be honored in.

William, Prince of Orange, to content those that reproved his too much
humanity, said, That man is well bought, who costs but a salutation.

A President of a Parliament in France, whose friends came to see him at his
new house, began exceedingly to commend it for the rareness of the Workmanship,
and the goodness of the stone, timber, marble, and such like: You mistake (said
he) the stuff whereof it is made; the house is only built de testes les fols,
of foolsheads.

Bias, one of the seven wise men of Greece, sailing in a ship where some
fellows were that had given themselves over to lewdness, and yet in a storm
were calling unto their gods for help, He said unto them, Hold your peace, for
fear left the gods should know you be here.

Alexander Severus was wont to say, That a Soldier is never afraid, but when
he sees himself well apparelled, and his Belt furnished with money.

Dionysius the Tyrant, said, We should deceive children with dice and
cock-alls, and men with Oaths.

Alexander the Great, when one wondered, why he not only not killed his
enemies, but took them to be his friends: It seems (says he) to thee profitable
to kill an enemy, and I kill an enemy while I spare him, and make him my friend
while I advance him.

The Philosopher Anacharsis, said of Solons Commonwealth, That in the
Consultations and Deliberations of the Greeks, Wisemen propounded the matters,
and fools decided them.

Darius was wont to say of himself, In a pinch and extremity of peril he was
always wisest.

Favorinus told Adrian the Emperor, who had censured him in his own profession
of Grammar, That he durst not be learneder than he, who commanded 30. Legions.

Thou art an Heretic, said Woodrofe the Sheriff to Mr. Rogers the Proto-Martyr
in Queen Mary's days: That shall be known (quoth he) at the day of Judgment.

General Vere told the King of Denmark, that Kings cared not for soldiers,
until such time as their Crowns hung on one side of their heads.

Tamberlain having overthrown Bajazet, asked him, Whether ever he had given God
thanks for making him so great an Emperor; who confessing he never thought of
it; Tamberlain replied, that it was no wonder so ungrateful a man should be
made a spectacle of misery: For you (says he) being blind of one eye, and I
lame of one leg, was there any worth in us, why God should set us over two such
great Empires?

Luther was wont to say, that three things make a Preacher, reading, prayer,
and temptation; reading a full man, prayer an holy man, temptation an
experienced man.

One having made a long, tedious, and idle discouse before Aristotle, concluded
it thus, Sir, I doubt, I have been too tedious to you with my many words: In
good sooth, said Aristotle, you have not been tedious to me, for I gave no heed
to any thing you said.

Aigoland King of Arragon, coming to the French Court to be Baptized, and
asking who those lazers and poor people were, that waited for alms from the
Emperor Charlemain's table? When one answered him, that they were the servants
of God: I will never serve that God said he, that keeps his servants no better.

One being ready to die, clapped a 20 s. piece into his mouth, and said, Some
wiser than some, if I must leave all the rest, yet this IN ll take with me.

Sabina, a Roman Martyr, crying out in her travail, and being asked by her
Keeper, how she would endure the fire the next day? Oh well enough, said she;
for now I suffer in childbirth for my sin; but then Christ shall suffer in me,
and support me.

Cardinal Columnus, when the Pope threatened to take away his Cardinals Hat,
That then he would put on an Helmet to pull him out of his throne.

King James, after he had moderated as Dr. of the Chair at Oxford in all
Faculties; when in the public Library there, he beheld the little chains
wherewith the several Books were fastened to their places: I could wish (says
he) (if ever it be my lot to be carried captive) to be shut up in this prison,
to be bound with these chains, and to spend my life with these fellow-captives
that stand here chained.

Aesop being set to sale with two other slaves, a Chapman enquired of the
first, what he could do? He, to endear himself, answered, mountains, and
wonders, and what not? For he knew, and could do all things. The second
answered even so for himself, and more too. But when he came to Aesop, and
demanded of him what he could do? Nothing, said he, for these two have
fore-stalled all, and have left nothing for me.

The Philosopher Byon, when a certain King for grief tore his hair: Does this
man (said he) think that baldness will assuage his grief?

One being demanded what his studies would stead him in his decrepit age?
answered, That he might the better, and with more ease leave the world.

The Ambassadors of Samos, being come to King Cleomenes of Sparta, prepared
with a long prolix Oration, to stir him up to war against the tyrant
Polycrates, after he had listened a good while unto them, his Answer was:
Touching your Exordium, I have forgotten it, the middle I remember not, and for
the conclusion, I will do nothing in it.

Scipio being one day accused before the Roman people of an urgent and capital
offense, in stead of excusing himself, or flattering the Judges, turning to
them, he said, It will well beseem you to judge of his head, by whose means you
have authority to judge of all the world.

Atisthenes was wont to say to his disciples; Come on my Masters, let you and
me go to hear Socrates, there shall I be fellow-disciple with you.

Julius Drusius, to those Workmen which for 3000 crowns offered so to reform
his house, that his neighbors should no more overlook into it: I will give
you 6000 (said he) and contrive it so, that on all sides every man may look
into it.

The Stanhop said merrily, That not he, but his stately house was guilty of
high treason.

Eleazer, a Jew, being demanded when it would be time to repent and amend?
Answered, One day before death. And when the other replied, that no man knew
the day of his death: He said, Begin then even to day, for fear of failing.

Apollidorus was wont to say of Chrysippus his Books, That if other men's
sentences were left out, the pages would be void.

Cato said, He had rather men should ask why he had no Statues erected for him,
than why he had.

A certain Souldan, who died at the Siege of Zigetum, being persuaded by the
Muphti not to suffer so many Religions as were in his Dominions: He answered,
That a nosegay of many flowers smelled far more sweet than one flower only.

Pope Sixtus said, That a Pope could never want money, while he held a pen in
his hand.

One said of Erasmus his Enchyridion, That there was more devotion in the Book,
than in the Writer.

A Frenchman being asked by one of his Neighbors, if the Sermon were done? No,
says he, it is said, but it is not done, neither will be, I fear, in haste.

When one asked the Duke of Alva, whether he had not observed the great
Eclipse of the Sun? No truly, said he, I have so much business on earth, that
I have no time to look up to heaven.

A Physician was wont to say pleasantly to delicate Dames, when they complained
they were they could not tell how, but yet they could not endure to take any
Physic: Your only way is to be sick indeed, and then you will be glad to take
any medicine.

Diogenes being asked what time is best for meals? He answered, For the rich
man when he had a stomach, and for a poor man when he could get meat.

Jovinian said to the Orthodox and Arrian Bishops, contending about Faith: Of
your learning I cannot so well judge, nor of your subtle disoutations; but I
can observe which of you have the better behavior.

An Arrian Bishop entreating the Emperor* Constantine to give them a Church: He
answered, If your cause be good, one is too few; but if bad, one is too many.

The Philosopher Theodorus was wont to say, That he gave his scholars
instructions and lessons with the right hand, but that they received them with
the left.

Luther would often say, That if he thought the reading of his Books would
hinder the reading of the Scriptures, he would burn them all before he died.

When one accused a Comical Poet, that he brought a lewd debauched Ruffian on
the Stage, and so gave bad example to young men. True, said he, I brought such
a man on* but I hanged him before he went off, and so I gave them a good
example.

One being asked what exploits he had done in the Low Countries? Answered, That
he had cut off a Spaniards legs: Reply being made, that it had been something
if he had cut off his head: Oh, said he, you must consider his head was off
before.

A gallant sometime said to a reverend Prelate, If there be no judgment to
come, are not you a very fool to bar your self from the pleasures of this life?
To whom the Prelate: And what if there be a judgment to come, are not you then
a very fool, for the short pleasures of this present life, to bar your self
from those eternal joys of your life to come?

Charles the 5th. Emperor was wont to say, That the King of Spain ruled over
asses, doing nothing without violence or blows; the King of France over men;
and the Emperor over Kings. And when one of the standers by said, that the
Polonians also had their King: I grant, said he, that he is* their King.
Meaning, that his power was limited by them.

When Marshal Biron bid Sir Roger Williams bring up his Companies faster,
taxing the slow march of the English. Sir, says he, with this march our
Forefathers conquered your Country of France, and I mean not to alter it.

The same Sir Roger Williams, to an idle Spaniard, boasting of his
Country-citrons, Oranges, Olives, and such like: Why, says he, we, in England,
have good Surloyns of Beef, fat Muttons, and dainty Capons, to eat your sawee
withal.

One demanding of an Italian, why their Muttons and Cattle were so small and
lean? Because (quoth he) we Italians eat the grass in sallets, and by robbing
the pastures, deceive the cattle.

A Portugal Captain once told King Sebastian, providing for his journey into
Barbary, That wars should be accompanied with three streams, the first, of men;
the second, of victuals; the third, of silver.

Another being demanded how many things were necessary hereunto, answered,
Money, money, money.

Sigismond, the first King of Poland, moved by Leo the 10th. to war against the
Turk, answered, Few words shall serve, first, make firm peace among the
Christian Princes, then will I be not behind the forwardest.

When Ferdinando Cortez had conquered Mexico, the King of Mexico drawing his
dagger, gave it to him, saying, Hitherto I have done the best for the defense
of my people; now I am no farther bound, but to give thee this dagger to kill
me with.

Hannibal having sent his Brother Mago to discover the Romans Camp, and
returning, he asked him, What news, and what work they were like to have with
the enemies? Work enough (answered Mago) for they are an horrible many. As
horrible a many as they are (replied Hannibal) I tell thee brother, that among
them all, search them never so diligently, thou shall not find one man whose
name is Mago.

Captain Gam, before the Battle of Agincourt, being sent to make the like
Discovery, told King Henry the 5th. That of the Frenchmen, there were enough to
be killed, enough to be taken prisoners, and enough to run away.

At a Solemn Convention of many Philosophers, before the Ambassadors of a
Foreign Prince, and that every one, according to his several abilities, made
demonstration of their wisdom, that so the Ambassador might have matter to
report of the admired wisdom of the Grecians* Amongst those, one there was
that stood still, and uttered nothing in the Assembly, insomuch that the
Ambassador turning to him, said. And what is your gift, that I may report it?
To whom the Philosopher, Report unto your King, that you found one amongst the
Grecians, that knew how to hold his peace.

A Barber going to the Court, and being at his return asked what he saw? He
answered, the King was neatly trimmed.

Themistocles, being invited to touch a Lute, said arrogantly, He could not
fiddle, but he knew how to make a small town a great City.

Plutarch tells of two men that were hired at Athens for some public work,
whereof the one was full of tongue, but slow at hand, but the other, blunt in
speech, yet an excellent Workman: Being called upon by the Magistrates to
express themselves, and to declare at large how they would proceed; when the
first had made a long harrange, and described it from point to point, the other
seconded him with this short speech: Ye men of Athens, what this man has said
in words, that will I make good true performance.

King Porus, when Alexander asked him how he would be used? answered in one
word, (...), Like a King. Alexander replying, do you desire nothing else? No,
said he, all things are in (...).

Solon being demanded how a Commonwealth might best be preserved in peace?
Answered, that the Commonwealth is in good estate, where the people obey the
Magistrates, and the Magistrates obey the Law.

Pelican, a German Divine, said, concerning his Learning, When I appear before
God, I shall not appear as a Doctor, but as an ordinary Christian.

When Plato saw one indulgent to his flesh in high diet, he asked him, What do
ye mean to make your prison so strong?

Augustus said, that Petitions should not be given to Princes, as meat to an
Elephant, that one is afraid of.

Vespasian asked Apollonius, what was Nero's overthrow? He answered, Nero could
touch and tune the harp well; but in Government, he used sometimes to wind the
p^ns too high, and sometimes to let them down too low.

A fat man in Rome, riding always upon a very lean horse, being asked the
reason thereof? Answered. That he fed himself, but trusted others to feed his
horse.

Philip of Macedon was wont to say, That an ass laden with gold would enter the
gates of any City.

At the Treaty between the English, and the King of Spain, the Commissioners
being met in a French Town, the first question was, what Tongue they should
Treat in? One of the Spaniards, thinking to give our English a sore gird, said,
In French, and these Gentlemen cannot be ignorant of the language of their
fellow subjects: No, faith my Masters (said Doctor Dale, Master of the
Requests) French is too common, especially in a French Town, We Will treat in the
Mother Tongue, Hebrew, the language of Jerusalem, of which your Master is King.

One being exiled his native Country, and one day asked why he looked so
heavily? replied, I bear the Emblem of this place in my front.

When Ennius sought his friend at his house, and asked his servant where his
Master was? Who hearing, said to his servant, Tell him I am not at home; which
Ennius overheard, but took the answer from the servant. The next day the same
man, coming to Ennius his house, and demanded of his servant where his Master
was? Ennius spoke aloud, Tell him I am not at home. What, said he, will you
deny your self with your own tongue? Why, said Ennius, I believed when but your
man told me you were at home, and will you not believe me which say so my self?

Erasmus being asked by Frederick Duke of Saxony, what he thought of Luther, so
much earnestly seeking Reformation? Erasmus answered, Luther had committed two
great errors: One was, that he touched too near the Crown of the Pope;
another, too much the bellies of the Monks.

A certain bold-fac'd fellow, came one day to an Emperor, and desired his
Majesty to bestow some reward upon a poor kinsman of his: I am your kinsman,
quoth he, both by father and mother, for we come all of Adam and Eve. Indeed,
thou say true (quoth the Emperor) and gave him a penny. A penny (quoth the
other) shall I have no more but a penny? A simple reward for an Emperor. Hold
thy self content, said the Emperor, If I should give to every one of my kinsmen
a penny, I should soon become a poor Emperor.

Alphonsus King of Arragon, answered an Orator, who had cited a long
Panegerycal Oration of his praises: If that thou have said, consents with
truth, I thank God for it; if not, I pray God grant me grace, that I may do it.

A Painter being blamed by a Cardinal for coloring the vi^ages of Peter and
Paul too red, tartly replied, That he painted them so, as ^lushing at the lives
of those men who style themselves their successors.

When Alexander received any Letters from any of his Commanders in Greece, of
some small Skirmish, or taking some Fort (He being used to great Victories) was
wont to say, They seemed to him but as the battles of frogs and mice in Homer.

Some saying it was a strange resolution in L. Scilla to resign his
Dictatorship. Caesar scoffing at him, said, That Silla could not skill of
Letters, and therefore knew not how to Dictate.

Aristippus, having a Petition to Dionysius, and no ear given him, he fell down
at his feet, in manner of a worshipper: Whereupon Dionysius stayed, and gave
him the hearing, and granted it. And being reproved, that he would offer that
indignity to Philosophy, as for a private suit to fall at a Tyrants feet; He
replied, That it was not his fault, but it was the fault of Dionysius, who had
his ears in his feet.

It is a notable speech reported of one Nemon, that was General of Darius his
Army, when he was fighting against Alexander, one of his Soldiers reproached
Alexander: The General came to him, and smote him, saying, I did not hire you
to reproach Alexander, but to fight against him.

A great man, who himself was very plain in apparel, checked a Gentleman for
being overfine: Who modestly answered, Your Lordship has better clothes at
home, and I have worse.

Themistocles, when an Ambassador in a set Speech boasted great matters of a
small Village, took him up thus: Friend, your words require a City.

It was the saying of a noble Venetian Duke That it is sufficient for a
discreet Prince to have power to revenge, that his enemies may have cause to
fear him.

An Ambassador of Athens, answered King Philip of Macedon, threatening that he
would cause his head to be cut off: If thou take this head from me, my Country
will give me another that shall be immortal. Statuam pro capite, pro morte
immortalitatem.

Diogenes seeing a certain man dressing and decking himself for a festival day,
said unto him thus: Why do thou take such pains to trim thy self to day,
seeing that every day is a festival day to a virtuous man?

There was a certain rich wretch who had in his house great store of wine, but
was so niggardly, that he sold the best, and kept the worst for his own use. A
servant of his, observing the pinching and preposterous niggardliness o^ his
Master, fled away from him; and being asked afterward why he had left his
Lord? answered thus: Because I could not endure to stay with a man, who having
that which was good, made choice of that which was evil.

The Philosopher Aristippus, having lost one of his three Farms, said thus unto
his friends; That it was babishness to be sorry for one Farm los^, and not to
be merry for the other two that did rest in his hands, seeing that all of them
had lien open to the same adventure.

Secundus the Philosopher being demanded, What is a wife? Replied, She is
contrary to an husband.

Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick, when the people would have made him King,
refused it, saying, That he had rather make Kings, than be one.

Pompey, when his soldiers, would needs leave the Camp, threw himself down at
a narrow passage, and bid them go, But they should first trample on their
General.

Diogenes said to one that had perfumed his lo^ks: Be careful your odoriferous
head procure you not a stinking life.

Themistocles to Symmachus, to whom, being desirous to teach him the art of
memory; He answered, He had rather learn the art of forgetfulness.

Vespasian seeing at once two fatal presages of his end, a blazing Comet, and a
gaping Sepulcher, turned them both from himself, with this pleasant scoff;
saying, The Sepulcher gaped for the old Empress Julia; and the blazing Star
portended the death of the King of Persia, who at that time wore long hair.

When Mr. Sam. Hieron lay on his deathbed (rich only in goodness and
children) his wife made much womanish lamentation, what should become of her
little ones. Peace Sweetheart (said he) that God who feeds the Ravens, will
not starve the Herns.

Mr. Fox (the Author of the Martyrology) being once asked at a friends table,
what dish he desired to be set up to him to begin his meal with? He answered,
The last. Which word was pleasantly taken, as if he had meant a choiser dish,
such as usually are brought at the second Course; whereas he rather signified
the desire he had to see dinner ended, that he might depart home.

Going abroad (by chance) he met a woman that he knew, who pulling a book from
under her arm, and saying, See you not that I am going to a Sermon? Mr. Fox
replied, But if you will be ruled by me, go home rather; for to day you will do
little good at Church. And when she asked, at what time therefore he would
counsel her to go? Then (answered he) when you tell no body beforehand.

When a young man, a little too forward, had, in presence of many, said, that
he could not conceive any reason in the reading of old Authors, why men should
so greatly admire them. No manuel, indeed, (quoth Mr. Fox) for if you could
conceive the reason, you would then admire them your self.

One told a Grecian Statist, who had excellently deserved of the City he lived
in, that the City had chosen 24 Officers, and yet left him out. I am glad,
says he, the City affords 24 abler ^han my self.

When one of Antipaters friends (who was an imperious and tyrannous Governor)
commended him to Alexander for his moderation, that he did not degenerate into
the Persian pride in the use of Purple, but kept the ancient habit of Macedon,
of black. True, (says Alexander) but Antipater is all purple within.

Alexander, when he gave large gifts to his friends and servants, and one asked
him what he did reserve for himself? He answered, Hope.

One asked a grave Gentlewoman how her maids came by so good husbands, and yet
seldom went abroad? Oh (said she) good husbands come home to them.

One having a shrewd wife, yet loath to use her hardly, awed her by telling her,
That he would beat her when he was dead. Meaning, that he would leave her no
maintenance.

One complaining that never had father so undutiful a child as he had. Yes,
said his son, (with less grace than truth) my Grandfather had.

A Farmer rented a grange, generally reported to be haunted with Fairies, and
paid a shrewd rent for the same at each half-years end. Now a Gentleman asked
him how he durst be so hardy as to live in the house? and whether no Spirits
did trouble him? Truth (said the farmer) there be two Saints in heaven, vex me
more than all the Devils in hell; namely, the Virgin Mary, and Michael the
Archangel; on which days he paid his rent.

When a Professor pressed an Answerer (a better Christian than a Clerk) with an
hard argument: Reverende Professor, said he, ingenue confiteor, me non posse
respondere huic argument. To whom the Professor, Recte respondes.

When one told Latimer that the Cutler had cozend him, in making him pay two
pence for a knife not (in those days) worth a penny: No, quoth Latimer, he
cozened not me, but his own Conscience.

When Buchanan lay on his deathbed, King James sent to know how he did? He
returned this answer, That he was going whither few Kings came.

Q. Metellus Pius, to one wondering at what he intended to do, and demanding of
him what he meant? Let alone, says he, farther to enquire; for if my shirt
knew what I meant to do, I would burn it.

Pericles being requested by his soldiers to fight, and that with vile
reproachful terms, replied thus: That if he could repair losses, and recover
life, he would as gladly adventure as they. But you see (said he) trees being
cut, they grow again; but men once slain, revive no more.

Henry the 4th. King of France, seeing the Chapel which the family of Bassom
Pierre had builded, and reading this verse of the Psalm, which was set down for
an Emblem: Quid retribuam Domino, pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? He said,
Bassom Pierre as a German should have added, Calicem accipiam.

To one, telling him that there is nothing does sooner make those who are out
of their wits to become temperate, than the punishment which is inflicted upon
them, the King interrupted his speech, and told him, Mercy pardons those who
have not deserved it; and the juster that wrath is, the more commendable is
mercy.

When men spoke of the insolences and ryots of the City, during the troubles,
etc. He said, The people of Paris are good, it goes as it is led; mischief
comes from those which go before, and not from their simplicity which follow
after, and grow bad by infection.

Considering on a time that Taxes were excessive in sundry places of the
Kingdom: He said, My people are made to pay a double tax, one to me, and
another to my Officers. The second makes the first insupportable; for the
expense of the Officers amount to more than the tax: It is a hard matter to
keep my self unrob'd, and almost impossible but that my people should be so.

He was wont to say, That he would not see them suffer harm, which were not in
case to do any.

Some one besought him to give him leave to carry the Cannon against some that
held his house: The King demanded of him what he would do when he had forced
them? His choler made him answer, That he would hang them all: Whereupon the
King sent him away with this mild reply, I have no Cannon to that use.

A maker of Anagrams, presenting something unto him upon his name, and telling
him that he was very poor: I believe it, said the King, for they that use this
trade, cannot grow very rich.

He was wont to say, That it was an offense to God, to give credit to those
Prognostics: and that, having God for his guard, He feared no man.

The same Henry, being at the Siege of Amiens, amongst others of the Nobles
which he summoned for that service, he sent also to the Count Soissons, a
Prince of the Blood to whom the King gives 5000 crowns pension. The Count, at
that time discontented, returned the King answer, That he was a poor Gentleman,
and wanted means to come to that service, as became one of his birth and
place, being a Prince of the Blood, and Peer of France: He therefore most
humbly craved pardon, and ^^at he would most humbly pray for his Majesty's
prosperous success, which was all he could do. Well (says the King) seeing
prayer is not acceptable without fasting, my Cousin shall hereafter fast from
his pension of 5000 crowns.

He used much this noble Speceh, when I was born, there were a thousand other
souls more born; what have I done unto God, to be more than they? It is his
mere grace and mercy which does often bind me more unto his justice; for the
faults of great men are never small.

When certain Romans practiced by secret counsel to kill the Emperor Domitian,
and gave part thereof to Trajane: He did answer; I do well see that Domitian
deserved not to be elected Emperor, and much less to be sustained in the same;
yet never the more shall I consent unto his death, for that I will rather
endure a tyrant, than procure the renown of a traitor.

The Emperor Adrian said, That he remembered not since the age of ten years,
whether he stood still, or walked by the way, that he had not either a book to
read in, or some weapon to fight with.

Being demanded why he was so bountiful unto his Ministers of Justice? He
answered, I make the Ministers of Justice rich, because by robbery of Justice
they shall no^ make other men poor.

When Favorinus, having an old house, at the entry thereof he had raised a
stately porch, painted with while: The Emperor said unto him, This house of
thine seems a gilded pill, which outwardly gives pleasure, but within is
full of bitterness.

Another friend of Adrians, named Silvius, very black of face, and of evil
shape of body, coming one day unto the Palace, all clad in white, Adrian said
unto those that were present, That black face, with that white garment, seems
no other, but a fly drowned in a spoonful of milk.

There was in Rome a certain man named Enatius, somewhat entered in age, and of
natural condition mutinous, ambitious, importune, intermedling, quarrellous,
and full of garboyl. The Emperor Adrian being advertised that Enatius was dead,
He fell into a great laughter, and swear, That he could not a little marvel how
he could intend to die, considering his great business both night and day.

There was a Senator named Fabius Cat^, a man of a small stature, which would
soon be offended, and as soon be pleased; unto whom Adrian said, Since your
chimney is so small, you must beware to lay much wood upon the fire, for
otherwise it will be always smokie.

When a certain cunning man made offer to the Emperor Antonius Pius, to place
him teeth wherewith to eat or speak; Antonius made answer: Since never from my
heart proceeded feigned or double words, there shall never enter into my mouth
feigned teeth.

Antonius always, for the most part, went bare-headed; and one advising him
the air of Rome to be very hurtful, and therefore necessary to have his head
covered, answered, assure me from troubles of men on earth, and I am assured
that nothing shall trouble me which the gods shall send me from heaven.

He sent Fulvius Tusculanus as Praetor into the Province of Mauritania, whom
within half a year he deprived of his Office, for that he was both impatient
and covetous; who complaining of the injury, said, that in times past he had
been a friend unto Antonius, but now it was forgotten: Whereunto Antonius
answered, Thou have no reason thus unjustly to blame me, because the office was
given thee by the Emperor, and not by Antonius; and since, thou did not
offend as Fulvius, but as Praetor; so I discharge thee of thy Office, not as
Antonius thy old friend, but as Emperor of the Roman Empire.

Some speaking in his presence of Wars and Battles, that Julius Caesar, Scipio
and Hannibal had fought and overcame in the field: Antonius Pius answered, Let
every man hold opinion what he thinks good, and praise what it pleases him;
but for my own part, I do more glory in conserving peace many years, than with
wars to conquer many battles.

Before he gave any government unto Praetors, Censors, or Questors, he caused
them to give an Inventory of their own proper goods, that when their charges
were finished, the increase of their wealth might be considered: Saying unto
them, That he sent them to administer Justice, and not by fraud to rob
Countries.

The Emperor Pertinax used to say, That, of Princes charging their Kingdoms
with unjust tribute, there succeeds a wilful denial of due and most just
payments.

He had a Son whom the Romans would have Created Augustus; which he would never
like of, or consent unto; saying, The gods never grant that, with the hopes of
the Empire, my son should be nourished unto vice and idleness.

The Emperor Bassianus would often say, I know not what man, having bread to
eat, or garments to wear, and cover himself on land, would (to become an
Emperor) go to Sea.

The Emperor Alexander Severus was wont to say, Princes are not to be known by
their vassals by their rich robes, but by their good works performed in their
Commonwealths.

Lewis the 12th. King of France, when he heard that the Pope had extremely
cursed him; He said, That this was a Pope made to curse, but not to pray.

He had in King Charles his time been evilly used by diverse, of whom he was
advised to take revenge at his coming to the Crown: Whereunto he answered,
That it became not a King of France to revenge the injuries done to a Duke of
Orleans.

Looking upon the Roll of King Charles his servants, he found two that had been
his dead enemies, upon each of whose names he made a cross; wherewith they
being in great perplexity, supposed the gallows to be prepared for them: Which
their fear being discovered to the King. He sent them word* To be of good
cheer, for he had crossed all their evil deeds out of his remembrance.

When a certain Courtier complained grievously of his wives unchastness, The
King bad him be of good cheer, for he that respected his wives incontinencie,
or the Popes curse, should never sleep quiet night.

Charles of Bourbon had often in his mouth the Apothegme of a Gascoigne
Gentleman, who being demanded by Charles the 7th. what reward might win him to
break his faith with him, whereof he had made trial in so many important
affairs? I could not be drawn thereunto (answered he) though I might have your
Kingdom given me, or the Empire of the Earth, and all the treasures of the
world; but I might be moved to do it by an outrage that might be offered me,
and for some injury that might touch mine Honor.

Plancus being told that Asinius Pollio had written certain Invective Orations
against him, which should not be published till after Plancus his death, to the
end they might not be answered by him. There is none (says he) but Ghosts and
Goblius that fight with the dead.

Peter Earl of Savoy, who to do his Liegehomage to the Emperor Otho the 4th.
came before him in a twofold attire; for he had on the one half of his body,
on the right side, from the top downward, set out with cloth of gold: and the
other half on the left side, covered with shining armor. The Emperor asking
him what such a diverse furniture meant? Sir, answered he, the attire of the
right side is to honor your Imperial Majesty; this of the left, shows me
ready to fight until the last gasp, against those that wish you ill, and speak
ill of you.

Pope John the third, being asked what thing was farthest from the truth? The
opinion of the common people (answered he) for all that they praise deserve
blame; all that they think is nothing but vanity, all that they say is nothing
but lying; they condemn the good, they approve the evil, they magnify nothing
but infamy.

Lewis the 11th. used this Apothegme, Where pride and presumption go before*
shame and loss follow after.

Dionysius having taken the City Reggio, and in it the Captain Phyton, he told
him, how the day before he had caused his son and his kinsfolks to be drowned:
To whom Phyton answered nothing, But that they were more happy than himself by
the space of one day.

Thales being asked how a man might be cheerful, and bear up in afflictions:
Answered, If he can see his enemies in worse case than himself.

A soldier being demanded by Nero, why he hated him: Answered him thus: I
loved thee whilst thou nere worthy of love; but since thou becamest a paracide,
a jugler, a player, and a coachman, I hate thee as thou deservest.

Another being asked why he sought to kill him? answered, Because I find no
other course to hinder thy uncessant outrages, and impious deeds.

Francis Duke of Britanny, Son to John the 5th, when he was spoken unto for a
marriage between him and Isabel a Daughter of Scotland, and some told him she
was but meanly brought up, and without any instruction of learning, answered,
He loved her the better for it; and that a woman was wise enough, if she could
but make difference between the shirt and doublet of her husband.

Demosthenes companions in their Embassage to Philip, praised their Prince to
be fair, eloquent, and a good quaffer: Demosthenes said, They were
commendations rather fitting a woman, an advocate, and a sponge, than a King.

Theodorus answered Lysimachus, who threatened to kill him: Thou shall do a
great exploit to come to the strength of a cantharides.

Aristotle being upbraided by some of his friends, that he had been
over-merciful to a wicked man: I have indeed (quoth he) been merciful toward
the man, but not toward his wickedness.

When an Epigramatist read his Epigrams in an Auditory, one of the hearers
stopped him, and said, Did not I hear an Epigram to this purpose from you last
year? Yes, says he, it is like you did: But is not that vice still in you this
year, which last years Epigram reprehended?

Some came and told Philopoemen, the enemies are with us: To whom he answered,
and why say you not that we are with them?

When Sicily did curse Dionysius, by reason of his cruelty, there was only one
old woman that prayed God to lengthen his life: Whereat Dionysius wondering*
asked her for what good turn she should do that? She Answered, That it was not
love, but fear; for (said she) I knew your Grandfather a great tyrant, and the
people desired his death; then succeeded your Father, more cruel than he, and
now your self worse far than them both; so that I think if you die, the Devil
must come next.

Pompey being in Sicily, pressing the Mammertines to acknowledge his authority,
they sought to avoid it, pretending that they had Privileges and ancient
Decrees of the people of Rome. To whom Pompey answered in choler, Will you
plead Law unto us, who have our swords by our sides?

When Lewis the 11th. demanded of Brezay* Senescall of Normandy, the reason why
he said that his horse was great and strong, being but little, and of a weak
stature: For that, answered Brezay, he carries you and all your counsel.

He said, That if he had entered his Reign otherwise than with fear and
severity, he had served for an example in the last Chapter of Boccace his book
of unfortunate Noblemen.

Considering that Secrecy was the Soul and Spirit of all Designs: He said
sometimes, I would burn my Hat, if it knew what was in my Head.

He remembering to have heard King Charles his Father say, that Truth was sick:
He added, I believe that since she is dead, and has not found any Confessor.

Mocking at one that had many Books, and little learning: He said, That he was
like unto a crook-back't man, who carries a great bunch at his back* and never
sees it.

Seeing a Gentleman which carried a goodly chain of gold, He said unto him that
did accompany him; You must not touch it, for it is Holy: Showing that it came
from the spoil of Churches.

On a time seeing the Bishop of Chartre mounted on a Mule, with a golden
bridle, He said unto him, that in times past Bishops were contented with an
Ass, and a plain halter: The Bishop answered him, That it was at such times as
Kings were shepherds, and did keep shee^.

Abdolominus, a poor man, rich in plenty except plenty of riches; to whom
Alexander of Macedon proffering the Kingdom of Sydon, who before was but a
gardener, was by him refused, saying, That he would take no care to lose that
which he cared not to enjoy.

When one told a Reverend Bishop of a young man that Preached twice every Lords
day, besides some Exercising in the weekdays: It may be (said he) he does talk
so often, but I doubt he does not Preach.

To the like effect Queen Elizabeth said to the same Bishop, when She had on
the Friday heard one of those talking Preachers, much commended by somebody;
and the Sunday after heard a well* labored Sermon, that smel^ of the candle: I
pray (said she) let me have your bosome-Sermons, rather than your lip-Sermons;
for when the Preacher takes pains, the auditory takes profit.

When Dr. Day was Dean of Windsor, there was a Singing-man in the Quire, one
Wolner, a pleasant fellow, famous for his eating, rather than his singing: Mr.
Dean sent a man to him to reprove him, for not singing with his fellows; the
messenger (that thought all worshipful that wore white Surplices) told him Mr.
Dean would pray his worship to sing: Thank Mr. Dean (quoth Wolner) and tell
him, I am as merry as they that sing.

A Husbandman dwelling near a Judge that was a great builder, and coming one
day among diverse of other neighbors, some of stone, some of tinn, the Steward,
as the manner of the Country was, provided two tables for their dinners; for
those that came upon request, powdered beef, and perhaps venison; for those
that came for hire, poor-John and apple-pyes: And having invited them in his
Lordships name to sit down, telling them one board was for them that came in
love, the other was for those that came for money; this husbandman and his hind
sat down at neither, the which the Steward imputing to simplicity, repeated
his former words again, praying them to sit down accordingly: But he answered,
He saw no table for him, for he came neither for love nor money, but for very
fear.

Scipio being made General of the Roman Army, was to name his Quaestor, or
Treasurer for the Wars, whom he thought fit, being a place in those days (as
is now) of great importance. One that took himself to have a special interest
in Scipio's favor, was an earnest suitor for it; but by the delay, mistrusting
he should have a denial, he importuned him one day for an answer. Think not
unkindness in me, (said Scipio) that I delay you thus; for I have been as
earnest with a friend of mine to take it, and yet cannot prevail with him.

A pleasant Courtier and Servitor of King Henry the 8ths. to whom the King had
promised some good turn, came, and prayed the King to bestow a living on him,
that he had found our, worth 100 l. by the year, more than enough: Why, said
the King, we have no such in England. Yes Sir (said he) the Provostship of
Eaton; for, said he, he is allowed his diet, his lodging, his hors-meat, his
servants wages, his ridingcharge, and 100 l. per annum besides.

Ellmar Bishop of London dealing with one Maddox, about some matters concerning
Puritanisme, and he had answered the Bishop somewhat untowardly and thwartly,
the Bishop said to him, Thy very name expresses thy nature; for Maddox is thy
name, and thou art as mad a beast as ever I talked with. The other not long to
seek of an answer: By your favor, Sir, said he, your deeds answer your name
righter than mine; for your name is Elmar, and you have marred all the Elms in
Fulham, by lopping them.

In the days of Edward the 6th. the Lord Protector marched with a powerful
Army into Scotland to demand their young Queen Mary in marriage to our King,
according to their promises. The Scots refusing to do it, were beaten by the
English in Musleborough-fight. One demanding of a Scotch Lord, taken prisoner,
Now Sir, how do you like our Kings marriage with your Queen? I always (quoth
he) did like the marriage, but I do not like the wooing, that you should fetch
a Bride with fire and sword.

Theocritus, to an ill Poet, repeating many of his verses, and asking which he
liked best? Answered, Those which he had omitted.

Castruccio of Luca, saying to one that professed himself a Philosopher, You are
of the condition of dogs, that always go about those who can best give them
meat. No (says the party) we are like Physicians, who visit their houses that
have most need of them.

Castruccio going from Pisa to Ligorn by water, and a dangerous storm there
arising, and thereupon being much perplexed, was reprehended by one of his
followers as pusillanimous, saying himself was not afraid of any thing: To whom
Castruccio replied, That he nothing marvel'd thereat; for every one valued his
life according to it is worth.

Being asked by one, what he should do to gain a good esteem? He answered him:
See when thou go to a Feast, that a block sit not upon a block.

When one boasted that he had read many things: Said Castruccio, It were better
thou could brag thou have remembered much.

Another bragging, Though he had tippled much, he was not drunk: Replied, An
Ox do the same.

Castruccio kept a young Lass, which he lay with ordinarily; and thereupon
being reproved by a friend, telling him that it was a great wrong to him, that
he had suffered himself to be so taken by a wench: Thou art mistaken, said he,
I took her, not she me.

Being one night in a house of one of his Gentlemen, where there were diverse
Ladies invited to a Feast; and he dancing and sporting with them, more than
befitted his condition, was reproved by a friend: Answered, He that is held a
wise man in the daytime, will never be thought a fool in the night.

When one asked him a favor with many and superfluous words; Castruccio said
to him, Hereafter, when thou would any thing with me, send another.

Having caused a Citizen of Luca to die, who had helped him in his rising to
his greatness; when it was said to him, he had ill done to put to death one of
his old friends: He replied, You are deceived, I have put to death a new enemy.

He said, He wondered much at men, that when they bought any vessel of earth or
glass, they sound it first whether it be good; but in taking a wife, they are
content only to see her.

Seeing that one had written upon his house in latin, God keep the wicked
hence; Said, The Master then must not enter here.

Treating with an Ambassador of the King of Naples, touching some goods of the
Borderers, whereat he was somewhat angry, when then the Ambassador said, Fear
you not the King then? Castruccio said, Is this your King good or bad? And he
answering, That he was good, Castruccio replied, Wherefore then should I be
afraid of those that are good?

The Lord Tinteville said to a great Personage of France, that none could write
the life of his deceased Master ( Lewis the 11th.) so well as he. To whom he
answered wisely: I am too much bound to him to speak the truth.

King James, being invited in a hunting journey, to dine with Sir Tho. J. of
Barkshire; turning short at the corner of a Common, happened near to a Country
man, sitting by the heels in the stocks, who cried Hosanna unto his Majesty,
which invited him to ask the reason of his restraint? Sir Tho. said, It was for
stealing a goose from the Common. The fellow replied, I beseech your Majesty be
Judge who is the greater thief, I for stealing geese from the Common, or his
Worship for robbing the Common from the geese? By my sale, Sir (said the King
to Sir ^ho.) Ise not dine to day on your dishes, till you restore the Common
for the poor to feed their flocks. Which was forthwith granted to them, and the
witty fellow set free.

Prince Henry was never heard to swear an oath: And it was remembered at his
Funeral-Sermon by the Archbishop; That he being commended by one, for not
replying with passion in play, or swearing to the truth: He should answer, That
he knew no game or value to be won or lost, could be worth an Oath.

There was a Duel between two eminent Persons of the Turks, and one slain: The
Council of Bashaws reprehended the other thus: How durst you undertake to fight
one with the other? Are there not Christians enough to kill? Did you not know,
that whether of you were slain, the loss would be the Great Seigniors.

King James having made a large and learned Speech to the Parliament, the Lord
Keeper, as Speaker to the Peers, whose place there usually adds to the Kings
mind and meaning, thus excuses himself: After the Kings Eloquence to be silent;
not to enamel a gold ring with studs of iron. As one says of Nerva, That
having adopted Trajane, he was immediately taken away: Ne post divinum and
immortale factum, aliquid mortale saceret; So he durst not after his Majesty's
divinum and immortale dictum, mortale aliquid addere.

Alphonsus King of Arragon, seeing a young Lady dance with a Gentleman who made
love to her, said to him, Comfort your self, this Sybil will quickly render the
Oracle you ask: Because the Sybils gave no answers but in motion.

The Monk, who ambitious of martyrdom, told the Souldan, That he was was come
into his Court, to die for Preaching of the Truth; was answered, He needed not
to have rambled so far for death, for he might easily find it among his Princes
at home.

Antigonus being asked by his own son, what time he would remove his Camp? He
said, The sound of the trumpet should give them notice.

The Conspirator had learned the lesson of silence well; who being asked his
knowledge, answered, If I had known it, you had never known it.

Pyrrhus King of the E^irotes, having in two set Battles, with great loss of
men, put the Romans to the worst, and hearing by a Favorite of his, this his
so great good fortune smoothingly congratulated: He said unto him, That two
Victories indeed he had gotten of them, but them so dear, that should he at the
same rate buy a third, the purchase would no less than undo him.

A soldier of Augustus, when his enemies throat was in his power, hearing the
Retreat sounded, gave over his violence, with these words; Malo obedire Duci,
quam occidere hostem.

The Janissaries are very true to a man that trusts himself with them, and
patient in bearing abuses. One of them being stricken by an Englishman, as they
traveled through Morea, did not only not revenge it, nor abandon him to the
pillage and outrage of others, but conducted him unto Zant in safety: Saying,
God forbid, that the villainy of another should make him betray the charge that
was committed to his trust.

A great Courtier of the great Moguls, noted to be a great neglecter of God, a
soldier of approved valor; but being in dalliance with one of his women, she
plucked an hair from his breast, which grew about his nipple, which presently
began to fester, and in short time after became a canker incurable: Seeing he
must die, he uttered these words: Who would have thought but that I, who have
been so long bred a Soldier, should have died in the face of my enemy, by some
instrument of war, etc? But now (though too late) I am forced to confess, that
there is a great God above, whose Majesty I have ever despised, that needs no
bigger lance than an hair to kill an Atheist, or a despiser of his Majesty.

King Henry the 7th. having pressed Doctor Fisher to the Bishopric of
Rochester, all men thinking it to proceed from the request of the Lady
Margaret, the Kings Mother, and his Mistress: The King said; Indeed the modesty
of the man, together with my Mothers silence, spoke in his behalf.

He refused the Bishoprics of Lincoln and Ely, proffered him by Henry the 8th.
contenting himself with his former, though less: Saying, Others have larger
pastures, but I have lesser charge of souls; so that when I shall be called to
an account for both, I shall be the better able to give an account of either.

Bishop Fisher, having all his plate stolen in one night, his servant pursuing
the thieves, found some pieces that they had let fall by the way; the Bishop
observing the next day the sad countenances of his servants, when knowing the
cause, said: If this be all, we have more cause to rejoice, that God has
restored us to some, than to be discontented that wicked men have taken away
any; for the least favor of God Almighty, is more to be esteemed, than all the
evil (which the Devil and all his wicked instruments can do unto us) therefore
let us sit down and be merry, thank God it is no worse, and look ye better to
the rest.

Sir Thomas Moore, meeting the Bishop going before the Kings Commissioners at
Lambeth, saluted him in these terms: Well met my Lord, I hope we shall meet in
heaven. To which the Bishop replied: This should be the way, Sir Thomas, for it
is a very straight gate we are in. They both suffered for refusing the Oath of
Supremacy.

The Bishop would always say, That the remembrance of death came never out of
season.

The Bishops man being clapped up a close prisoner, and threatened to be hanged
(for carrying letters from his Master to Sir Thomas Moore) they then being both
prisoners in the Tower) asked the Keeper, If there were another Act of
Parliament come forth, whereby a man should be hanged for serving his Master.

When Henry the 8th. was told the Bishops resolve, to accept of the Cardinals
Hat, if the Pope sent it to him: The King said; Yea, is he yet so lusty? Well,
let the Pope send him a Hat when he will, Mother of God, he shall wear it on
his shoulders then, for I will leave him never a head to set it on.

Cardinal Poole says of Bishop Fisher (in an Epistle Dedicatory to Henry the
8th.) That if an Ambassador had been to be sent from earth to heaven, there
could not among all the Bishops and Clergy so fit a man be chosen as he.

A foreign Ambassador, some 200 years since, coming to Durham, addressed
himself first to the high and sumptuous Shrine of St. Cuthbert, If thou be a
Saint, pray for me. Then coming to the plain, low, and little Tomb of Saint Bede, Because, said he, thou art a Saint, good Bid pray for me.

Richard the ^d. said no less spightfully than falsely of the Woodvills
(brethren to the Wife of his brother King Edward the 4th. by whom they were
advanced) That many were made noble, who formerly were not worth a noble.

One asked which was the best Edition of St. Augustine? To whom this answer was
given (generally true of all ancient Authors) Even that Augustine which is
least corrected.

There is a tradition of King Henry the 8ths. fool, coming into the Court, and
finding the King transported with an unusual joy, boldly asked of him the cause
thereof: To whom the King answered; It was because the Pope had honored him
with a style more eminent than any of his Ancestors. O good Harry (quoth the
fool) let thou and I defend one another, and let the faith alone to defend it
self.

The Lady Katherine, King Henry the 8ths. divorced Wife, was wont to say, She
accounted no time lost, but what was laid out in dressing of her.

Once an Eloquent Orator, free only of words, being otherwise extremely
covetous, made a large and elegant Oration in Latin* to persuade others
bountifully to contribute to a proper object of charity, whilst he himself
would not part with one penny to that purpose. To whom one of his Audience
(though far his inferior in Eloquence) made this sharp but short return: Qui
suadet; sua det. Let him who seeks to persuade others, give something of his
own.

Henry the 5th. having born away the Crown, supposing his Father had been dead;
when his Father used these words, How I came by it, and what right I have unto
it, God knows: He said, I am to receive it from you, as your next heir; and
howsoever you came by it, I will keep the possession of it by the sword,
against all mine enemies.

When Gowry was led to the Tower, a friend of his told him, Ah, my Lord, I am
sorry you had no more wit. Tush (quoth he) thou know not what thou say,
when saw thou a fool come hither?

When the Romans had nominated Titus Manlius Torquatus to be Consul, he
alleging the infirmity of his eyes, refused the honor, and said* He should
bring in a very ill and pernicious example, if he should undertake to govern
the Commonwealth with other men's eyes.

Charles the 9th. King of France, offered to the Prince of Conde his choice,
whether he would go to Mass, or choose perpetual banishment, or imprisonment?
What, replied he? to go to Mass, is simply a sin, therefore I will never
choose that; but to choose either perpetual banishment, or imprisonment, that I
cannot do, for then I should imply a certain guiltiness in my self; but it is
in your power, O King, to inflict which you please, and I am ready to suffer.

When Dionysius presented three whores before Aristippus, bidding him make
choice of them: He said, That Paris had such bad success for choosing one of
that kind, that he would never make choice of one of the three.

A certain Scholar amongst the Jews, asked one of the Rabbis, his Master,
Whether he might read any of the humane Writers, or not? He gave him this
Answer: You may read them, provided you read them neither day nor night.

Apelles, when his boy showed him a painted Table, and told him that it was
done in haste: He answered, He might have spared to tell him so, for the work
sufficiently showed it.

Luther said, The Cardinals were like Foxes, sweeping the house with their
tails, raising more dust than they cleansed.

Mr. Greenham answered one that spoke somewhat in his own disparagement: Oh
(said he) why do you praise your self so much?

Espenceus says of the Bishops in the Council of Trent; They were learned in
their assistants.

Du Mouline said of Roniface his Extravagants, They will do well with a sword
in hand.

The Roman General said of a recruited Army of Enemies, That those African
Nations, mustered under several names, were but the same men whom they had
formerly beaten under the notion of Carthaginians.

When a Roman Senator asked the Carthaginian Ambassador, How long the Peace
should last? That (says he) will depend on the Conditions you give us, If Just
and Honorable, they will hold for ever; but if otherwise, no longer than till
we have power to break them.

Batton Desidiale, who moved the people of Dalmatia to rebel against the Romans
(seeing them oppressed too much with tributes and exactions) making such sharp
war against them, as Tyberius the Emperor asked him on a time, why he had
caused the people to take Arms? To whom he answered b^dly, That the Romans were
the cause thereof; for they, in sending them shepherds with good dogs to
preserve them, they had sent them wolves which devoured them.

The Emperor Maximilian the 2d. could not endure that War should be made for
Religion; and was wont to say, That it was a deadly sin to seek to force men's
consciences, the which belongs to God only.

At the Treaty for delivery of the Town of Antwerp, the Hollanders insisting
upon explaining the word, scandal, etc. the Duke of Parma said: Can you not do
as the Countryman did at Rome, who passing along the streets before an Ecce
homo (which is the figure of the representation which Pilate made of our
Savior Jesus Christ unto the people) having made reverence, and passing on, he
bethought himself that Pilate might attribute this honor unto himself;
wherefore turning and putting off his hat again, He said, It is to the Christ,
not to the Pilate.

Pieresk us, the famous Frenchman, was wont to say, That whosoever seeks after
the uncertain good things of this world, should think and resolve, that he
gathers as well for thieves, as for himself.

Plato says, That the Laws of Necessity are so inevitable, that the gods
themselves cannot alter them.

Caracalla having miserably impoverished the people, his Mother reproved him:
To whom he showing his naked sword, replied, As long as I have this, I will not
want.

Aurelian demanding how he might govern well? Was answered by a great
Personage: You must be provided with iron and gold; iron to use against your
enemies, and gold to reward your friends.

The Caliph of Babylon demurring to give the Ambassador of Almerick (King of
Jerusalem) his hand bare, but gave it him in his glove. To whom the resolute
Earl of Caesarea said: Sir, truth seeks no holes to hide it self; Princes that
will hold Covenants, must deal openly and nakedly; give us therefore your bare
hand, we will make no bargain with your glove.

Lewis King of France, going the second time to the Holy Land, passing by
Avignon, some of the City wronged his Soldiers; wherefore his Nobles desired
him to besiege the City, the rather, because it was suspected that therein his
Father was poisoned. To whom Lewis most Christianly: I come not out of France
to revenge my own quarrels, or those of my Father or Mother, but injuries
offered to Jesus Christ.

Lewis severely punished blasphemies, searing their lips with an hot iron. And
because by his command it was executed upon a great rich Citizen of Paris, some
said, He was a Tyrant. He hearing it, said before many: I would to God, that
with searing my own lips, I could banish out of my Realm all abuse of Oaths.

It was the Speech of Gustavus Adolphus, but three days before his death: Our
affairs (says he) answer our desires; but I doubt God will punish me for the
folly of the people, who attribute too much unto me, and esteem me as it were
their God; and therefore he will make them shortly know and see I am but a man.
He be my witness, it is a thing distasteful unto me: And whatever befall me, I
receive it as from his divine will; only in this I rest fully satisfied, that
he will not leave this great enterprise of mine imperfect.

Hormisda being asked what he thought of Rome? Said, He took contentment in
this only, that he had now learned, how even there also men are mortal.

Socrates, appointed to suffer death, would learn to sing: And being asked what
good it would do him, seeing he was to die the next day? He answered thus: Even
that I may depart out of this life, learning more than I knew before.

Themistocles, after a Battle fought with the Persians, espying a pair of
bracelets, and a collar of gold, lying on the ground, Take up those things
(quoth he, speaking to one of his company that stood near unto him) thou art
not Themistocles.

A Jew being turned Turk, soon after, buying of grapes of another Turk, fell at
variance with him about weighing the grapes; from words they fell to blows, and
the Jew-Turk beat the other, which he endured very patiently, to encourage him
(as it seemed) in his new Religion. Soon after another Jew came to the Turk who
had been beaten, and demanded of him why he suffered himself to be so abused?
Who answered, You shall beat me as much, if you will turn Musulman. So zealous
are they to win Proselytes.

Philip the 2d. King of Spain was devoted to his Religion in so intense a
degree, that he would often say, If the Prince his Son were an Heretic, or
Schismatic, he would himself find fuel to burn him.

The Chyrurgeons being lancing his knee one day, the Prince his Son asked him,
Whether it did not pain him much? He answered, My sins pain me much more.

Reading a letter that brought him the news of the loss of his Fleet in 88. He
said (without the least motion, or change of countenance) Welcome be the will
of God; I sent my Cousin, the Duke of Medina, to fight with men, not with the
Elements.

He used to have a saying often in his mouth: Time and I will challenge any two
in the world.

Bias being demanded by a wicked man, what was piety? He was silent: The other
asking the reason of his silence: I answer not (says he) because you enquire
after that which nothing concerns you.

It was the sentence of Cleobolus: Do good to your friend, that he may be more
your friend; to your enemy, that he may become your friend.

To one who reproved Anaxagoras, for not taking care of his Country: Wrong me
not, said he, my greatest care is my Country. Pointing to the Heavens.

Portugal being revolted, the Conde D' Olivares came smiling to the King (
Philip the 4th.) saying, Sir, I pray you give me las albricias to hansel the
good news; for now you are more absolute King of Portugal than ever, for the
people have forfeited all their privileges by this Rebellion: ^esides, the
Estate of the Duke of Briganza, with all his Accomplices, are yours by right of
Confiscation; so that you have enough to distribute among your old loyal
servants by way of reward.

Attabali^a, a wild Pagan King* when he heard that his Kingdom was given by the
Pope to the King of Spain: Surely (said he) that Pope must be an egregious
fool, or some unjust and impudent tyrant, that will undertake to bestow other
men's possessions so freely.

An Indian being to die, was persuaded by a Franciscan Friar to turn Christian,
and then he should go to heaven. He asked, Whether there were any Spaniards in
heaven? Yes, said the Friar, it is full of them. Nay, then (said he) I had
rather go to hell, than have their company.

It was an excellent saying of Herod the Sophist, when he was pained with the
Gout in his hands and feet: When I would eat (said he) I have no hands; when I
would go, I have no feet; but when I must be pained, I have both hands and feet.

John, King of Hungary, used oftentimes to say, That the favor and love of
valiant men, gotten by bounty and courtesy, was the best treasures of a
Prince, for that courteous and thankeful men did oftentimes, in some one worthy
piece of service, plentifully repay whatsoever had been bestowed upon them; as
for such as were unthankeful, they did, to their shame, bear the testimony of
another man's virtue.

After the Victory of Lepanto, one of the chief of the Turkish prisoners,
hearing it compared to the loss of Cyprus, said: That the Battle lost, was unto
Selymus, as if a man should shave his beard, which would ere long grow again;
but the loss of Cyprus was unto the Venetians as the loss of an arm, which once
cut off, could never be again recovered.

A Countryman in Spain, coming to an Image inshrin'd, the extraction and first
making whereof he could well remember; and not finding from the same that
respectful usage which he expected: You need not (quoth he) be so proud, for I
have known you from a Plum-tree.

A Persian in England attending on the Ambassador, anno 1626. who perceiving
wealthy people in London, in the time of the plague, tumultuously posting to
their Country-houses: What (says he) have the Englishmen two Gods, the one for
the City, and the other for the Country?

Frederick, Burgrave of Noremberg (which he obtained of the Emperor Sigismond,
for his many good Services) making his Will, he intended to give that charge to
his second Son Frederick; and acquainting his eldest Son John, (who was a
contemplative man) answered: I did always think that Frederick had been more
dear to you than my self, which did somewhat grieve me; but now, dear Father, I
will change my opinion, and love and honor you, who by your last Will bequeath
rest to me, and cares to him.

Caesar was counseled to have a guard always about him. Whereto he answered:
That he would have none; for he would rather die once, than live continually in
jealousy and fear.

After his Victory in Spain, against Pompey's Sons (considering the danger he
had been in) he used to say, That only that day he fought for his life, and in
all other Battles, ever for honor and victory.

When the Captains and Soldiers would have given Valentinian a companion and
equal in the Empire, He told them: It was in your hands, and in your pleasure,
when I was not Emperor, to give me the government and command of the Empire;
but now, that I have the government, and am in possession thereof, it is no
part of your charge, neither ought you to intermeddle therein, for that it is
my charge only.

Valentinian the 2d. caused Ecius his General against Atila to be slain, having
some suspicion of him; but demanding of Proximus, a discreet and noble Roman,
Whether he had not followed the best and most profitable Counsel, by putting
Ecius to death? He answered: Whether the Emperor has put Ecius to death with,
or without reason, I dare not determine; but this I dare affirm, that by
killing him, thou have with thy own left hand cut off thy right.

The Emperor Henry the 4th. having slain his Competitor Rodulph, whose servants
going about to bury the body of their deceased Lord, with the Ensigns and
Ornaments of the Emperor, some asked of the Emperor Henry, Wherefore he
suffered Rodulph to be buried with such honor, seeing he was a Tyrant, and his
enemy? Whereto he answered: I would to God that all mine enemies were like
Rodulph, buried with the Ornaments and Ensigns of Emperors.

David Game, one of the bravest and most judicious Soldier of his time, being
sent by Henry the 5th. to make an estimate of the number of the French Army
(which infinitely exceeded the number of the English) went to the top of an
hill, and seeing all the Champion covered with Tents, and blazing with fires,
brought word back, That there were enough of them to be slain, enough to be
taken prisoners, and enough to be made run away.

A Kentish Knight, having spent a great Estate at Court, and brought himself to
one Park, and a fine house in it, was yet ambitious to entertain the Queen at
it; and to that purpose had new painted his gates, with a Coat of Arms, and
Motto, over-written thus, OIA VANITAS in great golden letters, the Treasurer
Burleigh offering to read it, desired to know of the Knight what he meant by
OIA? who told him it stood for Omnia: The Lord replied: Sir, I wonder, having
made your Omnia so little as you have, you notwithstanding make your Vanitas so
large.

The Philospher, when he saw a vain proud Gull, He wished (he said) that all
his friends were but such as that man thought himself, and all his enemies such
as he was.

Epiphanius having stayed long at Constantinople, and being to take ship to
return home again, he said: He was leaving three great things, a great City, a
great Palace, and great Hypocrisy.

Bishop Andrews, whom no man will envy the reputation of one of the greatest
Clerks in his Age, when a plain man came seriously to him, and asked his
opinion concerning an obscure passage in the Revelation: Answered: My friend, I
am not come so far.

Henry the 4th. King of France, used to say; That in his Kingdom he observed
there was a double tribute used to be paid: One to the King, the other to his
Officers; but the first was made intolerable by the second.

Tierceline, a Knight of very ancient Extraction, observing in his time, the
sale of Honors and Offices, nay, the highest Dignity of all, which is St.
Michaels Order, was prostant for money: He said; The Order of St. Michael was
become a Collar now for every Ass.

Robert, Duke of Normandy, when he was going to the Holy Sepulcher, being met
by one of his own Subjects, as he was mounted upon a great Saracens back; and
being much tired, he said: Commend me to all in Normandy, and tell them, I am
going to heaven upon the Devils back.

It was a witty saying of King James, when he was only King of Scotland, when
he received a Caveat from his Godmother Queen Elizabeth of England, to take
heed of the Spanish Fleet; He answered: For his part he desired but one request
of the Spaniard, such a one as that Polyphemus had promised Ulysses, that when
he had devoured others, he would swallow him last of all.

After the loss of Calais, an English Captain, having trussed up his bag and
baggage, to go for England, as he was going out of the gates, in a jeering
way, was asked, O Englishmen, when will ye back again to France? The Captain,
with a sad and serious countenance, answered: When the sins of France are
greater than the sins of England, then will the English return to France.

When one told Tyberius the Emperor, of some aspersions that were cast abroad
upon him; He answered: We are not angry that there are some who speak ill of
us; it is enough that we are in such a condition, that no body can do us any
ill.

Two Persian Ambassadors were employed to Pope Urban the 5th. who being
admitted, and desired to deliver their Embassage as succinctly as they could,
in regard of the Popes indisposition; yet they made a long tedious Oration,
which did disquiet his Holiness, as it was observed by the Auditors; the first
Ambassador having at last concluded, the second subjoyned very wittily, saying:
We have this moreover given to us in charge, that if you will not condescend to
our demands, this my Colleague must repeat his Speech again, and make some
additions to it. The Pope was so much taken with this, that he presently
dismissed both of them very well satisfied for the business they came about.

A Gentleman, who in a Duel was rather scratcht than wounded, sent for a
Chyrurgeon, who having opened the wound, charged his man with all speed to
fetch such a salve from such a place in his Study. Why (said the Gentleman) is
the hurt so dangerous? Oh yes (answered the Chyrurgeon) if he returns not in
post-haste, the wound will cure it self, and so I shall lose my Fee.

A notable fellow, and a soldier to Alexander, finding his first admission to
be the greatest difficulty, put feathers into his nose and ears, and danced
about the Court in an Antique fashion, till the strangeness of the Show brought
the King himself to be a Spectator. Then this mimick throwing off his disguise;
Sir (said he to the King) thus I first arrive at your Majesty's notice in the
fashion of a Fool, but can do you service in the place of a wise man, if you
please to employ me.

A man full of words, who took himself to be a grand wit, made his brag that he
was the leader of the discourse in what company soever he came; and none, said
he, dare speak in my presence, if I hold my peace. No wonder, answered one, for
they are all struck dumb at the miracle of your silence.

When once a Gentleman admired how so pithy, learned, and witty a Dedication
was matched to a flat, dull, foolish Book: In truth, said another, they may be
well matched together, for I profess they are nothing a kin.

A Gentleman traveling in a mysty morning, asked of a shepherd what weather it
would be? It will be (says the shepherd) what weather shall please me: And
being requested to express his meaning: Sir, says he, it shall be what weather
pleases God, and what weather pleases God, pleases me.

A rich man told a poor man, that he walked to get a stomach for his meat: And
I, (said the poor man) walk to get meat for my stomach.

A rich landed Fool, whom a Courtier had begged, and carried about to wait on
him, coming with his Master to a Gentleman's house, where the picture of a fool
was wrought in a fair suit of Arras, cut the picture out with a penknife; and
being chidden for so doing. You have more cause, said he, to thank me; for if
my Master had seen the picture of the fool, he would have begged the hangings
of the King, as he did my lands.

When the standers by comforted a natural which lay on his deathbed, and told
him that four proper fellows should carry his body to the Church: Yea (quoth
he) but I had rather by half go thither my self.

One braved a Gentleman to his face, that in skill and valor he came far
behind him: It Is true (said the other) for when I fought with you, you ran away
before me.

Sir Francis Drake, riding within the Road of Port-Rico, a shot from the Castle
entered the Steerage of the Ship, took away the stool from under him as he sat
at supper, wounded Sir Nicholas Clifford and Brute Brown to death. Ah! dear
Brute (said Drake) I could grieve for thee, but now is no time for me to let
down my spirits.

One walking in London-streets, met a gallant, who cried to him a pretty
distance beforehand, I will have the wall. Yea (answered he) and take the
house too, if you can but agree with the Landlord.

It was a mannerly answer which a young Gentleman gave to King James, when he
asked him what kin he was to such a Lord of his name? Please your Majesty, said
he, my elder brother is his Cousin-german.

When one, being an Husbandman, challenged kindred of Robert Grosthead Bishop
of Lincoln, and thereupon requested the favor of him to bestow an Office on
him. Cousin, (quoth the Bishop) if your Cart be broken, i will mend it, if your
Plough old, i will give you a new one, and Seed to sow your Land; but an
Husbandman I found you, and an Husbandman I Will leave you.

Arminius meeting Baudius one day disguised with drink, he told him, Tu Baudi
dedecoras nostram Academiam: Et tu Armini (answered he) nostram Religionem:
Thou Baudius disgracest our Universitie; and thou Arminius our Religion.

Henry the 4th. of France, being troubled with a fit of the Gout, and the
Spanish Ambassador coming then to visit him, and saying he was sorry to see
his Majesty so lame, He answered: As lame as I am, if there were occasion, your
Master the King of Spain, should no sooner have his foot in the stirrup, but he
should find me on horsback.

King James asking the Lord Keeper Bacon, what he thought of a French
Ambassador, who had then lately had his Audience? He answered, That he was a
tall proper man. His Majesty replied, but what think you of his headpiece? Is
he a proper man for the Office of an Ambassador? Sir, said Bacon: Tall men are
like high houses of four or five stories, wherein commonly the uppermost room
is worst furnished.

Lewis the 9th. who, in the Catalogue of the French Kings, is called St. Lewis,
was Baptized in the little Town of Poyssy; and after his return from Egypt,
and other places against the Saracens, being asked by what Title he would be
distinguished from the rest of his Predecessors after his death? He answered,
That he desired to be called Lewis of Poyssy. Reply being made, That there were
diverse other places and Cities of Renown, where he had performed brave
Exploits, and obtained famous Victories, therefore it was more fitting that
some of those places should denominate him. No, said he, I desire to be called
Lewis of Poyssy, because there I got the most glorious Victory that ever I had;
for there I overcame the Devil: Meaning that he was Christened there.

Don Beltran de Rosa, being to marry a rich Labradors (a Yeomans) daughter,
which was much importuned by her Parents to the match, because their Family
should be thereby ennobled, he being a Cavalier of St. Jag^: The young Maid
having understood that Don Beltran had been in Naples, and had that disease
about him, answered wittily: Truly, Sir, To better my blood, I will not hurt my
flesh.

It was the answer of Vespasian to Apollonius, desiring entrance and access for
Dion and Euphrates, two Philosophers: My gates are always open to Philosophers,
but my very breast is open unto thee.

It is reported of Cosmo de Medici, that having built a goodly Church, with a
Monastery thereunto annexed, and two Hospitals, with other monuments of Piety,
and endowed them with large Revenues, as one did much magnify him for these
extraordinary works; he answered: It Is true, I employed much treasure that way;
yet when I look over my Leiger-book of accounts, I do not find that God
Almighty is indebted to me one penny, but I am still in the arrear to him.

It was a brave generous saying of a great Armenian-Merchant, who having
understood how a vessel of his was cast away, wherein there was laden a rich
Cargazon upon his sole account, he struck his hand upon his breast, and said:
My heart, I thank God, is still afloat, my spirits shall not sink with my ship,
nor go an inch lower.

Sir Edward Herbert being Ambassador in France, there happened some classings
between him and the great French Favorite Luynes; whereupon he was told that
Luynes was his enemy, and that he was not in a place of security there: Sir
Edward gallantly answered, That he held himself to be in a place of Security
wheresoever he had his sword by him.

FINIS.
Faenestra in Pectore. OR, FAMILIAR LETTERS. By THO. FORDE.

Quid melius desidiosus agam! --

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham at the Black Bear
in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North Door, 1660.

To the Reader.
Reader,
THe witty Lucian brings in Momus, quarrelling at the Masterpieces which the
gods had made; and the only fault he found with Man, was, That he had not a
window to look into his breast. For this reason, I call this Packet of Letters
Fenestra in Pectore; Letters being the best Casements, whereby men disclose
themselves. Judicium fit per Brachium, say the Physicians; and I know no better
Interpreter of the Heart, than the hand; especially in Familiar Letters,
whereby friends mingle souls, and make mutual discoveries of, and to one
another. The pen, like the pulse, discovers our inward condition; if it become
faint, or intermitting, like the passing bell, it gives notice of the decay, if
not the departure of friendship; which is the soul of humane Society.

For these, I have no better Apology than their publication their impudence (if
it be so) bespeaking their innocence. They desire to please all, to injure
none. If you find some things in them that appear not calculated for the
Meridian of the present times, know, that they are left but to show what the
whole piece might have been, had my time and the times accorded; they might
then perhaps have given you some remarks of the miracles of our age, But the
Dutch Proverb tells me, Who brings himself into needless dangers, dies the
Devils martyr.

Nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse loquutum.

And I very well remember that notable Apothegme of the famous (though
unfortunate) Sir W. ^^leigh: Whosoever shall tell any great man, or Magistrate,
that he is not just; the General of an Army, that he is not valiant; and great
Ladies, that they are not fair; shall never be made a Counselor, a Captain,
or a Courtier.

Thou will say, it may be, I had little to do to publish my follies to the
world, and I am contented thou should think so, if it may pass for my
Apology, That I had little else to do. If it be a crime, the number of
offenders in this kind, is enough to authorize the fact, and turn the guilt
into a pardon, if not a passport.

For they who write, because all write, have still,

That excuse for writing, and for writing ill.

At this time I shall use no other, nor trouble thee any farther (Reader) when
I have subscribed the Author,

Thy Friend and Servant, T. F.

Familiar Letters.
To Mr. T. C.
Sir,
AT my arrival here, I find all out of order, though abounding with orders.
The King and Queen are departed, which makes us all dead* for what cause I
cannot tell you, unless it were for fear of the arrival of a stranger to this
Kingdom, and one that has been long since banished from hence: Nor durst she
appear now, but that it is Parliament-time. She was landed at Westminster by the
rout of Watermen, when they frighted away the Bishops commig to the House of
Commons door, it was put to the Vote, Whether she should come in or no? The
better part suspecting by ^^r habit it was Rebellion (they having seen her
before in foreign parts) would not admit her: But the Major part carried it in
the Affirmative, and the five Members were appointed to entertain her; which
they, did, and some say, she was placed in the Speakers Chair. She came not in
the Lords House, they could not Brook it; but I dare Say she had a Conference
with some of them in the Painted Chamber. Her Lodgings are provided in the
City, where she goes attired (as necessary) with a fair new cloak of Religion,
a Scotch Bonnet, a French Doublet, and Coats like Dutchmens Slops; her hair
red, like an Irishmans; neither Bands nor Cuffs, for she indures no Linen for
spite of Lawn Sleeves, unless a two or three Night-caps, because they are of
Holland. You would wonder to see in what droves our Citizens flock after her,
did you not know it is their nature, after strangers. But I Will follow her no
farther, lest you suspect me for one of her followers, who am, Sir,

Your Loyal Friend.

To Mr. T. C.
Sir.
THe Fire is now broken out of the House, and the sparks of sedition fly about
the City, being blown by the long-winded lungs of some Pulpeteers. Here want
not seditious Sheba's to blow the Trumpet, and as a Preludium, here is an hot
skirmish of Pens, but the Kings seems to excel them, as much as an Eagles wing
a Goose quill. The Women and Maids to espouse the quarrel, bring in their
Thimbles, Rings, and Bodkins, with as much zeal as the Israelites did their
Jewels to making of their Golden Calf. Such a tide of Plate every day ebbs and
flows at Guild Hall, that the Roman Emperor who swam in wine, had he enjoyed
this, might have sailed in an Ocean of Gold and Silver. They have exercised
their hands and Pens so long, till their Arms begin to be engaged, and it is
thought it may prove a General Engagement. I can go no farther for the Press,
but must here remain, Sir,

Wholly at your disposal,

To Mr. R. R.
My worthy friend,
I Received your Letter, wherein Love and Friendship seem to our-vie each
other; and which is predominant, were not easy to determine. Whereat, how I
was transported with joy, you may easier guess than I express. For those
unmerited Encomiums you so liberally put upon me, I conceive you rather thereby
instruct me what I should be, than tell me what I am. Or else, you looked on
those poor m^tes with the Multiplying-glass of friendship. Your offer to
continue this Literal correspondence, I willingly accept, and was never so ill
bred as to neglect such a benefit, when proffered. Willingly shall I exchange my
glass for your Gold: yet how mean soever my expressions may be; you shall find
them richly quilted with Love, which has long since knit my affections to your
virtues*

Nec si surgat c^ntimanus Gygas,
-- divellet unquam.
The Giant with his hundred hands,
Shall not untie those silken bands,
Which bind me fast to your commands,
Concerning the Books you wrote for, I cannot but admire you should not have
received them, since I delivered them to the same Carrier that brought you my
Letter. They set out together, however my letter out-strip't them in speed, but
I wonder not, that being winged with love and desire to visit that breast,
which the Muses and Graces emulate to make their Habitation. I may not forget
to remember my respects to your Brother, and Mr. P. and to assure you, that a
letter from either of them would be very acceptable; and the rather, though you
tell me my friends are all lame, that they are not ^ame friends. This is the
desire of

Sir, your and their Friend and Servant, T. F*

To Mr. J. A.
Sir,
I know you will much wonder at this seeming Solecisme, and I wonder as much at
the cause thereof. Having found the truth of the former part of the verse, that
vox audita perit -- I am bold to make an experiment of the latter, and try --
Si litera scripta manebit. Since words, like running messengers, have the fate
to have their errand forgot as soon as they are gone, may this serve as a more
constant Leiger, to whisper in your ears, that he who was so bold to request
that small courtesy of you, was emboldned thereto by a consideration, that he
was still, as you were once pleased to style him, your Friend. I protest, Sir,
in that confidence I so long importuned you, that I was ashamed to appear to
you again with the like request. And yet, desirous to see that poor brat of my
own brain, I resolved to make use of this Proxy, the rather, because (you
know) Literae non erubescunt. Sir, I readily believe that your occasions are
great; yet, if you please to make truce with your time, but so long as you may
look that poor paper, I will engage the utmost of my abilities to make you a
requital; and if you doubt of my ability, 'twill be a work of charity in you to
forgive me.

In Solomon's Temple there was an outer Court, into which strangers were
admitted; and an inner Court, where only Jews were to assemble; and the
Sanctum Sanctorum, where only the High Priest might enter. Give me leave to
tell you, that though you shut me out of the Sanctum Sanctorum of your
Friendship, nor will admit me into the inner Court of your Familiars, you shall
not exclude me from the outward Court of your acquaintance. And in this resolve
he rests, that is Sir,

What, or how you please to call him beside T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
My Real Friend,
I Received your welcome Letter, and as welcome Token: For the one I send you
an Answer, though not answerable; but to the other, I forbear to retaliate,
lest I should thereby turn your Gift into a Bargain.

Sir, I am very glad to hear that you receive your due money for your spiritual
bread, although, I fear, it is not the Tenth of your desert, knowing that you
cannot feed them but with fine Flour. And although I would not rob your Family
of their Dimensum, yet shall I hope you will not deny me a continuance of those
witty crumbs that fall from their Table. Nor can I be so far mine own enemy, as
not to think of yours, as Tully did of Atticus his Epistles, that the longest
are the best. And assure your self, as Cato said, He never knew an old man
forget where his gold was. My Fancy often turns Forrester, and walks the round,
till I meet with you, when I am infinitely transported with that but imaginary
enjoyment of that person I so much delight in; the conceit of which, has driven
me into a serious consideration and search, after the wonderful force of the
Imagination. And I find, some have been killed, others preserved, merely by the
strength of their imagination. Here could I be tediously copious in as
facetious as strange stories to this purpose; but I will not, with Phormio,
read a Lecture to Hannibal. It shall suffice me, to hope that such Imagies of
the brain, are no breach of the second Commandment: Nor yet am I of the belief
of that Priest, that was fully persuaded, That nothing was false that was
printed. Whatever be, I am sure this is not, that I am

Sir, your affectionate Friend, T. F.

To Mrs. B.
Mistress,
ALthough unknown (but by your courtesy) I am bold hereby to salute you, and
have sent this poor paper to kiss your hands, who have so kindly provided for
mine; not doubting but you will as much admire at these rude lines, as I did at
your kinder token. I call it yours, and therefore hold my self obliged by the
laws of Gratitude, to return you thanks. And, lest that should be too poor a
requital for so great a favor, be pleased to accept of this small token; for I
hate to be ungrateful, and am loath to be in debt, either i^ ^oyn or courtesy.
And, that I may not part those whom God has united, I must not forget to
return like thanks to your loving Companion, as knowing it was from your
Conjunction this Influence proceeded. May your Lives be as Lines parallal,
knowing no date till they both meet in our common Center of happiness. But I
fear to be tedious, time and opportunity may so propitiously befriend me, as in
some kind or other, at least, to endeavor you a larger requital: In the
interim acknowledge me

Your ready, though unknown Servant, T. F.

To Mr. B. R.
Sir,
BEing informed by our common friend N. H. that your intentions are for -- next
week, I thought it un mannerly, or rather unfriendly, not to bid you Farewell:
And I know not better how, than in the words of the Lyrick Poet to his Florus,

I bone quo virtus tua te vocat, I pede Fausto. And this not being present in
person, I am forced to do by Proxy, and with ^o in the Poet, Litera pro
verbis. I dare believe, though you go farther off, yet your affection will be
never the less; for I may justly confer on you, what one once did on Augustus,

Rarus tu quidem ad recipiendas amicitias, ad retinendas vero constantissimus.
Story tells us of two Palm Trees, growing on the two opposite banks of a River,
which notwithstanding the distance of the roots, and despite of the
intervening water, did lovingly infoliate and twine their branches* So,
notwithstanding the distance of place, our bodies are planted in, maugre all
opposition, we may entwine our branches (Letters I mean) neither (I hope) shall
any envious Catterpiller (or false friend) eat away those leaves, so long as
life remains in the root of

Sir, your unfeigned Friend, T. F.

To M. A. E.
Worthy Sir,
THe opportunity of this Bearer is sufficient importunity to me of troubling
you at this time, and your wonted ingenuity, I hope, will be my sufficient
warrant: Nay* I should be very much wanting to myself, and that respect I owe
you, if I should not. To let you know, that you have not sown the seed of your
favors in an altogether barren soil, as does he that confers a benefit on an
ungrateful person. But it is my grief, that the crop of my abilities falls so
much short of your desert, and my desire. To tell you any News, were but to
put you in mind of those miseries which you are already too sensible of; yet,
lest you should expect it, be pleased to understand, there was another message
came lately from the K. to the H. H. who have voted an answer to it; God grant
it may ^^ for Peace, the only Aqua-vitae to restore ^is fainting Kingdom. I
hope it is not yet with us, as it was once in Persia, when there was a Law made
against Peace; though I know subjects seldom draw the sword against their
Sovereign, but they throw away the scabbard. I forbear to say more, because I
know not whose hands my letter may go through; such is the misery of our Times*
that Burglary in this kind was never more practiced* nor less punished: Nay,
Lies are more tolerable now in Print, than loyal Truth in Writing: Yet fear I
not who sees and knows that I profess my self (as I am)

Sir, your devoted Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. F.
Sir,
NOt having had the happiness to see you of late, and hearing that you intend
to let the Country ingross your company, I thought good to visit you by this
silent, yet (to make it a Paradox) speaking messenger, and I had rather you
should imagine the cause; yet, if you will not, I must be bold to tell you,
that I much wonder I should all this while hear no noise of my Viol. Seriously,
Sir, I had such a confidence of your reality to your friends (in which number I
esteem my self one) that I could not believe the contrary, though it were
strongly instigated to ^e. And Sir, whether your usage of me has been
answerable to my expectation of you, I leave your self to judge. I cannot
imagine that you should think I would sell my -- for the mending or lend it,
with an intention to lose it. I should be very sorry, that that which was made
for Harmony, should be an Instrument of Discord between friends; it lies in
your power to prevent it: I am willing to believe you will; give not, I pray,
my good opinion of you the lie, because I desire to remain,

Sir, your Friend, T. F.

To Mr. J. A.
Sir,
SInce your departure, the cruel Fates, intending thereby to make me truly
miserable, have robbed me of a very friend, and that by the irrecoverable hand
of Death; and, as if they intended me the sole object of their envy, have
protracted, if not put off the performance of your promised courtesy; so that
now I am left alone, solitarily pondering the complaint of old Erasmus:
Anicorum meorum, alii moriuntur, alii mutant animum. Me thinks I am deprived of
all my Senses, since I can neither see you, nor hear, either of, or from you.
Knowing not the reason, I am ready to believe the best, and have Charity (which
Erasmus in his time compared to a Friars Cowle, because it covers a multitude
of sins) enough to hide all surmises, till Time, the son of Truth, shall
discover all things in their perfect colors. Me thinks I have the fortune of
some children, who having lost one arrow, shoot another after it, hoping
thereby to find it, and not seldom lose both: However you shall not Him, that
will resolve to continue

Your entire Friend, T. F.

To Mr. N. C.
Sir,
I Have sent you as many Letters, as there are Graces, and now, I hope, I may
lawfully desist, and I have the old rule for my warrant: Si ter pulsanti nemo
respondit, abito. I have long looked, and attentively listened for that happy
word, which should at once put a period to your silence, and mine expectation.
Happily you may thereby tacitly instruct me of the unwelcomness of my too
forward scribbling; but I shall end with this, lest I fall under the lash of the
Italian Proverb: Chi scrive a chi non risponde, o e matto, o ha di bisognia: He
that writes to one that answers not, either he is a fool, or has need of him.
Your silent action makes me remember the conceit of one, that going in the
street, and seeing the Sign of the Golden Cross, would lay a wager with him
that went with him, that he would make the Master of the shop (whom I very well
know) to pull down his Sign without speaking a word to him: The wager being
laid, he pulls off his his hat, and drops half a dozen legs to the Sign;
first, on one side, and then on the other; which the Master of the shop seeing,
thinking to prevent his future Superstition, suddenly pulls down his Sign,
which is now supplied with the badge of the Gilded Trumpet. Enough this time,
when I have subscribed

Yours, T. F.

To Mr. R. R.
Sir,
I Am so ambitious of continuing our ancient friendship, almost as old as our
selves, that I cannot omit the least occasion, that may ei increase or preserve
it. And although, me thinks, I hear you tell me, that my sounding on so slight
a knock, does but argue me the empter vessel, whilst you who are more full
fraught, give no answer, though with much importunity; I have no other excuse,
but to tell you, that I do it, to let you see, I had rather seem to be a
troublesome, than a forgetful friend. Truly says our English Proverb: He loves
not at all, that knows when to make an end. And the Italians are not amiss, who
say, L'amore senza fine, non ha fine. Love that has no by-end, will know no end.

For my part, I profess no other end in my affections, but your service, for
which I once gave you my Heart, and now my Hand, that the World may see whose
servant is

T. F.

To Mr. C. H.
Mr. Chapter
AS I was going to Church, to keep the Fast, your Letter encountered me, and
(as good reason) turned my Fast into a Feast; but such a one, as my Senses were
more employed on, than my Palate: It rejoiced me exceedingly to hear of that
ingenious Fl. though I expected to have heard from him before this: But I see

Non factis sequimur omnia qu^ loquimur, I am sure, Non passibus aequis.

To those Poesies you tell me of, I shall only answer them with expectation,
since the Instructor of the Art of Poetry tells me;

Nec verbum verbo, curabis reddere. And to return you something for your News,
I can only tell you this, that our streets abound with Grasshoppers silenced by
our great Hercules; and others, that look like horses thrown into a certain
River in Italy, which are consumed to the bare bones. For your desire to be
made merry, I must confess, Laeta decet laetis pascere cor^a jocis. But for you
to desire it of me, seems to be a jest it self. I doubt to be tedious, and well
know Seneca's rule, That an Epistle should not Manum legentis implere. I only
take time to subscribe my self*

Your true Friend, T. F.

To Mr. S. M. at Barbados.
Friend,
I Received your as welcome, as unexpected Letter; of which I will say, in the
words of Seneca that famous Moralist, in an Epistle to his friend Lucilius,
Exulto quoties lego Epistolam tuam, implet me bona spe: jam non promittit de
te, sed spondet. And God forbid that I should be so uncharitable, as not to
believe it: Yet, let me tell you, that without the reality of the actions, it
is but a dead letter; nay, 'twill prove a deadly, for, should you neglect to
do, what you there promise, or speak there, more than you do, that very letter
will one day rise up in judgment against you. Pardon my plainness, and think
never the worse of the Truth for my bad language; Truth may many times have bad
clothes, yet has she always a good face. It is a good mark of the moral
Philosopher, that sheep do not come to their shepherd, and show him how much
they eat, but make it appear by the fleece that they wear on their backs, and
the milk which they give. I will not wrong the sharpness of your judgment by
applying the Moral. I have read of two famous Painters, who, to show their
skill, the one drew a bunch of grapes so lively, that he cozened the Birds; the
other drew a veil so perfectly over his grapes, that he deceived the Artificer
himself: Could we draw the color of our good works never so lively, as to
cozen every mortal eye, and draw so fine a veil over our evil deeds, as to
conceit our selves into a conceit we had none, yet is there an All-seeing eye,
to whom the darkest secret is most appar^nt. Did we but truly consider this, it
could not choose but hinder us from committing those things we would be ashamed
to do in the sight of Man, which we daily do in the sight of an Omniscient
God. Therefore the advice of the Heathen Philosopher, may be made good
Christian practice, who advised to set the conceit of Cato, or like Grave man,
always before us, to keep us from doing what might mis-befit their presence.
It is a Character of the wicked man, drawn by the Divine hand, that in all his
ways he sets not God before his eyes: There is also another witness within us,
that can neither be bribed, not blinded. O te miserum, si contemnis hunc
testem! O have a care to offend that Bird in the breast, that must one day
sing, either your joyful Elogie, or more doleful Dirge. Camd^n our English
Historiographer, tells us of a place in Stafordshire, called Wotton, in so
doleful a place, under the barren Hill Weaver, that it is a common Proverb of
the neighbors,

Wotton under Weaver,
Where God came never.
But alas! there is no such place on Earth to be found; yet can I tell a place
where his pure Spirit abhors to enter, namely, into a person contaminated and
defiled with sin, and thereby made the harbor of Satan, and hatred of the most
High.

Whereas you tell me you are fallen to labor, let me comfort you with this, that
it is as universal as unavoidable a Fate laid on us by the mouth of Truth. Man
is born to labor, as the sparks to fly upward: As if Man and Labor were
Termini Convertibiles. But that you take more pleasure now in Labor, than you
did before in your Pleasure, it much comforts me, assuring me that you are now
sensible of that which the Romans taught by placing Angina, the goddess of
sorrow and pain, in the Temple of Volupeia, the goddess of Pleasure; as if that
pain and sorrow, were the necessary consequences of pleasure: Whereas on the
contrary, Goodness is like the Image of Diana, Pliny speaks of: Intrantes,
tristem; Euntes, exhilerantem. How wretched therefore is their condition, that
have their portion in this life! Well may we be strangers in this worldly
Egypt, so we may be inhabitants hereafter of the Heavenly Canaan. And you, and
I may say in the words of Seneca, Satis multam temporis sparsimus, incipiamus
nunc in vasa colliger^: We have spent time enough already, and it is high time
now to save the rest and to make the best of the remnant of our life, because
we know not how short it is. It was a wise caution of Eleazer, a Jew, who being
demanded, When it would be time to repent, and amend? Answered, One day before
death. And when the other replied, That no man knew the day of his death. Begin
then (said he) even to day, for fear of failing. Hoc proprium inter caetera
mala, hoc quoque habet, stultitia proprium, semper incipit vivere, quid est
enim turpius, quam senex vivere insipie^s. Give me leave, not to instruct you,
but to tell you what counsel I desire to practice; for it was an envious
disposition of that Musician, that would play so softly on his Harp, that none
could hear but himself. First, It Is my care not too much to indulge my body, as
knowing that those things the body inclines to most, are of the world, which is
enmity with God; and what the Spirit prompts to most, must needs be best,
because the Spirit is heavenly, and more of kin to the Deity. Honestum ei vile
est, cui corpus nimis charum est; said one, that knew well what he said: It Is
not for nothing that our inward spirit is always most sad, when our outward
man is most merry. In the second place, It Is my desie to avoid ill company,
because, as it is said of the Tyrant Mezantius, Corpora corporibus jungebat
mortua vivis. In that the Living rather putrefied by reason of the Dead, but
the Dead did not revive by the Living. Such is the nature of man says St.
Gregory, Vt quoties bonus malo conjungitur, non ex bono malus meliocriter, sed
ex malo bono contaminetur. It is a good caution therefore St. Bernard gives (in
his 48th. Sermon. in Cantic.) writing upon these words, As the Lilly among
thorns, etc. Vide (says he) quomodo caute ambulas inter spinas. I speak this
the rather, because I presume you walk there among thorns, and I know not
whether there be a place there like the street in Rome, that was called vicus
sobrius, because there was never an Alehouse in it. And, as Socrates said of
Alcibiades (that miracle of his time) when he saw him among Gallants, I fear
not Him, but his Company. Now the number of this Company, should not be a
means to make us run with them, but rather to run from them. And to this end,
it is necessary for a man to be ever resident on his Calling, lest he be turned
out of his Living, or at least of his well living, for nonresidency. Out of a
man's Calling, out of Gods Protection. It Is an Apothegme of a late Wit, That he
who counts his Calling a Prison, shall at length make a Prison his Calling. But
whither do I straggle? Me thinks I hear you say, as Queen Elizabeth once did to
an Ambassador, who made a long Oration before her in high terms, She answered
him, Expectavi Legatum, Inveni Heraldum; I expected an Ambassador, but find an
Herald: So, me thinks, I hear you say, Expectavi Epistolam, Inveni concionem. I
must confess, I might have learned so much modesty from Roscius the Roman
Orator, who was ever mute when he dined with Cato; and the Thrush never sings,
if the Nightingal be by. I might very well have spared this labor, it being
performed so well by -- yet if I have done amiss, it shall satisfy me, that I
did it to satisfy mine own conscience. Now might I relaxare animum, recreate
your mind, by making you some mirth with the discords of our Times; but truly
they appear to me a fitter subject for our tears of sorrow, than of mirth.
Assure your self, I had not thus far transgrest upon your patience, did you not
know me to be

Perfectly your Friend, T. F.

To Mr. A. E.
Sir,
THough I have not had the happiness of late to be so propitiously be-friended
by occasion as to write to you,; yet am I so confident of your wonted
ingenuitie, that you will not attribute it to any neglect of mine; which if I
were conscious to my self were so, I should judge it a crime so great, that I
should not forgive my self. But the truth is, I find more danger in the
conveying of News, than in the hearing of it: Nay, my misery is, I cannot, or
dare not at least, inform you of more than every Pamphlet can; to such a height
of suspicion are we now arrived. Besides so barren is each day of News, that
it is not worth doing penance in a sheet: yet, because you are desirous to know
(and I as willing to satisfy your desire) what is done in the Assembly and P. I
will venture to tell you in an old story. It Is this: Mr. Popham, when he was
Speaker, and the lower House had sat long, and done, in effect, nothing,
coming one day to Queen Elizabeth, She said to him, Now, Mr. Speaker, what
has passed in the lower House? He answered, If it please your Majesty, seven
weeks. You need fear no danger in this, for it is Nothing; and the Treaty is
come to as much, both Parties being not like to meet, standing still at their
former distance. This was prettily Emblem'd by two Sphaerical bodies, touching
only in Puncto with this Motto, Pungere possunt, pacificari non possunt.

Thus, Sir, you see, amidst these dusky clouds, Friendship dares mingle flames
in a Unequal, though not in a direct line. Ascertain your self of this, That as
it shall ever rejoice me to hear of your health; so it shall be my endeavor
always to be

Your unfeigned Friend, T. F.

To my Father.
Sir,
AFter the remembrance of my duty, which at all times wants not in my will,
though sometimes in my power. I lately saw Mr. M. but cannot tell you whether
with greater joy, or grief. It rejoiced me exceedingly to hear of your health,
but grieved me more to hear of my Mothers grief, for a false information, that
I was a Sectary, and a Malignant. Give me leave therefore to say something,
whereby I may at once recover her right opinion, and my reputation. And first
for the Sectary, Should I say nothing, my practice were enough to testify,
that I do as much shun their Companies, as hate their Tenants. I count them as
moles and warts, nay, wens in the face of the Body Politic, which, if not
timely lanced, will in time not only deface, but destroy our Common Mother the
Church: Neither do I love to run into those by-ways of Sects and Schisms, but
rather keep the safer road of the Churches practice. There is but one Way, one
Truth; and I account all those (not one better than another, but) all out of
that one Way, all opposites to that one Truth. I esteem them but as wild
beasts broken into the Vineyard of the Church, the hedge of our Government
being pulled up; but as nettles and weeds, (sown and watered by that envious
man) grown up to such an height, that will in time, not only o're-top, but
o'return the good corn. They are true vipers, a beast, whereof Naturalists
report, that first the she-viper biteth off the he-vipers head, and so she
conceives with young, and those young g^aw a passage through their dams belly;
so that their life is the death of both Father and Mother, as I may so speak.
This story I only relate, not apply, the Time and Times will not permit me.
But that these Vermin do daily increase, is as true as lamentable; and they go
on with that impudence, that they dare to quote Authority for their false
actions. If this be not enough to evince my integrity in this particular, I
here protest, that I am so far from falling, or leaning after any of these
ways, that I utterly abhor and detest them. I come now, to wipe off that other
aspersion of a Malignant; a term that has as much simplicity as malice in it:
For indeed, it is a name fitter for the Devil, than a Christian; nay, the
Devil, in French, is called The Malignant Spirit: And, according to the true
signification of the word in our language, it signifies one that bears malice,
or grudge to another. Now, if this be the thing is meant, I thank God, I bear
no man in the world the least grudge or spite; therefore, in that regard, I am
no Malignant: But, if this be not their meaning, for my part, I doubt of
knowing it, whilst they are ignorant of it themselves. Well, I see I must, like
children, frame a Baby of clouts to shoot at, fancy a conceit in my brain,
which I must confute. If then, by a Malignant, is meant one that opposes the
Parliament; be it known, that I never, in the least word or action, did, or
will do any thing to adopt me to be a Malignant: Or, if by it is intended such
a one, as will not run with the giddy multitude, that run before they are sent,
and are for that (with less simplicity, though as much malice, termed
Roundheads) that is, one that in ever turning, is never settled. And, indeed, I
know not how they should otherwise but wander in the Labyrinth of Errors, not
following the Cloud of the Churches practice: whereas, it is the Character of a
good man, to be like the Timber of Noah's Ark, which was (not round, but)
apiece, and would, therefore, not turn, but abide firm: If to be so, be to
be a Malignant, I care not to profess my self one. It is with men in these
Times, as I have observed in a Company of Soldiers, upon any motion, those
that are skilful and tried Soldiers, it is but taking a step with one foot,
whilst the other stand^ fast, and the motion is performed; whereas such as are
ignorant, run to and fro, perplexing themselves, and putting the whole company
out of order, before they get into theirs. So it is with us, we move not
without the word of Command, and then we shall, without molestation, face
about, if our Leaders think fit: Holding in this particular, the Politicians
rule; However we admire what is past, to submit to what is present. It were easy
to be infinite in this discourse. To shut up all, when I know better what it is
to be a Malignant, I shall be ready to give an account of my judgment and
practice. In the mean time, I beseech you to believe, that I am neither
Sectary, nor Malignant: But

Sir, your dutiful Son, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Ned,
GIve me leave to tell thee a truth in the words of that witty Martial, to his
Friend Priscus.

Cum te non nossem, dominum, regemque vocabam,
Cum been te novi, tam mihi Priscus eris.
I will not venture at a Translation, lest it should lose by it. But let me tell
thee, I suppose more friendship in that Monosyllable, than all the swelling
colors of abused Rhetoric. 'Twere a needless Tautologie, to tell thee thy
Letter was welcome to me; Diu desiderata dulcius veniunt. Thou do enhance my
value of them by their scarcity. But, for mine, alas, poor ex tempore things! I
make them as common, as they are easy; and yet am careless of my credit, that
I may not seem careless of my friend. Thou needst not beg such a trouble, that
is as certain as the Moons course. I am glad thou have got a witty Companion
there, for 'twas long since (here) turned out of the Line of Communication.
Commend me to L C. L. and tell him, his name should speak him my friend; for,
really, I am more beholding to that name, than any one I know. But I need not
go so far about, it is sufficient he is thy friend, and then he cannot choose
but be mine; for, among friends, all things are common, and why not friends
too? Really, I am so taken with that witty companion (and I know thou will not
be-lye him) that if he will honor me with his name in a piece of paper, I will
keep it as a Relick. And if I have run into an absurdity, let my fault be
excusable, in that it is in relation to that thou call Wit; and

If Cloris do at upon her face,
The fault is in her Looking-glass.
But for News, I know your eyes outstrip my pen, and, me thinks, I see thee
first look for the News at the latter end; that thou readst my Letters, like
Hebrew, backward. Yet, this time, thou will only find, what is no News, that
I am

Thine, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
REsolving, not always to act the Echo only in single Answers, to your
welcome Letters. No longer ago than the last night (my thoughts were wholly
employed upon a more pleasing object than sleep it self) in a serious
contemplation of you, my Second-self: The result of my thought, after a full
consultation, were, to visit you by a more real Proxy than my rambling fancy:
For, though I have read of a Gentleman, who, going to the Spittle, to hear one
of those annual Sermons, it seems his slownesse had shut him out of all hope
of hearing, and almost seeing the Preacher; till, remembering he had a
Perspective glass in his pocket, thereby drawing the Preacher nearer to his
sight (to prove a community of the Senses) the story tells me, he heard him
audibly. I never tried the experiment, but I dare affirm, that by the
Perspective-glass of Fancy, I have both visibly and audibly enjoyed your wished
presence. You know the old maxim is, Ubi amat, ibi animat: It Is therefore no
Paradox to affirm, that I have often been in the New Forest, (which your sweet
presence converts into a Paradise) although I was never there. But I fear, this
is no better than Crambe bis co^ta, and so nauseous, I quit it therefore, and
return to my first purpose, which was to tell you, that your last letter really
prevented my resolved intentions, which yet I am (and ever shall be) glad of,
to be thus intercepted, as professing it to be more proper to my weak pen to be
Respondent; which you will not doubt of, if you consider, that Trumpeters love
to sound near Fordy places, where the Echo uses to be most solvibly
Respondent: But I talk of an Answer, and return none.

In brief then, thus: I begin where you end, and here desire to erect an Altar
of thanks to the protecting providence, that shielded you (and in you my self)
from that first imminent, then eminent danger; as knowing the truth of that
saying, That Blessings often ravel out, for want of h^^iming by thankefulness.
I cannot speak my mind fuller, than he has done to my hand: Now, to your
desire, I cannot yet return you other answer, than that the utmost of my
endeavors were long since devoted to your commands: And for -- I expect him
daily in Town; when he is, I shall acquaint him with your intentions to him. I
hear that he is already turned Predicant; me thinks it is something too soon, to
spend his small stock of parts, which, I fear, will make him Mendicant. But I
had forgot to tell you, that I cannot but apprehend, that Providence in your
late delivery, has plainly given you a Caveat, that you, at least your Credit,
will be most safe in your own house. Prithee pardon me* if my affection make me
thus (if not too) bold, to tell th^^, that you betray that precious jewel of
your credit to the rape of every felonious tongue, which would be far more safe
in your own House. I could say more, but verbum sat, etc. Take it as the
counsel of

Your really endeared Friend, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Honest Ned,
IF there be one, whom the necessity of my Stars compel me to love, it is thee:
But besides this, I find my self entangl'd with a double tie; first, of thine
unparalled Love, as the tree; and now a gift, as the fruit of that: And, how
willingly am I imprisoned with these fetters! which, certainly if I could, I
would not break; a threefold cord is not easily cracked. Well, I acknowledge
my self, not only thy Debtor, but thy Prisoner, and count it my only Liberty.
Expect no such golden-mouthed Letter from me as yours was, nor any
silver-tongu'd Complements* Believe me, where I see most complement, I suppose
least friendship. Let me only affirm, that though our bodies are severed, our
souls still meet; though we are divided, we are not divorced; but like this
Virgin-widow, still flourish, though in the All deflowring Winter. Take it
therefore, not as a Token* but an Emblem of our Love. I presume it cannot be
unwelcome; if not for the Senders, yet for the Author, and the Subjects sake:
And for the other, if there be a Sympathy in Friendship (as I believe there is)
then cannot that be unpleasing to you, which was so superlative pleasing unto
me. However, I have aimed only at a supplying you with what (I conceive) your
Country is defective in. Sure I am, the offense cannot be great (if it be so)
the gift it sell being so small; especially from

Your fast Friend, T. F.

To Mr. R. R.
Worthy Friend,
WIth how much joy I received your exquisite Epistle, is easier for you to
imagine, than me to relate. You know me too well to expect the like Return from
me; yet shall I desire to follow you,

Tamen non passibus aequis. And to pay you your Golden Royals (if the
comparison be not too mean) with my farthing language: Yet, hoping it may be
Current among friends; for, I dare assure you, they carry the stamp of the
Heart.

My Tongue's not tip't with Complements, which be
But like green leaves to skreen Hypocrisy,
With words as false as fair. Who Fucus lays
Upon her face, It Is homeliness betrays.
Nor skill I of the powerful charms of Art,
But I can speak the Language of the Heart.
I admire others Neatness, but practice Reality, which I esteem so much the
more, as I find it less used. I think the Public* Faith has devoured all
fidelity, and the Sword cut that (supposed) indissoluble knot of friendship,
cancelled the Bond of all Obligations. Henceforth, shall they be only Names,
and succeedings Ages not know what they meant. But to your Letter, and my
Answer; which when I consider I cannot but apply that proper Speech of the deep
Putean to his Friend; Scribere ego poene impudentiam, silere tu delictum
censeas. Yet know I not of any letter that lies by me unanswered; for, I hold
it a breach of the Articles of Friendship, not to be punctual in Returns of
this Nature. If you accuse me of breach of promise, I cannot but tax you of
delay in yours; though I count this but Billingsgate policy. Proceed, then, my
Friend, and let our friendship be a Particular Exception from the General Rule
of the worlds falsehood. Our sweet Flower is transplanted to a remote soil, near
the Isle of Wight. Pardon me, if I be covetous of your learned lines, to supply
the vacuum of his absence: Nor is this covetousness unlawful; for I dare
pronounce it (in Seneca's style) Avaritia Honesta. And, hoping your fair Cham
will not disdain the silent whispers of a shallow Forde* assure your self, you
shall not hereafter complain for want of this kind of trouble: Although, to
deal ingeniously with you (as I would have my friends to deal with me) I have
so long discontinued this practice, that my pen is grown blunt, and my ink
thick: But some of your Academick Flames, may contribute much to the
sublimating of my settled fancy, which shall wholly run in Channels of your
commands: For I am

Sir, your ready Servitor, T. F.

To L. C. L
Sir,
YOu are pleased to style me your Honored Friend, which I must confess to be
too high a style for my low deserts to climb, did I not consider, that my
Honor consists only in your Honoring me with so unmerited a Title. It Is a
Maxim, Honor non est in honoranti, non in h^^^rato. Sir, I protest I intended
nothing that might occasion a blush; if it were, it was more proper for my
self: yet, having such a mirror, I was bold, against the rules of
Maiden-modesty, to look a stranger in the face. And truly, though I have no
skill in Palmistry, yet, by those fair lines of your Hand, I dare, without fear
of flattery, tell you, that Ned nothing wronged you; for, I assure you, I
discover in them a great deal of ingenuitie. But, to cast off all terms of
distance, that we may meet in a closer conjunction, believe it, Sir, in plain
English, that I love you with an implicit love; and shall count my self not a
little happy, if those seeds of friendship, sown in Winter, may flourish in the
Spring, and out-date time it self. This shall not be wanting, either in the
desires, or endeavors of

Sir, your as real as unknown Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Dear Ned,
I Should scarce believe there were such a thing in rerum natura, as what we
call a Friend, did not you come in, and convince me that you are one; and,
what is more, Mine. Go on* and let the world see, there is yet living that
flame of antique friendship, which the Ancients boast, and we despair of. I
heartily thank thee for thy last letter, though by the hand of a left handed
man-midwife it mis-carried in the delivery; and (as bearing the fate of the
Author) is gone on Pilgrimage as far as Exeter. I much lament the loss, and
should more did I not think the kinder Fates did it out of love to me, lest I
should have perished with too much joy. Have thou not heard? I am sure I have
read of many, that have been smothered with too much Happiness. Alexander, when
hearing that he was at once made Father of a Son, and Conqueror of his
Enemies, desired the gods to qualify it with some cross. It were easy to be
copious in this subject, did I not write to one, that may read to me in
History: And, truly, my last letter had the fate to be out-dated long before I
could get conveyance for it; wherein it much resembled the worm (in Pliny)
called Multipoda, or many feet, and yet has a very slow* pace. Ned, I wish
thee often here, yet am I never absent from thee: For, since that friendship
incorporated us, it is no Paradox to affirm, Hoc memorabile est, ego tu sum, tu
es ego, unanimi sumus. Neither may thou think, that distance, or cold can
sunder me, but I shall burn in friendship by an Anteperistesis. Things are now
at the Height, that we expect a sudden crack: I will not make my paper guilty
of relating any of it, you will see it in Print. What effects 'twill produce, I
will not Prophecy: But you know, The Philosopher that looked too high, fell
into the ditch. Farewell, and continue to Love

Thy constant Friend, T. F.

To M. C. F.
My Alter Ego,
MY last was in answer to yours of the 18th of September; since when, I have
been forced to recreate my fancy, with thoughts of thee my second self, as
Dido, in the Poet, did her* Aeneas:

Illum absens absentem auditque, viditque. Which I find well paraphrased to my
hand, thus:

Whilst absence severed them apart,
She saw, and heard him in her heart.
If my thoughts were so satiated with a mere what would your real Letters do?
which I know to be fraught with profitable pleasure, the perquisites of a true
Epistle: And though mine be not equal to balance yours, yet I shall endeavor
to recompense in number, what they want in weight.

Yours are rich wares, mine poor baggatels,
Yours Orient Gems, mine rugged oyster-shels.
Yet Tokens, with the true stamp, may
Be current, though of base allay.
Sir, flattery is no part of friendship; Non amo quemquam nisi offendam, said a
wise Heathen. Give me therefore leave to tell you, that you are too careless of
your credit: I hear you have thereby lost much ground in your P. affections,
which I could wish by Mr. E's* example, you would be careful of; for I can
assure you, in these times, the peoples affections are but a fickle foundation
to build ones hopes on: It Is a thousand pities, that the best ground should be
the dirtiest, and the best workmen the worst husbands; especially one of your
color, who ought to walk not only cast, but cause. You know who says, A
Ministers Doctrine is like a candle, if not guarded by the lanthorn of a
cautious life, will soon be blown out by the wind of detraction. The Egyptians
Hierogliphick God by an open eye: He is totus oculus; and I am persuaded, there
is no color so much in his eye as black* Enough of this: I am not willing to
run into the common error of the Times, to usurp Moses Chair. If my zeal to
your welfare has already committed a trespass, let it be sufficient, that it
was out of perfect friendship. It is said of Gerson (that famous Frenchman)
that he took not content in any thing so much, as in a plain and faithful
reproof of his friend: And, it is the note of that venerable Bede, that Semper
optimos sapientum ut dictum majorum auscultent, aliquando minorum. And I will
not only suffer, but thank you, to deal so with me. Concerning News, I am of
the Italians mind, That nulla nuova, is bona nuova; the least news is the best
news. Take it briefly thus: His Majesty does lay aside his own Interest
wholly, that He may (if possible) comply with his Conquerors; that I may truly
apply to him that saying of an undaunted Captain, slighting the insulting
braves of him that took him, thus: Thou hold thy Conquest great, in
overcomming me, but mine is far greater, in overcomming my self. 2. Death is
grown as insatiable a Country C. M. for he has of late swallowed all the
living creatures, men, women, dogs, cats, etc. in a whole City in Spain, not
leaving one alive to relate it. But I forgot your business. I mentioned it to
Sir Chapter who is no Orderly man, nor willing to receive it: I have mentioned it
to others, with as much earnestness as you can imagine, but the great distance
of place, makes them not meet my desires. Though I have used this (as I thought
persuasive) argument, The farther out of sight, the more safe: For I am
confident, many a man's Good Living, and not his bad life, has entitled him to a
Prison. Therefore count I you wise, in sequestring your self, to avoid a
Sequestration. Sir, I hope you will judge of my endeavors by the success, but
believe me to be

Yours as real as obliged Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Bad, wicked war. Anagr.
Honesty,
NOw must my wearied fancy undertake
A tedious task: to seek I know not where,
Whom I shall find, alas! I know not when:
Yet on I must, bound by a thread of love,
Which happily may prove a clew to guide
Me in this wide Maeandring Labyrinth.
So have I seen (as groping in the dark)
An arrow shot at random, hit the mark.
On then, my Pilgrim-pen, masked in the weeds
Of blackest sorrow; and with big swollen eyes,
Seek him thou can not see: make hills and dales
Resound with thy loud voicing of that name,
Whose Echo stands in competition with,
And far out-vies the music of the Spheres:
At whose sole sound my duller senses dance
A Galliard; but that failing, lifeless stand.
Like that strange Lake, that whilst the music sounds,
Does flow in measures; and then ebb as fast,
When that does cease: Or like the stones and trees
That danced attendance on Orpheus Harp.
Strike thou blessed Lyre, and with thy music call
My sorrow-fetter'd senses from the grave
Of lumpish grief; which Resurrection must
Only be wrought by thine all-charming pen:
Or else, as great Augustus, in a kiss,
Surrendered up his latest breath unto
His dearest Livia; thereby making her
Sole Heir to that surviving part, which long,
By transmigration, lived in her breast.
So must my starved Hopes surrender to
Those long and fierce assailants, which besiege
Me, with their troops of fears, and pale despair,
If not relieved by thy timely quill.
But fear, like to a cunning enemy,
Does labor to persuade my jealous thoughts,
That thou art not in a capacity.
Now, therefore quickly, my Terpander, come
With thy Harmonious lays, allay these stirs,
And civil broyls, in my perplexed thoughts,
For fear they mutiny, and me betray.
Delay not, now, to give my fears the lie:
For, spinning out the thread of time, will make
But a sad woof to cloth my sorrows with,
And turn my Tragic verse to Elegies.
And thus my many feet have almost run
My fancy out of breath: Here I must rest,
And Tantalize with weary expectation,
Till mother-time (that is gravidated with
A dubious issue) be delivered of
A masculine, white boy of mirth, or with
A female Negro of grief; which will be
Strange welcome to
Your Servant, Allegre.

To Mr. S. M.
Sir,
IT is reported by Pliny, that Apelles, that famous Painter, was wont, when he
had finished any piece of work, or painted table, to set it forth in some open
place, or thorow-fare, to be seen of Passengers; and himself would lie close
behind it* to hearken what faults were found in it; in that, preferring the
judgment of the vulgar* before his own, imagining they would spy more
narrowly, and censure his faults more severely than himself could. Having
exposed this homely piece to public view, I have, with Apelles, li^n unseen,
and to that purpose, unknown, that thereby I might the better learn what others
opinions were thereof: Not trusting to my own, as knowing that Ely was not the
only indulgent Father to his own Offspring. And, as it was his aim to rely
upon the judgment of the most judicious (of which number, I esteem your self
none of the least) it had been presented to you in the first place, had I not
been deterred, as not daring to approach the scorching rays of your severer
censure: Like him, that being in the presence of Augustus* the Roman Emperor
(who had a piercing Eagle-eye) turned away his face; the Emperor demanding the
reason why he did so? He replied, Quia fulmen oculorum tuorum far non possum.
The like may I affirm: Ter limen tetigi, terque recedi. Often have I been about
it, and as often repulsed by the consciousness of mine own unworthiness: Yet have
I, at length, adventured, in confidence that you have, as well charity to
pardon, as judgment to find out errors. With such a hope therefore, that you
will skreen your severer censure with a veil of charity, I have, at length,
presumed this into your presence: The rather, because I do hereby but return
you the Honey, made from the various flowers of your own garden; where, I hope,
I have not (as some that do, Spinas libroru^ colligere) weeded books; but
crop't their blossoms, and yet left never the less behind me. Naturalists
(those Clerks of Natures closet) report of the Peach-tree, that it receives the
quality of the soil where it is planted. In Persia it is poisonous, elsewhere
nutrimental: Such is the condition of our nature, that it ever reteines the
savor of that liquor wherewith it was seasoned in its youth. It has been my
care, and is my hope, that I may one day affirm that of the Philosophers
scholar, Me mihi melior reddidit, quam accepit. Another obligation there is
also, which has occasioned in me this present boldness, and to you this
present trouble: Tha^ you are one that do not scaenam servire, but are truly
sensible of the irregular actions of those, who would be thought the line of
Truth. I think the Poet Prophesied of our age, when he complained,

Victa jacet pietas, and cedit viribus aequum.
Non metuunt leges, stat pro ratione voluntas.
Omnia pro tempore, nihil pro veritate.
Comines complains, that many men's Offices and Lands were taken from them for
running away (in the Battle between Lewis the 11th. and the Burgundians) and
given to those that ran nine miles farther. But I have made too long a
Parenthesis in your more serious occasions; and, me thinks, I hear Apelles his
Ne suitor ultra crepidam, rounded in my ear. I here cease, though not from being

Your faithful Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
YOur Letter of the 2d. of November, came safe; and though late, yet at last I
return you an answer: For, though the Apostle says, it is the duty of a good
servant (...) not answering again: yet I think, it is no part of a good friend.
Whereas you tell me, it is no News to hear of the theft of felonious tongues,
but that it were a greater wonder, if they should turn honest, it puts me in
mind of a facetious speech of the grave Cato: When one asked counsel of him
soberly, what harm he thought boaded him, because Rats had gnawn his Hose? He
answered with this jest: That it was a strange thing to see that; but it had
been much more strange, If his Hose had devoured the Rats. Now, to be serious.
If you will needs know from whence that smoke came, I must tell you, it arose
from the New Forest, but I discovered it at London; and finding it might
forerun a storm, I was bold to fore-warn you of it, because, you know,
Praemonitus, praemunitus. Neither ought you (I suppose) to despise it,
(especially coming from a hand aimed only at your safety. Great ships have
been cast away by a little leak unlooked to. I remember the Fable that the
Butterfly asked the Owl, How she should deal with the fire that had scorched
her wings? Who counseled her, not to behold so much as its smoke And, because
you will know of me where this vapor did beat in; Truly, I was informed, you
were like to ruin your fortune, and that by one whom I know you esteem your
friend. Therefore was I bold to advise you to provide an Ark against the
Deluge: Not like the merry Scholar in Chaucer, that he might lie with the
Carpenters wife. But I talk idle. Really, I had not said any thing, had I not
been confident, you would take it with the right hand, as I gave it; and the
rather, that I might thereby engage you to deal with me in the same manner:
For, Hoc officium (as I take it) is Maximum beneficium. And now, would not my
very excuse increase my fault, I would Apologize for my (I fear) too tedious
prolixitie. I will only add, that I shall be very glad your more urgent
business would permit you to punish me in the same kind: Who am, not queint,
nor quick now, but still

Your entire Friend, T. F.
Post.
The Fratres Gladiferi are still predominant. People were never so poor, nor
never so brave, as if they would be proud by an Antiperistasis.



To Mr. J. W.
Sir,
THat you accost me with the name of Friend, I am not a little joyful, but more
to be yours. It is a term used by all, understood by few, but practiced by
none, that I can find. But I will not build my credit upon the ruins of
others: It is sufficient, that I can boast of this, that I am yours; and I hope
you will still deign to be mine. And now Sir, I shall return an answer to the
several particulars of my Letter, Ordine quisque suo. First, You tell me you
are solitary and Hermetical. I could hardly forbear envying of your Happiness:
It Is a life I as much desire, as I little hope for. But, Sive pluit Jupiter,
aut non pluit, non omnibus placet. And so I quit that, and am arrived at your
desire, which to me is a sufficient command. It Is News you desire, and it
would have been News indeed, if you had not. In brief then, Kent is, for the
general, quiet, only some excepted places: But, to make you laugh, Prophet,
Hunt, the other day, at a full Exchange, came crowding into the middle, with a
joyntstool upon his head; which, when he had set down, he stood up on, and
cried, O yes, if any man in the Town, or Country, can tell me what good the
Parliament has done these eight years, let him come, and speak, and I Will sit
down and hear him: and, that you may know the truth of it, he is in Bridewell
for his labor. And now I meet with your Cordial, which is Cordiality, well may
we invent new terms to signify realitie by; for I think, hereafter the old
will not be understood. I have remembered you to as many as I suppose your
friends, and have only in return, Mr. Th. E's service. The rest, not concluding
you aimed at them in particular, since you only shot at Rovers in the general.
The second part of your commands, I have performed only upon your welcome
Letter, and have sent this to kiss your hands. If this may contribute any thing
to the delivery of your expectation, I shall count your acceptance a sufficient
reward. But I will not add feathers to the wings of time, which I know you put
to lawful usury. Here then I take my Rest, and resolve to remain,

Sir, yours ready to serve you, T. F.

To Mr. W. L.
Will.
LEt my Hand now speak for my Heart, and know* that the lines of the one, is
the language of the other. But I will not tire thee with a preamble, lest it
might be suspected for a piece of Rhetorical insinuation; but abruptly tell my
errand, without respect so much as to a civil Complement. Will. How really I am
obliged to thee in my affections, my engagements thereto, by thy many
multiplied courtesies, may sufficiently testify: And for that reason (to make
short work) I am resolved to give thee that, for which, from another I should
have expected, and happily have had a price. You cannot imagine me so little
Man, or that to cost me so little pains, but that I must conceive it worth as
much as every puny Pamphlet; or (grant it were not) think me so simple, as to
run the Gantelope of the worlds censure* for Nothing. Yet is not any, or all of
these strong enough to draw me from dispensing with mine own profit, or credit,
when they stand in competition with a friend. In brief therefore, if you can
imagine it worth your acceptance, or but enough to strike off the least notch
from the tally of mine engagements, it is yours. I refer it, and my self, wholly
to your dispose. Some (you cannot but think) I must bestow on some friends; and
I should be loath to buy, what I did not sell, or have and must give away. My
short stay here, will not admit any long delay. Let thy answer be like my time,
and my departure, short and shortly. I am still

Your long-lasting Friend, T. F.

To Mr. J. W.
My friend,
FOr so I presume to call you, because, if your Tongue and Heart were Relatives
when you wrote your last kind Letter, you were pleased to dishonor your self
with that Title. To lay aside all terms of distance, that we may close, and
mingle souls in the flame of friendship, pardon me hereafter, if I lay aside
the name of Mr. as incompatible with that of friendship. But let me tell you,
that I can scarce think your invective against Complements to be real, since
you cannot complete your Letter without them. Tully once told a Lawyer,
pleading a bad cause: Tu nisi fingeres ne sic ageres. For your Complements you
bestow on me and mine, I shall only assure you, you struck the ball to an ill
hand, if you look for a rebound. Your quibble upon my name, would have pleased
me exceedingly, had you not married (and so marred) it with so dis-agreeing an
Epethite, as to call that deep, whose very name speaks it but shallow: So that
by styling me deep, you have taken away my name of Forde. But if you will have
my Etymology, it is this; Vadum a vadendo, from going; and so it tells you,
that I shall never be weary of traveling in your service. Or, if you will, it
is (...), trajicere, to pass over, and so I pass it by. That that poor draught
has satisfied your thirst, I am not a little glad; but it seems, it was of the
nature of salt water, which makes the drinker but the drier. And, truly, I
question not but you are, if you keep your promise, and not drink till the
return of this, which I wish may be answerable to your expectation. For your
complaint of want of Books, I conceive it needless in you, who are a walking
Library. Now will I relate what they here tell for truth. One Rolph, (something
near Ravillac) a Shoemaker, had plotted to have brought his Majesty to his
Last; but (as Heaven would have it) he proved but a Cobbler at it, and so was
discovered. Your Letter which mine was big with, is safely delivered, by

Your Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
My best of Friends,
FInding friendship to be as cold as the weather, we thought to repel it, by
celebrating this present time with the remembrance of thee; when we turned thy
Aurum Palpabile into Aurum Potabile; and I dare affirm it was Cordial. We did
remember thee Pleui^ poculis; and because two make no music, we engaged two or
three other Consorts, to complete our Harmony. And that thou may see, we did
not only drink like irrational animals, I will tell thee (if my memory fail me
not) the Original of Healths. When the Danes Lorded it over our Kingdom,
(whence by corruption they were termed Lurdanes) they were quartered in several
Houses, (a word, I must confess, I understood not when I read it first; but
since, the Times have instructed me with a witness.) They were so imperious,
that no man thought himself secure in their presence: and knowing the advantage
men have of one that is lifting his hand to his mouth in drinking, they used
(which after was a custom) to drink to one at the Table, who was thereby
engaged to be their pledge, or surety for their safety, whilst they were
drinking* and some of our Countries do still retein the original, in answering
Sir, I pledge for you. To this I doubt not but the witty Waller alludes in his
Poems, where he sings,

Wine fills the veins, and Healths are understood,
To give our friends a title to our blood:
Who naming me, does warm his courage so,
Shows for my sake what his bold hand would do.
News is so confused, that I know not where to begin; yet where should I, but
at home: and that is in the Churchyard, that you may know* In nomine Domini
incipit omne malum. Our yard is a place of Rendezvous, a Bridewel, an
Execution-place, etc. Here the gallant Pitcher went to Pot: I mean, was broken,
by the merciless blind bullets; or (if thou will have it in plain terms) was
shot to death. I could not name him without an Elegy, but that I think my Muse
is run away, to seek a better Master in these hard times. And indeed, the Muses
may well be Maids, for they are commonly farthest off, when most entreated.
Mary was once the hate and burden of the City, and the name's but
Anagrammatiz'd; but they are as weary of their Physicians, as they were before
of their disease. I cannot resemble our rich Citizens better, than to some Hogs
I have read of, that were so fat, that Mice made nests in their buttocks, and
they felt them not. But now they have pretty well eaten through their fat, and
are come to the quick, and now they begin to be sensible of them. Here are some
desperate Members, that gape wide to devour their Head, and there is nothing
can rescue him but a miracle. And now, I hope, the largeness of my Letter will
excuse me from adding any more* No wonder my Letters are so big, being so old
before they come to hand. Let me only add that I am still

Dear Ned, Thine, usque ad aras, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Friend, or Brother, choose you whether,
Natures bonds are strong in either.
THough I never knew the happiness of a Brother, I count that want infinitely
supplied, if not out-gone, by the adoption of some friends: of which number, I
need not now tell you, you hold a chief place. You may easily imagine how
welcome your last was to me, the rather, because it assured me of your, not
only receiving, but accepting mine; which (seriously) I doubted, when
afterward I read Seneca's Caveat: Vide, non tantum an verumsit quod dicis, sed
an ille cui dicitur very patiens sit. But, believe me, it was pure friendship
that praecipitated my pen; and in friendship, those are great faults, that are
not venial. And now it lies in your power only, to make those poor papers a
true glass (as you are pleased to call them) in a reflection of my own face,
without partiality; and indeed, this was the chief intent of my design at
first: and you cannot think how I will ^ug it, nay, out-dote Narcissus himself.
I hope, though you have entertained the Graces, you have not quite cashiered
the Muses: For, though the Times be hard, yet they are no chargeable retinue.
But, I know you expect some News: and truly, here is Nova, and ina^dita rerum
facies. Here, they that count Stables as good as Churches, have made our
Churches Stables. But enough of this, and for this time, when I have styled my
self

Your diligent Observer, T. F.

To Mr. L. C. L.
Noble Sir,
THe last clause of your last ingenious Letter, has proved a Prophecy: For,
you are pleased to tell me, that you long for my answer, and truly I have made
it a long answer, though a short letter: and that, till it come, every day's a
month; and I am sure, it will be a month every day e're you have it: yet be
confident, it was not for want of love, but want of leisure. You know, Parvus
amor loquitur, ingens stupet. Great love (like great grief) must move gradatim.
Sir, that you tell me, since you saw my lines, you are grown womanish, and long
for a view. I dare not think it flattery, because from a friend; yet am I not
a little proud on it. Thus have we the happiness (like Princes) to woo by
Picture, and wed by Proxy. For though I have hitherto been an Atheist to
female love, yet have I thus often wooed, and as often won a second-self; for
so's a friend, as well as a wife, and the marriage of the minds, is no less
firm and honorable, than that of the body. And I will assure you, Sir, I am
more ambitious of that happy visit you are pleased to promise me, than some
Amorett^ would be of his Mistress. In the mean-time, I shall hope to see you in
those lively Images of your ingenious self. To those unmerited Encomiums you
are pleased to bestow on my unworthy Poem, I will answer nothing, save that I
will make it an argument of your love to me; for it is a Symptom.

Quae minime pulchra sunt, e^
Pulchra videntur Amanti.
If now you expect any News, I must deceive your expectation; for here is
none, save what you will see by the Printed Papers: and truly, I am afraid this
cold weather will usher in a hotter Summer. You Will spell my meaning, though in a
mystery; because, Plura literis committere, nec vacat, nec tutum est. But that
I am

Your most affectionate Friend. T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
I Received your late (I think last) Letter, fraught with Flowers: and, credit
me, with as welcome a countenance, as we behold those early violets, the first
fruits of the Spring, after a long and tedious Winter. I heartily congratulate
your entrance into the Bond of Wedlock, for it is a bond, though a sweet one,
and question not but you have a fit yoke fellow. Now are you a Complete Man,
which the Rabbis say no man is, till he have his female Rib restored him,
which before he wanted. That you have matched one of my name, I cannot account
any other than an act of the Divine Providence, to make our Friendship grow up
into a Brotherhood: So that now it shall be no longer as you say,

Friend and Brother, choose you whether,
But Friend and Brother both together.
Hereafter shall I be not a little proud of my name, that it may be serviceable
to the production of such sweet Flowers as your self. Wonder not now, that in
stead of greeting you with an Epithalamium, I grace you with an Elegy. Indeed,
I must acknowledge, that mourning is not fit for a Wedding garment, yet most
fit for me at this present, being really sensible of the death of the general
Father of our Country, and fearful of the death of my own dear Father in
particular. And to express my self in the words of the Poet,

Hei mihi difficile est imitari gaudia falsa,
Difficile est tristi fingere mente jocum.
Give me leave only to present your Wife, my Sister, with my as hearty, as
invisible salutes; and so I take my leave of you both, with that of the witty
Catullus:

-- Boni Conjuges bone vivite, and munere assiduo valentem exercite juventam.
This is the hearty wish of him that is proud to be accounted

Your glad (though sorrowful Friend and Brother, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Ned, dear N. my N.
AS I was going to write a Letter to thee, came thine to me; and, believe me,
with no little welcome. I thank thee for thy Letter, more for thy Verses, but
most of all, for thy constant perseverance in friendship. Go on, and let us
(if possible) draw the knot of our love yet faster. I dare presume thou will,
and for me, may the Muses, or what is more, the Graces hate me, when I cease to
love thee: For thy superlative wishes, may they rebound a thousand, times
multiplied upon thine own head. But for the particular of Trading, truly, I
shall choose (in these (times) to sit down, rather than set up; not daring to
put to Sea, while this Tempest lasts. Me thinks, we wander still as in a night
of miseries, and yet see no Hesperus of any comfort appear, that might be the
welcome Harbinger of a more wished for* than expected Sun: We still like (the
Andabates) fight blindfolded. No sooner has two Parties conquered one, but they
oppose each other: and yet, as if the Tragedy were ended, the Soldiers have
routed the Players. They have beaten them out of their Cockpit, baited them at
the Bull, and overthrown their Fortune. For these exploits, the Alderman (the
Anagram of whose name makes A Stink) moved in the House, that the Soldiers
might have the Players clothes given them. H. M. stood up, and told the
Speaker, that he liked the Gentleman's motion very well, but that he feared they
would fall out for the Fools Coat. But you know who has Acted that part, and
may very well merit that, among the rest of his gifts. Ask me no more for
News, for now I am careless how things pass, as setting down this resolution,
that nothing can happen well, nor worse than has. Being stunned with that fatal
blow, I am not sensible of any thing else: only that I am still

Really thine, T. F.

To L. C. L.
Sir,
LEaving the enclosed to speak for it self, and indeed the muteness of grief is
Eloquence. I am sorry that our infant-friendship should find so sudden a grave
of forgetfulness; but I hope it is not dead, though sleeping: Let this be as
the Trump to awaken it to a Resurrection: For, assure your self, it will be as
welcome to me, as a dead debt to an Usurer. We are fallen into Times (like those
the Father spoke of) In quibus non erat quandum vivere. And truly, these
speaking pictures of my friends, are the only Scaene of mirth to me in this
deep Tragoedy. Pardon me Sir, if I now claim a debt of you; for a promise is a
debt, I mean an Elegy: I Will assure you I have expected it long, and I know it
will not come short of mine expectation: I know you have delayed it all this
while but to inhance its value; but there needs no art to make me prize a
wel-writ Poem, and such I dare not but think yours to be, Fortes creantur
fortibus, etc. I dare not flatter my self into so high a presumption, as to
merit it by any thing of mine, yet may this serve as a challenge* and though I
lose my credit, I shall account my self a gainer by the bargain.

The last, though not the least of those that honor you, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
SO willingly could I have born the Bearer company, in so pleasant a
Pilgrimage, that I cannot but at once complain of my hard hap, and envy this
papers Happiness.

But though my body be confined
To time and place, so's not my mind.
For with my nimble fancy I outrun both this and them, and salute you, as the
Food Nessus did Pythagoras, and called him by his name, as one admired for his
flood of wisdom, if we credit the faith of Aelian. And I dare not suspect but
you feed your friendship with equal flames, that it may be like the Vestal
fire, perpetual. Nor can I think your pleasant Forde will prove a Lethe of
forgetfulness, to drench the remembrance of our friendship. I have read of a
mountain so high, that what was written in the ashes of one years Sacrifice,
was found legible in the next: So, hope I, the Characters of our friendship
indelible by ought but Death. I am now changing the air, but not my mind of
being

The admirer of your worth, T. F.

To Mr. J. P.
Sir,
I Received your Letter, and that with as much welcome as Penelope did her
Ulysses, after an Ages absence. Seriously, that I have not hitherto writ to
you, was not either for want of Love or Leisure, but blind-folded by ignorance
of the place you make happy with your presence, I knew not how to find you out.
Believe me, Sir, you, with my honest Lightfoot, are so deeply fixed in the
fastest of my affections, that I shall sooner forget my self to be, than you to
be my friends, or my self your servant: And think not this a complement, but a
lively Image of my thoughts; which, though I want your Art to give it colors,
yet is as really decypher'd in this poor black and white, as in the richest
tincture. Sir, I pray let the shortness of my time (at present) excuse the
shortness of my Letter, and be confident, that my next Answer shall be more
answerable to your desert, and my desire; the height of whose ambition is but
to continue

Your Th. Forde.

To L. C. L.
True Philanax,
NOw have I found a way to try thy yet unquestioned friendship; it is this. See
here a poor Pamphlet shrowding it self under the patronizing wings of all that
dare style themselves the Authors friends. My absence from the Press, has
filled it with an innumerable company of unpardonable Errata's: So that,
besides the principal of pardoning the irregularitie of the thing it self,
there arises an unexpected score, for unlooked for Errata's. Well, it cannot
now be helped: It Is the Image of thine unknown friend; and, though much
disfigured in the limning, if thou can but discern a Real Heart, it is all I
wish for. Read it over, tell the errors, and tell me of them, so shall thou
truly approve thy self, what I would be loath not to believe thee. You know,
Caecus amor proli. Parents eyes are blind to their own, they read with the
multiplying glass of self-love, which sees a spark of fire through an heap of
ashes. Do me therefore that real part of friendship, as to send thy most rigid
censure of it: And in so doing, thou shall (if possible) yet farther oblige

Thy T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Ned,
BEing now reduced to my primitive condition, I have for the present shaken
hands with the world, and retired my self into my Cell: there will I lie perdu,
and laugh at the madness of the Times, without envying their State. May they
have as much as I contemn; it is riches enough for me, to lose as little as I
can, which whatsoever it be, I am able to make up with thoughts of you my real
friends. Excuse my present shortness, and measure not my love by my lines; but
ascertain thy self I honor thee as an unparalled piece of real friendship. I
cannot question my farther distance will any whit turn the edge of thy quondam
constancy, for what need words among friends. Ned, This unworthy piece will
adventure upon thy charity, seriously, not without the shame of the Sender;
For, besides the Errors of the thing, the Printer has filled it so full of
gross Errata's, that I cannot give one without an Apology; and I cannot devise
one good enough to equal the badness of the Press. However, draw the veil of
thy friendship over the errors, and where thou find them, pardon them. But
one thing more, send me thy severest judgment of it; lay friendship aside, and
tell me truth, without respect of person: Then shall I boast to have been

Thine Eternal Friend, T. F.

To M. C. F.
My double Flower,
AT length have I found a way, whereby this poor brat may bless the Author with
the happiness of kissing your hands. It Is Freeborn, though begot in servitude.
But I dare not venture upon your more judicious brow, without an Apology; not
so much for the Printing, as the mis-printing. I must needs say, whilst I was
at the press to overlook it, I durst own it; but as soon as I was gone, the
Printers so dis-figured it, that I knew it not again, when I saw it. Had I been
with them, I should have served them as the Philosopher did the Potter, reading
and mis-reading his verses, he brake all his earthen ware: The Potter demanding
his reason, he answered; You break my head, and I break your Pots. Seriously, I
think I should break their pates as miserably as ever was poor Prisscians by
any Pedantick. But, prithee exercise thy friendship so far, as to send me a
perfect Anatomy of it: I mean, thy judgment, without hands or eyes. Shut out
the name of friend, whilst thou censurest it, and send me that censure, as to
one that is no whit indulgent to his own. Then shall I boast to have vowed my
self

Thine absolute Friend, T. F.

One thing I forgot to tell thee, the Printer has robbed it of its Letters of
Credence: But you must put that upon his score.

To Mr. J. W.
Grace.
ANd now I dare promise my Letter a welcome, marching under, and with so good a
Grace. But I long to hear whether thou have given thy Grace a Surname yet, for
I cannot find it among all the Catalogue of Virtues. Perhaps I mistook the
Index, and should have looked for W. but I could not so readily hear of my
Gloves. Thou see I have found a way to whisper my yet unparched friendship,
though at a distance. I have read of a place called the Hall of Giants, in
Mantua, which has this strange and unusual Art, that how low soever one speak,
at the Corners it is intelligible to be heard, whilst those in the Midst hear
nothing. Me thinks, it fitly resembles our intercourse by Letters: Hereby shall
we be able to conquer distance, and live together, though far asunder:
Friendship hereby works like weapon-salve, at a distance, and undiscernable.
But I intended a Letter, not a Character of Letters. Now, having in part paid
my debt promised, it will not be unmannerly to demand yours; for promises are
debts: and I love as little to be indebted in courtesy, as in coin. If thou
searchest the File of thy promises, among other particulars, thou will find
this, Item, A Letter to

The expecter of that Happiness, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Dear Ned,
WIth thy Letter I received an Answer to my Search. It Is too long, and my time
too short, and my wit too weak to return a Reply. Be contented only with an
acquittance for the receipt of it; the rather, because I would not fail your
expectation; for I hate abortives of that nature. But before I give you a
discharge, I must quarrel with you, for some bad coin. Tell me of History,
Quotations, and Comments! What Galilaean-glass did thou use for Spectacles,
when thou read'st my letter? Your Comment has belied my Text: And what argument
have thou to prove me a Poet, except poverty; and perhaps, an ill face, with
Hipponax, who was no Painter, as you make him, but a Poet, with so ugly a face,
that two Gravers in stone set out his Statue to the world, and him to the
derision of the beholders: At which he was so enraged, that whetting his Pen
with anger, he did so thick discharge his Porcupine-quils, and his Badger-
Jambicks so bit, that (as the Stories say) for very anger made the two Gravers
hang themselves. News I can tell thee none, but that Trading, which before was
wounded, is now dead. That the Army have now done what the King all this while
fought for, namely, put a point, if not a period to the perpetual Parliament.
And having seized the King in Hurst-Castle, have possessed themselves of the
major part of their Masters, and thrown them into Hell. But now I begin to grow
as tedious to thee, as the time of thy absence will be to me: In deteining thee
too long from that name

So much obliged to you, T. F.

To Mr. W. L.
Honest Will.
THe Romans had a custom, that after any one was dead, one hollowed three
times in their ear, and after the third call, pronounced, Conclamatum est, He Is
past recovery. I have called three times without an answer, yet I dare not
pronounce a conclamatum est of our friendship, I know it is not dead. Thy last
was in answer but to a part of mine. Do thou mean to Comment upon my Letters
in Tomes and Volumes? Certainly we shall make excellent Harmony with the
several notes of Music, in Longs, Briefs, Sem-briefs, Minims, Quavers, and
Crotchets. But J. H. acts a part, (or rather no part), which, I think, is
beyond the Musicians Ela: I find no name for it; but let not them overhear me,
and I Will call it a Pause. Well, this conceit is neither Mean nor Base, but, if
you will, Treble, because we are three. Send me word what fortune my poor brat
finds in the world. how it goes off, and is relished: And do it as forgetting
me to be the Author, or

Thy Friend, T. F.

To Mr. J. H.
My best of friends,
LIttle less than infinite will number mine engagements to thee; and when I
shall quit scores with thee, I know not; yet may it show a willingness to pay,
in him that confesses the debt. I am glad of such an argument of something good
in that worthless piece, as the dislike of the world will draw for a
Conclusion. Really, I never intended they should like it, and should have
suspected it, if they had: For he that will please the Times, must go attired
in a Fools coat, not a Scholars habit. Did thou never hear of the
Philosopher, that when (in an Oration) the people applauded him, turned about
to some of his friends, and asked, What he had said amiss ^ Thy News of the
Hangmans so untimely death, when he was at the full ga^^ of one and thirty,
drew this ex tempore Epitaph from me.

Here lies the Royal Headsman, who in's time,
Of the Court-cards has cut and drawn the Prime:
But oh sad fate! death thus should Trump about,
And now at one and thirty put him out.
But I haste to subscribe my self

Thy much engaged Friend, T. F.

To Mr. T. P.
Sir,
I Had hitherto fully resolved, that the name of Mecoenas now lived only in
Horace lines; but your late Largess has made me recant my humor, and believe
that there are yetsome that dare patronize the Muses when grown poor: But as
the scarcity increases your honor, so would it my shame, if I should be so
ungrateful as not to acknowledge it; though I must confess, my retribution will
be as bad, as my mind is good, to erect a Pyramid to your singular example in
this Age. Not that I intend any Panygerick of your praises, that were fitter
for the Pen of Pliny, or the Mouth of Cicero, Give me leave only (without a
blush) to acknowledge my many engagements to your merit, lest I should meet
with the obloquie of the French, who (the Historian says) remember good turns
no longer than they are in doing. Sir, when I seriously consider your large
reward of so short a desert, me thinks (had I Plutarchs art) I could parallel
it with the bounty of Artaxerxes, who returned precious gifts to poor Sinaetas
for his handful of water: Or, if that be too small, to Alexander the Great, who
returned doubly to Anaxar^hus, for a small gift he received of him. Thus rich
grounds yield double flowers, for single seeds. Or yet, if these be too low, to
Streton, who studied to excel all other men in Liberality. And might it not be
thought flattery (to praise a man to his face) I would tell others, that your
Generous disposition is a miracle in this Age) equaled, if not excelled one, of
whom the Ancients boast, that was readier to give, than others to receive. But
I fear to offend your modesty, and will therefore silently admire, what I
cannot safely speak, knowing there is also an eloquence in silence. Yet would I
not altogether have my thankfulness (like men near the River Ganges) without a
Tongue. Alas Sir! what worth was there in that plain piece, that should cause
so rich a recompense! Truly, Sir, besides the reverence (which as a dictate to
natures law) I always bare you, your many favors, but especially the last,
will exact from me (without a complement) the speech of Furnius to Caesar,
Efficisti ut viverem and morer ingratus. Excuse the relating it in it is proper
Idiom: For, though it be said, that the Tuscane Speech sounds better in the
mouth of Sirangers, than of the Natives, I think not so of the Latin. You have
so obliged me, that (to use the expression of a Father to his friend) I owe
you, Et quae possum, and quae non possum. So that, did I not hope to meet with
a merciful Creditor, I must break without hope of compounding: However, though
you have cast your gift into a shallow Forde, yet it is so transparent, that
you may see it, without fear of being covered with any Lethe of forgetfulness.
Nor have you cast your coin on so soft a nature, that you should not hear it
gingle, at least in an Echo of Thanks: Although, when I have done all, my
Thankfulness must be like Timantes his Pictures, wherein was more to be
understood, than there was expressed. Thus, Sir, assuring you here is nothing,
but what is the immediate Transcript of my Heart, I crave leave to boast my
self,

Sir, your solely engaged Servant, T. F.

To Mr. J. H.
Honesty,
THy Letter was as welcome to me, as ever was rain to the parched earth. I
thank thee thee infinitely, but that is no payment. Well, set all upon the
Tally, and it is possible we may one day cross scores. Excuse my shortness at
this time, and let this Country News supply the defect. It Is this: That
Phoebus (now) courts the Lady Flora as rudely as he did his Mother, that bit
off her ear, when he should have kissed her.

That the Quadrupled Animals fare deliciously, for they feed on Roast-meat
every day.

That the Sun has saved the Husbandmen a labor of mowing and making their
Hay; for it now grows Hay, like him that sowed Malt, to avoid the charge and
trouble of making it of Barley.

That the world being turned Round, our Climate is exchanged for Spain, or some
more sweating Country: That we here know no reason of this unparalled Heat,
unless it be because we have now so many ruling Suns in the Sphere where there
used to be but One.

That, if this weather hold, we are like to have no raw fish, but all ready
boiled before taken, and all our drink burnt-wine, or vinegar.

That the poor Ephemeris suffer Martyrdom every day.

That, at night, when Sol is with our Antipodes, we feel his heat through the
cracks of the earth.

That this extreme heat makes the Heavens sweat a little sometimes, in stead of
rain.

Item, That my Ink is converted to Jet.

Item, That there is no more News.

For it is none that I am

Your T. F.

To Mr. R. R.
Sir,
I Dare not pretend to so much Philologie, as to criticize upon your term of
Infinitiores gratias; your adopting (by your using) it, is sufficient to
patronize it, and pass it through the guards of the strictest enquiry. Here
could I well cease, and, in stead of answering (which I shall never) admire at
your Elegant Letter you were pleased to honor me with: wherein, what streams
of Eloquence! what flames of Love! what Rhetoric! what Realitie! nay, what
not! So that, were all Epistles like yours, I would not wonder that Learning
and Letters are terms convertible. I honor the presence of my friends; but may
it ever be supplied by such Letters, and I shall never complain of their
absence. Before, I loved you as a friend, but now, I honor you as a Wit. But
how easily do passions exalted transport us! And how willingly do we yield the
cloak of our resolutions to the flatttering Sun of praise! But I am too
conscious of mine own unworthiness, to admit those large Encomiums your
flourishing pen has adorned me with. It Is a Pos^e of rare beauty; but I dare
not accept it, lest there should lie a snake of flattery, under those fairer
Flowers: And I wish you have not shown your Wit, and hazarded your Judgment.
When I read your neat lines, really I cannot but love them for their
gallantness, and pity them that, they had no better a Subject. Me thinks, they
seem like rich clothes upon a poor man (that do not suit) or like the Kings
Saddle upon the Millers horse. Who will not suspect your eyes blindfolded with
love, that have made Paris choice, and extolled a homely face, for an Heavenly
beauty. Well, since my deserts are too short to scale them, I shall (I Will
assure you) keep it by me, as too rich a cloth for my meanness, and shall lay
it before me, as a pattern of what would I be, rather than a picture of what I
am. Now, to your Why, let me return a Wherefore I have (to use your expression,
and who can use better) masked my self under the single letters of T. F. that
being unknown, I might more freely hear the worlds censure. I remember a
facetious tale of a Frenchman, that had printed much, concealing his own name:
One asking a man that brought his Copies to the press, Who the Author was? He
said, 'Twas one that desired to serve God invisibly. My humbler ambition flies
no such pitch; it is enough for me, if it may but reach to the service of my
friends, of which number, I know you to be so intensely one, that, as it is
said, that Plutarch once being named, the Echo answered, Philosophy; so,
should I call R. (I doubt not but) it would return friendship. This is the
Happiness of him that cares not to sacrifice his credit to your worth,

T. F.

To Mr. R. R.
Sir,
THat my late lines have produced your later Letter, I am not a little glad;
but that they should occasion a quarrel, I should be more sorry. If the
exception be my fear of flattery, know, that it was not the Height of your
expressions, but my own lowness, that frighted me into such a fear. Would not a
little David think himself mocked, to be proffered a Goliah's armor? But, for
my part, your merits are caveat sufficient to keep my words from the least
suspicion: And the construction of my words will be best made by the
Grammar-rule of friendship; for I was never guilty of so much Rhetoric, as to
tell a learned lie. My tongue and my pen (if I deceive not my self) are always
Relatives: Because Favorinus praised the Fever, should not we praise Health?
And because some Romans sacrifice to that, might not others to Aesculapius?
'Twere more shame to d^ny praises where they are due, than to admit them where
they are not. Why therefore are you so bashful? as if those parts (something
above the degree of admiration) had erept into your bosom unawares? And though
your modesty is such, (as may silently shame my forwardness) that you will not
show your self to the world, like that plant in Pliny, which buds inwardly, and
shoots out no bud, blossom, or leaf outwardly; yet give us leave to admire
it, though you bury your worth in the ore of obscurity. We count him a rich
man, that has his wealth in his chest, not on his back; yet excuse me, if I
think it an envious disposition, in him, that would play so softly on his Lute,
that none should hear but himself. But whether is my pen stragled? Surely as
far from the matter of my first intentions, as the answers of the two deaf
persons were from one another, that pleaded before a deaf Judge in the Greek
Epigram. To return therefore from my digression to your Letter. How shall I
interpret those expressions, of exact, ingenious, and learned Comment? rare,
transcendent, and incomparable Answer, not to say of flattery, but of very
large Hyperbolies!

But you have made me amends for them, when in the next sentence you handsomely
call me fool under the name of the Indians: where you tell me, I look on my
self afar off, through a perspective, and upon you near hand, etc. Me thinks, I
cannot obtein of my self to believe, that I am farther from my self, than I am
from you; and therefore the multiplying glass must go with the greater
distance: But I am afraid I have turned the wrong end, and rather overseen than
over-valu'd your crescent parts. To your desire of seeing some other pieces of
mine, I must only answer, that I am very much unprovided of any, for my store
lies in a Chaos, as yet unformed, in mold unmelted, or unminted; but such as I
have will be proud of your Sight and Censure. And for a continuance of this
literal correspondencie, know that I cannot be so much an enemy to my self, as
not to desire it; and with as much affection as I am

Your humble Admirer, T. F.

To M. J. H.
Honest Jack,
THe ancient Romans, who made a Deity of every thing, yet sacrificed not to
death, because from death are no Returns. For the same reason, should I not
write to London, and by consequence, not to your self. Trumpeters love to sound
where there is an Echo, and I love to write whence I can hear an answer.
Seeing once a Weaver at work, I observed, that by casting his shuttle from one
side to the other, he finished his web: Therein I saw a lively Emblem of
friends correspondencie by letters; if either fail, the web's imperfect. I make
it now my employment, that the ball should not fall on my side. I must confess
I have been from home of late, but now I am returned to that, and to my
custom. Letters unanswered, like meat undigested, breed no sweet breath. Well,
I shall expect an answer as long as the time I have waited for one, till when I
shall resolve to be

Your most assured Friend, T. F.

To Mr. S. M.
Sir,
OBliged by your courtesies, your command, and my duty, that ingratitude must
be more than Herculean, that could break this threefold tie. I have resolved
therefore now, to be rather presumptuous, than ungrateful; that I may tender
you thanks for the engagements you have laid upon me, though the very act
increase them; and to assure you, that I am nothing of the nature of that
beast, that is so forgetful, that though he be feeding never so hard and
hungrily, if he cast but back his head, forgets immediately the meat he was
eating, and runs to look after new. And if my silence seems to accuse me,
believe me, Sir, it was merely out to self-consciousness of my own unworthiness
to present you with any thing worth the reading; yet also remembering, that the
great Alexander would admit a return of Epistles between himself and Publius
his Bit-maker. I am a little encouraged you will at least pardon my poor
scribbling; if not for it self, or the sender, yet because it carries thanks in
the front, and they are current coin, and in which the poorest may be rich,
without ^ear of a Sequestration. That word that ham-strings all industry, and
makes men embrace the Stoical saying for a Maxim, Been qui latuit, been vixit.
And truly, for my part, I think we are fallen into Nero's age, in which Tacitus
says ( Inertia, sapientia fuit.) Sloth was a virtue. When the Ship of the
Commonwealth is steered by a Tempest, it is best lying still in the Harbor:
But I intend an Epistle, no Satyr. I am

Sir (without a complement) your very humble servant T. F.

To Mr. J. A.
James,
PArdon the familiarity of the Title, I use no complements to my friends; not
do I think them my friends that use them to me. The Italians speak out of
experience, The more tongue, the less heart; and you know their Proverb, La
penna della Lingua si dove tingere nel inchiostro del cuore. I could wish that
all the letters of friends were like Tullies, Epistolae Familiares; and the
Polite Politician tells me, that the greatest ornament of all Epistles is to be
without any. James. I love thee, I honor thee, and that sine fuco, sine
fallaciis. I would have my letters like the Herb Persica, which the Egyptians
offered to their god Isis, whose fruit was like an heart, and the leaf like a
tongue. Hereby do I talk with thee, now absent, and if thou will vouchsafe me
the like, thereby shall I see thee. Pardon me, if I challenge, nay, expect your
your promise, which if you perform not, I shall suspect your humor something
of kin to that of an excellent Archer, that would rather lose his life, than
show a trial of his skill. Letters are like those mutual pawns the Grecians
gave as Symbols of their friendship; like Dido's little Aeneas, to supply their
absence. Hereby are they present in England, Spain, or France, all in an
instant, and at once. Let it not be thought a Paradox, for Love goes beyond
Art. But what do I talk of love and friendship in this Age, wherein fast
friends are gone on pilgrimage, and their returns uncertain. But I grow
tedious: It Is the fault of parting friends; and now, like one in that ecstasy.
I know not what to say next: whether to commend thy diligence, in outvying
Ulysses, in that which the Poet says made him wise. Whilst I am like the
silly Grasshopper, that lives and dies in the same ground: Or shall I fear thy
danger, and with Charonidas, wonder not at those that go to Sea once, but at
those that go again: Or shall I dare to assume the presumption, for me, who am
no Traveller, to counsel thee, that art; no, I dare not. Yet let me remember
thee of the Speech of one that was; That a Traveller must have Eagles eyes,
Asses ears* the tongue of a Merchant, a Camels feet, a Hogs mouth, and an Asses
back. In a word, may thou measure, thy happiness by the Ell of thine own
desires, which shall not exceed the wishes of

T. F.

To Mr. J. H.
Sir,
YOur Letter was as welcome to me, as your absence is tedious. Complements suit
not the reality of my intentions; but imagine all the mere complemental
expressions of flattering Courtship put into truth, and all fall short of my
affections. To obey your command, if your patience will pardon the tediousness,
I will give you as brief an account as I can of my present estate. I have read,
that one Philostratus lived seven years in his Tomb, to acquaint himself with
Death. Truly, I have conversed above two seven years among the Dead, for so are
our Authors esteemed; and indeed, our Shops may not unfitly be resembled to a
Charnel-house: and there, and thus, have I gotten such a familiarity with
those faithful and unflattering Counselors, that I rather chose to lie in the
valley of obscurity, than to climb the dangerous Alps of aspiring greatness, so
long as the wind blows so high, and the stream runs so swift. Rather had I sit
still (by their persuasion) than rise to fall; or to fare hardly, than feed on
others bread: And, me thinks, I find my self very well decypher'd by the
Emblem, which represented certain Grasshoppers, that suck the dew, and pass
their time singing, with this Motto; Di questo mi contento, e megilio spero.
With this I am content, and hope better, when God shall so order the tide of
occasions, and the blasts of my friends favor, to lanch me from the poor
harbor, where I now lie windbound. Thus, Sir, I hope I have made you
reparation for my late silence, not doubting but you will make it but a
Parenthesis, which shall break no sense in our friendship: And this I shall
esteem a very great addition to your former Engagements; to all which, I shall
without scruple Subscribe

T. F.

To E. W. Esquire.
Sir,
COuld my messenger have delivered his errand in but intelligible nonsense, I
should willingly have spared you this trouble: But since it must be so, I shall
endeavor to make a virtue of necessity, and from hence take occasion to tell
you, that so many have been your favors, and so few the returns of my thanks
hitherto, that they have rendered mine ingratitude as superlative as your
goodness. Though you write your courtesies in running water (to which a Forde
is of very near kin) I desire to write my thanks in marble; and had I so
advantageous an occasion, I would make the whole world the Witness of mine
Obligations. To this purpose, I could wish this poor paper immortal, that my
gratitude, at least, might rival your bounty. But, Sir, you have endeavored to
make me live and die in your debt, which I shall rather resolve to suffer, than
to slander your nobleness with a thought of my slender requital. Now, Sir, if
you please to honor me with the additional courtesy of your Cambden, you
shall hereby infinitely add (if they surmount not that piece of Arithmetic
already) to your former favors and my engagements. And may this serve for my
Surety, that I will keep it carefully, use it warily, and return it speedily.
Thus, Sir, kissing the hands of your fair Venus, and her three Graces, I humbly
take my leave, who am proud to wear the livery of

Sir, your and their most obliged Servant, T. F.

To Mr. E. H.
Sir,
HAving armed my self cap a pe, with patience to receive as you promised, your
most rigid censure, I find, in stead of arms, you encounter me with flowers,
and, like Paris, make me stoop to your golden ball. Nor do I less wonder at it,
than the poor Norvegian did, the first time he saw roses, who durst not touch
them for fear of burning his fingers, being much amazed to see (as he supposed)
trees to bear ^ire. With little less wonder, do I behold your learned lines,
nor with less amazement, to see flames of love, and streams of eloquence so
Homogenial.

To your Letter, I shall return nothing, but only tell you, that what I
understand is excellent, and so I believe, and admire the rest. Your Allegory
of the Cook is neatly dressed, but except you be pleased to tinde one of his
lights, I shall fear to remain in darkness, and discover no farther than his
superficies. The censures of those blind-minded Jews you speak of, I shall
account my greatest commendations: Like Crates the Philosopher, who, having
received a blow on the face by one Nicodromus, a man full of base condition
(and as base conditions) was contented, for revenge, to set these words on his
wound, Nicodromus faciebat. To those large Encomiasticks you bestow on my poor
Pamphlets, I shall only say I am sorry they had no fitter subjects; yet am I
glad I was so happy to afford you any ground for your nimble fancy to work on,
and shall here promise you, that if you please to continue this literal
commerce, you shall not want a whetstone to sharpen your sithe, as you are
pleased to desire; and this property I may have (like the whetstone) though
blunt my self to sharpen another. Nor need you fear that you can use too much
ingenuity to me; for I am no whit affected with the heresy of the Times, which
count learning and wit (as you say) the scum of the bottomless pit; but know
how to honor it as much as I want it. In a word, Sir, I thank you for your
Letter, more for your Verses, but most that you please to style me

Sir, your very Friend, T. F.

To Mr. R. R.
Sir,
I Return you your New-Forrest, with as many thanks as it merits, and that is
infinite; which submission to your better judgment (from which I would no
sooner dissent, than from truth it self) I conceive this not at all behind the
first part, but in time; it appearing to me of as fine a thread, and no less
curious workmanship. Happily the others, being checkered with foreign flowers,
may render it more delectable. But why should we think a foreign garden of
flowers, and perhaps some weeds, better than an English Forest? Well may it be
more sightly, but, I Am sure, it is not so serviceable. Scarce can I hold my pen
from glutting in his praises, who is far above it is highest flight, did not the
Italian proverb check me, and tell me truly, La Lode nascer deve, quando e
morto chi si ha da Lodar: That praises should not be born, till the praised be
dead. I will therefore content my seff to say, that I hope such pleasant groves
are not superstitious; and could wish, that the whole Kingdom were so turned
to a Forest, and the Author the Ranger General.

That Is body might not be confined,
Who Is a free Monarch in his mind;
One who with his Majestic Pen,
May give the Law to other men.
Sir, I have sent you a Clavis to it, not that I think you need any, but that,
if you invite any friend to those pleasant walks, they may have an entry of
understanding, without picking the lock by a false construction. It was done at
a heat, and I have not time to file it over, but such as it is, it is yours. If
you please to send me the last Edition of the Kings learned pieces, I shall
keep it carefully, return it speedily, and remain continually

Sir, yours to command, T. F.

To Mr. W. L.
Sir,
I Must esteem it an happiness to hear of you, though I cannot hear from you:
and that I heard nothing of your sickness, till I heard also of your recovery;
so that now to tell you I am sad or sorrowful for your sickness, were as
preposterous, as to grieve for your death after your resurrection, or to bid
you goodnight in the morning when you are risen. But like the trembling needle
between two equally attractive Loadstones, so am I between the two different
passions of joy and sorrow: Joy for a friends recovery, and sorrow for a
friends restraint. Not to be joyful for your recovery, were to envy a public
good, and I might justly be accused for an enemy to the State, in not rejoicing
at a happiness so common, that deserves a day of Public Thanksgiving. Then,
not to be affected with the sorrows and sufferings of a friend, and such a
friend as E. B. were as great a crime as his whom the Romans condemned to
death, For wearing a Crown of Roses in a time of common calamity. I long to
hear how our honest friend stands, since the High Court sits; which if I do not
now from thee, I shall think, that whilst thy body suffered under the fire of a
Fever, thy friendship was sick of an Ague; that though the Dog Star reigned in
thy blood, thy affections labored under Capricorn. But, since thy sickness is
in it is Declension, I shall expect thy friendship to be again Ascendant, that
before did Culminate. And for my part, think not that thirty miles distance,
cold raines, or your silence, can make me forget you, or that I am

As much as ever Sir, your Friend, T. F.

To Mr. J. H.
Sir,
HAving hitherto waited with silence, to hear of your receipt of my Letter, and
finding none, makes me fearful that it miscarried in the delivery; and I am not
ignorant, or insensible of the many abortives of the Carriers Midwifery. But I
hope your candor is sufficient to dispel all clouds of suspicion that might
seem to eclipse my realitie, or to think that I am so much foe to my self, as
not to desire, or at least not to endeavor the gainful commerce of your
letters. I am not ignorant that all kind of Learning has been wrapped up in
Letters: And I assure you, Sir, I shall, in the enjoyment of yours, think my
self little less honored, than I do Lucillius by Seneca's. Nor shall I be a
little proud, that I may be any ways (though but occasionally) instrumental to
you, to exercise your excellency in this way: Neither do I altogether doubt of
the pardon of my rude scribbling, because I am

Sir (without Complement) your very humble Servant, T. F.

To Mr. E. H.
Sir,
THough I have paid the Principal, in returning your books, I am still indebted
for the Interest you were pleased to lay on them, in giving you my account of
them. For your Caussin, I return you thanks, in stead of censures, wishing that
he were now alive, that our late Tragedies might be acted over again by his
highflying quill, and be thereby committed to incredulous posterity. The Novum
Lumen Chymicum, I understand, is lately Translated; and indeed it were a
wonder, if there were any New Lights, that we should not have in English in
these Times. But, because you told me you lent me that only to laugh at, I
shall only tell you, it no whit failed your intention, or my expectation. Now
for your Vaughan, be pleased to take notice, that he is since answered by one
Moore learned and better famed than He; and therefore I shall let that Answer
be mine: Yet withal, that I serve such Books as the good Bishop served Persius,
when he threw him on the ground with a Si no^vis intelligi, debes negligi.
Thus, as the Hollanders sometime made money of past-board, I make my payment in
Paper, and in this coin I shall pay you liberally for your Arithmetic. Believe
me, Sir, it is Homers Iliads in a Nut-shell, and so handsomely compacted, that
the doggedest Critic cannot fasten on it; only let me tell you, it is
deficient in one thing, and that is, that it is not able to help me to number
the Engagements you have lain upon

Sir, your unmeriting Friend, T. F.

To Mr. R. R.
Sir,
He Is a bad debtor that pays by halfs; but he is a worse that never pays. That
I may not be guilty of that superlative ingratitude, I have sent you two Books
of your three. And for Bacon, I pray think it not long, if I should keep it
till Lent; for I mean, to all his Experiments, to add one more of your
friendship. If you expect an account of your I^^^ B^^: know, it is far above my
censure, as my praise; I go to that, as to my Bible, yet something in
Allegiance. Certainly, that Portraiture was drawn by a Divine hand, and wrote
with a pen pulled from some Angels wing. If there be one that wrote by divine
inspiration since the Apostles times, 'twas He, when He penned those
Meditations. Henceforth his Pen shall be his Scepter, His Book his Throne, and
the whole World his Empire: There shall he live and reign, and be as immortal,
as some of his enemies malice.

Take a more particular account of your Balzack thus: I undertook the reading
of him, rather for penance, than profit; but having read him once, that induced
me to read him again, and the second time drew on a third, and the third a
fourth; and now I send it you home, lest if I should keep it a little longer, I
should transcribe the whole Book. A better Character cannot be given of him,
than he gives of himself, take it therefore in his own words, That his Writings
smell more of musk and amber, than of oil and sweat. But to save time, I have
sent you a Pamphlet, that may serve as a foyl to set off Balzack the better:
Wherein expect neither Cicero nor Seneca; neither Howel nor Balzack; neither
Learning nor Language; nor any Letters beginning with the ambitious title of My
Lord, or Madam, they are more proud of the name of Friend, and, carrying that
stamp, they presume to be current, though they be but brass. Not that I intend
to make my private Letters public, but only to advance a community in
friendship, and to fulfill a command of yours in a letter (in that particular)
yet unanswered, of seeing some pieces of mine. And truly, these are no other
than pieces; yet, as in the several pieces of a broken Looking-glass, you shall
in every one see the perfect reflection of

Sir, yours in all Offices of Friendship, T. F.

To Mr. E. B.
Honest Ned,
RAther had I accuse the Carrier with negligence, than thee with
forgetfulness: Nor can I think the requesting of a friendly courtesy, could
scare thee into an unfriendly silence. Sure ye are all struck dumb at London,
or your ink, if not your affections, is frozen. The serious thought of which,
has made me almost believe, that the name of friend is but the fabulous birth
of some Philosophical Poets, or Poetical Philosophers, and fitted for Sir
Thomas Moore's Vtopia, or Plato's Commonwealth; not for an Iron Age, or the
dregs of Time. If thou art silent because thou have no News to write, write
that thou have none: However, let the world see there is one dares call himself
a friend, though in such an Age as this. And believe it, that the
all-self-devouring teeth of time shall never eradicate the name of B. from out
the heart of him, whose only pride is to tell the world who is

Ned, thine inseparable Friend, T. F.
Postscript.
You may, if you please, communicate this to all those that call themselves my
friends, and tell them, that till I hear the contrary, I shall suppose their
practice of silence intended for my pattern.

Vale.


To Mr. W. L.
Will.
NOr will I accuse your silence, nor excuse my own; it is sufficient I have
broken the Ice, and adventured to tell thee, it is possible to be a friend, and
silent; nor do I despair to hear the same from you: In confidence of which, I
say no more now, but tell you, I expect it. To your Father thus much.
Concerning the re-printing of my Characters, and augmenting them, I have had
some serious thoughts, and the result is this. I find them, upon perusal, not
suitable to the present State, being Calculated for the Meridian of a Kingdom,
not a Commonwealth, they are now like old Almanacks out of date. And to go to
them with the Arithmetic of Addition and Substraction, with the Pensil and the
Sponge, were to make my self guilty of what I there condemn. Besides, they were
then my resolved (and not yet retracted) thoughts: So that I hold it not safe
for you to print, or me to enlarge them, nor this, farther than to tell thee, I
long to hear from thee, and of our dearest Ned. I have a Letter has been
designed for him a long time, did I but hope there were a crevise in his close
prison, that I might peep through to assure him that I am his (as thine)

Still constant Friend, T. F.

To Mr. E. H.
Sir,
YOur last Letter I met on the way, as drawn thither perhaps by Sympathy, like
the Magnetic steel, to meet her loved Loadstone* I know love and friendship
work miracles, and act in Paradoxes: It makes the enjoyers thereof flame
without consuming, present and distant (if that word may be admitted in
friendship) all at once. By this I see my friend, when invisible, and hear him,
though silent. Like the Philosophers Stone, of which the Chemists so much
boast, Contraria operatur, sed semper in beneficium naturae. This is (if any
thing) the true Sympathetick powder, that works truer, and at a greater
distance, than weapon-salve. Willingly could I lose my self in this pleasing
Maeander; but I will rather commend the Theory to your more active Pen, and
resolve to act the practick part my self. For your Verses, I will rather remain
in your debt, than pay you with bad coin. I assure you Sir,

I have no vein in verse; but if I could,
Enclose each word a Mine, believe't I would:
I only Court her that drops* Elegies,
Whilst others Musessing, mine only cries.
Yet shall I not refuse what your injunction shall lay upon me, because I am

As really your Friend, T. F.

To Mr. T. P.
Sir,
FOr me to attempt an Answer to your Letter, were to venture at the flights of
an Eagle, with a Sparrows wing. The Italians tell me in a Proverb, The higher
the Ape climbs, the more he shows his nakedness. And truly, should I endeavor
to reach the pitch you have set me for a pattern, I should rather imitate
Icarus in his fall, than you in your flight. It is enough for me to admire and
applaud the happiness of your undertakings, that can at once captive Apollo and
the Muses, and make the Triumphs of former Ages, the Trophies of your Pen's
victories. Where you profess your self Davus, I must confess my self no
Oedipus: Giving you therefore the liberty the Civil Law allows (and I should
be uncivil if I should not) to interpret your own words, I will guess at your
meaning, and return you, not only an Answer to your Riddle, but the reason of
it. Sir, if my less comprehensive Genius deceive me not, you like not Latin
lace to an English suit; and herein you have light upon an humor, that I have
long since retracted, and esteem now as too pedantical. But you may perceive
they savor of the ferula, and imagine my then regnant humor; like young
stomachs, that like raw fruit, better than reasted food: Yet must I farther
confess, I have been so conscious of mine own inabilities, and so confident of
the Ancients worth, that I have preferred to use their more refined lines, than
my unfiled language: So that I discover in my self the fancy of the Painters
boy, who thinking to supply the defect of his skill, by the richness of his
colors, had laden Venus picture with gold and silver, in stead of native
beauty: For which he met with this censure from his Master, that he had made
her rich, whom he could not make fair. So have I embroidered my courser cloth
with others ends of gold and silver. It only remains that I tell you, that I
cannot tell you how much you have won me by that one act of dealing freely with
me; and to assure you, that you could not have studied a way to oblige me more.
And that you may believe my realitie herein, be pleased to inform me of the
Author of your Utinam nescire Literas; and if it prove the speecch of that
Negro-black Tyrant, you shall find my submission as humble, as your conquest
noble. If you think the Frontispiece discrepant to the following leaves, I
shall conform the printed Title to the written Book, not the written Book to
the printed Title* For I resolve not to change their name, nor alter their
property of Familiar Letters, for my private friends. But I hinder you too
long, from what I only intended, to acknowledge my self

Sir, your conquered Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. P.
Sir,
THat that poor grain of mine has produced me so sudden, and yet so large a
return, argues the fruitfulness of the Soil wherein 'twas cast, not the
goodness of the seed, or of the Sowers less skilful hand. Hereafter shall I
believe, what before I took for a fable, That there is some ground so fruitful,
that the husbandman reaps at night, what he sowed in the morning. Your
Christning my fancy with the name of a Thrush, might very well teach me the
modesty of that volatile, who is said to be silent, whilst the Nightingale
(chief Chaunter of the aerie quire) produces her more clear and tuneful note,
did I not hope by my plain Song to gain your more artificial descant. Your
proclaming my attempt rather Pheatontick than Icarian, is no more (pardon the
boldness of my ignorance) than for a man to be killed with a silver sword,
rather than an iron dagger, the only pre-eminence being in this, that he
perished like the other, but with this addition of honor (if it be so) of
falling under the burden of more bold attempts. Where before I but confessed,
I now profess my self no Oedipus, nor made I any riddles, but guessed only at
the meaning of yours, and therefore am not apprehensive of your Analogy of the
Cobbler (whom I leave to maintein his more ambitious title of a Translator)
unless you intended your picture of your friend, like Horace's monster, which
begins with a fair woman's face, and ends in a foul fishes tail at last. But it
was your Phaetons fate, to meet with so dangerous a fall, from the Chariot of
the Sun to a Shop-window. Nor need we any Sphin^, to unriddle this repugnancie
in terms, whose part it was to make them. At what words of mine you admire, I
know not, it is my endeavor to avoid that Selecisme Augustus found fault with
in M. Antony, of writing such things as men should rather wonder at, than
understand. I applaud the happiness of your Genius, who can coin words with
your own stamp; only I suppose, that of unoepodize, would be no whit less
current, were it shorter by the first syllable. Of that Socratick vice you
speak of, I have not so much in me, as to defend it: Far be it from me, to
adopt the quarrel of those great Clerks; it is enough for me, if I may boast my
self their, and Learnings unworthiest servant. To your confirmation of Nero's
Vtinam, I now yield my full belief, and should do so, you affirming it, though
all Historians denied it, and withal, my promised submission: Only give me
leave to cleave the hair, and tell you, that it was the speech of Nero, though
not then a barbarous tyrant, having then but newly entered his Quinquennium, so
much by all extolled, whilst reteining his Master Seneca's more than
Philosophical instructions. And so I leave him, when I have told you, I shall
accept those unmerited Encomiums you impose upon me (with that then good
Emperors speech to the Senate giving him thanks) Cum meruero. Sir, I do, and
shall (I think) persist in confining those poor papers from the eye of the
world, not daring to let them go abroad in this super-fine Age, in so homely a
dress; nor herein can I apprehend my self guilty of that (...), you Prophecy
me guilty of, unless it be, in that I have answered your letter before I had
returned you the due thanks and praises the worth of that would justly exact
from the most sullen ingratitude. Believe me, Sir, you are Master of an
Imperial pen, and would you once break through the veil of derogating silence,
your beams would be sufficient to create a day, even in the nightie Chaos of my
duller intellect, to cast a cloud upon all former names, and be night
posterity. But I shall rather choose an admiring silence, than an undervaluing
commendation, because I desire to make good to a tittle the title of

Sir, your faithful Servant, and not unfaithful friend, T. F.

To Mr. T. L.
Sir,
THat you may see how willing I am to comply with every occasion that may put
me in a capacity of serving you, I shall now answer your command, with my
opinion of Speed, and his History. For the History, it is a work of deserved
commendations, and without any exception. For the Author, I cannot so well
assure you; but if Speed be not too much wronged in the relation, he was but
the Journeyman-Taylor in the business: It was (say some) cut out by abler
workmen, he only made it up, and in that has merited the commendations of a
very good workman, besides what we are indebted to him for the fashion, the
lining, facing, and pressing; but for the last, I believe we are more beholden
to the Printers press, than to his goose. This presents me with a fair occasion
of presenting you with a Copy of Verses, not unworthy your reading, upon
Speeds Chronicle, sent from a Son to his Father.

God be my Speed, so I began, it is true,
And now it is time to wish a Speed to you:
Then briefly thus, as long as life endures,
God be my Speed, and let my Speed be yours.
If great books be great evils, lo a shift,
To turn this Speed into a lesser gift.
Take but some vowels out, and then 'twill be but an Epistles Preface, S. P. D.

Excuse me, for once, if I make it the Epilogue, and with it conclude my self

Sir, your real, though remote Friend, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
Parvus amor loquitur, ingens stupet. WOuld you measure my love by my silence,
you could not pronounce it short. Often has my pen been on the paper to write to
you, and as often been taken off, with a consideration of the rudeness of my
rustic scribbling, which is now worn into such an habit, that you will
willingly retract whatever suspicion you have formerly had of any ingenuity in
me. However, lest a continued silence should cast me in (and out of) your
affection I am resolved to say something, though it be but to confess my self
guilty of that most unpardonable offense in friendship, Ingratitude. Yet am I
not without some excuses, which would be ready to plead in my behalf, did I not
rather wish to receive a new life, of happiness by your pronouncing my pardon.
I am your prisoner, deal with me as you please, only grant me my liberty,
without which, I cannot make good, as I desire, the title of

Sir, your though rude, yet real Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. D. P.
Sir,
PResuming your goodness will pardon the rudeness of the address, I have sent a
brace of Pamphlets to kiss your hands. Being conscient to themselves of their
own unworthiness, like trewant Scholars, they durst not appear without an
Apology; neither should they, or this, but that I know you daily meet with
such Exercises of your patience, and that I know you have indulgent charity
enough to cover the faults of those you love. Please you to suspend your
severer thoughts, and to make a small truce with your nobler employments, I
shall humbly beg their pardon in a very few words. That they came no sooner,
was out of necessity; that I shall crave you will vouchsafe to indulge; that
they come now, is out of duty, and that I shall promise my self, you will deign
to accept. Sir, I hate to be officiously injurious to my friends* and therefore
I will not increase my fault* in excusing theirs: only let me impetrate one
thing more, which, I conceive, will deceive your expectation. It is not that
you will correct their faults, that the world knows you can do; nor that you
will forgive them, that your wonted candor flatters me you will do; but, that
having atteined your hands (which are the bounds of their ambition) they
believe they have obtained their end, and they desire not to outlive that
happiness; but that you will condescend, as I have made them an offering, to
make them a sacrifice, be you the Priest, your harth the Altar, and their Urne;
and besides the courtesy you shall do your self, in saving the reading of such
nugacities, you shall thereby answer their desert, and my desire, who am so far
from craving their reprieve, I would my self be the hastener of their
punishment. Here would I cease, but I am loath to lessen the noble office of
your mercy; by what impulse of spirit I know not, but such is the tendencie of
my desires, to express the realitie of their professions to your service, that
to say I love you, is beneath the ardor of my affection: I am ready to
profess, with that old Roman, who proclaimed, he was not only in love with
Cato, but enchanted with him. Only here is the defect, that, as the Italians
say, He that paints the flower, cannot paint the smell: So, in professing my
service to you, I cannot discover the realitie farther than you will please to
give me credit, and believe that I am

Sir, your most real Friend, and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. J.
Sir,
WHat in Superiors is counted gift and bounty, in Inferiors amounts to no more
than homage and gratitude: And well it is, if, in stead of abating, it increase
not the audit of their Obligations. Such is the nature of the present; and
though it pretend not to acquit the least part of that debt your civilitie has
involved me in, yet shall I hope it may arrive at the tender of a grateful
acknowledgment; and I wish my thanks may prove but as large, as you were
liberal. Think it not strange that I have been thus long silent, nor account me
an unclean beak, if I still chew the chud in a thankful remembrance. Sir, the
noble entertainment you vouchsafed to me, a stranger has cherished the
enclosed pamphlets into a confidence, that you will deign them not only a
favorable acceptance, but that your goodness will also grant them the benefit
of the late Act of Pardon, without which, they will seem as much strangers to
our Commonwealth, as their Author was to your self, who should now too much
wrong your noble nature, if he should not profess himself,

Sir, your most indebted Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. A.
Sir,
I Being of late arrested at the suit of some importunate occasions, which
would willingly be called necessary, I have been so much their prisoner, that
till I had satisfied the utmost minute, I was so far from a possibility of
being your servant, that I was not my own Master. Now must I compound with you,
and entreat, that if my so long silence deserve not to be answered with a
repeated act of that dormant pardon you long since pleased to grant me, yet,
that you will at least, accept of this as Interest, till opportunity shall
enable me to discharge the whole. I shall now begin to turn the weekly
hour-glasse of our Commerce, and hereafter measure my life by my letters: For,
though I have intermitted my constant course* you are in no more likelihood to
be rid of this trouble, than you have hopes of losing your Ague by the
alteration of the fits. If friendship be the incorporating of two bodies, by an
union of souls making but one of two: Me thinks, this constant correspondence
fitly answers to that deservedly applauded notion of the Circulation of the
Blood. It shall be my care, that no stop be made on my side, that we may
preserve the life of our Friendship, during the life of

Sir, your Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. P.
Sir,
BEsides the natural Antipathy of my Genius to Controversies, I have been of
late so divorced from my self and my own thoughts* by the motion of an higher
wheel than my own occasions, that I am altogether discouraged to give you any
account of this piece, upon so transient a view, that I fear I shall give you
as ill an account of it, as he did of Venice to King James, that told him, He
knew nothing of it, for he rode post through it: Yet, to satisfy your command,
against all these discouragements, I shall adventure a few hasty lines to your
more settled judgment. Sir, did not the Authors worth out-poize those petty
exceptions that might be taken in advantage, as the scarce sense of the title,
and some other inconsiderate expressions in the whole, that seem to clash one
against another, I shall only commend to your consideration these few
thoughts. The Proverb is common (wherein wit and experience club, to say much
in a little) That marriages are made on Earth, but matches are made in Heaven.
I am easily induced to believe, that the omniscient providence, which descends
to take care of the falling of a sparrow, and the number of our hairs, should
much more take care of that grand Climacterical Action of a man's life, the
restoraration of his lost rib: I shall therefore not fear to affirm, that a man
hits not upon his mate by chance or casualty, but by the undeclinable ^ate of
Gods prae-determination: And having laid down this for a ground, I shall
adventure this Superstructure, that it is not in the power of a man to dis-joyn
himself from the companion which providence has joined him to, in so
indissoluble a link of amity, that one member is not more truly a part of a
man's body than his Wife; and therefore he ought rather to undergo with
patience what God has ordained him, perhaps for other reasons than he can
understand, than to forgo it with wilfulness. I remember it was the
resolution of a complete man, That he took the untowardness of his wife as a
School of patience. Yet, to pursue the Allegory, though I would not have a man
to cut off a limb for a curable disease, yet if it outface art and nature in a
remedy, then Ense rescidendumest. And having done so, I cannot suppose it
lawful (though I should grant all his assertions for indisputable truth) that
such a man should admit another member, like a wooden leg; and, if I mistake
not (to help him a little) the weight of our Saviors argument, lies in the
last clause, that whosoever puts away his wife for other cause than adultery,
commits fornication, If he marry another. To come as near therefore as I can,
to comply with your Author, I shall lay down this Position, that it is
altogether unlawful for a man or wife to divorce, If both parties be not
equally agreeing to it, and if either of them marry again. And to this I shall
add this inconvenience, that being parted, they must not expect that the Devil,
who is the Father and Factor of divisions, will be less active in so wide a
breach, that is so ready to widen the least cranny of discontent into his
advantage: He that will creep in when the doors are shut, shall we imagine him
to be less willing to enter when they are wide open? This farther, I must
confess, there are some natures so Hetrogenious, that the streightest, and most
gordion knot of Wedlock is not able to twist, of which the Epigrammatist speaks
my mind better than I can my self:

Non amo te Sabide, nec possum dicere quare,
Ho^ tantum possum dicere, non amo te.
Take the English, is the words of a Gentleman to his wife.

I love thee not Nel,
But why, I cannot tell:
But this I can tell,
I love thee not Nel.
So that I must confess I cannot but afford them my pity, that are thus
joined in you know whose phrase, like a Spread-Eagle, with one body* but two
heads: But whether this division ought to make a Divorce, I had rather
subscribe to your judgment than tell you my own, who am

Sir, wholly at your dispose, T. F.

To Dr. S.
Sir,
NOt to confess your favors, were a sullenness beyond the sin of ingratitude;
they were too late to be forgotten, and too large to be requited* Civilities,
that might very well constitute a Turkish Paradise: A debt beyond my meannesse
to discharge, so that you have paid me beforehand for all the services I shall
ever be able to do you: And it shall be my endeavor, that my performances of
your commands, may be as swift as Lightning; or the flights of that Bird, which
is happy to make his nest in your Arms. My thanks will bear the better weight
(for they are too light of themselves) if you please to tender them to Mr. L.
whom it were a Solecisme to put last: To your self varyed, and your self
multiplied: And give me leave to kiss your hands, as I give you mine, that I am

Sir, your much obliged Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. A.
Sir,
IT was once my misery, and your good fortune, that I have had, of late, no
leisure to discharge my weekly tribute, which indeed amounts to no more, upon
your audit, than the product of a constant trouble. Assure your self, I take no
pleasure in being my own enemy: For how many rare fi^h might my course bait
happily have taken! But truly, I have been so crampt, or rather crippled with
some not unnecessary diversions, that my pen has been forced to wander from
the direct road of your service. Now, having retrived an opportunity of in
happying my self, by this literal exchange, I shall take leave to tell you,
that I will not forgive my self, till you pronounce my pardon. And I cannot but
indulge my hopes, with confidence that you will once more exercise that noble
virtue, from the many repeated acts of which goodness, I am apt to plead
pr^scription. Though, having dealt so unworthily with you, I am something
suspicious you will retract that title of worth, your friendship has formerly
fastened on my unworthiness, and no longer vote those lines for jewels, which in
the midst of Summer, present you with conceits as cold as ice, or our modern
charity. However, in obedience to the Sovereignty of your Judgment' I shall
resolve to estimate my self by your valuation of me, and make your opinion the
Standard, whereby to measure my abilities to your Service. And, as we measure
our hours by minutes, and those by the minuter attoms of sand, may my several
Letters but run into Syllables, by which together you may read me (though
imperfectly)

Sir, your very faithful Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
PArdon the bashfulnesse of my Pen, that has been hardly drawn to the
presumption of endeavoring an answer to your ingenious lines. Had my fancy
been better, or yours worse, you had long before this time received an Answer.
But such is the unequal fate of the greatest merits, that they always meet
with the least returns; stupendous worth exacting from our surprised senses,
but admiration (at best) in stead of praise; and admiration is never so well
dressed, as when it is clothed in silence. Sorry I am that you should waste
your so great respects upon one that deserves so little, and that has nothing
to return you, but the protests of a most real affection. The Gentleman you
speak of, I have not yet seen, nor heard of, but in your relation: Whenever he
comes, assure your self he shall be as welcome as his own worth and your
commends can render him: But he shall pardon me, if I wish rather it had been
your self. It is an Age, me thinks, since I enjoyed you, and I grow old in my
unhappiness: It Is in your power to create a Spring in my soul, and to make
those faculties live again, that have hitherto been buried in a silent grave of
negligence. One li^e of yours will be strong enough to draw me from that depth
of dullness into which some late melancholy thoughts have thrown me, though it
were as profound as the pit wherein Truth lies hidden. The fire that shines in
your expressions is only able to call forth that quondam ingenuitie you accuse
me of: If ever I enjoyed any such thing, 'twas when I enjoyed you; and that
left me, when I left London: Like insects in Winter, retired to their first
nothing, as resolving to enjoy no life, in the absence of the Sun their Father.
Since I cannot encircle you in person, let me embrace your picture, and let
your pen supply the silence of your tongue. If you will sometimes vouchsafe me
this happiness, I shall quit scores with my wishes, and resolve to be no
happier in this unhappy Age. Thus, because you have expected it long, I have at
length returned you a long Letter, to assure you that I am, and most sincerely

Sir, your Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. A.
Sir,
THis Letter must begin, where yours ended' because, what you commend to me as
an object of my pity, has been the subject of my thoughts; for it is
impossible my friends should suffer any loss, and my self not be sensible of,
and sorrowful for it. If the stream of your grief may be subtracted by
division, I refuse not, and that willingly, to take my part, that yours may be
the less. The cause that challenges our grief (for now it is mine as well as
yours) speaks it self in the loss of a Friend, of a Mother. To begin with that
ends all, Death, me thinks, I can find as little cause to lament, as to wonder
at it, it being so general a necessity, that none ever did, or ever shall
avoid it. We were born to live, and live to die. It is the only thing we can
here expect, without a fortass^, the only certainty of which we cannot be
deprived. Epictetus wondered no more to see a mortal man dead, than to see an
earthen pitcher broken. And as wise a Philosopher as the former, entertained
the news of his Sons deaths, with no more but a Scivi eos mortales esse natos:
As being a greater wonder that they should have so long, than that they died so
soon. Why should we wonder, or grieve, to see one go before us, the same way
that we our selves must follow. Vale, vale, nos t^ sequemur, was the solemn
leave the Ancients took of their deceased friends; and, if we believe the
Grammarians, from thence we call a Funeral Exequiae, the same being noted not
without a silent lesson in our common custom, of the Coarse's going before,
and the attendants following after. It is Seneca's observation, Nature has
ordained that to be common, which we account so heavy, that the cruelty of the
fate may be lessened by the equality. But it is the death of a Mother, and here
nature and affection will put in a plea, and plead prescription for our grief;
yet may we entertain our fortune with dry eyes. We know she was mortal, and so
liable to the common ^ate; a mother, and so by the order of nature to go
before her children: She was before them, that they might be after her. It was
thought ominous among the Jews, and not without the re-mark of a punishment,
for the Father to bury the Son, as if it were an inversion of the course of
nature, and not to be seen without a Prodigy. But I remember what the Schools
teach: That an Angel of an inferior, cannot enlighten a superior Hierarchy:
Yet I presume you will excuse the rashness of the attempt, since it proceeds
from the affection of one devoted to be in all relations

Sir, your ready servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. A.
Sir,
THat a discourse of death from a sick person, and firm arguments from an
infirm and shaking brain, should have the good hap to rout, or, at least, to
prevent the triumph of your sorrows, was certainly to be ascribed to the
benevolent Planet that co-operated in their production; or rather, to your own
more favorable Aspect. I shall not pursue a flying enemy, nor torture that
argument to a martyrdom, that is already a willing Confessor. Your quoted
Author has expressed himself Fuller, than the smalness of my reserve pretends
to. That the death of one, breaks another heart, is not safe to contradict,
since it has obtained the general vote of a Proverb. But I shall humbly
adventure to lay the Scene at a greater distance, and date it from that Golden
Age* when hearts were so entwined, they could not part without breaking, when
that Gordian knot of amity was not to be united, till it were cut by the Sithe
of him that out-conquers Alexanders sword. Were it not to upbraid the present
Age by the comparison, I could willingly venture at a Character or Encomium of
that venerable Friendship, the Imitation of former, and Despiar of later Ages.
But I shall do the subject more right to commend it to your more commanding
Pen, and study always to make good the precise value you are pleased to put upon

Sir, the meanest of your servants, T. F.

To Mr. D. P.
Sir,
WHether this should be an Apology for my former, perhaps too frequent visits,
or my later, as uncivil forbearance, I know not, since both have been equally
liable to the piquant censures of detracting tongues; and in so loud an accent,
that I question not but they have long since arrived your ears. It is not my
intention to make this paper guilty, by relating those stories which would be
tedious for me to write, and troublesome for you to read. Had they been vented
with as much innocence as falsehood* I could have looked upon them as some
pretty Romances, and at once both laughed at the Relation, and pitied the
Relator. But finding them so loaded with the over-weight of scandal, as well as
slander, I should belie my own thoughts, if I should not say they have touched
the most sensible part of my soul. That I have hitherto been silent, and
contented my self to be an auditor only, was, that so, if it had been
possible, they might have found a grave in their birth* And it is a common
saying among the Jews, That lies have their feet cut off; they cannot stand
long to what they say. But since I see (by what design I know not) that they
have already outlived the common age of a wonder, though I know you are too
wise to take up any ware upon trust from such walkingpedlers (for so I am
informed the original speaks a Talebearer) I am not altogether diffident of
your pardon if I shall enter my protests (which is all the re-action I shall
endeavor) that whatever some have fancied, or others reported, I never
propounded any other end to my self (either in a direct or collateral line) in
my approches, than to make my self happy by the enjoyment of your society.
This was the cause that inducted me into your acquaintance, and I am not
conscient to my self of any Apostasy from my first resolutions, or that those
real intentions have suffered any dilapidations. I must confess, 'twas my
ambition to rival your goodness, and to make my respects (i^ it had been
possible) as infinite as your merit; and I have read, that excesses in
friendship are not only tolerable, but laudable. But that what I thought
obedience, should be interpreted impudence, is a false construction of the
Syntaxis of my intentions. 'Twas not your fortune, but your favor* that I have
courted; were you as poor as Codrus, I should love you no less than I do; and
were you as rich as Croesus, I could love you no more. I conceived my self
obliged by my Profession to wait upon you as a Scholar, and by your courtesies,
engaged to love you as a friend; and if this be a crime, I blush not to confess
my self guilty in a very high measure: But if any of my words have been wracked
by others, to make them depose any thing contrary to what I here profess,
believe them not. I list not to enter the pitched field of a dispute; nor will
I retreat to the common intrenchments of excuses, I lay down my Arms at your
feet: And, as I can have no other witness, I will have no other Judge but your
self; resolving to be either innocent, or guilty, as you shall pronounce me. It
was no small commendation Paterculus gives of Pompey the Great, where he
affirms, that he was Amicitiarum tenax, in offensis exorabilis, in recipienda
satisfactione facilimus: Of this I believe your continual practice an exact
Translation. What though the Comical Speech of Florence be Canonical, Mulier
aut amat, aut odit nihil est tertium; it would be as falsely applied to you, as
truly to the Sex it is spoken of. And for my part you shall do me but right to
believe that I ever was, am, and will be

Sir, your Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C.
Sir,
NOt out of any uncivil dis-respect to your commands, nor any unwillingness to
serve you (so far as the too short line of my abilities will stretch) have I
hitherto been silent. Could I have wrought my self to that height of
presumption, as to think any thing of mine of merit enough to arrest your
sight, you had long since had an answer, and perhaps as long as your
expectation. It was not that I thought a letter lost to me, but because I knew
it would be loss to you; and hereof this is too sufficient a witness. Yet, Sir,
lest you should think I am either too full of business, that I cannot, or of
idleness, that I will not write to you, I have sent these lines to kiss your
hands, and to assure you, that you have infinitely obliged me by your late
letters you vouchsafed to honor me with: So full fraught were they of your
wonted ingenuitie, that (to tell you the truth) I could spare no time from
reading of them, to return any answer to them. But now, since you are pleased
to descend so far below your self, as to entreat for what you might command, I
shall no longer dispute, but obey: Yet will I not tire my self with troubling
you, farther than to re-assure you that I am

Sir, your very humble Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C.
Noble Sir,
HAving already confessed the debt, your late ingenious Letters have engaged me
in, I shall take leave to pay you (since you are pleased to grant me that
favor) as unsolvent debtors do their patient creditors, by small sums weekly.
I would willingly speak my gratitude in as loud an accent as you have done your
goodness: But, as you have honored me beyond the utmost of my wishes, and
placed my meanness on so high a pinnacle of happiness, as my most ambitious
thoughts durst never aspire to; so you have only left me modesty enough to
blush at my own unworthiness, and to promise you, that I shall hereafter lay
hold on every handle of time, and court all opportunities to serve you. But,
Sir, I wish you have not undervalued your judgment, by over-valuing those loose
lines you undertake to call most choice jewels; which ('it is my fear) will prove
but pebbles, or Bristow-stones at best: If they carry any thing of jewels in
them, it is only this, that they have nothing of worth, but what your
valuation puts upon them. However, since it cannot be admitted as History of
what I am, may it prove a Prophecy of what I may be, and that my endeavors
may overtake the mark your charity has already anticipated, that you may not
repent that you have owned me for

Sir, your very Servant, T. F.

To Mr. J. S.
Sir,
SO long it is since I received your Letter, that I should be ashamed to
confess it, did I not believe that I have hitherto done you a courtesy, by not
troubling you with my rude lines: yet dare I no longer maintein that opinion,
lest you should vote that for a neglect, which I have thought a favor. You
would pardon, if not pity me, did you know how I have been racked with
diversions, neither pleasant, nor profitable, but as vexatious as the
tediousness of the law, and the much business of the Lawyers could render them*
But, I am now in hope that my Cause will hang in suspense no longer than till
the next Assizes. The old rule was, Inter arma silent leges: I shall alter it,
and say as truly, Inter leges silent literae* I must hope my friends will
forgive me the Lawyers faults, since they have robbed me of the most necessary
functions of my life: nay, I am in doubt whether I may put this last year into
the account of my life, since I have not had time to tender you the services
and respects due from

Sir, your humble servant T. F.

To Mr. C. M.
Sir,
YOur civil reception of the tender of my endeavors to your service, has made
me presume, that your goodness will maintein your first favor with a second;
and, if occasion serve, to mention my desires to those noble Gentlemen in
conjunction with you; from whom I cannot despair of a favorable Aspect, being
represented by so happy a Medium *as your self. But I should be too injurious
to the public good, to detein you longer from your more noble employments. I
shall only beg the happiness of a room in your memory, in quality of

Sir, your most humble Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. P.
Sir,
HAving long since received your Letter and not receiving any answer, you might
justly think I either not received, or slighted your command. But, when you
have read this, you will believe that my silence was neither out of sloth, nor
slighting; it being much against my will that I have deprived my self of the
pleasure I take in serving you. The reasons that obliged me this delay, were
more just than I wish they had been: For, this vagrant Pamphlet that now
attends you, was stragled from me, and much time passed before I could procure
a Pass to send it home to the place of its birth. Since when, I understood that
your occasions called you to a greater distance, which rendered me incapable of
serving you. Thus, Sir, you see it was not out of any covetous or envious
humor, or a fear of the expense of a few lines; which when you have them, are
so worthless, that I might have done you a greater courtesy to have forborne
them now. Only this rudeness may serve to let you see how much I esteem you my
friend, in that I have taken no more care to entertain you with that studied
respect which I should, to any but my Familiar. I shall not Apologize for the
rudeness of this undrest Pamphlet, which now waits upon you in obedience to
your call; nor tell you, that I desire you would read it to your own ears
only; nor that I shall long to see it again: But only desire you to remember
what place you hold in the number of his first friends, who is

Sir, your old Friend and Servant, T. F.

To M. C. F.
Sir,
I Have heard of those men-moles, that Ner^like, rip up the entrails of their
Mother Earth, to plunder her of her hidden Excrements (who many times dig so
long under ground, that they meet with their own graves before they are
willing) though none of the best men, yet have they this good quality, that
they are continually calling and talking to one another, that if a sudden damp
should surprise any of them, the rest may speedily be ready to help and
assist them. It is no shame for the best to learn what is good, though from the
worst of men. Considering therefore the many clouds and vapors that
continually are ready to overwhelm and stifle us in this vault of earth (where
we are but day-labourers) it is a necessary duty of friends to be frequent in
these Offices of friendship. How unhappie had I been, had that boisterous wind
blown down your earthly tabernacle, and deprived me of a friend without any
warning! And though my eyes and ears were lately the happy witness of your
recoverie: Yet, me thinks, I know not how to credit them, till you vouchsafe to
give it me under your hand and seal, and confirm to me the continuance of my
health and happiness in yours. Certainly, there is more intended in these
visits, than common custom and complement. Letters are the lawful Spies and
Intelligencers of amity; the honorable Leigers to continue a good
correspondencie amongst friends. And, if, as our late Physicians hold, most
diseases and distempers of the body are occasioned by the stopping of the
bloods circulation, surely, the omitting of these correspondencies, breed no
good blood, but, like the intermitting pulse, proclaim the decay, if not the
death of friendship. It is not enough that you are alive and well, unless you
tell me so, and communicate your happiness to me, by the information. I cannot
safely say I am well, unless I know my friends are so, who are my self. Let
your Letters sometimes tell me how I do, and be at once my physic and
Physician; and I shall duly pay you the Fee of being

Sir, your officious servant, T. F.

To Mr. S. S.
Sir,
HAving sounded a retreat to my self from my former, perhaps too familiar
converse with the world; being able by experience to confirm the wise man's
censure, that it is not only vanity, but vexation of spirit. I have confined my
self to my own home: Yet, because man is Animal sociale, and God himself
thought it not fit for Him to be alone, I have undertaken (that lawful
Negromancie) to converse with the dead; the best and most impartial
instructors. I shall make bold (in obedience to your command) from your
well-furnished Market, to borrow some supply: For knowledge is truly pabulum
Animae, and Books the best Caterers of that entertainment. Had I time, I would
venture at an Encomium of those best of Companions. But the messenger stays,
and I cannot. Let me therefore (without a Preface) crave the privilege of your
Fuller; from whose Pisgath, I am ambitious to take a view of that Holy Land*
for which, and your many former favors, I must subscribe my self

Sir, yours obliged, T. F.

To Mr. T. L.
Sir,
AMongst the ill turns of my cross fortune, it was not the least, that I could
not attein the happiness of seeing you, when last in London; though your
goodness often endeavored it, and I was not idle in the like returns. If you
will pardon me my City-misfortune, in recompense, I will enjoin my self the
penance, or rather the happiness of a twelve miles pilgrimage, to kiss your
hands, at your own home, when the weather and the way shall so far be-friend
me. In pursuance of that service I owe you, I have now sent, etc. -- I suppose
you expect, and I presume, as good and as cheap as you could have bought them:
For I would willingly obtein your belief, that my service to my friends is not
mercenary; and that I look not to be paid again for those acts of duty which
your courtesies have paid me for beforehand. This is no complement, but the
real, though ex tempore dictates of my Heart.

Sir, your humble servant, T. F.

To Dr. S.
Noble Dr.
THe ingenious Italians have three significant phrases whereby they character a
work exactly done. They say, it was performed, Con diligenza, con studio, and
con amore. Without any ambition, I must crave leave to tell you, that in order
to the content I take in serving my friends, and especially your self (to whom
I am bound by so many repeated acts of friendship) I have not failed in any of
those particulars in my search for --. For, to have enjoyed the pleasure of
satisfying your expectations, I used all the diligence and care that could be
thought on: For I think I left not a shop unvisited, though yours were my only
errand, and, but for one place, I must have returned with a non est inventus.
Sir, your goodness makes me apt to believe, that you will not censure the Act
by the Issue; and I shall live in hope, that some other command may render me
more happy in the performance* Let the shortness of my time and paper excuse
this abrupt tender of my thanks and service to your self, your good bedfellow,
and the rest of your happy Family; and do me the favor, or rather the
justice, to believe me to be

Sir, your very ready and real servant, T. F.

To Mr. S. S.
Sir,
AS needy debtors pay one sum, but with an intent to borrow a bigger; so I
send you home three Books, with a request to borrow a fourth. Thus do I link
your courtesies, and my engagements together; and knowing the undoubted
fertility of your friendship, I shall make every former favor the Parent of
another. So that, if it be a fable that Pliny tells of some Mice in Caria, that
are so fruitful, that the young ones are with young in their Dams belly: The
pregnant acts of your Friendship may be the Moral. I shall therefore request
the use of your Plutarch's Morals, which (I doubt not) will instruct me how to
return you due thanks for your many courtesies, whereby you have so many times
bound me to be

Sir, your thankeful Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. C. F.
Sir,
OF all pleasures, reading is the best: of all readings, those Antelucanas
Lectiones are to me the most pleasant and profitable. And surely there is
something in it, that Lectus and Lectio are of near affinity. These are the
only Curtain-Lectures. Not long since I fastened upon Sir Richard Bakers
Soliloquie, or, as he calls it, Pillar of thoughts; deservedly so styled, for
the solidity of the composition, the rareness of the materials, and height of
the fancy. There, amongst other choice notions, he falls upon the immortality
of the Soul, and has so well discharged himself in it, that he has left no
place for a Sceptick to rest in: Only I could not see (for indeed my candle is
not of the largest size) how he does clearly evince the Original of the
rational soul, but (with St. Augustine) refuses to determine whether it be
propagated, or infused. I dare not resolve, where so great men doubt, and
wherein the soul it self is ignorant, or silent; as if it had drank of Virgils
Lethe, before it came into the body, forgetting how it came there. Weighing
the arguments of both sides, my reason holding the balance with an equal hand,
the arguments for the Traduction, in my eye seem to be most weighty. Perhaps
because I know not how to answer them. When I consider the births of bastards,
and other such like irregular productions (the Anomalies of nature) I cannot
(me thinks) salve Gods justice, who, if the soul be not ex traduce, must favor
those irregularities, so much against his Holiness: And what has the poor
innocent soul done, to be imprisoned in a sinful polluting body? For, if the
soul be not propagated, then the bodies of Infants only have sinned, and are
only liable to the punishment of Original sin. Now certainly, it cannot be
properly said that the body sins, for the body is but the souls
instrument, and what evil has the soul of a young dying Infant committed, if
his soul were not derived from Adam? And if the soul be infused, who doubts but
that it comes pure and unspotted from the hands of God? It was an error
reckoned upon the score of the Arrians, that our Savior took only flesh of
the Virgin, but not the soul: But it is the opinion of the Church of England,
that Christ took man's nature upon him in the Virgins womb; whence it must
necessarily follow, that he took both body and soul, since either, without the
other, make not perfect man. Yet, if this be evaded, as extraordinary, in the
History of the Creation, when God took Eve out of Adams side, it is not said,
that He breathed into her the breath of life, as before He did to Adam: Perhaps
(and if silence may be interpreted consent) to intimate that her soul was
derived with her body from the man. But, that the soul, which Philosophers call
Anima, composed of the vegetative and sensitive faculties, is ex traduce, is
yielded; the only question being about the Spiritus, which, they say, is the
breath of God, infused in the third, or four the or sixth month; or, to say
truth, they know not when. Now, if this Spirit be infused before the birth, why
see we not the effects and workings of this Spirit? But it seems as dull as the
body is feeble; whereas, experience tells us, Chickens as soon as hatched, fall
to pecking, ducklings to padling, the colt falls to sucking as soon as foald,
the lamb as soon as fallen; whereas this Spirit in man is not seen, till almost
the third part of his life be spent, and perhaps not at all* Let a child be
brought up in a wood, or a wilderness, what difference will appear between him
and a beast? So that this Spirit seems to be increased by, if not derived from
civil society, and liberal education; whereas, if the soul be infused by God,
that it must come perfect from his hands, who makes a question? These things my
faith can easily leap over, and turn these mountains into mole-hils; but my
reason is at a stand, and craves the favorable assistance of your courteous
hand, because I know you will do it, and that dexterously. If you have the
good fortune to rout these light arguments, which I send out as my forlorn
hope, I have yet a reserve left, which may tell you, that a man may be victus
in praelio, and yet victor in bello. But I leave you to your good fortune, with
assurance that your enemy is no other than

Sir, your Friend and Servant, T. F.

D. P. B.
INfandum (Philippe) jubis renovare dolorem* Dolorem sub sigillo silentis
signandum esse, vel lachrymis potius quam verbis exprimendum* Nefanda illa
nocte, flagranti amicitia, fluenti eloquentia, medio de font leporum, surgit
amari aliquid. A Cacumine montium sum dejectus, e Paradiso ejectus; in orbem
iturus, rediturus nunquam: foemininae linguae gladius versatilis regressum
prohibet.

Heu! quae nunc tellus, quae me aequora possunt accipere, aut quid jam misero
mihi denique restat? Silentium olim pendidit Amyclas, jam vana loquacitas
perdidit Amicos. Nunc serio, ah nimis sera! illud C^mici, Mulier aut amat, aut
odit, nihil est tertium. Tu tamen vale and constanter Ama.

Constantissimum tuum Amicum, T. F.

To Mr. S. S.
Sir,
CHristian moderation is the best reconciler of all controversies; for it has
been too often found by sad experience, that in the heats of disputations, men
have sought victory, rather than verity, Truth being often lost by an overhot
and hasty search: Witness the many, and too eager Disputes concerning Admission
to the Lords Supper; to which some men, by a too hasty, and less charitable
zeal, have excluded all, though never so worthy, lest they should lose the
authority of Examination, which the Scripture no where commands, no^ hardly
anywhere allows; it being not possible for any man to know what is in man, but
the Spirit of man which is within him. The Apostle St. Paul therefore lays the
injunction upon every man to examine himself, not sending him to another to
usurp the power of Auricular Confession, which they condemn in the Papists, yet
would exercise themselves. I deny (under submission) that any man can show any
one direct place of Scripture that commands or enjoynes the Minister to examine
his Parishioners; it being his Office to teach them their duties, to reprove
them for, and convince them of their errors, and it is left to the people to
examine and reform themselves by that glass which the Minister holds out unto
them. We accuse the Romanists (and justly) of grand Sacrilege, for denying the
Cup unto the people, whilst we are deprived not only of part, but of all. How
justly, let the Scripture, and the practice of all Ages (till ours) show. It is
denied that Judas received the Sacrament with the other disciples, though three
Evangelists absolutely relate it, and the fourth does not deny it. It is also
denied, that the Sacrament is a converting Ordinance, because the Scripture
does not say so in express terms: By better reason we say it is, because the
Scripture no where denies it, and reason it self speaks the use of it to be
verbum visibile, it setting forth Christ and his Passion to our eyes, as the
Word preached does to our ears; and we have always been taught, that the Eye
is the aptest Scholar If it be not a Preaching action now, it is because we
have it not to see; else to what purpose did our Savior command us to use it
in remembrance of him? That all should receive the Sacrament of the Supper,
because all have been Baptized, is an argument framed only by the Con^uters
thereof; for none (that I know) who plead for a free admission, but make some
exception from this general rule, as infants, fools, and excommunicate persons;
for that all have a right to eat, is an argument never maintein'd, the only
question being who have this right, and who have not? That Infidels, Idiots,
and Children have not, all agree, for reasons too plain to be questioned. That
scandalous persons have no right, we deny not neither, only say, they are not
to be accounted so, till excommunicated: Nor can that man be lawfully accounted
guilty in the sense of the Law, till proofs have convicted, and sentence
determined him to be so: For to deny a man the privileges his birth allows
him till the Law determine that he has forfeited them, is an injustice, and no
command of Christ or Scripture. Sure I am, the Master in the Parable reproved
not his servant for admitting him without the wedding garment, it was their
part to invite all, and if any would presume to come unfitted, it lay upon
himself to bear the sentence of their Lord; the Apostle telling us, as it is a
duty upon every one to examine himself, so he comes upon his own peril, to eat
and drink his own damnation. And because he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation; yet it follows not that the Sacrament
should be denied them: For who knows not, that though a man have been loose and
careless in his conversation, yet God may work a change in him in an instant,
even in the very act of Administration: And certainly, no means ought to be
denied any man, that may conduce to, if happily not produce that good end for
which all the Ordinances of the Gospel are ordained. But I forget, I intended a
Letter, not a Dispute, since without controversy I am

Sir, your Friend and Servant, T. F.

To Mr. S. S.
Sir,
I Am not at all infected with that itch of Disputation; how contrary it is to
my more peaceable temper, all that know me can witness. But having routed the
main body of your arguments, I shall now scatter your reserve. It is said the
Church of Ephesus is commended for trying and judging of men: But it is clear
by the next words, that this trial was of their doctrine, not of their lives;
and that they were found false Apostles. Neither can this (if it were as is
pretended) authorize a particular Minister to that, which may be lawful to the
Church, it being too tender a thing to be trusted with one man alone to
determine; for what inconveniences would thence follow, may easily be imagined.
The Priests indeed (as you say)* were commanded to make a separation between
the clean and the unclean, but it was of beasts for the sacrifices, as the
Texts express themselves. And St. Peter says God had shown him, that he should
not call any man common and unclean: And St. Paul tells the Corinthians, that
he had no power to judge them without. That Christ gave the Supper only to his
Apostles, is plain, but it is as plain that one of them was a Judas; and what
select company was ever in this world, wherein was not some close hypocri^e?
and no Devil to the white Devil. I have done with your arguments, and shall now
sound a retreat to my self, and resolve to draw my pen no more in this quarrel:
For I know not whether this kind of duelling be not forbidden by the late Act;
if it be not, I wish it were, for I love not to contend with my friends with
any other weapons than love and service. When you conquer me at those weapons,
I must forget your merit, or that I am

Sir, your friend and servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. F.
Sir,
HAving lately (not without pleasure and profit) read your Church History; by
which, you have not only indebted our Church in particular, but the whole
Commonwealth of Learning in general; my memory continually upbraided me with
ingratitude, till I found out this way to convey my resentments. For, though
our Returns of thanks ought to be large and universal, as your merit, yet your
goodness (I hope) will not refuse the single gratitude of private persons. In
that number (though the last, and the least) I am bold to tender my mite. A
task indeed better befitting a more equal pen, since none is able to do it but
your own. But I know your modesty is as great as your merit, the highest worths
being always accompanied with the lowest humiltie. May your name ever live, who
have raised so many to life, and rescued their memories from the tyranny of
oblivion. Amongst many others, I am particularly obliged to your courtesy, in
the remembrance of that good man Mr. Udal, whom by kindred I am something
related. One, of whom we have this tradition, that he was the first man King
James asked for when he came into England; and being answered, that he was
dead, the King (whose judgment was an exact standard of learning and learned
men) replied, By my sal, then the greatest Scholar in Europe's dead. And
certainly, by his own party (if they may be admitted for competent Judges) it
is not yet resolved, whether his Learning or his Zeal were greatest; and they
think they justly boast him a Confessor, if not a Martyr for that Cause, which
since has paid those scores with Interest. Now, though I am no heir to his
opinions, yet a small affinity to his Person, makes me embrace the opportunity
of proffering you that Intelligence you complain to want, the rather, because
(perhaps) no man can now do it but my self; and I have a Relation of all his
Trials, Censures, and Sentence, written by himself; which (I doubt not) may
give you a satisfactorie account in what you desire. If you please to command
it, I shall be ambitious to serve you, and the truth therewith. But I could
wish you would review that passage in the 31 Sect. After the Execution of Udal,
etc. for he died at the White-Lyon (just as his pardon was procured) and was
buried at St. Georges Southwark. And so I leave him to his Rest, wishing his
good name and doctrines may survive his discipline. Sir* you have not only
engaged Learning, but Religion, to perpetuate your labors. Fame is much in
arrears to your Desert, and therefore cannot in justice but continue that
veneration in length to your memory, which it yet wants in breadth. Those
Religious Houses, erected by a better devotion, than that which destroyed them,
are more beholding ^o your Pen, than to their Founders, or Materials; you
having made them a task for the remembrance and admiration of future Ages, so
long as Time shall hold a Sithe, or Fame a Trumpet. I would say more, if the
universal applause of all knowing men had not saved me a labor. And (to pay
you in some of your own coin) It is no flattery to affirm, what envy cannot
deny. Did I not foresee that the relation would swell my discourse beyond the
limits of a Letter, or the length of your patience, I should assume the
liberty to inform you, that my neighborhood to the place, acquaints me with
some Relicts of Religious Houses, at and near Ma^don, bearing still the name of
an Abbey, a Friery, and a Nunnery. And, if we may judge of Hercules by his
foot, of the whole piece by the remnant, and of them by their Remains, I
should suppose them not behind many in England. As yet, I know little of them,
but their ruins; but, if you vote it convenient, I shall endeavor to improve
my present ignorance into a discovery of them* I suppose it will be no hard
task; I am sure it shall not, when in relation to your command. I must now take
pity of your patience, which had not run this hazard of abuse, did I not know
I have to do with so great a Candor, from which I can expect no less than
pardon. And in that presumption I crave your leave to be, as I subscribe my self

Sir, your most assured servant, T. F.

To M. --
Madam,
WEre I sure of the cause of your malady, I could easily hope the Cure; but,
being to guess at the one, it will be no wonder, if I miss the other. Of all
diseases, those of the mind are worst, of those, that of melancholy: of
melancholies, the religious. I know not by what unhappy wit, the the badge of
melancholy has been fastened upon the spirit of Calvin, that Patriarch of
Presbytery. This I know, since that unhappy Planet has reigned over us, we
have too sensibly felt all those unlucky effects that an ill-boading Comet
could produce. What wars, what bloodshed, what ruins have we seen in the
State? What factions, what fractions in the Church? What envy, what hatred,
what divisions amongst private persons? What doubts, what fears, what
distractions in all men's minds? In a word, what not?

Gladly do I remember those happy days (now happy only in the remembrance)
that Golden Age, wherein we had but one Truth, but one Way, wherein men walked
lovingly together, without contentious justling one another. When those Silver
Trumpets of the Sanctuary gave no uncertain sound; when the way to Heaven was,
though a narrow, yet a plain and direct path; not blocked up by envious
censures, by distracting clamours. But now I sadly see, and sigh to say, our
Rents are like to prove our Ruin, and our distractions our destruction. I
remember a Story of a knavish Painter (so my Author calls him) who, being to
make the Picture of some goddess for a City to worship, drew the Counterfeit
of his own Mistress, and so caused her to be courted* that (perhaps) better
deserved to be carted. I wish this tale were not too true of our times. It is
too obvious to conceal the Parallel. Do we not daily see Religion dressed up in
the several shapes of every ones fancy, and obtruded upon the easy multitude,
as the only Deity for their adoration and observance? our faith made as
changeable as our fashions? And, what is the misery of our miseries, none are
so easily deluded, as the well-meaning, simple-hearted, honest Christians; who,
out of an excess of Charity, are ready to believe all men mean truly, because
they do so themselves.

If this be your case (and I am to seek if it be not) let me give you this
Caution, Beware of that evil which comes near to the shewof good; none can so
easily deceive you, as those Hyaena's, who have learned your voice, to draw you
out of the way. Take heed of those serpents of the color of the ground. Let
St. Paul beseech you to mark them which cause divisions and offenses: Contrary
to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. I am mis-inform'd, if
the same word which we read Contrary, does not also import near. There are no
opinions so dangerously contrary to the truth, as they that seem very near it.

Let me assure you, it is the old way, which is the good way, wherein you shall
find rest. There shall you find a direct road, without any turnings and
windings of private interest or faction: No briars and thorns of quarrelling
disputes; no soul-destroying doctrines, under the ostentious titles of
soul-saving truths. It is no such long and melancholy way, as we see now
chalked out by those who have found out new paths to heaven, that our Fathers
never dreamed of. There shall you find gravity without morosity* and mirth
without madness; Christian cheerfulness as well commanded, as commended.
Religion is no such frowning fury: Psalms and Hymns ar her daily practice, as
well as prayers and tears. The same Holy Spirit that commands us to pray
always, enjoins us also to rejoice evermore. We sin, if we rejoice not: There
is not more error in false mirth, than in unjust heaviness. Can they be sad,
who have a God to defend, a Christ to save, and an Holy Ghost to comfort them.
It is for those that know not God, or know him displeased, to droop, as men
without hope.

An humble practice of those Common truths, alone necessary to salvation, is
far more safe, more happy, than all the towering and lofty speculations of
unquiet Heads, and too busy Brains. There is some reason in the old Scotch
Rithme.

Rob. Will. and Davy,
Keep well thy Pater noster, and Ave,
And if thou will the better speed,
Gang no farther than thy Creed:
Say well, and do none ill,
And keep thy self in safety still.
Our way is not tedious, nor our burden heavy; why then should we add length
to the one, and weight to the other, by an un-necessarie sadness? Whilst
hypocrisy lies under the clouded brow of a Pharisee; a cheerful countenance is
the badge of innocence. It is a disparagement to our Master, and his service,
to follow him sighing, I have done. Pardon me this (perhaps un-necessary)
length, and believe me, however the Physic chance to work, it is tendered with
an hand aiming only at your happiness; and that would gladly wish no better
employment, than to strew your way to heaven with Roses. This is the height of
his ambition, who is

Madam, your most humble Servant, T. F.

To M. D. P.
Sir,
THe Italians say in a Proverb, That words are but females, deeds are males. I
can allow them to be females, so they be fruitful in these masculine
productions, and not subject to miscarry of those fruits, with which they often
seem so big. I have endeavored my promises should not prove abortive; but it
has staid so long by the Carriers Midwifry, that what you expected as a gift,
will amount to a purchase; for, a courtesy delayed, is dearly bought. Besides,
I cannot expect it should arise to the merit of a gift, since it will hardly
amount to the least mite that I owe you. Your courtesies have been so many,
your favors so large, and the continuance so long, that I despair of
discharging the Interest, should your goodness abate me the Principal. But if a
thousand thanks, and ten thousand good wishes may pass for pay, you shall never
have cause to call me ungrateful; for herein I can be as liberal as your self.
I remember the Dutch History tells us, that at the Siege of Alcmar, the
soldiers within, being without pay, the Magistrates caused dollers of tin to
be coined, of three shillings a piece, with promise, that the Town being
delivered, they would redeem them for good silver at the rate. I will wrap up
this poor present with a faithful promise, that when propitious Heaven shall
transmute my tin and copper into gold and silver, payments shall be more
proportionate to your merits, and my obligations, by which I stand firmly bound
to profess my self

Sir, your Servant, T. F.

To M. J. W.
Madam,
NEither out of sloth, nor slighting; not out of forgetfulness, nor
unwillingness, have I hitherto delayed this debt of duty, which you may justly
have expected sooner. Believe me, I have not yet forgot those many, many
favors whereby you have perpetually bound me to serve you. My silence thus
long, has been not out of negligence, but design. I was not willing to meet
your sorrow in its full careere, resolving rather to await the turning of the
tide, and expect an ebb of your passion; lest in stead of a lenitive, I had
brought a corrosive; and in stead of abating, increased your grief. By this
time, I hope, your Reason has subdued your Passion, and natural affection
given place to Religion; which, as it allows a moderate sorrow for the death of
our friends and relations, so it appoints bounds to our tears, and commands us,
Not to weep as those without hope. When my thoughts reflect upon your loss of
so dutiful a daughter, so good a wife, so pleasant a companion, so true a
friend, in the fair flower of her youth, in the pleasant Spring of her age; me
thinks, I could mingle my tears with yours, and forget what I intended. But
when again I consider the miseries of this life, the troubles of this world, the
losses and crosses, the corroding cares, the doubtful fears that attend us
here: when I balance our loss with her gains, the miseries she is past, with
the happinesses she enjoyes, I can find so little cause to mourn, that I must
confess we have infinitely more reason to rejoice. Alas! what is our life but a
sea of troubles, a pilgrimage of dangers, a race, a warfare, a banishment; the
world a prisonfull of chains and captives, at best an Inn, no habitation?
Death is our quiet harbor, an end of our journey, a conclusion of our warfare;
that brings us from exile to our native home; that gives us a Kingdom for a
prison, crowns for chains, and for this poor baiting-place of earth, an
everlasting habitation in Heaven. Shall we then grieve for those are gone
before us, who are released from the evils present, and secured against those
to come, who are taken from labor to rest, from expectation to fruition, from
death to life. Is it not unjust? Is it not envious? The Philosopher, who was
asked, Which was the best ship? wisely answered, That which is safely arrived.
Shall we weep for those, who have already made their voyage, or rather for our
selves, who are still tossed upon the waters of strife, who are still subject
to those storms and tempests, which they have happily past? They are not lost,
but gone before; not perished, but perfected; not dead, but departed. A
long-sick man commanded this Epitaph to be written upon his grave, Here I am
well. Fortune (they say) most hurts, whom she seems to favor; Death most
favors those he seems to hurt. Nor may we account an early death untimely: The
fruit which to our apprehension is blown down green and untimely, is gathered
full ripe in Gods providence. The fairest flowers soonest fade. The Sun and
Moon, the most bright and glorious of these heavenly bodies, fulfill their
courses in a short season, whilst the dimmer and duller Planets are longer
time wheeling about. It is sometimes the happiness of young John, to outrun
old Peter to the Sepulcher. This is Gods will, and therefore not to be
resisted, not to be repined at. It is their happiness, therefore not to be
lamented. Can our fears profit them where they are, or bring them back to us?
I could allow you to be lavish of your sighs, to be prodigal of your tears,
were they not unfruitful, were they not unlawful. I can easily believe your
loss of her, to be as great as your love to her; but your meeting again will be
more joyous, than your parting was grievous. But what do I do? I forget that I
write to one, whose Christian carriage has (I doubt not) already prevented me
this office; and whose excellent parts are able to anticipate whatsoever I am
able to say. Give me leave only to kiss your hands, and once more to assure
you, that I am still as much as ever,

Madam, the most humble, and the most real of your Friends and Servants, T. F.

To Mr. T. C.
Sir,
IT is informed from several parts, that the Butchers have knocked down the
Excise-men, and cut the throat of the Excise upon meat: And they have so
generally thrown off that yoke, that it is believed they will hardly be brought
to admit the putting of it on again. Whither do these confusions tend! Where
will they end! We are like the poor Ass in the Fable, who often changed his
Master, but always for the worse. Will not all these miseries yet open the
eyes of the blinded multitude! I would be-speak them in the words of Ananus,
one of the Jewish Priests, inciting the people against the factious Zealots;
amongst other passages (which you may find in Josephus) he thus questions them,
-- But why should I exclame against the tyrants? Did not you your selves make
them great, and nourish their power and authority by your patience? Did not
you, by despising those who before were in authority, being but a few, make all
these, who are many in number, tyrants over your selves?

When Consuls succeeded the Roman Kings, the Historian says, they changed gold
for brass, and loathing one King, suffered many tyrants, scourging their folly
with their fall, and curing a fester'd sore with a poisoned plaster. Do we not
plainly see the Fable moralized by our selves? The Serpents Tail would needs
one day fall a quarrelling with the Head, saying, that she would by turns go
before, and not always come lagging behind; which the Head having yielded
unto, was the first that repented it, not knowing how, or whither she should
go; and besides, was all rent and bruised, being forced, against nature, to
follow a member that had neither seeing nor hearing to conduct it. Our
factions, fractions, and lawless liberty, render us like the poor Bactrans, of
whom it is said, that they are Sine Fide, sine Rege, sine Lege. But whither is
my pen running? Since I began with the Excise in England, I will waft you over
into Holland, where it first began, and was invented; there you shall see how
ill the Dutchmen at first relished this Tax upon their drink: It occasioned
this Libel in Dutch, which you shall read in English:

I wish long life may him befall,
And not one good day there withal;
And Hellfire after this life here,
Who first did raise this Tax on Beer.
With this Postscript, The Word of God, and the Tax on Beer, last for ever and
ever.

But it is no wonder the Dutchman should be so angry with this charge upon his
drink, since you know it is said, Germanorum vivere, est bibere. And they
account the turning of water into wine, the greatest Miracle that ever Christ
did; which miracle only made one of them wish that Christ had lived in their
Country. No more now, but that I am still as always,

Sir, your Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. C.
Sir,
WE have now (thanks to our Preserver) lived to see those men confuted to their
faces, who would needs determine the end of the world, before the end of the
year; and upon no better ground, that I could hear from any of them, than this,
because (say they) the old world was drowned in the year from the Creation,
1657. And I find the Learned Alstedius fathering of this fancy, because he
found the same number of years in the Chronogram of Conflagratio Mundi. How
miserably, and yet how often have the too credulous vulgar been deluded by the
vain Predictions of such idle Astrologasters! I remember Hollingshed tells a
story of the Prior of St. Bartholomews London, who built him an house on
Harrow-hill, to secure himself from a supposed flood foretold by an Astrologer:
But at last, he, with the rest of his seduced company, came down again as wise
as they went up. Such is the fate and folly of those false prophets, that they
often live to see themselves confuted. It is a witty jeer the Cambro-Britannian
Epigrammatist puts upon the Scotch Napier, who more wisely had determined the
end of the world at a farther distance.

Cor mundi finem propiorem non facis? ut ne ant^ obitum mendax arguerere:
Sapis. Thus, as is well observed, by a late and Learned Author, Astrologers
have told of a sad and discontented day, which would weep it is eyes out in
showers, which when 'twas born proved a Democritus, and did nothing but laugh
at their ignorance and folly.

Infinite are the Stories upon Record of the madness of those men, and the
vanity and credulity of the easy multitude: Strange, that they should be so
grossly, and yet so often cheated with the same bait! But I conclude with a
more serious observation of Ludolphus, of the two destructions of the world: As
the first, says he, was by water, for the heat of their lust; so the second
shall be by fire, for the coldness of their love. In hopes that ours is not
yet grown cold, I subscribe my self,

Sir, your loving Friend, T. F.

To Mr. E. M.
Sir,
BOdin the Frenchman, in his Method of History, accounts Englishmen barbarous
for their Civil Wars: But his Countrymen, at this time, have no great reason to
cast dirt in our faces, till they have washed their own. They who have hitherto
set us on fire, and warmed their hands by it, are now in the like flames
themselves. It has been one of their Cardinal Policies to divide us, lest our
union should prove their ruin. It was the saying of the D. of Rohan, a great
Statesman, That England was a mighty Animal, and could never die, unless it
killed it self. Certainly we have no worse enemies than our selves, as if we
had conspired our own ruin: For Plutarch calls the ardent desire of the
Graecians to make Civil Wars in Greece, a Conspiracy against themselves. But
well may the winds and waves be Pilots to that ship whose inferior Mariners
have thrown their Pylot overboard. Dum ille regnabat, tranquille vivebamus, and
neminem metuebamus, said the people of the Emperor Pertinax. We remember the
time when we lived in peace and plenty, till we surfeited of our happiness; and
as our peace begat plenty, so our plenty begat pride, and pride brought forth
animosities and factions, and they, if not prevented, will be delivered of our
ruin and destruction.

In times past (says Cornelius Tacitus of our Countrymen) they lived under a
Monarchy; now, that they are subject to diverse Masters, one can see nothing but
faction and divisions amongst them. This was spoken of our forefathers; and our
Posterity will think it meant only of us. The God of union reunite us, and
out of this Chaos of confusion, create an happy concord amongst us, before our
rents prove our ruin, and our distractions our destruction. This is the
constant and hearty prayer of

Sir, your assured Servant, T. F.

To Mr. T. C.
Sir,
I Must tell you, you are not justly troubled at the injustice of our new
Judges, since they have thereby rendered those brave men Martyrs, which
otherwise had died as Criminals. Socrates his wife exasperated her grief by
this circumstance, Good Lord, said she, how unjustly do these bad Judges put
him to death! What, would thou rather they should execute me justly? replied
he to her. The injustice of the Judges sentence, declare the justness of the
condemned's cause. It is not the being a Judge that makes his sentence just, or
the prisoner guilty: There have been those, and we have seen them, who have
committed murder with the Sword of Justice, and executed Justice as a
malefactor. Nor have the friends of those happy Martyrs any cause to be ashamed
of, or grieved for their death, or manner of it: Damnari, dissecari, suspendi,
decolari, piis cum impiis sunt communia: (says Erasmus) Varia sunt hominum
judicia, Ille foelix qui judice Deo absolvitur. The old Martyrs have accounted
martyrdom the way to heaven on hors-back. The first man that died went to
heaven, but the first man that went to heaven died a Martyr, suffered a violent
death by the hands of a cruel and unmerciful brother. We have lived to see that
politic principle of Periander put in practice, who being consulted with how
to preserve a tyranny, bid the messenger stand still, whilst he, walking in a
garden, topt all the highest flowers, thereby signifying the cutting off, and
bringing low of the Nobility. Yet will not this do with us; it is but like
Cadmus his sowing of serpents teeth, which will raise up armed men to revenge
the quarrel of those brave spirits: For though our Curfeu-bell has been rung
out, and the fire of our zeal raked up in the ashes of Acts and Orders, yet it
is not extinguished: Witness those Sparks who have revenged the death of their
Sovereign with the hazard of their own lives.

By this time, I doubt not, but they who most endeavored his Majesty's death,
have seen cause enough to wish him alive again, and are ready to engrave that
Motto upon his Statue (which they threw down with contempt) which was set upon
the Statue of the Roman Brutus, Vtinam viveres. It is yet some comfort that we
can mingle sighs, and assist one another with mutual counsels and courtesies,
which shall never be wanting from

Sir, your assured Friend, T. F.

To Mr. T. L.
Sir,
BEing lately at our New Court, there I saw his Highnose, so environed with his
guard, as if he had been their prisoner, and wondered how he durst venture
himself amongst so many dangerous weapons. I was ready to have said unto him,
as Plato did to D^onysius the tyrant, when he saw him compassed about with many
soldiers of his guard, What, have thou committed so many evils, that thou
stand in need of such a guard of armed fellows? To see the difference
betwixt fearlesse innocence, and fearful guilt! M. Aurelius, that good Prince,
never had any guard; for (says my Author) he stood not in fear of his
subjects. Innocence is the surest guard, as Pliny told Trajan the Emperor:
Haec arx inaccessa, hoc inexpugnabile munimentum, munimento non egere. Frustra
se terrore succinxeret, qui septus charitate non fuerit. Armis enim arma
irritantur.

White Hall is now become Black-hall, with the smoke of coals and matches: But
it would make one sad and sigh to see what havoc is made of his Majesty's
goods and household stuff, and to whose using his house and furniture is fallen.
It minded me of a story in Q. Curtius, who says, Alexander (that great robber,
as the petty Pyrat called him) sitting in Darius Seat, which was not fit for
him, but higher than served for his stature, his feet could not touch the
ground; one of his Pages put a board underneath for him to tread upon; whereat
one of the Eunuchs that belonged to Darius, looked heavily, and fetched a deep
sigh, whose sadness when Alexander perceived, he enquired of him the cause? He
answered: That when he beheld the board whereon Darius was wont to eat,
employed to so base an use, he could not behold it without grief. Who can see
those brave horses which used to draw his Majestics Coach, now drag in enemies
cart, without pity and indignation? But enough of this, and for this time I am,

Sir, your very Friend, Servant, T. F.

To Mr. E. H.
Sir,
HAving now retrived my rude draught of that excellent, but lost virtue of
friendship, I send the picture to you the pattern, that it may be corrected by
the comparison. It cannot be expected that it should be an exact piece, or that
I should draw it to the life, which has been dead to us poor mortals;
especially having had so little light, and at so great a distance as we are
removed from that golden age wherein friendship flourished. I cannot but
admire, that so noble a subject has found so few friends: For, except that
Triumvirate of Eloquence, the Roman Cicero, our English Seneca, and that great
Dictator of Learning Sir Fra. Bacon. I have found few or none, who have written
any just discourse of it: From their trine Aspect has my discourse received
some light and augmentation. Yet have I not altogether trod in their steps, nor
made any better use of them, than admire those I could not imitate; neither
have I used any gay or painted language, but plain and simple, like the subject
I handle. I have labored to make it like, rather than handsome. An Ambassador
coming to Treat with the Roman Senate, having his head powdered, and his face
painted, Cato told them, they could not expect any truth from him, whose very
locks and looks did lie. I have therefore studied to represent this Lady, sine
fuco, sine fallaciis, without the dressings of any artificial handsomness, or
auxiliary beauty. If you like it, love it; if not, draw the curtain of your
charity over it, and let it lie, till some abler workman shall take the pensil
in hand. It is enough for me, if it can but speak the Author

Sir, your true Friend, T. F.

To Mr. J. A.
Sir,
DId not the same peremptory business that pressed me down, still keep me
here, I shoud (at least) have prevented the Office of this Paper, and not been
beholding to a mute proxy for the delivery of a message I should rather, if
not better, have done in person. Since fate will have it thus, let me crave
your credence, that what you shall here read, is not so much the dictate, as
the transcript of my heart. Sir, I left not my careful thoughts with your line
of Communication; they have been, and will be my constant companions. Haeret
lateri lethalis arundo; and I despair of any other cure, than the dictamen of
your friendly counsel. I am confident your goodness will do me not only the
courtesy, but the justice to believe that my recesse was rather retreat, than
a flight from the negotiation we had in hand, A business (if my thoughts
deceive me not) too weighty to be carried to the end without a rest. Pardon me,
if I am willing to look before I leap. -- But after the verdict of my most
considerate and serious thoughts, I must profess I have a large and long
experience of the skill and fidelity of you my leader: Nor do I fear a
miscarriage where you are pleased to be my guide. To say nothing of other
circumstances I am not forgetful of, though silent in, allow me the liberty to
tell you, Spem de futuris foveo: principium liquet; and it shall not only be my
wish, but the most earnest of my endeavors, (...). I have hitherto but tythed
my thoughts, which should I allow my pen the liberty to write, would be too
tedious for you to read. In a word therefore (to do you the courtesy of
concluding) I shall promise, that one line from -- (if he please to maintein
his first favor with a second) will easily and quickly draw me from the most
earnest of my engagements to tell him Vis a vis, that I am what I ever was, and
still hope to be accounted

Sir, your very very Friend, T. F.

To Mr. R. H.
Sir,
IN my addreresses to my friends, I do always intend too much reality, to be
beholding to a Complement, in this to you, if an excess of affection should
unawares transport my pen to an extravagant flight, your merits to me, and my
obliged respects to you, may sufficiently secure me from the guilt of a
suspicious hyperbole. When I have said all I can, I shall be so far from
thinking it too much, that I must confess it to be too little. I could rather
have contented my self to have been still your silent debtor, than by the
adventure of a few hasty lines to stand in need of your pardon. To think to
quit scores with you, by any thing I can say or do, is beyond the most
confident of my hopes; and had not your command exacted it, I should not now
have put you upon a new exercise of that goodness, to which I am already so
much indebted. In the large Catalogue of those whom your repeated civilities,
and constant courtesies have purchased to be your friends, I dare affirm, you
have none more seriously sensible of your favors, or that does more really
wish your welfare, than my self. May success and prosperity wait upon all your
undertakings; may health and happiness be your constant attendants; and may the
same good Angel that carries you from us, guide you in your journeys, and
return you in safety.

Let not your dear Consort (the best of wives and women) think that I have all
this while forgotten Her: She is too much your self to be divided from you in
our good wishes. Sir, I am equally, and at once her and your

Most obliged Friend, T. F.

FINIS.
LOVE'S LABYRINTH; OR, The Royal Shepherdess: A TRAGI-COMEDIE. By THO. FORDE,
Philothal.

Quid Melius desidiosus agam?
Fata viam invenient.
Comica festina gaudet sermon Thalia.
LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham, and are to sold
at the Sign of the Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

To his Worthy Friend Mr. Thomas Forde on his LOVES LABYRINTH.
TRue Friend, while others me outvie, and grace the ^
(As thou do them far more) I scarce can trace thee
I many thousand miles do wander
Of Pilgrimage in thy Maeander,
Till by the golden thread,
Of Love I Am safe through led.
Thy Wit is far beyond the Serpentine;
Thy wreathings chequer-work and warp divine;
Thy curious inter-woven Plots,
Rich twine, ^y'd all in Lovers-knots:
Thy Skill is exquisite,
To untie and unite.
Thy Tent-works inlet pleases me so well,
I Would have none outlet: I Would rather dwell.
I love thy labyrinth, and approve,
That thou should labyrinth my love:
There I poor well-hous'd elf
Might safely lose my self.
I see, work-women a'n't above workmen*
How far short comes the needle of the pen!
Those Damsels, who are so devouts
In pricking little holes in clouts,
Thy lively Tapestry-story
Out-strips their painted glory*
Let spleen it self judge eithers manu tract:
Their female works cannot speak, thy male-words Act.
A drop of this your art (Sr.) passes
Beyond an Ocean of allusiv^ ad gr. (...).
the Lasses
Their by as-stitch does squint,
But thine's downright in print.
Nay all thou do would be such ne'retheless,
Though it never saw the light, nor felt the press.
Thy last impression comes behind,
The first and chief is in thy mind:
Thou art beyond the rest,
Thy first Edition's best.
None living can (I probably conjecture)
No not thy self) repair this Architecture.
Each line's right perpendicular,
Reason thy Pium, and Truth thy Square:
Each full-point may be sead,
A nail driven to the Head.
But I could wish there were no period,
That (though all is even) yet something still were od;
That after all Exits might begin
Still more fresh Intrats to come in.
The whole frame so divine is,
Naught vexes me but FINIS.
N. C.

To my ingenious Friend, Mr. Thomas Forde, on His LOVES LABYRINTH.
WHo truly will thy Labyrinth commend,
Shall find it hard, both to begin, and end:
Yet thou have spun a thread, with which t'untwine
The wandering Lover, though all things combine
To stop his passage: Such a flowing Style
Thou usest too, as did my sense beguile:
For whilst I read, I neither Scaene nor Stage,
"Could think were feigned: I saw an Active Rage
"Appear in Damocles, which to my eye
"Not Acted seemed, but real Tyranny.
" Sephestia's love and doom; the better fate
"Of Pleusidippus, not more fortunate:
"For he Loves Labyrinth did also tread,
"And Court incestuously his Mothers Bed.
"And so her father, husband too (none known)
"Yet he by sympathy did claim his own,
"And had a grant, which moved the Tyrants spleen,
"(Since he could not enjoy her for his Queen)
"To kill them both; their destinies prevent,
"As loath to have destroyed the innocent.
"Yet at the last each thing succeeds with good:
"Though the foundation seemed t'be laid in blood.
"And then the harmless shepherds rural sport,
"Whose innocence makes every place a Court.
And all things in so consonanat a dress,
Makes more the seeming, not the being less.
That (credit me) there is not in it a line,
('It Is all so rare) but I could wish were mine.
And as before, so I say now of this,
Thou have thy skill by Metempsychosi^*
Proceed then Worthy Friend, and may thy Fame,
Like Laureat Johnson, ever speak thy Name.
Edw. Barwick*

Persons Personated.
DAmocles, King of Arcadia. Father of Sephestia. Agenor, King of Thessaly.
Father of Euriphyla. Maximus or Melecertus, Prince of Cyprus, who married
Sephestia. Plusidippus, Son of Sephestia and Maximus. Menaphon, the Kings
Shepherd. Doron, a silly Shepherd. Lamedon, Brother to King Damocles. 2 Lords
of Arcadia. Romanio, Eurilochus,
2 Pirates of Thessaly, who found Plusidippus. Artaxia, Queen of Arcadia, mother
of Sephestia. Sephestia, or Samela, wife to Maximus, and mother of Plusidippus.
Euriphyla, daughter to Agenor, who loved Plusidippus. Pesana, sister to Doron,
in love with Menaphon. Carmila, sister to Menaphon, in love with Doron.


The Scaene Arcadia*

Loves Labyrinth.
Act. 1.
Scaene 1*
Enter King Damocles with two Lords, and Lamedon. King. CAn this be true?


1 Lo. My Liege, as truth it self.


King. And will neither the power of a King,
Nor precepts of a father over-sway
Her fond affections; but that thus she will
Run headlong to her ruin? Let her go.

1 Lo. Yet shot she not at rovers, but a Prince
He is, young and deserving; therefore since
Sh'has hit the mark, it will now be in vain
To give her aim, or make her shoot again.

Kin. Was she so hasty, that she could not stay
To take our Fatherly advice with her?
No wonder if she wander in the Labyrinth
Of love, without the clew of our counsel.

La. Come brother* come, she is not the first has done
A miss; her own affections were the surest guide
Unto her own content: she chose to please
Her self, not you, come, let this anger cease.

1 Lo. It Is now too late for to recall what is past,
The match is made, and that so surely fast,
It Is past dissolving now; a Grandfather
You are alreay: From their conjunction has
This in^^^ence proceeded, a fair boy
Has given them earnest of succeeding joy.

Kin. How! a boy! and shall that base brat enjoy
My crown? no, no, I Will take a course for that.

La. Why brother, it is a Prince by birth, and why
Not born to Reign?

Kin. Ay, mischief's on my head,
But I Will prevent the plot and storm, we will send
Them far enough* from troubling of our state:
Distance and danger shall they first subdue,
Before they gain our Crown; the slavish waves
Shall be their subjects: let them go and and win
The trydent of great Neptune, waters King.
I mean to set them forth.

1 Lo. What means my Liege?


Kin. Nay, I Am resolved, since that they do no more
Regard my favor, they shall feel my frowns.
O ye Celestial Deities! where are
Your power and wonted justice now become?
All things run headlong, and the feet forget
Their duty to their Head, and traitors turn,
Breaking the bonds of government; that now
A Princes power, or Fathers care's contemned,
And only recompensed with slight and scorn.

La^ But* Sir, though she her duty do forget
To you, yet is she still your child, and may
Be easily reclaimed. Shall one misdeed
Forfeit all former loyalty? She used
To be more ready to give, than you
Could be to ask. Come, let the weight of that
O're-poize your anger, and this light offense.

Kin. I Will hear no more, all pity now is gone,
And anger has the castle of my breast
So strongly fortified, whole valleys of
Requests can never move: cease then your suit,
To which my ears are deaf, and tongue is mute.

1 Lo. Heaven is not so impregnable, but that
Entreaties may both siege and conquer it:
If that your daughter has run on the score
Of one offense, will nothing cancel it?

Kin. My resolution's writ in Adamant.


1 Lo. Dread Sir, and may not tears then blot it out?


Kin. Nor all the liquid drop the sea contains
Shall quench my rage; for now I have forgot
All pity of a father, and that wretch
Shall feel what it is to lose a fathers love. --
Since she will needs slight and contemn our care,
I Will have a Bark provided, without oar,
Or sail, or pilot, but the wilful wind,
And waves, true emblemes of their giddy act,
And therein with her brat, and mate imbarqu'd,
Shall seek their fortunes: And see you it done
Without delay, our Will admits no time,
T'expostulate no more than alteration*

1 Lo. O good my Lord command my service in
Some nobler act than this and do not try
My faith in that, for which ^'de rather die,
Than do it. What heir shall succ^ed your self
In the Arcadian Diadem, if thus you drown
The Sun of all our hopes, which must
Supply your place, when as your Sun shall set
In darkest clouds of death, must night ensue,
And seize upon our Horizon? -- O let
Some pity of our drooping state prevail.

Kin. All will not do. I Will have it done; then go
Or stay and pull my vengeance on thy head.
Will you turn traitor too, to our commands?
As you tender our favor, or your safety,
Go execute my will without delay.

1 Lo. And must my safety prove their ruin? can
They not live, but I must die? I Will do it.
Perhaps the tyrant-waves may prove more kind
Than is their King My Liege I Will ease your mind.

Lam. And must they, and they only prove (poor hearts)
A sacrifice to fury for their love?
I Will be companion of their fortune. We
Will leave this cursed land, which is naught else
But a dry sea of miseries, in which
We daily float; the sea can never be
More merciless. O what a maze of woe
Do lovers tread (dire fate) that for their love,
Are recompensed with hatred. Farewell world,
Thou ball of fortune banded to and fro,
And never quiet; we will try what fate
Awaits us in the sea, it cannot be worse
Than here we suffer by our dearest friends.

Kin. Well brother, since you are so weary of
The world, pray take your share with them, and care
Of her: I leave her unto you, and to
The mercies of the waves, and so adieu.

Exit. Scaen. 2.
2 Lo. Was ever man so resolute to undo,
What an whole age cannot recompense again?
To cast away a Lady of that worth,
That bankrupt nature cannot furnish forth
Her Parallel: A beauty that would tempt
The gods to lust: But guarded with an eye
So modestly severe, it would strike dead
All lustful hopes of the hot ravisher.
See where she comes, like Phoebus newly rose
From Thetis bed: Little does she suppose
The cruelty of her once happy Father,
In having such a daughter, now no^ fit
To Enjoy a blessing which he values not.

Seph. What news my Lord? Is the ice of my fathers
Anger broken? Has the sun of counsel
Thawed his frozen breast?

1 Lo. Ay, into a flood --


Seph. What means this passion? Speak man, for I am
Prepared; it cannot be worse than I expect.

1 Lo. Why then it is --
Let me first drown my self
In mine own tears, and vent my mind in sighs:
Madam, you may guess sooner than I can tell.

Seph. Prithee torment me not thus with delays,
More tedious than the thing can be, what e're
It is. Come, I am armed with the shield
Of patience, my breast is mischief-proof.

1 Lo. It Is easier far to tell than execute:
I wish my task were done with telling it.
Madam, He has made me the sad Over-seer
Of that dire act, which he so fears to speak.
Silence will not relieve, it may protract
The doing of that horrid fact, which who
Shall hear, will loath the name of father, for
Your fathers sake, who when perhaps you are gone
By's want will prize your worth the more, and, love
You better than he ever did before.
Thus are we taught to value of the light,
By the dull silence of the darker night.

Sep. But to your story, and my doom, which sure
Must needs be great, that it can find no vent.
Come ease your shoulders of this burden, lay
It on mine, who have deserved it.

1 Lo. Lady, wonder not at our unwillingness
To tell what we had rather wish our tongues
Out, than to be the unhappy messengers
Of such sad news, the truth whereof must rob
Arcadia of it is richest, choicest Gem,
That does adorn her Princely Diadem:
By venturing all our hopes to the mercy
Of the cruel waves, He has pressed to be
Your only Pilot; being ship't alone,
With your dear babe and husband, without sail,
Or oar, to contradict the lawless seas,
In their unbounded raging tyranny:
Whose heedless rigor yet may hap to prove
More kind unto you than your fathers love.

Sep. Heavens will be done: But had another hand
Inflicted this, it would have lighter seemed: --
Yet is there comfort in his cruelty,
That has not parted me from him, for whom
All this will be but light; his company
Will sweeten all my sorrows, and convert
My mourning into mirth: Can I be sad,
Enjoying him will only make me glad?

Enter Lamedon. Lam. I cannot win my brother to reverse
His cruel sentence, but it must be done. --
Dear Niece, I Am thy companion; misery
Shall never make my friendship to turn edge,
But at the lowest ebb of fortune shall
My love still flow: the sea shall never quench
That flame which virtue once has kindled in
My breast, nor shall it meet, or be put out
With any cold extinguisher but death.
If many shoulders make griefs burden light,
Then so shall ours: and may mine cease to be,
When they shall cease to bear their equal part,
And sympathize with thee, as does my heart.

Seph. Uncle, my thanks. How rare it is to find
A friend in misery! Men run from such,
Like Deer from him is hunted with the dogs,
As if that misery infectious were.
Men fly with Eagles wings away,
But creep like snails, when they should succor lend.
I cannot therefore choose but prize your love,
Who dare be true unto your friend; a name
Nearer than that of kindred, or of blood:
This is the effect of noblest virtue, which
Ties firmer knots than age can e're undo:
Such is the knot my Maximus and I
Have tied, spite of my fathers anger, it
Shall hold, when envy's tired to invent
Mischiefs, in vain, to cut the knot in two,
Which heaven has knit too fast to loose again.
Alas fond man! who thinks to unravel what
The gods have wove together. -- It Is in vain.

Scaen. 3.
1 Lo. Lady, time calls upon you not to stay,
Lest by a fond delay you call upon
His fury to convert into some worse,
And sudden punishment, which may deny
All hopes of future safety; of all ills
The least is always wisely to be chosen.

Seph. Go and prepare that floting grave, which must
Devour's alive, I will attend you here.
Before when will my dearest find his grief,
In finding me thus lost without relief.
Exeunt. Manet Sephestia. Why does my Love thus tarry? surely he
Forgotten has the place, or time, or else
He would not stay thus long; but can I blame
Him, to be slow to meet his ruin? I
Could wish he would not come at all, that so
He yet might live, although I perish; but
How fondly do I wish to be without
Him, without whom alas! I cannot live.
'Twere as impossible as without air:
He it is for whom I suffer, and with him,
All places are alike to me. -- See where
He comes, who is sole keeper of my heart.

Enter Maximus. Max. My dear!


Seph. Ah, dear indeed, for whom thy life
Must pay the shot of cruelty enraged. --

Max. What means my love? is it she, or do I dream?
Sure this cannot be she, whose words were wont
To be more sweet than honey, soft as oil:
These words, more sharp than daggers points, n^'re came
From her I know -- What say thou my sweet?

Seph. The same -- truth will not suffer me to speak
Other, lest I should injure her* -- O that
'Twere possible so to dispense with truth,
Not to betray our selves -- I know not what to say. --

Max. Heavens bless us, what a sudden change is here!
Love, who has wronged thee? tell me, that I may
Third their lives upon my sword, and make their
Dead trunks float in their own blood, till they blush
At their own shame: Tell me my heart, who is it?

Seph. Alas poor soul! thou little dreamst what sad
News does await thine ears; my tongue does fail,
Not daring once to name the thing must be
Our loves sad end, and dire Catastrophe.
My fathers fury -- Oh that that name
I once delighted in, should odious be
To mine affrighted senses! -- But for thee
Alone, it is I grieve, not for my self. --

Max. Be It what it will, so that it be but in
Relation to thy love, I will embrace,
And hug, and thank that malice too, that so
Invented has a means whereby I may
But testify my loyalty to thee:
For whose sweet sake I would encounter with
Legions of armed furies; sacrifice
My dearest blood unto thy service, which
I more esteem, than all the wealth the world
Can boast of: It Is thee alone I value,
Above whatever men's ambitious thoughts
Can fathom with their boundless appetites.

Seph. This flame of love must now be quenched in
T^^ foaming sea; we are designed a prey
Unto the fury of winds and waves. --
The deadly Barque's providing, which must be
Our moving habitation; the sea
Must be our Kingdom, and the scaly fry
Our subjects: -- This, this, the portion is
Of fortunes frowns, and fathers fiercer hate.
Fly, fly, my dearest Maximus, and save
My life in thine; oh stay no longer here.

weeps Max. Why do thou torment thy self before
Thy time? will thou anticipate the sea?
And drown thy self in ^ears? Deny me not
To share with thee in suffering, as well
As I have done in pleasure; it is for me
This storm is raised, were I once cast away,
His rage would cease. I, I have wronged thee,
And I Will be just to thee and to my word.
draws I Will open the sluices of my fullest veins,
And set them running, till they make a flood,
Wherein I Will drown my self --

He offers to kill himself. She stays his hand. Seph. Thine heart lies here;
It Is here, locked up securely in my breast:
First open that, and take it out; for death
Shall never divorce me from thy company:
I will attend thee through those shady vaults
Of death, or thou shall live with me. -- Do think
This body possible to live without
A soul? or without thee? Have pity on
Thy tender babe, whose life depends on thine,
And make not me widow, and him orphan,
With unadvised rashness -- Sheath thy sword.

Max. Mine eyes will never endure it, to behold,
Thee miserable, no, no, death first shall draw
A sable veil of darkness over them -- --
Pardon my rashuess, I will live with thee,
And tire thy fathers rage with suffering,
So he will but suffer thee to live in mirth,
The greatest sorrow shall not make me sad.

Seph. Here comes my father, cerainly his rage
Will know no bounds: I fear it will
Break forth into some desperate act on me.

Max. Although he be a King, which sacred name
I reverence, and as a mortal god
Adore; he shall not dare to injure you
Before my face: first shall he wear my life
Upon his sword, if he but dare to touch
Thy sacred self. -- --

S^^n. 4.
Enter Damocles. Kin. How now light-skirts? have you got your Champion
To shield you from our anger? know I have
Not yet forgot the name of father, though
You thus have slighted it; but as a King,
We must be just to punish your contempt.
Did you so well know your beauty to be
Proud of it, and yet so little value it,
As thus to throw it all away at once?
Well, get you gone. -- Since that you have esteemed
A strangers love before your lovalty
To me, or my care to you, a stranger shall
Inherit what you were born to, had not
Your fond affections forced this vile exchange.

Max. Sir -- for your fury will not suffer me
To call you father; think not your daughter
Undervalued by her love to me:
Her love ran not so low, as to be sto^p'd
To meet with crime, who am a Prince n^ less
Than is your self: Cyprus my Kingdom is.

Kin. What drew you hither then? you must needs know
It is no less than treason for to steal
An heir to our crown: what drew you hither?

Max. Hither I came, drawn by that forcible
Attractive, for to offer up my self
A sacrifice at the altar of her love.
Tossed with a sea of miseries, I came
To anchor in the haven of her heart:
And if this be treason, I shall not blush
To be esteemed a traitor. But if not,
Then pardon me, if bolder innocence
Does force me tell you, it is not just in you
Thus to oppose what Heavens have decreed.
Believe me, Sir, it is neither safe nor just,
For you to violate the laws of fate.

Kin. Let not your pride so far transport you, that
You tax our justice. I shall scourge your haste th'wind
Into a leisurely repentance, when
The sea shall teach you that your tears, and
That sighs become your headlong rash attempts.

Max. Great Sir, lay what you will on me, I scorn
To crave your favor for my self; but yet
Let Nature prompt you to be merciful
To her who is a chief part of your self.

Kin. No, as ye have joined your selves in mirth, so
Will I join ye too in mourning; and because
Two no good consort make, my brother shall
Bear a third part in your grave harmony.

Seph. Father, let me the heavy burden bear
Of this sad song alone: let all your fierce
Justice center in my breast. -- --

Kin. No more,
Our sentence is irrevocable, naught
Shall satisfy me else: I Will have it done.

1 Lo. My Liege, the barque is ready, and attends
Your pleasure; the commands of Kings are not
To be gainsaid, or broken; for the will
Of heaven is obeyed in doing them.

Seph. We do obey it then, and willingly,
Father, for yet I cannot forget that name,
Although these injuries would raze it out
My memory; I will not now dispute,
But readily obey your will: and know
The pleasures of your Court should not entice
Me shun this coming terror, which will be,
More welcome to me by my company.
And thus I take my leave. Here may you find
She kneels. That happiness you wish, and we shall want
Whilst that we prove our selves loves Confessors,
If not his Martyrs. -- --

Kin. I will hear no more.
Away with them, my Lord, you know the place,
Our sentence and the time, I long to see
Me, and my Kingdom from these monsters free.

Max. Arcadia adieu! Thou have before
Been famous for the happiness of loves:
Now mischief has usurped the seat, and may
It be the object of the gods hatred,
Since Love's the subject of their cruelty.
Come dearest, let us wind our selves so close,
That envy may admire, and so despair
To enter here, where love possession keeps.

Exe^nt. Scaen. 5.
Kin. Now shall I live secure, for now there is
None left, whose nearness to our blood might edge
Their hopes, by killing us to gain our Crown.
Kings lives are never safe from those that wish
Their ends, which must initiate them into
Th'enjoyment of a Kingdom; this same crown
Is such a bait unto ambitious spirits,
It Is never safe upon the wearers head.
Enter Artaxia weeping. Why weeps my dear?

Art. Ask why I do not weep.
(Poor Artaxia) are my tears denied me!
Ask why I do not rave, tear my hair thus,
Why such a weight of sorrow does not rob
So much of woman from me, as complaints!
Or rather, why do I not cloud the sky
With sighs; till at the last with one bold stab
My own hand take from insulting fortune,
This miserable object of her sport.
Ask why I do not this, not why I weep!

Kin. Or stint thy tears, or mingle mine with them,
By a relation of their cause; these eyes
Trust me Artaxia, are not yet drawn dry,
Nor has strong sorrow e're exhausted them,
To make them bankrupt of a friendly tear,
But not a fond one. Why Artaxia!
Why do thou hasten those that come too fast,
Sorrow and age, clear up thy clouded brow.

Art. Ah Damocles! how have thou lost thy self!
And art become a monster, not a man,
Thus to deprive me of my only joy,
The only stay and comfort of mine age,
Which now must fall. Break heart, and give
My sorrows vent. Ah! my Sephestia's gone,
For ever lost unto the world and me.

Kin. Content thy self, not I, but justice has
Deprived us of her: Justice, that is blind
To all relations, and deaf to entreats
Of fond nature, or fonder affection.

Art. Ah cruel justice! Justice! no tyranny,
This is: Death, be my friend, and join once more
My dear Sephestia and me -- I come
Stabs her self! Sephestia I come; cursed world farewell.

Kin. Help, help, Artaxia, my dear, help, help,
Sephestia does live, she is not dead.

Art. Oh, it is too late -- oh-oh-oh --


She dies. Enter 2 Lords. 2 Lor. Heavens! what a sight is here?
The Queen, she is dead, stark dead, what shall we do?
This wretched land is fruitful grown of late,
Of nothing else but miseries and wo^s*
Jove sends his darts like hail-shot, no place free:

Kin. Ah miserable man I am, a wretch,
Who thus have lost two jewels that the world
Cannot recompense: I know not what to do. --
Now could I tear my self in pieces, that I have
Thus parted friends, and left my self alone.
Offers to kill himself I am resolved, I will no longer live.

2 Lo. Stay, good my Liege, live, and repent of what
You Have done, you have killd enough already.

Kin. If I should kill my self, and lose my crown,
I were better live. -- Call us a Council quickly.
But my wife, my dearest Artaxia!
That I could breath life into thee again,
Or else were with thee!

2 Lo. He Is not yet so mad.


Kin. O ye powers above! what mean ye thus
To wrack us mortals with such blacker deeds
Than hell it self! or remove them, or take
All senses from us. Bear the body in,
And summon all our Lords with speed to attend
Upon us, that we may find out from whence
It is we suffer this sad influence.

Exit. 2 Lo. Unhappy King! he has undone himself,
And all the Land. His sublimated rage
Has sown a crop of mischiefs, which no age
Can parallel; great-belly'd time is big
With sorrows; and our next succeeding times,
Must reap the harvest of his bloody crimes.

Exit. Finis Actus primi.
Act. 2.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Menaphon, and Doron. Men* HOw mad a thing is Love? It makes us lose
Our senses; whilst we wander in a maze
O^ endless torments: sometime with his smiles
The cunning thief does flatter us with hopes
And tantalize our expectations, when
Strait our winged joys are gone, and we
Do wrack our selves with future coming fears:
A mistress frowns does cloud our clearer sky.

1.
Fond love no more,
Will I adore
Thy feigned Deity.
Go throw thy darts,
At simple hearts,
And prove thy victory.
2.
Whilst I do keep
My harmless sheep,
Love has no power on me:
It Is idle souls,
Which he controules,
The busy man is free.
Enter Doron. Dor. Ah Menaphon, my Sister Pesana, a pies
On her, I had almost forgot her name, with come.
Thinking on her business.

Men. Why what is thy business, Doron? tell me,


Dor. My business, it is none of my business, I tell you,
It Is my sister Pesana's business.

Men. Well, what is her business then? I prithee tell.


Dor. Ah Sir! she is sick.


Men. What is she sick of Doron? let me know.


Dor. Why* truly Sir, she is sick of you.


Men. She sick of me? why, am I a disease?


Dor. I mean -- I mean -- she is sick for you.


Men. That Is kindly done of her, Doron, that she
Will be sick for me: I Will make her amends.

Dor. Will you make her amend, said you? I am
Afraid you will make her end first; but truly
Menaphon I have a suit for you.

Men. Have thou a suit for me? Is it a new one?


Dor. I say I have a suit to you.


Men. To me? well, and what is your suit made of?


Dor. In good sooth, Sir, I must entreat you will
Love my sister as well as you have done.

Men. No, Doron, love and I are fallen out, and he
Will not let me love thy sister or thee either.

Dor. No^ my sister, nor me neither. Out thou
Caterpiller, thou weasel, thou hedg-hog,
I will make you love me, and my sister too.

Men, You are out of your suit now Doron, and
I fear you will catch cold, now you are hot.

Exeunt. Scaen. 2.
Enter Maximus shipwrack't. Max. Where am I now? Sure it is Arcadia.
A land happy in giving birth to my
Sephestia* Ah my Sephestia! --
But now no^ my Sephestia, since the waves
Have ravished her from me, and all my hopes
Are proved abortive; why do I now live!
Since she is gone, whose life and mine were both
Twisted on one thread! Ye fatal Sisters!
Why did not your cruel knife cut my life
In twain, when hers was broken off by the
Rude waves and blustering wind, who strove which should
Gain her from each? But both from me have robbed
Her*^ now may the sea well boast, and outvie
The beggered earth; since it has her who was
The earth's whole sum of riches. O ye gods ^
Why did ye once make me so happy
To enjoy her, and now snatched her again
To make me thereby the more miserable?
Yet is she not quite drowned; for her heart
Is here: it is mine the sea does prey upon.
Well, my Sephestia, oh that name does ravish
Me: This body shall a monument be,
And my whole life a continued Elegy,
Both consecrated to thy memory.
I Will drown thee once more in my tears,
Which I will daily pay, as tribute to thee.
Cyprus adieu, greatness also farewell.
I see, those who are lifted highest on
The hill of honor, are nearest to the
Blasts of envious fortune, whilst the low
And valley fortunes are far more secure.
Humble valleys thrive with their bosoms full
Of flowers, when hills melt with lightning, and rough
Anger of the clouds. I will retire from
The front of honor, to the rear of a
Shepherds life: where whilst I do daily tend
The harmless sheep, will I sing forth sad notes
Of their blessed happiness, and my misfortune.
I will no longer keep this miserable name
Of Maximus* but clad in sorrows weeds,
Will I wear the name of Melecertus.
No more Maximus Prince of Cyprus, but
A poor shepherd will I be: when you see
Those weeds, and hear Melecertus name,
I am that wretched he, who, like the snake,
Have cast my former coat by creeping through
The hole of misery, and got a new.

Exit. Scaen. 3.
Enter Doron. Dor. My Carmela is coming, and I Am provided to cast
A sheeps eye at her.

He flings at her. Enter Carmela. Car. Now I see how Love came blind, he flung
His eyes at me in stead of a love-dart.

Dor. Ha, my Carmela, let me kiss thy honysuckle lips*


Car. You kiss so hard, you will leave your beard behind.


Dor. By my troth, Carmela, swains cannot swear,
But -- I do love thee -- by our great god Pan
I love thee.

Car. You said you could not swear, and yet you Swear you love me.


Dor. Love, I have stared so long at thee, that I Am now grown blind.


Car. Then shall you be led, like blind beggars
With a dog and a bell, or else be beholding
To the glasier for a new pair of eyes.

Dor. I know not what you mean eyes, but I am
Sure that I am off the hooks. You tell me of
Eyes, eyes, but it is your no's that torments me.
This blind god, that the Poets call Cupid, has seen
To hit me with his dart, I know not how,
But as the blind man killed the crow.

Car. Then you are one of the wanderers in Loves
Labyrinth, I prithee let me lead thee.

Dor. Ay, so we may both fall; but no matter,
For if you fall first, I Will fall on thee.

Car. Fie, Doron, fie, are you not ashamed?


Dor. Ashamed? of what? marry better falling
Falling out.

Car. You Are very merry Doron, where is your in, than music?


Dor. Let me play on thee, my pretty bag-pipe,
And I know thou will sing, loath to depart. --

Car. And I Will try that, now follow me.


Ex^^* Dor. Nay, when you came to the snuff once, I thought
You would quickly go out.

Scaen. 4.
Enter Menaphon. Oh Menaphon, hark, I am undone, as a man
Should undo an oyster.
Men. Why Doron, what is to do with thee now*


Dor. Why man, thy sister Carmela is grown
proud,
And is just such another as thy self, she slights
And scorns poor Doron; and yet because I love
her*
As my sister does thee, she laughs at me. Well,
I will be even with her* for if she will not love
Me with a good will* I Will love her against her
Will; and I think I shall be even with her there*

Men. Come, Doron, come, count love a toy,
As I do, who take far more joy to view
My flocks; here is my content; when heavens frown,
I think upon my faults; and a clear sky
Puts me in mind of the gods gracious love:
Envy o're-looketh me, nor do I gaze
So high as tall ambition; and for love,
I feed my self with fancies, such as these.
Venus (the Poets say) sprang from the sea,
Which notes to me the inconstancy of love,
Changing each day with various ebbs and tides*
Sometimes o're-flowing the banks of fortune
With a gracious look from a lovers eyes,
Ebbing at other times to the dangerous shelf
Of cold despair, from a Mistress frowns.
Your Cupid must be young* to show
He is a boy, his wings inconstance tell*
He Is blind, to note his aim is without rule,
Or reasons guide; such is the god ye serve.

Dor. Treason, treason against the god of love*
Menaphon, though you be my friend, I will
Have you articl'd against at the next meeting well
Of the Shepherds.

Men. Lovers sorrows be like to the restless
Labors of Sisyphus.

Dor. Like thy tongue then.


Men. Your Mistress favour's honey mixed with gall
A bitter sweet, a folly worst of all,
That forces reason to be fancies thrall.
Then love who list for me, if beauty be
So sour, then give me labor still.

Exit. Dor. How I would laugh to see Menaphon once
Manacl'd with loves fetters, that he might repent
His blasphemy against the shepherds deity.

Exit. Scaen. 3.
Enter Sephestia shipwrack't, with her Uncle Lamedon. Seph. Ah cruel fortune,
but more cruel father,
Most wretched I, who thus am robbed of all
My pregnant hopes, my springing joys blasted
With winter frowns. Jove send a flaming dart
Into my breast, to melt my frozen heart
Into a flood of tears, that I may drown
My self in them* since that the waves have proved
Unkindly courteous to preserve my life,
But to prolong my misery, and he
Is drowned who was my life's preserver.
Ah ye enraged deities! could ye
Be so unkind to draw my life's thread out
Thus long, to survive him who was my life?
Why did ye not, or save his life with mine,
Or destroy mine with his, that so I might
Enjoy his company in life or death?

Lam. Ay, in the gods time, Niece, but not before.


Seph. And oh* my dearest Plusidippus! could
The waves be so hard-hearted, as to crop
Thy blooming youth, to send thee to thy grave
Before thou were a man? Had they but left
Me thee, it would have eased thy fathers loss,
If I had had his transcript to have viewed
In thee, who were his perfect Image. Now
In stead of heir to the Cyprus crown,
The cypress grove shall be Joynter, where
I Will sadly spend the remnant of my life,
To weep my losses, and my own sad fate,
Which thus I will revenge; my Maximus
Shall live still fresh within my memory,
There fixed too sure for all the briny waves
To wash away. Nor shall I e're forget
My son, my Plusidippus. I could feed,
My self unto eternity with these
Sweet names, which do as far outvie
The Nectar and Ambrosia of the gods,
As pearls do pebbles. I can hold no more*
My heart's so full, 'twill break, or overrun
The sluices of mine eyes. -- ^'ll weep the rest.

Lam. Why do thou thus torment thy self in vain?
Thy tears will not recover them again.
Fates dart is shot, and cannot be recalled,
Nor is there any salve for fortunes wounds,
But patience; therefore seeing me
Partaker of thy sorrows, now lean all
Thy cares on me, it is some relief,
In sorrow to have fellows of our grief.

Seph. My husband and my son are gone, and I
Survive alone un^o their misery.

Lam. Chance is like Janus, double-fac'd; sometimes
With smiles she comforts us, sometimes
With frowns she casts us down again: A calm
Succeeds a storm, and a sharp winter does
Precede a pleasant spring.

Seph. Often turnings tire
The weary traveller; and love does lose
His followers, in a wild Labyrinth
Of woes. How am I fallen from all my hopes!
(An exile in my native Country:) and
The crown hope seemed to place upon my head:
Banished from the pleasures of the Court,
Parted for love from him I could not choose
But love, from Maximus, who has for me
Suffered as many mischiefs as malice
Could invent, and now all sum'd up in death.

Lam. What of all this? after the storm that rent
Our ship, we found a calm that brought us safe
To the shore, whilst Neptunes mercy was beyond
The envious blasts of Aeolus; and thus
The gods do recompense us with their favor,
For the dis-courtesies of your father.

Seph. Sweet Lamedon, once partner of my joys,
Though now partaker of my wants; I see
You are as constant in my sad distress,
As you were faithful in my richer fortunes:
Though friends seldom prove friends in poverty
Misfortune has not changed your mind, but you
Temper my exile with your banishment:
Your aged years shall be my sole directors,
Your will the ruler of my actions.
If you persuade me to content, Portia
Shall not exceed Sephestia's patience:
If you will have me strike my sails, I will,
And steer my course by th'compass of your care.

Lam. Since hope is all the portion we have left,
Let Us thank the gods that saved our lives, and rest
Our cares on them, they can return us more
Than we have lost, or fit our minds to bear
Our present state. Contentment gives a crown,
Where fortune has denied it: patience
Makes all things easy to an humble mind.
Cares are companions of the Crown, the Court
Is full of busy thoughts, and envious strife,
Whilst peaceful sleeps attend a Country life.

Seph. Then Lamedon will I disguise my self,
And with my clothes will change my former thoughts,
Measure my actions by my present state,
Not by my former fortunes. Sephestia
No more: Alas! I know not where, or how
We shall bestow our selves: Surely this is
Some un-frequented place, no harmless sheep
Do feed, nor shepherds tend their thriving flocks.

Enter to th^^^ Menaphon Scaen. 6.
Sephestia, Lamedon, Menaphon. Men. Heavens! what a sight is here! Such stars
appear
But rarely in our Country Hemisphere,
I am so Planet-struck with one short glance,
I neither can retire nor yet advance.
What resolution is of proof against
Such charms as these! Some goddess has assumed
An humane shape to tempt us weaker mortals.
Cupid, I cry thee mercy now, although
I were an Atheist unto thee before,
Thou art the Deity I will adore.*
Sure they are in distress, those pearly tears
Furrow her cheeks with cruel strife
Which shall run fastest, are no sooner dried,
New sighs, like the warm southern wind proclaim
A fresh approaching shower. I fear they are
Some passengers late shipwrack't, for I saw,
(When walking by the shore) some floting parts
Of a torn ship, contending with the waves.

Lam. Courteous shepherd, if distressed persons
Fortune has robbed, and the sea favored
(If it be a favor to live and want)
May crave your aid so far, as to direct
Us to some place may rest our wearied bones,
Our charges shall be paid, and you shall have
For recompense, such blessings as the gods
Use to bestow on hospitable men.

Men. Strangers, your quality I know not, nor
Shall now dispute; but if a country cell
May not too disparage you, here is
Hard by my cottage, and your home.

Seph. Kind Sir, your courtesy is much beyond
Our merit, and our present hopes below
A suitable return; please you accept
Our thanks, as earnest of that larger debt
Future ability may see discharged.

Men. Lady, I have no curious hangings to
Adorn my walls, nor plate to show my wealth:
Yet do I live content; and you shall find
Such welcome as a cottage can afford.

Lam. Sir, blame not our wills, but present want, which now
Makes us thus plentiful only in thanks.

Exeunt. Scaen. 7.
Enter Doron, Carmela. Dor. Carmela, by my great bel-weather, Carmela,
I Am over the tops of my high-shooes in love,
And there shall I stick and starve, if thou do
Not pull me out. -- Where have thou been
This live-long hour?

Car. What, does the mouth of your affections water?


Dor. Water? No, it fires. I Am so all a-fire, that I dare
Not go amongst my flocks for fear, lest
I should burn up all their pasture, if thou
Do not shower down some dew of
Comfort to cool me.

Car. I shall soon cool your courage* Doron; for
I cannot, may not, will not love thee.

Dor. Out you gossip, not love me? go, get
You spin on Ixions wheel.

Car. No, Lovers spin on that, and so must you.


Exeunt. Scaen. 8.
Enter Menaphon. Men. How fond was I, when I as vainly strove
To keep my heart against the god of Love!
I little thought his power; when I resolved
To live, and not to love: Nature I see
Cannot subsist without loves harmony.
In vain I shut the door, and bolted it
With resolution; strait the thief,
Thorough the casements of mine eyes got in,
And stole away my heart; as once of old
He served the merry Greek Anacreon;
Whose fancy fits my fortune: Here it is*
Loves Duel.
Cupid all his Arts did prove,
To invite my heart to love;
But I always did delay,
His mild summons to obey;
Being deaf to all his charms.
Strait the god assumes his Ar^^.
With his how and quiver, he
Takes the field to Duel me.
Armed like Achilles, I,
With my shield alone defy
His bold challenge, as he cast
His golden darts, I as fast
Caught his Arrows in my shield,
Till I made him leave the field.
Fretting, and disarmed then,
The angry god returns again,
All in flames; *stead of a dart,
Throws himself into my heart.
Useless, I my shield require,
When the Fort is all on fire.
I in v^^^ the field did win,
Now the Enemy's within.
Thus betrayed, at last I cry,
Love thou have the victory.
Alas! what heart's so fortified, to prove
The several batteries of the god of love!
What ear's not charmed with th'rethorick of a voice,
Whose single note would silence all the Quire
Of the Aerial feathered Choristers!
What eye would not be blinded to behold
Those eyes which cast a cloud upon the Sun,
And bring his light under disparagement.
Enter Sephestia. Witness that face, whose Shrine has made me blind.
How fares my fairest guest?

Seph. The better for
Your courteous entertainment, may the gods
Be favorable to your flocks, as you
Have friendly been to us.

Men. May I presume
To crave your name, and to enquire how
Hard-hearted fortune could be so unjust,
To injure innocence? Sign she is blind.

Seph. My name is Samela, my parentage
But mean, the wife of a poor Gentleman
Of Cyprus, now deceased: How arrived here*
Pray do not now enquire; time may reveal,
What present sorrows force me to conceal.

Men. I will not press your yet fresh bleeding wounds,
With a rude hand; it is time and patience
Must work the cure; the gods allow a salve
For every sore, but we must wait on them:
Their time is best; for when we strive to heal
Our wounds too fast, they do but fester more.
Rest here content; a Country life is safe,
Fortune o're-looks our humble cottages
We are not pained with wealth, nor pined with want,
Our sheep do yield us milk for food, and wool
To make us clothes; hunger and cold we slight:
Envy has here no place, we will friendship keep,
Free from all jars, and harmless as our sheep.

Sam. O happy life! would I had never known
Other than this, which by comparison,
Renders mine odious to my memory.

Exit weeping. Men. Sorrow sits heavy on her heart, but shows
More lovely in her face; those tears appear
Like crystal dew upon the blushing rose.
Beauty thus veiled, is more inviting, than
Shining out in it is unclouded splendour.
Fortune, I hate thee, for thy spite to her,
But thank thee for thy courtesy to me,
In sending her for shelter to my house.
Kind love assist me now, and I will be
Her constant servant, and thy votarie.

Exit. Finis Act. 2.
Act. 3.
Scaen. 1.
Romanio and Eurilochus, with Plusidippus. Romans THis present to the King of
Thessaly
Will gain us both reward and pardon too
For all our former Pyracies upon
His seas and ships.

Eur. Ay, he has never a son,
For to inherit the Thessalian Crown:
Hereby this lad may gain a Kingdom, whilst
We seek but our liberties and lives,
For time to come, and pardon for what is past.
This is the place the King does often frequent,
When public cares oppress his Royal head,
Here he unloads the burden of his thoughts,
And changes cares for recreation. --
See where he comes! God save your Majesty.

Romans Long live Agenor, King of Thessaly.


Enter King. Kin. What means this bold intrusion? who are ye?
That dare presume into our private walks?

Eur. Pardon, great Sir, we come not to offend
Your sacred Majesty, but to present
Shows Plusidippus to the King. You with this living gift.

Kin. This is a gift
Indeed; where had ye him, or what is his birth?

Romans Please you, dread Sir, grant us your pardon then,
We shall declare unto you what we know.

Kin. Take it, we freely pardon ye. Now speak.


Eur. Then be it known unto your Majesty,
We the two famous Pirates are, you have
So long laid wait to take, but all in vain.
Roving upon the coasts of Arcady,
We found this beauteous youth upon the shore,
Whom (we suppose) the seas had wrack't, but saved
His life, which we have nourished ever since,
And now bequeath unto your Majesty:
For which we beg no recompense, but this,
To seal our pardons for our former faults.

Kin. Look that for time to come ye honest be,
And for what is past we freely pardon ye.

Romans Thanks, Royal Sir, the remnant of our lives
Will we spend in your service, and so give
Again, our lives which you have given us,
When they were forfeit to your laws and you.

Exeunt. Kin. This is a welcome gift. What a divine
Beauty does sparkle in his countenance!
Surely he cannot be of mortal race
Descended, but Jove himself has sent him,
To be the happy heir of my Kingdom.
Immortal Jove! I thank thee for this gift.
Thou could not have sent a welcomer.
My pretty lad, where were thou born? can tell?

Plu. I know not, Sir, -- my name is Plusidippus.


Kin. Come, follow me, now have I found at once
An husband for my daughter, and an heir
For the Thessalian Crown. Thrones are supplied forth,
By Jove, who, when the root is withered,
Can make more heavenly branches to sprout
Which may in time grow mighty trees to shade,
And shelter all their liege-subjects under.

Exeunt. Scaen. 2.
Menaphon solus. Strike home, great Cupid, with thy flaming dart,
As yet thou do but dally with my heart:
It Is rather scratched than wounded; I do hate
A lukewarm love: give me a love flames high,
As it would reach the element of fire,
From whence it came; a low and creeping flame
Befits ^ chimney, not a lovers breast.
Give me a love dare undertake a task
Would fright an Hercules into an ague.
A love dare tempt the boldest fate, and die
An honored captive, or bold conqueror.
Give me a daring, not a whining love,
A love grows great with opposition:
A love that scorns an easy task, things great
And noble always are most difficult*
This is the love (blind Cupid) I would have,
A love that brings home trophies, or a grave.
I Will tempt his god-ship with a song, and see
If verse, not sighs, will gain the victory.
1.
No more, no more,
Fond Love give ^'re,
Dally no more with me;
Strike home and bold,
Be hot, or cold,
Or leave thy deity.
2.
In love, lukewarm,
Will do more harm,
Than can fevers heat:
Cold cannot kill
So soon as will
A fainting, dying sweat.
3.
I cannot tell,
When sick, or well,
Physic, or poison give;
Still in anguish,
I do languish,
Or let me die, or live.
4.
If I must be,
Thy Votarie,
Be thou my friend or foe:
If thou will have
Me be thy slave,
Hold fast, or let me go.
Sure Cupid has resigned his place, and given
His godhead unto Carmela, whose eyes
Wound more than ever did his darts.
But what is that, if she have power to hurt,
And wants mercy for to heal those hurts.
I fear whilst I make her my deity,
I do but thereby make her proud,
And with my own hands place her out of reach.
Yet she is in distress, and that should make
Enter Doron. Listens and laughs. Her humble: I relieve her, therefore she
Has the more reason thus to relieve me;
And certain, she will rather love than want.
Dor. Ha ha, ha, etc. are you caught, Menaphon?
In Faith, I think you are fettered now, you are hanged
In The brambles of love, as well as I. You laughed
At me before, but now I Will laugh at you.

Men. Ah Doron! now I crave thy pity, for
I never thought an earthly beauty could
So soon have fettered me; what did I say?
An earthly? No, Doron, she is heavenly,
Brighter than Phoebus in his glittring pride:
Venus her self was not so fair a Bride.

Do. How now Menaphon! I Am afraid thou will
Be a beggar shortly, thou art a Poet already.
One of the threadbare crew, that ragged regiment.

Enter Samela. Men. See Doron, see, see where she comes, who with
Her brighter luster can create a day
At midnight, when the Sun is gone to sleep;
Eclipse his noontide glory with her light:
Her absence would benight the world* and cloath't
In blackest darkness, for to mourn it is loss.

Sam. Good Morrow Host, how thrive your well-fed flocks?


Men. My flocks do thrive (Lady) and cannot do less,
Blessed with the auspicious sunshine of your eyes;
And I were too ungrateful, if I should
Deny to give you back again, what I
Enjoy but by your beauteous influence.

Sam. You Are merry, Menaphon, if not profane,
To rob the gods of what is due to them,
To give it to the object of their scorn.
Could I dispense good fortunes, I should not
Forget my self, and choose the meanest lot.

Exeunt. Menaphon Dor. This it is to be in love, how spruce is
Become of late, as he were always going
To a feast? and talks as if he were some
City Orator. Why can I not do so? I Am
Sure I am in love as well as he. But
I Will go hire some journey-man Poet, or other,
And he shall make me some verses
For my Carmela: And that will do as
Well, as if I made them my self; I Will
Set my brand upon them, and then no
Body will question them to be mine, no
More than they do my sheep that are marked.

Enter Melecertus. Scaen. 3.
Ay, ay, it shall be so. Oh Melecertus,
Yonder is the finest shepherdess that ever
The moon held the candle of her light to; the
Shepherd Menaphon has got her to him, as
If because he is the Kings shepherd, he
Must have the Queen of Shepherdesses.
Mel. Have seen her, Doron? and do know her name?


Dor. Seen her? ay, and sigh to see her too; her name, I
Think, is Stamela -- no, no, -- Samela, Samela,
Ay, ay, that is her name, I have it now, I would
I had her too.

Mel. What kind of woman is she, can thou tell?


Dor. Ay, or else I were naught to keep sheep.


Mel. Can thy tongue paint her forth to mine ^ar?


Dor. Ay, ay, legible, I warrant you.
Her eyes are like two diamonds, I think, for
I never saw any before; and her locks are
All gold, like the golden fleece our shepherds
Tell of.

Mel. It were good vent'ring for that golden fleece,
Doron, as Jason long since did for his.

Dor. Her hands are all ivory, like the bone-haft
Of my best knife, her alablaster, and her
Eyes black as my blackest lamb, her cheeks
Like roses red and white that grow together.
What think you of her now? have I not made
A fair picture on her?

Mel. Ay Doron, were this picture painted to
The life, as thou have here described it,
It could not choose but make an absolute,
Rare, and complete piece of deformity.

Dor. Nay, nay, if you don't like it, I don't
Care, but I had it out of an old book of
My brother Mor^^'s, they call 'm
Rogue-mances, I think: my brother
Has a whole tumbrel full on 'm, he is
Such a Bookish block-head --

Mel. Nay, be not angry, Doron, I believe
Thou mean a beauty beyond expression*
And such an one I had, till envious fate
Robbed me of her, and all my joys at once,
Heavens envying at my happiness,
Sent death to fetch her from me, and she is dead,
Dead, Doron, dead, -- she is dead to me, and to
The world, and all but to my memory.

weeps. Dor. Fie, Melecertus, what do mean to
Weep? what, will thou make dirt of
Her ashes with thy tears?

Mel. Well, Doron, we forget our flocks, and we
Shall miss the shepherds merry meeting.

Dor. That Is true, and there will be the shepherdesses
Too, and Menaphon will bring his fine
Mistress thither; there shall thou see her,
But first mask thine eyes, lest thou lose
Them, and become love-blind, as I am.
Good Melecertus take the pains to lead me.

Exeunt. Sc^n. 4.
Enter King Damocles melancholy, 2 Lords. Kin. How wretched am I grown, I hate
my self,
And care not now for my own company:
I loath thee light, and fain would hide my self
From mine own eyes; I Am weary of my life. --
Where shall I hide my self, that there I may*
Deceive th'approaches of discov'ring day?
I Will seek some gloomy cave, where I may lie,
Entombed alive in shades of secrecy.

Exit. 1 Lo. His thoughts are much perplex't, and black despair,
May push him on unto some desperate act,
If not prevented by our vigilance.

2 Lo* This is the effect of rash resolves, when have
And passion hurry men to do those things
Reason would wish undone, at least delayed.
Our wills spurred on by rage, never stop, till we
(Blinded with anger) headlong throw our selves
From dangers praecipice, into a gulf
Of black despairing thoughts; and then too late
Repentance lends us so much light as may
Show us our madness, and our misery.

1 Lo. Ill actions never go unpunished;
They are their own tormentors, and do prove
At last, furies to lash the guilty soul.

2 Lo. When reason is deposed, and passion reigns,
Nothing but lawless actions do appear:
When passion has usurped the helm,
And steers a wild uncertain course, not by
The card and compass of advice, the ship
Will never make good voyage, but be tossed
Upon the waves, and all her lading lost.
He by his wilful rage has cast away
Himself, and floats upon the waves of ruin:
Let Us try if we can waft him safe to shore,
Lend him our helping hands, lest he do sink
Into that deep and black gulf of despair.

1 Lo. Let Us after him, and try what we can do,
In saving him, we save our Kingdom too.

Exeunt. Scaen. 5.
Enter Menaphon, with Samela, and Pesana after them, Melecertus leading Doron.
Pes. Hey day, what is here, my brother Doron?


Mel. Doron conceits himself that he is blind.


Dor. Ay, Doron's as blind as any door: what
Creep I here upon? Carmila, oh Carmila,
The very sight of thee has recovered mine
Eyes again.

He stumbles on Samela in Carmila's clothes. Men. Nay, now I see,
Doron, thou art blind indeed,
That do not know Carmila from her clothes.
No, no, it is Samela, not Carmila.

Dor. Which is my Carmila? good Melecertus.
Show me where she is.

Mel. It seems, Doron, Carmila is not here.


Dor. Why, what do I do here then? I thought
It was something I missed, only I
Mistook; for I had thought it had
Been my eyes were lost, but now I
See it is my Carmila is missing, whom
I had rather see than my own eyes.

Pes. This is my corrival in Menaphon's love.


Mel. She is a beauty indeed; and since my
Sephestia is drowned, without compare.
I cannot blame Menaphon, but envy
Him rather, for his so happy choice.
O happy! yet to me unhappy beauty!
That does (as in a glass) present unto
My frighted senses the remembrance of
My loss, which, unless by this fair piece,
Cannot be recompensed by the world. --
Mistress, you are welcome to our company.

Dor. By my troth, Mistress, you are very welcome,
As I may say, unto our meeting.

Sam. Thanks shepherds: I am a bold intruder
Into your company; but that I am
Brought by your friend, and my host Menaphon.

Mel. Mistress, your presence is Apology
Sufficient; yet do we owe him thanks,
That by his means we have the happiness
To Enjoy your sweet society in this
Our rural meeting, when shepherds use
To cheer themselves with mirth and pleasant tales.

Sam. I hope my company shall not forbid
The Banes between your meeting and your mirth.

Mel. Then by your leave, fair shepherdess, I will
Begin with you. If the gods should decree
To change your form, what shape would you desire?

Sam. I would be careful how to sail between
The two rocks, of immodest boldness, or
Of peevish coyness; therefore to answer
Unto your question, I would be a sheep.

Men. A sheep? Mistress, why would you be a sheep?


Sam. Because that then my life should harmless be,
My food the pleasant Plains of Arcadie,
My drink the curious streams, my walks
Spacious, and my thoughts as free as innocent.

Dor. I would I were your Keeper.


Mel. But many times the fairest sheep are drawn
Soonest unto the shambles to be killed.

Sam. And sure a sheep would not repine at that,
To feed them then, who fed her long before.

Pes. Then there is more love in beasts, than constancy
In men, for they will die for love, but when?
When they can live no longer, not before.

Men. If they are so wise, it is their mother-wit,
For men have their inconstancies but from
You women, as the sea it is ebbs and tides
Has from the moon. -- Your emblem to an hair.

Dor. Menaphon, if you hate my sister, I Will --
Love yours for it in spite of your teeth*

Pes. Your mother surely was a weather* cock,
That brought forth such a changeling; for your love
Is like the lightning, vanished as soon
As it appears; a minute is an age
In your affections. You once loved me* --

Dor. Ay, I would you loved him no better.


Men. If that I be so changing in my love,
It is because mine eye's so weak a Judge,
It cannot please my heart upon trial.

Pes. If that your eye's so weak, then let your ears
Be open to your loves appeals and plaints,

Sam. Come, for to end this strife, pray let us hear
The opinion of good Doren, who is so mute,
As if h' had lost his tongue too, with his eyes.

Dor. By my ^ay, fair Mistress, I was thinking
All this while with my self, whether in being
A sheep, you would be a ram, or an ewe?

Sam. An ewe, no doubt; if I should change my, shape
I would not change my Sex; and horns are held
The heaviest burden that the head can bear.

Dor. I think then I were best be an ewe too,
So I might be sure to have no horns:
But I would not greatly care to wear horns,
Were I a ram, were it but where you were and gives
An ewe. --

Men. Well, shepherds, come, the day declines,
Us timely warning for to fold our flocks.

Exeunt. Scaen. 6.
Manet Melecertus. Were my Sephestia living, I should think
This sheperdess were she: Such was her shape,
Such was her countenance; her very voice
Does speak her my Sephestia. But alas!
How fondly do I dream! I do embrace
A cloud in stead of Juno. Yet I love,
And like her, 'cause she is so like my Love.
We love the pictures of our absent friends:
And she is the living picture of my dear,
My dear Sephestia. Me thinks I feel
A kind of sympathy within my breast*
To like and love her of all women best.
Forgive me, my Sephestia, if thou live,
If I do love another for thy sake:
Thy likeness is the loadstone which does draw
My heart to her, that nothing else could move.
Exit. Scaen. 7.
Enter Pesana. Thou most impartial deity of Love!
Can there be two Suns in Loves Hemisphere?
Or more loves in one heart than one that is true*
Or can the stream of true love run in more
Channels than one? Shall I be thus paid
For my love to false Menaphon? Hereafter,
Venus, never will I adore thee, nor
Will I offer up so many Evening
Prayers unto Cupid, as I have done. --
Was ever poor maid so rewarded with
An inconstant lover, as I daily am
With this same fickle-headed Menaphon!
Enter Doron. How now Pesana! what is the news with thee?
Pes. News! marry it is the news I complain of;
Were Menaphon the old Menaphon, that
He was wont to be, I should not complain*

Dor. Come -- plain Pesana must not grutch to give
Way unto fine Samela* that has turned his*
Heart, and if he do not turn again
Quickly, he will be burnt on that side; well,
Be content a while, by that time he has loved
Her, as long as he did thee, he will be as
Weary of her, as he is now of thee.

Pes. But in the mean time* Doron, I must be
A stale to her usurps my right in him.

Dor. Ay, that is the reason he does not care
For thee, because thou art stale.
Thus do poor lovers run through
The briars and the brambles of difficulties,
And sometimes fall into the ditch of undoing.

Pes. Good Doren, be my friend to Menaphon.
And mind him of his former love to me,
Or I shall learn at last to slight him too.

Dor. Ay, ay, he has a sister, just such another
As himself, I Am zure she has even broken
My poor heart in twain; and if it be
Piec'd again, it will never be handsome.

Exeunt. Scaen. 8.
Enter Lamedon. How happy are these shepherds! here they live
Content, and know no other cares, but how
To tend their flocks, and please their Mistress best.
They know no strife, but that of love, they spend
Their days in mirth; and when they end, sweet sleeps
Repay, and ease the labors of the day*
They need no Lawyers to decide their jars,
Good herbs, and wholesome diet, is to them
The only Aesculapius; their skill
Is how to save, not how with art to kill.
Pride and ambition are such strangers here,
They are not known so much as by their names*
Their sheep and they contend in innocence,
Which shall excel, the Master or his flocks.
With honest mirth, and merry tales, they pass
Their time, and sweeten all their cares:
Whilst Courts are filled with waking thoughtful strife,
Peace and content do crown the shepherds life.
Finis Act. 3.
Act. 4.
Scaene 1.
Enter King of Thessaly, and his daughter Euriphila. Kin. DAughter, it is
enough, we will it, see
You show your duty in obeying us;
Since I have made choice of him for my Son,
Accept him for your husband: He Is a man
Ancient in virtues, although young in years:
He Is one whose worth is far beyond his age.

Eur. Father, it grieves me that the cross Fates have
Forced me to hate the man you so much love*
Cupid has struck me with his leaden dart,
I cannot force my own affections.

Kin. How Is this? you hate him whom I love! can he
Be the object of your hate, who is alone
The subject of my love and reverence?
He whom the gods in mercy have designed
The happy Successor unto my crown,
And to your love? Bethink your self again.

Eur. Great Sir, the gods themselves are subject to
That little deity of love* can I
Withstand his power, or love against his will?
Force cannot work on love, which must be free,
And uncompell'd, else can it not be true,
Nor lasting. Sir, urge me no more in vain.

Kin. What a strange change is here! Your will was wont
Freely to stoop to all my just desires;
Is it now grown so stiff* 'twill not be bent
By my commands? I know thou do but feign.

Eur. I would obey your will, could I command Mine own affections, or choose my
love.


Kin, Do it, or else by Jove, whom I present*
*ll punish thy neglect. -- I cannot think
Thy words and thoughts agree. Surely to love,
Is natural, why then not to love him,
Whom nature made to be beloved? He has
Artillery enough about him to take in
The stoutest heart at the first summons. -- Well,
Think on it Euriphila, when I am gone,
I Will leave thee here, Lovers are best alone.

Exit. Scaen. 2.
Eur. How rarely have I played this part, and hid
My love under a mask of hate! -- but now,
Me thinks, I feel the fi^e of love to rage
More fiercely in my breast; for being kept
So close, it will break out too soon: I must
Invert the course of love, and woo him first.
Enter Plusidippus. He comes, and fitly: Cupid, instruct me now,
To war and conquer in this bloodless fight,
That wins the field by flight, and not by force.
Yet must I veil my love still, and seem coy,
Till by a false retreat I make him fall
Into those snares I set, and wish him in. --
What means this bold intrusion? do befit*
You to intrude into my privacies?

Plu. Lady, the fault's not mine, fortune has led
Me to this place: mine ignorance (I hope)
Will plead mine innocence. As I have found
Your Royal Fathers noble favors far
Exceed my hopes, or my requital, let
Not your frowns strike dead whom he has raised
To life; cruelty cannot lodge within
That tender breast was only made for Love.

Eur. Dare you presume to talk of love to me?
Am I a mate* fit for your choice? Be gone,
And seek some shrub may fit your lowness best.

Plu. Madam, this storm becomes you not. It is
Degenerate from your noble Fathers strain.
I cannot think this should proceed from one,
That is the Heir to his name and worth.

Eur. My fathers ears shall ring with this, that he
Has warmed a viper, which would bite him now,
And entertained a guest would rob his host.

Plu. Lady, my spirit tells me that my birth
Is not so base as you conceit. I mean
To try my spirit, and my fortunes in
Mars his Camp, but not in Venus Courts.
Since nature's so unkind, as not to let
Me know* what honor I was born unto,
I Will win some to my name, by actions, which
Shall speak me noble; I had thought to have made
You the fair goddess at whose shrine I meant
To Have offered up, and sacrificed my self,
And all my services; but cause you prove
So rough, I will not harbor here* but seek
The world through, for an altar worthy of
My labors. So, fair proud, farewell.

Exit. Eur. Art gone! I did not well to tempt a part
I knew not how to act, to hide a flame
I could not well conceal: for hereby have
I drove him quite away. -- Euriphila,
Thou were too blame. -- Well, I will after him,
And try if I can fetter him with gifts,
Whom love cannot entangle: Mars is his god,
Not Venus; once more will I try, and show
Him plainly how I love him: Juno help,
And thou, O little deity of Love*
Besiege the castle of his stubborn breast,
Bend all thy batteries unto his heart,
Make it the mark of all thy golden darts.
Let him no more resist, but know thy power,
That Mars with all his armor, nor his forts,
Castles, or coats of mail, can fence him from
Thy little piercing shafts, which wound unseen.
And I will try what work a woman's arts
Can make against these stubborn warriors hearts.

Exit* Scaen. 3.
Enter Samela. I have but one heart to bestow, and that
Must not be Menaphon's; mine eyes do fix
On Melecertus, the best counterfeit
Of my lost Maximus: I cannot yet
Think on that name, but it does seem to chide
My hasty choice, and drown my love in tears.

She weeps* Enter Menaphon. Men. What mean these sudden passions, Samela?
Have thou not here all thou can wish? what do
Thou want can make one happy, but content?

Sam. It Is true, I nothing want, that a poor wretch
Can wish for; but this happiness does mind
Me of my fore-past happiness that is lost.
Is It possible the vein of true love can
Be broken, and the wound not bleed afresh
At every thought! Alas! my heart's so full
Of tears and grief, that some will overflow.

Men. Had thy tears power to raise the dead again,
Then were they lawful and commendable:
But since that tears are fruitless, and your friends
(Like water spilt) now past recoverie,
It is but folly to weep for the dead.
Pursue no more fled joys, turn and receive
Those coming pleasures which do court your hand
To take them. If thou will listen to my love --

Sam. I like my grief much better than thy love.


Men. Why so nice and coy fair Lady
Prithee why so coy?
If you deny your hand and lip
Can I your heart enjoy?
Prithee why so coy?
For thy flitting joys are past,
I will give thee joys at last.
Joys that shall create each other,
Make thee both a wife and mother.

Sam. Y're merry, Menaphon, but I cannot join
In consort with you. Seek some other mate;
I have no heart to give, nor hand to take
Your gift. Another reaps what you have sown,
And like to enjoy what you have hoped in vain.

Men. Another reap what I have sown! Is this
Your gratitude you so much boasted of?
Have I supplied your wants with plenty, and
With scorn do you repay my charity?
Did I relieve you in distress for this? --
By Pan, the god of shepherds, or return
Love for my love, or be turned out of doors.

Sa. My heart never knew what baseness meant,
Of thankful thoughts for your civilities; (it is full
If those will satisfy, I Will employ all
The Exchequer of my breast; bu^ as for love,
Alas! that is not in my power to give*

Men. I saw your loose eyes at the shepherds feast,
Roved every where, but Melecertus was
The mark they aimed at most. Well, get you gone,
Expect no more from me, but slight and scorn.

Exit. Sam. My grief was ominous, and did presage
This sad mishaps was I not crossed enough
Before? when will my sufferings have an end!
Well, I Will go seek my uncle Lamedon,
The comfort and companion of my woes.

Exit. Scaen. 4.
Enter Euriphila. Love bids me go, but reason bids me stay;
Reason! thou have no share in love; I Will on*
Love is a passion* passions know no laws,
The gods themselves cannot be wise and love.
Enter Plusidippus passing by. Friend Plusidippus, hark, who would have thought
You so faint-hearted, that a maidens frowns,
Could turn the edge of your affections?
Plu. No, madam, but your scorn has whet the edge
Of my resolves, to seek some other clime
May prove more temperate: Arcadia is
The place I aim at, where, I Am told, there dwells
A Lady of that beauty, that the world
Cannot show her second; thither am I bound.

Eur. You do but jest, I hope, I Am sure I did*
No other; for I love thee with my heart,
Offers him gifts. And may these signs confirm it that I do.

Plu. I must not dwell at these signs, well I may
Bait for a while, but cannot make a stay.
Arcadia is the place I visit must,
That is the center whereunto I tend,
And where my labors hope to find an end.

Eur. What, must a Lady woo you to accept
Her favors? Come, what need have thou to seek
Offers him her gifts again. Dangers, and love abroad, who have at home
The only daughter of a King, who courts
Thee for thy love? what mean those silent looks?
Hear me, my Plusidippus: what, still mute?

Plu. Th'attractive of that beauty I have seen
But in a picture. will not let me rest,
Until I see that creature so divine,
Arcadia is blessed withal, to be
The happy casket of so rich a jewel.

Eur. By all the love thou ow'st my fathers care,
I do adjure thee to stay here with me,
And in mine arms I Will lodge thee until time*
Shall make thee King of Thessaly; meanwhile
Let me be happy in th'enjoyment of
Thy company, and seek not toils and care,
When thou may live more happy here, than
Can wish, or find in any other place.

Plu. My Genius prompts me, that I must not rest thou
Here, for the gods do seem to call me hence*
And their decrees I may not break, nor will.

Exit. Eur. This scorn tormenth me, yet can I not
Repay his hate with hate; but I do love
Him more. Love, this is tyranny in thee.
Enter Agenor King. Here comes my Father, may his news be good.

Kin. Now forward girl, did I for this provide
An husband for you? do you thus reward
My love to you, to slight him whom I love?
Your scorns will force him from our Court to fly.
And now I hear, he will to Arcadia.

Eur. Believe it, Sir, it is far from me to wish,
Or be the cause of his departure hence.

Kin. Yes, yes, your peevishness I hear's the cause,
Nay, I my self have heard, with shame to think
You so much scorned a man, I so much loved.
Did I grace him, that you should disgrace him?

Eur. Great Sir, the greatest loss is mine; and none
Can tell with what an heavy heart ^ shall
Be forced to part with him. And therefore, if
You please to use your power to stay him here,
You may so be my father the second
Time* by preserving the life you gave me,
Which, without his presence, is nothing worth.
As you tender the life of a daughter,
Or the welfare of a maid, endeavor
His stay, or I shall follow him to death. --

Kin. I Will find him out and try what power I have
Upon him: I suppose my kindnesses
To him, may well deserve his acceptance,
They have not been such as should weary him,
Nor is a Crown a thing to be slighted,
Nor easily obtained; yet his stay*
May purchase mine, and it is an easy rate.

Exeunt. Scaen. 5.
Enter Lamedon, Samela. Lam. What, Niece, still weeping! cannot curing time
Invent a plaster for thy wounds, but that
They still thus bleed afresh? what is the cause?

Sam. Dearest Uncle! who hitherto have been
The only Partner and Physician
Of all my griefs; unless your skill can fit
A cure unto my present cares, I must
Yield to their strength, for with continued
Batteries they so assault me now, that
I must be forced to sink under their weight.

Lam. Why, what new cross has happened unto thee?
That thus renews thy grief? Come, tell it me;
And doubt not of my readiness to try
All means for thy relief; but first it is fit
I know the cause, the first step to the cure.
Unbosome then thy grief, and give it vent;
Is Menaphon as kind as he was wont?

Sam. That name it is that is my sorrows spring
From whence these tears do flow, it is he alone --
Unkind and false, base-minded Menaphon. --

Lam. Out with it all, and tell me how he has
Abused thee, and I will try to right
Thee, and requite him for his injuries.

Sam. When as he saw I would not satisfy
His foolish fancy, for which cause alone
He hitherto has entertained us,
And not for to relieve our wants; he sees
His hopes are frustrated, and I despise
His clownish love, he turned me out of's doors:
Where shall we lie? we are exposed unto
The mercy of the kinder elements;
The heavens must be our canopie, and the earth
Our bed, the poor flocks our companions.

Lam. Well, fear not, S^^^la, already I
Have found a way to case thy mind; I have
A little money left, and there withal
Soon shall I purchase a small flock for thee:
Where thou shall live secure, and free from fear,
Enjoy thy little with content; there is
A shepherd lately dead, whose flock I Will buy,
And thou shall be it is Mistress, Samela.

Sam. Uncle, my thanks shall ever ready be
For you, as always is your care for me.
But let your haste prevent my coming griefs,
For griefs have wings, wherewith they fly to us,
Comforts are leaden heel'd, and move but slow.

Lam. Fear not, I will dispatch it suddenly,
The shepherd Doron's brother's lately dead,
And he has the disposal of the flock,
As soon as I can find him, we will try
If reasonable price will make them ours,
Enter Doron. See where he comes preventing me; Doron,
The merry shepherd! whither away so fast*

Dor I Am running for my life, Sir, my brother's
Lately dead, and I Am afraid death will catch
Me too, if I don't make haste. I Am sure
Carmela has half cut the thread of my
Life in twain, with the hook of her cruelty:
Besides, Moron's sheep are roving to find
Their master, and they I go till they lose
Themselves, if I find them not the sooner.

Lam. Moron! what was he a kin to a fool?


Dor. Why he was my own brother, Sir.


Lam. I thought so. Dor. I must be gone.


Lam. Nay, stay Doron, what will thou take, and we
Will ease thee of the trouble of thy sheep.

Dor. By my troth Sir, and you shall have them, but
What will you give me, and you shall have
His flock, -- ay and me too, if you will, for
I think Carmela will not.

Gives him gold. Lam. Will these content thee for thy sheep?


Dor. Ay marry, this is something lik -- you
Shall have them Sir, were there as many
Of them as there are hairs on their
Backs. -- They talk of a golden fleece
But I think I have made their fleeces
Gold now. Come Sir, I Will deliver you the sheep.

Exeunt. Scaen. 6.
Enter Menaphon. Forlorn, forsaken, and the object made
Of all the shepherds storms! what shall I do*
Love is no god, Fortune is blind, and can
Not help; sleep flies, and cares possess my head.
Mirth makes me melancholy, company
Yields me no comfort: when I am alone,
A thousand fancies do distract my thoughts:
And when I try to drown my cares in wine,
They swim aloft, and will be uppermost.
I Will try if I can sing my cares asleep.
Ye restless cares, companions of the night,
That wrap my joys in clouds of endless woes,
Spare not my heart, but wound it with your ^^ight,
Since love and fortune prove my equal fo^s.
Enter Pesana. Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Pes. Now will I take time by the fore-lock, and
Creep into Menaphon's breast, through the cracks
His minion S^^^l^ has made in it.
Aside. Friend Menaphon, what* is your courage cooled?

Men. Cold entertainment has my courage cooled.


Pes. You know where you might have been let in, long
E're this, without assault or battery.
But you are served in your kind, for being coy:
Now you have met with your mate (friend) I hope.

Men. She set my heart on fire by her presence,
That will not be put out by her absence.

Pes. Then I see you mean to follow her with
Your suit and service still, for all her scorn.

Men. No, she has wounded me too deep, to make
Pursuit after her, therefore let her go.

Pes. Now then you know what it is to be slighted;
So once you slighted me, now I Will slight you.

Exit. Men. Ah cruel love! whose music is composed
Of Lovers jars an discords, mixed with sighs!
If I turn traitor once more unto love,
I Will rob him of his deity, and pull
His little Kingdom down; I Will pull his wings,
And with the quils made into pens, and dipped
In saddest lovers tears, in stead of ink,
I Will Satyrs write against his tyranny.

Exit. Scaen. 7.
Enter King Agenor, Plusidippus, and Euriphila. Kin. Why then, my Plusidippus,
will you leave
Us, and your fortunes? It is my resolve
To make you heir to my crown, my Son
And Successor.

Plu. Great Sir, I would not be
Fondly injurious to my self, or you,
Or so profane unto the gods, to slight
Their and your gifts, when proffered me so fair:
I must obey their dictates, and my vows,
Which call me to Arcadia, till when,
I cannot rest. Give me your Royal leave
To go, I will engage my hopes, and all
My future happinesses, to return
In so short a time as you shall limit me.

Kin. Then daughter, since it must be so, I can
Not tell how to deny his just request:
But see you part with him in friendship. And
The like Sir, I require of you to her.

Exit. Plu. Far b^ it from me to deny so fair
Requests* Lady, in sign hereof, I take
This parting kiss, and may it cancel all
Miscarriages* and seal Loves covenants.
And thus I take my leave but for a while.

Eur. Then take thee this my dearest heart, and bear
It with thee; may it be a charm to keep
Thy chaste affections from a Strangers love:
May your return shorten my tedious hours,
Since I neglect mine own content for yours.

Exeunt. Scaen. 8.
Enter 2 Lords. 1 Lo. It seems our Kink has pretty well outgrown
His griefs; and now he meditates new Loves.

2 Lo. The fire of love has thawed his frozen breast,
And turned his cold December into May:
His Scepter's changed into a sheep-hook, He
Is gone on pilgrimage to seek a wife
Amongst the shepherdesses; there is one
Whom I have seen, and he is gone to see,
May vie with Juno for precedencie:
Who in the habit of a Country lass,
Carries a Prince-like countenance and grace.
In The Arcadian Plains she keeps a flock
Of sheep, whose innocence and whiteness she
Surpasses, whilst the shepherds daily strive
Who shall bid fairest for this fairer prize.

1 Lo. And he will out-bid them all, if that will do.
But what a motley mixture will it be,
To see his gray hairs joined with her green
And springing youth? The strange effects of love*
Well may she be his nurse, but not his wife:
What Is love in young, is dotage in old men.

2 Lo. Love can create an Autumn Spring, in^u^^
New spirits in the old, and make them young
Besides, Honor's a bait frail women know
Not to resist: who would not be a Queen?

Exeunt. Scaen. 9.
Enter Samela. Once more does Fortune flatter me, with hopes
Of a contented life: now am I free
From jealous Menaphon's suspicions,
And without fear enjoy my wished love.
Enter Melecertus. See where he comes, the picture drawn to th'life
Of my dead Maximus, my former joy.
Mel. All hail unto the fairest Samela,
And to her happy flock: I envy them
She is their Mistress, I her servant am.
Long since my heart was hers, may she but please
To take that kindly, which I freely give.

Sam. But, Melecertus, can I hope to find
You real unto me, whose worth I know
Cannot but be engaged already to
Some more deserving creature than poor I.

Mel. Lady, my services were never due
To any, but to one, which bond harsh death
Has cancelled to make me yours alone.

Sam. You call death harsh for freeing you from them,
And would you be in the like bonds again?

Mel. Your heavenly likeness does compel me to it
You are the same, but in another dress.
Let me no longer therefore strive to win
That fort, I so much covet to be in.

Sam. Then Melecertus take thy Samela.


Mel. Oh happy word! oh happy fate! the gods
If they would change with me, should give me odds.

Finis Act. 4.
Act. 5.
Scaen. 1.
Enter King Damocles, like a Shepherd. THus* Jove changed shapes to satisfy
his love,
He laid his godhead by; my Kingdom I
Have for a time forsaken, and exchanged
My royal robes for shepherds weeds. How light
(Me thinks) I feel my self! having laid by
My crown, with its companions heavy cares!
Enter Plusidippus. But who comes here? His paces to me tend.
Plu. Shepherd, well met, but why without a flock?
What, has the rot consumed thy sheep? or are
They gone astray?

Kin. No, not my sheep, but I,
Aside. So far, I almost know not where, or what
I am* -- to seek, as yet I know* not whom.

Plu. This old man dotes, and knows not what he says;
Where is thy bag-pipe, and thy merry lays,
That shepherds use to have in readiness?
Surely thou art no shepherd, but some goat
Crept lately into a sheeps habit. -- Do
Thou know the field of the fair Samela?

Kin. This boy will be my Rival, for that name
Aside. Sounds like the creatures that I seek for. -- No,
Go seek your Stamela, I know no such.

Plu. This is intolerable, -- I will scourge
Enter Samela passing by. Draws. Thee into better manners. -- But that divine
Appearance makes my spirits calm, and strikes
An awful reverence into my breast.
This is the beauty of the Arcadian Plains,
Sh'has shot her rays so home into my heart,
But partial fame was niggardly and base,
In giving but a glimpse of this rare beauty.

Sam. Do You know me, Sir, or have you lost your way?


Plu. I cannot likely lose my way, where I
Do find such glistring goddesses as you.
Indeed the force of such a light, may rob
Me of the office of mine eyes, and make
Them dark with too much brightness; can I choose
But gaze upon the Sun, when first I see it.

Sam. I think you lost your wits, or else your eyes,
That you mistake a glo-worm for the sun,
And make a goddess of a shepherdess.

Plu. Lady, if I have lost my wits or eyes,
It was with seeking you, whose beauty drew
Me hither; for your sake alone have I
Shook hands with Thessaly, and all my friends,
Only to join my hands and heart with you.

Sam. I should be loath to give my hand unto
So sudden a conclusion, and my heart
Is neither in my power or possession.

Plu. Fair Shepherdess, my errand is in love,
To yield my heart into your hands; it is yours,
By gift and conquest; I Am at your command.

Sam. If that you are at my command, be gone,
I cannot, will not listen to your words.

Exit. Plu. And have I left my dear Euriphila
For this! I see beauty makes women proud,
I would I were at Thessaly again,
There should I welcome be unto Euriphila,
Whose heart I know's my fellow-traveller,
Her salt rears, by this time, would make a sea,
Wherein I might swim back again with ease.

Exit. Scaen. 2.
Kin. I see this youth's repul'st, and he is young
And stout, and well deserving, how shall I
Hope to prevail with her? if lively youth
She do despise, then much more cripling age:
Nor do I know what arguments to use,
Unless to tell her that I am a King,
And lay my Crown and Scepter at her feet,
Which she will scarce believe: my shepherds hook
Will not be taken for a scepter, nor
This poor cap for th'usurper of a crown. --
I have a way whereby to work my will,
And this young man shall be my instrument:
There stands a castle hard by, whither he
Perforce shall carry her. I Will work my will
Upon her, when I have her there confined.

Enter Plusidippus. Plu. I will revenge this scorn, if force or wit
Will do, I Will make her pride come down.

Kin. Be wise,
Young man, and valiant, and I will tell
Thee how thou shall obtein thy full desire.

Plu. But tell me how, and then let me alone To act, what e're it be.


Kin. A Castle stands
Near by, guarded with crows and negligence,
Thither thou may by force convey her, and
Then force her unto what entreaties cannot.

Plu. Old man, if I do gain her by thy means,
Thou shall not want reward: I know the place
Where she does tend her flock, and I Will watch her,
As she does them; and when I see my time,
I will convey her where you shall direct.

Exit. Kin. I will attend you here. -- Now must I plot
To get her in my power, and then I shall
Advance her to a crown against her will.
But yet, I cannot think Honor should need
An Advocate; women's ambitious thoughts
Do swim aloft, they love to be above
Their neighbors, envying every one whose height
Does overlook, and seems to upbraid
Their lowness by comparison; their minds
Are always climbing up to honors hill,
And pride, and self-conceit, are the two wings
Which elevate their thoughs to fly aloft.

Enter Plusidippus, with Samela. Plu. Now, Mistress Coy, you are not in your own
power,
But mine. Old shepherd, take thee charge of her.

Exit. Kin. Lady, you see what folly it is for you
To deny men what they can take without
Your leave. Now must you yield unto the
Of Thessaly. -- But if you will be wise,
And see a good when proffered, you may be Knight
A Queen* by granting of my suit, who am
King of Arcadia, although thus disguised.

Sam. My father Damocles! it is he now sues
aside. To me his dauughter: He Is incestuous grown.

Kin. This is too woman-like, to turn away
From your own happiness. -- And it is strange,
That honor does not tempt her; thou shall have
A Crown and Kingdom at thy sole command,
And change these rural weeds for princely robes,
If thou will be my wife, pleasure for pain,
And plenty for thy poverty. What say?

Sam. Your potent batteries, and golden baits
Might win (perhaps) on some ambitious soul:
They nothing move me, to remove my love
Already placed on Melecertus, He,
He only does, and shall possess my heart.

Kin. A shepherd. Shall a shepherds basnesse stand
In competition, and outweigh a King?
A subject be before his Sovereign
Preferred? Oh how prepostrous are the minds
Of these fond women! Come, be well advised,
And change that petty pebble for a pearl.
It Is in my power to make thee happy, or
With one breath to blast the flower of thy hopes.
And to repay thy folly with thy shame.
Do not go on to kindle such a fire
Within my breast, as shall consume both thee,
And all that cross the current of my will.

Sam. I have already sad experience of
The wild effects of his enraged will,
aside. Yet such the crosness of my fortune is,
I must again be made the subject of
His furious tyranny; but I Am resolved.
Know Sir, I value more my minds content,
Than all the gawdie shows Courts can present:
I am too well confirmed in the bliss,
And sweet content attends a Country life,
To leave it for the giddy-headed Court.
Besides, my true affections are so riveted
Unto my Melecertus, that nor frowns,
Nor flatteries shall part my heart from him.
Cease therefore farther to commence a suit
Nature forbids me grant, and you to ask.

Kin. And have I with my Kingly robes laid by
My Kingly mind? No, it shall never be said
A woman's will has contradicted mine.
But it is by policy that I must work,
Since I have laid my Kingly power aside,
I Will set my brains o'th'tenterhooks, and stretch
Them to their uttermost abilities,
To win this scornful beauty to my wife,
Or else revenge it with her dearest life.

Exit. Scaen. 3.
Sam. My life has hitherto been checkered with
Variety of fortunes; sometimes with
A white of happiness, and then a black
Of misery; thus loves bright day of mirth,
Is followed with a darker night of woe.
How fair of late my fortune seemed to be,
And now, alas! o're-cast with blackest clouds
Of discontents, wherein I labor with
Important suits, I cannot, may not grant.
No, no, my Melecertus, I am firm
To thee, nor shall the rain of tears,
Or winds of threats remove me from thy love.
Be thou but constant, nay, I know thou art,
I will not wrong thee with so foul a thought,
As once to doubt thou can be otherwise.

Enter Plusidippus. Plu. You're from your shepherds now, or their defense,
Presume not they can rescue you, it is past
Their skill or power, to force you from mine arms.

Sam. Alas, fond boy! I scorn thy threats, as much
As I hate thee, or slight thy boasted strength.
Were but my Melecertus here, he would
Whip thy rudeness into better manners.

Plu. It Is well you are a woman (not a man,)
And have no other weapon but your tongue,
Which you are priviledg'd to use, and we
To laugh at. But in short, if you will accept
My love and service, then shall you be safe,
And happy: Soldiers cannot talk, but with
Their swords, and then they strike gainsayers dumb.

Sam. All this is nothing; for your words, nor swords
Shall not remove me from my dearest friend,
He has my heart, and I have nothing left
But hate, if you will accept of that, it is all
That I can give, or you receive from me.

Plu. You must be dealt with as we use to do
With sullen birds, I Will shut you up, and then
Perhaps you will sing another note, you are
Not yet in tune, you are too high for me,
But I will take you lower. I will plough
Your heart with grief, and then (perhaps) it will
Better receive the seed of my true love.

Sam. Sooner the turtle shall forget her mate,
Than I my Melecertus; and when I
Cannot see him with mine eyes, my mind shall rove,
Winged with desire, throughout the spacious world,
And find no rest, until it meet with him.
And though our bodies never meet, our souls
Shall join, and love each other after death.
Thus is true love immortal, and shall never
Die, but with our souls shall live for ever.

Plu. Shepherd, who e're thou art, I cannot choose
But envy thee thy happiness, who have
So true a love: I cannot but admire
This noble soul and love her, though she hate
Me for it; I Will treat her civilly, and if
I cannot obtain her for a wife, she shall
My goddess be, and I Will adore her name,
Though at a distance. Lady, will you walk?

Exeunt. Scaen. 4.
Enter King Damocles. It is an ill wind that blows no man good;
Though the Thessalian lad have got the prize
In his possession, it shall not be long,
But I will have them both in mine, I have
Dispatched a letter to my Lords, to send
Me suddenly some servants to assist
Enter Menaphon. My plot. Now Menaphon, what is the news?
Men. Great Sir, the messenger's returned, and brought
The men you sent for, they are here at hand.

Kin. It Is well; direct them to the castle that
I told you of, and give them charge to seize
Upon the buzzard and his prey, and bring
Them both to me: mean-time go you, and find
Out Melecertus, that I may be sure
Of him, for he is my rival in my love.

Men. My Liege, all shall be done to your desire.


Exit. Kin. Blessed policy, thou far exceed'st dull strength,
That wanders in the dark of ignorance,
Wanting the eye of wisdom, both to guide,
And to defend it from approaching harms.
Thus art with ease does move the pondrous load,
Which strength could never master, or remove.
The Foxes tail must piece the Lions skin.
Little Ulysses with his wit did more
Against the foe, than Ajax with his strength.

Exit Scaen. 5.
Enter Samela. It is some comfort yet that I can change
My prison, though I am a prisoner still,
Would I could change my company as soon.
But ah! most wretched Samela, who were
Born to misfortunes, and to nothing else:
As if that I alone were fortunes mark,
At which she only ayms her angry darts.
The morning of mine age was clouded with
Mishaps, and now my noon is like to be
The fatal night unto my misery. --
My Jailer is so kind, as if he meant
To bribe my love; but these are gilded pills
I cannot swallow. Should my Father get
Me into his possession once again,
I were as bad, or worse: I know too well
His passion, to hope any help from him.
I Will tell him plainly who I am, and try
If time have dulled the edge of's cruelty:
Perhaps the kinder gods may move his heart
To pity, and convert his rage to love.
He is my father still, and though unkind
To me, yet can I not forget I am
His child, and owe a duty to his name.
He is my King, and so I must obey
His will; if I must suffer, let it be
From his, rather than from a strangers hands.
Exit. Scaen. 6.
Enter Doron, reading. I think I am provided now, if Poetry
Will do it, my Carmila is mine; these
Witty knaves, what fine devices they
Have got to fetter maidens hearts?
The Poet Orpheus made the Thracian
Dames dance after his pipe, and Ovid
Charmed the Emperors daughter with
His Poetry; there are some secret
Enter Carmila. Charms in these same verses sure.
Let me see here what I have got.
Ha Carmila, look here, I think
You Will love me now.
Reads. Carmila -- A Miracle.


Car. A miracle, for what, Doron?


Dor. Why, a miracle of beauty, and I think
You Will be a miracle of folly, if you
Don't love me now.

Car. What small Poet have you hired
To make a miracle of my name.

Dor. Nay, I have more yet, and better,
That I found in the Nichodemus
Of Complements, that is a sweet book,
It Is a very magazine of Poetry, a
Storehouse of wit; do but hear
Them Carmila.

Car. Let Us hear them, Doron, are they
Worth a laughing at? Let Us hear.

Dor. Well, well, it is no laughing matter; but I Am
Sure your laughing has made me cry.
Now Carmila, you must imagine that it is
I, and only I, say this to you, and none but you:
For the unhappy wag has so fitted my
Fancy, as if 'twere made for no body but me.
Excellent Mistress, brighter than the Moon,
Than scowred pewter* or the silver spoon:
Fairer than Phoebus, or the morning Star,
Dainty fine Mistress, by my troth you are.
Thine eyes like Diamonds shine most clearly,
As I Am an honest man, I love thee dearly.
What think you now, Carmila, is not this
Admirable? if these strong lines will
Not draw your love, I know not what will.

Car. Had it been your own mother-wit,
Doron, I could have like't it well:
But for you to father the brat of
Another's brain, is too ridiculous.
I like your love much better than your
Hackney lines: but bought wit's best.

Dor. If you like not my lines, because they are
None of mine, you will not love my
Heart neither, for that is not mine, but yours.

Car. Yes, Doron, if you have given me your
Heart, I will not die in your debt, but
Give you mine in exchange for yours.

Dor. Than welcome to me my new found heart,
We Will live, and love, and never part.

Exeunt. Scaen. 7.
Enter Melecertus. Revenge shall soon o're-take this proud boy, who
Committed has so bold a rape upon
My Samela: He had been better to
Have lodged snakes in his breast, than to steal
This spark, that shall consume him and his nest.
Samela! Samela! that name alone
Infuseth spirits into me, inflames
My soul with vengeance, till I recover
My dearest love.

Enter Menaphon. Men. Now shall I be revenged on Samela,
And on her Melecertus both at once:
I Will make her know neglected love may turn
To hate, and vengeance take the place of scorn.
Well met friend Melecertus, what, alone?

Mel. I Am solitary since my mate is gone.


Men. Your mate has taken flight, she is on the wing,
But I can tell thee where she nests, and bring
Thee guickly where thou shall retrive the game.

Mel. If thou will do this, Menaphon, I shall
Be studious to requite thy love with mine:
I pay thee sterling thanks and services.

Men. I will not sell my favors to my friends,
My work is all the wages I expect.
Come, follow me, I Will lead thee to the place,
Where the fresh gamesters have thy love in chase.

Exeunt. Scaen. 8.
Enter King Damocles in his Royal robes, Plusidippus and Samela, prisoners.
Kin. Now Sir, you see the shepherd is become
A King; and though you have deserved death,
Yet since you have but acted our commands,
We here release you, and not only so,
But entertain you with all due respect,
At once belonging to our neighbour-Prince,
And near Allie, the King of Thessaly. --
Some secret power does force me love him so,
That if I had a daughter to bestow,
I Would wish no other Son-in-law, but him.
Now my Sephestia, what would I give,
Thou were alive, I had thee, and thou him.

Sam. He little thinks I am so near, or that
It is his daughter he would make his wife.

Kin. Thus, Gentlewoman, you are once more fallen
Into my hands, I am the Arcadian King:
Be sudden therefore to give me your love,
Or else forseit your life for your contempt;
Think on it, and choose which you will rather do.

Sam. Sir, I am still the same I was before:
My love, like to a mighty rock, stands fast,
Disdaining the proud billows of your threats.
Crowns cannot tempt, nor Kings command my love,
My love is free, and cannot be compelled.
True love admits no partners, is content
With one, and Cupids statute law forbids
Pluralities of loves.

Kin. Since you are so stiff,
You will not bow, I Will make you bend, or break.

Enter Menaphon with Melecertus. Mel. I am betrayed by this base Menaphon.


Kin. Here comes my Rival; when I have dispatched
Him to the other world, your plea is spoiled:
My sword shall cut your gordian knot in two;
Your ghosts may wed, your bodies never shall.
I Will be his Executioner my self,
I Will trust no other eyes to see it done.

Sam. Now is it time t'unmask, and let him know
He wounds his daughter through her Lovers sides.
She kneels. Father, your fury once exposed me to
The greedy jaws of death, which yet more kind,
In pity saved my life, you sought to lose.
I Am your Sephestia, Father, know your child.

Mel. And is it possible, Sephestia lives,
Once more to enjoy her truest Maximus?

Sam. My Maximus, I Am thy Sephestia:
Oh that our Plusidippus too were here!

Plu. And I am he, my name is Plusidippus.


Seph. My dearest son! it is he; now were my joys
Complete indeed, were but my Uncle here.

Mel. I am so wrapped with joy, I scarce can get
Breath, to express my thanks unto the gods.

Men. What will become of me? I shall be hanged,
Or lose my place at least; I Will get me home,
Amidst their mirth they will not think on me.

Exit. Kin. My only daughter! Dear Sephestia,
And you, kind Maximus, I ask
Both of you pardon for your injuries,
And for requital, thus I do create
Thee King of Arcadie; and may the gods
Requite your sufferings, and forgive my crimes.
Long may ye live, and happy; may your days
Be sunshine all, and know no clouds nor night.
Enter Lamedon. And that we may not leave one string untuned,
My brother comes to make our consort full;
The best of brothers, and the best of friends,
Thanks for your care of her, whom you have made
Your daughter by a better claim than mine.
Now let the whole land swim in mirth, and load
The altars with their thankful sacrifice
Unto the kinder deities, who through
A sea of woes, have sent us happiness.
Let Us in, and hear the strange adventures have
Befaln your heaven-protected persons; griefs
Grow less by telling, joys are multiplied.
Although against them all things seem to strive,
At last just men and lovers always thrive.

FINIS.
Fragmenta Poetica: OR, Poetical Diversions. WITH A PANEGYRIC UPON HIS SACRED
MAJESTY'S Most happy Return, on the 29. May, 1660. By THO. FORDE, Philothal.

LONDON, Printed by R. and W. Leybourn, for William Grantham, and are to sold
at the Sign of the Black Bear in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1660.

Poetical Diversions.
For Christmass-day.
1 Shepherd. WHat, have we slept! or does the hasty Sun
Bring back the day, before the night be done?

2 Shep. What melody is this that charms our ears?
Is it the music of th'harmonious Spears?

Angels. Peace shepherds, peace; glad tidings we ye bring,
Your God has got a Son, and ye a King:
And he has sent us with this news to tell,
Who late was Ours, is your Immanuel.
Up, up to B^thlehem, there shall you see
An Human shape enclose the Deity.
Behold, a cratch imprisons him, whose hands
Have framed the earth, and curbs the sea with bands.
He now begins to be, that no beginning knew,
He now begins to live, who being gave to you.
Go see The Eternal God a child's become,
The ever-speaking Word himself lies dumb,
Who by his word feeds all is fed by meat,
The Almighty King of Heaven has left his seat,
And now keeps Court on earth: haste ye and see
The cratch his throne, beasts his attendance be.
And all to be your Savior, and to free
Ye men from sin, and Satan's slaverie.

Chorus of Angels. Glory to God on high, and peace on earth,
Good will to men by this our God-mans birth.

Shepherds. Come, let us go see these wonders which are told,
Let what our ears have heard, our eyes behold.

Soliloquie. Crowd in, my soul, and see amongst the rest,
And by thy sight, oh be for ever blessed!
Hark how the Angels sing, the heavens rebound,
And earth with th'eccho of th'Angeli^k sound.
Never till now were the well-tuned Spears
Heard to make melody to mortal ears.
Now every pretty bird with his warbling throat,
To's newborn Maker elevates a note.
See how the earth, being big with pride to be
Out-gone by heaven, puts on her liverie
Of mirth, and laughs with joy to hear
Her Maker now will please to dwell on her.
The whole world was agreed to entertain
The King of peace, who now began his reign:
Mars shrunk for fear, Bellona hid her head,
When peace was born, all discords lay for dead.
Then why should bloody characters descrie
The blessed day of his Nativitie?
O let the purest white note out that morn
From all the rest, when Innocence was born.

On the Nativitie.
1.
Hail holy tide,
Wherein a Bride,
A Virgin, and a Mother,
Brought forth a Son,
The like was done,
Except her, by no other.
2.
A Virgin pure,
She did endure
After her Son, or rather.
It may be said,
She was a maid,
And this Son was her Father.
3.
Here riddles vex,
And do perplex
The eye of humane reason;
Heaven did combine,
With earth to join,
To consecrate this season.
4.
Hail blessed Maid,
For by thine aid,
Eternal life is Ours,
Thou did lie in,
And without sin,
The son of God was yours.
5.
Hail happy birth,
Wonder of Earth
And heaven; the Angels sing
Anthems to thee,
As glad to see
Their newborn heavenly King.
6.
Though thou art poor,
Kings thee adore,
And precious presents bring,
They kneel to you,
And humbly bow,
As to some sacred thing.
7.
Thou that art able
To turn a stable
Into a Temple, come,
Possess my heart,
Cleanse every part,
And take it for thy home.
For Christmass-day,
LEnd me a pen pulled from an Angels wing,
That I the news of this blessed day may sing;
Or reach a feather of that holy Dove,
Wherewith to show this miracle of love.
Darkness is turned to light, midnight to morn;
Who can be silent when the Word is born!
Hark how the Angels sing, they bow, and more
Than Persians they this rising Sun adore.
The Court's removed, and the attendants fly
To wait upon this humane Deity.
He, who was clothed with glorious Majesty,
Is veiled with flesh, the better to comply
With mortal eyes; dis-robes himself of light,
Lays by his beams, stoops to our weaker sight:
And with his other favors this does give
That man may see the face of God, and live.
The Son of God becomes the son of man,
That men may be the sons of God again!
Here God is man, and man is God, he takes
Our nature to him, not his own forsakes.
A mortal God, Immortal man in one,
Thus heaven and earth are in conjunction.
See how the shepherds flock, and Kings (as proud
To be his subjects) to his presence crowd.
Haste, haste my soul, there is danger in delay,
Since thou have nothing else to offer* lay
Thy self down at his feet; pray him to make
His lodging in thee, as he deigned to take
Thy nature on himself. -- But stay fond soul,
He Is purity it self, thou art too foul
To lodge so bright a guest, in whose pure eyes,
Heavens and Angels are deformities.
Yet see, he smiles, and beckens thee to come,
As if he meant to take thee for his home,
To wash thee with his blood; do not repine,
The sins are His, His righteousness is thine.
Hark, he invites himself to be thy guest,
Whose presence is thy physic and thy feast.
Behold he bows the heavens, and comes down,
Takes up thy Cross, that thou may wear his Crown.
And in exchange assumes thy poverty,
Pays all thy debts, sets thee at liberty.
He sues to serve thee, and expects no more,
Thou should give him* than he gave thee before.
His work is all his wages, and his will
Is all his hire; be thou obedient still:
Love him* as he loves thee, and 'cause thou art poor,
Give him thy self, thy all, He asks no more.
Lord it is not fitting thou should come
Into so base a room
First, with thy spirit cleanse my heart,
And by thy powerful art,
Thine and my enemies expel,
Make an Heaven of my Hell,
Then for ever in me dwell.
But, Lord, if thou vouchsafe to dwell
Within so dark a cell,
Take thou charge of the family,
And let me dwell with thee.
Thine is the cost, be thine the care,
That Satan have no share,
For thou will find no room to spare.
For Christmas Day.
Invocat.
The Day, thy day is come,
O thou most glorious Sun,
When thou did veil thy self, that we
Mortals might thy glory see.
Lend me a ray of light,
That I may see to write,
And Carol forth thy praise,
In ever-living lays.
Thyrsis. WHat made the Sun post hence away
So fast, and make so short a day?

Damon. Seeing a brighter Sun appear,
He ran and hid himself for fear:
Ashamed to see himself out-shin'd,
(Leaving us, and night behind)
He sneaked away to take a nap,
And hide himself in Thetis lap.
When, lo, a brighter night succeeds,
A night none of his luster needs:
A night so splendent, we may say,
The day was night, and night was day.

Thyrsis. See, Damon, see, how he does shroud
His baffled glory in a cloud;
From whence he peeps to see the Sun,
That has his lusters all outdone.

Damon. But ventring on he spies a star,
More glorious than his Hesper far;
Which with a fair and speaking ray,
Told plainly where his Master lay.
Ambitious then to steal a sight,
He saw it was the God of light;
Then strait he whips away his team,
The well lost minutes to redeem;
And flies through all the world, to tell
The news of this great miracle*
It was not long before he came
Unto the lofty house of fame,
Where every whisper, every sound
Is taken at the first rebound,
And like an aerie bubble blown
By vainer breath, till it be grown
Too big to be concealed, it flies
About a while, gazed at, then dies,
Something he tells, and hasts away*
He could not, and fame would not stay,
To near the rest; for she well knew,
By mixing of false tales with true,
To make it more. To Rome she plyes,
Her greatest Mart of truths and lies;
The gods (says she) will dwell on earth,
And give themselves a mortal birth.
But they of fame had got the ods,
For they themselves made their own gods;
And cared not to increase their store,
For they had gods enough before.
To Solyma she takes her flight,
And puts the City in a fright:
Unwelcome news fills Herod's ears,
And then his head, with thoughts and fears.
The King of whom the Sages told,
And all the Prophecies of old,
Is born, says fame; a King who shall
Deliver Judah out of thrall:
Kings shall his subjects be, and lay
Their scepters at his feet; his sway
Shall know no bounds, nor end, but he
Beyond all time, so fates decree.
By this the Sun had crossed the seas,
And told the news to the Antipodes.
The aerie spirits packed hence away,
Chased by the beams of this bright day.
The fiends were in an uproar, hell
Trembled with the dismal yell.
The Prince of darkness was in doubt
The Lord of light would find him out;
And that the word of truth being come,
His oracles must all be dumb.
Pale death foresaw he was betrayed,
That King of terrors was afraid.
Glory be to God above,
For this miracle of love:
Ever blessed be the morn,
When the God of Love was born.
Love so charming that it can
Contract a God into a Man.
And by the magic of his birth,
Make an Heaven of the Earth.
Ever, ever sing we thus,
Till Angels come and join with us.
They rejoice with all their powers,
Yet the Benefit is Ours.
They with joy the tidings bring,
Shall We be silint when They sing?

The 25. Cap. of Job Paraphrased.
Then Bildad answers, dominion and fear
(Which rule us mortals) lo his In-mates are.
Can numbers shallow bounds confine his hoasts?
Or does his light baulk any unknown coasts?
Can man be Gods Corrival to be just?
Can he be clean that is defiled dust?
The Moon in the ocean of his light is drowned,
The stars impure in his bright eyes are found.
Then what is man? (alas!) poor worthless span,
Or what is his son? a worm* less than a man.
35. Cap. of Job.
Then 'gan Elihu speak, vileness do dare
Thy righteousness with Gods thus to compare?
Thou say, what gain will righteousness bring in?
Or shall I thrive by that more than by sin?
I Will answer thee. Behold, the clouds that stand
His surer guard against thy sinning hand.
Legions of doubled sins cannot assault
Thy God, or pierce his starry-guarded vault.
Nor can thy stock of good increase his store,
Thy hand may hurt, or help (like thee) the poor. etc.
On the Widows 2 Mites.
How comes it that the widows mites are more
Than the abundance the rich gave the poor?
Whilst they their worldly goods lib'rally hurled
She gave her heart, more worth than all the* world.
On Christ's Cross.
As from a Tree at first came all our woe,
So on a tree our remedy did grow.
One bare the fruit of death, the other life;
This was a well of Salem, that of strife.
On Christ's Death and Resurrection.
What, can God die, or man live, being slain?
He died as man, as God he rose again.
Genesis 2. 18.
When man was made, God sent an helper to him,
And so she proved, for she helped to undo him.
On the miracle of the Loaves.
This was a miracle indeed, when bread
Was by substraction multiplied:
Why wonder we at this strange feast,
When Gods's both giver, and a guest?
On Christ's Resurrection.
The Lord of life lay in a tomb,
as in the womb,
His Resurrection was a second birth,
from th'womb of the earth.
On M. M. weeping at Christ's death.
What, weep to see thy Savior die,
Whereby thou liv'st eternally?
But now I know, 'twas cause thy sins
Were the sharp spears that wounded him.
Mark 12. Give to God, etc. And to Caesar, etc*
Give God and Caesar both, how shall I do?
Give Gods receiver, and thou giv'st him too.
On the world.
That the worlds goods are so inconstant found,
No wonder is, for that it self is Round.
Similis simili gaudet.
Wherefore does Dives love his Money so?
That Is earth, So's He* Like will to like we know.
On Calvus.
Calvus of late extreme long locks does wear:
The reason is Calvus has lost his Hair.
On Mal^ido.
Mal^ido on his neighbor looks so grim,
Proximus is Postremus sure with him.
On Will: who had run through all trades and was now a Cobbler.
I prithee Will whither will thou so fast?
Thou can not farther, for thou art at thy Last.
Better fortune.
Whilst that the Huntsman stared, he became
Unto his dogs their banquet and their game:
But from Acteons fortune I am free,
Because whilst I saw her, she could not me.
On Cornuto.
Cornuto cries He Is weary of his life,
He cannot bear the Lightness of his wife,
She wants so many Grains, she will go with loss;
Yet a Light Woman is an Heavy Cross.
Mart. Ep. 24. lib. 2.
If unjust fortune hale thee to the bar,
In rags, paler than guilty prisoners are,
I Will stick to thee; banishd thy native soil,
Through Seas and Rocks I will divide thy toil.
On one who fell in love with Julia, throwing Snow-balls at him.
I Am all on fire; strange miracle of Love,
These Watery Snow-bals Hand-Granadoes prove?
If from cold clouds thou do thy lightnings dart,
Julia, what Element will ^ence my heart?
J. Cesaris Epigram.
A Thracian lad on Ice-bound Heber plays,
The glassie Pavement with his weight decays.
Whilsts with his lower parts the river fled,
The meeting Ice cut off his tender head,
Which having found, the Son-less mother urnd,
Those to be drowned were born, this to be burnd.
Hensii Epitaph.
Trina mihi juncta est variis aetatibus vxor,
Haec Juveni, illa viro, tertia nupta seni est:
Prima est propter Opus, teneris sociata sub annis,
Altera propter Opes, tertia propter Opem.
Englished.
Three wives I had in several ages Past,
A Youth, a Man, an old man had the last;
The first was for the Work, a tender maid,
The second was for Wealth, the third for Aid.
Out of Italian.
My Mistress has my heart in hold,
But yet it is under locks of gold,
In which the wind does freely play,
But my poor heart does prisoner stay:
What happier prison can there be?
Confinement is my liberty.
H. Grotius, S. Pet^i Querela.
Quae me recondet, recondet regio? qua moestum diem
Fallam latebra? quaero nigrantem specum
Qua me sepeliem vivus: ubi nullum videns
Nulli videndus, lachrymas foveam meas.
Englished.
What place will hide my guilt? that there I may
Deceive th'approaches of discovering day.
I Will seek some gloomy cave, where I may lie
Entombed alive in shades of secrecy:
There seeing none, nor any seeing me,
I will indulge my tears with liberty.
Out of Italian.
I am a child, and cannot love,
Ah me! that I my death must prove.
Will thou that I thee adore,
Cruel thou must be no more.
Torments my heart cannot bear,
Nor must any grief come there.
To Henry the 4th. out of Bahusius.
O mighty King! glory of Princely race,
Thy Kingdoms safety, and it is chiefest grace:
We wish our Muse worthy thy worth t'adorn,
She nothing more desires, can nothing less perform.
Thou grace of arms, make war a sport to be,
To labor's rest, to wake is sleep to thee*
Thy call makes soldiers, whom thou have so in awe,
Thy word is a decree, thy beck a law.
Thou lead'st them on, thy deeds serve for commands,
They learn their duty from thy feet and hands.
Thou conquer'st e're thou fight'st, fortune's decree
Assures thee triumph, before the victory.
Thy helmet laurel, fights all trophies be,
To fight and conquer is all one with thee.
Thy mercy strives thy sword for to reprieve,
And when thou strik'st thy foe, thy self does grieve.
Though forced to fight, to expiate their deed,
Thine eyes do weep, fast as thy foes do bleed.
Pardons are thy revenges, whilst thy sword
Does wounds dispense, thy hand does help afford.
Like dreadful lightning to the war thou come,
Conqueror, than conquered milder thou return'st.
To conquer others were too small, but thou
A nobler triumph over thy self do show.
Loves Duel, out of Anacreon.
CUpid all his arts did prove,
To invite my heart to love:
But I always did delay,
His mild summons to obey:
Being deaf to all his charms,
Strait the god assumes his arms.
With his bow and quiver, he
Takes the field to duel me.
Armed like Achilles, I
With my shield and spear defy
His bold challenge: as he cast
His golden darts, I as fast
Caught his arrows in my shield,
Till I made him leave the field.
Fretting and dis-armed, then
The Angry god returns again,
All in flames; 'stead of a dart,
Throws himself into my heart,
Useless, I my shield require,
When the fort is all on fire;
I in vain the field did win,
Now the enemy's within.
Thus betrayed, at last I cry,
Love! thou have got the victory.
With a Letter to Aglaia.
Go happy paper, view those eyes,
Where beauties richest treasure lies;
The quiver whence he takes his darts,
Wherewith he wound's poor mortalis hearts.
But yet, fond paper, come not near
Those all-consuming flames, for fear
Thou perish by their cruel art,
That have inflamed thy masters heart.
Yet if thou will it so hardy be,
To venture on a battery,
On that presuming Castle, say,
Wonder not I have found the way;
For (fairest Lady) hereby know,
The dart came first from your own Bow.
Excuse for absence.
You need inflict no other banishment,
The fault it selfe's my greatest punishment.
Often would I pardon crave; but still my Muse
Prompts me, foul weather is a fair excuse.
If that will not suffice; then let this be,
That I have none, my best apology.
Convict me of my crime, and as it is meet,
I Will do you daily Penance in a sheet.
But, prove me absent first, and then,
I Will write apologies, or burn my Pen.
Planets are where they work, not where they move,
I am not where I live, but where I Love.
With Herberts Poem.
The Poet's now become a Priest, and lays
His Poem at your feet, expects no Bays,
But your acceptance; kind'le it with your eyes,
And make this Offering prove a Sacrifice.
The Vestal fire that is in your breast, will burn
Up all his dross, and make it Incense turn;
And then your smile a second life will give,
He Will fear no death, if you but bid him live.
Pardon this bold ambition, it is his drift,
To make the Altar sanctify the Gift.
Visit this Temple, at your vacant hours,
It Was Herberts Poem once, but now it is Yours.
On the death of M. A. S.
Fain would I pay my tribute to thy Hearse,
And sigh thy death, in never dying verse.
But I in vain invoke my Muse, for she
(Alas!) is dead with him for company.
Like to those Indian wives who count the thread
Of their life ended when their Mate is dead.
When souls thus linck'd divorce, one cannot part,
Without the breaking of the others heart.
To vent my sorrows yields me no relief,
He grieves but little that can tell his grief.
Let others less concerned this truth approve,
And strive to show their Wit, more than their Love
My grief confutes the Laws of Numbers, I
Whilst others Write, will Weep thine Elegy.
Each line my tears a Colons charge defray,
Verses have Periods, but no Period they.
Reader since He my better half is gone,
My heart is but his Monumentall Stone,
On which this Epitaph inscribed shall be:
I di'd in him, and yet he lives in me.
Laus and votum vitae Beatae. Out of Lipsius.
Equal unto the Gods is he,
And much above what Mortals be,
Who the uncertain day of fate,
Nor wishes nor repineth at:
T'whom impotent Ambition, nor
The hope of gaine's Solicitor.
Whom Princes thundering threats cannot move,
No, nor the darts of angry Jove.
But seated in Security,
Laughs at the vulgars vanity.
Whose life's thread's spun so even, that there
Can not be seen the least knot of care.
O might I but thus far aspire,
To shape my life to my desire:
Nor Offices, nor Wealth I Would crave,
Nor with white Stee'ds in triumph brave,
To lead along poor Captived Slaves.
I in vast Solitude should dwell,
A neighbor to the Muses Well:
Orchards, and Gardens to frequent,
There would I seat my sole content;
So that when as full ripened Death,
Shall put a period to my breath,
Tedious to none, and without strife,
Calmely to end my aged life.
On T. Bastard, and his Epigrams.
That thy names Bastard, friend, is thy hard fate,
Thy Births I Am sure are Legitimate.
Well may a Bastard be, all Common race
To thy diviner wit must need give place:
No, Jove himself begat thee, and thy Birth,
Gets in us Wonderment as well as mirth.
Momus to Bastard.
The proverb says, Bastards (remember it)
Must fling no stones; least they their father hi^*
Answer.
Momus stand off gald backs will winch, it is true,
Here Is Salt, or we should never hear of you.
Again to Bastard.
Bastard, that is of best wit, say the Dutch,
Then as thy name is so's thy nature such:
What if the multitude laugh at thy Name,
Know, their disprayses do advance thy fame.
To the Reader, Out of Faius.
Who will read these? None. Why? nor mock, nor jeere.
Nor Baudry (wishd by many) comes not here,
But one or other hap'ly they may find,
Preferring good* before Jests, he will mind.
But if none read, grief does not me assault,
For if none read, then none can find a fault.
Upon His Sacred Majesty's most happy Return, on the 29th. of May 1660.
Awake dull Muse, the Sun appears,
Open thine eyes, and dry thy tears:
The clouds disperse, and Sable night*
Resignes to Charles his conquering light
Batts, Owls, and Night-birds fly away,
Chased by the beams of this bright day.
A day designed by Destiny,
Famous to all Posterity.
First for the birth of Charles, and now
It Is His Three Kingdoms Birthday too.
We moved before, but knew not how,
We could not say we lived, till now.
Like Flies in VVinter, so lay we,
In a dull, senceless Lethargy.
Touched by his healing beams, we live,
His Presence a new life does give.
Each loyal heart struck by his Rays,
Is filled with gratitude and praise.
Those Phaetons who had got the Rain,
And needs would guide great Charles his Waine;
Have found their Folly in their Fate;
And Phoebus now assumes his State.
The Trees who chose a wooden King,
To be their shade and covering:
Whilst they injuriously decline
The fruitful Olive and the Vine
Consuming fire from the Bramble came;
They read their Folly by the Flame.
True Emblems of our giddy age,
Not ruled by Reason, but by Rage:
The tail would quarrel with the Head,
And no longer would be Led:
The inferior Members soon give way,
And the Tail must bear the sway,
Blind as it was* ('to ur misery)
With many a Sting, but never an Eye.
Then were we dragged through mire and stones,
Which bruisd our flesh, and brake our bones,
Our Feet and Legs foundred and lame,
We saw our Folly in our Shame.
We praid, but no releif could find,
The Tail was Deaf, as well as Blind:
Drums, Trumpets, Pulpits with their sound,
All our entreaties did confound;
Till pitying Heaven heard our cry,
And God vouchsafes, what men deny.
After a twelve years suffering,
Just Heaven Proclaims Great Charles our King:
Free (like Ulisses) from the harms
Of Foreign Sirens tempting charms.
And now our Joyful Land does ring,
With ^o Paean's to our King:
All England seemd One bonfire, Night
Seemed to contend with Day for light.
For Bells our Kingdom has been famed,
And the Ringing-Island named:
More truly now, when every Bell
Aloud the joyful news does tell.
That Charles is landed once again,
With Peace, and Plenty, in his Train.
No more shall brother brother kill,
Nor sons the blood of fathers spill:
No more shall Mars and Madness rage,
Peace shall bring back the Golden-age.
No more shall Loyalty be Treason,
Error truth, and nonsense reason;
Nor will we sell our Liberty,
For a too-dear bought Slavery.
No more shall Sacrilege invade
The Church, nor Faction make a trade
Of Holy things; nor Gospel be
Lost in a law-less liberty.
No more hope we to see the time
When to be innocent's a crime.
No more, no more shall armed might
Though Wronged, overcome the weaker Right.
Now shall all jar^ing discords be
Drowned in the pleasing Harmony
Of peaceful laws, whose stiller voice
Shall charm the Drum and Trumpets noise,
The Church shall be Triumphant, more
Than it was Militant before.
The withered Laurel, and the Bays
Revive to crown our happy days
These, and all other blessings we
Great and Good Charles, Expect from thee*
Whose Virtues were enough alone,
To give Thee Title to the Crown.
You Conquered without Arms, Your Words
VVin hearts, better than others Swords.
Pardons are Your revenges, we
Jov in Your Boundless Victory.
What others use to do with blows,
You by Forgiving kill your foes:
Your mercy does your Sword reprieve,
And for their faults, You most do grieve.
Your Martyred Fathers charity
(His last and greatest Legacy)
You most do prize. Could we but tread
That pace of virtue which you lead,
How quickly should we all agree,
To live in Love and Loyalty!
Whilst others their rich Presents bring,
All I can give's, GOD SAVE THE KING.
FINIS.
Errata.
In the Panegyrric.

Page 9* Line ^^ Read infortunately, In the first Elegy on K. C. ^. p, ^ ^* ^
^, moving ^ 11* ^^, his,

In Apothegms p, 40 ^, 20 r, Lord Stanhop, p, 49 l, penul^, r, the contrary, p,
50 l, 12 r, one, p, 50 l, 2 r, deadly, p 64 l, 17* r, neighbors with carriages.

In the Letters. p, 4 l, last r, lame, it may appear, p* 3 l, 9 r, to the p, 24
^, clew, p, 44 l, 15 r, your, p, 54 l, 17 r or, l, 23 r* grate, p, 55 l, 11 r,
been, p, ^7 l 10 r, jucundum, p, 69 l, 21 dele thee, p, 82 l, 12 dele full, p.
90 l, 13 r, else, p, 94 l, 19 dele Negro, p, 102 l, 11 r* beast, p, 111 l, 18
r, live, p, 115 l, 31 r, Terence, p, 130 l, 12 r, perdidit, p, 130 l, 14 r,
Comici Cogito, p, 154 l, 12 r, in his p, 155 l, ^ r, than to, p, 156 l 13 r,
rather a, p, 156 l. 28 r, (...).

In Loves Labyrinth, on the title, for festina r, festiva, in the first copy
of verses, after outlet r, there, p, 3 l, 4 r, ready in* p* 3 l ^ r, volleys
l, 18 r, drops, p, 8 l, 30 r, thou now p, 10 l, 9 r, thou thus, l 15 r,
wronged, p, 11, l, 1 r, rashness, l, the last, r, mine, p, 23 l, 12 r, be my,
p, 26 l, 20 r, too much, p, 40 l 4 r, shine, p, 32 l, 27 r, grown, p, 33 l, 9
r, can a, p* 36 l, 9 r, her neck, p, 48 l, last r, empty, p, 54 l, 9 r,
scorns, p, 55, l, ^2 r, and, ^ 56 l, 16 r, King.


