THE DESIRES of his EXCELLENCY Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the General Council
of the Army, held at Putney October. 21, 1647.

Concerning the security of Deanes and Chapters Lands for their Arreares.

Also several Proposals concerning the Estates of Papists, and the
compositions of Delinquents.

With his Excellencies Letter to the Committee of the Army, to represent the
same to the Parliament.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the General
Council of the Army.

W. Clarke.
Putney. 28. October. 1647.


LONDON, Printed by T. H. for John Playford, at his shop in the Inner Temple.
1647.

SIR,
AT the last General Council of the Army, the particulars contained in the
enclosed Paper were resolved on to be represented to the Parliament, in
relation to security for Arreares and other concernments of the Soldiery, I
desire your self with the Committee of the Army, would be pleased to take
care, That the said Paper or the matters contained therein, may be speedily
presented to the Houses consideration: I remain

Your very assured friend, THO. FAIRFAX.
Turnham Green 27. October. 1647.
For the Honored ROBERT SCAVVEN Esquire, in the Chair of the Committee for
the Army.
The Desires of His Excellency, Sir Thomas Farifax, and the General Council
of the Army, held at Putney, October. 21. 1647.
FOrasmuch as we understand, That the House of Commons in the Overture of
Deanes and Chapters Lands, for the security of the Arreares of the Soldiers,
have not past, but referred to some other use the Rents of Assize, etc. This
Council does crave leave humbly to represent to the Houses of Parliament, the
insufficiency (as we conceive) of that security, and our Desires, that as well
the Rents reserved upon all Leases, as the Lands and all other the rights and
benefits, belonging to Deanes and Chapters for their former maintenance and
support, may be comprehended and past for the said security, as fully as
Bishops Lands were, and with no more exceptions; without which; we cannot
accept it as any considerable security; yet we desire all due regard may be
had to the present Lessors of the said Lands. And also to the maintenance, a
reasonable satisfaction of all such persons as having a present interest in the
Revenue belonging to Deanes and Chapters, have not forfeired the same by
Delinquency: And to the end, the just expectations of the Soldiery (in
reference to their great Arteares) may be put into a speedy way of
satisfaction, we desire the House will be pleased to put the said Lands into
the hands of certain Trustees, that so they may be sold out of hand for the
uses aforesaid, and that there may be a present public prohibition of any
further proceedings in renewing of Leases, enlarging of Estates, or cutting
down of Woods or any other waste upon the said land: and as we think, we may
justly expect the like care and expedition in this business as has been
manifested to our Brethren the Scots, in order to their satisfaction before
their departure out of England. As for the Rents of Papists, that have been in
Arms, we crave leave to make our Exception against that security, and to
represent (according to our former Declarations) that we do not desire, That
Papists in Arms ( qua Papists) should be excepted from Pardon, or made less
capable of Composition then others, nor have their Estates exposed to sale,
wherefore in lien of those Lands of Papists in Arms, we renew our desires,
concerning Forest Lands, with a due Consideration, of the adjacent Poor, that
they be to ways damnified thereby; and forasmuch as the Arreares of the
Soldiery is so great, that the securities formerly desired, in regard of the
Exceptions contained in them, which heretofore have not been so obvious to us,
will not be sufficient to discharge them: We likewise desire,

That all such Moneys as shall arise upon Compositions of Delinquents, past or
to come, may be charged as further security for the said Arreares, to take
place after the moneys already charged upon the same shall be satisfied.

It is further desired,

That the whole matter of s^^curity for Arreares of the Soldiers, may be
included amongst the Propositions for peace, and that the other Particulars in
our late Paper of the one and twentieth of September, about our Concernments as
Soldiers, may also be taken into consideration, and what is or shall be
resolved thereupon, may be inserted into the propositions to be sent down to
his Majesty.

And forasmuch as we have made diverse addresses to the Parliament, for the
settling of the Army, and other Forces of the Kingdom, and satisfying them in
their just dues and necessary concernments, as aforesaid, and we find little
has as yet been done to that end, and for that we conceive the Consideration
thereof is of so great concernment, as that it is the first foundation of any
settlement that can be to the public affairs.

We humbly desire, That the Houses will be so sensible thereof, as to make it
their business to insist upon the speedy Consideration of these things, until
they may be fully provided for.

By the appointment of his Excellency, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army. WILL. CLARKE.
Putney. 27. October. 1647.
FINIS.

