DAEMONIUM MERIDIANUM.

SATAN at NOON.

Or, Antichristian Blasphemies, Anti-scripturall Divelismes, Anti-morall
Uncleanness, Evidenced in the Light of Truth, and Punished by the hand of
Justice.

BEING, A sincere and impartial Relation of the Proceedings of the
Commissioners of the County of Berks, Authorized by the Ordinance for Ejection,
against John Pordage, late Minister of Bradfield, in the same County.

Published for the vindication of Justice, and satisfaction of the
Conscientious, in the name, and by the order of the said Commissioners and
Assistants.

With some Notes, and Animadversions upon a Book of the said John Pordage,
entitled, Innocence appearing, etc.

By CHRISTOPHER FOWLER, Minister of the Gospel at S. Mary's in Reding.

Mos iste semper viguit in Ecclesia, ut quo quisque foret religiosior, eo
promptius novis adinventionibus contrairet. Vinc. Lyrin. adv. Haer. cap. 9.

2 Pet. 2.1, 2. False teachers shall privily bring in damnable heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them, and many shall follow their pernicious
ways.

1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathema
Maranatha.

1 Gal. 8. Though an angel from heaven preach otherwise, then that we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed.

1 John 2.23. Whosoever denies the son, the same has not the father.

Peccatum nocet personae, sed Haeresis communitati, Luth. tom. 1. p. 260.

Hoc est artificiu^ unicu^ Satanae and fanaticoru^, quod nolunt videri male
docere, se jactant sincerissimos, fidelissimos, cum sunt omniu^ mendacissimi.
Id. tom. 4. p. 339.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Eglesfi^ld, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Marigold in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

To his Highness OLIVER Lord PROTECTOR of England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness.
WE humbly crave leave to acknowledge, that we look upon it as an eminent
mercy, that under your Highness Government, a gracious, and a wise Providence
has put an opportunity into the hands of men desiring to fear God, to effect,
what is of highest concernment, for the good of souls: that, they may neither
be starved by the Ministers insufficiency, nor poisoned by blasphemy, nor
blinded by ignorance, nor hardened by scandal,

Whilst men slept, (we are loath to say the masters of the house,) the envious
man has sown Tares, tares full of deadly poison, and that poison diffused into
the very vitalls of faith, and godliness, and that so subtly conveyed, that
Satan fights against Panatici pugnant contra Christum, sub titulo Christi:
Luther.
Christ, under the notion of Christ.

Among the many sad Instances in this nation, this ensuing Relation presents
some of those doctrines to your Highness view, Doctrines so directly
destructive to the very fundamentalls of Religion, that we solemnly profess,
(were it a matter eligible) we had rather ten thousand times, that we, and our
dearest relations should die stark mad in chains at Bedlam, then to live, and
die in such execrable opinions against our Lord Jesus.

In all humility we beg the boldness to say, that your conscientious, and
solemn pursuance of Reformation, that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus may be
glorified, will be the life, and length of your days in this time of trouble,
as a bond of love upon the hearts of the Godly, in this hour of Apostasy,
whilst you live, and leave your memory precious to succeeding Generations.

Your Highness faithfully devoted, in the service of the Gospel, in the name of
your Commissioners, and their Assistants; and among them the meanest, CHRISTO.
FOWLER.

The PREFACE to the READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou art here presented with a faithful relation of the Proceedings of the
Commissioners of Berks, in the business of Dr. Pordage, late Minister of
Bradfield in the said County: we desire that thou may read as we do write,
with a sad heart that such prodigious, and damnable heresies should be belched
forth in such a land of light, both publicly and privately against the person
and merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, as this Dr. has done.

We are well assured, that neither the former Parliaments, nor the present
Governors did intend, or mean thus to tolerate, though they were tender to
consciences truly tender; their care was, and is, for the ejection of
Scandalous, ignorant, and insufficient Ministers, and in their room, placing
Godly, Learned, Orthodox Divines, the noblest work that can be undertaken, (if
we may have liberty to express our thoughts) in any Common wealth, that calls
it self Christian. This man formerly placed in, and now ejected, was none of
these; first, not Godly, because, he denies the Godhead of Jesus Christ,
vilifies his precious blood, which the Acts 20.28.
Scripture calls the blood of God. A Doctrine that wants a name black enough to
be called by, in which any man living, and dying can never be saved, and
certainly there can be no godliness in that religion, in which there is no
salvation.

Secondly, Not learned, (we speak not of that great help and ornament of humane
learning, whereof this man has no great cause to boast, (although by a
Charientismus he is called Doctor) but, because he is ignorant of the chief
heads of Religion, which even some children of ten years old from their
catechism can deliver in more intelligible terms, then he has done.

Thirdly, Not Orthodox, because, his doctrines are Diametrically opposite to
all those that now are, or those that have been received as such, by the people
of God in all former ages, and his exposition, and application of the Scripture
is a mere wretched and senseless corruption of the sacred text.

Fourthly, No Divine, because, his heresies are, (if by the example of the
Appietatem, aut Lentulitatem, Cic. epistol. lib. 3. epist. 7.
Orator in Latin, we may have leave to coin a word in English) rather
Divellity, then Divinity.

The Matter of his Charge (for which we refer thee to this relation) may be
reduced to four heads.

First, Blasphemy, and of that, the most pernicious, directly destroying the
very foundation.

Secondly, Pretended Visions, of Angels, to confirm that blasphemy.

Thirdly, The Doctrine and Scandal of uncleanness, the God most justly
punishing impiety with impurity. Romans 1.21, to 24.
Issue of that blasphemy.

Fourthly, Ignorance and insufficiency, the ground thereof.

For the first, Blasphemy, he has often denied the Godhead of our Lord Jesus,
which may be called antecedent Blasphemy, and called his righteousness a
sapless righteousness, and his precious blood a va^n thing, which are most
direful Blasphemies, and consequences of the former.

The first of these was the damned heresy of Eusebius. Eccles. histo. lib. 5.
cap. ult.
Theodotus, the tanner, Ibid.
Paulus Samosatenus, Epiphan. Haeres. 71. Aug. haeres. 44, 45.
Photinus, Ibid. haeres. 49.
Arrius, whom Hierome in apol. adv. Ruffin. calls Damonium Meridianum, Mahomet.
Alchor. c. 5. p. 72. (if this may be called Heresy.)
Mahomet, Mr. Rutherfords Survey, part. 1. cap. 9.
Henry Nicholas founder of the Familists.

The other execrable Blas^hemy concerning Christ's righteousness, is either a
piece of old Alphons. de castro. lib. 7. col. 7. 510.
Pelagianisme, which puts the merits of Eternal life upon the performance of
humane nature, or rather, new Rutherfords S rvey of the Spirit, Antic. c. 9. p.
58, 59.
famil sme, which most absurdly, and blasphemously says, that Christ is not
one man, the Son of Mary, but all men believing and loving, and that Christ is
not God, and man, but the state of perfection in believers, what Christian
heart can choose but be affected with some sparks of holy zeal against such
cursed doctrines, spit in the facce of Jesus Christ, by an handful of sinful
dirt, fit to be cast into the street, Psalm. 18.42. and which impious doctrines
do necessarily conclude our religion to be but a fable, our faith a fancy, our
hope a dream, and us of all creatures the most miserable.

To the second, as to Visions of angels, we believe the Christian Reader will
easily persuade himself, that the Blessed Angels would rather lie down in the
flames of hell, then come to confirm such wicked, antichristian doctrines, but
this is an old fetch of the Prince of darkness.

The Angelici were thought by some to have been so called for their pretended
communion with angels, which agrees well with that we find in Epipha. cont.
haeres. lib. 2. tom. 1. p. 60.
Epiphanius v^z. that they held themselves to be of the order of angels, as
being persons in their own conceits angelical, if so, it is likely they looked
the angels should be This Doctor does confess converse with them.
familiar with them, But the constant phrase of the Scripture still mentioning
familiar spirits in an evil sense, never in a good, teaches us to take them
not for glorified Angels in heaven, but for damned fiends in hell.

The pretense of converse with Angels, we find most frequent amongst
Mahumetans, Papists, and Familists, take a single instance of each of them;

First, Mahumetans, and here, most notoriously famous is the grand imposture of
that wicked Forbes instruct. hist. theol. p. 176.
Mahomet, pretending great familiarity with the Angel Gabriel, and that the
Alcoran was let fall from heaven into his bosom, when he was asleep; A great
helper of this wretch, was Sergius a Nestorian, who denied (as our Dr.) the
Godhead of Christ,

2. Of the Papists we have a notable history of their S. Francisca, who was
said to have enjoyed the sight of an Angel Here is the Drs. match.
continually, he was of an incredible beauty, his countenance more white, then
snow, more ruddy, then the rose, crossed on his breast, his locks long, and
curled, more clear then polished gold, shining with such brightness, that she
could read her mattens at midnight.

3. As for the Familists, we cannot have a fitter example then of their
Patriarck Mr. Rutherford^ Survey Antic. cap. 9. p. 55.
Henry Nicholas, who gave out that he had Visions of, and conferences with
Angels from heaven, from whom he learned to expound Scriptures by Allegories,
but such Angels are quickly discovered to be Devils indeed, when their
Revelations are brought to be tried by the Word of God, as they ought, Isai.
8.20.

Mary Wiltshire reported to Dr. Goad, and Dr. Featly, at Lambeth, that there
appeared to her one in the shape of a woman, with very shining l^ght, having
the moon under her feet, and the sun over her head, with bright beams about it,
who gave her being sick in her bed, three Benedictions, and Fisher the Jesuit
told her, without doubt it was the Blessed Virgin Mary, and it was revealed to
him, she must be a Nun of the Order of S. Clare.

Luther, tom. 2 in Genesis Fol. 193.
Luther being acquainted with this Cheat of Satan, and fearing to be deluded
by some Diabolical imposture under the appearance of Angels, daily prayed,
that God would preserve him from such visions, contenting himself with reading,
and meditation of the Scriptures, and hearing Sermons, and prayer.

The fancy of Epiphan. con. Haeres. lib. 2. tom. 1. haeres. ^9.
Quintilla, or Priscilla, who said, that Christ came to her when she was
asleep, and revealed to her that Pepuza the Village where she lived was an holy
place, the city Jerusalem which descended out of heaven, is parallel to the
vision of Susan Day a^ Bradfield, and the Drs. conceit that his house should be
as Noah's Ark, for safety to those that came to dwell under his roof.

We never read nor heard but these pretenders to Visions did ever scorn, and
trample on the Word and Ordinances of Jesus Christ, the Ordinance of Water
Baptism is totally denied by the Dr. and the other Sacrament is in effect
denied, because the things sign^fied are denied, so did Ruther. ubi ante, p.
60.
Henry Nicholas the Oracle of his Sect hold, that Scriptures, preaching,
Sacraments, were but fleshly, elementish, ceremonial, and indifferent things.

The third head of the charge against the Dr. is for Uncleanness in Doctrine,
and that in two points; the one, denying with the This Marcion had a bastard by
a sister, for which fact he was ejected, and then denied Marriage to
Christians. Ob stupratam virginem rejectus, nuptias interdixit Christianis.
Erasmus in his epist. before Irenaeus.
Marcionites the remedy against it, prescribed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.2. the
other allowing liberty for it, by penalty of women.

So did Mahomet, and the Papists now do, by tolerating Stews, allowing many
female bedfellowes, for one wife, as Sleidan. Comment. lib. 4. p. 79.
Cardinal Campeius did in Germany; Pope Hildebrands doctrine was very good news
to whoremongers, who for one wife might have the use of 600 women, Idem, p. 200.
John of Leyden the Mechanical King of the Fanatics in Germany, pretended,
that he received his impure doctrine by Revelation, and when some made doubt of
such Libertinisme, he laid down his cloak upon the new Testament, and swear by
them both, that he had that doctrine delivered to him from God himself.

Obj. The Dr. is a Professor, and is taken notice of for holiness, amongst men
of his persuasion at least, nay and others, very many.

Ans. So was Caspar Rutherfords Survey of Antic. c. 5. p. 15.
Swincfield reputed a man grave, civil and fervent in prayer, yet he became a
blaspemous heretic against the nature of Cbrist, and against the Scriptures,
saying that Christ was not only once born, but often, and that we ought to
content our selves with the teaching of the spirit, for, the vocal word is to
be rejected as a killing letter.

Our English false Prophet Cambden Annal. l. 4. p. 40.
Hacket was a Professor of sanctity, a hearer of sermons, a reader of
Scriptures, pray^ng with admirable fervency, yet fell from duty to revelation,
and from revelation to blasphemy, such blasphemy against God, that even the
Devils scarce ever durst utter.

The Dr. has brought in his Protestation.

Ans. Be pleased to read the animadversion upon it, for present, consider the
Elcesaits, Priscillianists, and Familists, they took liberty to dissemble in
their own defense, though they did so upon different grounds.

The Alphons. de Castro. adver. haeres. l. ^0.
Elcesaits took a liberty to say any thing, because they held that God was more
pleased with truth in the heart, then displeased with falsity in the mouth.

The Aug. de haer. haer. 7.
Priscillianists they allowed in themselves the denying of the truth, because
they held it better to conceal the truth with lying, and perjury, then to
confess it with shame, and infamy.

The Cambden Annal. l. 2. p. 18, 219.
Familists held it was lawful for them to deny upon their oaths before
Magistrates what they list, or before any other which were not of their own
Family, which of these the Dr. will choose for his brethren we cannot resolve,
it is l^ke, he will acknowledge none of them for his master, nor is it
needful, that one Heretic should learn of another, for the same Devil may
teach them all in several ages, the same Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies, as
Call. instruc. adv. Libert. c. 1. p. 435. opusc.
Calvin observes.

The fourth and last head, is ignorance and insufficiency, we shall leave it to
the conscience of every impartial Christian, whether his showing himself
grossly That is the most favorable word, we wish there be nothing of pride,
contempt, and scorn.
ignorant of the Lord Jesus in his Person, and Offices, even to a denial of
them, and that with reproach, and this in public, his senseless allegorizing
of the Scriptures, be not a sufficient ground for being sentenced, ignorant,
and insufficient.

As for our awn particular, (if we know our own hearts) we have not been acted
in this business through spleen, passion, or personal respects, but in
sincerity desiring, and (according to our meannesse) endeavoring the glory of
Jesus Christ, and the good of precious souls, nor do we find our selves moved,
(and we desire we may not) with those unworthy Robbers, lions, Fiery furnaces,
partial, cruel, envious, unjust, killing the Prophets, crucifiers, etc. These
and such like are the sweet flowers of his meek Rhetoric in his book, to this
purpose speak the Familists against the Puritans in their supplication to King
James, printed An. 606.
aspersions, and reflections cast upon any of us by himself, his Lawyer, or his
party.

As for the Dr. himself, we heartily wish, that God may vouchsafe him
repentance unto life, and that God would be pleased to open the eyes, and turn
the hearts of those poor, seduced people who are Belepered with these impious,
and impure doctrines, and that God would make, and keep the Commissioners of
this County, and all the counties of this Nation Conscientious in, and
Courageous for the Truth.

C. F.

The Reader is requested to observe that, that Note p. 18. beginning Lastly
whereas the Dr. complains, etc. is misplaced, and page 84. at the beginning of
the page, let him take in this, The Drs. Answer.

In the Preface page 5. line 3. read plurality for penalty. p. 8. marg. r. read
for was. p. 17. l. 18. r. so for too. p. 18. l. 14. r. soaringnesse for
oaringnesse. page 20. l. 1. for there read theirs. p. 24. mar. The Quae. dele
The. ibid. at the end of the margin, for dejected by these renowned r. detected
by the summoned. p 26. l. 16. r. Acerrimi for Acerrini. p. 27. l. 1. for so r.
for. p. 40. l. 16. read work for world. p. 78. l. 12. read bear for blaze. p.
79. l 5. r. Isleworth for Haworth. p. 84. l. last, r. our for one. p 98. l. 7.
r. salt for soft. p. 99. l. 24. r. procedure for procedence. p. 101. l. last,
read crown for crow. p. 111. margin. r. o for o penult. p. 119. mar. r. quam
for quod. p. 127. l. 25. r. vocans for vacans p. 159. l. 34. r. at for all. p.
168. l. 2. r. enemies for exercises, ibid. l. 33. r. Antichristian for
Antichristianisme. p. 169. l. 6. r. ever for either. ibid. l. 9. Harness for
hardness.

There are other Literal faults, and faults in pointing which thou art desired
to mend, or pass by.

A Just narration of the proceedings of the Commissioners of Berks, upon
Articles of Blasphemy, pretended visions, uncleanness etc. exhibited and
proved against John Pordage, late minister of Bradfield in the said county.
MOnday the eighteenth of September 1654, being the first day of the
Commissioners meeting, a charge of articles was then exhibited to them, against
Doctor John Pordage Rector of Bradfield in this county, who was thereupon, by
warrant dated the same day under the hands and seals of five of the said
Commissioners, required to appear, and give answer to the said articles on
thursday the fifth of October following, at the Bear in Speenhamland by
Newbery, On which day the said Doctor accordingly appeared, but produced no
answer, only pleaded he had been formerly discharged from the matters charged
against him in the said articles by the Parliament, and the former Committee of
this county: which no way appearing to the Committee, it was then resolved by
them, that by virtue of the Ordinance they had power to question the said
Doctor, upon the said articles, and did then order him a copy of the said
articles, and further time to give in his answer thereunto, till thursday the
nineteenth of the said October.

At which time the said Doctor again appearing, after many demurres by him made
to the authority of the Commissioners, in a comtemptuous way and manner, he did
exhibit his answer in writing to the said articles. But additionall articles
being then exhibited against him, the Commissioners ordered him a copy thereof,
and gave him a fortnights time to bring in his answer to the said additionall
articles, and then to produce his witnesses for proof of his defense, and
justification to both the said charges, and had summons granted for his said
witnesses accordingly.

On thursday the second of November, the said Doctor made a further appearance,
and gave in his answer to the said additionall articles: and further
additionall articles being then exhibited against the said Doctor, the
Commissioners ordered him a copy thereof, and gave him furrher time to give in
his answer thereunto, till the two and twentieth of the said November, at the
Bear in Reading, at which time they appointed to proceed upon the whole, and
ordered witnesses to be then and there produced on both sides, as well for
proof of the said several charges, as of the Doctors answer and defense
thereunto, and summons were issued out for that purpose.

On the said two and twentieth of November, the Commissioners meeting at the
said place, and receiving the Doctors answer to the third paper of articles,
proceeded to examination for proof of the whole; and having spent the said day
in examination of several witnesses for proof of the articles, they appointed
to sit the morrow after upon the same business and then adjourned.

The next day being the twenty third of the said November, they made further
proceedings in the examination for proof of the articles, and after all the
witnesses for that purpose that were then present, were examined in open Court,
and in the Doctors own presence, and by himself cross examined; the
Commissioners required the Doctor to produce his witnesses for his defense and
justification, (if he had any) which he refused, demanding to have first copies
of the depositions against him, before he would produce his witnesses, which
the Commissioners judging to be very unreasonable and irregular, thought not
fit to grant unto him, and though they might then justly have proceeded to give
their judgment, without giving him further time, he making default, yet
notwithstanding, such was their tenderness in the carriage of this business,
that they gave him further time to produce his said witnesses, (viz.) till the
thirtieth of the said November, at the Bear in Speenhamland; where the Doctor
appeared not in person, but by his wife and others of his family excused his
failer, in regard of sickness, and infirmity of body, under which (as they
pretended) he then labored, and could not appear without further danger of his
health, which excuse (although no positive proof thereof was then made) was
admitted by the Commissioners, and further time yet given him, till the seventh
of December then following at the Bear in Reading. At which time the said
Commissioners proceeded to examine several other witnesses then present, in
behalf of the Prosecutours, which having done, they examined several witnesses
on the Doctors part and behalf, and the Doctor pretending to be ill, they
adjourned for that time till the morrow morning following. But for that the
Doctor had the same day produced several witnesses in his behalf, who being
sworn, neither the questions propounded unto them by the Doctor, nor the
evidence by them given did lead to justify the Doctor from the matters
charged, and proved against him, but merely dilatory, as was judged by the
Commissioners. They did therefore require, that according to former order, he
should the next day give in the names of his witnesses, together with his
interrogatories in writing, to which he would have them examined, which the
Commissioners might first consider of but he peremptorily refused so to do,
only instead thereof, he offered several questions, which being taken by the
Clark, were afterward debated by the Commissioners, and by them adjudged to be
to as little purpose (though they should be admitted to be true) as the former
evidence already taken in his behalf, but only to delay, yet notwithstanding
they proceeded to examine two of the Doctors witnesses to some of those
questions, which they judged most tending to his justification, which having
done, and heard patiently what either the Doctor or his counsel could say at
large, they caused the whole proceedings to be read over publicly, and then
commanded the company to withdraw, that they might resolve on their judgment,
which was unanimously agreed on, for the ejectment of the Dr, out of the
parsonage of Bradfield, for scandal, ignorance, and insufficiency proved
against him,

The most material things charged against him, with the depositions thereupon
taken, on both sides, upon which the aforesaid sentence of ejestion was
grounded, are as follows,

1 Article.
In the first paper of articles exhibited against the Dr.

That the fiery deity of Christ mingleth, and mixeth it self with our flesh.

Answer.
I was then speaking of the mystical union between Christ and his Church, and
in the illustration of this union, I applied that expression out of the 8 of
the Canticles, He mingled his wine and his milk together: so in this union
Christ's divine nature mingleth it self with our humanity, his spirit without
flesh. This expression Master Tickle was pleased to charge with blasphemy,
asking me what I meant by flesh, I answered (in conference) by flesh I
understood not the sinful and fleshly part of the soul, that lusts against
the spirit, for with this there can be no union. Secondly, nor the outward
elementary flesh of the body, but by flesh, I understand our pure humanity or
the regenerated part of the soul, the converted, part of the spirit; and thus
the spirit of Christ, and the regenerated part were really in union one with
the other, according to the Apostles phrase. We are made partakers of the
divine nature.

At this answer he had nothing to reply.

The proof of this article.
Master John Tickle Minister of Abingdon, and one of the Assistants to the
Commissioners sworn, and examined.

This Deponent says that Doctor Pordage did deliver in the Pulpit, that the
fiery Deity of Christ mingleth and mixeth it self with our The Dr said the
deity of Christ mingles it self with our flesh, that is execrable blasphemy.
Then, with our pure humanity, that is canting nonsense: then, with the soul of
Christ, most unsound and ignorant.
Flesh, and being charged with blasphemy by this Deponent; he repeated his
sense thus, he did not mean with our corruption, but with our flesh, holding
his hand over the Pulpit.

And this Deponent being cross examined to several Interrogatories exhibited
by the Doctor farther says, that after the Doctor held up his hand, as he has
formerly deposed, the Doctor said, that he did not mean with our flesh, but
with the soul of Christ, and that this article was delivered without any the
least limitation, as to the sense of it, and that the same was fully and
roundly delivered in the Doctors sermon at Ildesly, whereupon the Deponent
charged him with blasphemy, and afterward they fell into a dispute.

Article 2.
That the imputative righteousness of Christ is a sapless righteousness.

The Doctors answer to this article is.
I thus deliver the truth: as I was paraphrasing on that portion of scripture
mentioned in the 9 of Daniel and the 24, of everlasting righteousness,
Untruth, notorioussy false, read the proof and the he^ds of his sermon in the
animadversion.
I did say words to this effect, That the imputative righteousness of another
was a saplesse and empty righteousness to all those that had no right, or
interest in it. etc. I shall desire a little to explain my self on this
proposition, that the imputative righteousness of Christ will prove a saplesse
righteousness, for he that has not the spirit of Christ dwelling in his heart
by faith notwithstanding all his That application can there be of Christ and
his merits without the spirit.
application of Christ and his merits, yet to him it is but a saplesse
righteousness: so says the scripture, he that has not the spirit of Christ
is none of his, though he should apply the imputative righteousness of Christ
to himself, But here I do not deny the imputative righteousness of Christ, nor
his active and passive obedience to be the material cause of justification,
Yea, I own and acknowledge Christ's righteousness to be the souls
righteousness in point of justification when it is applied upon a true ground
according to the true So Mr Erbery would say, that Christ was God according to
the Scriptures, in his sense.
sense of the spirit in the Scriptures.

The proof of this article
The aforesaid Master John Tickle examined to this article.
This Deponent says that the Doctor delivered that the imputative
righteousness of Christ was a saplesse righteousness.

And being cross examined to this article, and asked by the Doctor whether
these words (viz) (the fiery deity of Christ in the center of our souls,
burning etc.) were not added as some limitation to this second article.

This Deponent says, he does not remember any such addition as is mentioned in
the interrogatory, unless it were in Thus, which righteousness Dan. 9.24. Is
not the saplesse righteousness of Christ, But the fiery, etc.
opposition to the righteousness of Christ which he called saplesse, and he
farther says, the Doctor did not deliver any such limitation as he makes in
his answer thereunto, and that there was no such word as Let the Christian
Reader observe this passage.
except spoken nor any thing like unto it.

Master Roger Stephens of Reading Gentleman sworn and examined.
To the second article this Deponent says, that Doctor Pordage delivered in a
sermon at Ildesly, that the righteousness of Christ was a saplesse
righteousness, a mere empty thing, Observe what was the drift of the Drs sermon
and he does not remember any thing to the contrary but that the same was an
entire sentence, and only so, and that to his apprehension the drift of his
sermon then was to take off the strength and efficacy of Christ's righteousness.

And this Deponent farther says, that in the said sermon the Doctor did
deliver these words (viz) you are not to look to this (meaning as the Deponent
apprehended Christ's righteousness) but to the fiery deity, burning in the
center of the soul, consuming and destroying sin there, which last mentioned
sentence did not immediately follow the words which he used when he said, the
righteousness of Christ was saplesse, but the same was farther off in the
midst of his sermon. On the defendants part.


In behalf of the Doctor to this article,
Mary Pocock sworn and examined.
This Deponent (being asked whether she heard the Dr deliver the second article
(viz.) That the righteousness of Christ, was saplesse, and whether it was
delivered with a limitation or not) says it was with this limitation (viz.)
Except the firery deity of Christ be in our souls, burning up our lusts and
corruptions.

And this Deponent (being asked whether these last words were spoken together
with the other words to make up one sentence) says yes, thus that the
righteousness of Christ was saplesse, except the fiery deity of Christ be in
the center of our souls burning up our lusts and corruptions.

Richard Higgs of Sulhamsted Turner sworn and examined.
This Deponent says, that he has been a hearer of Doctor Pordage, at certain
times for five or six years last past, and that during that time, for ought the
Deponent knows, the scope of the Doctors Ministry has not been against the
right or due application of Christ's righteousness, but against the
mis-application thereof, for ought he knows: But this Deponent being asked
whether he has been a constant hearer of the Dr, he says he hears him very
often, but he is at his own parish in the mornings, and sometimes he is absent
at other times, but he has often heard the Dr.

And this Deponent being further asked, what he has usually heard the Dr
preach concerning the imputative righteousness of Christ, he says he cannot
charge his memory, but has a note to which he would reflect for recollecting
of his memory, and thereupon produced a note drawn in the form of an
examination, in which, what he should say was prescribed unto him, which note
was given him from the Dr as he confesses: and being asked what himself, or
what the Dr meant by Christ's righteousness, he says he cannot depose: This
witness the Dr called, godly, sober, learned was the animadversion.
But here the Dr interposing says, that Christ's righteousness is his active
and passive obedience. Upon which the Deponent was further asked, what was
Christ's active obedience, he says it was his suffering on the cross.

Daniel Roberts of Reading feltmaker, sworn and examined.
This Deponent says he does not remember he ever heard the Dr preach above
once, which was about three years since at Bradfield on the The men of his
persuasion keep the Lords day on this account, because it is the custom of the
nation.
Sabbath day, as the Deponent was going to Wayhill Fair, and that then the Drs
text was upon that Scripture (The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a treasure
hid in the fields,) which treasure the Dr did soundly apply to the
righteousness of Christ, and that he did very much extol the righteousness
of Christ, but he does not remember any expression of imputative
righteousness, and that to his best remembrance, the Dr did explain the
righteousness of Christ to be his obedience to his Fathers will, as far as the
Deponent could judge, and the Deponent being asked whether the Drs drift in his
sermon were not to advance an inherent righteousness, he says he cannot
remember.

Animad. first.
Animad. 1. and that in these three particulars, First, as to the Articles,
secondly, as to the Drs witnesses, thirdly, as to his plea.

First particular.
As to the articles, we entreat the reader to observe, that these two articles
deposed, and the other two (of which anon) were not collateral passages, but,
the main heads of Dr Pordage's sermon, his text was Malachy 3.1. his Doctrine,
That, God does usually prepare his way, in the hearts of his people, before he
comes in with his glory to them. He proceeds thus.

There are several preparations laid down by Divines, as the conviction of
sin, the terrors of the law, the death of Christ, the free grace of God, which
are (said he) but fleshly, and flashy discoveries.

I shall give you (said the Dr) the preparations according to the six days
work in the creation, the seventh being that glorious rest, when God comes in
with his glory to the soul.

The first preparation is a glorious union, which union is mingling, and mixing
it self with our flesh.

The second is a glorious righteousness, Dan. 9.24. saplesse, imputative
righteousness of another (viz. Christ as he explained it) but, the fiery deity
burning in the center of the soul.

The third is a glorious liberty, which liberty (said the another, and applied
by the cleaving of the soul, but the fiery deity burning up our lusts, and
corruptions in the center of the soul.

Two other passages of blasphemy there were uttered by the Dr, that were
forgotten by Mr Tickhill, the Deponent, but after finding his paper, he does
remember them, and does assert them (as upon oath.)

The first is this: That God in Christ, and Christ in the saints, is the unity
in trinity, and trinity in unity.

The second is this: That Christ in his preparatory coming by his fiery deity,
quite consumes, and destroys all sin and corruption, which consuming of sin is
that doing away of transgression, mentioned Dan. 9.24.

If it be said, Mr Tickhill is severe, and rigid, and so prejudice may bar
the door against truth, then,

Secondly, we request that this testimony witnessed and signed with Mr
Pendarvis his own hand, may be considered.

These are to certify whom it may concern, that in a sermon at Ildesly, Dr
Pordage did deliver these following expressions.

First, That Christ was a figure, and but a figure.

Secondly, That the Godhead was mingled with our flesh.

Thirdly, That the imputative righteousness of Christ, was but a saplesse
righteousness.

Fourthly, the graces, and gifts of the spirit were but flesh.

Fifthly, That Dr Pordage did falsely accuse Mr Tickhill of coming on purpose
to oppose him, neither of us This work of providence (as it were) speaking
thus, (as now we see it come to pass) yonder is a blasphemer, hear him, and
discover him.
thought of his being there. I went, and he with me, to preach upon the desire
of the people: what limitation used by the Dr, or whether any, I do not well
remember.

Ita testor. Joh. Pendarvis.

Second Particular.
To the second, as to his witnesses, here we do unfeignedly profess, we are
even fain to force our selves under much unwillingnesse, to this part of the
animadversion, not that we regard any revilings, and censure, so as to be
troubled, but because we are willing to live in peace. But because the matter
of these articles charged, and proved, is of so high a concernment, that all
that is dear and p^ecious to souls, in heaven, and earth is imbarqued in it;
and because the Dr pretends visions, and those of such height, and glory (as he
calls them) that the like have not been heard, or seen: and because his friends
do intimate, that, these Angelical visions are in order to the pure preaching
of the gospel to the Church, which has been in Apostasy many hundred years,
and because he lays such a weight upon his witnesses. Lastly, because he has
published them to the world, and named them often in the text, and margent, we
think it a duty incumbent upon us to write the truth, promising to deliver
nothing but the truth, and purposing not to write all the truth we might,
merely for quietness sake, and to prevent family disturbance.

Truly it seems somewhat observable, that Dr Pordage, who has enjoyed such
visions of glory, (as he says) has such high discoveries, pretends to such a
pitch of sanctity, and mortification, even to perfection. Having so much
acquaintance in London, and in the Country, and being under so high a charge,
as Blasphemy, Devillisme, Uncleanness, and ignorance, that notwithstanding all
this, he should bring no more, or no other witnesses in his behalf, then he
has done. And were it not that we desire to be serviceable to the public, we
might have spared this pains, (we have no itch to be in print) for the very
consideration what manner of persons the witnesses are, has given no small
satisfaction of the Drs guilt, to all Christians hereabouts, that know him, and
them.

The first witness for the Dr is Richard Higgs, we purpose not to mention the
many ill-complexioned and hard speeches, which this man has uttered against
the ministry, and maintenance. This language now a days passes amongst many,
rather for a prime character of a godly man, (as they style it) then for any
fault; many (and we speak it sadly to see them so befooled) have little else to
show for their religion, but their being scurrilous, against Universities,
Ministers, Learning, and maintenance. Do we speak for our selves in this, or
for the truth? the Lord knows, and our consciences know, and the day will
discover it.

So that the gospel, religion, learning might thrive, and prosper, we should
desire to be silent, though we sat in the dust; and whatever become of us, or
ours, or them, we can in some measure be contented, so that the purity and
power of the gospel may dwell in the land.

This man is brought in by the Dr as his chief witness, he quotes him often,
and does preface his testimony, that, he is a pious, prudent, and a learned
Christian, and therefore to be heeded by the people, and believed by the
Commissioners.

Thus he deposes, that he heard the Dr preach at Bradfield upon, and for the
imputative righteousness of Christ, and this he attested with much confidence,
but now observe these particulars.

speckled toad lying under a wholesome sage leaf, some wretched familisticall
blasphemy, under wholesome expressions, nothing more common: these late years
past have discovered this practice, more then many former generations; and
therefore we pressed him over and over, seeing he had been a seven years hearer
at times, and a man intelligent, and one that penned the sermons, that he would
tell, what he conceived the Dr did understand by Christ's imputative
righteousness, but there was no prevailing with him, he would not tell.



This practice of the Dr l^oks very ill favored, for this is not the first
time that he has done so with his witnesses.
paper before he came, prescribing what he should speak,) to say, the
righteousness of Christ was his active and passive obedience, he did tell the
Commissioners what he meant, but being further asked, what he meant by Christ's
active obedience, he answered, Christ's death upon the Cross. This pitiful
answer makes us, who know his former profession, think, that the fiery Deity
and visions of Bradfield, and a typical Christ, are like to make this man to
forget, if not to slight the knowledge of Jesus Christ, in the scripture; and
now we have mentioned that blessed book denied by many, and woefully neglected
by most, the reader may observe in the next place something of this very
witness.

Fourthly, This Deponent was much infected with the pernicious now spreading
heresy of anti-scripturisme, he denied the Bible to be the word of God, and
from whence he should suck in this venom, we cannot imagine, but from
Bradfield visions, we are satisfied that this also is one of the Drs opinions,
even because, (though we have many other reasons,) this man so much his
intimate and bosom friend, and grand and choice disciple, is of this
judgment; these three particulars were witnessed to his face, before his
friends, by sufficient testimony, as spoken by him.

That the The Dr prints page 40. That Higgs said he spoke of the essential
word, which is utterly false, and besides m^kes the discourse nonsense.
Scriptures were not the word of God.

And being demanded, what they were then, if not the word, he answered.

That they were old declaratives

And then he spoke thus to one of the company, in a wretched blaspheming way.

That, if we had the And sure they think they have, and would be very angry if
it should be questioned, the Lord lo^k upon the land, so many familists or
q^akers, so many Bible makers.
spirit, we might make as good as that and (to use his own expression) even
thee, Will. Jennings, who was one of the company. Obj. But he professed the
contrary, we reply let no man deceive you with vain words, sure it were a very
sorry plea for a felon convict, to plead thus, I did not steal, for I profess
my judgment is against theft, why does not this man recant and express
repentance for it, if he does really renounce it? but seducers, and the
seduced, especially seducers seldom or scarce at all will confess their
errors, for fear of loosing their credit and repute, which if they loose their
work is quite spoiled: give us leave a little (though it be somewhat digressing
yet it may be advantageous, and we are sure it is seasonable) to propose an
instance or two first, a clamorous and followed Arminian * being much worsted
in debate of the general point, (as they term it) being asked after in
private, by a person of honor, and piety, whether he were not ashamed to face
it out so in public, and whether he did not speak against his own light (he
said) we must say something because of the people, so said a great preaching
Anabaptisticall Arminian to an officer, a gentleman of integrity now in the
army, do thou think said the officer to him, that your answer to the argument
was the meaning of the text, no, replied the preacher, but I must say
something; thus it was in this very case of Richard Higgs, who being entreated
by one of us to recant, and repent of his all-destroying Anti-Scripturisme, the
party solemnly protesting, that he entreated him, entirely for the good of his
soul, and not to endanger him as to the civil magistrate, one standing by,
like an Elymas did diswade him from the acknowledgement of it, as his error,
and perverted him from doing his duty by confessing and giving God the glory,
saying thus, Confess, yea, that is that, they would have: if heretics, and
seducers of all sorts and sises had not bin practitioners in this black art of
smothering the light, and holding down the truth, nay had they bin but so
ingenious, as in case of a nonplus to have craved day, and said (as a learned
man did, and every godly man would) I will answer thee to morrow, in all
likelihood, these foul heresies had bin rotting in their graves, which are now
jetting and walking up, and down the streets, every where. but to proceed.

The next is Daniel Roherts, he is quoted by the Dr as a witness for him, and
here we do profess our pen is very loath to give down its ink, we do find in
us a very great averseness from naming of any names, but, most of all,
neighbors, but the Dr has named them often, and pleads for them, and lays
great stresse upon them, and the cause is Christ's, therefore we may not seek
the favor, or fear the face of man. Thus then, this person was first a
separatist, then a preacher de se, thens a dipper, and a Our hearts ache to
think what kind of persons all England over lay hands upon, and thrust
themselves into the administration of Christ's ordinance,
breaker of bread, then, an Anti-Sabbatarian, (and that very day and time of
the day, that he traveled with this misshapen error in public, and
miscarried, it pleased God, that there was a travel at his house with a birth
of a misshapen child) then, an How many thousand souls have bin robbed and
ransacked by sturdy and bloody heresies, little errors like little thieves
first creep in at the casement, and let in the great ones after them.
Arminian, much for that darling and intoxicating point which pleases at the
heart, (and so has a great advantage to spread) all carnal loose ones, viz,
general redemption, once a mortalist, now, a simple compounded Anabaptist,
perhaps, he may think it an honor to him to be the last, and thank us for
naming of it, if he does, we did not mean it so, neither did we name it so, as
to asperse him, nor to take of the least from his testimony, for that is little
enough already, if it were a little less, it were just nothing: but, to let
the conscientious, understand who are the Drs witnesses in print, and to judge
as he sees meet.

The next is Mary Pocock, a woman formerly of a troubled spirit, who seeking
rest, and not finding it, has turned aside to lying vanities, and has laid
out her money for that which is not bread, we are horribly afraid for her, that
she is gone off quite from looking for justification and life by a Christ
without her, a most Christ dishonouring, and a soul damning, yet a dandled and
huggd opinion amongst very many, at this day; as to her testimony consider.

First, that she deposes against Mr Tickhills and Mr Stevens oath, and Mr
Pendarvis point blank, as though she were resolved, etc. Oh sad!

Secondly, She is one of the Drs family, fellowship, and the country says,
community as to goods, and it is thought, it may concern her, in case the Dr be
ejected.

Thirdly, We are assured, the Drs tenet is, that he may say, and unsay, though
he say in his book, it was said maliciously, to cast an odium upon him, and for
his practice, we have found his answers most notoriously false, now this woman
we fear, is too much one of his disciples.

Fourthly, This woman refused an oath at Reding when she was to speak for the
truth, in some articles against the Dr, and the very next week, at Newbery when
she appeared for him, she was altogether as forward to take her oath.

Lastly, She being examined at Newbery, upon that oath which she had taken for
the Dr, whether she did not relate to some persons of honor, how the Dr had
contended with the Dragon, three hours in his chamber, saying to one another
thou lie, and thou lie, and whether she did not relate that the Drs
children were strangely acted in their legs, and thighs, and arms, and whether
she did not relate to them, how Mrs Flavell had been in a trance, and how she
had found the Philosophers stone, which had puzzel'd so many wise men, (viz.)
the divinity in the humanity.

She made an answer in a careless way, to our amazement, and pity, (sc.) she
could not tell whether she told them so, or no, perhaps she did, perhaps she
did not.

It is wonderful strange, that such extraordinary passages, related by her in
a glorying way, when they were reaking hot, nay when it was (as she phrased it)
given in to her to reveal them, and she did reveal them to persons of honor
and unquestionable evidence, who do still attest it, and when she was minded of
some circumstances of the relation, she did remember something of them, it is
much (we say) that she should no better remember this her own relation. does
not this woman think that she may say any thing to save the Dr from the world?

The third particular.
The Drs plea.
That these articles come not within the compass of the Act against
Blasphemous and Atheistical opinions, by which Act the Commissioners are
limited. page 54. This he pleads for himself, often in his book.

Answer,
We are well assured that all fearing God in the nation, will with their souls
consent with us, that the Denial of the Godhead of our Lord Jesus, the making
a piff at his precious blood, and calling his complete righteousness a poor,
vain thing, that the Lord Christ is but a type, are blasphemies that open their
mouth against heaven, and are of as high a nature, as wretched men, or damned
spirits can be guilty of: and do at once, so directly destroy scriptures,
duties, ordinances, graces, glory, all. Now if this defense of the Drs be true,
we profess our unfeigned sorrow from our inmost hearts, that the blessed glory
of our dear Lord Christ was no more consulted for, if there be no provision
made, for the stopping of the mouth of blasphemy against the Lord Jesus, by the
Civil Magistrate.

We profess we cannot but wonder at the great rashness of this Dr, and lament
the dishonor (as we humbly think) that this vain man casts upon authority, in
that he proclaims upon the house top, and tells it in Gath, that hideous
blasphemies against Jesus Christ, are not punishable by the Commissioners of
the several counties; which God forbid, and we believe all the Saints will say
Amen. And we do with case and comfort persuade our selves, that the supreme
Magistrate does not intend it, and will never suffer it.

Whereas some do blame the Commissioners for being immethodicall, for not
reducing the articles under the head, ignorance, we answer, that the articles
alleged, and proved, do indeed show him guilty of the greatest ignorance, and
insufficiency, that is imaginable, and does abundantly clear the justice of the
sentence: yet these articles when they were exhibited, were looked upon as
having too much hideousness in them, that the Commissioners could not find in
their hearts, to rank them under any other head, but that of blasphemy, and do
still look on them as worthy to be branded with the blackest Epithet that hell
can afford.

And if it be true (as some do say it is, and therefore do say, the
Commissioners do they cannot tell what themselves, for these articles do not
come under the act, as they pretend) then, we shall not be so quiet in our
consciences as we desired, unless we beg leave to say, that it was no
testimony of over and above kindness to Jesus Christ, in those persons that
drew up that act, (and who they were, we profess before the searcher of
hearts, we know not) to draw it up so, as not to mention, nor mean the
safeguarding of his glory, from the tongues of blasphemers, which are set on
fire of hell: We say again, if it be true, we do not say it is so, we cannot
say it: and therefore, were we fit, (as indeed we are altogether unfit,) we
would in all humility beseech his Highness Honorable Counsel to take this
matter into consideration, and to determine as they see cause, that so for the
future, all clamours of men, and quibbles of counselors may be prevented, and
every article may be reduced under its own proper head. The ground of our
request is this, we are fully persuaded they will never suffer any to be
Preachers of the Gospel, who are blasphemers of the Lord Jesus, who is the
substance of the gospel, in whom all the promises are yea, and amen, and whose
precious blood is the blood of the everlasting covenant.

We have been pressed in our spirits to this boldness, through the grief of
our hearts, because we do in some pittance perceive what, through the wretched
confidence of profane ones, and the secret confidence of moral ones in their
own civil righteousness, and what through the For so these would be thought.
acuteness of Socinianisme, and the For so these would be thought.
oaringnesse of Familisme, and the croaking of the Quakers, and the spreading
of all these, there are very poor, mean, and slight thoughts all the land over,
in city and country, of the glory, love, blood, and merits of our Lord Jesus,
who is God over all, Blessed for ever. And let him be blessed for ever: as the
great God, and our Savior, Amen.

Lastly, Whereas the Dr complains how much he was injured by being represented
by his enemies, and looked upon by the Commissioners, as a conjurer, and
sorcerer, and one that dealt in Negromancy, (as he called it) and black Magic;
and to this purpose, stuffs out his book with several allegations of his own
dear ones, to vindicate himself from Necromancy, and sorcery; this is nothing
in the world but stramineous, chaffie stuff, put in to fill up a ragged book:
for the Commissioners did not look upon him as a conjurer, but as an impostor,
who made use of his apparitions, and visions, as a ministerial way, viz. to
confirm his blasphemies, to draw in disciples, and to confirm those that were
so, vaunting himself thus, what? but one, but one in the whole creation,
pretending, that other ministers knew no more of the gospel, then a dead horse,
and why? because they are not Nicolaitanes and visioners.

But he complain's much page 71. that the Commissioners would not take in his
witnesses, who could depose how he had preached against conjuration, which
witnesses he names twice in the margent, to make his reader believe how
grievously he was wronged.

Answer.
Though the business be eccentricall, yet we will see what the witnesses could
have said for the Dr against conjuration, they begin thus and say,

They heard the Dr preach in 653 at Bradfield, out of Psalm. We cannot imagine
what verse, or verses. were the text out of that Psalm 51.
51. thus, From the subtilty and craft of the fireroot, through the prying, and
searching of it, does arise all Necromancy, and all prying into such curious
arts springs from the fiery essence in the will of men and women, that
stirs them up, to pry into, and after such hidden curiosities, this is the
gate through which all hidden curiosities do enter. For this he quotes Exodus
7.11. Then the king called all his wise men, etc, and at another time, he
preached at Bradfield out of Matt. 4.5. and from thence he observed, that one
pinnacle of the devils temple,, was the pinnacle of the unlawful arts and
forbidden sciences.

His use was this, he exhorts the people, and that as they love their own souls,
to take heed of this door, the subtilty of the dark Magicks. and bids them
consider how the scriptures do condemn the lusting and prying mind: and for
this quotes Acts 19.19. Those that used curious arts burnt their books. For the
Divil, the Dragon, does labor to carry up men's minds to the top of the
pinnacle of dark Magicks.

What a sad thing is it, and who can choose but pity the case of this Parish, to
be fed with such husks, such allegogoricall, unprofitable, unsuitable
discourses?

What should be in the Drs mind, to tell them of the fire root, and fiery
essence, and the pinnacle of the devils temple? and so to conjure them, as they
loved their souls to take heed of the black Magicks, poor creatures, we cannot
imagine, unless it be this, that the Dr began to smell powder, there was a
great noise of the Devils, at Bradfield, and there was the Ordinance for
ejecting Ministers, preparing, the Dr was afraid the Priests would persecute
him (for his light eclipsed there,) out of envy, he thought, they would article
against him, as a conjurer, and therefore he preaches in his flinty non
sensicall way, against the Dark Magicks, and provides his own family, to
observe, and bear witness, (for in all his thirteen weeks trial, there was
not one inhabitant a witness for him) and so in his margent he puts them in
rank, and file, to bear witness.

He complains likewise in the same page, p. 71. how Mr Ford went about to stir
up the Magistrate against him, as a blasphemer. And good reason, what harm is
in that? what does the Dr find himself a grieved at? is not he a blasphemer? or
does not the civil Magistrate want stirring up? Mr Ford said his living was
possessed, why, was it not? does not he say, that there were an innumerable
company of Devils in his house? yea, but he says, Mr Ford branded him for a
conjurer: now, that is utterly untrue, and we believe he had no such thought in
his heart.

The third Article.
That the discoveries of the sinfulness of sin, the terrors of the law, the
death of Christ, the free grace of God, are fleshly and flashy discoveries.

To this the Dr gives no particular In his printed book, he does acknowledge
it, and gives this reason, Because it was not comprehended in the Act against
Blasphemies. Pity, if such a blasphemy, should have such a plea. But there,
page 42. he tells the world, that even the discoveries of the free grace of
God, and the death of Christ, are but weak, in comparison of the more full, and
clear manifestations, and operations, of God, upon the soul, in bringing of it
into divine union, and fruition.

Answer.

For our parts, we have ever thought, that the discovery of the Fathers rich
grace and the most precious death of Christ, had been of all discoveries, the
most glorious. St. Paul calls it a height, breadth, depth, and length, and
these being too short, he tells us, it passes all understanding. Ephesians. 1.17.
St. Peter tells us, That even the Angels do pry into this glorious mystery. 1
Pet. 1.12. the word is (...), which signifies, propenso collo, and accurate
introspicere. And for the weakness of these discoveries, we are content to be
in the dark with St. Paul, who tells us, 2 Cor. 3. the last, We beholding as in
a glass, the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image, from
glory, to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. The true and indeed Saints
of God, the more they behold by the eye of faith, in the pure, and clear glass
of the Gospel, the glory of the Lord Jesus, what he is in himself, how
infinitely blessed, and self-sufficient, and what he has done for them, in
suffering such wrath, in conquering such enemies, in purchasing such glory,
with much more, and all this, so freely, so fully, so unchangeably, for such
wretched creatures as themselves, who are altogether as bad, as the worst in
hell: we say, the more gracious souls do converse with these glories, the more
they are transformed, and, that, into the same glorious image, and there they
proceed, even from glory, to glory, and all this is wrought in them, by the
spirit of the Lord.

It is not a weakness, but a wickedness in this Dr, to call the discoveries
of the Fathers grace, and the son, death, weak discoveries, im comparison, we
demand in comparison of what? what discoveries are more glorious, and
powerful, then these? does not the man mean his visions at Beadfield, and his
tincturation? oh! detestable, in his Epistle. Dedicatory, he does intimate the
narrowness, systemes, forms, darkness, of his persecutours. Be it so, nay it
is so, we arrogate not to our selves, we are nothing, and there is nothing more
sometimes, upon our hearts, then this, that God would make our hearts to know
our own nothingnesse. But we do profess to the world, that we would much
rather by many thousand degrees, be in the dark with St. Paul, and St. Peter,
then to be in the light, with David George, Caspur Swincfield, Henry Nicholas,
John Pordage.


answer.

The proof of this article.
The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill to the third article.

This Deponent says, that the Dr delivered, That the discoveries of sin, the
terrors of the law, the death of Christ, the free grace of God, are fleshly,
and flashy discoveries: and, being cross examined to the Drs interogatorie, he
further says, the very sum and substance of this article was delivered
fully, and roundly, by the Dr, in the express words, for the substance, to the
best of this Deponents remembrance, and that without any limitation.

4 Article.
That the liberty, and freedom, spoken of, purchased by the blood of Christ,
and applied by the clinging, and cleaving of the soul to Who is that another?
how basely, and with contumely, does this man speak of Christ?
another, is not a liberty, or freedom, from the curse of the law, the wrath
of God, but the fiery deity of Christ, in the center of our souls.

The third and fourth articles of the last charge, being of the same effect,
shall be here added. viz.

The third article of the last charge.
That the blood of Christ is not meritorious of any man's salvation.

The fourth article of the last charge.
That it was a poor thing, to live upon the blood of Christ, and fetching it
over again, in a contemptuous kind of speaking; Piff, said he, thou art a babe,
thou know nothing, to live upon the blood of Christ, that is a poor thing.

Answer.
To the former of these articles being the fourth of the first charge, the Dr
gives no particular And gives this reason in print, viz. not being within the
act against blasphemy. Observe, what use this man makes of that act, in his
printed answer, he puts in the word (only) a notorious untruth, page 43.
studied on purpose to deceive. He says, that Mr Tickhill did mistake, which
is, not a mistake in the Dr, b^t an impudent untruth.
answer.

His answers to the third and fourth articles of the last charge, are as
follows, viz.

To the third.
I call heaven and earth to witness, that such thoughts never entered into my
soul, nor did such words, come out of my mouth; for my judgment ever has
been, and still is, that the blood of Christ, is satisfying, reconciling, and
cleansing blood, that it is interceding, redeeming, meriting blood, in relation
to all those, who, through faith, and patience, come to inherit eternal life.

To the fourth.
I acknowledge, that about four years since, some such expressions were uttered
by me, to Mr Grip, but without any such intent, as may be supposed, by my
accusers, and not with that circumstantiall aggravation, of repeating it in a
contemptuous manner, which is but Read the proof, is not this an interjection
of scorning?
a supposition of my adversary, and cannot be attested upon Oath, without his
witness, pretends infallibly to How should we know your thoughts, but by your
words?
know my thoughts, and purposes: Again, this being spoken to a particular
person, upon a particular occasion, might be true, if the circumstances of the
discourse were accordingly added, though, as here presented, it seems very
monstrous.

Therefore to make things clear, I shall here insert some particular
circumstances, which may present this article, though, in a new, yet, with a
true face. I coming to Mrs Grips house, she Untruth.
took me into a private room, to have some conference with me alone, where she
False. read the animadversion.
breaking forth into a violent passion of tears, weeping, and wringing her
hands, and pouring forth ^itter complaints, and invectives against Mr Fowler,
as that he was a graceless man, a lier, and a slanderer, not worthy to come up
into a Pulpit, or to have the name of a Minister of Christ, with other, such
bitter expressions: the cause of which was, as she then told me, Mr Fowler's
reporting about, that she then lived in adultery, with a gentleman not far off;
and after her passion was somewhat allayed, she brake out into these, or such
like expressions, of high assurance: Christ has loved me, and died for me, and
justified me, by his blood, from all guilt of sin, I am an elect person, a
justified person, and what is this Mr Fowler, to Oh, the invention of man, not
such a word spoken.
charge sin upon me? these, and other expressions, fell from her, to this
purpose, from some of which, I feared, she was drenched with A mere figment,
and base contrivance of his own heart.
Antinomianisme, and told her more then once, it was a poor thing, to live upon
the blood of Christ, and to look so much upon that, except she had the nature
of Christ, and the spirit of Christ; asking her, where was the meekness of
Christ, the patience of Christ, to suffer as an innocent lamb, quietly. Oh,
amazeing, that any man could devise such untruths, so many, and all
forethought, and deliberate; not a true word.
But still she cried out, she lived on the blood of Christ. I told her, it was
a poor thing, to be thus exalted, with notions of the blood of Christ, without
mentioning sanctification, and those holy graces, which flow from Christ's
nature, dwelling in the soul. Now by these expressions of mine, my scope was to
make Mrs Grip see the necessity of sanctification, and of a pure and holy life,
and not to make void the blessed effect of the blood of Christ, applied
according to the mind of God, and true meaning of the scriptures: and now
having related the Sea what Mrs G^ip deposes to these circumstances, at the
end of her deposition,
circumstances, as near as I can rememember, I believe a sober and knowing
Christian will not judge me either This fardell of studied untruths is very
scandalous.
scandalous, or ignorant for these expressions.

The proofs of the forementioned articles. The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill.
This Deponent further says, that the Dr delivered that the liberty, and
freedom spoken of and purchased by the blood of Christ, is not a liberty, or
freedom from the guilt of sin, the curse of the law, the wrath of God. But the
fiery deity of Christ, in the center of our souls.

And this Deponent being cross, examined by the Dr, further says, that the
very sum, and substance of this article, was delivered fully, and roundly by
the Dr, in the express words, for the substance of them, and that, without any
limitation, to the best of his remembrance.

Master Christopher Fowler Minister of S. Mary's in Reding, and one of the
Assistants to the Commissioners, sworn and examined, deposes,

That about three weeks, or a month since, this Deponent acquainted Master
Daniel Blagrave the younger, that these Commissioners did intend to This
gentleman with others was summoned to appear by a warrant from the
Commissioners, to testify his knowledge as to this article, and some others,
but did not appear. The Quae. What that clause intends in the Ordinance, viz,
the Commissioners shall issue forth summons, when the persons summoned will
appear, if they please, and if they will not, they may choose, (for so some have
answered) had the appearance bin according to the summons, the doctrines, and
deeds of darkness had bin more dejected, by these renowned.
summon him, to testify what he knew of Dr Pordage's doctrine, in relation to
Jesus Christ, and thereupon (among other things) the Deponent asked him,
whether he did not hear the said Dr deliver, that, the blood of Christ was not
meritorious of any man's salvation, to which be answered, he had heard him speak
to that purpose.

Susanna Grip, wife of John Grip, of Reding, Joyner, sworn, and examined.

This Deponent says, that she told Dr Pordage, it was a high thing to live
upon the blood of Christ, to which he replied, piff, to live upon the blood of
Christ, that is a poor thing, and repeated the same again, and said, thou art a
babe, thou know nothing, to live upon the blood of Christ, that is a poor
thing, whereupon the Deponents heart fell almost dead with fear at his words.

And the said Susanna Grip being crosse-examined by the Dr, and asked, whether
this was delivered in the same very words, she Observe this passage, and judge
of the Drs answer.
answers, in the same words, and they were spoken in the Kitchen about four
years since, to her best remembrance, but who was there present, she does not
remember.

And this Deponent being further asked by the Dr upon what occasion this was
spoken, she says the Dr was speaking something in a rambling manner, which she
did not understand, but she thought she would speak something to him which he
should understand, and rejoice with her for it, and that was the occasion of
the discourse, and she says further, that the Drs words were delivered without
any explanation of them, only this, she asking him (being ready to faint) what
then Dr. He answered, I do not know what the matter is, that I must speak to
you, I do not use to That i^ true, no more did the G^osticqu s of old, and the
libertines of late, and the familists now,
discover my self, but he told her something of a man that dyed at Jerusalem
sixteen hundred years ago, and that she must have it in her, which she cannot
remember, being then so amazed at his words, and the D^s answer to this article
being read unto her, she deposes that all the circumstances mentioned in his
said answer, are all of them false, and untrue, there was nothing of such a
discourse, as the Dr pretends, nor any thing tending to it, his answer was all
false, and untrue.

George Aslet of Bradfield, Weaver, sworn, and examined, deposes.

That he has heard Dr Pordage in the Church of Bradfield, about two years
since deliver, that, it was a vain thing to trust in the the Dr prints that he
has had wonderful visions of the three worlds. 76 p. in which of these worlds
think you did he see this very accursed doctrine, was it in the world of
Devils or, the world of Angels, or, of glory, our very hand trembles at the
writing of this, and every godly heart abhorres it, at the very reading this
single pass^ge discovers of what order his angels are, and of what kind his
visio^s.
blood of him, that dyed at Jerusalem sixteen hundred years since or more,
unless it were acted in me, or in thee, for that was but in the type, the
substance must be fulfilled in us, and that Christ must be crucified in us,
that Pontius Pilate must condemn him in us, and the Jews put him to death in
us, crucified in us, that he must lie buried three days in us, and must rise
in us, and must ascend in us* otherwise it was a vain thing to believe in him
that dyed at Jerusalem sixteen hundred years since, or more, without us.

This Deponent cross examined.
Being asked in the Drs behalf whether he did write down the forementioned
particulars, or not, he answers, negatively.

And being further asked, whether he did complain of the premises within six
months, to any justice of peace, after the speaking thereof, he answers he
did not, nor did But now he sees cause to complain, for he came in of his own
free accord, unexpectedly, and blessed God for the government, authorizing
persons to whom he might complain.
find any cause so to do.

Animad. 2.
Acerrini morsus morientium ferarum, wild beasts near their end, bite so
fiercely, they will even make their teeth meet, the unclean spirit rends, and
foams when he is a departing, and to be ejected, what ailes this Dr to imagine
on his bed, and when he comes forth to tell such a forged, lying tale; it is
true, his words seem smooth as oil, but they be very swords he does not bark
much, but he bites, and bites the deeper, because he does not bark. We conceive
the Dr fitting in counsel with his thus, what shall we do to blast this
testimony the accuser has brought in before these men of the world? so it
says that I should blaspheme the blood of their Christ, their ordinance will
reach me, or they will stretch it, and the Priests are rigid, advise what is
best to be done I know Mistress Grip is the witness against me though she does
not appear, nor it named, my conscience tells me so. Re olved upon the
question, that it is lawful for the Dr to say what he please to the
commissioners to ^ave himself* and to say what he please of the witnesses to
blast them, and their testimony,

The Dr labors might and main to overthrow this testimony, knowing that this
(concurring so directly, with M^ster Tickhills, and Master Stevens) would help
to overthrow him, for his overthrowing the very foundation of faith, and
godliness.

We desire the discreet Reader to observe his We cannot find more smooth
epithi^es, w^ hope it is not b^tternesse, but some better thing, it is in the
'cause of Christ
consultingly forged answer, and ex ungue leonem to see him by this paper, as
he in his visions did the Devil by his cloven foot, page 74. of his book.

Thus he tells you how he came to Mistress G^ips house, and how he found her in
a very exceeding great passion, with tears, and cries, and wringing her hands,
using bitter invectives against Master Fowler; and he tells you the reason why
(viz.) because he reported to the gentry thereabout, that she lived in adultery
with a For this was in h s answer before the Commissioners, but as he can say,
and unsay, so he can put in, and put out even in print. What an ^ngratefull man
is this, thus to bespatter, and disgrace, (so far as in him lies) one of his
best friends, in the face of a multitude: he resolves to hazard all his
friends, to attempt any thing, so he may enfeeble this sub^tantiall evidence.
gentleman, not far off, and how he was afraid th^^ she was drenched with
Antinomianisme, and therefore discoursed to her of the nature and spirit of
Christ.

To disprove this, we offer these considerations.

First, that Mistrisse Grip being then upon her oath, did solemnly appeal to
the Lord of heaven, the searcher of all hearts, that she did not speak a sword
of Master Fowler, neither had so much as a thought of him, and that she was so
far from tears and wringed hands, (as this man feignes) That she was in some
measure of joy, in the apprehension of Jesus Christ, and she did affirm, before
God, the Commissioners, and above two hundred persons, that it was all false,
and a mere forgery, not a word of it true.

Secondly, Consider this, that about a fortnight before his trial was at the
Bear in Reding, Master Daniel Blagrave told her the said Mistress Grip that the
Dr would declare to the Commissioners, how she had railed against Master
Fowler, upon which, she came to Master Fowler's house immediately, where Master
Nutkins, one of the Commissioners, with some friends, then was, and she was
exceedingly moved at the Drs impudence, and wickedness, admiring how he could
raise such a report, saying, she did not think he could have bin such a Devil,
and there solemnly did aver, before some Christians, that she did not speak
to the Dr so much, as one word of Master Fowler, and did conceive it to be a
plot to affright her. So that as the D^s lying answer was premeditated, through
wickedness, her answer upon her oath, was premeditated also, through
providence.

Thirdly, As to that passage of the Drs contriving, or some of his Angels, what
Master Fowler should report etc. Master Fowler remembers not any such thing
reported by him to any of the gentry, as his own judgment; the truth is, many
of the gentry have rather wondered at his sparingnesse, and silence, when
occasion of such discourse has bin offered, the ground of which silence was
sincerely this, when he looked upon the reports of many, six or seven years
since, and the suspicions of some godly persons, he durst not justify her, and
on the other side, when he looked upon her profession, gifts, expressions,
temptations, he durst not condemn her especially when he looked upon her
temptations, which he believed to be real, and his judgment is, that a
tempted person may without any great difficulty discern the temptations of
another, whether they are from pretense. and hypocrisy, or whether they are
from reality, and feeling, especially if they have frequent conference.

What passages of lewdness there have bin, or whether any he knovves not, he
has spoken unto them both of this very sin, six years since in private, and
both did deny it, he leaves them, and the issue to God, but the rise of the Drs
forgery and lying. he believes upon good ground to be so false, that he thinks
the first deserves the Pillery, the second may claim the whetstone, and the D^s
design to blast her testimony, will stand heavy upon his account, unless he
come to be vvashed, with that most invaluable blood of Christ, which he has
esteemed as a poor thing.

Fourthly; Again consider that this Deponent Mistress Grip did relate this of
the Drs blasphemy to Master Fowler, and the other, of apparitions with
indignation and grief, before ever the ordinance for ejecting came forth,
saying to him and others, shall this blasphemer continue to bewitch souls? and
will the higher powers do nothing? shall such be tolerated also? now, whether
this woman, who professes tenderness of spirit, even against the least
untruthes having spoken much against this man's blasphemies, and visions, before
any Commissioners were in being, and there being betwixt them no personal
grudge, (as to the world, she is a looser, and did expect to be so before
hand,) should so solemnly depose before God and Angels an untruth, we leave it
to the judgment of indifferent men.

Fifthly, Besides if the Drs discourse were (as he pleads clearly against his
own conscience) such, as it is in his answer, let the Reader consider, what
color even in the least can there be, for Mistress Grips question, (viz) what
then Dr? and his answer to that question, (viz.) I do not use to reveal my
self, but I do not know, what the matter is, I must speak to you; for consider,
what is there in the Drs answer, but that any man may speak to any person.

But this is just like Master Erbury, who, when he had spoken most bitter
things against the Lord Jesus, to an understanding christian (of which you
shall hear by and by) clapped him on the arm, telling him, I do not use to reveal
my self so to others.

The truth is, the Dr seeing Mistress Grip to be fixed, and knowing her
testimony would be looked on as conscientious, and in some hopes of his own
foolish heart, thinking to make her a Proselyte, and on that account having
revealed to her that, which he knew would very much discover him, he thought to
try this last attempt, whether he might affright her out of her testimony, but
this would not do, she being thoroughly resolved to go through all reports to
bear witness against such horrid blasphemies, for the glory of Jesus Christ.

But the Dr goes on, and says she is perjured, and why? because she says, she
never railed against Mr Fowler in her life, see p. 62.

1. Consider her answer, registered by the Clark, and read by him, at the
command of the Commissioners, to all the people.

2. Mrs Grips answer was this, The Lord knows it is all false, false, never,
never: any indifferent person may see the question is not, whether, she did
ever rail in her life, but, whether at that time, as the Dr pretends, and which
railing at that time, upon such a report, was the rise, and ground of the Drs
discourse with her.

And here the Commissioners did several times offer the Dr, and all his
friends, that if any one could say any thing, to evidence the Drs answer to be
true, which Mrs Grip did depose to be false, he should be heard, with all
freedom and willingness; but no man appearing to the point in hand, the
Commissioners proceeded to some other articles, for which this bold fellow does
asperse them for unconscionablenesse, injustice.

But who are his printed witnesses, p. 62. with which he makes a noise, and
clamours upon the proceedings, by this way deceiving many, and hardening more.

1. Mr Richard Stockwell is quoted, and set forth (by the Dr) as a pious, sober
Christian. page 63.

Ans. We wish him so, with all our hearts, this man was proffered his oath, if
he could testify any thing of Mrs Grip, railing at Mr Fowler, as the Dr
pretends in his answer, she did, which he could not do, and so was not admitted
as a witness.

Obj. But the accuser says, this man, Richard Stockwell, is an Erburist.

Ans. And he must say so still, upon the reasons which he gave to the
Commissioners, till Richard Stockwell says no.

Having so fit a season, we desire leave to speak a little of Mr Erbury, we
have no thoughts in our hearts to rake up the ashes of the dead, he is gone to
his account, and stands, or falls to his own master: we do it, in a little
subserviency to the glory of Christ, by undeceiving, (if he please to make us
isntrumental) if it be, but one soul in the nation, especially about London,
and in this county. Upon personal knowledge, and upon the oath of Christians,
(if called to it) we declare, that these were his positions.

First, That the Father in flesh, is the Son.

Secondly, That the Father in Adam, and so downward, is Christ.

Thirdly, That the fullness of the Godhead is in Christ, and the saints, as the
soul is in the head, and foot.

Fourthly, That Jesus Christ was man as he, and no more God.

Fifthly, That it is blasphemy to say that Jesus Christ made an atonement, for
the sins of Gods elect.

Sixthly, That coming to a murderer sentenced to die, he said, thou have killed
a man, what if thou had killed a hundred? I tell thee for thy comfort, God is
in thee, but thou do not see it, but thou shall see it.

These upon credible testimony.

1. That there is neither good, nor evil, but as men apprehend it.

And that he might do any thing if his mind did lead him to it.

Positions enough to astonish the heavens, and shake the earth, and tend our
very bowels; from another guess man then this Dr. both for life and learning.
But he is gone to Eternity, and to us that knew him, out of his grave he
preaches a sermon upon that text, Romans 11.20. Thou stand by faith, be not
high minded, but fear. let us pray, pray, pray, that God would keep us in the
knowledge, love, and practice of all divine truth. But to return.

The next witness for the Dr, to prove that Mrs Grip did rail, etc. is John
Tench. p. 63.
We wonder that this witness also is not encomiasted with the titles of a
sober, and pious Christian, we cannot tell what this man would swear, but we
know with sadness of heart what he says, he has twice in public denied the
blood of Christ, to be the blood of God, and this (as we fear) not through
mistake, or ignorance, for he was often told, and several scriptures were
alleged to that purpose, (viz.) that it was the blood of a divine person, not
of the divine nature, but he still persisted in his foolish (to say no more)
cavillations, and afterward said to one of us, that Christ died, and rose
again, and then became God.

This is one of John Tawneys followers, a blasphemer of the Lord Christ, a
slanderer of Christians for his sake, a late abettor of the Anti-scripturall
Quakers at Reding, and one, whose inconsiderablenesse makes him audacious.

The rest are Eleanor Burly, Mrs Kent, ibidem, and in another place John
Hambleton is quoted.
What savor these three have among understanding Christians that know them, we
will leave to others, the very naming of the last, will make those that know
him, even to hold their noses.

Ob. See how bitter these Priests are, and how rigid.

Ans. Our reply is this, we have concealed many passages that we might have
rehearsed, to avoid this very objection, but we do conceive it inevitable, and
unreasonable too, for, this objection will be made by those, who have gall, and
bitterness, and are the most bitter people in the world; if our relation be
false, we yield to suffer, if it be true, why are we bitter? is it because we
will not see the everlasting Deity, the precious blood, the blessed word and
ordinances of Jesus Christ, trampled, denied, blasphemed, and sit still with
our hands in our pockets, but according to our measure, speak a word for him,
and his? is this bitterness? then the Lord make us more bitter; in these
fundamentalls Jesus Christ will give us but little thanks in the day of our
account, for our Gallionisme, or moderation.

Obj. But grant for once, that these witnesses are against ordinances,
sabboths, scriptures, grace, Christ, (for so they are, some of them against
most, and every one of them against some) yet their testimony is legal.

Ans. It is confessed, and their testimony was received as such, and we desire
it may be weighed, with all our hearts.

Obj. The Commissioners would not receive their witness.

Ans. We reply, This is a sordid, and false imputation of the Drs upon them,
they were examined, the Dr had his liberty to propose any questions, and to
produce any witnesses, it is confessed, the Commissioners did refuse some of
the witnesses, because they could not speak to the matter in hand, as, when it
was deposed, the Dr had spoken blasphemy at one time, in one place, they
offered to depose that they heard him speak otherwise, at another time, and in
another place, and this is the naked truth, yet the Commissioners are clamoured
upon, by him and his friends, in Court, in city, in town, in country, even for
crucifiers. etc.

To conclude, that a man of such pretended glories, visions, sanctity, likened
even to Christ almost, as to have no sin for the Devil hardly to work upon him
by, should have no more, no other, to appear in his behalf, but as thou have
seen, Reader, seems to us wonderful, observable.

The fifth article of the first charge.
That by male, and female Genesis the 1. we are to understand by male, the
Deity, and by female, the humanity, and that these two become one flesh.

Add to this two other articles of the last charge, viz.

That he preached at Bradfield and did labor to defend it pertinaciously, that
the little horn in Dan. 7. verse. 8. was Christ, and being told that the horn
made war with the Saints, yet he persisted to say that he was Christ.

That he is ignorant and insufficient for the work of the Ministry.

The Drs Answer.
To the first of these the Dr gave no particular answer.

Animadver. 3.
The Dr could not tell what to say then, but since in his book. page 44. he
answers thus to this article.

That by male and female might be shadowed forth the Deity and pure humanity,
the male representing the Deity, the female the pure humanity, which by union
become one, the spirit of the soul brought up by Christ into a mystical union,
is made partaker of the divine nature.

Answer.
What un-edifying matter, and language is this? is this to speak to
edification, exhortation, and to comfort? is not this and all the rest taken
out of the euangle of Henry Nicholas, and Jacob Behmen? is there not a serpent
in this grass? Irenaeus observes of the Gnostics, that they did with
Scripture words, and phrases, as if some skillful Artist should make with
precious stones and pearls, the most exquisite effigies of some Heroique
prince, and when it is done, and completed, in comes some fantastical
fellow, and pulls it all to pieces, and with the same stones and pearls, goes,
and makes the picture of an ape, or a dog. How hateful is this says that
Father as it was then, even so it is now, the Gnostics in the first times, and
the Familists, and Quakers, in these last times differing no more, (some
circumstances excepted) then Simon Magus differs from Simon the Sorcerer, the
Familists take Scripture words, phrases, and expressions, which shine as
pearls in that place, and meaning where the hand of the blessed spirit has
set them, and they dismember them, and pluck them asunder, and with them,
according to their own whimsies, they make sometime an ape, or a dog, or both;
sometime nonsense, or blasphemy, and oftentimes both, as for instance, such
expressions as these, Christ in you, the fellows of Christ, Christ's brethren,
partakers of the divine nature, I in them, and they in me, you need not that
any man teach you, taught of God, perfect as the Father, the letter kills,
the spirit to God etc. Now consider how our new Gnostics wrest, and rack these
scriptures, and make them speak, what they never meant, how do they take these
pearls, these choice texts of heaven, and with them make pictures of hell? e.
g. I, as Christ, Godded in God, a typical Christ, you are Christed, partakers
of the divine essence, that of God to God, and body, and soul to the grave,
fleshly ordinances, carnal scriptures: etc. We need not quote the texts, where
these phrases are, neither need we name the men that handled them thus, indeed
we cannot, they are more in number, then we can count.

The Dr in his printed answer to this article, speaks much of the souls union.
We desire to speak a word, not to amaze as he does, but to benefit the Reader.

We do acknowledge a real, spiritual, eternal union between Christ and
Saints, and when we think of it, sometime a little fire kindles, and we say,
Lord, what is man? our hearts close with that of a godly learned Reynold Conf.
with Heart. cap. 1. Divis. 2.
man, spoken upon an occasion something like this, and very proper to these
days, the unity (says he) that the Scripture notes is of three sorts, first,
of persons in one nature, secondly, of natures in one person, thirdly, of
natures and persons in one quality, in the first is one God, in the second is
one Christ, in the third is one Church. i. e. The company of the elect called,
and sanctified by one spirit, partakers of one Baptism, knit to Christ by one
faith, among themselves in one love, to serve one Lord, in one hope of one
eternal glory: the first and second of these unions, we desire to believe,
because they are written, and to admire, because they are exceeding glorious,
the last union by the spirit, and faith, we desire to feel, and experimentize
in our own souls, knowing that in these cob webby times of vain speculations,
one beam of Gods love, one drop of the blood of Christ upon our hearts, one
witness of the spirit in ordinances, will do us more good, then all the
meteors, and notions in the world.

But as for H. Ns, union, of being christed in Christ, and I. Ps. union, of the
deity and pure humanity to be one flesh, and W. E. union of God is in thee, and
thee, and the N. Qs, union, to be Christ, a part of God, we desire to look on
them, as more abominable, then abomination it self. nay more ugly then hell it
self.

To the second and third his answers follows.

Concerning the little horn. Dan. 7. to be Christ.

This article was four years since exhibited against me, from which I was
discharged by the Committee, Richard Higgs, John Higgs, and Richard Luington
attesting on oath, that I paraphrasing on the seventh of Daniel, and speaking
of the little horn, said, that some interpreters would have the little horn, in
the letter to be Antiochus Epiphanes, a bloody, and persecuting tyrant, others
think the little horn to be the Turk, who is a great persecutor of Christians,
Mark this fantastical ignorance, if not worse, for by such a mystical
liberty names may be applied, that we dare not name, which, how dreadful is it?
But in the mystery in regard of his power, we will apply it to the power of
Christ in a christian, who is often in Scripture resembled to the horn of
David, and to the horn of salvation, and that upon three considerations. In
regard that Christ's power in the soul, does appear to be a little horn, a small
despised instrument to sense, and reason, for flesh and blood look upon it, as
a poor instrument in regard of bringing down the strength of sin in us.

Secondly, In regard of sin, and This man belies the Devil, who quakes at an
ordinance, much more, at Christ's power, his fear that Christ will exert, and
put forth an act of power, into the heart through an ordinance is so great,
that he even trembles at the thoughts of it, the very address to the solemn
reading of a chapter will make the Devil sad, he is afraid of the issue, your
anti-ordinance men in England, are the best friends that he has had this many
a day,
Satan, who, laugh the power of Christ in the soul to scorn, yet before him
his accursed kingdom must fall.

3. In regard of its birth, and beginning in the soul, it is at the first, as a
very We have heard the parable, in regard of grace that to be little at first,
but never of Christ's power to be little, till now.
litttle grain of mustard seed, yet in due time it will destroy the kingdom of
sin, and set up the kingdom of holiness in us, having thus drawn away the vail
from this article, I hope it appears with a more tolerable and innocent face.

That I am very ignorant, and insufficient for the work of the Ministry.

I believe those that exhibit this article against me, upon trial will be All
the precedent articles prove it (if some of them should not come within the
act, for blasphemy, (which plea i^ his Diana) yet, they all prove him to be
ignorant, and insufficient, in a very high degree of both,
found very ignorant, and insufficient to judge of it, and as to those that are
to be my judges, I hope they will not make their wills the rule of ignorance
and insufficiency, But proceed according to the Canons of pure reason, or
supernatural revelation, in giving judgment concerning this particular, the
event of which I leave to God.

The proofs of the aforesaid articles.
The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill of Abingdon.

This Deponent says, that the Dr did deliver that by male and female. Genesis 1.
We are to understand by male the Deity, by female the humanity, and that these
two are one flesh, and being cross examined, he further says, that the Dr did
deliver these expressions with approbation, and the Deponents has cause to
believe it was his own judgment, and as far as he does remember it was
delivered as his judgment.

The second was fully proved upon oath before the Justices, by Francis Smith,
of Bradfield, who went to the Dr about it, being much offended, and told him
the little horn made war with the Saints, yet the Dr did still pertinaciously
maintain it, and spoke evil of those that opposed him in it.

The aforesaid George Aslet of Bradfield further deposes, and says.

That the said Dr about a month since, did deliver, that doubtless, the
Apostle in that text. 1 Cor. 6. (know ye not that your bodies are the temples
of the holy Ghost,) did not Why does the Dr quarrel at this text? unless it
be urged here, as a forcible argument against fornication.
mean these earthly bodies.

And this Deponent further says, that the Dr did deliver that by that text
Genesis 18. verse. 19. ( I know him, that he will command his children, and his
household after him, etc.) was not meant the outward household of Abraham, but
his inward household, his will and affections, which he was Lord Paramount over;
and he quoted that text in the last of Joshua, (as for me, and my house, we
will serve the Lord,) which he likewise said, was meant of the inward, and not
the outward house, Observe his Allegorical phancies, proved by profound
reason. he confesses in his book. p. 87. in the margin, That by Abraham's
family was meant his will and affections in a mystical sense. But how his
will, and affections, could be his family after him, indeed is very mystical:
in his Epist. Ded. to his highness, he does as much as say, that, he a
precious saint, is ejected by the ministers, because his interpretation of
scripture, cannot suit with their darkness.
for a man (said he) cannot command his wife, and children; and he further
says, that these words were delivered about two years since, to the best of
this Deponents remembrance, and the Deponent says he judged those expressions
to be contrary to the meaning of the holy Ghost, in those scriptures.

The sixth article of the first charge.
That the gifts and graces of the spirit are but flesh.

The Drs answer is as follows.
I confess, I said the common gifts, and graces of the spirit were but flesh,
but this I opened after this manner, they were Untruth. compare with this, Mr
Stevens deposition to this article.
but fleshly, weak, carnal, in the point of Justification, in point of trust,
and confidence, in regard of salvation, and life eternal, and no otherwise, as
their Untruth. this witness was Mr Pendarvis, as the Dr prints him to this
article, p. 45. Mr Pendarvis says no such thing at all, in his testimony,
under his own hand.
own witnesses, on examination confessed, before the honorable Committee of
Berks.

The proof of this article.
The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill,

This Deponent further says, that he heard the Dr deliver in discourse with Mr
Pendarvis, that the gifts, and The Gnostics (in Irenaeus) gave out, that they
were the spiritual, and had no need of any of those graces, and gracious
actions, which were required in other men. They were the (...), moved by an
higher principle, and divine revelation.
graces of the spirit are but flesh, and that there was no limitation
whatsoever, in the delivery thereof.

In the behalf of the Dr.
The aforesaid Mr Roger Stevens being asked by the Dr, whether he did not
acknowledge before the late Committee, that the said Dr did express the common
gifts, and graces of the spirit to be flesh, To this he says, he did not hear
those expressions in his sermon, but in a dispute afterward, he heard the Dr
say, that he did either say, or mean the common gifts, and graces of the
spirit; and that he offered a scripture to prove it by, viz. that place, Isa.
40. (all flesh is grass, If this text would prove any thing, it must prove
them to be grass, not flesh. mark his Logic, thus, all flesh is grass, ergo,
the gifts and graces of the spirit are flesh.
) and the Deponent testified the same, to the said Committee.

Mary Pocock sworn, and examined.
Being asked in the Drs behalf, how he did open those expressions of the gifts,
and graces of the spirit, in his sermon at Ildesly, she says, as to what the
Dr delivered in the said sermon, to that particular, she cannot depose.

The seventh article of the first charge.
That Christ is a type, and but a type.

Add to this the second article of the last charge, being of the same effect.

The second article of the last charge.
That Christ was not perfect, alleging that text to confirm it, because he
cried out my God, my God, etc.

The Drs answer to the first of these is,
This was in conference, he asked me whether Christ were a type or no: I
answered, Christ was a type so He is not so expressed, but thus, he left us an
example, the word is not (...), but (...), a Metaphor taken from a Limner, or
Scriuener, (...), leaving us an example 1 Pet. 2.21.
expressed, the 1 Pet. 2.21. How was Christ a type, said Mr Pendarvis? I
answered, his life and conversation was a type, that is, a pattern and example,
for us Christians to square our conversations by; who denies this? said he, why
I affirm no more, said I, then that Christ is a type; is he but a type, replied
Mr Pendarvis? I answered, why ly ye thus upon the catch? I say Christ is a It
is very improper, and too much in any man, but in you, horrid, tell us of what
Christ is a type, when the thing tipified is come, the type cease, when you
are Christed, then Christ cease, and you and he are well met, is not this
your direful meaning?
type, but I will not affirm Christ is but a type, and this they both confess
in their answers.

The Drs answer to the second.
;I do nakedly, without any vails, profess, that I ever did, and still do look
upon Christ as a most perfect Copy, and Pattern, to square our lives and
conversations by: Utuntur praeclaris sententiis, they use excellent speeches,
as if they would extol the virtue of Christ, but it is only to cover the
turpitude of their doctrine, all their speech tends to this, that, whatever
Christ did, or suffered, was only an histrionicall action, or a show exhibited
on a theater, in which the mystery of salvation is figured. Calvin. adver. lib.
cap. 17. p. 535: opuscul.
yea, and to be a perfect Mediator in reference to the world, he undertook for
the redemption of the world, being free from the least tincture, either of
original, or actual sin, and truly the thought of any such things never
lodged in my heart. But suppose I uttered such expressions as these, yet the
manner of it will sufficiently free me from the guilt my accuser may hope, and
believe I am obnoxious to by it. I confess I uttered these or the like words,
yet it was only in relating to what I heard in a sermon of Mr Blagrave says
that the Dr never spoke a word of Mr Erbury neither white nor bl^ck: an unwo
thy shift, to throw it upon the dead.
Mr Erburies at Somerset House, who at that time endeavored to ennumerate
Christ's supposed imperfections, whereof he made his crying out on the cross in
those expressions one, Now I leave it to your considerations whether my
relating to some that were wise, and knowing what I heard from another, with
much grief to my soul, makes me any way culpable, or guilty.

The Proofs of these articles.
The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill further deposes, In eo constituunt
redemptionem nostram, quod Christus solum velut typus fuit. idem ibidem.
that he heard the Dr deliver, that Christ was a type, and but a type, and
being cross examined, he further says, the Dr did endeavor to prove Christ
was but a type, out of S. Peter, where he is called (...).

The aforesaid Mr Christopher Fowler further deposes, That about three weeks,
or a month since, in discourse with Mr Daniel Blagrave the younger, This
Deponent then asked the said Mr Blagrave, whether he had not heard the Dr say,
that Christ was not perfect, to which he answered, yes.

John Grip of Reding Joyner, sworn, and examined, deposes.
That he was at Mr Blagraves house, when the said Mr Blagrave was ill, and kept
his chamber, and the said Mr Blagrave and the Deponent fell into discourse
about Dr Pordage, in presence of Mrs Blagrave, and that in the said discourse
Mr Blagrave told his wife, that the Dr held strange opinions, such as were not
agreeable to the word of God, for he did maintain that Jesus Christ was not
God, but that he was a type, and but a type, man, and not God, the shadow, and
not the substance, and Mr Blagrave did labor very much to take off his wives
affection from the Dr, and his ways, but he could not prevail.

This Deponent further says, that sometime the last summer Mr Charles Blagrave
told him that the Dr should say that Christ was not perfect, and quoted that
scripture mentioning our Saviors passion (when he cried out, My God, my God,
etc.) to prove the same.

In behalf of the Dr.
The aforesaid Mary Pocock further deposes, that she heard the Dr maintain in
hot discourse with Mr Pendarvis, that Christ was a type, and proved it out of
S. Peter, (he was an example) and she heard the Dr say he would not He would
not stand to it what Arrian, Socinian, or F^milist scarce ever would? Observe
what the fear of the Magistrate will do upon blasphemers.
stand to the word but, That he was but a type.

John Pordage son to the Dr, aged between 19. and 10 years, sworn, and
examined deposes. That in a dispute between the Dr his father, and Mr
Pendarvis, about five or six years since, about Christ's being a type, the Dr
said that Christ was Observe his sons testimony.
but a type; to which Mr Pendarvis said, do you say but a type, whereunto the
Dr answered, he did not stand to but a type, it was only a slip of his tongue,
but he maintained that Christ was a type.

Animadver. 4.
To weaken the testimony of John Grip the Dr prints page 42. a letter from Mr
D. Blagrave, to the Commissioners, consisting of these two parts. First, I dare
not condemn the innocent, Secondly, I do not remember I said so to Mr Grip.

Ans. We confess, there was a letter sent from that Gentleman, but the
testimony of this letter was indirect, and the letter was refused by the joint
consent of the Commissioners, because Mr Blagrave was twice summoned by their
warrant, and did not appear: some say he would not, others think he durst not.

The Dr says, that Mr Blagrave being detained about earnest business at
London, could not appear according to summons, and therefore wrote this letter.
And yet in all that letter there is not so much as one civil hint that he gives
of his taking notice, of any such summons at all. No, no, his letter was nor an
intended answer to the summons, there were other weighty motives for it.

Upon this account we might have spared the readers pains, and our own,
passing by this letter in silence. But because a copy of it is granted out in
favor to the Dr, and is now traveled farther then where either Mr Blagrave or
the Dr are known, (for where they are, we fear it not) and so may raise some
prejudice amongst some, who are willing to lay hold upon a bulrush, therefore
we judge it as a duty incumbent upon us, to take liberty of proposing a few
questions to Mr Blagraves conscience.

First, Does Mr Blagrave think in his heart that the Dr is innocent? does not
his conscience tell him that he heard the Dr assert, that Jesus Christ was not
GOD? and does this man call this innocence? if this be innocence, then we
confess we are to seek what is blasphemy, or what can be guilt: do not Mr
Trapham and Mr Tickhill depose it? nay, do not the Dr, and his own brother
confess it? and yet Mr Blagrave the then Chaireman says, the Dr is innocent.
We desire to know in which of the Drs worlds he finds, that blasphemy against
the Lord Jesus is innocence. Yet further, when Mr Trapham told Mr Blagrave of
the Drs denying Christ to be God, and he returned this faint answer, sc. then
we must take another course with him, then, even in the same breath, the Dr
replied to Mr Blagraves head, But Christ is not Jehovah; and is this innocence?
Oh the patience of God! Beyond all this, Mr Blagrave being told in the town
Hall at Reding, that the Dr should say before him, that Christ was not Jehovah;
Mr Blagrave answered, yea, but he does not deny Christ to be GOD though; as if
the Lord Christ might be God, though he be not Jehovah our righteousness, Jer.
23.6. if he had not bin the first, viz. Jeh^vah, he could never have bin the
last, viz. our righteousness.
Jehovah, (as the Socinians say, that Christ may have the worship of God,
though he be not God by nature) and is this innocence too?

This last was deposed before the Commissioners, by Mr Stevens, an
understanding Christian, who being justly offended with Mr Blagraves
countenancing the Dr in his blasphemies, told him of it to his face, and from
him received the forementioned answer, about seven months since.

Secondly, In the letter he says, he does not remember that he told John Grip,
the Dr should say Christ was but a type, a shadow, man, and not God.

Ans. We affirm, that upon the showing the printed passage of the letter to
John Grip, he replied, But I do remember it very well, and he will, if called
thereto, depose it in Mr Blagraves presence; and we can safely say of this man,
that we believe he desires to get, and keep a good conscience.

We do foresee, that Mr Blagrave will be unsatisfied for our speaking so much.

Our answer is, that we are unsatisfied sometimes in our consciences, for
speaking so little.

As to the article it self of Christ's being a type,

We entreat the reader to observe the fullness of the evidence, deposing that
the Dr said, that Christ was a type, and but a type. Now, we cease to wonder,
that one of his choice ones should speak thus, to knowing persons, and reputed
godly, who were on purpose speaking of Christ's righteousness, viz. I fear many
make an idol of Jesus Christ, as though trusting in the Lord Jesus crucified,
without us, were idolatry. And another of his disciples, who speaking before of
the present contest, concerning Christ's righteousness, said thus, what need I
to contend and wrangle about that which I my self am, which I have essentially
in me. Nay the Dr himself delivered this in the pulpit, long since his
pretended converse with the Angels, and his visions of the eternal world,
(viz.) whosoever did attain to a particular faith, these signs shall follow,
they shall speak with new tongues, they shall lay hands on the sick, God will
bring them to glory, and God the Father will deliver up to them the keys of
his everlasting Godhead.

To conclude,

This never enough accursed doctrine of a typical Christ, did spread like a
gangrene in Calvin's time; a little after in England, by Henry Nicholai, born in
Amsterdam, an ignorant man, but a crafty hypocrite, and one that had a kind of
deceiving violence, in his smooth language of love: since that, in New England,
by Gortyn and his disciples; and then again in England very lately, Mr
Rutherford who is good at surveys, and viewing, gives a most shrewd guess,
that the tokens of this soul-plague are to be seen upon the books of Mr
Saltmarsh, etc: and now at this day this plague-mark is visible to every eye,
and creeping about many hearts. Is it not a sad thing, that persons should take
in such notions of Christ, that do altogether destroy Christ? that blaspheme
his person, reproach his blood, deny his purchase, and that make his infinite
love and grace to poor sinners, to signify just nothing? in which notions a
man cannot be godly while he lives, and must be damned when he dies, for the
rise, progress, growth, and continuance of found godliness flows from the
right knowledge of Jesus Christ.

Do we not see these figure-makers, and makers of types, which God never made,
which never came into his heart, what shadowy, empty creatures they are? the
Socinians and Familists have nothing for the soul real in this world, their
light is darkness, their sublimated notions froth, their words bubbles, their
holiness mere varnish, their austerity, Pharisaisme, their fasting and prayer
(when they do it) a device to entrap souls, their public demureness, private
loosnesse, their comfort, a delusion.

What they shall have in the next world (in case of final impenitence, which
the Lord of mercy forbid) is real indeed, but what is it? but a sense of
wrath, and guilt of sin, even against this now blasphemed Jesus Christ, a worm
of conscience, a lake of fire, the gnawings of heart, which are really so
grievous that no heart can think or guess; and all this without remedy,
without ease, even for ever and ever.

The eighth and ninth Articles of the first charge.
First, That Christ was not God.

Secondly, That Christ was not Jehovah.

Add to these the fifth article of the last Charge. (viz.)

That one speaking to him of the glorious persons in Trinity: he replied,
persons in Trinity, there is no such thing, and again there is no such thing,
as persons in Trinity.

The Drs answer to these are as follows.

That Christ is not God, that Christ is not Jehovah.

I do acknowledge that such expressions were uttered by me, but I hope the bare
expressions of such H^bemus confitentem, It had bin far better said, such
horrid diabolical blasphemies, then such negations, this is very improper, and
so mincing, what Christian heart can bear it?
negations do not make me come within the guilt of the act, for it must be
known what words preceeded such expressions and what followed, to say in
preaching there is no God does not make the preacher guilty of atheism, if the
words going before be but annexed (the fool has said in his heart there is no
God, so do but join these words with the What former? you should have said with
the latter, this is put in as a miserable wretched shift, say that such a
blasphemer is an adulterer, yet join these words with it. (viz.) he goes a
whoring after his own inventions, this is not culpable.
former, Christ is not God the Father, Christ is not Jehovah, Jehovah taken
strictly for the person of the Father, the first person of the glorious
Trinity, I say add but these words and there is nothing blasphemous, or
culpable in such expressions.

Though I do acknowledge that such expressions fell from me (viz.) that Christ
is not God, that Christ is not Jehovah, yet I never avowed, or maintained such
propositions, they were only uttered by way of False, they were the points
disputed on.
dispute and that upon this occasion, Mr Daniel Blagrave then being chairman
of the Committee demanded of Mr Tickhill, what blasphemy was, he answered an
evil speaking against God the Untruth, so thick a man may feel it, read the
proof.
Father, Who heard you reply so? neither the chairman, nor your brother, nor
Mrs Pocock, a studied untruth.
I replied a lame definition of blasphemy had Mr Tickhill said evil speaking
against God, which is a word implying the Trinity in unity, there had been no
occasion given of contest, for the ground of the expressions arose from the
weakness of his definition of blasphemy, in that he said blasphemy was evil
speaking against God the Father, to which I replied, his definition of
blasphemy does not reach to that for which he accuses me, for what he charge
me with is not What is this but a deliberate consulting of a whole series of
untruthes?
blasphemy against God the Father, but against Christ God the Son, I have
uttered no evil speaking against God the Son but seemingly to my accuser in
saying that his imputative righteousness would prove a saplesse
righteousness, to all those that had not the fiery deity in the center of
their souls, burning up their lusts and corruptions. Mr Tickhill then replied
to that Committee, pray take notice that the Dr denies Christ to be God, which
I prove out of John the 1.1. Who can make sense of this stuff? the Dr wants a
good memory, read the proof.
To which I replied Christ is not God the Father but God the Son, Christ is
Jehovah, and so called the Lord our righteousness said Mr Tickhill, to which I
replied Christ is not Jehovah, if you take Jehovah for the personality of the
Father, this is the truth as the whole Committee of Berks then present can
testify, and I was then by their vote cleared of all the unworthy aspersions
and dismissed, and Untruth, the business dismissed, but you were never
discharged.
since upon proof of witnesses dismissed, and that after a full hearing by the
Committee of plundered Ministers.

I humbly conceive that if the former act did expressly adjudge and condemn
evil speaking against Christ, yet my delivering such expressions in an ex
tempore dispute, (viz.) that Christ was not God, or Jehovah, did not make me
obnoxious to the guilt or penalty of that act, because page 980, and 981 they
only shall be condemned as guilty who shall avowedly profess, maintain, or
publish in words, or writing such and such execrable opinions, etc. Which I
never did, nay I profess avowedly the contrary, and declare in the sincerity
of my heart, that the thought never entered into my soul, to deny the Godhead or
deity of Christ, and I have avowed, maintained, and published by preaching that
Christ is God, out of John the first and twelfth, The word was made flesh, from
whence I did maintain, and publish that Christ was God coequall, coeternall,
and coessentiall with the Father, contrary to all those blasphemous and
execrable opinions which deny Christ to be God, so that now I hope the mere
uttering of such expressions by way of dispute, before an understanding, and
judicious Committee does not make me a transgressour, according to the true
sens^ and meaning of this act.

Ans. 2. Concerning the persons in Trinity.
I do here profess, and avow from the sincerity of my heart, that I believe
the Trinity of persons, as an article of my faith, viz. That there are three
persons distinct from each other, the person of the Father, the person of the
Son, the person of the holy Ghost; yet not so as to prejudice the unity in
essence, and so I believe the unity, as not to confound the Trinity of persons.

I See the first animadversion, where it is affirmed by a judicious and pious
person, as upon oath, the Dr said, that God in Christ, and Christ in Saints, is
the Trinity in unity and unity in Trinity asserted from John 17.
never uttered any such expressions in that way, as to give any just ground of
suspicion of my denying the Trinity, But I remember about four years since
before the Committee of Berks, Mr Fowler, or Mr Gilbert I remember not which
desired the Commit to give them liberty to ask me two or three questions,
amongst the rest they ask me whether there were three persons in the deity, I
answered them, I believed the Trinity as it is recorded. 1 John 5.7. There are
three that bare record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost.
Thus you see I believe the Trinity, but do you believe the Trinity of persons
said they? I replied I find not the word persons in the text, but to put you
out of doubt, I do not stumble at the word person, and this afterward I told to
the above mentioned Mr Grip in a private conference some years since, to whom
I affirmed that I found no such expressions as persons of Trinity, in the
Scripture, and that the word person being a schole term was And why difficult,
it being the most apt, plain significant term that is, persona denote^ only
substantiam primam intelligentem, (...), any substantiam singularem, whether
living or dead; the fathers Greek and Latin agreed to use the word person, as
signifiing an underst^nding subsistent. There is no term so safe, so full.
Three properties, is very improper and dangerous. Three qualities, absurd and
more dangerous. Three manifestations, Familisticall and hellish. Three persons,
most suitable, specially when we add infinite, divine, a person in all
authors generally denoting a substance living, intelligent.
very difficult, to be apprehended, by common capacities, but I never spoke
this to prejudice the true notion of the persons in the sacred Trinity, which I
do cordially believe, but only to show, that ordinary Christians should not be
too curious, in prying into the deep mystery of the three persons in the
Trinity, but rather content themselves, with what the Scripture plainly affirms
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, as distinct, and yet one. But to conclude
this answer, pray consider what hard measure it is, thus to pick out a broken
sentence out of a long discourse, and so to accuse one without relating the
circumstance which might serve to clear, what otherwise may seem very strange
to prejudiced persons.

The proofs of these Articles.
The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill of Abingdon.

This Deponent says, that he heard the Dr deliver before the Committee of this
County at Reding, that Christ was not God, and that he was not Jehovah, and
being cross examined, he further says, the Dr did endeavor in dispute with
great seriousness to maintain, and defend as his judgment that Christ was not
God, and that he was not Jehovah, and that there was no such expression of the
Father mentioned in his, this Deponents definition of blasphemy, as is
mentioned in the Drs answer, but says that his definition was, that Observe
the Deponents definition of blasphemy, and judge whether the Dr did not study
an untruth.
blasphemy was an evil speaking against God, derogating from his glory either
in his name, nature, word or works, and that the Drs immediate words thereupon
were, Let the magistrate hearken, ruling in the fear of the Lord, and let the
reader hearken and be astonished at it, and grieve. what can be more wickedly
asserted by the Dr, and more punctually proved by any Deponent?
Hark! he answers, blasphemy is an evil speaking against God, and in his
paper charge me with blasphemy against Christ; That (as if) is the breath^ of
the bottomless pit.
as if Christ were God, hereupon we began a hot dispute about the Godhead of
Christ, the Deponent asked the Dr, if Christ were God, who did deny it, and put
the Deponent upon proof of it, whereupon he cited that Scripture. John the
first, In the beginning was the word, the word was God. To which the Dr
replied, he is he is called God, so the Arrians, of the founder of whom Arrius,
the godly Emperor Constantine said, that he was (...). Epiphan. lib. 2. Tom.
2. Haeres. 69. a wicked interpreter, the picture of the Devil.
called God, but he is not Jehovah, then the Deponent replied, he is Jehovah,
which the Dr likewise put him to prove, then he cited that Scripture, his name
shall be called Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. and (as he remembers)
the Dr did disallow of that proof, as being out of the Old Testament, then the
Deponent cited that Scripture. Rev. 1. He that was, is, and is to come, as
being of the same purpose with Jehovah.

Thomas Trapham Esquire one of the Committee sworn and examined, deposes.

That to his remembrance, the word Father was not mentioned, in Mr Tickhills
definition of blasphemy, and he says, the Dr did then deny Did Dr Pordage
speak in the sincerity of his heart, (as he pretends in his answer to these
articles, and others) that such a thought never entered into his soul? let the
conscientious judge.
Christ to be God, which he this Deponent acquainted Mr Blagrave with, to which
Mr Blagrave said, if he deny Christ to be God, we must take a further course
with him, then the Dr answered, Why was there not a course taken with him, when
he denied Christ to be Jehovah?
Christ is not Jehovah, and when Mr Tickhill had confuted him in that argument,
then he said, he was not God the Father.

The aforesaid Susanna Grip.
This Deponent further says, that the Dr came into her kitchen at another
time, and as she thinks he then came from the Committee, and the Dr then said,
whereas Ministers speak of persons in Trinity, there is no such thing, there
are three that bear record in heaven, but there is no such thing as persons in
Trinity, and the Deponent says that these words were spoken by the Dr, about
two or three years since, but whether the maid, or any body else, or who was
then present, she does not remember, and she further says, that these
expressions were delivered without any further explanation, as she remembers.

Witnesses examined in behalf of the Dr.

Mr Francis Pordage Minister of Stanford Dingley, and brother to the Dr sworn,
and examined.

This Deponent says that these words (viz.) that Christ was not God, and that
Christ was not Jehovah, were delivered before the Committee of Reding, in a hot
dispute, and, that in the same words the Dr did express those words, that
Christ was not God, with this limitation (viz.) that Christ was not God the
Father, and that the dispute arose upon a definition of blasphemy which Mr
Tickhill gave to Mr Blagrave, (viz.) that it was against God, to which the Dr
replied, he says it is against God, and Observe this testimony from his own
witness even the Drs brothr.
he charge me for speaking against Christ, and that the Dr did then declare
to Mr Blagrave, that Christ was God, but this Deponent does acknowledge that
there was so much distance of time, at least between the Drs denial of Christ
to be God, and his correcting of it afterward, as required Mr Tickhill to
prove him to be God, and to be Jehovah, and he further says, he did not hear
Mr Tickhill speak any thing of God the Sea what a man this Dr then is, as upon
premeditation to deliver in such an untruth, and since to print it, and to cry
out upon the Commissioners as Pilates and persecutors.
Father, in that dispute.

And this Deponent being asked by the Dr, whether frequently in that dispute,
when the Dr spoke of denying Christ to be God, he did not always speak in
relation to God the Father.

To this he answers, his brother did say he spoke it in relation to God the
Father, but he cannot say frequently, or always.

And he further says, that the Dr did in a sermon in Laurence Church, clear
himself concerning the Trinity of persons, and that Christ was God, and did
assert it as his avowed judgment, and he further says, the Dr did make his
limitation concerning the deity of Christ, after Mr Tickhill had cited many
Scriptures, to prove the deity of Christ, and being asked by the Dr whether he
understood him to be confuted, or mistaken, he says mistaken.

The aforesaid Mary Pocock further deposes.

That she was before the Commitee of Berkes, when she heard the Dr dispute with
Mr Tickhill, concerning Christ's being God, in which dispute she heard the Dr
say, that Christ was not God the Father, but she did not hear him deny but that
he was God the Son, neither then, nor any other time, but owning him to be
perfect God, and perfect man, and she further says, that she heard the Dr
express that sentence (that Christ was not God) with this limitation (viz.)
that he was not God the Father.

And being asked by the Dr whether she did not hear him deny in that dispute,
that he held Christ was not God. She answers she did apprehend him so, so far
as she was satisfied with it.

And being further asked by the Commissioners whether in that dispute, she did
not hear the Dr deny Christ to be God.

She answers, she did hear him deny Christ to be God the Father.

And she being further asked whether the Dr did bring in that expression of God
the Father, after many scriptures, cited by Mr Tickhill to prove Christ to be
God.

She answers Scriptures Mr Tickhill did bring but she is not able to say it
was before the Dr did express God the Father.

And being further asked whether the words of God the Father were not spoken by
the Dr after Mr Blagrave told him if he held such opinions, they must proceed
against him.

To this she says, Mr Blagrave put some questions to him, but what they were
she cannot remember.

And now we come to the second charge of Articles exhibited against the Dr,
which for brevity sake I shall not dissect particularly, but (being most to one
purpose) set them down together, with his answer to them, and Depositions
thereupon, which are as follows.

Articles against Dr Pordage, Parson of Bradfield.
1. Mrs Lewin of Hampsted Norris being with child, and near the time of travel,
sent for Dr Pordages mother to be her Midwife, but he would not suffer her to
go, saying they would not be guilty of such a beast-like life, meaning Mrs
Lewins being with child by her husband.

2. Dr Pordage coming to the house of Mr Lewin, in his discourse with Mrs
Lewin, blamed her for having children by her husband, and argued with her of
the unlawfulness of having children by her husband.

3. In his discourses with Mr Lewin concerning the same subject, endeavored to
maintain the unlawfulness of their having children, and said that Adam was
made Male and Female in himself, and had he not fallen he had brought forth
children himself: and seemed to maintain the same by scripture, and other ways.

4. In his discourses with Mr Lewin which was about the time that one Everard
was with him at his house at Bradfield, who was generally reputed to be a
Con^urer* he asked Mr Lewin whether he would no^ (...) afraid, if he should see
his own picture or shape, intimating that he himself had used to see his.

The said Dr Pordage has had for some weeks together in his house the same
Everard, and one Tawney, who styled himself King of the Jews, who had been
qu^stioned (as is generally reported) for holding dangerous and unsound
opinions, as that there is no hell, and the like.

My answer to the second articles exhibited against me, is as follows.
As to the four first, I know not how or what positively and directly to answer
to them, till I see them first, proved by oath, and that from such persons who
are without just exceptions, after which I shall be capable to return a more
full and complete answer.

Neither do I see that seemingly to maintain and argue by way of dispute only,
the unlawfulness of Mrs Lewins having children by her husband, for the sifting
forth of truth from error, could it be proved that I did so, could argue or
evince my ignorance and insufficiency for the ministry; for this, though it
were evinced to be my crime, cannot in justice and equity be referred to that
head, but to scandal and heresy; except ignorance and insufficiency be resolved
into the boundless liberty of the wills of the Judges, that what they judge
and deem ignorant and insufficient, must be ignorant and insufficient, whether
ignorance and insufficiency be really in such a subject or not.

That I gave entertainment to one Everard in my house, reputed a conjurer, and
to one Tawney, who is reported to hold unsound opinions.

As to the first part, I confess that one Everard about four years since, was
received into my house at Bradfield, for the space of about three weeks and no
longer, and that after this manner. False, he was there before oftentimes.
He came in harvest time, with a new pair of harvest gloves on his hands, to
show his willingness and readiness to work, and asked to speak with me, and
told me, that if I pleased to employ him in harvest work, he came to offer his
service: hereupon I entertained him as a workman. And thus you see the manner
of his coming, and the cause of his entertainment.

Whereas it was said he was generally reputed a Conjurer.

I never heard the least intimation from any, that he was ever suspected to be
a conjurer, till after his departure from my family; if he was a conjurer
before, it was more then I knew, or had heard of: but after his departure, I
confess there arose a general report up and down the country, that he was a
Conjurer, but from that time to this I have never seen him, nor known what is
become of him.

After his absence I do further affirm, that I feared and was strongly inclined
to believe, that according to the general rumor, he was a conjurer; hereupon
I was in a great straight in my own spirit, whether I should prosecute him or
not: my zeal to Gods glory, and my obedience to the commands of God, that
says, Not a word true, read the note upon his protestation.
suffer not a witch to live, giving me some impulsions to do it, but after
serious debate and consideration within my self? I resolved this case, or
scruple of conscience thus, That my own persuasions and jealousies, though they
had some ground of probability, yet being not certain, afforded me not
sufficient ground of prosecuting him as a conjurer, or of swearing positively
he was such; now I leave it to your serious considerations whether this
tenderness of conscience, keeping me from prosecuting of him, or swearing
against him, for fear of that heinous sin of perjury, makes me either ignorant
or insufficient for the ministry.

To the second part of the fifth article, which concerns my entertainment of
Tawney, reputed as it is there expressed, to be one that holds unsound opinions.

I answer thus, It is well known that as I invite none, so I turn away none
that come to visit me, be their principles in matter of doctrine, worship, and
discipline, different from mine; I will briefly show you my grounds and ends.
My grounds are these, I look upon it as my duty, according to the Gospel of
Christ, to entertain all strangers, that be in want and necessity, professing
the name of Christ.

If enemies hunge^, we are to feed them, if they are naked, we must cloth
them, and as for strangers, we are to lodge and entertain them Heb. 13.2. As in
the practice of this I break no law of God, so no law of man: and you may
remember in the 37. article of Government, it is expressed, That all such as
profess faith in God by Jesus Christ, though differing in judgment from the
doctrine, worship, and discipline, publicly held forth, so as they abuse not
this liberty to the civil injury of others, nor to the actual disturbance of
the public peace, shall be protected, and then surely their hungry bellies may
be fed, their bodies clothed, their persons lodged, and their wants supplied.

And further, my ends are these, which are pure and Evangelicall, that I may
prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, that I may t^y the spirits,
because many false spirits are gone forth into the world. Now how are they to
be proved and tried? not by Who says they are? but they are to be suppressed:
who calls the Mag strates weapons carnal, but the carnal?
carnal weapons, as by penalties, mulcts, imprisonments, and other external
punishments, but by convincing of them with sound doctrine, Christian
discourse, and spiritual arguments, and by the example of a good conversation,
and thus Gods glory, and the good of others, are my only ends, in giving
entertainment to all strangers, that come in civilitie to visit me.

Now the cause of many We never heard of any but those mentioned in the next
animad.
strangers coming to me as guests, from all quarters of this land, arises from
those lying printed pamphlets, that have scarce a word of truth in them, these
draw all seeking inquiring minds to visit me, for diverse ends best known unto
themselves. Let it be but proved that I have given entertainment to any common
Why did not you put in blasphemers, ranters, anti-labbatarians, such as stay at
home, and skim the pot, or ly in bed, and meet no where on the Lords day?
swearers, to open drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, or to any known profane
persons, and I shall judge my self obnoxious to your censure: but all that I
give entertainment to, appear clothed under some show of godliness or other,
but if they have not the power, it will be their own misery.

In a word, the strengh of this article does but amount to thus much, that as
Mark the comparison, there is pride, and non sense in it.
Christ was supposed and accounted a friend of Publicanes and sinners, so am I
reputed a friend to all people that profess Religion, and walk orderly be
their opinions in matter of doctrine or discipline, never so much differing
from my own, or those commonly received. Yet this does not argue my ignorance
and insufficiency for the Ministry; but if in it any thing be culpable, it is
to be referred to the head of scandal and heresy. But here being no law of
prohibition, I cannot see any transgression in it against the law either of God
or man.

But to conclude, these articles being matter of fact, till I see them proved,
and each article in justice and equity referred to his own proper place, or
head, either of scandal or heresy, I cannot give a more direct, or positive
answer to them.

The proofs hereupon are,
John Lewin of Hampsted Norris Clark, sworn, and examined.
To the Be pleased to read and consider the following animad.
first and second articles he cannot depose.

To the third he says, that about three years since the Dr and he had some
discourse about some principles of religion, the Dr did urge that place in
Genesis, (that he made them male and female) but whether he meant Adam singly,
or what mental reservation he had, the Deponent knows not, and further to
this article cannot depose.

To the fourth, he says, that about the time mentioned in the article, the
Deponent met the Dr in London, and in discourse with him, the Dr asked the
Deponent, if it would not be terrible to see apparitions, but did intimate
nothing that he used to see any himself.

Anne the wife of the aforesaid John Lewin sworn, and examined.
To the first article, this Deponent can say nothing.

To the second, she says, that the Dr told her when she had two children (a
boy and a girl) she had enough, one for her husband, another for her self. To
which the Deponent answered, (as it shall please God,) then the Dr replied,
piff, it is as your selves will, but says that the Dr did never persuade her
to live from her husband.

To the third article, she heard the Dr and her husband in discourse to the
purport of that article, but what the words were, she cannot depose.

Animadver. 5.
We shall take the Drs answer as it lies in order.

First, As to Mr Lewin, he was the man who related the foresaid articles
himself to two of the Commissioners, Mr Whetwhyck and Col. Arthur Evelyn, to
whom telling them of the lewdness of these principles, they both, viz. Mr
Lewin and his wife, replied, we are ready to depose it, and did farther affirm
to Gol. Evelyn, that they did hear the Dr assert the same things at another
time.
and that in terminis, of his own accord, and this with so much seeming
willingness, that the gentlemen stand amazed at his fordid shrinking from, and
denying of his own testimony, which he wrote with his own hand, and altered as
he pleased. Besides, Mrs Lewin related the very same to Mr Woodbridge, who did
offer to attest it upon oath.

We do not wonder at this carriage of his at all, our wonder was, that Mr Lewin
of all men should accuse the Dr; the proverb is, it is an unlucky bird, that
defiles his own nest: the truth is, he thought if he should discover the Drs
lewdness, some of the Drs party might discover his own vileness: he was loath
to speak the truth, for fear he should be discovered, and now through a
righteous providence he is like to be discovered, because he would not speak
the truth.

He was afraid his crew would tell of him, and now some honest and
understanding officers hearing of his baseness, have detected him, take his
character thus;

This Mr Lewin (we are unwilling to say Minister) of Hamsted Norris, was
formerly a member of the army, where he lived in wickedness to no small
height, and that, First, against God, by cursing and swearing, and this (as was
judged by some) he reckoned as a piece of his perfection, in a ranting way:
Secondly, against others, by pilfering (to say no more) in a most fordid,
unworthy manner: Thirdly, against himself, by sinning against his own body, (if
he himself is to be believed) boasting of his wickedness, he could not blush,
nay he gloried in his lewdness, and proclaimed his sin as Sodom under the
pretense of a shaking or convulsion fit, he was taken in an unseemly wanton
da^^ance with a woman.

Being asked whence he came, in a profane way personating the Devil, he
answered, I came from compassing the earth to, and fro, seeking whom I may
devour.

From credible persons, of pious repute, we have this, sc. that he should speak
to this purpose, I preach of faith, and am Orthodox in the country, but I do
not mean so.

All this and much move, we have from persons of place and integrity in the
Army, who are ready to testify what they have said, out of their own
willingness to the service of the gospel, and a desire to promote the good of
souls; and in this business of shrinking in his evidence, Mr Whitwick and Col.
Evelyn do intend to prosecute him, either as a slanderer, or a false- swearer.

Obj. But is not this cruelty, even to fetch the blood of men's names?

Ans. Our consciences bear us witness that we take no pleasure in it, we are
compelled thereto, and partly by his own carriage: our apology shall only be
that of Mr Calvin, for himself, in the same case, against the like persons,
viz. Better it is that the names of men should rot above ground, then that the
glory of our Lord Jesus should be trampled upon, nay, in the least impaired.

Obj. Were it not better to be silent, are there not of Familists many, and
bloody too?

Ans. We remember what Luther said, he should be contented to be accounted any
thing, so he might not be found Modo non arguar reus maledicti silentii.
guilty of a cursed silence, in the cause of Jesus Christ: as for danger with a
little poor faith, through mercy we have learned to say, our times are in Gods
hand; and to apply what the Lord Christ says, a sparrow does not fall to the
earth, without my Father.

Secondly, Th^s Everard mentioned in the fifth article, was first a separatist,
then a scoffer at ordinances, then a curser, then a blasphemer, then by report
a conjurer as the Dr says, but indeed rather an apparitioner, as the Dr is,
then, mad and frantic, and committed by authority to Bridewell.

The Dr in his answer labors industriously to cheat his reader, by saying that
this Everard came to him with a pair of harvest gloves upon his hands for work,
as though he had not seen him before, when as for many weeks and for most days
in the week this Everard came to the Drs house before harvest began, and after
he was gone, the Dr reported that he was an honest godly man.

Thirdly, As for John Tawney the Dr exhibites a long answer of his feeding the
hungry, and his pure ends in entertaining strangers, etc.

Ans. May it please the reader to consider that this Tawney at first denied the
Scriptures, then cursed them, and lately within these five months burnt the
Bible openly in Lambeth, wickedly calling the blessed Gospel of the Lord
Christ, the grand Idol of England, that he pretended he had a revelation to
destroy the Parliament, who has since written a book as full of open
blasphemy, and sly sedition, as a toad is full of poison, this man finds
entertainment (as at other times) so about August last, for a fortnight
together at the Drs house, and the Dr quotes for his defense in so doing, the
thirty seventh article of the government viz. All such as profess faith in God
by Jesus Christ. etc.

Consider, whether these men will stretch that article, it seems by this kind
of men John Tawney himself, does profess faith in God by Jesus Christ.

Ob. But what is this to the Dr? he is not of Tawneys way?

Ans. it was lately confessed to a person that will depose it, by one of the
Drs own visioners one of his own way, and his own family. That, Dr Pordage, and
John Tawney were both of one judgment.

Fourthly, the Dr answers, he entertains those that come to him under some show
of godliness or other.

Ans. We would not seem to carp, therefore we will not propose this question to
him, how many shows of godliness there are, the sequel will resolve it.

We profess we do not know, neither can we learn of any that he has
entertained, but Abiezer Copp, notorious for blasphemy, and rantisme, in whose
behalf this Dr appeared before the Committee at Reding; and being opposed by
one of us, replied, (but with much meekness) that we should follow shortly
after our dear brother Love. Or Coppin, to whose book that crawls with
blasphemy, the Dr gave his approbation. Or John Tawney, or Everard, who set
their mouths wide open against God and man: or Elizabeth Pool, or Goodwife
Geffreys, who even stink above ground: we that live round about him, do not
know any godly person but shuns him as a very monster: it is a frequent blind
he puts upon his reader, by citing in his own behalf, and against the
Commissioners, the godly party.

For our parts, we dare not say, that any Socinian or Familist is, or
(continuing such) ever can be a godly man, our reason is, because such deny the
Deity, and satisfaction of our Lord Jesus, from the sound and feeling knowledge
whereof, proceeds and streams out all real and sound godliness, a godly
Familist, or Socinian, sounding in our ears even as great a contradiction, as a
godly Turk.

God forbid that we should speak one pick against holiness, better that our
tongues should be dumb, then our mouths utter, and our hands wither, then our
pens should write one tittle to blemish it. We desire to look upon it as the
most glorious thing in the world, and we would rather (if our own hearts do not
deceive us) seek our bread, and the bread of our little ones, with holiness in
our hearts and lives, in a howling wilderness, then to enjoy all the scepters
of the world without it: yet give us leave to say (if it be but to ease our
hearts) that it is a trouble to us, that Blasphemers, Antichristians,
Anti-scripturists, should go up and down, under the precious name of men
fearing God, by which artifice they harden themselves in their impieties, and
infect souls with their blasphemies.

We do forethink that that expression of a godly Turk, will sound harsh, but we
know not why it should, See Dr Calovius Socinis. proflig. p. 33. 34.
Ignatius calls the predecessors of the Familists and Socinians, the seducing
serpent, or the Devil preaching to destruction.

The Fathers denied the Ebionites to be Christians.

The Samosatenians were accounted and called God-killers, God-deniers, (...).
(quantum in ipsis) quia divinam Christi naturam negabant, because they denied
Efficitur (prob dolor) ut Jesu Christi religio Turcis sit ludibrio. cap. 1.
Johan. p. 7. explic.
Christ to be God by nature.

Socinus himself says, that the Protestants held opinions that made their
religion ridiculous to the Turks, what were those opinions? why, in special
this, that Christ is God: so then if we would deny the Deity of our Lord
Christ, (as do the Familists and Socinians,) we were in a fair way not to be
ridiculous to, but to agree with the Turks: again, this Hac ratione Turcas ad
Chapter religionem allici posse, ibid. p. 2.
Wretch tells us, that one reason of his writing against the figment (as he
calls it) of Christ's divine nature was, to make the Turks turn Christians;
therefore by a parity of reason, they that do deny the Divine nature of Christ,
in this point may quickly turn Turks.

Valent. Gentil. a blasphemer of Christ's divinity, was not Non puduit eum
subsidium petere ex Alchorano Aretius. Hist. Val. Gent. cap. 1.
ashamed to seek arguments to help himself, out of the Turkish Alcoran.

And Alciatus Mahometista sactus est. idem. cap. 2.
Alciate one of his accomplices, (as he confessed himself) was turned downright
Mohammedan.

Calvin in his instruct. ad Lib. calls them rake-hells, dogs, swine, we fear
that, in giving smooth language to villainous seducers of his kind, we use more
manners then will do the gospel good.

Dr Twisse, a late learned, pious man, did call them Atheists, and he often
said to one of us, that all gospel Atheism was against the Lord Jesus Christ:
in a little measure we find it, amongst the Gnostics and Arrians, and for some
Centuries, their main spite and quarrel was against the Lord Jesus; after, for
more Centuries, in the kingdom of the Papacy, where their damning error, is
in dividing, and so by consequence destroying both the efficacy of Christ's
grace, and the fullness and compleatnesse of his righteousness as to
justification: upon the account of which last, some learned men (when zeal was
in request) have said, That a Papist living and dying in the doctrine of the
Council of Trent, can never be saved; in this last Century the Libertines and
Fanatics in Germany, and the Netherlands, the Socinians in Poland, and the
Familists in England, what do they mainly do? but pour forth their venom
against the Divinity, personality, and righteousness of the Lord Jesus.

To shut up all, the Court Drs in the late Kings time, began much to vary their
expressions, using such, in which they might have the company of the Socinians,
as affecting to call Christ their Great master, sometimes, their Lord and
master, that a man could hardly discern by their prayers, whether they
respected most the Lord Jesus, or their very good Lord and Patron. God has
found many of them out, and cast them out; the desire of our hearts to God is,
that Familisticall. Allegorizing, Antichristian doctrines, may be shut out from
thence, and all Pulpits of the land, that the name of our Dear Lord Jesus
Christ may be magnified in us, and we in him.

And so we come to the remaining articles of the third and last charge.

The sixth article of the last charge.
That it was a weakness to be troubled for sin.

The Drs answer.
I do not remember that any such expression as this ever dropped from my mouth,
and I am persuaded that no one dare assert it with an oath, which if they could
not make much to their purpose, for with a charitable construction it might
thus be made forth, That it is a wretched, want of any real experience, for no
man is so much troubled for his sin, and laments over it, and abhorres himself,
as he that has the sense of Gods love, the more assurance, the more repentance.
weakness for one to be troubled for sin, who has the assurance of Gods love,
his sin pardoned, his person justified, sanctified, and his will converted
from, and crucified to sin, for such a one should be triumphing in the power of
faith, love, enjoying sweet heavenly communion with God, and saying, oh Death,
where is thy sting? and there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. Whereas trouble for
sin thus pardoned, and mortified, may be an engine for Satan to make a soul
question Gods love, and to bring it out of a spiritual enjoyment of God, into
a slavish fear, and disturbance.

The proof upon this article.
Note that Mrs Grip was the witness intended for the proof of this article who
did, and does attest it, and will depose it.
Mr Benjamin Woodbridge Minister of Newbery, and one of the Assistants to the
Commissioners sworn, and examined, deposes.

That Mr William Twysse of Dorcester told this Deponent either that Dr Pordage
did maintain it to him, or speak in company in his hearing, that he is no true
Christian that could not commit the greatest sin and not be troubled for the
same, or words to that effect to this Deponents best remembrance.

The eighth Article
That he knew nothing to the contrary, but that a man might keep company with
more then one woman, being taxed for keeping carnal company in London.

This witness also was not called. the Commissioners being abundantly
satisfied and tired out, but upon the fight of the Drs book he has witnessed
it under his own hand, as you shall see.
To which we may join another of the third charge. viz.

That Marriage was the way of beasts, as also that Francis Knight of
Wallingford discoursing with some of Blewbery that use to Dr Pordages, they
speak very much against the lawfullnesse of marriage, he wondering at it, asked
them whence they now came, they answered we came just now from the Dr from
Bradfield.

We shall likewise join in this place several other articles contained in the
said third charge, preferred by some of the parish. viz.

That Dr Pordage about eight years past did carry Mrs Flavell behind him on
horseback on the road to London, and about Hounslow did enquire for a private
house, and was directed to one Goodman Loughton a smith, who lives in Hessen
parish half a mile out of the road between Hounslow and Branford: and when he
came, asked if his friend behind him being sick might have entertainment: 'twas
answered yes: then the Dr left her there; Mrs Flavell in in a short time fell
in travel, but did never own being with child till she was in travel, and
then desired no company might be called in, yet the good woman of the house,
Goodman Loaders wife, called in three or four, and Mrs Flavell was then brought
to bed of a daughter, having then no husband that the world knew of, Mr Flavell
being dead.

Thirdly, That Dr Pordage came to that house and christened that child, and
named it Hannah, and the Dr came often to visit her there, and always alone
by himself.

Fourthly, That the child being put to nurse in the same parish, the Dr removed
Mrs Flavell to Kensington, and paid the Smith for her being at his house. That
a little while after, the nurse went to Kensington, to enquire for Mrs Flavell
to pay her some money, but she was removed, and the nurse saying she left a
child with her, the company smiled, and said they thought she was such a woman,
after this the nurses husband wrote a letter to the Dr, to Bradfield, that he
was twenty weeks pay behind and could not forbear, whereupon he was paid, and
shortly after sent for the child away from nurse.

Fifthly, That a little while after, this Mrs Flavell came again to the Drs
family, and a little child called Hannah, it was also brought thither, and Mrs
Flavell took the care of it ever since, and Mrs Flavell being by neighbors
asked whose child it was, said, a dear friend of hers, but none could ever
hear in the house whose child it was, and some telling Mrs Flavell that the
child was so like her, that they should take it to be hers, had she not said
the contrary, she ansvvered, as before, it was a dear friends of hers, but
never named whose.

Sixthly, That this child who was called Hannah, the last summer they changed
her name and called her Ruth: they have also changed all their names, the Dr is
called Father Abraham, his wife is also called Deborah, and old goodvvife
Pocock is called Rahab, and so the rest.

Seventhly, That Goodman Loughton's son being a soldier, savv Mrs Flavell in
Bradfield street, and spoke to her, but she took no notice of it, afterward
Mrs Flavell coming to his fathers house, his mother in discourse asked whether
she lived at Bradfield, Mrs Flavell said she knevv no such place; I will call
my son in who savv you there: Mrs Flavell said people were given to lying,
and would not have him called, and presently called for her horse and went
away, and though before she had resolved to stay all night, and never since
was there, except since the Dr has bin questioned.

The Drs answers follow viz.
To the first.
I never kept scandalous company with any woman, in London, neither was I
ever taxed for any such thing, except one by Mrs Grip, who I believe is the
witness against me, and that upon this occasion,

At the time I had my former conference with her, the heat of passion being
over, she told me I was also taxed for keeping carnal company with a woman in
London, I replied I am a man born to all manner of suffering, and told her she
saw and knew the manner of my conversation, asking her whether she believed it,
and she answered no truly, and then I solemnly protested the contrary, and this
is all the taxing I ever had from any one, at which time, I was earnest with
Mrs Grip to discover to me from whom she heard it, but she put me off, telling
me she did not believe it, and that she would tell me some other time, but from
that long discourse I had with her, fearing she was deeply tinctured with the
principles of Antinomianisme, and not knowing whether she might not be tainted
with some notions of Rantisme, which at that time were every where frequently
discoursed of, I took this occasion to try her, telling her (as near as I
remember) that there were some that affirmed, they knew nothing to the
contrary, but that a man might company with more then one woman, but to speak
the truth she let it fall without seeming to approve of any such thing. This I
solemnly a vow to be the truth, as near as I can remember, and I believe Mrs
Grip dare not swear that I mentioned any such thing, as my judgment, or
produced one Scripture or argument to defend it, I profess to the whole world
in the presence of that eye that sees through all hearts, that all such loose
principles which turn the grace of God into wantonness, and that run opposite
to the laws, morality, civility, modesty, and sobriety, or that any way
indulge wantonness, and lasciviousness, are as inconsistent with my
principles, as heaven and hell, light and darkness, are opposite one to
another, which will one day clearly appear to the world what ever I am now
thought of.

To the second viz.
That marriage is the way of beasts, the Dr gives no particular answer.

To that of Mr Knight.
That some of Blewbery that spoke against marriage, said they came from my
house.

I hope I have enough to do to answer for my self, what needs the assertions of
others be alleged as articles against me, they spoke against marriage, having
lately been at my house, therefore I must be guilty of it, surely this
consequence is neither according to natural, artificial, or divine reason.

The answer to the articles preferred against the Dr by some of the parish,
follows.

Now I come to the articles exhibited against me by some of Bradfield parish,
and as to those which concern Mrs Flavell.

I shall answer. First, Somewhat in general, touching their import and nature.

Secondly, By way of negation.

Thirdly, By way of acknowledgement.

This charge of articles has no legal reference of charge at all to me, but
is merely scandalous, importing but a libell, nothing of fact, really
criminous, being laid to my charge, which will more clearly appear, When the
erroneous circumstances of it are detected, by which also the subtilty, and
envy of my adversaries will be discovered, who positively allege nothing
against me, that may bear an action of damage at the Common Law, by which they
might suffer for their injurious dealing, yet by plausible prevaricating
circumstances would seem to make me highly criminous and guilty.

It Is confessed that the parish Were deceived in the time, and some other
circumstances, the Dr makes a great boast to no purpose, read the proof, and
the note.
Now I shall answer negatively, to many erroneous, prejudicing circumstances,
which are by design heaped together, to put a plausible face upon an envious
libell, or illegal charge.

First, Its said it was some eight years since, I brought one Mrs Flavell to
goodman Loughtons etc. which is an error, though one of the smallest, brought
in, to prejudice the more, for it was some nine years since.

Secondly, Its further said this was carrying her to London, which I deny, for
it was coming from London, where she had for some time been.

Thirdly, That I asked whether my friend behind me, being sick, might have
entertainment etc. This I also deny, she was not then sick, neither did I use
any such expressions.

Fourthly, That I never mentioned she was with child. Ans. Though I did not (it
concerning me to do it) yet she herself did own it.

Fifthly, That in a shor time she fell in travel. Ans. A short time may seem
to imply some few days, or weeks, being brought in as an aggravating
circumstance, whereas it was some four or five months after.

Sixthly, That she had no husband then as the world knew of. Ans. She owned
then to the people where she was, and does still that she had had a second
husband, which some in the What world? not of this world that we know of, nor
any one that we can learn by.
world knew of very well, whose testimonies she can and will produce, when she
has sufficient occasion offered, by a legal call thereto, who is also able
and ready to give a sufficient account when occasion serves, of her not openly
assuming her second husbands name, her estate then standing as it did, which
having concealed for that time she was in Law, she thought O silly and poor
shift!
good ever since to be called by her first husbands name: but this subtle
dealing of her adversaries, by libelling scandalls, without positively
asserting she was not married, makes her incapable or recovering any damage of
those who now We never designed any thing but this. sc. if they do not produce
the father Frewin. the Dr must be the father or the Pandar.
enuiously, yet indirectly asperse her, which the Commissioners ought to take
notice of, who should not receive such libells which tend to the blasting of
ones credit and good name* which all sober Christians (ought for the Gospels
sake) to value, and yet absolutely prove nothing of such criminous fact, which
they design seemingly to prove, nor yet give sufficient ground of calling them
to an account, for such evil and malicious scandalls; but this not directly
concerning me, I shall omit much which might be spoken of it.

Seventhly, That I came often to visit her. Ans. This is not true, it was
rather seldom, being but three times in three quarters of a year, and that in
Term time, upon urgent occasions at Law.

"Eighthly, That I removed her to Kensington. Ans. That is false, For I knew
not when she removed thither.

Ninthly, That I paid the Smith, for her being at his house. Ans. This is
another untruth, I never paid him a penny, neither did I ever agree with him
for her being there.

Tenthly, That the nurses husband wrote a letter to me at Bradfield for money
for the child's nursing. Ans. This is a mere lie, for no such letter was writ,
neither did I ever agree for to pay for the nursing of it, as the nurse and her
husband can witness.

Eleventhly, That shortly after he sent for the child away, this I also deny,
it containing two untruths in it: for first, the child was not shortly after
sent for away, neither did I send for it at all, for it was fot away by the
mother her self.

Twelfthly, That a little while after, the said little one was brought into my
family. Answer, this is also false.

Thirteenthly, As to the seventh article of this libelling charge, in which
many circumstances are produced to scandal the gentlewoman, as though she had
told a great untruth it deserves no other answer but this, that it is compacted
of many lies, nothing being there true, that really tends to prejudice her, as
I believe will appear by the event.

Thus, in this short relation, wherein there is some truth, pray take notice
how many untruthes, and mere lies are mixed with it to put a beautiful face
upon an envious and unchristian design, and is not this to bear false witness
against ones neighbor? may not any ones innocence and integrity, be in this
manner undeservedly clowded, aspersed, and wounded, which I leave to the
serious considerations of the Judges.

As to my affirmative answer, what I acknowledge is this.

About nine years since, I brought behind me from London the forementioned Mrs
Flavell, who had been of ancient and near acquaintance with me, and my family:
to one Goodman Loughtons, a Smith in Hessen, where, some four or five months
after, she was brought to bed of a daughter, which she owned to the people
where she then was, to be by a second husband, even as she still acknowledges,
and further that I visited her three times in the space of three quarters of a
year, at term time, being then engaged in a Law suit, that concerned her that
one of these times I christened her child, and called it Hannah, that afterward
her occasions requiring not so much privacy, she came to live with her ancient
acquaintance at my house, where also for some years her daughter has been with
her.

Now to take away any thing that may seem to reflect upon me in this my
acknowledgement, pray consider these subsequent particulars.

1. That I and Mr Pordage, being of very near and long acquaintance with her,
it was but a friends courtesy for me upon her desire, to carry her to this
house behind me. That she had sufficient ground to retire into some such place
in the country, in that the city air was offensive to her health.

2. In that by the counsel of able Lawyers she was advised to retire to some
private place; she being then in law, engagements, and continually subject to
arrests, by the intanglements of her first husbands estate: her brother in law,
who was her adversary, then threatening to seize on her if she were above ground.

3. In reference to my engagement in her law business, I think it material,
briefly to relate the grounds, and occasions of it in the time of her
widowhood: her brother in law began a suit with her in the Common law, which,
fearing he should be there overthrown, he removed to the Chancery. Now she
being very unfit, and incapable to manage this her self, she earnestly desired
me as an ancient and trusty friend, to undertake it. Upon this, I went to Judge
Roles, and Mr Chuts with her, who looking into her evidences, and into the will
of her late deceased husband, found that for want of one clause in it, she was
liable to many suits and arrests, and to great intanglements, and that her
interest could not be established, but by much difficulty, and at length this
was the result of the Counsel. That she must let all her estate which was
under morgage, be forfeited into the hand of some faithful friend, and so sell
it away. Hence, I, through much importunity, laid down some hundred pounds,
rescued the morgage, and so became interested in a suit at Chancery, which
lasted three years. Now, from this may further appear sufficient ground. First,
why I brought her to that private house. Secondly, why I came to her in the
time of her retirement, I then received money from her to follow her suite.
Thirdly, why I came alone, it being then her interest to be concealed, being
subject to arrests.

I shall proceed to add some few circumstances more, which may serve to clear
me before all sober persons.

First, At my coming I told the people my name, and that I dwelt at Could not
you have saved all this pains by one certificate, where her hushand lived, and
died? had not you four months time, before your sentence?
Reding, that I was minister of St Lawrence Church, knowing the gentlewoman to
be sober and pious, now, had I been, as my enemies enviously pretend, I might
have concealed my name, quality, and place of residence.

We discovered to them, that the gentlewoman had an estate in the bulwork at
London, and rents there to receive, which they might enquire after, (as they
did for their security) now this was not the way to cover a work of darkness.

Thirdly, She sometime went to London to the Lawyers, whilst she was there,
some belonging to that family accompaning her, who found, that as she had
related she was in great troubles at Law, and were convinced that she
retired on that account.

Now in reference to most of those particulars, in which I have contradicted
and denied the alleged circumstances, and further vindicated my self, they are
exactly agreeing with what I have in writing confessed and acknowledged, by
Loughton himself, from whom this charge is pretended to be received, and by the
nurse of the child, subscribed by them both before witnesses, which
acknowledgement I shall produce, when I see occasion.

And by this I hope it may appear, to moderate, sober, and judicious men, that
this libelling charge, drawn up so falsely, enviously, and yet so subtily, It
was called upon as soon as known.
calling from the dead a business past some nine or ten years since since,
(which though it were criminous) as it is not) were legally to prejudice by the
Act of oblivion, or general pardon, as all other things pretended to be spoken
or acted by me before 1651. according to the judgment of judicious men, which
I leave to the Commissioners to consider of; I say, that this is but the effect
of the evil and wicked policy of my accuser, brought forth to prejudice and
overcloud that pure and innocent principle which I profess, and faithfully
live to; and the better to cover that evil design they have against my person,
and livelihood.

And now I appeal to the Commissioners, and to all that are pious, and sober
minded, whether my enemies do not deal very unreasonably, enviously, and unlike
Christians, from this business so long since past, which nothing criminous, is
positively objected against me, to draw such horrid conclusions, as commonly to
report, that I now live in base lust and wantonness: notwithstanding my
commending of, and owning the virgin life, I say, whether this be not exceeding
hard measure, and ungodly dealing, let all judge But I see that design of the
Devil in it, which mine enemies may be ignorant of, which is, to overcloud, and
darken by monstrous lies, and scandalls, which are the smoke of the bottomless
pit, that We desire the reader (if he please to take the pains,) to consider
the animad. upon his virgin life, with these that follow, in answer to his
pretended holiness, and swelling words of vanity.
life of purity, chastity, mortification, self denial, and heavenly
enjoyments, which God has favored me to live in; and so to affright all from
my acquaintance, which otherwise might very much prejudice, and overthrow his
kingdom. For the old serpent knows very well, as also my near friends and
acquaintance, that for above these four years, even since the time of my great
trialls, by the extraordinary temptations and representations of the devil,
that I have been abstracted more then ordinary, from all outward things, giving
my self up wholly to prayer, watchfulness, mortification, and constant self
denial; in dying to all earthly pleasures, even to things permitted, and
accounted lawful, as finding many things which ordinarily embraced, to be
great hindrances of the souls progress to God, and great burdens to a spirit
which tasted much of that tree of life, which grows in the midst of the
Paradise of God, and great cloys to a soul that sees through the vail of the
sensitive nature, into the spiritual glory of eternity. But what I have
enjoyed and experimented in this time of my extraordinary mortification, and
self denial, in the death of the animal man, and rising of Christ's image in
me, is not seasonable now to declare; yet, for the glory of my God, and the
undeceiving of those who strangely mistake me: Thus much in all humility I must
say, that did my accusers and my enemies know, what I have enjoyed in this way
of the cross, of the secret hidden treasure of eternity, and of the outgoings
of divine goodness, were they but acquainted with those discoveries of
celestial glory, instillations of the heavenly dew, and secret touches of the
holy Ghost, did they but know those bright irradiations of eternal light,
those strong motions of divine life, and pleasant streams of eternal love,
together with those deep sufferings, in bearing Christ's cross, which I and
many in my family, have in this time experienced, they durst not thus condemn
and judge me as an evil doer, and one that lives in the lusts of the flesh; but
my God has taught me whilst they curse, to pray for them, whilst they design
to ruin me, to love them, and whilst they hate me, to say with Christ, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

This I thought fit, in all humility, to annex to that libelling charge,
concerning Mrs Flavell: from which I have undeservedly suffered so much, by the
malice of the devil, and now I shall proceed to answer the remaining articles,
one of which is intermixed with the former seven that concern Mrs Flavell,
which is this:

That we have changed our names.
It Is well known that we It is false, for Mary Pocock subscribes her name thus,
Your friend, formerly called Mary Pocock, and before the Commissioners, she did
always subscribe her name with an R. though she is able to write legibly. the
R. standing for Rahab.
own and subscribe our names in our civil converse with the world, as this and
my former answers testify. I shall therefore wait to see whether any one dare
swear to this article, and though we did in our own private family call one
another by scripture names, yet I conceive it did not concern the civil
Magistrate to take cognizance of such a thing, it being not practiced to make
any disturbance or confusion in the State,

The proofs of the aforesaid articles.
The aforesaid Susanna Grip,

This Deponent further says, that she told the Dr, she heard it was reported,
he should keep company with a woman in London, and asked him if it were true.
To which the Dr answering, asked her, who informed her so, the Deponent
replied, she would tell him; whereupon the Dr smiled at it, and was not
troubled, but denied it, saying no. But he made her a further answer, that he
did allow of such things, as she understood him, but what his express words
then were, she cannot remember.

And the Drs answer to the said article being read unto her, she says, she
does not remember any such passages, as are therein mentioned, viz. that he
should say I am a man born to all manner of suffering, and that the Deponent
knew his life and conversation, but she does confess she did then reply, that
she did not believe any such thing of him, and being cross examined, she
further says, that (as she remembers) the Dr did speak that passage, (of
allowing that they may have more then one woman) as his own judgment, and not
as another man's; and this was spoken in the Deponents own Court, (no body else
being then present) about three or four years since.

Roger Loughton of Heston in the County of Middlesex Locksmith, sworn, and
examined.
This Deponent says, that about nine years since or upwards, Dr Pordage
brought to this Deponents house Mrs Flavell behind him, under the name of Mrs
Frewin, and that both the Dr and the said Mrs Flavell did ask for entertainment
for her, and that they did ask what they should give for her board, and her son
Stephens, and that they did bargain for eight shillings a week, and then he
carried her away and she came not till after Christmas, and how she then came,
whether in a cart, with her trunck and clothes, or otherwise, he knows not:
but the Dr did not then come with her, and after she had been there a while,
the Deponents wife conceived she was with child, which she denied, saying it
was a timpany, and that she remained there till between Easter and Whitsuntide,
when and where she was brought to bed of a daughter, and she did not desire any
store of company to come to her labor, though the Deponents wife did desire
it; and after she had been a short time delivered, the Dr came, and baptized
the child in the Deponents chamber, and named it Hannah, and after that the Dr
called the Deponent aside into his orchard, and prayed him to find out a
private place, two or three miles from the Deponents house, where Mrs Flavell
might go now and then to see her child.

The Deponent answered, it would be inconvenient, because it was a time of
soldiers, and the corn way high, and thereupon he did not look out as the Dr
desired. And he further says, that when the Nurse did bring the child
ofttimes to see the said Mrs Flavell, she would not permit her son Stephen to
call it She was afraid of the proverb, viz. children and fools tell truth.
sister, saying it is not my child, Stephen, it is Nurses. Afterward the said
Mrs Flavell departed from the Deponents house, to Kensington, where she
remained about a month, and that the Deponent having occasion to go to London,
called at Kensington by the way, to speak with her, but she was gone from
thene, whereupon the Deponent told that her child was not well, and then two
gentlewomen of the house told the Deponent, that she had denied to them that
she had any other child but her son Stephen. And the Deponent further says,
that the Dr came to his house three or four times in Term time, and that both
the Dr and the said Mrs Flavell did inform the Deponent, that she was marrird
to one Mr Frewin, a Minister, about six weeks, but she was a widow, as both of
them said, when they came to the Deponents house.

Elizabeth Benwell maidservant to Mr Ellis of Shinfield, formerly servant to
the Dr, sworn and examined, deposes,

That Mrs Flavell did usually lie in the Drs bedchamber, during the time the
Deponent was servant there, which was about a year and a quarter.

The aforesaid George Aslet.

This Deponent further says, that about a month since, Good wife Knap told
him that she being at the Drs house, Mrs Flavell was very angry with her, and
threatened to have her whipped for saying the child Hannah was Mrs Flavells child,
and that she then denied she had any other child, except Stephen her son, and
that when the said Goodwife Knap denied she had said any such thing, and began
to be outrageous, the old and young Mrs Pordage desired her to be pacified,
saying, happily it might be another woman should say so.

Animad. 6.
Let the reader observe, that to that article, that marriage is the way of
beasts, the Dr gives no particular answer, and good reason, for to affirm it
before the face of the country, had been very monstrous, and to deny it, had
been notorious.

In the business of Mrs Flavells child Hannah, we desire the reader to
observe, First, That the Dr in his answer to this article would call the child
by no surname at all, but only Hannah, and being demanded by the Commissioners
to tell them Hannah what? what besides Hannah, even to the derision and wonder
of all standers by, he would by no means give in any particular answer but
Hannah, and I will say nothing but Hannah, and Hannah what you will, observe
that the Dr should carry away the mother with child to a private place, and
after baptize the child, and take mother and child back again into his own
family, for some years, and yet not know the surname seems to us incredible.

But what should the man say, it must have been called by him either Hannah
Frewin, or Hannah Flavell, or Hannah Pordage, or some other Hannah: the first,
Hannah Frewin had been to make the child daughter of a man, that for ought yet
appears never was in the world, for the second, Hannah Flavell had been to make
her the child of a father dead two or three years before she was born; for the
last, Hannah Pordage if it were true, (as it is very possible) yet it was not
safe as yet, as yet the times will not blaze it, there is a pure word wrested
to a ranting sense viz. All things are lawful, but not expedient.

Secondly, Consider that in open Court, Mrs Flavell appearing and being
demanded by thee Register what her name was, answered Mary Flavell, and being
demanded the second time, gave the same answer, Mary Flavell, and being minded
by the Register that surely she did forget her self, her name was Mary Frewin,
she answered, Mary Flavell, or Mary Frewin which you please.

Thirdly, The child was often denied by her to be her child, and commonly taken
for her niece, till it was discovered by Roger Loughton, at whose house the
child was born, the timpany proving to be a daughter, whose testimony is uery
considerable. the man being rational, discreet, refusing all occasions of
being tempted, for before his testimony was given in, the Dr with all his women
sent for him to an Inn in Hounslow, but he refused, the next day being Tuesday
they came to his house at Heston, but he was gone to Branford, whether the Dr
and his company went and inquired for his shop, where they found him, and would
needs persuade him to go with them to the tavern to drink a pint of wine, he
replied, he had no body to look to his shop, the Dr told him he would give a
boy sixpence to look to his shop in the mean time, he answered no, he was about
his business, if they had any thing to say to him he would give them an answer
there right, he thinks if he would have been so base as to have been tampered
into silence, he might have had a round some of money, This was toward the end
of the last harvest.
the discovery is observable for these two providence in it.

First, The manner which was this, a plain country man of Bradfield went to
Heston to see his brother living there, with whom, on the Lords day, he went to
Haworth to hear the sermon, where also was this Roger Loughton, a frequent
hearer there, after the evening exercise there were two children baptized, and
all being finished by a providence, the country man of Bradfield, and his
brother, and Roger Loughton, met and went home together, going in the way the
country man began to discourse, and said to his brother, I have seen more to
day then I have seen these two years, I have seen a child baptized, our Dr will
not baptize, Roger Loughton not knowing who the man was, nor where he lived,
asked his country, and his Drs name, the man told him Dr Pordage, at a place
called Bradfield in Berks, Loughton smiled and questioned the man about Mrs
Flavell, and how many children she had, the man replied one, a boy named
Stephen, and being asked whether she had not a daughter, was answered by the
country man, no, never a child that we know of but only her boy Stephen, R.
Loughton said, yes, she has, and I knew when the Dr would baptize, for she was
brought to bed at my house of a daughter, and the Dr came and baptized it
himself, and called it Hannah.

Secondly, The second providence is the time when, and that was about a month
before the Commissioners were authorized by the Ordinance; therefore whereas
the Dr says we rake in the grave of the dead, we reply the scandal was
prosecuted as soon as it was discovered, there was not two months respite
betvveen the one and the other.

The rest of the articles contained in this third charge, being most of them
concerning the Drs visions, both of the Dr and the rest of his family, and
others of his followers, and of their strange and unheard of apparitions,
revelations, trances and raptures, converse with Angels both good and All
principles and practices, tending to Rantisme, Diabolisme, Sorcery, and
seducing of others.
bad, shall not be here particularly distinguished, but for brevity sake put
together as they were exhibited together with his answers thereunto, and the
proofs together afterward as follows.

That he has very frequent and familiar converse with Angels.

First, That a great Dragon came into his chamber, with a tail of eight yards
long, four great teeth, and did spit fire at him, and that he contended with
the Dragon.

Secondly, That his own Angel came and stood by him while he was expostulating
with the Dragon, and that his Angel came in his own shape and fashion, the same
clothes, band and cuffs, the same banstrings, and that his Angel stood by him,
and upheld him.

Thirdly, that Mrs Pordage and Mrs Flavell had their Angels standing by them
also, Mrs Pordage singing sweetly, and keeping time upon her breast, and that
her cbildren saw the spirits coming into the house, and said, Look there
Father, and that the spirits did often come into the chamber, and drew the
curtains when they were in bed.

Fourthly, That the said Mr Pordage confessed that a strong enchantment was
upon him, and that the Devil did appear to him in the shape of Everard, and in
the shap^ of a fiery Dragon, and the whole roof of the house was full of spirits.

Fifthly, That Mrs Margeret Pender acquainted wit^ the doctrine of spirits, and
pretended to be converted by visions of Angels, and whose confession follows,
does thin^ that she was bewitched by them of Bradfield.

Her confession to Mr Fowler who penned it from her own mouth before witness.

She was taken ill upon Wednesday in the afternoon in July 1653. about nine a
clock the same night, there appeared unto her the vision of a man standing at
her beds feet, on Thursday the next day he had a book in his hand, and stood by
her all that day and said nothing, on Friday it spoke, saying to her, why art
thou so discomforted, she answered, a wounded conscience who can bear, he
replied, Observe how the Devil will speak Gospel for his own bloody ends.
he that has wounded thee will make the whole, then she spoke much of her own
unworthiness, he replied there was worth in Christ, and he had paid a ransom
for her, then he told her that that book in his hand was the book of the Lamb,
and that her name was written in it, she saw the book, a broad book with a
parchment cover, she saw writing in it, and then was she Beware of false joy.
lifted up with a great deal of joy.

About four a clock the same Friday. the dark Angel came and stood by the other
vision, with a knife in his hand, and said thou have had a great deal of joy,
and offering her the knife, bid her dispatch her self, and she should enter
into that eternal rest her soul so much thirsted after, upon this she
trembled, the bed shook, and her Mrs held her.

The same Friday, she had visions presented upon the wall, she saw the world,
and the resurrection of the dead, and the son of man appearing in the clouds
of heaven.

She saw clearly the vision of a friend of hers, of London, in her chamber at
Southcott, her friend was much inclined to this way, she much wondered at it,
and told Mrs Pordage of it, who answered her, alas so do we, we see abundance
of those we never knew before, when once they come into our way.

On Saturday Dr Pordage came to her being sent for, and prayed in a very
strange language, she did not very well understand what he said, she heard him
say, Lord, but nothing of Jesus Christ, but the abyss. and the bottomless
eternity.

She heard a great noise of drums and trumpets, she asked the Dr what the
rattling of the drums and trumpets meant, he answered her, it was an alarm to
the spiritual war.

One of the nights she saw a vision of young Mr Daniel Blagrave, which came to
her beds side, she took him by the hand, and it felt cold, she asked the Dr
what it meant, he answered her that the coldness of the hand, did signify his
beginning to be cold to vanity.

She asked Dr Pordage what the visions meant she saw upon the wall, he answered
that they durst not reveal one another visions, he did not question, but God
would discover himself, and reveal wonderful things to her.

She was from Wednesday noon till Monday noon, and did not eat one piece of
bread, but some times drank a little water and sugar, and she says she was not
sick at all after the first two hours, and when she was about to eat, she had
a voice came to her viz, The Devil will do more then some Quakers, for he will
quote the Scripture, but it is as some of them do, o deceive.
we are not to live upon bread, but upon every word of God, and upon that voice
she did not eat.

She says that she has oftentimes seen at London flashes of light in her
chamber, and at last heard a voice which put her into a very great fear and
sweat, saying to her, thou have married a lump of clay, but thou must return to
thy first husband, which is thy Savior, thou must go to Joppa: And upon this
she was convinced that these visions were of the Devil, because the voice was
clean contrary to the Scriptures. she says that she has heard it reported at
At Mr D. Brs where she then lived.
Southcott, that ere long Dr Pordage should have power from on high to bestow
saving graces on whom he pleased.

That Dr Pordage preached that water baptism was not the ordinance of Jesus
Christ.

That about Michaelmas in the year 1653 he was commanded by his Angel or from
Heaven, to give off preaching and take no tithes, but since he conceives he
has had a dispensation.

That in July last 1654 he was to be taken up into heaven, and it is said by
some, he has been there, and dismissed again about his business.

That he cursed the people of Bradfield in the pulpit, and their posterity for
ever, in this world, and in the world to come.

That he faith goodwife Pocock sings the highest hymns very sweetly, that
she knows not a word when she begins, but is taken with a burning about her
heart, and when she has done she cannot repeat a word, if it were to gain the
world.

That goodwife Pocock lately came to Collonell Evelyn, saying she had a word to
him from God. viz. have nothing to do with that just man.

The testimony of Richard Seyward. September the 9. 1650.

I came into Bradfield Parsonage in the evening, and there I heard a very
mournful cry, as if it had been one in extreme pains, but who it was I knew
not, but it continued all the time that I was at the door, which was well near
a quarter of an hour, and so it continued when I went away, and then the tenth
day in the morning I came unto Mr Francis Pordage at the parsonage of Stanford
Dingley, and he enquired of me what I did think of the noise that I heard, I
told him I could not tell, then he related to me, the Lord was about a great
work in this kingdom, and to this nation, and the cause of this cry was one in
travel, and the pains were so extreme, that if I had stayed there but a little
longer, I might have heard it as far as the town, but now she was delivered of
a man-child, and the travel was at an end, and that he and others were eye
witnesses of it.

That in Dr Pordages house in Bradfield, the new Jerusalem has been seen, to
come down from heaven, all of precious stones, and in the new Jerusalem there
was a globe, which globe was eternity, and in the eternity were all the Saints.

That at the said Drs house, the face of God has been seen, not as Moses saw
him, but the very face, as one man may see another.

That one being in the said Drs house in a trance, the said Drs daughter being
by her, said that she saw two Angels all in white, with crowns over her head.

That he might say any thing to the men of the world.
I answer, to the best of my remembrance, I never False, read the animadversion
on his protestation.
uttered any such unchristian maxim, much less ever held it as my judgment,
and I confidently believe, there is no one in the earth that dare witness it,
with an oath.

I know very well that Mr Fowler has been, if not the author, yet the
reporter of my holding this monstrous tenet, for he has confidently averred,
and often insinuated into some of the gentry of this County, and into his own
proselites, that I am a Let the reader judge whether he is a Familist or net.
Familist, and it is my principle to say, or unsay any thing that may make to
my own advantage, which God knows is a sad scandal, and a monstrous untruth,
and clearly appears to those who know the integrity of my principles and
conversation, to be a blur cast upon me, from the contrivance of subtle
machivillian policy, to prejudice all I say or answer to those horrid things
objected against me, for if this be once settled in those who are my judges, it
is vain for me to answer, deny, or avow any thing. But the Lord forgive my
adversary, for this his unchristian dealing, and grant he may repent of it,
before he comes to give up his last account, before the great Tribunal of
Christ.

That he has frequent and familiar converse with Angels.
As this article is presented in general terms, without expressing whether the
Communion be visible or invisible, I do not see how it can touch me, though my
enemies were my Judges, because every true christian has frequent Communion or
converse with Angels, as you may see, solidly and clearly proved from Scripture
by the Lord Lawrence, one very learned and pious, now President of the Lord
Protectours counsel, in his book entitled, one communion and war with Angels.

Concerning the vision of a Dragon, and the apparition of spirits.
I may deny these four articles, as they are taken together and expressed in
those terms, and in that manner, in which they are set down in my accusation,
for I believe none dare swear the measures, or teeth of the Dragon, with the
appearances of my own Angel etc. without incurring the crime of perjury.

I will not confess any apparitions in particular, till they be proved, least
I should seem to accuse my self, they being brought in as a crime against me,
and as instruments to condemn me.

Yet in general I acknowledge, that some four years since there were many
strange and wonderful apparitions in my house: But what can these in justice
amount to, though attested by oath, and confessed particularly by my self, when
brought before those who profess themselves christians, and acquainted with
the history of the holy Scriptures; pray was not Job a pious, sincere, and
eminently righteous man, yet how was he scared with dreams, and terrified
through visions. Chap. 7. ver. 14. Did not Zachariah the Prophet. Chap. 3. see
Satan standing at the right hand of Joshua to resist him. Did not John Rev. 12.
in a vision behold a great red Dragon, that made war against Michael and the
holy Angels? and was not Christ himself tempted of the Devil, by voice and
visions. Mat. 4. ver. 6.8. Now the servant is not greater then the Lord. Joh.
15.20. and therefore not exempted from the like attempts of the Devil? I
beseech you consider whether this earth be not the place where the Devil walks
up and down, seeking whom he may devour: how then can Bradfield or any other
place, he exempted from his appearing when God permits, and may not all this be
for the manifesting of his glory, goodness, and power? and who can tell whose
family may be next exposed, by Gods permission to be tried and proved by the
representations of Satan, and I desire you seriously to consider, how any such
apparitions raised by the Devil, and permitted by God, for his own glory,
argue me either ignorant, scandalous, or insufficient, surely it rather argues,
that he has blessed me with a strong faith in that he permitted such great
trials, and made me isntrumental to overcome them, by prayer and fasting: if
it can be proved that I ever so much as looked toward the unlawful art of
black magic, or that any evil spirits were raised up, by any compact of mine,
explicit or implicit, or that these evil apparitions, were subdued and
overcome by any other means, then by Gods blessing upon our fasting and
prayers, I shall judge my self worthy of punishment.

But otherwise it is hard measure to be prosecuted, for the malice of the devil
toward me, inflicting what I was passive in, and could not help, especially by
those who profess the Christian religion, and know that the God of heaven
ruler over all, permitting and disposing of whatever comes to pass.

That Mrs Margaret Pendar does think she was bewitched by them of Bradfield.
Here is a long and tedious relation, in which truth and Her confession is true
in every particular.
untruth are mixed together: the whole structure of which relation, so far as
it concerns me, depends on this weak basis and foundation, That she thinks she
was bewitched by them of Bradfield.

But what a sad thing is this for my accuser, to impeach me for that which
might endanger (if true,) my estate and life, upon the thoughts of a
discomposed maid; because she thinks I sent those visions, therefore I must be
thus arraigned: but for my part, I do not believe she dares say so, much less,
swear it, having no grounds at all for it.

I shall briefly relate some circumstances, which concern this business, and
may serve something to clear it up. Before these visions of hers, I had never
seen her as I know of, nor exchanged so much as a word with her. In the time of
her visions Mr Daniel Blagrave, whose servant then she was, came for me
himself, to fetch me to his house to visit her: to which motion I yielded,
being suitable to the law of Christian charity, and when I came, I had no
conference with her, but in the presence of Mr and Mrs Blagrave, with others
that were then present: and from this visit, there arose a rumor that I was a
conjurer, and a sorcerer, which report was spread abroad by two, that carry the
name of Ministers of Christ, Mr Fowler, and Mr Ford: the last of which so
exceeded the bounds of charity, and Christian moderation, as in his sermon at
the Assizes, to call me a horrid blasphemer, asserting that the Devil was as
visibly familiar in my family, as my own servants, and so excited Magistrates
to persecute me.

As for those What one untruth? declare it if you can, Mrs Pendar confessed all
this freely, and it was written from her own mouth before witness. This answer
of yours is an overgrown untruth.
untruths which are mixed in the relation, I shall not trouble my self to
answer them, for I know when they come to be sworn to, and to be cross
examined, they will appear to be but the fulling of that wicked Maxim,
Calumniare audacter aliquid haerebit. Calumniate boldly, something will stick;
which being a piece of Jesuiticall policy, has been practiced by my accuser,
in this confused Rapsody of Articles.

That my chamber has been filled with spirits.
I hope none will be so unadvised as to swear to this article, being spirits
are immateriall, and Silly nonsense, for he does c^nfesse in print p. 73. that
the Dragon almost fill^d a la^ge room.
cannot take up place, or fill a room.

That I preached that water Baptism was not the Ordinance of God.
It was never so See Franc. Knights testimony under his hand.
preached by me, all that then I affirmed was this, that water Baptism could
not be proved to be the Ordinance of Christ, by way of eminency, so called from
that text of scripture, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all nations, Baptizing them in the
name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost; for the Baptism may very well be
understood of the Baptism of the spirit, which by the disciples was
instrumentally administered to all converts: yet I deny not water baptism to be
a gospel Ordinance, instituted by John, as the chief instrument under God, from
whom he received his Commission, and that this was the sum of what I then
preached, I can prove by oath.

That about 1653. I was commanded by my Angel, or from Heaven to give off
preaching, and to take no more Tithes, but that since I have had a dispensation.
I believe no one that has the fear of God before his eyes, dare attest this
article by oath, as it is here stated, this is answer enough to such a thing,
which is merely brought in as an odium by my accuser, the more to prejudice me.

That in July 1654 I was taken up into Heaven, etc.
If Paul were now upon the earth, he were in danger to be accused by my
accuser, for his rapture into Heaven, or Paradise, but this concerning me will
prove but some idle dream, created by some bodies fancy, to make people wonder
at me.

That I cursed the people of Bradfield in my Pulpit, and their posterity for
ever, etc.
This article was one of those heard and examined, four years since, by the
Committee of plundered Ministers, from which I was acquitted by them, these
witnesses, viz. Richard Luington, John Hambleton, Mary Pocoek, Richard Holmes,
with four more attested by oath, that I did not curse the people of Bradfield,
for as it was expressed in the article, the testimony of these witnesses was
this: That they being present September the 29. the Dr expressed himself thus,
Bradfield is a place, partly made famous, partly infamous, by reason of the
false and lying reports that are abroad. But I say, cursed be the tongue, and
the mouth that shall say, that what is done by the power of God, is done by the
power of the devil, what one Parishioner is here cursed by me, except any ones
conscienc accuses him, of the guilt of that forementioned blasphemy.

Concerning Goodwife Pocock singing Hymns and spiritual songs.
She acknowledges it as her gift, bestowed by God, being according to the
gifts of Christians, in the Primitive time, but this does not directly concern
me.

Concerning the same persons coming to Col. Eveling, and saying she had a word
from God, viz. have nothing to do with that just man.
She owneth these words, and looks upon me as a just man, and a No denier of
Christ is a Christian, much less, a true one.
true Christian, and believes that Col. Eveling will one day know, she gave
good counsel upon good grounds.

Touching Seywards depositions, of the birth of a child, and one being in
travel.
This was one of the former articles, of which I was acquitted by the
forementioned Committee.

Mrs Elizabeth Pordage, and Mary Pocock, asserting on oath, that there was no
woman in travel, nor any child born, nor any other cry heard, but of those at
prayer; which was also witnessed on oath, by Mrs Frances Pordage.

That in my house the new Jerusalem has been seen to come down from Heaven,
and that in it was a Globe, which Globe was Eternity, and in that Eternity all
the Saints.
As to the substance of this article, if God have favored any with such a
vision, surely they would be no more ashamed to own it, when called to it, then
John was to write Rev. 21.1. That he saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, come
down from God out of Heaven, where he also describes it, by all the most
precious stones in the creation, but in reference to my family, I believe none
dare attest they heard this spoken by any of them, which I believe will prove
some It is now-confessed by himself in print p. 77. and Susan Day says, she
saw it with her eyes. See her testimony.
groundless imagination.

That in my house God has been seen face to face, etc.
As this article is stated, I shall give no other answer but this, who dares
swear to it? or what proof can be brought of it?

The proofs of the aforesaid articles are as follow.
Concerning the converse with Angels, or rather Devils, ^ombating with the
Dragon, and the visions of Mrs Pendar.

Mr Christopher Fowler further sworn, and examined, deposes.
That about Michaelmas last, the Deponent speaking with Mr This Gentleman was
summoned to appear, but did not.
Daniel Blagrave the elder, concerning the visions of Angels, that were in his
house, in reference to Mrs Pendar. The Deponent told him, the said Mr Blagrave
he did believe he was able to say much to the purpose, it being in his house,
and desired him thereupon to speak his knowledge of the truth, both in point of
conscience, and in point of reputation, he being censured for supporting such a
man as Dr Pordage. The said Mr Blagrave answered, Why the Dr does converse with
Angels, and I believe when he comes before the Commissioners, he will not deny
but he does converse with Angels. To which the Deponent, replied, if he does
confess them Angels, we will prove them Devils. And he further says, that he
has credibly heard something tending to this purpose, that Dr Pordage has
seen the To the question of the white vision, the Dr would not answer at any
hand.
vision of the said Mr Blagrave somewhat a white vision.

And he further says, that the entrance of his discourse with Mr Blagrave, was
in reference to the visions that were seen by the bodily eyes, and mentioned
the visions of Mrs Pendar, that were by her reported to be such; upon this he
understood Mr Blagrave that the purport of his answer was a visible converse
with Angels.

This Deponent further says, that in conference with Mr Daniel Blagrave the
younger, he asked him if he could not speak to the Drs converse with Angels, he
answered (as far as the Deponent remembers) he could speak much.

And the Deponent further says, that Mrs Pendar being asked by him, did
acknowledge (on Thursday last at London) that at Mr Blagraves house at
Southcott, she heard a great noise of drums, and trumpets, which Dr Pordage
(who was sent for to her) told her was the alarm to the spiritual war. And
that one night she saw the vision of young Mr Daniel Blagrave come to her bed
side, and she took him by the hand, which hand felt cold, which Dr Pordage
expounded to her thus, That the coldness of his hand signified that he began
to be cold to vanity, and that she asked the Dr what the visions meant upon the
wall, and he replied, Mrs, we do not use to reveal one another visions.

The aforesaid Susanna Grip.

This Deponent further says that the Dr told her that a great many spirits
hovered about his window, and kept a noise, and that he told the company, there
could come in but one at a time, and that a great dragon did come in with a
long tail, and great eyes, and vangs, and did spit fire at him, and that his
own Angel stood by him, in his own shape, in the same clothes, band and cuffs,
and did protect him: and that the Dr likewise told her that Mrs Flavell and Mrs
Pordage had their Angels likewise standing by them; and that he overcame the
Dragon, and that his Children saw the spirits, and said, look there father,
(they being not afraid after they had fasted and prayed,) and he further said,
that the spirits did afterward come into their chamber, and drew the
curtains, and looked on them, but they would not take notice of them.

She further says, that the Dr told her the spirits came about three days
after they had fasted and prayed, and did flash open the curtains, and look in
upon them.

The aforesaid John Grip.

This Deponent further says, that he was at Mr Blagraves house, when Mrs
Pendar saw the visions mentioned in her confession, and that the said Mrs
Pendar said, she saw a man in white, (as she thought) with the Lambs book: and
the said man told her, that her name was written in the book, and that she
heard a watch going, and that there appeared another in the likeness of a
black man, with a knife, which he offered to her. And the Deponent further
says, that at another time, at his house, the said Mrs Pendar did inform him,
that Dr Pordage had said he had power to bestow the gifts and graces of the
spirit, upon whom he pleased.

At other times he says, he has had often conference with Mr Blagrave, and at
one time above the rest, walking over the fields toward Southcot, we fell into
discourse concerning Dr Pordage, and the said Mr Blagrave did then tell him,
that the Dr did go about to persuade him to leave off all employment, and to
sell his estate, and to retire to his house, for his house was the ark, as
Noah's ark was, to receive all those that must be saved; this was sometimes this
last summer, and that Mr Blagrave did seem very much to slight it, and asked
the Deponent what he thought he should have got by it, had the Dr prevailed. To
which the Deponent replied, that he thought the Dr had a grand design in it,
for Mr Blagrave being accounted one of the wisest men in the country, if the
Dr had prevailed to have drawn him away, he might likewise have drawn away most
of the country, and then he would have set up himself like Mahomet.

The Deponent further says, that Mr Daniel Blagrave the younger told him, when
the spirit came upon the Dr, he would leap over pales of a great height, about
five foot and half high, as the Deponent could conceive by his relation, and
this was told him within twelve months last past.

Susanna Grip, daughter of the said John Grip, aged 21 years, sworn, and
examined.
This Deponent says, that about three or four years since in the Deponents
mothers kitchen, she heard Dr Pordage say, that a great Dragon came into his
chamber, and that he expostulated and contended with it, and that the Dragon
did spit fire at him, and that his own Angel did appear to him in the shape of
a man, with his band, and his clothes, and bandstrings, and did support him,
whilst he contended with the Dragon. And the Deponent further says, that she
heard the Dr say, that the spirits did come into his chamber, and drew the
curtains, and looked upon them; and that the Dr likewise said, they were
affrighted at first, but afterward when they were used to it, they were not.
And she says, that she heard several other things to this purpose, which now
she cannot remember to depose.

And this Deponent being cross examined, further says, That he declared, that
the Angel which appeared with the band and bandstrings, etc. was the Drs own
Angel, and not the Angel of another, to the best of her remembrance.

The aforesaid Elizabeth Benwell, further deposes,

That she saw something like a star, in the red chamber in the Drs house, by
the beds leg, it was light, and somewhat like a star, but she cannot say it
was a star yet it was in the night, and no other light in the room, to the
best of her remembrance.

She further says, This Deponent was formerly servant there.
she has heard music at several times in the Drs house, when she did not
know that any Instruments, or Musicians were in the house; and that she heard
it in the kitchen, and in her Mrs closet, and did app^ehend the same to be near
her, but did see none playing.

The Dr being asked, does confess before the Commissioners, that he has seen
many dreadful apparitions of Devils at his house, and that his family did see
them, and that a great Dragon did come into his house, with a long tail, and
great teeth, but he does deny that he said his Angel did protect him. He
further says, that about four years since he had apparitions both of good and
bad Angels, for three weeks together, at his own house, but from that time to
this they have ceased in He has still visions, but not apparitions, he has
the same object still, Angels and Devils, (it appears by his words) but not in
the same manner. He has had (to use Mr Bl. words, who best knows his words and
meaning) visible converse with Angels formerly, that is, apparitions, and he
has them still, but not in the same manner. Now they be visions, his inward
senses (as he does phrase it) are open.
that manner.

He does also deny that ever any Angel appeared in his clothes, band and
cuffes, as also that his Angel did never appear to him in his life, in any
visible shape.

He further says, that he never saw Mrs Flavels, nor Mrs Pordages Angels
standing by them; but it does not therefore follow but that they might stand by
them: and being asked, whether he did not relate the same to Mrs Grip, he
answers, he This answer is like Mary Pococks oath, see animadver. the first.
can neither affirm nor deny it, for he does not remember whether he did or no.

He further says he cannot affirm nor deny, that he related to Mrs Grip, that
his children saw the spirits, and cried, look there father. But he says, he
does positively deny that he related, that the spirits did come into his
chamber, and And yet he does grant in his book p. 72. about the last line, that
a spirit did on a sudden draw his bed curtains, about the middle of the night,
this perjury is like the other, supra.
draw the curtains when they were in bed, and will prove the deposition that
shall affirm it, to be perjury.

He further says, that he has daily converse with Angels, and that he has
heard it credibly reported that he has every day two angels dressing of him,
and that they who reported it to him, said, they had it from the mouths of two
Ministers.

The aforesaid Mr John Tickhill,

This Deponent further says, that a summons being issued for the appearance of
Susanna Day, The messenger went for her, and met with her on Tuesday night
last, being the fifth instant, at this Deponents house, and that she was
willing to come, but could not in regard of present distemper, but the said
Susanna (having reported to several people in Abingdon and in particular, to
this Deponents wife, that she was at Dr Pordages house, and that the people
there told her, her eyes were opened, and she saw at that that time, the new
Jerusalem come down from Heaven, all of precious stones, and so on according as
in the article,) the said Susanna told the Deponent on the said Tuesday night,
that the last time she was at the Drs house, she saw the new Jerusalem come
down from Heaven, a city four square, with borders of precious stones, and she
being asked whether it was not her fancy only, she answered, she saw it really.

The Deponent further says, that he asked the said Susanna whether she saw any
Angels in the Drs house, to which she answered no. But she said the Drs
daughter did see two Angels holding a crown over her the said Susanna's head.

On the Drs behalf.

Mrs Elizabeth Blagrave wife of Daniel Blagrave of Southcott Esquire sworn and
examined, deposes,

That she never heard Mrs Pendar say she was bewitched by those of Bradfield,
but she said Mrs Pendar And did not the Dr say so too, and did not some more
say so likewise, and speak high of it, and piffe at low dispensations, but she
has since confessed that they were from the Devil, and gives her reason
because the vision did contradict the Scripture, viz. tending to this, that she
must leave her husbands.
told the Deponent that her visions were from God, and that she had never spoke
with the Dr in her life.

This Deponent further says, that Mrs Pendar told her she had been at Mr
Fowler his house, and that Mr Fowler examined her touching her visions, and the
Deponent asked her what she said, to which she replied, she was sure she had
said nothing to him that could hurt the Dr. Thereupon the Deponent asked her if
she had told Mr Fowler that the Dr did send those visions, to which she
answered, she could not say the Dr did send them, for a world.

She further says, that Mr Pendar told her that his wife said (when she came
to London) she Then (it seems) she did say it to him at Reding, nay, she did
confess it to him again the second time at London after the Drs trial begun
would not say what she had said to Mr Fowler if it were to do again, for she
perceived it was a snare or trap.

She further says, she was by when the question concerning young Mr Blagraves
hand was put, and she asked it her self some in the room, and the answer was
that the coldness of his hand as far as they knew signified his dying to
vanity which was delivered in a jesting manner, which answer was not delivered
by the Dr, and the Deponent says the Dr never gave such an answer in his life
as she knows.

This Deponent further faith that she heard a muttering that Mr Grip should say
that the Dr had persuaded Mr Blagrave to leave all and come and live with him,
whereupon the Deponent asked Mr Blagrave about five or six weeks since
concerning it, and the said Mr Blagrave answered to the Deponent that he did
not remember that the Dr ever said any such thing to him.

Lastly, this Deponent says she never knew any thing of the Drs judgment,
neither did he ever bring her into any judgment, and that she never had any
discourse with the Dr till she did first begin with him, and that if ever he
had confirmed her in any thing it was in nothing disagreable to the word of God.

Concerning the man child mentioned in Seywards testimony.
Mr Francis Pordage Brother to the Dr, and Minister of Stanford Dingley, sworn,
etc.

This Deponent says, that it was one Mrs Flavell, that in the aforesaid
testimony is mentioned to be in travel of the child, and he further says,
that about four years since Mrs Flavell was very earnest in prayer on a day
when they were fasting which was at the time when one Seyward came to the door,
and that the said Seyward knocking, the Deponent went down to the door to him.

This Deponent does further acknowledge, that the said Seyward came to him
about the time mentioned in his said testimony to the parsonage of Stanford,
and that it is probable he did ask the said Seyward what he did think of the
noise he heard at the Drs house the day before, and that (the said Seyward
answering he could not tell) it is probable the Deponent did relate unto him
that the Lord was doing a great work in this kingdom, and to this nation; and
does confess that unadvisedly he told him that the cause of the aforesaid cry
was one in travel, but he does not remember that he spoke any such thing as
that (the pains were so extreme, as that had he stayed longer he might have
heard it as far as the town) but he does confess, he said, she was in travel
of a man-child, and that he and many others were eye witnesses of it.

And the Deponent being asked who it was that was in travel, he answered Mrs
Flavell.

And he being further asked what became of this manchild, he answers it was
the How could they be eye witnesses (as but two lines above he says they were)
of such a man child as this?
birth, death, and resurrection of Christ in the nature of Mrs Flavell.

And he being further asked how the birth, death, and resurrection of Jesus
Christ in the nature of Mrs Flavell, was so great a work that God was doing to
this nation, he And yet but even now he said it was probable he did say so not
above ten lines before.
answers he never said any such thing.

He further says, that this travel of a man-child was not any natural birth
of a child out of the womb, But the cry that was then made was nothing else but
the groaning and intercession of the spirit in her prayer.

Note that these witnesses following were not examined, because the
Commissioners were satisfied. Francis Knight an understanding christian,
thought himself bound to witness for the truth.

These are to certify that (I having discourse with some of Blewbery, who then
came from Dr Pordages house, and are reputed of his way, concerning marriage)
they affirmed with much heat that marriage was not lawful, but a defilement.

Secondly, that the Dr told me that he thought there was a legion of Devils in
his chamber.

Thirdly, I affirm that the Dr preached at Bradfield, that water baptism was
not the ordinance of Jesus Christ, and I going to him afterward, and telling
him, I was not so resolved, he replied, whosoever looked upon water-baptisme
any otherwise then as an Ordinance from John did not look upon it aright, and I
do offer my self to maintain that if the Dr deny it, he has a face of brass.

Francis Knight.
As for his cursing the people of Bradfield, take this deposition before the
Justices of the Peace.

William Wickins sworn and examined, says, that Dr Pordage did deliver in his
sermon upon the 29 of Sept. that accursed were the people of Bradfield, and
their posterity, and to you I speak, so may you be accursed and your posterity
in this world and in the world to come.



Animad, 7.
The Dr pretends to, and now has printed h^gh visions, and so high, that even
by himself they are likened to the visions of Paul, and John in the Revelation,
so far are they above the raptures and trances of John Becold, Matthias, and
the rest in Germany.

He has seen the world of Devils, evil spirits innumerable, their order and
government, he has heard, felt, tasted, and smelt hell, in salt, sulphur, and
that by amagicall tincturation, as his phrase is.

He has seen the world of Angels, and of them without number, bright as the
rays, sparkling like diamonds, he has tasted, and heard the dews of paradise,
and h^rmonious music, his inward senses were opened to see the kingdom of
glory, and there he says he is, for his spiritual senses were never shut, nor
shall be unless he return back into the earthly nature. page 77.

He says this was given to him as an extraordinary favor from God, and this
he speaks in high langu^ge, and swelling words, and now he has a command from
God to publish it, some persons are, and many more are like (specially if the
Quakers proceed in every corner of the Land to make the people
Antiscripturists, which is the great design of the Devil, for the Bible makes
him a Quaker) we say many are like to cry up these visions, and cry out upon
the ordinances of the Lord Christ.

The question is concerning their proceedure, whence are they: whether from God
or from the Devil? we shall confess with all willingness that if they be
from God, visions of the Lord, they are very admirable and extraordinary (as he
calls them) besides the ordinary dispensations of God to his hidden ones, and
let it be proved by the Dr or any of his in the world that they are such, we
shall willingly confess our selves to be persecuters, plunderers, thieves,
lions* (as he says) and we trust we shall not be ashamed to give God the glory.

But if they be from hell, and diabolical, then we say, the God of heaven did
scarce ever permit Satan to act a cheat upon fallen man beyond this delusion of
the Dr, we do not know (but it may be our ignorance we heartily confess) any
feigned story of visions that come near these, the 74, 75, 76, 77 pages of his
book do exceed all of the Mahumetans, Papists, Familists, old or new, and we
cannot but look upon them. First, as tremendous judgments from God upon men,
who are most righteously punished with believing lies, because they receive not
the truth in the love of it. Secondly, as wise providence for the trial of
others, of the christian magistrate for the probation of his courage, zeal, and
love to truth, and of the private christian for the trial of his faith, that
those that are approved may be made manifest. Thirdly, As a call from heaven to
every one of us to keep close to Scriptures to labor for a sound scripturall
knowledge of the Lord Jesus, to love the truth for the truths sake, and to
practice it for Christ's sake, from his love, and for his glory.

The reader has seen his blasphemies, we shall now desire his favor to
consider and judge, what his apparitions, revelations, visions are, and what
his mortification is, which was always the pretense of cheates and deceivers;
John of Leyden did much press the people to mortification, and to a converse
with God, the precious title of holiness is assumed by the Popes, even those
that were conjurers, whoremongers, dealers with the Devil, we shall speak of
these in order.

First, Of Angelical Apparitions.
We desire to bring them to the scriptures the only balance, and lapis lydius,
that so we may try them by the weights and touch of the word: let no man say
this is a low dispensation, if they do, yet their hard words are occasionally
our advantage; the more these times vilify, the more we desire to magnify the
scripture; the wickedness of these days, by a kind of antiperistasis,
intending the small heat of our affections toward them; the history of the word
is a ground for a divine faith, because the authority is divine; humane
authors we do, we can believe, but humanely.

First, They were very rare, to a very few men, and those eminent, and
extraordinary ones, as to Abraham, Jacob, Daniel, etc. we believe from Adam to
Moses, and from him to Christ, and from Christ to this day, we cannot find
thirty persons upon authentic records that have had apparitions of Angels, not
one Saint amongst many thousands.

Secondly, To those they did appear, they appeared seldom, most of these few,
had they had apparitions of Angels but once less, they had had none at all.

Thirdly, They made no tarriance with them, to whom they did appear: we
believe, take all the appearances from the creation to this day, and compute
the time, it will not in all make up one natural day, take them all together,
not 24 hours.

Fourthly, Very few of them did appear, upon their appearances; not above two
or three at most, but most commonly but one: and when the scripture speaks of
Angels plurally, it names their number, as two to Lot, three to Abraham, two to
the sepulcher of Christ, unless it be to Jacob, in Genesis 32.2. and to Elisha, 2
Kings 6. and to the shepherds, Luke 2.

Fifthly, Their appearance was upon some extraordinary business, which may be
reduced to these four heads.

1. Either of tidings and message, as of a son, and such a son as Isaac to
Abraham, and Sarah, when the one was an hundred years old, and the other
ninety: so to childlesse Manoah, concerning the birth of Sampson: to Zachary,
concerning John the Baptist: and to the V. Mary, and the shepherds, to
foretell to Mary, and declare to the shepherds, the birth of Jesus Christ, and
to declare to the women, his resurrection.

2. Angels have appeared for comfort, so to Jacob when he was afraid of Esau,
to Joshua at the siege of Jericho, to Gideon against the Midianites, to Daniel
in the captivity, to the Lord Jesus Christ in his agony.

3. They have appeared for deliverance, as to Lot, out of Sodom, when God
purposed to rain brimstone, to Peter in prison, when his chains fell off, Acts.
12.

4. They have appeared for direction, so to Cornelius, to bid him send for a
Minister, Peter.

Some of these apparitions were not of created Angels, but of the Angel of the
covenant, the Lord Christ; as that of Joshua, and Gideon, as appears by the
context; besides these the scripture records very few. Austins rule was, non
credo, quia non lego, I believe nothing, but what I read in the Bible.

Sixthly, Many of these few angelical apparitions were before there was any
scripture, or written word, or if after, then, when the prophets were very few,
as to Manoah, or in the captivity, as to Daniel, or before the publication of
the Gospel.

Yet behold, here is a man that in the midday of the gospel, under the
compleatnesse of the word, who tells us of the apparition of blessed angels to
him and his, more for number, and longer for continuance, then all the saints
of God from the beginning of the world to this day ever had; nay longer, by at
least 20 times, for he enjoyed these apparitions for 21 days together, and is
in the way of visions still, he has had visions for these five years: and yet
the man no way (as we understand) extraordinary. We profess we know him not
otherwise then very mean; if he be in any way more then ordinary, it is in his
magical, gross ignorance, his doctrines of filthiness and blasphemy, his
foolish pretense of holiness, his faculty of saying, and unsaying. Let no man
say we rail, we hope we know, that what we speak is upon record in heaven, both
what and how, and likewise to what end we speak; we think it is enough to
unloose the tongue of the dumb, (as it was said of him in the Historian) to see
such swords) even bitter words) to be drawn, and their point to be set to the
very heart of religion, and all Godliness.

To see the Jewels of glory taken out of the crow of Jesus Christ, by wicked
hands, and now the Angels must be pretended by their apparitions, to become
vouchers. Oh dreadful!

Then secondly, what extraordinary service did God send them about? When we
consider the man what he is, for learning, very slender, for parts, very mean,
as poor as a beggars patcht coat, for religion, rottenness, for his doctrine,
a blasphemer of the Lord Christ, and a high reproacher of his precious blood,
for his way, tending to filthiness, for his temptations, fallacy and
cousenage: we cannot imagine what business the glorified Angels should have in
his chamber for three weeks together.

Give us leave to debate the business a little with this Dr, it is possible that
by that means truth may appear, and give some light to the reader.

1. Dr, Of which world was that angel that appeared to you, in your clothes,
band and bandstrings? was not this directly proved against you? and how
fumblingly did you answer? this very thing was spoken by the Deponent, long
before the Commissioners were in being; why do not you own that apparition now,
in which formerly you gloried? what, did an angel of glory come into your
chamber, and put on your clothes, band and strings, and cuffes? Mrs Pordages
and Mrs Flavels angels standing by them was clearly deposed; Mrs Bla. angel in
her morning coat Mr Bromly could not deny, Mr D. B. angel, somewhat a bright
angel, is credibly reported, Dr, were all these angels of glory?

2. Of what world are those angels that come frequently to one of your
proselites, and stand at her beds side? they neither do any thing, nor speak
any thing, do the Angels come from Heaven on such sleevelesse errands?

3. Of what world was that angel that appeared to her in Dr Pordages shape,
band, and cuffes, just as he used to be when he was going into the pulpit, and
this apparition more then once: tell us is it an angel of light, or a fiend of
hell?

4. Tell us of what world, (for you have the key to open mysteries, to use some
of his own words) was that apparition that came to your aforesaid poor,
seduced, be-pitied proselite, that came to her upon a white horse, and told her
that he was Christ, (oh dreadful! our hearts and hands even tremble) and that
she was his bride, and that he was come to fetch her away to heaven.

5. Of what order was that apparition of a star, or somewhat like it, in your
chamber at Bradfield, that your maid saw, and deposed it? was it from heaven,
or not? you do not so much as offer a word of answer in your book.

6. Of what world were those angels, that at several times gave your maids a
pleasant fit of music in the kitchen when they were washing of their dishes?
this one of them deposed, that she heard it often, when there was no musician,
nor instrument of music, and she saw none playing, and the Dr could not except
against her evidence, could not reply to it, nay, has not said a word to it in
his printed book since.

7. Of what world, from heaven, or hell, were those Angels that made music for
you Dr, with Jewes-harps, and drums, and which you your self heard in your
house? are such vain and poor employments suitable to the nature of glorified
Angels.

8. Of what world were those Angels that carried Mrs Brown (the Abbess of your
virgin number) into heaven? (we cannot think she went thither of her self)
where she says, she saw the Trinity, and danced before the Trinity, and being
asked, what dance? she answered the just man, Oh dreadful!

9. Dr, Of what world was that angel that counseled you, and the compiler of
your book, not to print the apparition of the heavenly angels to you? there is
not a word of their apparition to you, in all the book that we can find, your
term there p. 73. is, Ministration; was not the devil afraid if that were
printed, the whole plot would be discovered? he and you thought, that no
rational Christian would believe that those angels did appear in your chamber,
much less three weeks together, which you confessed again and again, to the
Commissioners: what equivocating, juggling tricks are these?

Secondly, As to his Revelations.
Revelations properly are either prophetical, of things future, eorum quae
Deus vult de nobis, as the revelation of John, or else doctrinall, eorum quae
vult a nobis, as the revelation of Paul, He received the gospel by revelation.
and what God would have us believe and practice.

Now Dr, for your doctrines, we can find nothing in your raptures, but the
doctrine of virginity, which you offer to prove, but come off most ignorantly,
which doctrine tends to destroy the bond of marriage, and so to introduce a
more then heathenish community.

As for your prophesies, we confess there is a great report now among your
defiled ones, of great prophesies, and wonders; it has been said by one of
your choice ones lately, that whosoever comes to be Parson of Bradfield, will
find that Miracles are not ceased yet.

There are only two that we have heard of, that look that way.

First, That in July last 1654 you even you Dr should be taken up into heaven
with a white staff in your hand, and should come down again, and become a
great man, this was related from your mouth by one of your best friends, and
therefore unlike to belly you, to two persons that desire to fear God, who also
will, if called, attest it, what evidence would some men have? would they have
his Arthingtons and Coppingers proclaim it in Cheapside, why, the times yet
will not bear it.

Secondly, That you said confidently (like a prophet) that within two years
from the time of your speech, there should be no government in England, neither
Parliament, nor Magistrate, nor any such.

This will be deposed from your own mouth, the last of these we see is false,
there has been a Parliament since that time, and there are Magistrates at this
day.

This did John of Leyden with his visions and revelations, he prophesied the
deliverance of the town of Munster, which was delivered up, and the prophet was
tortured and hanged upon the highest steeple in an iron cage, which remains to
this day (says Spanhemius) as a monument of the Magistrates justice, and to
learn men to take heed how they despise the Deity.

Henry Nicholas proph^cied that he should be raised from the dead after three
days, but his memory, bones, and all lie rotting to this hour.

David George prophesied of his rising from the dead too, indeed he was raised,
but not to life, but to execution, the Senate of Bazill being deceived by his
seeming meekness and hypocrisy while he was alive, and being informed of his
wicked doctrines against the Lord Christ, when he was dead, the Magistrate
(says Spanhemius) by a solemn ordinance commanded his wretched corpse in his
coffin to the place of execution, and there burnt it to ashes.

Thus did Hosman, whom his disciples called Eliah (as our Dr is called Father
Abraham) who said that Strasburg was the new Jerusalem, this fellow was clapped
up in prison by the Magistrate, the Anabaptists prophesied that he should come
out with an hundred and forty four thousand sealed ones, and smite the earth,
but he never came out, but died in prison, many more might be recited for these
quaking familisticall times, but we will name but one more, and that is out of
New England.

Mrs Hutchinson when she was imprisoned for her blasphemies by the Magistrate,
prophesied that she should be miraculously delivered as Daniel out of the Lions
den, but it proved false; she was afterward banished by the Magistrate to
Road-Iland, from thence removed to the Dutch plantation, near a place in the
Map called Hell-gate; where the Indians contrary to their wont, at least beside
it, slew her, some say burnt her, and all hers.

Ob. If it be said, did not Mr Knox prophecy of the hanging of the Lord
Grange? and Mr Wise-Heart foretell the shameful death of Cardinal Beaton? who
was hanged over the window out of which he looked to see the man of God burnt?
so did not Luther speak many things of Germany, and of his own writings that
came to pass?

Ans. First, These men were sound in the faith and godly. Secondly, They did
not pretend immediate revelations. Thirdly, They speak by the rules of
Scripture, as, the transgressors shall be cut off and, the enemies of God
shall consume away. Fourthly, They spoke them as their judgment, they imposed
them on no man's faith, these were no more revelations and prophesies then what
that eminent Dr Twisse.
Saint of God whose memory is precious, said to one of us upon the breaking of
the short Parliament in 1641 concerning the Arch Bishop of Canterbury. sc. I do
much mistake if ever God suffer that man to die in his bed.

Thirdly, As to his visions.
The Dr speaks much of his visions, and those of the dark-world, the world of
Devils, and the light world of Angels, and the eternal world of glory, and
that he is now past Enthusiasmes (it seems he has been acquainted with that
cheat of the Devil also,) and lives in glory; the height of these pretended
glorious visions renders them but the more deeply diabolical.

Visions in Scripture are for the matter the same with revelations, only they
differ in this, that visions are by the representation of the images of things
to the mind, as to Esaias, Jeremiah, the Scriptures use the terms promiscuously,
it is commonly received that Paul was converted by a vision, Acts 26.19. I was
not (says he) to King Agrippa disobedient to the heavenly vision, and he was
strengthened in his great labors, pains, and dangers by a vision, Act. 18.8,
9. The Lord in a vision by night said to him, be not afraid, but speak, and
hold not thy peace.

But what is this to this Dr? Paul by a vision instrumentally from a blasphemer
becomes a preacher, his man by his visions of another kind from a mean preacher
becomes a bold blasphemer, God does not now convert men by seeing visions, but
by hearing sermons, we mean by the word, the Lord Christ in heaven keeps, to
his own prayer, sanctify them, through thy truth. John. 17.17.

What God may do by permitting, and ordering the apparition of the Devil to
some sinner, is another case, (but it is very rare) either for See Sleidan.
moribundus suis acclamasse scitur, ut cadem, qui lectum conscenderet, arcerent
lib. 23. cap. ult.
terror, and despair, as to Crescentius, to whom the Devil appeared as a
black Dog, with fiery eyes, and ears hanging down to the ground, or for
recovery, which is extraordinarily seldom, we know but one, and that in these
days, and because fit for these days, take it as it follows from a godly
ear-witnesse, under his own hand.

Dear Sir, I have one thing to tell you, which is a very remarkable passage of
divine providence amongst us, here is one Nicholas Earl a Shoemaker, sometimes
living at Totnes, now a soldier in the fort of Plymmouth, within this month
he did estrange himself from God, conceiving there was no need of the
ministry, that it must down, and that the Sacraments were but ceremonies, and
the Sabbath not to be observed, to that purpose he argued with some about it on
the Saturday, my man was present, and saw him in his hot contestation falling
to the ground; he detested those that bear the image of God, conceiving himself
the only Saint, he was against singing of Psalms, insomuch that when others did
sing, he would say they did lie like Devils; he resolved to open his Shop
windows the next Lords day, but on the Saturday night he was under strong
temptations, the Devil seemed to appear to him with terrible, strange
roarings, on the Sabbath day he sent for me, and when I came, at the first I
was welcome to him, but suddenly he spit in defiance at me, seeing him in that
temper I left him. The Monday about twelve a clock he came to himself, and has
a strong conviction of his errors, whereas he had left praying for a blessing,
and returning thanks for the creatures received, he is now much troubled at the
thoughts of it; I have had conference with him, he cannot be thankful enough
to God for his mercy in returning him so soon, he desires the ministers to
bless God for his return, and prays that he may be steadfast in the truth,
this that I have written to you is certain truth, you may do well to acquaint
others to take heed how they professedly step out of Gods ways, he wishes
that all his friends may take warning by him.

Here are symptoms of conversion, but the issue we know not, real grace is
glorious and rare, upon the one hand of it a man may live blameless, and die
Christlesse, and upon the other hand, a profane person may come to be chained
and terrified while he lives, and yet to be tormented in chains when he dies.
But to proceed.

Either your visions are contrary to or beside the written word, or else
according to it: if the first, we demand, how are they from God? if they be
revelations of things contained in scripture, we demand, why from God? the
ground of our demand is from that text, (though we might quote 20 more) Luke
16.29. They have Moses and the prophets. Dives answered, nay Father Abraham,
but if one come from the dead, then they will believe, as if Dives had said,
it is true, they have Moses and the prophets, but non satis est, that is not
enough; Abraham answered, if they will not believe Moses and the prophets,
neither would they believe though one came from the dead.

Do we not more certainly see and believe the devil to be prince of the air?
and do we not more clearly discern spiritual wickednesses in high places? upon
the account of the most infallible word, then by seeing the devil in a
postillian at Bradfield? do we not know that he is a lion, and dragon, and old
serpent, more clearly a thousand times in the word of God, then in Dr Pordages
glass windows and sieling? is not the discovery of their number, power,
malice, fierceness more durably laid down in the blessed Bible, then in your
brick chimney? does not the experience of the saints second the word, and they
feel it true, and see it in others, better then in your sulphur, soot and salt?

Is not the hidden manna, the smell of Christ's garments, the white stone, the
sweetness of his ointment, the everlasting love of the Father, the comforts of
the blessed spirit, is not one ray, one shine, one drop of these glories upon
the heart, through the spirit of grace, by the word of grace, better shall we
say, then your dews of Paradise, your harmonies? we abhor the comparison.

Obj. But, God may, what hinders? page 67. excellent Logic.

Ans. Dr, make your syllogism, if you cannot, we will help to make your
proposition. what God may, that he does; we deny it, you and all yours will
never prove it: nay, do we not know, that through divine permission and wise
ordering, the devil may? nay, do we not find in these days he does, nay in
this very case before us? you cozen your deluded silly women, with a may not
saints enjoy?

May not Dr Pordage have his Logic ad unguem, dip, and understand in
Chrysostom, render Grammatically five lines in Tully, or five verses in Virgil
prima facie? yet we know he has not the faculty,

We speak not this to overstresse that kind of learning, very desirable, and
serviceable, nay we should have been ashamed to drop this, but that we are
ashamed to see the froth, and folly of this man, even since his coming into the
virgin life, that in this also he will vain gloriously seem to have that
learning, which he never had, no not to a single sip.

Obj. But the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles had visions. page 67.

Ans. Make your inference: what then? which of these are you? did you never
read 1. Heb. 1. God who at sundry times, and in (...) per multas parts, (...)
quoad formam.
diverse manners spoke unto the Fathers by the prophets, has in these last
times spoken unto us by his Son. Did you never read some pent commentary of the
lower form, on this text? if you did not, what makes your outward man to be so
censorious? if you did, what makes your inward man so ignorant? take one for
all.

Deus loquutus est.
Olim per prophetas. Tunc Patribus. Tunc multifariam. Nunc per filium. Nunc
autem nobis. Nunc ut in fine temporum.
Conditio igitur nostra exhac part potior est, in modo quoque revelationis
excellimus, and after, Quum Deum nobis locutum esse dicit in his postremis
temporibus significat, non amplius esse causam cur expectatione novae
revelationis simus suspensi, neque enim particularis est sermo quem attulit
Christus, sed extrema clausula. and Calvin in locum.

God spoke
Heretofore by the prophets. Then to the Fathers. Then sundry ways. Now by his
Son. Now to us. Now as in the last time, fully.
But you proceed, your visions are suitable to the visions of the Prophets and
Apostles, even to Paul's rapture into the third heaven, and John's voices upon
mount Sion, you tell us this, but pray who told you so? give us but one single
argument, show us but one single instance of any saint that has had scripture
visions, since the vision of John did conclude the scripture,

As Suetonius in Caligul.
Hitherto as of a saint, now speak we must as of a monster.

Let the reader observe, that before these visions, and since, this man that
tells you page 73. the spiritual eye locked up and shut by the fall, has been
opened in an extraordinary way to him and his, and that ever since their
spiritual senses have never been shut, we say this man did before, and has
since, most blasphemously reproached the Godhead, and blood of the Lord Jesus.

We do not desire that the meanest reader may see by our eyes, we refer him
to the relation, nothing doubting but he will easily observe, that the
Deponents as to this article (by which we conclude his visions to be
devilismes,) were, and are conscientious and knowing, and their depositions
full and clear: the D^s answers (where they have any thing like answers) false
and forged, and so we leave him to judge as he sees cause.

It Is some trouble to us, that we are no more troubled and affected in our
hearts, that such contumely should be cast upon our Lord Christ, and the sp
rits about the throne, that the angels of glory must be printed to converse
with him, who has spoken wickedly against their Lord, even the Lord of glory.

Obj. But he denies it solemnly.

Ans. So did Arrius in the (...). Epiphan. Haer. 69.
very face of Constantine, so do malefactors at every assize, and sessions.

Obj. But the Dr is not maintaining, and holding now.

Ans. Yes, he is, till he recant, and repent, which the Lord grant, and hasten.

Obj. But, you see his protestation.

Ans. We do not believe it, and we will offer a reason for it too, that is
this, if he did really own that faith which formerly he destroyed* he would
truly be sorrowful for destroying that faith, which now he says he owns: thus
did S. Paul, but of his sorrow who sees any evidence?

The truth is, from his visions (he says) he ^s come to virginity, from thence
to the bestiality of marriage, from thence either it must be his pleasure, that
the wo^ld shall end with this generation, which is more then impiously absurd,
or else he must be for community, which is more then probable, though more then
Some Indians punishing adultery with death even in the greatest, without mercy.
Paganish* or else, women to bear children, otherwise then by men, which is
more then a Bedlam fancy.

The premises considered* (though we do persuade our selves we have not known
the tithe of his abominations, and the pranks of Satan amongst him and his) we
have ground to believe, that his visions were nothing else but Erburies
prophesies, Mary Gadberries lights, poor Gilpins inward voice, and the silly
women's being taken up into heaven, at Newbery, with many other small pieces of
visioners in the nation, collected into one volume, and in somewhat a fairer
dress presented by Satan at Bradfield, and printed by him in London, for
Giles Calvert stationer to the etc.

Before we shut up this, we would desire the reader to afford us a little of
his time, and patience, to read these four considerations.

First, The divine scriptures, there is excellency, sufficiency, and
profitablenesse to edification, exhortation, comfort, to convince, to convert,
to confirm, all which the blessed spirit works by these, as it pleases him: we
know the scriptures can do nothing without the spirit, and we are certainly
persuaded the holy spirit will do nothing without the scriptures.

The promise of grace is of both these, sc. my word and my spirit, Isa. 59.
last. which promise relates to gospel times, as to the more clear and
plentiful vouchsafement of both, and blessed be God it is at this day in some
measure fulfilled amongst the Lords chosen ones; therefore we have reason to
believe, that the pretended visions of heaven amongst this kind of men, are
real delusions of hell, designed to thrust out the scriptures.

As for the onelynesse and fullness of the scriptures, we offer amongst many
that might be offered, these few.

First, 2 Thessal. 2.1.2. Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our
Lord Jesus, that ye be not shaken in mind, Paul observes th^ee wa^es of
deceiving. 1. the pretense of revelation, 2. the smoothness and subtilty of
expression, 3. the forgery of testimony.
neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us; and that they might
not be deceived by either of these, he lays down the word, as a sure rule and
guide.

The next is that 1 Timothy 6.3. If any man teach otherwise (upon what pretense
soever) and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus,
and to the doctrine which is after Godliness, he is proud etc.

The third is that full text 2 Timothy 3. last. All scripture is given by the
inspiration of God etc. where we have, first, the authority, secondly,
infallibility, thirdly, usefulness for doctrine, etc. and fourthly the end,
that the man of God, even Timothy, may be furnished, and that thoroughly, and
that to all good works.

The last we will mention is that of Peter, 2 Pet. 1.19. We also have a more
sure, (...), piscator.
or most sure word of prophecy. The Apostle prefers the voice of God in the
scripture, above the voice of God upon Mount Tabor, and upon this reason; the
Jews to whom he writes, might possibly question that of Mount Tabor, but they
never questioned the truth of God in the scriptures.

And because this argument from the fullness of the scripture is profitable in
it self, and seasonable, and direct to our present purpose, we had thoughts to
show the judgments and experience of the saints in it, but for fear of tiring
our reader, we will confine our selves to two eminent ones of former, and later
times.

The first is Austin, how does he raise and intend all his faculties to
discover the glory of the word, it is (says he, Austin. ser. 38. ad Fratres in
eremo.
) more sweet then honey, more pleasant then bread, more soft then oil, more pure
then silver, more precious then gold, the meat of angels, the dainties of
Archangels, the glory of the Apostles, the confidence of the Patriarchs, the
hope of the Prophets, the crown of Martyrs, the doctrine above all to be
beloved, the breasts for the faithful, the wisdom out of the mouth of the
most High, the queen of all sapiences, the science of sciences, therefore
legite, attendite: there we find that God is length for eternity, breadth for
love, height for Majesty, depth for wisdom, it enlightens the mind, purifies
the heart, strengthens faith, conquers the devil, contemns the world, with much
more.

The other is Luther, I have (says he) agreed with God, Luth. loc. com, class.
4. p. 76. pactum feci cum D^o meo.
that I might not have visions or Angels, I am contented that I have the Bible,
which is abundantly enough to grace, and glory, this I believe, here I
acquiesce, and I am certain I cantot be deceived. Instead of inspiration, we
have the doctrine of the gospel, and in the place of visions, we have the
Sacraments, which show forth Christ, many Fanatics have set upon me with their
visions and revelations boastingly, but I answer I would rather have David's
understanding in the word, then the visions of the prophets.

The second particular is this, That these visions and revelations have been an
old shift of Satan, and a cheat formerly, and so down to this day.

The Gnostics, of them the Valentinians and Cerinthians with others, these
were horrid railers against Jesus Christ, scoffers of the Apostles, kennels of
all noisomnesse and filth, not to be named, non-sensicall wresters of that
which they pleased to allow for scripture, yet they gave out they received there
doctrine by revelation from heaven; and it is observable, that when Cerinthus
was driven to a non plus, he said, it was revealed to him by Christ; and so
downwards to the Papacy, where we have revelations and visions enough to fill a
dung-pot.

Dr Reynolds in his conference with Heart says, that of these Papisticall
visions, some were real, some forged, the first were from the devil, but both
first and last were for the devil.

And after when God raised up Luther, with an excellent spirit, and the light
of the gospel began to dawn, and shine in despite of Satan, the Pope, the
Emperor, and beg^n to spread not only to some towns, but Dukedomes and
Provinces, the devil had no way to help himself but by the trances and
revelations of that wicked crew in Germany, who Odio implacabili nos
insectantur plus quam papistas, they said there were two true prophets, David
and King John the Tailor, and two false prophets, the Pope and Luther.
maligned Luther, with a most deadly hatred, by far more then the Pope himself.

The like entertainment found the reformation in England in Q. Eliz. time, but
by the care of the Magistrate this fire of hell did not flame very high, nor
last very long, nor spread very fair, now in these days the reformation
prayed for, being in some hopeful way of attainment, what visions and
revelations are pretended far and wide, even from Dan to Beersheba, from
Barwick to the mount?

Thirdly, Observe, this Dr in all his visions sees nothing at all, there is a
deep silence as to the everlasting Godhead, and most precious blood of our Lord
Jesus: his visions teach the way to the virgin essence, and the life of
perferction, by way of conformity, which way he saw fore-right, and wisdom
that eternal virgin invited him to follow her in the the way of circumcision,
resignation, and the cross, and so on to the resurrection, ascension,
glorification, and fixation, page 77. These good words as they are here,
signify to us that know the man, no more then a bladder upon a nutshell. Nay,
we have reason to believe that in his sense they are full of the wine of
dragons, and poison of asps, making our Lord Christ but a type.

Fourthly, Observe, that he ascribes his height and abstractednesse, and his
pretended mortification, and living with God unto his visions, for so he tells
you the good effect of this upon my self and family, page 72. the effects and
impressions left upon our spirits, page 76. And now for the space of these four
years, ever since these, we by the grace of God* page 77. etc. his holiness is
not wrought by the scriptures, but by apparitoins. So that now it must not be
sanctify them through thy truth, but through visions: now it must be no more
believing in Christ's name through the word, but through the sight of the dark
and light world. Oh horrid! who sees not but in these quaking days, when there
be so many hundred Quakers, who deny the scriptures, this Dr comes in with his
visions, and tells their glorious effects, to do a kind office for the devil,
viz. to make the scriptures seem useless, and by degrees rejected, and at last
denied.

We shall conclude this with that precious passage of Dr Reynolds, in his first
these. with a little addition.

Away with the Jews, and their Cabala of Rabbis, away with the Montanists and
their new comforter, away with the Trent Fathers, and their traditions, away
with the Anabaptists, and their revelations, away with the Quakers, and their
actings, away with Matthiz, and all his trances, away with the Statists and
their guide reason, away with John of Leyden with all his raptures, and away
with John of Bradfield, with all his visions. The scripture, the word suffices
us, our salvation is Christ, the way to salvation, faith, the guide of the way,
the scriptures, the light whereof directs our steps, the food nourishes our
souls, the preservative keeps us from diseases, the plaster cures our wounds,
the sword kills our enemies, and the conduct brings us to eternal glory.

Animad. 8.
He tells the world thus, we had an opening of the eternal world, by a divine
transportation into the glory of the majesty, and we heard unutterable words
and mysteries. and we daily die to our self ownments, it is our desire to put
some Queries to this Seraphick man: to clear the truth.

First, Dr pray tell us whom do you mean under these high visions, and such a
degree of perfection from the enjoyment of them? for pity do not design to
cheat your reader at a distance, who never heard of you, but by your book.

Tell him who you mean by we and us, if you will not, then we must, thus,
Father These names they have given themselves in a mystical sense, and there
is we believe some mystery of wickedness in it.
Abraham formerly called John Pordage, one, Deborah formerly Mary the quondam
wife of John, two, Mary Flavell the woman of them both, three, we know no more
unless it be Eliezer the Steward of the family called Francis, and Susan: Day,
as for Rahab formerly Mary Pocock she denies it, Mr Bromley did first scruple.
and then If it had not been so, he would quick^y have said it: the country
conceives his silence to be a concession.
deny his oath, being demanded to testify of Mrs Blagraves vision in her
morning coat, Mary Allen says nothing, John Bolt is a pitiful ignoramus fit
to be the Drs servant and witness, here is all the number that we know of,
they shall proceed no further, their folly is made manifest: blessed be God.

Secondly, Why did you very often neglect your people upon the Lords Day,
somet^mes five or six weeks together, did not you apparen^ly mind your own
tithes, more then their poor souls? and when you were in the pulpit, why did
you use such uncouth, canting, unedifiing language? one of the inhabitants
deposed that you preached like John Tawney.

Thirdly, Why did you (when you thought you might safely do it) speak so
slightly of the Lord Jesus? nay, have not you wickedly (if not in some degree
Satanically out of your Satanicall pride, from your Satanicall visions)
reproached the blood of the Lord Christ God blessed for ever? are these the
effect of your visions, and your transporting into the eternal world? Oh
villainy of all villainies!

Fourthly, What mean you by saying p^g. 35. that many from out-places were
quickened by your ministry and strengthened? do you mean your witnesses? The
Lord convert them, or whom do you mean, name one, name but one of those many,
this is not only vain boasting, but wicked, that may be in a truth, but this is
in a ly, The Lord be merciful to that country.

Fifthly, What mean you by suffering under your nose the child Hannah to call
Mrs Flavell Aunt? the child was not so wise as to know her own Father, and you
were not so honest as to let her know her own Mother.

Sixthly, What did you mean to suffer Mrs Flavell to live in the practice of
such known untruths as these for many years? viz. that Hannah was not her
child, that she was the child of a dear friend of hers, that she was entrusted
by the mother to look to it, and this against your knowledge have you a
dispensation for this lewd practice?

Seventhly, Nay Dr tell us what did you call the child? did not you say Mrs
Flavell was her Aunt? you pretend poorly in your book a law suit, as a reason
why she concealed her name nine years together, pray tell us why Widow Fruin
should be so unsafe? was dead Mr Fruin any more liable to a law suit then dead
Mr Flavell? it smells above ground.

Pray tell us one thing you are best able to answer; and we will put it to you
in your own language. sc. were not you Mr Frewins figurative similitude?

Eighthly, Why did you in such an unseemly manner for any man, but in you very
scandalous, suffer, nay entertain Mrs Flavell to ly in your bedchamber for 15
months together, what had this been in one of the narrow stamped priests your
persecutors? as you are pleased to call them.

Ninthly, What meant you to lodge at Roger Loughtons house in the chamber next
to Mrs Flavells, there being nothing between you but a latch, why did you lodge
there to the suspicion and derision of that family, were there not beds enough
at Hounslow but a quarter of a mile distant?

Tenthly, Why do you muffle your reader by printing in your book Mrs Flavell
lodged in your chamber for fear of the apparitions. page 70. when as the
apparitions you confess lasted but three weeks, and your maid deposes she
lodged there twenty times three weeks? are these the glorious impressions left
upon your heart by your visions?

The truth is you are and have been since these pretended, glories filthy, as
to your doctrine, and the scandal of it, false, covetous, ignorant, we shall
propose these in this method to the reader, and give some instances of each.

First, What do you mean by proposing to the world your practice and deliberate
judgment, as to leave your wife! you tell us something of your self, pray let
your self tell us something, was your marriage with the woman (whom in print
you call Mrs Pordage) was it a marriage in the Lord or not? if it were, why do
not you live together in your relations in knowledge and wisdom? Those whom
God has joined let no man put asunder, art thou bound to a wife, seek not to
be loosed? Mat. 19.6, 1 Cor. 7.27. This is the language of the precious word to
us in the lower dispensation (as it is called) if you did not marry in the Lord
but came together in a bestiall, carnal, adulterous way (as you phrase it)
whose fault was that? is it the fault of Gods Ordinance have you not learned to
distinguish between Gods institution, and man's abuse of it? why do you call
marriage idolatrous, adulterous.

Secondly, you tell us that now you and your quondam wife separate, do us the
favor to tell us from what you separate, is your separation from a thing
lawful, then who has required this at your hand? who bad you do it? was it
one of your Angels in you bright world, your mundus luminosus? if you separate
from the use of marriage as a thing unlawful, who told you it was so? was it
not one of your Devils in your dark world, in your mundus tenebrosus?

Thirdly, Why are you so unhappily like the Manichaei auditoribus suis ut
plebeis and imperfectioribus nuptias concedebant, electis vero (quos ita
vocabant) and perfectioribus omnino interdicebant usum eonjugiii Chem. Ez^m:
par. 3. p. 5.
Manichees of old a filthy generation, you say in your book you do not dissuade
people from marriage, but you propose even to the married the virgin life as
more perfect; yet we know the Manichees were, and the country says, you are
against marriage, though neither they then, nor you now will own it publicly,
amongst their proselytes they did own it, and whether you have done so amongst
your disciples we will leave it to the judicious by what follows, your own
judgment for the use and having more women then one has been proved upon
oath, which is a sacred thing even among the Paynims.

Fourthly, Pray Dr tell us what mean some of your family to say to this
purpose, that Uxorem ducens grauius peccat quod si fornicetur.
married persons were as bad or worse, then they that had a bastard.

Fifthly, What made one of your disciples to say lately that marriage was not
lawful, and that she would not marry if she might gain never so much.

What meant one of your disciples to tell a married woman that she must come
out of that beastly nature, speaking of marriage.

Six^hly, Whence did she learn to expound that text, Luke 20.30. Was it not
from you viz. they that were accounted worthy of that world* and the
resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in marriage, thus, you
think (quoth she) that that text is to be meant of the end of the world, No no,
it is to be understood of Christ rising in us, in you, and in me, and then we
must neither marry, nor be given in marriage, is not your hand in all this?

Seventhly, why did you make no answer to that article exhibited against you,
sc. that marriage was the way of beasts* if you say it was not proved, we reply
there was no cause, you never denied it.

The second particular for your falsenesse.

First, Most of your answers are most untrue, and some of them notoriously and
deliberately false.

Secondly, Why did you slanderously report, and plead openly and since print
page, 88. that George Aslet was a drunkard? when as you know no such thing by
him at all, nay when all the country that know him know it to be utterly false.

Thirdly, Why would some of you have inveig^ed a man to witness this against
him before the Commissioners? designing by such a lewd slander to weaken his
testimony, may a man lie and swear false to save a saint from the men of the
world?

Fourthly, Why do you falsely print page, 88. that goodwife Knap under her hand
and before witness has denied that she told George Aslet, that Mrs Flavell
threatened to have her whipped, for saying something of another child besides her
boy Stephen? when the woman never denied it, but still affirms that Mrs Flavell
did deny to her that ever she had any child besides Stephen, the woman would
have you show her hand, amongst you she was circumvented by a lie, and now she
says, you have printed a forgery.

Fifthly, Why did you take one of your parish into your study, having summoned
him by a warrant to appear before the Justices fot you, and then, and there did
dictate to him what be should swear? and why did you profer to write it down
for him in case he could not remember your instruction? how unconscionable is
this?

Sixthly, Why do you print page 88. that you expounded that in Genesis
concerning Abraham first historically? the witness says it is a studied lie,
and does offer to depose it, and will prove it an untruth by several reasons.

Seventhly, Why do you print that you never denied water-baptisme to be the
ordinance of Jesus Christ? Francis Knight a pious knowing man says the
contrary under his hand, and bids us tell you in print, that if you deny it (as
you have done) that you have a face of brass, you may say or unsay (it seems)
what you please

Eighthly, Why do you print in your Ep. Ded. to his Highness, that his
ordinance for ejecting scandalous ministers is abused to the condemnation of
the St. Antichrist. St. Ignorant. St. Blasphemer. St. Familist.
Saints? and why do you prognosticate that the Commissioners will turn the edge
of it against them thaet have glorious discoveries of God? we begin to think
the Devil is afraid of the Ordinance, and shall take these bold words for an
untruth, till you produce what Saints, when, and where, and by whom persecuted.

Ninthly, Why do you say page 112. and often, that the Commissioners have used
all means to hinder a rehearing of your cause? for our parts we have not heard
of any that has done this, neither have we attempted it directly or
indirectly, there is such a boasting of so many great friends you have between
Charing cross, and Westminster Hall, that we have expected it every week, but
for our hindering of it, till you prove it, it must go for an untruth, and a
design of your own to harden the Familists and the Quakers in London, Bristoll,
Lechlade, Reding. etc.

The thi^d particular covetousness.

First, Why did you defraud one of your neighbors in bargaining, letting, and
renting? the man was before the Commissioners to make his complaint, and has
since made it several times to understanding Christians.

Secondly, Why did you after you came out of your Familisticall pulpit on the
Lords Day, presently fall to discourse with one of your neighbou^s of buying
and selling? were you so full of the world you wanted vent, could you not stay
for your own day?

Thirdly, Why did you hire out your teams of horse to carry bark, and this to
the great hinderance of your neighbors who did use to earne money that way?

Fourthly, Nay why did you when your poor neighbors had agreed to carry at
such a price, agree at an under price, for less, to get the employment out of
their hands, are these your parcells of perfection?

Fifthly, Why did you rent land and sow it to halfes when corn was dear and
your living worth hundreds? by your example you did fearfully harden your
people in earthly mindedness, your heart mortified by your visions of
darkness thought you could never have enough.

Sixthly, Why did you tell the people in the pulpit when you came to Bradfield,
that now the great pot should go over, and what a liberal house you would keep
(a most seraphick argument, is it not?) but they say they could never see pot,
pan, nor kittle, indeed they say you are a very miser, an earth worm.

Seventhly, When one of your neighbors was taken from his plough oftentimes in
your business, went to Newbery eight miles for you five or six times, and to
London for you thirty nine miles, and you promised to pay him for his labor,
why did you give him for a hundred and fifty miles travel even two shillings?

Eighthly, But Dr when there was a collection for a poor burnt Mariborough
town, and you spoke to the people to give liberally, and many knowing the
place did resolve to do so, why were you the leading man so cruel, you threw
down your twelve pence, even to the scorn and table-talk of some rich
inhabitants in your parish.

Ninthly, Why did you wring dues from the people beyond the customs of the
parish for marrying? it is true this was put in as an article against you by your
parishioners, and it is as true it was put out by your accuser, you vapor much
upon this in your book, can you say that any of your persecutors did take such
a sordid way as to bargain before hand, and to demand more then their dues?

Why did you trouble your parishioners and that often before the Commissioners,
when all the difference did not amount to above eighteen pence? your visioning
family has been complaining and crying as the Horse-leach give, give, the Lord
cure this dropsy in yours and you, in us and ours.

The fourth particular ignorance taken out of his Book.
First, Why do you say that the law of nature prompts you, and your way to
require an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth? does the law of nature allow
private revenge? why are you such an ignoramus as to join with the Pharisees to
corrupt the text? in the Epistle to the Commissioners.
it seems you have a warrant from the law to revenge your selves, it concerns
the Magistrate to take care you may not have power too, this is not only
ignorance, but tends to sedition also.

Secondly, What do you mean in saying But the law of grace commands us to deny
our selves? do you mean that Gospel commands do thwart the commands of the
law? we know that Jesus Christ did not fill up, much less contradict the law,
but vindicate, and clear it from the false glosses of the Scribes, and
Pharisees whom you imitate in this also.

Thirdly, Why do you confound the essential word, Ibid.
and the engrafted word, and make them both one? we hope it was your ignorance,
though we have too many reasons to believe that even in this you did lift up
your heel and kick at Jesus Christ, or else to make no other word but the word
within us, as Swincfield, Gortyn, and then if you come to have power, let all
godly men beware their throats.

Fourthly, Why do you say that Mat. 28.19. Go teach all nations and baptize,
page 27.
that baptism there may very well be understood of the baptism of the spirit,
show what one of all the many expositors received for pious and orthodoxe did
ever sense it so? in those primitive times, either they had those extraordinary
gifts of the holy Ghost before they were baptized, as in the case of Cornelius.
Act. 10.47. or else they were baptized before they had these gifts as the
disciples at Samaria, Acts 8.16, 17. Did not you in this maliciously asperse
all water baptism? and through pride and ignorance dream that you should
receive power from on high to bestow the graces of the spirit on whom you
pleased?

Fifthly, Ibid.
Why do you say that the Apostles did administer the baptism of the spirit to
all their converts? how many visible converts were there and upon that account
baptized, who never had either the extraordinary gifts, or the saving graces of
the spirit? what do you think of the Familists old acquaintance, Simon Magus?

Sixthly, Why did you say that baptism is a Gospel ordinance instituted by
John? and now to qualify the business you print it (instrumentally) do
instruments use to institute ordinances? thus you labor to support your
ignorance by a falsitie forethought.

7. You say that your judgment is for persons to live as single, though in
united forms, and your deliberate practice is thereafter, well, but why do you
say that this practice is according to that of Christ, Mat. 19.12. He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it. Pray tell us, does not our Lord Christ
speak to the unmarried? read the 10 verse, the disciples said, if the case be
so, it is not good to marry: Christ answered, But all men cannot receive it, or
abstain from marriage, cannot live Batchelours, what is this to you that have
been a married man these many years?

8. So the other of Christian Eunuchisme, there be some Eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven, you are of the last sort, you were not born so, and you
were not made so of men, but you have made your self so, but we tell you again,
you ignorantly, if not wickedly pervert the text, for the text is meant of the
unmarried, nay the very drift of the chapter from the first verse to the ninth,
is to confirm the bond of marriage as indissoluble, against the Pharisees: what
does this concern you, that have a wife and seven or eight children?

9. You are most unhappy in your Marginall text, to 1 Cor. 7.38. let them that
marry be as though they married not; do you think the meaning of the Apostle
is, that man and wife should not dwell together, as man and wife? but live, as
you pretend, you and Mrs Pordage have done, as though you were not man and
wife. It is clear, that in this, you and Mrs Pordage are no more, then you and
Mrs Flavell.

10. Why do you say Christ was born of a Virgin, and lived in virginity,
Christus non duxit uxorem, and ejus actio est nostra instructio, said the
Gnostick^. Respondet Clemens, conjugium Christus approbavit doctrina, and
miraculis. Chem. exam. par. 3.
leaving us an example? was that the reason why he did come? When we think of
the infinity and glory of the Lord Christ, how unsuitable marriage was to him,
and how his work was to give up his soul a ransom, we cannot but admire at the
blindness of this Dr, who still is driving at this, that Christ is but a type.

Why do you say that you had two spiritual worlds discovered to you, and apply
to these worlds that text, Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made the world; were the
worlds in that verse made by Christ, your mundi Idaeales your fantastical
worlds at Bradfield, pitiful ignorance.

11. Why do you quote that text, Heb. 5.14. but strong meat belongs to those
that are of full age, and have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil, and wretchedly apply it to your spiritual sensation, (as you call it)
and the opening of your inward senses, to see cloven feet, and dragons? is this
the meaning of the holy spirit?

12. You say among the devils you saw principalities, powers, dignities, and
you say this is answerable to the text, Ephesians. 6.12. Tell us, who told you, which
was this, and which that? did any one point with a rod, and say to your inward
hearing, there goes a prince, there goes a power? why do you force that text to
palliate the matter, and cheat your reader? this text proves that the devils
are by Gods just judgment rulers of this world, but it does not prove any
government or princedome among themselves.

13. To hasten: You say you had an opening of the eternal world, the kingdom
prepared, where you were, as Paul once, etc. page 78, and you call it the world
to come, and quote for it Heb. 2.5. He has not put in subjection to the Angels
the world to come, whereof we speak. We do confess this text is controverted,
Calvin understands it of the world restored by Christ, our right being
forfeited by sin; Piscator of the mundus renovatus, as in 2 Pet. 3.11. So the
Annotations on the New Test.
others of the gospel world, because of the context. But we conceive it is
hardly sense to understand it as you do, of the kingdom of glory, for how
alien and foreign is it to S. Paul's mind, to read that text thus, he has not
put in subjection to the Angels the kingdom of glory, of which we now eak.

Though this might have passed for a small mistake in another, yet in this Dr
it is considerable, because he pretends his hearing of the unutterable
mysteries of that kingdom, and therefore his ignorance is observable. we
believe S. Paul's rapture, but not his in the least, by any means.

14. In the same place you say that your divine transportation was agreeable to
that of John 17.24. Father, I will that those whom thou have given me, may be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory.

What ignorance, and wresting of the scripture is this? was Christ with you in
your chamber at Bradfield? what did you behold of the glory of Christ there? it
is justly charged, and fully proved, and righteously sentenced against you that
you have blasphemed that glory, sc. his Godhead and blood; and you do not tell
us that in this third heaven you saw any thing of either: is that sweet prayer
to be understood of visions here on earth, or of believers coming to, and
abiding in heaven with Christ for ever?

15. So Heb. 10.19. is quoted by you to speak for your entrance into the
eternal world by your visions, but the text says no such thing, the text does
not say, we have an entrance into the holiest by visions, (which are delusions)
but by the blood of Jesus.

16. What did you mean to call wisdom, and quote for it Pro. 8.20, 23. the
eternal virgin? See the last. Annot. Assemb. upon the text.
do you know what you say? who is there meant by wisdom, is it not Jesus
Christ? did he show you the way that leads to the life of virginity, to leave
your wife? why do you call him the eternal virgin? is it not to possess your
people against marriage? are you out of your wits?

17. Why did you insultingly p. 103. charge Mr Trapham a godly person, one of
the Commissioners, and now print him a man of mean intellectualls, and why?
because he never heard of any other death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, but
at Jerusalem: you pitiful ignoramus, is not this true? does not the Apostle
say, Christ being risen from the dead, dies no more? Romans 6.9. and in that he
died, he died once, and Christ was offered once, not often. Heb. 9. last. Now
if he died but once, he rose but once, and both these he did at Jerusalem. You
say that Mr Trapham never read, or never understood these three texts.

First, Heb. 6.6. You Dr, is that text understood of backsliders real
crucifying Christ on earth, or their wicked trampling and profaning of his
blood, now he is in glory? was this done by their hands, or by their hearts?

The next you quote is Gal. 3.1. Is this text understood of a crucifying Christ
indeed, or the showing forth of his death in the word and Sacraments? does not
that very verse say that Christ was set forth amongst them? and before whose
eyes (mark Dr) not by whose hands, and crucified amongst you, not by you.

For the other text you quote, about Christ's rising, Ephesians. 2.5. It Is true, Gods
elect were quickened with Christ, what then, what do you conclude? ergo did
Christ rise in other places besides Jerusalem?

The truth is, Mr Trapham was transported with a just indignation, to hear this
man's brother vent such Familisticall stuff concerning the man child, reported
by himself to be born at Bradfield, sc. that this man child was (as the younger
Pordage said) the spiritual birth, life, death, resurrection of Jesus Christ,
in the nature of Mrs Flavell, who lies under the scandal of a bastard, by this
Dr hitherto, because they have had nine months time to produce a certificate
of the town, and county, where her dead pretended husband Mr Frewin was
married, lived, and died; and we suppose that in honor and conscience they are
bound to vindicate their innocence, (if they be innocent.)

This speech of the younger Mr Pordage, was the occasion of Mr Traphams
speaking what he did, which is a truth, at which the ignorance of this Dr
scoffs. It is such a truth that strikes through the loins of Familisme.

18. Why does your learning quote for your receiving tithes, Psalm. 24.1. The
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof? from whence you say, that tithes
are the Lords by an undoubted interest, as well the tenth (say you) as all the
rest, and all the rest as the tenth; most profound reasoning. Let the
countreyman look to it, for as you have had the tithe under this Magistrate,
and the Farmer all the rest, so had you a Magistrate to your own mind, by his
order, you might take all the rest, and leave the tithe to the Farmer.

What did this man mean to say page 86. that upon the supposall of his guilt of
adultery, yet now he is not chargeable, and why? because he was not accused
within a year after the fact.

It is much, that he having such visions of the inward world, should be so dark
in the justice of the outward world. Sir, you were not prosecuted as a felon,
for adultery by a law ex post facto, for your life, but merely for the scandal
of adultery, as you was, (though you never were in any sense) a minister, in
regard of your office, before the Commissioners, who as such, are empowered
only to take notice of scandal.

Your Plea had been rational before a Judge of Assize, but before the
Commissioners absurd, yet you fill a page with this stuff, and clamor upon
your betters. Suppose a member of a Church should have a pardon as to life, for
an act of Adultery, should this pardon exempt him from the censure of the
Church in point of the scandal of adultery? this was much your case, and to
this purpose tended Mr Fords rational discourse, which you in your silliness
jeere and scoff at.

Animad. 9.
He offered to the Commissioners his protestation, which sounds orthodox. and
since has published it in print to the view of the world, beginning thus, I
John Pordage do solemnly avow and protest, etc. page 91.

Ans.
It is confessed that his appeal to God and protestation are apt to beguile the
plain hearted, therefore we desire the reader to consider these particulars
ensuing.

1. Arrius, whose bowels gushed out at his easment upon the stool, according as
Constantine the pious Emperor had told him, that in case he did (...). etc.
Epiph n. cont. Haer. lib. 2. Tom. 2. H^er. 69.
dissemble, God would find him out speedily.

This Arrius brought in a paper into the Council of Socr. Schol. Hist Eccles.
lib. penult.
Nice, in the form of sound and wholesome words, but reserved his own heretical
opinions, in another paper within his bosom, protesting he believed all this,
clapping his hand upon his breast, that he believed what there he had written.
And because we have first mentioned Arrius, it may not be altogether
impertinent to show how that wretch and this Dr were alike in their lives, we
heartily wish in their death they may be divided; their likeness is in these
particulars.

First, Arrius was a man pretending to gravity, Epiph. con. Haer. lib. 2. Tom.
2. Haer. 69.
holiness, contempt of the world, so this man.

Secondly, Arrius went about with flattering speeches, smooth smiling words and
insinuating entisements of meekness, so this Dr.

Thirdly, Arrius drew after him seven hundred professing virginity, but here
the Dr excells him though not in his number, yet in his notion, for he is
familiar with the virgin essence, only here is the difference, Arrius seduced
virgins, but did not dissuade them from marriage, this man disswades the
married from the marriage bed, and would seduce them to his virginity.

Fourthly, Arrius complained of persecution by the Bishops, and that for
Christ, this complaint he made to Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia one too much of
his own wretched way, and in favor with the Emperor, so this man complains
of persecution by the poor, trampled ministers, we bless God that we have not
much fear as to his protection, though he and his proselytes, and his family do
slanderously boast much among the country people.

Fifthly, Arrius complains much of the bitterness of the magistrate, at least
by the instigation of the Bishops for ejecting him, and his as wicked men, and
monstrous not fit to live; just so does this Dr in his book page 102, 103, 104.

Sixthly, Arrius and his accomplices did abuse the ear of Constantine, Simulate
and per ^roniam paenitentiam egit. Epiph.
and by deliberate forgeries did calumniate Athanasius and the orthodoxe; so
does this man labor to serve the priests (as he termed them) in his book.

Seventhly, Arrius was a notorious dissembler in his life, and died stinkingly
(as Fox says of Dr Gardner) at the ^akes.

For the first of these we leave this Dr to the judgment of Christians.

For the second, Aug. de Haer. Haer. 88.
we refer it into the hands of a most wise and gracious God.

Secondly Thus did Pelagius wretchedly d^ssemble, he did seem to unlade his
filthy stomach of his proud and wicked heresy, by a solemn pulick
renunciation, afterward he returned with the Dog to his vomit, and the swine
to the mire.

But secondly of later times, and there observe the history of Valentinus
Gentilis, this wretch went further then this Dr, for he not only made a solemn
and Orthodox confession of his faith, but also a recantation of his heresies,
at last an abjuration under his own hand.

The Senate of Geneva hoped that his repentance was cordial and sincere.

He confessed that he offended in denying Christ to be God.

He professed he did believe the Doctrine of the Trinity, and cried out, Oh my
conscience is wounded for my inconsiderate answers to that excellent Divine and
servant of God John Calvin, I make no question but the searcher of all hearts
has forgiven me, and I beseech you likewise to forgive me.

He walked bare-legged, barefooted, and bare-headed through every street in
the city, with a light in his hand, and a trumpet sounded before him, he burnt
all his heretical doctrines with his own hand. September. 4. 1558.

Aret. Hist. Val. Gent. 1.2.20.
The Senate forgave him, only took his oath that he should not depart the city
without their leave, but he soon brake his oath, and fled away, the Governor
of the Province of Gaium enquiring into, and finding out his wretched opinions
committed him to prison, but after a while released him, but no sooner was he
delivered, but he published his blasphemies in print, and abused the Governor
dedicating his book to the Governor; and making men believe as though his book
came forth with the Governors consent, and authority; not long after he goes
to Lions, where he was fifty days, and by complying with the The Papists did
tolerate a blasphemer, because an Anti-Calvinist, and this Dr does much please
himself in his foolish hopes because he is an Anti-presbyterian.
Papists against Calvin he was released; after many journeyes and dissemblings
knowing that Calvin was dead, he came back to his old quarters to Gaium, where
by a wonderful providence the old zealous Governor whom he had abused,
commanded in chief, though out of his turn, the Governor cried Fiat quod
justum est, and clapped him up in prison, this was in the year 1556, eight years
after the Senate of Geneva had dismissed him, he appeals from the Governor of
Gaium his enemy to the Senate of Berne, by them he is charged with Blasphemy,
Heresy, Perjury, and for joining with Alciate and Bland^ate for the seduc^ng of
precious souls, he renounced them both, and said, that Alciate was turned a
Turk, and Blandrate a Sabellian, the Senate picked out all his heresies and
blasphemies new and old, wherein Valentine agreed with Arrius; Justo Dei
judicio caesus blasphem are simul and vivere desiit. Aret.
the Senate heard him from the fifth of August till the ninth of September, he
remained stubborn, confident, and pertinacious, The Senate pronounced the
sentence of death upon him, which was executed accordingly, the judicious
reader will quickly make the parallel; it was a fair warning given him by the
Senate of Geneva, and their admonition was prophetical. viz. Filium Dei quem
praedicamus in Diabolum transfiguras, Deum quem colimus vocas Deum Turcarum,
mult aque ejus generis, sed vide miser, ne te praecipetaverit tuus furor, ut
voces emitteres quae per jugulum redeant: Thou do transfigure the Son of God
into a Devil, our God thou call the God of the Turks, wretch beware least
thine own mouth cuts thine own throat.

Secondly, Many more might be produced, but we shall trouble the reader but
only with these late observations.

First, Mrs Hutchinson of New England defended her opinions with lies and
equivocations, and pretended she was still of Mr Cottons judgment, she
professed her repentance, but still kept her wicked opinions, at last through
Mr Cottons and Mr Davenports means, she confessed before the congregation her
heresies, that she was deserted of God, deluded by the Devil in her
revelations, desired the congregation to pray for her yet afterward she was
found to be a liar, giving no satisfaction in her answers, but by lying circum
locutions denied all.

Secondly A learned man and a professor of religion in Cambridge denied
propitiation for sins by the death of Christ made the Lord Christ to be but a
figure, and a type, and being opposed by one now a godly minister, he took him
by the hand, and made this answer, if you speak of it to any body, I will deny
it every word.

Thirdly, That when Mr Erbury for some of his blasphemies against the glorious
Divinity and blood of Jesus Christ was before the Committee for plundered
Ministers, at Westminster, he began to make a solemn profession of his faith in
Orthodox language, to the admiration of some there that had heard, and were
ready to witness against him, the said blasphemies.

But the then Chairman took him short off from his protestation, and commanded
him silence, saying, we know your tricks well enough.

Atque adeo hic est unus ex praecipuis capitibus Theologiae ipsorum, said
Adver. lib. cap. 5. page 5^3.
Calvin of the Libertines, this is one of the master pieces of their divinity,
that they have the art of dissembling, and transforming themselves into any
shape, quo facilius hominibus imponant, and again, Idem, ibid. cap. 8. p. 519.
Hinc fit ut si hodie Quintinus etc. If Quintinus were here to day, a prisoner
for his blasphemy, either before Christians or Papists, it would not trouble
him at all, for he is certain of his freedom, because he could assent to
either of them, and yet for all that never deny his faith and doctrine, neque
tamen propterea doctrinam suam abnegaret.

Obj. But what is all this to the Dr, either his principles or practice?

Ans. We conceive that to the ingenuous reader the samenesse of doctrine with
Blasphemers, is a sufficient argument for the samenesse of principles and
practices with them also; the Devil being the same, sc. the father of all sort
of lies from the beginning, to this day. Irenaeus ad. Haer. lib. 2. c. 34.
We know the saltness of the sea by the taste of one drop, we need not drink
up the whole. But more distinctly, and first, as to these destructive
principles.

1. This has been the drift of the Drs discourse oftentimes at Mr Blagraves,
to affirm, that a man may say or unsay unto the world.

2. The Dr has said, he was called of God, and if he did overreach, it should
not be laid to his charge, for he was called of God.

3. The Dr has said, that we may do any thing with the world, or we can do
well enough with the men of the world.

These testimonies are the more considerable, because of the advantages these
persons had that tell them, whereby through providence they came to know, and
through conscience (as we hope) do reveal these wretched tenets of darkness.

Now, as to his practice, we entreat the reader to observe,

1. That his answer given in to the articles faithfully and incorruptly
printed, and published in this relation are most of them devised forgeries, and
studied untruths.

But secondly, This very man made a solemn protestation, and profession of his
faith, when he was in his first troubles, and since that time, he has vented
many of these very horrid things proved against him in this relation, against
our Lord Jesus, we say even since that time some years.

Now seeing he has so manifestly violated his first protestation, and we see
it proves false, we leave it to the conseientious to consider whether this
printed protestation may pass for true, or no, only tell him Luth. tom. 4. p,
180.
Luthers thoughts, Fanatici norunt verbis, gestibus, scriptis simulare,
dissimulare omnia.

But yet a little further, put the case his protestation be true, what is that
to the Commissioners? are they directed to proceed according to the
protestation of the accused, or according to the allegations and depositions of
the witnesses? Obj. Two sober men who were at the first sitting of the
Commissioners believed him, for they never appeared afterward.

Ans. True, but those many left behind were sober, and sound too, and that both
in point of science and conscience. Again, who those two were, the Dr names
not, neither will we, but desiring to study and practice that text 1 Gal. 10.
(we would not be ambitious of any man's praise, nor sollicitous for any man's
censure.) We wish that those gentlemen, and all Commissioners to whom these
presents shall come, sadly to consider, that text which God did shoot as an
arrow into the heart of poor Spira, the head whereof did stick to his dying
day, viz. Luke 9.26. In hunc textum defixis oculis semper intue^i convenit, non
est quod callida dissimulatione hic sibi quisquam placeat pietatem se fovere in
cord fingens, qu^m externis testificationibus prorsus evertit.
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words, of him shall the Son of
man be ashamed when he shall come in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and of
the holy angels.

Obj. This man has some followers, and like enough to have more, sure they
believe him.

Ans. Heresy and lust quickly find entertainment with our natural hearts,
which must be wrought upon supernaturally, before truth, which is supernatural
and they, can meet together in love. So some did follow Quintinus, and other
Fanatics, and Calvin gives these two reasons in his days, which we evidently
discern to be the same in ours, viz. Satanicall pride, and beastly filthiness.

Calv. Ep. 1. page 44.
1. Nonnulli stultae curiositati adeo sunt addicti, some so much addicted to
foolish curiosity, applied their minds to superfluous questions, who not
content with the simplicity of the scriptures, did volitare velut in aere, in
frivolous speculations, that they might vaunt themselves of high things, se
sublimiores esse, and sublimiora persequi, that they were more high then
others, and did follow more sublime strains.

The second this, Some that began to be seasoned with gospel purity, were weary
of it, and did relinquish it, to lead a lustful filthy life, ut effroenem sibi
sumerent licentiam, and vitam ducerent flagitiosam, and so it is now, that they
might take an unbridled license to themselves, and lead (at least in secret) a
flagitious filthy life.

Before we conclude, we would fain have the Country reader understand this one
thing, that the Swincfieldians, Henry Nicholas, the Familists in New England,
and the new Quakers do hold that the scriptures are carnal, the Bible fleshly,
element^sh the word of God is to be rejected as a dead killing letter. Some
scores of places might be cited out of their writings in these words, and to
this purpose: from hence this follows, that a man is not bound to the outward
command, no man is bound to suffer for religion, a man may bow to an idol, go
to Mass, any thing, so they reason and conclude.

And by the same reason, a man may say, and unsay, swear, and forswear,
protest, and never mean, lie, kill, steal, commit adultery, if he have an
impulse, or if it be his light; let the countreyman hear what Mrs Hutchinson
said in open Court, that we are not bound to the law, and it is no
transgression against the law to commit sin; and let him consider what an
Enthufiast did, the History is this,

Thomas Schucker, a disciple of Rinckius the grand Anaebaptist, in the midst of
a great throng, pretending a rapture and revelation from heaven, commanded his
brother Leonard Schucker to kneel down, being demanded by his father and
mother, and many others, what he meant, answered, he would do nothing but what
was revealed to him from heaven, all the people being attent, the prophet with
a This was at Sengall, a Town in Helvetia, in the year 1527. Spanhemius.
drawn sword, cuts off his brothers head at a blow; being apprehended by the
Magistrate, and condemned to die, he did nothing relent, but professed upon the
scaffold, that this was the will of God, and it was revealed to him from heaven.

Obj. But what is this to Dr Pordage, he has visions, and does converse with
God.

Ans. This Dr did write a letter to a person of honor and piety, complaining
against Everard, that he was a witch, a sorcerer, and the most dangerous man in
England, entreating his assistance to apprehend him, and within five days
after to two persons of note, denied every word, saying he was no such man,
denied it earnestly, and often, nay said that Everard (of whom you have heard
something in these papers, page 56.) was an honest, godly man, after many
denialls, being told by them, that they admired at him, for they lately saw the
clean contrary under his own hand in a letter to Col. Evelyn, Governor of
Wallingford, This Dr was surprised and startled at it, being not able to deny
it, but said, he was now of another mind, Col. Evelyn meeting the Dr, told him
what a lewd practice this was, to affirm and deny at pleasure, not to be
endured amongst men, as men, for by this means he might practice any
wickedness. He answered, that he was in a distemper when he wrote, that he was
of one mind then, and another now, and that no man ought to persecute another
for his Witchcraft and sorcery must have liberty of conscience.
conscience, thus adding one lie to another.

Observe, whither will men run when once they come to fall off from the Deity
and blood of Jesus Christ, whither will they go? deceive, affirm, deny, etc.

Of what high concernment is it to us for the present, and for eternity, to use
all spiritual means, to get and increase in the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
that knowledge with feeling, Phil. 1.9. that savor of the knowledge of the
gospel, that knowing of the truth as it is in Jesus, that spirit of wisdom and
revelation, to open the eyes of our understanding, that we may know the
unsearchable riches of Christ, to know with all our hearts; this knowledge
being the spring and source of all evangelicall, true, and lasting holiness;
especially it concerns us in this hour of temptation that is come upon the
land. Those called Quakers are both Antiscripturists, saying the Bible was good
for those times, but now they are out of date, and also Antichristians, let no
man deceive himself by their pretended mortification, they do deny redemption
from guilt and hell, by the blood of the Lord Christ, without us, and so at one
blow overthrow all religion, and holiness.

If we had a voice as loud as the voice of the Archangel, (as one of the
Chrysostom. upon Psalm. 4. v. 2. O mortal men how long will ye love vanity?
Ancients said upon another text) and all the nations for our audience, there
could not, there cannot be a more preserving, seasonable, sanctifying text,
then that of 1 Cor. 2.2. I desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. It was the wish of godly Mr Hildersham upon that scripture, and we
make it ours, would to God that all the People in England were of S. Paul's mind.

Animad. 10.
Upon this Doctors pretense of Holiness, height of mortification,
abstractednesse from the world, living on the tree in the midst of Paradise,
etc.

Ans. This is not the way of Gods Saints: Abraham is dust and ashes, Jacob
less than the least mercy. Job abhors himself, David cries out, Lo^d who am
I? Peter calls himself a sinful man, and Paul, the least, less than the
least of Sa^nts. Thus did not the Fathers or Martyrs boast of, but complain
against themselves. The richest Mines lie lowest, and the deepest rivers make
the least noise. But he must praise himself, or else who will, that knows
God? and how how should he be like his predecessors, of ancient and later
times? As

Simon Epiphan. contr. haer. page 18. Tom. ^. lib. 1.
Magus, a horrid blasphemer of Christ, a sink of filthiness and Lust, a man of
very slender parts, and a shallow judgment, and so fell to deceive the people
by Magical tincturation (as the Doctor phrases it) he bewitched the people of
Samaria.

This wretch gave out, that he was some great one, he called himself the power
of God, and gave out, that he came down from on high, and the people presently
said so, even from the least to the greatest, they said, this man is the great
power of God, Acts 8.10. yet Peter tells him, he was in the gall of bitterness
and bond of iniquity ver. 23. he kept a Harlot whils he lived, and was brui ed
to pieces when he dyed.

The false Apostles and Idem Haer. 31. page 56. Tom. 2. lib. 1.
Gnostics by what name soever distinguished from their several ringleaders,
how did they vaunt themselves as the knowing men of the world, and the
spiritual ones, soaring in their notions? they had their mystical stuff, and
unintelligible words, but very Caterpillars of Hell upon every green herb, let
the Gal. 3. Phil. 3. 2 Pet. 2. 1 John 2. Jude the whole Epistle.
Apostles, Paul, Peter, John and Jude, be considered, speaking their unerring
judgment of them, they called them Witches, Dogs, ungodly, wanton,
bruit-beasts, presumptuous, ignorant, cursed Children, Antichrists, Liars,
filthy Dreamers, despisers of Government, for whom is reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever.

This vaunting of heigths has ever been the way of Heretics, Epiphanius
observed long since, that the Gnostics of all sizes, and all the rest
Dignitate etc. they boasted themselves with honorable titles, to convey their
poisonous Doctrines, and Calvin of late, sub praetextu nominis, etc. they
labor to raise an esteem to themselves, and so to seduce the simple, under the
pretense of sanctity.

Thus did Antonius Pocquius hear him speak for himself as one raised of God in
these Last days, thus, we are now taught of God, I understand nothing, for God
is my understanding, thanks be to God by the spirit of renovation, I am raised
from the Dead, I am quickened with Christ, called with Angels, I am past the
Law, an heir of Immortality, our Souls are the secret dwellings of Divinity,
the world is burnt up in me by fire, etc. You will say, what was this Pocquius?
sure a holy man, yes, if you will take his own word, but hear what Mr.
Furcifer, nebulo, impius, infal x, poreus, very often, Calv. Instr. ad. lib.
cap. 23. his censure of Pocquius.
Calvines censure was of this high-flown Meteor, this Satan, transforming
himself into an Angel of light.

Calvin terms him a rake-hell, a villain, ungodly, unlucky, a Swine, etc. yet
Calvin was a man of singular patience and meekness, insomuch (as Epiphan. said
of himself, that he did compel himself to write the blasphemy and filthiness
of Heretics for the good of future generations) so did he even force himself
to rehearse the ungodly, and unclean practices of the Libertines, to name
their persons, and to set such deserved brands upon their names, for the glory
of the Lord Jesus, and saving souls from being taken in the snare of the Devil.

David George of Delph, in the Netherlands, an Impostor, a pattern both of
detestable Heresies, and abominable filthiness, ^parbemius in his naration of
the Original of Sects, page 21.
he gave himself out for the Christ of God, he called the Scriptures
imperfect, nay, childish and carnal; he cozened his Disciples of their Money,
he pretended persecution for the sake of Christ, (as this Doctor does in his
book) and although a man would think that no person could be so irreligious, or
irrational to entertain his horrid Doctrine, yet a very great multitude were
seduced by this vile wretch, his means of seducing were these three: 1. A
crafty way of instilling his opinion into others, creeping into men's minds by
little and little through subtle and wary insinuations, for he would not
reveal his horrible mysteries, but to those who were totally his own; 2. by
counterfeiting a comely, majesticall kind of countenance; but 3. and chiefly
by an outward show of a holy life, and a mortified conversation, and his
frequent and seemingly M^re austere than any Gapucian, fasted three days
together. Ruther Sur. cap 4.
fervent pouring out his prayers unto God; at last when his Vizard began to be
torn from his face, by some of the Netherlands, who knew him, who fled to
Basil for succor, this wretch partly through the gnawings of a tormented
conscience, and partly through fear of the civil Magistrate, pined away and
died miserably, in the year, 1556.

Henry Nicholas, whose Blasphemies are justly accursed to the pit of Hell, and
whose secret whoredoms and filthiness were at last detected, yet how did this
man pretend austerity, holiness, perfection? giving out in his gibberish, that
he was anointed in the hoary age, of the holy understanding, at the beginning
he watched diverse nights, and fasted, and prayed, and praised, and then came to
visions, and thence to the Devil.

Faustus Socinus, that wretched Caitiffe, and incarnate fiend, who made it his
business to confute that inveterate figment, (as he calls it more then
Satanically) of the Deity of Jesus Christ, yet this man also pretends much
meekness and modesty, using toward those that did detest and oppose him, the
sweet compellation of Brethren, and that in such a sweet way, (as many now
adays do language it toward blasphemers) he would commend Luther,
Oecolampadius and others, and as it were by a side wind of their
commendations, sail into the port of his own ample praises, he Dr. Cheynect
rise and groath of Socianisms.
pretended to be a reformer of the reformers, nay, of the reformation it self,
he looked on other men, and gave it out amongst his Proselites, as low men (as
the Doctor calls the Ministers of a narrow stamp) he says that God in this
last age intends to make many new and glorious discoveries, and slily
intimates, as though he were the man ordained of God to erect the temple of
Christ: many more might be named, but these are too many, and truly we should
admire at our own folly, in being so copious upon this subject, but that we
cannot choose but stand amazed at the indiscretion of many professors,
especially in such a day of plentiful light, who do unawares plead for, and
give countenance to horrid Blasphemers, because they walk under the notion and
show of holiness, and pretended mortification, as if we had no Bibles to
inform us, that Wolves, devouring wolves should come in Sheeps clothing, and
false Prophets should carry their matters with so much speciousnesse, that they
should bid fair, nay and should do it too (if it were possible) namely
deceive the very elect, the Devil is never so much a Devil as when he is
white, he knows full well that he can do nothing to any purpose for his own
Kingdom, but in that color, we desire to have a raised esteem of the least
dram of true holiness, we say that Rubies and all that can be named or
imagined, are not comparable to it; we say as Luther, that one single gracious
work, is more worth than the whole world, only it is a trouble to our Souls,
to see people cheated into, and hardened in damnable opinions by such shows and
pretenses: we believe there can be no real holiness, without the sound and
right knowledge of Jesus Christ; we conclude this for these days, with that of
Adversus Francisc. p. 570.
Calvines in his days, they have mortification often in their mouths, but
their mortification is this, viz. they have no sense of good or evil.

Animad. 11.
As to the Phrase and Language used by the Doctor, as for example:

The fiery Deity burning in the center of the Soul, the Godhead mingling it
self with our flesh, the divine union, the divine transportation into the
glory of the Majesty, p. 76. the essential essence of love, fixation in the
love of the holy Ghost, divine tincturation, eyes fixed upon the being of love,
the pure life of virginity, with many more. We desire the Reader to observe,
that this has been the guise of Blasphemers and Familists old and new.

Valentinus in his Men's in^^^^^b^lis magn^ ^^^e in. b l^bilibus ^^nominatorum
supersalestium. and Epiph l. 1. Tom. 2. Hae^. 3^.
Epistle begins high with swelling unintelligible words, thus: The
unabolishable mind to the in magnitude unabolishable, of unnameable
supercelestiall secrets I will make mention to you, with a fardell of
nonsensicall stuff of his males and females, and his triginta saecula. This
Blasphemer was as errant too at Allegorizing as our Doctor; he proves his
thirty Ages or Worlds most clearly by the Parable of the Laborers sent into
the Vineyard, thus: Some were sent at the first hour, (...), These they called
wonderful ineffable Mysteri^s.
some at the third, some about the sixth hour, others at the ninth, some at the
eleventh hour. Now compute 1. 3 6. 9. 11. and these hours put together make
thirty, and this among his Sect was as clear as the Sun to prove his triginta
saecula. Just as R. Higgs (one of the Doctors Disciples and Witnesses) when one
told him he could not believe Abraham's family in that Text to be his Family in
him, viz. his will and affections, Oh said Higgs to him, It is clear as the
day, so that Pontius Pilate must condemn Christ in us, and the Jews put him to
death in us all very clear. This Allegorizing and Quakerisme bids fair to
drive the Scriptures out of the world, the very hopes whereof will make the
damned Fiends keep Holyday in Hell, when men thus abuse the Scripture, and
bewitch the simple. It calls to our mind a saying of an Ancient, Whosoever
speaks the Scriptures in another sense than he that wrote it, that man Austin
de Doct. Chr. lib. 1. cap. 37.
speaks a lie, though he speak the Scripture.

And again, for this frothy language of Seducers: What Idem de Doct. Chr: lib.
4 c x.
profit (says he) is there in the sublimity of words, which are not
understandable by the hearers? when there is no other cause of speaking, if
they understand not what we speak, for whose sake we speak that they may
understand; He that teaches, should avoid all words that do not teach.

Quintinistae peregrina, etc. the Velut cerculatores and errones ex Bohemia.
Cornicantur.
Quintinists use a strange and uncouth language, with which they do so chough
it, that there is no more perspicuity in their words, than in the chanting of
birds, and this they do a maliciously to circumvent novices, ^^^^in adv. (...)
cap. 7. (...). 516.
for they reveal not the mysteries of their abominations, which lay under the
covert of their swollen language, but to their own, who are bound to them by
Oath of Secrecy, under these they lay hid like thieves in a thicket, their
novices stand amazed at the sublimity of their words, which Peter and Jude
compare to bubbles and froth. See more.

So H. Nicholas, thus, H. Rutherfords Survey Antichrist, cap. 9. page 56.
Nicholai, through the holy spirit of the love of Jesus raised by the highest
God from the dead, anointed by the holy Ghost, in the old age of the holy
understanding of Jesus Christ, illuminated with the spirit of heavenly truth,
the true light of perfect being godded with God, or the spirit of his love.

John Knewstubb in his confutation of H. N.
This form of writing is an evident note of a seducing spirit.

There are Quakers at Bodenham, who suffer extreme tortures of body, visible to
the reporter, and many others, very often so extreme, that if God did not limit
the Devil, their inwards would burst out, trembling and quaking in their
agonies, as though their flesh would part from their bones, and ligatures, they
call these The Quakers blazing star, by Edmund Skippe, teacher at Bodenham.
page 22.
agonies the fiery trial, and they say it is the power of the Holy Ghost
burning up and destroying their corruptions, purifying them as gold tried by
the fire seven times.

They tell you how much joy and pleasure they have mixed with their torment
that they could wish to be in it even for ever and ever.

This they call the drinking of the Cup, the undergoing the wrath and curse of
God, as Christ did, most blasphemously, and say they must be brought to suffer
as Christ did, until there is nothing left them but the pure seed of God. Thus
reckoning as far as I can determine (says he) by their words, that upon this
account they must be Just like the Doctor, not by the saplesse righteousness
of another, but the fiery deity burning in the center of the soul:
justified before the Lord. This testimony is unquestionable, because of an
eyewitness and eare-witnesse, Like to be seduced into this way by Satan, but
delivered out of it by the Lord Christ.

The Quakers at Reding had the same language of Christ suffering death from the
eternal Love, and the holy Ghost burning up their lusts, and what were these
but Blasphemers, saying, 1. Your Ministers tell you, that Christ died for your
sins, if so, then you may live in them. 2. That the Scriptures were not the
Word of God. 3. That Solomon was a fool, for saying, To every thing there is a
season, Eccles. 3.1, 2.


And this is their common principle, but the times will not yet bear it.

Thus Call. ad Lib. cap. 9. page 519.
Quintinus, Porcus ille unumquemque Apostolorum aliquo scommate notavit vacans,
Paulum vas fractum, Joannem juvenem stolidum, Petrum abnegatorem Domini,
Matthaeum foeneratorem. We are loath to English it.

Animad. 13.
Upon the Doctors pretended great Temptations by several applications of the
Devils to him, in the shape and clothes of Everard, and of a Giant with a
Sword in his hand, and a great tree lying by him, and a great red Dragon, with
red Eyes, and Teeth, and a long Tail, page 73. of his books, for three weeks
together.

Observe that temptations of Satan, are either ordinary or extraordinary.

1. Ordinary are injections to ordinary sins, as Satan tempted David to number
the people, and the Devil entered Judas to betray the Lord Christ, these are
frequent and hardly discernable from our own lusts, and therefore in this case
it is the truest, and safest course, to lay all the blame upon our own Souls:
let no man by the way of extenuation say, that when he is tempted, he is
tempted of the Devil, his striking fire could never harm us, were it not for
the tinder, and lint of our own base hearts; thus did David, I have sinned
(says he) and I have done exceeding foolishly; Nay, thus did Judas, I have
sinned in betraying innocent blood, and thus do the Damned in Hell, let us do
it as David did, Graciously.

2. Extraordinary, and these are of three sorts,

1. Of Blasphemy, and such as is not to be named, against God, Christ, the holy
Spirit; Saints thus tempted, would not in cool blood consent to such a thought
for 1000. worlds, one of the best ways in this case is, the more they are
tempted to Blaspheme, the more to lift up God in his glory, and to magnify him
infinitely above all, so to beat the Devils weapon down upon his own head.
Though they find a pronenesse in their nature, sometimes to close with such
temptations, yet this they gain by it, even to hate their own base nature.

2. Of violence to lay violent hands upon our selves, or our relations, and
this also is very terrible, and will make a man sweat for fear, and ask a Saint
in this case, or let him ask his own heart, whether he would do such a thing
or no, and he would tell you no; he would rather choose to be torn in pieces
with wild Horses, or be buried alive than do it, and yet it is so violent,
that they will say sometimes they must do it. The Lord keep such from the
evil one.

3. Unreasonable temptations, as that a man is not the same person he was, that
he must show himself as guilty of some notorious fact of which he never was
guilty, with many more; there are many Saints go to Heaven, that never feel
them, and those that do feel them, God makes them gainers by them exceedingly;
some learn more in this School, than by any books in the world, the Devil is
but Gods Scullion: incomparably better it is, to live under these temptations,
though for the present grievous, than to enjoy in a state of since, all the
pleasures and treasures of a 1000. worlds: the frownings of a Father are better
than the kisses of an enemy: the bitterest Physic, how much better is it than
the sweetest poison? by these sullyings and besmearments of dark temptations,
God makes the vessels of mercy to shine the brighter. The Lord Christ
out-shoots the Devil in his own bow; what he intends for the greatest
mischief, Christ converts into a sovereign good; Blessed be God.

But now this Doctor does not tell us in the least what his temptations were,
of what kind they were, nay in his book he says nothing (where he had a fit
opportunity to declare himself) of temptations, but of a conflict between him
and a great Dragon, and that he was assisted by the Angels, and page 76. he
says, the great conflict was between the dark world, and the Devils thereof,
afflicting them with dreadful shapes, poysonfull smells, and the light world,
and the Angels thereof, relieving them with odoriferous perfumes, Angelical
harmony, etc.

We deny not but God may suffer the Devil to appear to a Saint, but first it
is very rare; secondly, such Saints have been Gods real ones; thirdly, if so,
yet not to fight and contend with Satan mouth to mouth; fourthly, for a short
time, not twenty days together; fifthly, they have not an Angel standing by
them in their own shape to support them: the battle of Saints is within, which
through grace they fight with spiritual weapons under their Captain the Lord
Christ, through whom they are more than conquerors: as he has conquered for
them by his death, so he does conquer in them by his spirit.

The Doctor in his answer to these Articles, concerning apparitions, quoted
with much confidence the Lord Lawrence as a friend to this way, he must quote
him to this purpose, or to no purpose, and indeed therefore to no purpose,
because to this purpose, that learned Gentleman says nothing (that we can
find) toward it, the hearers much admired, and his favorites much simpred at
the naming of such an eminent person; if he be not of the Sure this honorable
and Leraned Man is not for a visible converse with Angels, nor the apparitions
of Devils in the shape of Giants, Dragons, Villains, in order to temptations.
Doctors judgment, why did he abuse him to name him before the Commissioners
and the Country? if he be, why did not he prove it in his Printed Book? in this
indeed he was tempted to deceive.

The truth is, (the Articles and Depositions in the Relation considered) the
result of all his pretended temptations will be this, that the Devils spitting
fire at him, and other Devils under the notion of Angels supporting him, was to
this purpose, That by this means he might more deceivingly and plausibly spit
fire at Jesus Christ, which the Doctor has done both before and since his
Apparitions and Visions; and therefore his quoting for his defense, the
temptations of the Lord Christ, Mat. 4. is wicked, and borders upon Blasphemy;
and his quoting of Job, (Job 6.4.) is very impertinent and ignorant. Job says
in that Text, The Arrows of the Almighty stick in me, and the venom thereof
drinks up my spirits, by Arrows figuratively we are to understand afflictions
inward and outward, which like Arrows were upon, and in that holy man, swift,
sudden, sharp, secret, wounding afflictions, described, 1. By the Efficient,
The Arrows of the Almighty: 2. By the Effect, They did heat and burnt up his
spirits. What is this to the sight of a great Dragon, with a long tail, and
great teeth?

Animad. 13. Upon his high Appeal to God, p. 112.
Concerning his Appeal to God, we profess that when we considered the
solemnnesse of an Appeal to the most high God, of what an important and
serious nature an Appeal is in it self, and considered the principles and
practices of this Doctor, we could hardly persuade our selves to read it; and
when we did, we were astonished to read such swelling words, as to his own
holiness, and his great persecution for righteousness; but this also in an
evil cause is not a new thing, we will instance in one, and that is Sir The
Narrative of King James, Printed by M. Sparks page 148.
Jervas Yelvis, when he was arraigned in the business of Sir Thomas Overbury,
he made solemn Appeals to God, and deep protestations of his Innocence; yet
after the Sentence, he confessed his guilt in the Tower, and upon Tower Hill
gave as large a testimony of sound repentance and real hearty sorrow, as few
Histories can show the like, and lamented that sin of protesting and appealing
in particular. That which we would have the Reader to consider, is, what Judge
Crook said to him at the Bar, when he did call God to witness, and protest,
Sir, (said the Judge) It is not your deep Protestations, nor your high Appeals
to God, that can sway the Evidence given upon Oath unto the Jury.

We have not named this Gentleman to blemish him for his sin, but to show what
dangerous courses guilt, and fear through guilt will put men upon to blind the
world, and save themselves: and we have mentioned his great repentance, not so
much for his honor, as the Doctors imitation, that he (if God please) may do
likewise and not to be as V^hementisimis and diris devotionibus per salutem and
damnationem animae omnia verissima esse d^jerabat. Camd. An. par. 4. page 35.
Hacket, who boasted of his temptations from the Devil, and his revelations
from God, with the highest oaths and protestation, that they were all most
true, when indeed they were all stark false.

But let us a little debate the matter with this man.
Doctor, how durst you speak thus, Eternal Majesty thou know it never
entered into the intention of my Soul to deny the Godhead of Christ, the holy
Trinity, etc. shall we believe that you preached and affirmed those Doctrines
that never came into your soul? Do you think that your appeal shall weigh
down the evidence of five godly persons, who would not lie, much less would
they swear false for God, will they do wickedly for the Gospel? did not you
confess that you did say, Christ is not Jehovah? could Mr. Blagrave deny it?
were there not Articles of Blasphemy charged upon you, and proved against you,
to which you never offered an answer? as this, That the liberty of Saints is
not a liberty from the curse of the Law, the guilt of Sin, the wra^h of God
by the death of another; meaning Christ, and explaining it so. And this, that
the discoveries of the sinfulness of sin, the death of Christ, the free grace
of God, are but fleshly and flashy discoveries: to these and others tending to
bestiality, and an African monstrousness, you never so much as offered an
answer in your own defense; are not you arrived to the perfection of the
Familists, viz. That now you are free to do that, which formerly, when you
were in the dark, you looked upon as a sin?

2. Doctor, why do you alter the tense in the next words, thus Thou know, I
am not guilty, not thus, I never was guilty of holding Christ to be imperfect,
and his righteousness to be fruitless: the truth is, we do not know what any
familist is, he is such a Proteus, more changeable (as they say) than the
Moon, for he will change every day as he sees fit, tantum constans in
levitate, only constant in being unconstant.

3. Why do you speak thus, Oh thou bright-eye, do thou not see the innocent
sufferings of my person for thy names sake? how often have I been numbered among
transgressors for thy truth and life? Oh dreadful! did Christ's Martyrs ever
suffer for such Articles charged and proved against them, how unlike are you to
them? they suffered for affirming Christ to be God, and his righteousness to
be our Salvation, and you were sentenced for denying both: Aretius calls Val.
Gent. and such as he, Satanae Martyrs, the Devils Martyrs; the accursed
Socinians, when they deny Christ to be God, they say they do it for the glory
of God the Father; The Jesuits do glory much in the Martyrdom of some of
their Society: it is a good Cause, It is not pana but causa, nor that only,
but conscientia that makes a Man a Martyr, his sufferings must not only be for
righteousness, but also for righteousness sake.
and a gracious Conscience that makes a Martyr, you have neither of these.

4. Why do you speak thus, they have ejected me out of my estate, which was
thy gift; The Country thinks it was the gift of some other, we are no way
satisfied that Bradfield Parsonage was Gods gift to you (as you pretend) and at
your re-hearing (for which you say boldly some of the greatest eminency in the
Council were, p. 111.) we shall give in our reasons for it; for the present we
will propose these Quaeres to you, 1. For what did your Tenant by your own
appointment give or pay to your use 85. l. to a friend? 2. Were not Doctor
Twisse's children sordidly defeated of that very money? 3. Is it not confessed,
That you gave a pair of Coachhorses to somebody that cost you 40 l?


The rolling of your brats conceived and born of your own lusts to the door of
Providence, with other reasons, does even force us to write almost with the
same liberty, that men do live in.

Why do you say thus, Oh thou eye of Eternity, in pure obedience to thy will,
I have addressed my self to the higher powers, that they might be left
inexcusable; what language is here? did ever the best of the Prophets give such
language as this in their own case, to the worst of Princes? see the man's
fierceness against souls, and those of Magistrates, the Christian, the
highest Magistrates, by his addresses to them he did design their
inexcusablenesse before God! Athanasius would not say so much in his own
particular wrong to Julian, as this Sathanasius says to the Council, when he
is not wronged at all, unless it be by indulgence. No, no, it is not the
suppressing, but the countenancing of, and conniving all seducing Blasphemers,
that will render the Magistrate inexcusable, which we unfeinedly desire the
Lord to forbid in their hearts by his grace, as he has forbidden them by his
command in the word.

6. Why do you speak thus, O omniscient Majesty; thou know that we are
neither the better, nor the worse for the justification, or condemnation of our
fellow creatures, but why so? when men fearing God are authorized to proceed
judically against persons for Blasphemies and Lewdness, proved by the oaths of
honest knowing men, and are found guilty, is this to be never the worse? for
Wickedness to be punished, Truth vindicated, the hearts of Gods people
rejoiced, the Souls of men to be delivered from the hands of destroyers, the
simple to be undeceived, the mouth of wickedness to be silenced, is all this
never the better?

Does not this strike at all civil government, and judicial proceedings? for
cui bono are they? We are neither the better nor the worse, if it be replied,
we i. e. we in our selves are never the worse, we answer, what is there more
said by the Doctor, than any Felon in Newgate may speak for himself? let any
admirer of his, either he or she, show the difference, if they can.

7. But Doctor, why do you call the Magistrates from the highest to the low
ones (your cause has been before both) your fellow creatures? is not this the
language of Babylon, amongst your Babel Quakers? where did you learn thus to
speak? what Scripture, Author, or indeed any man did ever learn you this? the
Quakers are not Men but Monsters.

8. Why did you not in your appeal clear your self of that suspicion of
bastardy, which you yet lie under? what is the matter you do not speak a
syllable of it? did you forget it? or are you guilty and afraid of more
discoveries? you have said that you would spend 500. pound, but you would right
your self from that libelling charg (as you term it) why do you not begin?
you do but vapor, nay, you do worse by far? you design to harden your
fellows, and cheat silly women; the Lord prevent and follow you and us, that
we may cease to add sin to sin, and one transgression to another:

Lastly, you conclude your appeal thus, My soul flies to thee as a Dove to the
Ark of rest, to be taken up into thine Eye; O how my Soul groans to be taken
to a presentiall enjoyment of thee, to feed continually on the tree of life,,
etc. We warn you in love (though you may call it as you have done the fire of
wrath) that a We advise the Reader to that searching pi^c^ of Perkins, v^z H^w
far a man may go and be a reprobate.
professor may go to Hell in his duties, and do you think to go to Heaven
in your Blasphemies? A man may loose his Soul in a good cause, and do you
think to save yours in a bad one? nay, the worst that ever was. Unless you
look on that Jesus, whom with burning arrows you have pierced, and mourn,
which God grant, your high expressions may cheat your Proselites whilst you
live, and deceive your own Soul when you dye, which God forbid.

Animad. 14.
Toward the Vindication of the Commissioners, from the unmortified tongue of
this pretendingly mortified Doctor.

1. He excepts against Mr. Dunch, and why, because Mr. Dunch looked upon him as
worse than a Felon, and asked him how he durst to deny the Godhead of Jesus
Christ? this was before the Ordinance came forth for ejection.

Answ. A savory Speech from a Religious, Zealous Gentleman, our Souls desire
that of his own Order he had more company in his Gospell-Zeale which is
according to knowledge; pray how did Saint Paul look on the false Apostles,
who did not arrive to that height of express Blasphemy as you have done in any
proportion? did not he look upon them as witches? How did Peter look upon the
Gnostics, when he called them cursed children, going in the way of cursing
Balaam? How did Polycarpus look upon Marcion, when he called him the first
begotten of Satan? or Constantne upon Arrius, when he named him the Image of
the Devil?

How do you think the Senate of Bazil looked on David George, when they did
execution upon his bones, and burned them to ashes? How did the Senate of
Geneva, look upon Servetus a Spaniard, a Blasphemer of the Son of God, when
they burnt him? pouring out his Soul in the midst of his Blasphemies in the
very fire, and this was done by the advice of Calvin, Oecolampadius,
Melancthon, and the Churches of Helvetia.

How did the Senate of Berne look on Valentine Gent. they arraigned him, and
sentenced him to Death for his Blasphemies against the Lord Jesus, and the
Sentence was executed upon him? Aretius tells us he dissembled at the very
place, nay, at the very point of Execution; and when they were ejecting him out
of the world (as you did when you were ejected out of your living) he boasted,
se pro gloria altissimi pati, that he suffered for the glory of the most high
God: did not the Senate look upon him as bad as a Felon? to come nearer. How
did Queen Elizabeth look upon Hacket think you, a Blasphemer of the Lord
Christ, when he was hanged and quartered, and whereas commonly people at such a
spectacle are compassionate, now by the hearing of the Blasphemies of this
Seducer upon the Ladder, as soon as the Ladder was turned (as Multitudine
postulante demittitur, exenteratusque membratim dissecatur. Annal. par. 4.
Cambden tells us) they cut him down, and pulled out his very heart.

When Gortyn and his crew had vented these three things especially, in
New England; See the History of New England, page 186. Anno 1643.
1. That Christ was no otherwise borne, than in the heart of Believers, and that
he and his were personally Christ. 2. That Ordinances were but Silver shrines,
made for Diana. 3. His disowning of, and contempt against the civil Magistrate.


How did many of these godly Magistrates look upon them there? how did Mr.
Cotton publicly and privately press the Magistrate, not to suppress their
Doctrines only, but to punish them as Malefactors; Nay, Mr. Wilson an humble,
tender, meek-hearted man, did profess, that if the Magistrate should condemn
them, he would be the first man should throw the first stone at them.

How did the Magistrates in England look on Prefat. Barth. Legate. Ob nefandos
errores Hareses, and detestandas Blasphemias, and execranda Dogmata: the Kings
writ to the Sheriff of London: the Narrative of King James by M^ Spark,
Printed, 1651. at the latter end.
Barth: Legate of London for these Blasphemies amongst many others?

1. That Christ was not God. 2. That there were no Persons in the Trinity. 3.
That Christ was not God from everlasting, but began to be God at his
Incarnation. 4. That the Apostles did teach Christ to be Man only. 5. That
Christ was not to be prayed unto.
Who for these Heresies was convented, condemned, and burnt in Smithfield, Anno
1611.

How did they look upon Super refandis haeres. C^ inthi, Vale tiniani. Arrii,
M^cedonii Sim: Magi, Man. King James hi^ W^it to the Sheriff of the County,
ubi supra.
Edward Wightman of Burton upon Trent, who was likewise arraigned, sentenced,
and burnt at Litchfield for these blasphemous opinions: 1. That Jesus Christ
was not the true natural Son of God. 2. That Jesus Christ was a mere
Creature. 3. That the holy Ghost is not God. 4. That he the said Edward
Wightman is that person spoken of in Deuteronomy. 18.18. (I will raise them up a
Prophet.)


How did the Parliament in 1643. look upon the denyers of the Divinity of our
Lord Christ, Anti-Scripturists, etc. but as felons, and worse than felons?

How did the last Parliament in 1654. three months since, look upon Biddle and
Tawney, reprochers of the Lord Jesus and the blessed Spirit, and Scriptures,
but as Felons? Some do think that they had looked upon them so, that in case
of their pertinacy, no man should have looked upon them in these Nations for
some years; had not the Session been concluded by the expiration of their
time. They declared their judgment by the commitment of their bodies to the
common Jail, and by burning Biddles book by the hand of the Executioner, in
London and Westminster.

Nay above all these, and which is the ground of these, How does God look on
Blasp^emers and Idolaters, read Deuteronomy. 13.7, 8, 9, 10. Here are two things
observable.

1. It is evident, the Civil Sword was appointed as a remedy against
Blasphemy: And

2. That it was the appointment of Jesus Christ, the Angel of Gods presence,
whom the Jews tempted in the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.9. and therefore it is not
true that the Lord Christ never appointed the Civil Sword as a remedy in the
case of Blasphemy, for he did expressly appoint it in the Old Testament, and he
never did abrogate it in the New. The reason of the Law (which is the life of
Law) is of eternal equity, viz. Because he has sought to thrust thee away
from the Lord thy God, ver. 9, 10. If Magistrates be the Ministers of God in
the New Testament, (as they are called Romans 13.4.) and Ministers to punish
evil doers, then surely either this is no evil, viz. to seek to thrust away
Gods people from him, or else the Magistrate is to execute vengeance on such,
as evil doers, non datur tertium. Godly Magistrates of old did take care for
the souls of the people, and they did it, not as types of Christ, but as
servants of Christ; for if they did it as types of Christ, then that care is
utterly abolished, and this very Ordinance by which the Dr is ejected, would be
as unlawful as to offer Sacrifice, etc. which how irreligiously absurd is it?

That saying of the King of Persia may deserve the thoughts of Christian
Magistrates, Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven for the house of God,
let it be done diligently, for why should there be wrath against the King and
his sons? Ezra 7.13.

We desire the Reader to observe,

1. That God from Heaven, and Magistrates of all forms, as Emperors, Kings,
Queens, free States, Parliaments, have looked upon Blasphemers, Seducers, as
bad, nay, worse than Felons, and these assisted by the advice of godly able
Ministers of the Gospel, and these too of all forms. Episcopacy, Presbytery,
Independency.

Object. Then was then, and now is now.

Answ. We do foresee this objection, because we do converse with it, are well
acquainted with it, the cryers up of a Toleration, The whore of Babylons
back-doore, (as Master Cotton calls it) use to speak much to this purpose. But
we say,

1. If the power of the Civil Magistrate in the things of God and Jesus Christ
were a truth then, it is a truth now, (the righteousness of Gods Testimonies
is everlasting) unless they can produce a repeal from God, and they may read
till their eyes drop out of their head, before they will find that, as we
believe.

2. For our parts we would not stand at the Bar of Christ with this guilt
upon our hearts, sc. of exempting of the Civil Magistrate in the case
aforesaid, That Religion may look to it self if it will, if she will have a
nursing Father and Defender, she may seek them: we would not thus be guilty for
the gain of the whole world.

3. Our thoughts are, that this objection will not be able to lift up its face,
but would think it a friendly office to be buried under some rock or mountain
at the day of Christ's appearing with all his Saints.

But to proceed.

The next Commissioner taxed by the Doctor is Master Trapham, and that first,
for the meannesse of his intellectuals. What a bold man is this to censure men,
and his Superiors, knowing men, and conscientious? But of this before.

2. For his Passion, and why? because he said, he could as willingly run his
sword into the bowels of such a Blasphemer, as into the bowels of a common
enemy, a shrewd crime indeed: why Doctor, is not Blasphemy against God a
greater evil than Enmity amongst men? the words to any sober understanding can
amount to no more than this, that Mr. Trapham is more heartily and zealously
bent against the Enemies of Jesus Christ, than against his own Enemies, and
the exercises of Civil liberty, that he is more a Christian than an English
Man: Mr. Trapham says to you, as Mr. Dunch did, How durst you be so wicked as
to deny the Godhead o^ Jesus Christ? The Devil durst not do it, nay did the
clean contrary, Mark 5.7. Jesus the Son of the m^st high God torment me not.
The Socinians, Familists, Quakers, do out dare and out do the Devil.

The next is Mr. Cook of Wallingford, indeed his charge is high, but as false
as falsity, the Doctor charges him, 1 for a supplanter of Mr. Wire, 2. that
this Mr. Wire suplanted is a godly man.

1. For his supplanting, the naked truth is, that the business concerning a
Minister for Wallingford, was made known to his Highness the Lord Protector,
who was pleased to refer it to Mr. Caryl, Mr. Peter's, Mr. Lockier, who
according to his Highnesses order met, and upon hearing on both sides, after
two hours debate did apprehend, and accordingly did order Master Pickney to be
the fitter man to be Minister of Wallingford, and Mr. Wire after some
convenient time to remove; A Copy of this Order we have seen, and this the Dr
calls subtle supplanting, and that the Godly party look upon it so.

2. As for Mr Wyers godliness, we wish it so, we are sorry that we are forced
to write what he has delivered, viz. that the Death of Jesus Christ is not the
procuring cause of Man's Salvation, a Doctrine toto coelo, inconsistent with
real godliness, or any one duty of it.

Object. The Man is known to be a blameless man.

Answ. Tell us not of that, a man may be without Crime, and without Christ,
nay, Antichristianisme, it is common case now adays, if his life, or any man's
life whatever, in the guilt of such a Blasphemy, should out-dazle the holiness
of an Angel, yet we will not stick to say, that there can be no Salvation, he
that will go to Heaven out of Gods way, must enter in without Gods leave.

The next is, Mr. Nutkins, who is reproached by the Doctor for blind Zeal and
rigidnesse of Spirit; A most unjust and false accusation: the man is a man of
eminency for knowledge, piercing into the Scripture, Soundness and Piety; a
man fearing God above many, a long stander, and a great proficient in the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, and one of those (happy man he) that loves the truth
for the truths sake, and our Lord Jesus in sincerity.

The last that were present, but not named, are Master Stroud, and Major
Fincher, whom this Doctor calls more moderate than the rest, yet their hands
were to the Sentence: we reply yea, and their hearts too, and we believe that
they would go from one end of the County to the other upon their bare feet,
(rather than it should not be done) to rid the Souls of people from such a
Blasphemer, to whom they give no thanks at all for his seeming commendation.

The last Commissioner named by him, but not present, is Colonel Arth: Evelyn,
a person of Conscience and Honor, whom the Doctor calls, A chief contriver of
the design against him, and that he set the wheel of others Zeal and false
Passion in motion, and that he prejudiced him in London and the Country,
telling all he met, that he was abominable and monstrous, etc.

Ans. As for designs we are not in the least conscious of any, unless it were
a design to advance the good of Souls, and to vindicate the fundamentalls of
the eeverlasting Gospel, from the tongues of Blasphemy and Lewdness: as for
this Gentleman's driving on a design, and setting others on work, and telling
all he met, that the Doctor was abominable, here are three untruths in a
breath, not one sentence true, no not one. It Is confessed, that he has said to
some, that this Doctor was an unworthy, false, ignorant man, before he was
sentenced, in which he spoke his knowledge, and he looks upon his ejection, as
an act of justice in God, and an act of conscience for God, in the
Commissioners, and a good mercy from God to the Country.

We cannot conceive what design this Gentleman is in a capacity to entertain
against this Doctor upon any self account (as this man insinuates) as though
his ejection were not justice, but some Plot, we do really assure our selves,
that the Commissioners can truly rejoice that their proceedings were not in
fleshly wisdom, but in singleness and sincerity in this business, and so
long as they have rejoicing in themselves, they do not regard the censure of
others, they know the praises of men cannot cure or cool the Conscience in
point of guilt, neither can the strife and reviling of tongues, in the least
disturb the Conscience in point of uprightness, it matters not what all the
world says, so God speak peace: only they take notice, that

It was very unrighteous, and unconscionable and daring in this blown-up Dr, to
speak evil, and that so publicly of his superiors: we do not believe that any
of those great Friends of his (with the frequent report of whom we poor
Country people are amused) would ever encourage him to, or will support him in
these unjust practices; we believe it is, and desire it may be far from them;
we believe he made more bold to vent his spleen upon the account of his
friends, out of his own presumption, than ever he will have thanks for his
labor.

As for the Ministers used at pleasure, made and represented as it pleased the
Doctor, amongst his own of all sizes and conditions, their answer is this.
They desire to be found in the blessed righteousness of the Lord Christ,
(whom they desire to love above their lives) that in him they may appear
blameless before the Father, and they do sincerely, though weakly labor, to
buckle upon their bosom, the breast plate of righteousness, which will keep
the faces and reproaches of men far enough off from their hearts.

They crave leave to say (as their betters have said, when they resisted to
blood) non patimur, sed videmur pati, We seem to suffer in the eyes of men, we
do not suffer in our own Consciences.

They hope they are not guilty in the transaction of this business, to suffer
as Malefactors in the account of Christ, and they know they are most unworthy
to suffer as witnesses upon the account of Christ.

They remember what Luther said (when the Popes paper Bull roared against him)
sure (said he) I am afraid because I am unworthy of such an honor, as to
suffer for Christ, this roariag Pope means not me. What are they, that they
should then be reviled, maligned for the sake of Jesus? Whether they have cast
the Doctor with Daniell (as he meekly says) into the Den, or with the three
Children into the fire, or whether he has not cast the glories of the Gospel,
and the joys of real Saints, into Satan's Den, (quantum in se) and into the
fire of the Pit, the day will reveal, that great day of Revelation.

These Ministers humbly tell their Fathers in Christ, and all their
fellow laborers, that they have been so inured to the noise of Nilus, that
they scarce hear it now; they have been so accustomed to the reproaches of
Anabaptisticall Arminians, Anti-sabbatarians, Anti-Christians, Anti-ordinanced
men, etc. that (they hope they are not vain) they are become deaf to them:
they are even almost Scandall-Proof.

To conclude, this Doctor calls the Commissioners Crucifiers, Plunderers of his
holiness, at the entrance of his book, and now grossly slanders some of them.
Oh what would these men do, if they had but the liberty of their hands, as
they have of their tongues! he clamours as though he were Persecuted, when he
is indeed the Persecutor; he does not suffer but act Persecution. Let the
Reader judge whether the Commissioners Persecute him, or he Persecutes the
Commissioners; what would these men do, if they had power? they sparkle rage
and fury through their eyes and tongues, the Lord grant the Gospel may never
feel the weight of their hands, the little finger of the Familist, and Quaking
Antiscripturist, would be heavier than the arm of Queen Mary, former
persecutors would pass for merciful men in comparison of these, Haeretici
sanguinarii, and the more spiritual the Heresy, the more bloody: it is true,
they have either been smiling, and fawning, and meek (as they call it) in the
cradle, but it is as true they have ever proved foul and bloody in the saddle.
Blasphemy in hardness would be matchless in cruelty: It is good for us to draw
nigh to God in this glorious, complete, (though now vilified) righteousness of
Jesus Christ, who has, and does, and will deliver us.

The last note upon this Doctors Appendix, page 106. concerning his Appeal to
the Higher Powers.
HE says, many were against his appeal, and his Petitioning the higher
Powers, and why? because it was a thing too conformable to the custom of the
world, and too slavish for men that live to the li^e of Christ, out of the
ways of Babylon. Observe, these many are some of his own, as you may judge by
the phrase, turbulent, and ignorant ones, as if Magistracy were a piece of
Babylon, and not an ordinance of Jesus Christ. The truth is, men are mad
because they cannot be so, mad at heart, because they cannot be mad in hand,
enraged against the present power in another hand, because they cannot be
outrageous with it in their own Government was looked on as tyrannical and
fleshly among the Munsterians, but when they came to have it, they were so
fleshly and tyrannical, that they spared no flesh that came in their way.

He proceeds to give an account of the reason of his applying himself by the
way of appeal, to the person or persons; here are so many unworthy reflections
that we are very unwilling to follow him, we do not desire in the least to
provoke the supreme Magistrate against him, only we crave leave to beseech his
consideration, as to the temper of these men; verily a Man could hardly have
spoken more contemptuously than this Doctor has done, if he had been before
the grand Signior at Constantinople, or the great Cham of Tartary: his reason
is,

1. He thinks there should be rulers, and ruled, and that from the inward
worlds which he has seen, and there 1. from the Government of Hell; 2. from
the Government of Angels, (which is more than ever the Dr will prove, though
his inward senses has conversed with them this 5. years) then 3. from the
outward world, (as he calls it) as Moses, Joshuah, etc.

His inference is this, now, what now? why now if we are to own, i. e. to Take
notice of this.
take notice of the rulers of Hell, how much more of the rulers of the world,
though made according to the rules of the Spirit of this world? how ugly does
this expression look? yet for a salvo to save his skin, he comes in with an id
est, that is (says he) according to the wise Canons of rational policy, what
ailes this man? here is not a word of Christian Magistrates, are not our
Magistrates Christians? is not the Gospel more clear and pure in England,
than in most, nay any part of the Christian world? do they not take care for
the good of precious Souls? the Lord increase their care, and pity to them
1000 fold: it is sadly true we confess, and may it be for a lamentation, that
there are many, very many thick fogs of Familisme, Socinianisme,
Anti-Scripturisme among us, and (were it convenient) we should say, that if the
Magistrates do not scatter them, by justice, Gods justice may suffer them to
scatter the Magistrates.

He proceeds to distinguish how men came to power, to this purpose some, by
immediate Divine designation, some by succession or Free election, some by
ambition, but he makes no application of his distinction, he does not tell us,
of which of these the present powers are, the reason is, as we apprehend, not
difficult to be rendered, it is facile enough, because, if he had applied his
distinction, he must either have boldly affronted the present Magistracy, which
is not to be endured, or else highly displeased his own Sect, which he cannot
endure.

To the last member of his distinction, sc. these who assume power of
necessity, policy, ambition, etc. he puts a boundless, and caetera, leaving
himself scope enough to say what he pleases amongst his own.

The Doctor names three ways of coming to Magistracy, indeed this third is no
way at all, unless it be of Boniface, Kniperdoling, or the Quakers.

Some wise men name a fourth, and that is Power, thus, Upon the alteration of
Government, either in the Line, or in the Form, (and who thinks that either
of these simply, in natura rei, is unalterable, do we not read the contrary in
all History? do we not find the contrary in some Countries?) in such a case,
Power sets up Authority, which is, as we may say, the materiale, and this being
confirmed by the fundamental order of the Country, where such alteration is
made (which is as it were the formale of it) becomes fully complete, and
entirely legal to all the exercises of Authority.

Which in brief is no more but this, Power brings in Authority, and Authority
is nothing else but established, and regulated Power. As for men's assuming
power out of ambition, Pride (which is one of the Doctors brainlesse heads) we
cannot judge of that, For, Who knows the mind, and ends, and designs of a
Man, but the spirit of a man? Let them look to the sincerity of their hearts,
and against the irregularity of these base ends, for Every Man shall bear his
own burden, whosoever he be; but things of this nature are above our compass,
and without our business, this being to submit, and not to dispute, therefore
we proceed.

He tells us, that he bows to the powers, as Abraham did to the Heathen people,
and as Paul gave the Ethnic Princes their titles, appealing for justice to
Caesar, a Heathen tyrant, and this may be done by him, (as Paul did it) without
owning himself of, and in union with their corrupt societies. Further he says,
that as there was no necessity for the Jews who lived in Ethnic Babylon, to
partake of their sins, though they were civil to the power, so they that live
in Christian Babylon, are not necessitated to partake of their sins, though
they give them titles, and appeals ^t them.

We profess our selves at a stand to determine, whether here be more
ignorance, or sed^tion, here is so much of both; are our Magistrates the Sons
of Heth? is he Abraham? are they Heathen Caesar's? is he Paul? is England
Babylon? may not Christians be Magistrates?

Object. Your note is partial, he quotes, Romans 13.5, 6, 7.

Answ. The Quakers who would be glad to see all the Bibles light and flaming in
the fire, do yet quote them for their own ends, to deceive; and the people
say in their simplicity, they quote the Scriptures, and so are bewitched by
degrees, when as these men hate the Scriptures, and Blaspheme them, they mean
no such thing; so here even in this also, this Doctor has said,
notwithstanding this text now printed by him:

1. That he cared no more for the higher powers, or any man in England, then he
valued the dust under his feet; and this in the Pulpit, and as we conceive, nay
are certain, since he has been in the third Heaven as he pretends.

2. He has said, that there should be no Parliament, nor Magistrate, nor
Governor in England ere long, and being demanded how men should or could live
without Magistrates and Law, he answered, the Saints should take the Estates of
the wicked to themselves, and the wicked should be their slaves, and that there
should be a kind of Majesty, sparkling out from the Saints that should
overawe the wicked; and Mrs. Pordage said to a professor, what you have shall
be ours, and what we have shall be yours; this was spoken since his inward
senses have conversed with the Angels, and the eternal world, and it was spoken
confidently, as if he had been a Prophet, but the time prefixed, which was
about two years is expired, and he a false Prophet.

Had this Doctor vented this stuff in his Pulpit, or blurted out this riffe
raffe before the Commissioners, or any others else, and not published it in
Print to the view of all, we should have buried it in silence, and let it have
rot, we should have been more respectfull to the Government, and the honor of
the Nation, then to have published his saucy and seditious language.

He says that his Highness, the Council and the Nation, may thank the
Commissioners, for hastening the poureing the vials of Gods wrath upon the Land
for their persecution.

Answ. Thus the shakers pronounce the curse against those that oppose them in
their detestable opinions; what means this man to speak thus? when as the clean
contrary is true, it is the Magistrates doing justice upon Seducers, especially
in fundamentals, that is a Scripture way to prevent the pouring forth of wrath
upon the land, and to preserve the people from the Plague, that all Israel may
hear and fear, and do no more so.

The higher powers have no cause to thank him for his uncivil kindle-cole,
appendixe, made merely to satisfy some, that they may appeal to the Powers,
though they and he agree in the maine, viz. That the Powers notwithstanding
such an appeal are Babilonish.

For our parts we desire to lead a quiet and peaceable life, where, as here in
the land of our Nativity hitherto, we may do so in all godliness and honesty.

2. We bless God, and praise him for the liberty of the Gospel, and we
confess we pray against a wretched universal Toleration.

A toleration of Idolatry infected the ten Tribes; that Infection proceeded to
break forth to a Botch, they became Idolaters; that Idolatry was the chief
Sin from whence came their Captivity, which Captivity was into a strange
Land, where they continue to this time.

God did forbid them to suffer any strange Gods, nay not to ask after their
names, nor to enquire how the Nations did worship them: but they hearkened not,
They mingled themselves with the heathen, Psalm. 106, 35, 36. And what then?
they learned their works; What works? they worshipped their Idols; And what
follows? which became also their ruin.

They had many warnings and Sermons from God by the Prophet; but perhaps they
thought they were resolved, and wise enough, than ever to say to a stone, thou
art my Father, or to worship the host of Heaven (as many a man in England
would have even spit in a man's face, if he should have been told 12. years
since, that he would deny Sabbath, nay Scripture, nay Christ the Lord, with an
Am I Dog, which yet is woefully come to pass) by this means they were ensnared,
and did as the Heathen, and were well nigh 2^00. years since carried away by a
Heathen Prince into a Heathen Country, no man knowing where they are to this
day.

3. We do not envy at men's exercising in a ministerial way, so they be
qualified according to the Scripture, although they never smell the smoke of
the University, w uld all the Lords people were Prophets Yet we say, 1. we are
hearty we^l-wishers to those places, and the learning there attainable which is
exceedingly advantageous, and we confess, that the spite of the Devil, the
subtilty of the Jesuits, the barbarism o^ New lights, as they are called, the
hard speeches of Loose ones, makes us prize them both the more; sure it must be
some great good that is condemned by these: 2. As for Ordination, we believe it
was instituted by Jesus Christ, and never hitherto by him made null, and
therefore necessary where it may be had.

We cannot but sadly look upon, and lament over the woeful effects of the
Separation; How has God born witness against it in our sight, as heretofore
in Germany? Into what Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, Looseness, Lewdness,
neglect of Duties, scorning of them, have thousands run? A man may run and read
it, we call these, and might name many particulars under these, effects of the
Separation, we think they are more than Consequences.

Obj. What need this? to what purpose do you mention it?

Answ. The unworthy speeches of this Dr. and such like have even forced this
confession from us, and yet not in regard of our selves, that we may stand
right in the eyes of men (we would live in the Testimony of our own hearts) but
in regard of the word of the Gospel, that the lewd reports of men, who make it
their business to speak evil, may not prejudice (as it does too much every
where by the policy of Satan) men from hearing, and through Grace entertaining
the truth, whereby they may be sanctified and saved. Now God, our Father, who
has freely loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, through Grace, and
our blessed Lord Jesus who has loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his
own Blood; and the holy Spirit, who does reveal that Grace in the Scripture,
and seal it upon our hearts, vouchsafe, that Truth, and Righteousness, and
Peace may meet and dwell in the midst of us, and our children after us, and
grant that those, who hold the Head, and walk in the Light, may have fellowship
one with another, that the glory of the Lord may dwell in the Land in our
days, and the Generations that shall come after us, till time shall be no more.

FINIS.

