A FURTHER PROPOSAL From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND The Council of
war of the ARMY under His COMMAND.

Desiring the discharge of all such persons as are imprisoned under pretense of
Conventicles, or for private Meetings for Religious Duties.

ALSO, A Petition and Remonstaance from the Forces of the Northern Association;
declaring the Reasons of their apprehending and securing Colonell-Generall
Poyntz.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War.

Signed, John Rushwo^th, Secr.



London, Printed for George Whittington, and are to be sold at his shop at the
sign of the Blew Anchor in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

A further Proposal from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
War, of the Army under his Command.
WHereas diverse persons really affected to the weal and peace of this Kingdom
(many whereof have engaged their estates and lives with the Parliament in the
late war) are now imprisoned, indicted, and otherwise very grievously vexed
(and many others liable to the like trouble) by force or pretense of several
Statutes (especially intended) against those who repair not to some Church or
Chapel to hear the Book of Common prayer, or against those who are Popish
Recusants, and by their not going to Church might be discovered: And against
these who should hold any Conventicles of Meetings to plot and conspire some
mischief to the State. Now forasmuch as the Parliament has declared against
the Book of Common Prayer, and that the said Act against the Conventicles was
not intended against people meeting only for Religious Exercises: we therefore
desire, That all persons proceeded against upon the Statutes of 3^. Eliz. 3.
Iacobi, or upon any other Statutes or Acts whatsoever of the same tenor with
the premises may be forthwith discharged from their imprisonments, indictments,
or any other molest^tion whatsoever, by virtue of the forementioned Statutes,
unless such persons shall be proved either Popish Recusants (and that by some
other way then by their not coming to Church) or to have in such private
Meetings as aforesaid some perjurious design, conspiracy and practice against
the State.

And for a more effectual course herein we desire, That the Parliament would
be pleased to give orders accordingly to all the Judges of Assizes for this
next Circuit throughout the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales (as part
of their Instructions) to acquit all persons suffering as aforesaid, by virtue,
or under pretense of the said Statutes, otherwise then as before excepted, and
to give the whole matter so in charge, that all Justices of the Peace, and whom
else the same shall concern, may not henceforth a tempt to bring the like
trouble upon any other of the well-affectd people of this Kingdom, under the
like pretense, as they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Redding July 21. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and his council of War, Signed, John Rushworth. Secr.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of all the forces in the
Kingdom raised for the defense of the Kingdom.
The humble Petition of the Soldiery of the Northern Association.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Excellencies Petitioners, having lately acted in matters
that concern their future well-beinge and safety; and also declared their
willing compliance, and connection with the Army more immediately under your
Excellencies command, we being engaged thereunto several ways, account it
our duty, as well to apprehend their and our opposers, for our own security; as
to defend our selves in the same cause. We cannot indeed but with grief relate,
that there should be such persons amongst us, that durst appear to act
against those principles, which first engaged us to the present service.
Therefore for our own pres^rvation, we are enforced to act against all such
persons of what quality soever, whose power might prove destructive to the
wel-being of the Subject, And accordingly thereupon we have apprehended Col.
Genesis Poyntz, who alleged authority, for acting against the public good. We
considering what dangerous consequent effects did, and might flow from such a
corrupt member as he, and others of the same nature, to deprive us of our
future happiness (if permitted to remain unremoved) who have made use of him,
and his authority, to bring to pass their plots, of machivilionisme. We
therefore humbly present to your Excellency (to whom we conceive we ought to
repair for redress) as follows:

1. That your Excellency would be pleased seriously to ponder the sadness of
our condition in being destitute of a Commander in chief, of known integrity,
and that accordingly your Excellency would be pleased to help us in this our
great necessity. 2. That your Excellency would be pleased to further
whatsoever may conduce to our future safety, for we conceive our selvas very
near to destruction, when the Enemies of our well-being have the command over
us, and would willingly make us accessory to our own thraldom. 3. That your
Excellency would be pleased to cause this charge to be prosecuted against him
by a Council of War of the Army more immediately under your Excellencies
command, many Officers here being accessory with him in the same undertaking.
4. These things being performed, we humbly desire your Excellency seriously to
consider our former engagements with you in former service, and to take such
course for our future supply with pay, as we may not lie languishing, when our
Enemies are in prosperity.
And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Colonel Poyntz Regiment.
John Bradley William Smith
Colonel Bethels Regiment.
Thomas Cambridge William Tomson
Colonel Copeley's Regiment.
John Hodgson William Bates
Colonel Ponsonbies Regiment.
Thomas Hunter Thomas Wharton
Colonel Brights Regiment.
John Drake James Mark
Colonel Overtons Regiment.
John Benninton Robert Morris
Col. Collingworths Regiment.
Robert Sharbie Thomas Shalloket



The humble Remonstrance of the Soldiers of the Northern Association, to his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of all the Forces of England,
raised by the Authority of Parliament.
May it please your Excellency,
WHereas, we have lately been put upon actions very public (yet lawful)
which we could have wished had been more private, had we not been exposed so to
manage the same for necessity sake, and in the carrying on of these affairs
of so great importance; Two things have been laid before us, Happiness and
Misery, Peace and War, Welfare and Ruin.

And unless we should have degenerated from the very principles of nature,
and consequently have become inhumane, we must have carried on these affairs
as they now appear to have been.

As for our parts, we do seriously protest, that the very principles which led
us to undertake the service, were for the advancement of the Subjects good (to
wit) their just rights and immunities; And in the undertaking of the service
we were thoroughly resolved to live and dye in defense of the same.

Indeed, we cannot but bless God for that glorious success which has been
freely given to those that undertook the service.

To this end, although our hardships have been very great, and occasioned many
inconveniences to our selves, yet our happiness is, that the Lord has crowned
our endeavors with the end of our desires, in some respect; but
notwithstanding (to our amazement) the endeavors of some pretended friends
were not wanting utterly to deprive us of the fruit of our hard labors and
dangerous service; which enterprises striking at the temporal foundations of
our well-being, brought us very near even to destruction it self. And since it
has pleased God to stir up the Army more immediately under your Excellencies
command, to withstand the Contrivers of this stratagem; We could do no less
but manifest our affectionate approbation of their actions, and our earnest
desires to partake with them in any condition whatsoever, which are expressed
in the Declaration, Petition, and Representations which we lately presented to
your Excellency: But since our first endeavors to associate our selves with
the Army more immediately under your Excellencies Command (out of the
apprehension we had of the equity of their proceedings) we found very many
unwilling persons both to our and the Kingdoms welfare; which have done as
much as in them lies, to obstruct our proceedings. And for this their
averseness to us, they have pretended the authority of Colonell-Generall
Poyntz; which we examining, found to be too true; insomuch as we have received
diverse Letters, sent to particular Officers, manifesting not only the
averseness of his spirit to whatsoever might conduce to the advancement of the
public good, but also the violence that he intended to offer to any such
persons, as should close or comply with that Army more immediately under your
Excellencies Command, in their just undertakings: Insomuch that we having
formerly had sufficient testimonies of his violent entreating of some, even to
the death, without a legal trial, (although it should be granted that their
fact were heinous;) we could not expect, but receive hard measure from such a
one, whose will was his reason, and his reason not his will, he being in a
capacity of acting dangerous things, and not wanting a will thereunto, as your
Excellency may please to take notice by the copy of his Letters, our case
being such, as that our happiness consists in being under such command as do
highly prize our welfare for the future. But least we should pass by such
persons whose perfidiousnesse has been a great cause of his acting, we shall
humbly remonstrate to your Excellency, that although in our apprehensions the
carrying on of the business by him will import no less then that he did
endeavor, as much as in him lay, to re-imbroyle us in a second war, and that
not against our foes, but against those who were our fellow servants for the
public good, viz. the Army in the South: Yet notwithstanding it is so plainly
evident unto us, that there is a sort of men who seemingly lie under a
prodigious Lethargy, and would gladly render themselves to the apprehensions
of godly men, as if they were unacquainted with the business, and frame that
as an excuse for their non-concurrency with us when it is too apparent (for
their credit) that they with him have countenanced and kept correspondency with
the Members accused by your Excellency; and not only so, but have made use of
his power for the accomplishment of their illegal designs: But the just God
will not suffer unjust men to go unpunished. Out of the apprehension of these
things, we could do no less but foresee the eminent danger that was like to
befall both our selves and the Nation with us, and what a great obstruction
there might (by this means) be put to the present hopeful proceedings. We
therefore considering what dangerous consequent effects were like to follow, if
such as these men were suffered to reside amongst us, and that the meanest
creature endeavors to use all means (even by nature) to preserve it self; and
knowing our late obligement not only to endeavor to protect, but also to act
against such persons; we sent a party of Horse upon Wednesday at night, being
the seventh of this instant month, to apprehend Colonell-Generall Poyntz,
which they accordingly did, and in the mannaging of the same, were as free from
offering any violent and uncivil action, as it was possible for men in that
cafe to be. He being apprehended, was brought to Pontefract, and is now sent to
be tried by a Council of War of the Army more immediately under your
Excellencies command, which we humbly desire may be accomplished, he having
deserved the same for injury done both to Soldiery and Kingdom, as more
plainly by the Charge does appear. And we shall humbly desire your
Excellency, that such course may be taken for a Commander in chief, and
Officers of integrity to be entrusted with these Northern Forces, as may
abhor all corruption in their places of trust, and as do disdain to go so
far beneath the spirits of upright men, as to stoop to compliancie with any
unjust thing for sinister respects sake.

These things being accomplished, we then hope sweetly to sit down under, and
fully to be possessed of that peace and future happiness, which is the very
price of our blood; and we shall willingly betake our selves to such
employment, as shall conduce to Gods glory, and the Kingdoms service.

Thus have we humbly remonstrated to your Excellency our present condition: To
whom shall we appeal (next to divine Providence) for a redress of our
grievances, if not to your Excellency, of whose faithfulness we have had
sufficient testimony, and whom we have followed to look death cheerfully in the
face (for our Countries freedom) in former services; and we hope shall not
now be left destitute of your help; which if we shall obtain, to be added to
the rest of former favors, we shall then rejoice, and quietly repose our
selves to all such warrantable undertakings as shall befit men who have been so
concerned in public Affairs, and (we hope) shall leave our freedom as an
inheritance to succeeding ages, and our selves (in the interim) to be commanded
by your Excellency, or whom else you shall think fit, for the service and safety
of King, Parliament and Kingdom.

Colonel Poyntz's Regiment.
John Bradley, William Smith.
Colonel Bethells Regiment.
Thomas Cambridge, William Tomson.
Colonel Brights Regiment.
John Drake, Fr. Mark.
Colonel Overtons Regiment.
John Benington, Robert Morris.
Colonel Copleys Regiment.
John Hodgson, William Baytes.
Colonel Ponsonby's Regiment.
Thomas Wharton, Thomas Hunter.
Col. Collingworth's Regiment.
Robert Sharbye, Thomas Shalloket.




