Sir Thomas Fairfaxs His last LETTER Of the Treaty with Sir Ralph Hopton, And a
Declaration of the proceedings of his Majesty's Agents with the Irish Rebels,
by way of Answer to his Propositions concerning his Majesty's general Treaty
for PEACE.

The Conditions made between his Majesty's Agents and the Irish; with the
transaction of the business of the Earl of Glamorgan, and other notable
Observances, by way of answer to Sir Ralph Hopton.

A Copy of Sir Ralph Hoptons Demands made to the General; with a List of such
as came in to Sir Thomas Fairfax during the Treaty.

Prince Charles it is believed will come in, and also that Exeter will
capitulate, and Barnstable, and Pendennis the like.

Sent to the Committee of the Army, and commanded to be printed and published
according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke. 18 March, 1645.

Sir Ralph Hoptons Demands.
SIR,
I Received yours, bearing date the fifth of this month, wherein I must
acknowledge much kindness from you, and a very Christian consideration of
sparing of blood: But one thing there is, I am confident, you have too much
honor to expect from me, which is, that to avoid any danger, or to enjoy any
worldly advantage; I will renounce my Masters Service, to whom, I am both a
sworn Subject, and a sworn Servant, that I must profess; I am resolved, to
undergo all fortunes with him, and if there shall be cause, to suffer any
thing, rather then in the least point to taint my honor in that particular,
and I hope, there is not a man of any consideration in this Army, under my
command, that is not so resolved; yet in all honest and honorable ways, to
procure the Peace of this Kingdom, and the sparing of Christian blood, and
take God to witness, I am, and still have been most desirous: And I hear,
from good hands, our Gracious Sovereign, is at present so far advised in a
Treaty with the Parliament, as that he has promised to pass 4 of the
principal of their Bills proposed, whereof the intrusting the Militia for seven
years, in hands agreed between them is one. I desire you to deal freely with
me in that particular, for if that be so, it will spare the labor of further
Treaty; being, for my part, ready to obey whatsoever his Majesty shall agree
unto: God indeed has of late humbled us with many ill successes, which I
acknowledge as a very certain evidence of his just judgment against us for
our personal crimes Yet, give me leave to say, your present prosperity cannot
be so certain an evidence of his being altogether pleased with you. It is
true, we are reduced to a lower condition then we have been, yet have we a
gallant body or Horse, that being preserved to a general accord, may be for
good use against our common Enemies, and being otherwise pressed, I may say it
without vanity, want not a resolution, at least to sell our selves at a dear
rate against any odds: Your Propositions, though they be not wholly to be
consented unto, yet if a general accord, much more desirable, be not in a
likely forwardness to prevent them, I shall be willing, that eight Commanders
of ours, with three Countery Gentlemen, give a meeting as soon as you please,
to an equal number of yours at any indifferent place, to consult of this great
business, and to conclude of some Propositions that may be Reasonable and
Honorable for both parts, wherein, I hope, God will so bless our clear
intentions, as may procure a probable inducement to a general Peace, according
to the unfeigned desire of

March 8. 1645. Your Servant RALPH HOPTON.
A part of yours falling upon a guard of ours yesterday, it is likely they
have taken some prisoners; I desire the favor from you, to receive a list of
them by this Trumpeter, till I receive a positive Answer to the contents of
this Letter, I shall not permit any of mine to attempt any thing upon any of
your Forces.


Your Servant RALPH HOPTON.


SIR THOMAS FAIRFAX, HIS ANSWER.
My Lord;
I Should most freely and truly inform your Lordship the best I could in any
thing that might lead you to a right understanding of things in order, to the
Peace of the Kingdom, or the real good of your self and those with you, so
far as may stand with my trust and duty to the Public; to what I conceive
your more certain knowledge of that your desire to be informed in, concerning
the Kings offers to the Parliament, would not be prejudicial: But the truth
is, I can give you no other satisfaction or assurance therein, then this, That
the King has made some offers to the Parliament, and amongst them one
concerning the Militia, something to the purpose, as you say you have heard,
but the just certainty what his last overtures are, or how far they have
advanced toward a general accord, I cannot at present certify; I do not
hear they have proceeded so far as to a Treaty; and I believe, That as the
Parliament may be discouraged from that way of Treaty by former experiences of
the fruitlesnesse thereof, and the ill use the same has been designed or
driven to, viz. only to gain advantages for Wars, without real intention
of Peace; so the late overtures that way are the least like to be successful,
by reason of the clear and certain discoveries the Parliament have had. That
his Majesty at the same time was and is laboring by Agents in all parts, to
draw in Foreign Forces, and especially, That the Earl of Glamorgan by
Commission from his Majesty, had concluded a Peace with the Irish Rebels on
Terms extremely dishonorable and prejudicial, upon the only condition of
sending over force under the command of that Lord, to invade England, whereof I
presume you cannot but have heard: And though his Majesty did in a Letter to
the Parliament disavow any such agreement, and pretended he had given order to
the Lord Digby, for the attainting and impeaching the Earl of Glamorgan of
High Treason, for what he had done therein: Yet by late discoveries to the
Parliament, and especially by Letters intercepted the other day at Padstow,
from the Lord Digby, the Earl of Glamorgan, and others, to Secretary Nicholas,
your self, Sir Edward Hide, the Lord Culpepper, and others, it is most clear
and evident, that the arresting of the Earl of Glamorgan, was only for a
present color to salve reputation with the people, and continue their delusion
till designs were ripe for execution, for the same peace is fully concluded
with the Rebels, the King to have the aid conditioned upon the same agreement,
and the Earl of Glamorgan at liberty again, and to command that force in
chief. Now for the overture of a meeting to treat further about the
Propositions I sent; Though I know nothing material that I can add or alter,
except in circumstances; yet I shall not refuse or decline such a meeting, or
ought else that probably tend to the saving of blood, or further misery to any;
Provided the meeting be speedily, and number of persons not to exceed four or
five. But (my Lord) when you consider what I have before related concerning
foreign Supplies, which I have reason to think you know and believe, you see
what cause I have to be jealous of advantages sought by delays, and not to
intermit any time, or omit any opportunity to prosecute the service I have in
hand; and that there may be no color of your expecting that forbearance on my
part, which you offer on yours. I do the more hasten back this my resolution
unto you; In pursuance whereof I do not despise, nor shall insult upon your
present condition: I question not, nor yet shall, I hope, be much moved with
that resolution of your men: I presume not on former successes, nor present
advantage in fleshly power, but desire to trust in God alone, whose favor and
blessing to this Army above others: I do not account in what is past, or expect
in future, to be for any precedence in merit or goodness of ours, whereby we
should be more pleasing to him then others; but from his own free grace and
goodness toward his people, whose welfare, with the common good of the
Kingdom, we seek and desire with all faithfulness and integrity to pursue.
And so committing the issue of all to his good pleasure, I remain

March. 9.1645. Your humble Servant T. FAIRFAX


A List of such as are come in to Sir Thomas Fairfax during the Treaty.
THirty five Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeant Majors, and Captains came in, March
11.

Forty Gentlemen of quality that came in the same day, some of great note.

One hundred Gentlemen, and others that have stolen away by Parties out of the
Enemies quarters.

Ninety six common Soldiers from Penryn with Arms.

Twelve more followed them.

Forty from Penryn are gone home, and have laid down their Arms, Colonel
Treoanian the Governor of Penryn (by Treaty) since.

All the Officers and Soldiers in the Fort and Harbor.

The Governor of Man's Castle.

All the Soldiers and Officers there.

One hundred Officers and Soldiers of Col. Champernoones Regiment, Falmouth by
this means is ours on that side the Harbor.

Two thousand Horse at least that are ours by the Treaty.

Three or four thousand Arms.

Prince Charles it is believed will now come in, and also that Exeter will
capitulate, and Barnstable, and Pendennis the like.

FINIS.

