THE Deep Sighs and Sad COMPLAINTS OF Some late Soldiers in Captain NEEDHAMS
Troop, in Colonel HACKERS Regiment, for wanting of Justice and Judgment, To our
Brethren and Fellow-bondslaves, who as yet are compelled to gather straw, and
make up your tail of Brick, and has no ease nor abatemant in your burdens, We
do complain.
We look for Justice but find Oppression, We wait for judgment, but behold a
cry.
DEar friends and Countrymen, you Commoners of England, whom we dearly love,
and whose Freedom and Liberty we have long desired, and the Lord that knows
the hearts of men, knows that we are yet free and willing to leave Father and
Mother, Wife and Children, and all the estate that we have in the world, and to
adventure our lives for your freedom, and truly of late we have had great
hope that this year had been appointed of the Lord to be your year of lubile,
which thoughts of freedom was no small joy to us, and that which caused our
hopes was, that the Lord has put such an oppertunity into the hands of the
Army, who was the great power that then late at the Stern of Englands affairs,
and might at pleasure have taken of burdens and loose bands of wickedness, and
have let the oppressed go free, which they did much pretend, and we hearing
their fair pretenses, could do no less but believe them, and we our selves in
our places which God had set us, being Members of the same Army, though the
least belonging thereto, thought our selves bound in conscience as far as we
are able to help forward with the work, and considering that the first work to
set about to do, for men that pretends themselves to be instruments of working
out a Nations freedom, is to look into themselves, and amongst themselves, and
there to try seriously whether they do lay any part of the burden upon the
people, whose freedom they do pretend or no, and if upon Examination they
sind themfelves to be oppressors of the power in the least, or layers on of
those heaburdens.

I say, the first work they ought to do is, to remove that oppression wherewith
they do oppress, and then they may proceed boldly to do as Moses did, when he
saw one Israelite smite another, and seek the destruction one of another; use
means to assuage their Tyranny, and bring down the Oppressor: so I say, we
being bound in Conscience thus to do, looking in our selves, and amongst our
selves, did find out the Acon, one Captain Needham, as we do conceive, that did
disobey the Command of God, in not being content with his wages, for God
commands all Soldiers whatsoever, to do violence to no man, and be content
with their wages; but he like that covetous Acon did proceed to wrong his
Masters, the Commoners of England, and the poor soldiers who served under his
Command, and being right sensible of this his unjust dealing, one Thomas
Fothergill a Soldier under his Command, having his spirit burdned with his and
other men's unjust dealings, could no longer forbear, but did proceed to
exhibit these nineteen ensuing Articles, which I do commend to your judicious
considerations.

Articles exhibited by THOMAS FOTHERGIL against Capt. NEEDHAM, in Colonel
HACKERS Regiment.
Imprimis, that the said Captain mustered in his Troop Robert Lavender in
October 1653. and received his pay who never was yet seen in the Troop.

2. That the said Captain mustred Thomas Vasse in April and May 1653. Who was
never yet seen in the Troop.

3. That the said Captain mustred John Rumfard in April and May 53. who was
never yet seen in the Troop.

4. That the said Captain mustrea Jervis Price in Sept. 1651. who was with
Charles Stuart at Worcester fight, and the said Jervis Price ran from his
Colors, in October 51. and the said Capt mustred him four months after he was
run away, as ^il appear in the Muster-roles.

5. That the said Captain mustred, and suffered to be mustred William
Stephenason the space of five months after he was run away from his Colors,
and when orders came to reduce ten men out of a Troop, old s^uldiers were
reduced, and the said William Stepheason was continued in the roles.

6. That the said Captain mustred John Ross a little Scotch Boy, who ran on
foot after the Troop, and was not any way capable in doing a soldiers duty.

7. That the said Captain contrary to the orders of the Army, mustred three
servants of his own as soldiers in the Troop, and received pay for them, one
of those servants being a child, not any way capable in doing a soldiers duty,
and has been mustred since November 1653. as will appear by the Muster-roles,
and was never yet seen in the Troop.

8. That the said Captain did re-entertain George Hubbert, who was reduced out
of the Troop for disobeying Command, and being drunk, and when the said Captain
had orders to reduce all servants out of the Troop, he continued the said
George Hubbert still in the Troop; and reduced an old soldier against whom he
had no accusation,

9. That the said Captain bath detained the Pay of several soldiers above a
year, as will appear by evidence.

10. That the said Capt. when he quartered at Kinardy in Bamph-shire, he drunk
so much Ale and strong waters, tell be was so drunk, that he could not find the
way into his Chamber, though he had before quartered a long time in the house.

11. That the said Captain left his Troop when we were in the highlands of
Scotland, and came for England about the beginning of July, and has not been
with the Troop in all above twenty days since the aforesaid time.

12. That the said Captain mastered Henry Hill and his man in April and May
1652. and received their pay, who never was as yet seen in the Troop.

13. That the said Captain mustred Henry Eden and Ronland Scaife in March 1652,
and when he had mustered them, he reduced them, and received their pay.

14. Tat the said Captain mustred Thomas Fihther, Edward Morley, and Thomas
Rigg in April 1652. and detained each man of fifteen shillings of the said
Months pay, and the month of May next following, the Roles being lost, the
said Captain did affirm that the aforesaid men were mustrod in the said May:
and caused the Clark of the said Troop to pay him for each of the said men. one
months pay, which they never had, they being reduced before in April muster.

15. That the said Captain in November 1651. having a drunken and a prophaue
person to be his servant, he being so sensible of his drunkenness, he could no
longer for shame, for the satisfaction of the Troop, but reduce the said
servant, and within three days after that he had cashiered him, he
re-entertained and continues him him in the Troop almost a year, and received a
soldiers Pay foor him, notwithstanding the said servant still continued in his
profaneness.

16. That the said Captain being present with the Troop in September 1651.
deprived John Lowes, an old soldier, and another ouldier of their muster
pretending there was not Room, yet notwithstanding his pretense, mustred one
Summerskill, and received his pay though he never was yet seen in the Troop,
and further in October next after, his name being in the role, he was called at
the Muster, the Golonells Clerk being there present, affirmed that he was
mustred in their Troop, so upon that our Captain being absens our Leiutenant
croffed him out of the roles, as will appear by evidence.

17. That the said Captain when we we^e called into the highlands of Scotland,
had five or six servants, for which he received the States pay, besides a
little Scotch boy which he mustred, whose employment was the leading of a
dog, and the said servants did not perform duty; but was employed about his
particular occasions.

18. That the said Captain and another Gentlemen riding on the high way, and
discoursing of some Gentlewomen, and at length pitching their discourse on a
particular woman, the Captain said, O she is a pure creature, I wish I were in
bed with her, the Gentleman judging his words very uncivil, reproved him, and
said, why are you so vainly given? the Captain replied with a light answer, and
said, are we not all Flesh.

19. That the said Captain mustred Henry Hill and his servant mentioned in the
twelfth Article upon the third of May 1652. when as orders was fos reducing of
thirty men, notwithstanding the reducement, the said Hill and his man,
continued in the roles another muster, though never seen in the Troo^^^nd the
said Captain received their Pay.

These nineteen Articles is either confessed by the Captain, or otherwise
punctually proved.
ANd I desire you to take a little notice of the ninth Article of detaining of
pay, the Article is but short, but much contained in it, for twelve several
men did make it appear that he had defrauded them of their due; Now Frinds,
that which I desire you to take notice of, is, that there was a Court chosen by
whom we know not, nor by what means this Court was procured, we know not, but
it was not the usual Court by which others used to be tried; and whether they
were chosen of purpose for some end or no, we know nor, but we have just cause
to fear.

And to say we had no justice, I do not, (neither dare I say it) but I leave it
to your consideration, but this we proved, that Captain Needham mustred several
men that was never seen in his Troop, and received pay for them, and mustred
some four months after they run from their colors, and was gone to the Enemy,
and he received pay for them, and the Count did not find him guilty of the
breach of that Article of war for false musters but did fine him twenty
pounds for the fact. An unheard of thing by us; again we proved that he had
kept from many of our Troop, several sums of money above a year and a
half; and after the exhibiting of the articles, compounded with several men,
payiog some twelve pounds fifteen shillings, and some less, and was not found
guilty of that article of war for detaining of pay, but was judged blame worthy
by the Court, and reproved for not counting with his soldiers, and paying to
every man his due, and ordered to pay to every man what he could challenge, and
desired him not to be ready again to stretch out his hand to draw to himself;
So we leave it to men of abler judgment then we are to judge, whether we had
justice done or no

But dear friends, this is not all that we have cause to complain of, for here
is more injustice offered unto us yet, nay, such as was never yet heard of, for
fince his, trial they have gone to the General enforming against us, we know
not what, but one thing we know, if for matter of fact, unjustly, for they have
not any thing against us in the least, but that we brought these deed of
darkness to light, and possibly they feared if we were suffered, that more of
their base dealing would be brought to light, and so upon their information,
the General has granted an order to reduce (as they say) as many, and who
they please, denying us absolutely of the privilege of the law under which we
live.

A sad story, and much to be lamented of all men, that men should pretend
nations freedom, and say that God has used them as instruments for the
procuring of it and yet deny their fellow laborers of the privilege of a
known law and severe, the which will take hold of a man for the least offense
that may be, what shall we say in such cases, all that I have to say to you my
friends the Commoners of England, cease you from man whose breath is in his
own nostrils, and learn to wait upon the true and everliving God, who is that
Moses that must lead you out of bondage, into that land of true rest and
happiness, which if you do in faith, patience and obedience, you are sure to
have your expectations answered, for though man fail us, yet he never failed
those that waited on him.

A WORD TO THE ARMY.
OH gallant Army of England whom the Lord has made valiant, and has crowned
with as much honor as ever was Army crowned with since the world began, and
has made the enemies of this nation flve before you with shame and confusion
of face, and those was the Enemies of England which the Lord had a controversy
with, whom he had formerly made great, and put power in their hands, and set
over the people in this nation, to lead and to keep in safety and freedom, and
without all doubt gave this command, both to King Charles, and the late
Parliament, to take off heavy burdens, lose the bonds of wickedness, and let
the oppressed go free; which command they disobeyed, and continued the poor
oppressed people of this Nation in as much bondage and slavery as might be, so
that the poor was forced with many sad groans to cry unto the Lord, and the
Lord heard them, and without all doubt, his wrath was kindled against those
unjust men, who had not obeyed his Command, and set his people free, but
continued them in their bondage, and raised you up to bring them to confusion;
well has the Lord raised you up to do this great work, and made you
instruments to pull down those great and mighty Powers, which in the eye of
reason was invincible: Now I beleech you consider, whether the Lord has put
that power into your hands that was in theirs or no? now if it be in your power
to loose the bands of wickedness and let the oppressed go free, oh do it! and
then you are sure to be gloriour indeed, and crowned with more honor then
ever, and shall eat the good things of the land, and the Lord will delight to
dwell amongst you; but on the contrary, if you will be like the rest, and make
your hearts far, and your ears heavy, and will not hear the cries of the poor
oppressed of this nation, and bring them into that freedom which they have so
long expected and waited for.

Surely the Lord will have the same Controversy with you, that he had with
those before you, who disobeyed his commaed, and if his wrath be once kindled,
who shall be able to deliver you our of his hands? nay, though you be great and
mighty, he can raise up poor contemptible creatures, to bring you down, and make
you fall with as much shame as the rest. Therefore look about you, and work
while it is called to day, least a night befall you, in which you cannot work,
and to will day overtake you at un^wares, and then you be if reed to ery for
help, when none will deliver you.

Now my desire and prayer to God for you is both General and Army, that now
when you have put down those great and unrighteous men, that you may not
endeavor to seat your selves in their places, and make your selves Kings and
Lords, to lord over the heritage of God, and the Commoners of England, who is
as freeborne as your selves: but instead of so doing, learn to do justice, and
love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God, and endeavor to take off those
heavy burden:, under which the people do so extremely groan, and at last let
the oppressed go free, and remember your fair promises in all your
declarations, which did engage all honest hearts so freely, to take your part,
and let our ears be no longer filled with those empty sounds of fare promise,
but let our hearts be filled with the sense of the enjoyment of Freedom, and
that the people of this Nation may have no more cause as they have had, and as
we have just Cause to complain of, now of injustice and oppression, but that
every one may do as he has just right, sit down under his own Vine, eating
the fruits of his own labors, and that he may not when he has labored all
day, have some lion or other at night to come and eat both him, and the fruits
of his labors up.

And now my friends, as many of you as desires to live godly in this present
world, strive not to contend with the great men of the world, for it is in
vain for you so to do, but wait upon that king of peace, who if you do, will
give you peace that passes understanding, and bring you into that freedom,
that all the great men in the world cannot deprive you of, so hoping that my God
will give me so to do, I rest.

He who desires your greatest good. THO. FOTHERGILL.
The Names of those that complains for want of Justice, reduced out of Captain
Needhams Troop. Tho. Fothergill. Tho. Bruce Corporal, Christophar Pyhurn
Clerk. John Wardell. William Poyd. William Bunkin. John Hall. Joseph Brooks.
Francis Kuowles.




FINIS.

