FOUR Great Victories: OBTAINED By Major General POJNTZ, On Thursday and
Monday last.

1. The taking of Boulton Castle, from Cellonel Skroope; With a Copy of the
Articles on which it was surrendered: where was taken 100. Muskets, 50. Pikes,
20. Halberts, 2. Barrels of Gunpowder, good store of provisions and Ammunition,
and all their Bag and Baggage. 2. The slighting of Welbeck; of Boulsover, and
of Tuckhill, three Garrisons in the North. 3. The taking of Worton Castle, the
Copy of the Articles, and taken in it, 150. Arms, 40. Pikes, 3 Barrels of
Gunpowder, 20. Vessels of strong Bier, and all the Provisions and Ammunition,
Bag, and Baggage. 4. Skipton in Yorkshire, also upon surrender.
Commanded to be Printed, and published according to Order.

London Printed, by JANE COE. 1645.

The manner of the taking of BOULTON CASTIE: With the Copy of the Articles
whereupon it was surrendered; by Major General Pointz his Forces.
THe Yorkshire forces having lain before Boulton Castle in Yorkshire, some
time, and intending to storm it, and play against it with the great Guns which
were sent thither for that purpose; it made the Enemy much afraid, and on the
4, of November 1645. It occasioned a parley, which parley occasion Articles to
be drawn up, and the result was; That the said Castle of Boulton, should be
surrendered for the use of the Parliament a coppye of which articles assigned by
both parties I shall give you verbatim; as they were agreed on between
Colonel Lassels and Colonel Scroope, as follows.

A Copy of Articles agreed upon for the Rendering of Boulton Castle the 4. of
November Anno. Dom. 1645.
1. That the Governor and 4. Servants with horses and Arms and what other
Gentlemen are pleased to go with him, shall have passage provided them to go
beyond sea, or to Newarke with a safe convoy, the Governor having liberty to
declare himself within 10. days which he will make choice of. 2. That all
Captains, and superior Officers may march away to the Kings Garrison at Newark,
with their horse and Arms, having a secure convoy, or to go to their homes at
their election and other Gentlemen with their horse and swords, and such as
want horses to have liberty to procure them, and those who please to go to
their own homes and remain there under the protection of the Parliament. 3.
That all inferior officers and soldiers within the Castle, with all their
apparel which properly belongs unto them, shall have liberty to march to the
Kings Garrison at Newarke with their swords, together with the laid officers, or
have pass to go to their dwelling places and their remain, under the
protection of the Parliament. 4. That the Governors mother with her daughter
may remain in the said Castle with a convenient number of servants until the
pleasure of the Parliament be signified therein, and in case of her present
removeall, that the servants may stay until the like order, having a fit part
of the Castle assigned them, and further that her self, her daughter and
attendance with what she is permitted to carry forth out of the said Castle be
secured by the convoy so far as her way lies toward Newarke. 5. That all the
Arms, Ammunition, and other goods now in the Castle, except before mentioned
shall be safely preserved and not hid, conveyed or inbesselled, but delivered
up with the said Castle, for the use of the King and Parliament, to whom shall
be Authorized, and that the writeings, and evidences in the Castle, which
concerns the Governors estate, may be secured for him in the Castle, or
removed from thence, any time within 14. days at his pleasure. 6. That all
officers and Soldiers, now prisoners in the Castle shall be see at liberty at
the sealing hereof, and that the Castle be surrendered unto me upon Thursday
next, being the 6. of this instant November, at one of the clock in the
afternoon for the use aforesaid.
Francis Lasells, John Scroope.


And accordingly, the said Thursday November. 6. it was surrendered. This Boulton
Castle was the Lord Scroops, this Colonel Scroops father, but his children
being bastards, and so not legitimate, he is not in a capacity of his fathers
honors. This Colonel John Scroope, is the son of the aforesaid Lord Scroope,
but not legitimate as aforesaid.

A List of what was taken in Boulton.
100. Muskets. 50. Pikes. 20. Halberts. 2. Barrels of gunpowder. Good store of
Bullet and Match, victual and other provisions. Some treasure considerable.
All their ammunition, and baggage
The Manner of the taking in of Welbeck House, by Major General Pointz his
forces.
Major General Pointz has treated several times with the Lord Fretchwell,
about the surrender of Welbeck House, not far from Newark; the Enemy desired
to have Winkfield Manor, on the edge of Derbyshire, slighted by us, and that
then they would slight Welbeck House, but that was refused, because Wingfield
Manor is the only pass we have, to stop the Newarkers from breaking into
Derbyshire: so they treated further, and agreed upon the surrender of Welbeck
House, for two other pettic Garrisons of ours to be slighted; little
considerable or useful to us, now we have taken Boulton house, especially if
Skipton be taken in too, which is also upon surrender. But the result of all
was to this effect.

1. That Welbeek a Garrison of the Kings, should be slighted, and they march to
Newark or elsewhere, and no Garrison be any longer kept there on either side, 2.
That two Garrisons of ours, viz. Boulsover in the farthest part of Derbyshire,
and Tuckhill on the hither part of Yorkshire, be slighted by us, and no
Garrisons kept in either of those places by either party.
Welbeck house is the Earl of Newcastles, and so is Boulsover. The Lord
Fretchwell one of the Kings new made Lords, was made Governor thereof.

The manner of the taking Worton House, by Major Genesis Pointz his Forces.
Major General Poyntz his forces having sat down before the enemies Garrison of
Worton house upon the borders of Nottinghamshire, a summons was seut in to the
Goverrnour Sir Robert Therrill, to demand the Castle for the Parliament, but he
denied to surrender, the enemy in Newarke being much discontent at the loss at
Spelford, and other places, and much troubled about it, and also for the death
of the Earl of Chesterfields son, who is since dead of his wounds, and not
knowing how to releeve them, which Sir Robert Therrell desired, but none durst
venture to attempt, yet the Lady Therrell Sir Roberts Lady being frighted with
the thought of those that were killed at Spelford by standing out so
obstinarely, she sent to Major General Poyntz to desire a passs to go in to
her husband, which was granted her, our forces being more willing to reduce
those places then to shed blood if it may be, but the mean while no
opertunity was lost, nor time neglected in the work, but all things were made
ready to storm; which was intended to be done on Sunday, or Monday last at the
farthest.

When Sir Robert Therrill, that honest man if he had it, and good Bowler, saw
that we were resolved to storm, and that he could expect no releef to come to
him; he perlied, and so both coming to capitulation, he agreed to surrender the
Garrison of Worton house for the use of the Parliament, and accordingly Articles
were drawn up and signed by both parties, the substance whereof was thus.

1, That the Governor and Officers should march away with their Arms. 2. That
the soldiers should march without Arms. 3. That they should march out the
next day to Newarke. 4. That the Castle with all therein should be surrendered
to the service of the Parliament.
And accordingly on Monday the 10. of November 1645. it was surrendered to the
Parliament; and Major General Poyntz was possessed thereof.

This Worton house is an house of the Lord Chaworths, standing on the borders
of Nottinghamshire, it was a kind of a subgarison to Newarke, and of great
concernment: it was very useful to them for a guard to Newark, and also a
considerable pass, and will be as useful to us to streit them, and to lie
close to them.

It is said that they in Newark are more discontented at the loss of this
Garrison, then at any they have lost a long time, and are now in a great fear
themselves.

A List of what was taken in Worton House, by Major Genesis Pointz his forces on
Monday Nov. 10. 1645.
150. Fire aarmes. 40. Pikes. 3. Barrels of Gunpowder. Buller and Match good
store. 20. great Vessels of strong Beer. Good store of Beef and victual. Many
Popish Books, and picturs. All their ammunition, bag, etc.
The Enemy had also quit the Garrison of Boulton Abbey, and quite left that
before, which was a Garrison they had not long erected, but left it again, and
were gone into Skipton; Boulton Abbey stood between Skipton, and Boulton.

Skipton also should have been stormed, but the Enemy desired a patley, and are
upon capitulation; the Articles were drawn, but not fully concluded on, but
they are for certain on surrender also.

FINIS.

