FOUR MATTERS OF HIGH CONCERNMENT.

Viz.

I. Diverse Questions upon his Majesty's last Answer concerning the Militia,
Resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament.

II. The humble Petition of both Houses of Parliament, to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

III. His Majesty's Answer to the last Message and Resolution of both Houses of
Parliament, Concerning the Militia and the Prince.

IIII. The resolution of both Houses of Parliament, March 2. With an Order for
the speedy Rigging of the Navy, for the defense of the Kingdom.

AC:OX.
seal depicting 3 crowns and an open book

LONDON, Printed by R. Oulton and G. Dexter, for F. Coules, and T. Banks, 1641.

THE HUMBLE PETITION OF Both Houses of Parliament, to the Kings most excellent
Majesty.
Mest gracious Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's most loyal and obedient subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament do find their just apprehensions of sorrow and fear in respect of
the public dangers and miseries like to fall upon your Majesty and the
Kingdom, to be much increased upon the receipt of your unexpected denial of
their most humble and necessary Petition, concerning the Militia of the
Kingdom, especially grieving that wicked and mischievous Counselors, should
still have that power with your Majesty, as in this time of eminent and
approaching ruin, rather to incline your resolutions to that which is apt to
further the accomplishment of the desi^es of the malignant enemies of Gods true
Religion, and of the peace and safety of your Self and your Kingdom, then to
the dutiful and faithful counsel of your Parliament.

Wherefore they are enforced in all humility to protest, that if your Majesty
shall perfist in that denial, the dangers and distempers of the Kingdom are
such, as will endure no longer delay but unless you shall be graciously
pleased to assure to them by their M^ssengers, that you will speedily apply
your Royal Assent to the satisfaction of their former desires, they shall be
enforced for the safety of your Majesty and your Kingdoms, to dispose of the
Militia, by the authority of both Houses, in such manner as has been
propounded to your Majesty, and they resolve to do it accordingly.

They likewise most humbly beseech your Majesty, to believe that the dangerous
and desperate design upon the House of Common^ mentioned in their Preamble,
was no^ in^e^ted with any intion to cast the least aspertion upon your Majesty,
but therein they reflected upon that malignant party, of those bloody and
malicious practices, they have had so often experience, and from which they can
never be secured, unless your Majesty will be pleased to put from you those
wicked and unfaithful Counselors, who interpose their own corrupt and
m^l^cious designs betwixt your Majesty's goodness and wisdom, and the
prosperity and contentment of your self, and of your people. And that for the
dispatch of the great affairs of the Kingdom, the safety of your Person, the
protection and comfort of your Subjects, you will be pleased to continue your
abode near to London and the Parliament; and not to withdraw your self to any
the remoter parts, which if your Majesty should do must needs be a cause of
great danger and distraction.

That your Majesty will likewise be graciously pleased to continue the Princes
H^ghnesse in these parts at St. Iameses, or any other of your Houses, near
London, whereby the designs which the enemies of the Religion and peace of
this Kingdom may have upon his Person, and the jealousies and fears of the
people may be prevented.

And they beseech your Majesty to be informed by them, that by the Laws of the
Kingdom, the Power of raising, ordering, and disposing the Militia within any
City, Town, or other place cannot be granted to any Corporation by Charter, of
otherwise, without the authority and consent of Parliament,

And that those parts of the Kingdom which have put themselves in a posture of
defense, against the common danger, have therein done nothing out according to
the declaration and direction of both Houses, and what is Justifiable by the
Laws of this Kingdom,

All which; their most humble counsel and desires, they pray your Majesty to
accept as the effect of that duty, and allegiance, which they owe unto you, and
which will not suffer them to admit of any thoughts, intentions, or endeavors,
but such as are necessary and advantageous for your Majesty's greatness and
honor, and the safety and prosperity of the Kingdom, according to that trust,
and power which the laws have reposed in them.

Diverse Questions upon his Majesty's last Answer, Concerning the Militia,
Resolved upon by both Houses of Pa^liament.
Resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament.
THat this answer of His Majesty is a denial to the desires of both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the Militia.

Resolved, etc. That those that advised His Majesty to give this answer, are
Enemies to the State and mischievous Projectors against the defense of the
Kingdoms.

Resolved, etc. That this denial is of that dangerous consequence, that if his
Majesty shall persist in it; It will hazard the peace and safety of all his
Kingdoms, unless some speedy remedy be applied by the Wisdom and authority
of both Houses of Parliament.

Resolved etc. That such parts of this Kingdom as have put themselves into a
posture of defense against the common danger, has done nothing but what is
justifiable, and is approved by the House.

Resolved etc. That if his Majesty shall remove into any remote Parts from his
Parliament, it will be a great hazared to the Kingdom; and a great prejudice to
the proceedings of the Parliament.

Resolved etc. That these Houses holds it necessary, that his Majesty may be
desired, That the Prince may come unto Saint James, or to some other convenient
place near about London, and there to continue.

Rosolved etc.

That the Lords be desired to join with this House in an humble request unto
his Majesty; That he will be pleased to reside near his Parliament, That both
Houses may have a convenience of Access, unto him upon all occasions.

Kesolved etc. That the Lords be moved to join with this House in some fit
course of examination, to find who were the persons that gave his Majesty this
advice, that they may be removed from his Majesty: and brought to condign
punishment.

Resolved etc. That no Charter can be granted by the King, to create a power in
any Corporation, over the Militia of that place without consent of Parliament.

Resolved etc. That the Lords shall be moved to join with this House in these
Votes.

Kesolved etc. That the Lords shall be desired to appoint a select Committee,
that may join with a Committee of a proportionable number of this House; to
consider, and prepare what is fit to be done upon these Votes, or upon any
thing that may arise upon this answer of his Majesty concerning the Mil^ita,
and concerning the Prince.

March, 2. Questions resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament: With an Order
for the speedy Rigging of the Navy, for the defense of the Kingdom
Resolved upon the Question by both Houses of Parliament.

THat the Kingdom be forthwith put into a posture of defense, by Authority of
both Houses, in such a way as is already agreed upon by both Houses of
Parliament.

Resolved etc.

That the Lords be desired to join with the House of Commons in this Vote.

Resolved etc.

That a Commit shall be ^pointed to prepare a Declaration upon these two
Heads, viz.

1 To say down the just causes of the fears and Jealousies given to these
Houses; and to clear these Houses from any jealousies conceived against them.

2. And to consider of all matters that may arise upon this Message of his
Majesty and to declare their opinions what is fit to be done thereupon.

Die Mercuriij, 2. Martij. 1641.

THe Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, having received
advertisement of extraordinary preparations made by the neighboring Princes,
both by Land and Sea, the intentions whereof have been so represented, as to
raise an apprehension in both Houses, that the public honor, peace, and
safety of his Majesty and his Kingdom cannot be secured unless a timely
course be taken for the putting of this Kingdom into a condition of defense,
as well as Land. It is therefore Ordered, by the Lords and Commons aforesaid,
that the Earl of Norththumberland, Lord high Admiral of England, do forth
with give effectual direction and order, that all and every the Ships
belonging to his Majesty's Navy, which are fit for service, and not already
abroad, nor designed for this Summers Fleet, be with all speed Rigged, and put
in such a readiness, as that they may soon be fitted for the Sea; And that his
Lordship do also make known unto all the Masters and owners of such Ships as
now are in, or about any the Harbors of this Kingdom, and may be of use for the
public defense thereof, That it will be an accep^able service to the King and
Parliament, if they likewise will cause their ships to be Rigged, and so far
put in a readiness, as they may beat a short warning set forth to Sea, upon
any immergent occasion, which will be a means of great security to his Majesty
and his Dominions.

His Majesty's answer.
I Am so much amazed at this Message, that I know not what to answer. You
speak of Iealousies and fears, lay your hands to your Hearts, and ask your
selves whether I may not likewise be disturbed with Fears and Iealousies; and
if so, I assure you this Message has nothing lessened them.

For the Mil^tia, I thought so much of it before I sent that answer, and am so
much assured that the Answer is agreeable to what in Justice or Reason you can
ask, or I in Honor Grant, that I shall not alter it in any point.

For my residence near you I wish it might be safe and Honorable, that I had
no cause to absent my self from White Hall, ask your selves whether I have
not.

For my Son I shall take care of him, which shall Justify me to God as a
Father and to my Dominions as a King.

To conclude, I assure you upon my Honor, that I have no thought but of Peace
and Justice to my people, which I shall by all fair means seek to preserve
and maintain, relying upon the goodness and providence of GOD, for the
preservative of my self and Rights.

FINIS.

