FOUR Wonderful, Bloody, and Dangerous PLOTS DISCOVERED, And brought to Light
by Gods Providence. With the manner and means of their Discovery and
prevention.

The 1. from Norwich, where a Train of Papists had conspired the firing of the
City, which was begun, but not effected.

The second from Cheshire, wherein was intended the General Ruin of the whole
Country.

The 3. a general insurrection of the Catholic Adherents in diverse parts of
this Kingdom.

The 4. by a Confederacy of Papists to deliver a Jesuit, one William Waller,
from the sentence of death, justly and according to Law, pronounced against
him, which was most auspicuously brought by a Porter, by the Carriage of a
Letter.

London, Printed for John Gilbert, 1642.

The first Damnable and Hellish Plot against this Kingdom.
IN the City of Norrige there was a great Uproar, which awakened the Citizens
of that place, and warned them to shake of their security, and with all care
and diligence to look into the ensuing danger, now imminent over their heads,
and ready to fall upon them.

This Uproar was occasioned by some insolent, disquiet, and ill intended
Papists, who had conceived a mischief in their hearts, and were not at peace
until they had executed and given birth unto their mischievous design.

They had their Agents for this Attempt, and the merciless fire must be the
instrument, by which they intend to perfect their desires, They had hired two
mercenary Knaves, by whose hands they would bring their wishes to an end, which
being placed at both ends of the City, at an oppointed time should give fire to
the Houses, the one was discovered, being about to set fire to a thatcht house,
and no harm was there acted, the other hadgiven fire to a house joining to the
high Bridge-street, which house for want of present assistance was burnt down
to the ground, but by the providence and mercy of God, there the mischief was
staid, and proceeded no further, which caused the Citisens to keep a strong
Watch ever since, to prevent the like Attempts, if in Case any should be set on
foot.

The second, was a general insurrection of the Papists in Cheshire, occasioned
by an Order issuing forth from the High Court of Parliament, to this effect,
That all Papists within his Majesty's Kingdom of England, should be Disarmed,
and all Military Ammunition be taken from them.

The chief Officers in that County endeavored to put this in execution, but
they found very stout and resolute Opposers, who denied to part with any of
their Arms, resolving rather to part with their Lives then their Arms and
weapons. The Major having this bold and audacious Answer returned, commanded
the Assistance of the Train Bands to search with him, who with their Muskets
charged, with powder and bullets, did proceed in the Execution of the Majors
Command, and were resolved, where they found any uncivil opposition, to shoot
down their Houses over their heads.

The Papists having intelligence of their Command, gathered together, and in the
dead of the night began to set upon the City, and beat down the walls, the
watch although not able to resist, yet by their Clamor of Treason, presently
awakened the Citisens, which caused the Rebels to fly unto my Lord Thooms his
house, but before they could reach so far, two of them were taken, the rest by
the Porters jealousy, and the guard about the house were suspected to be of
the Train band, and by that means were denied Admittance, who by the pursuit of
the Train Band were carried to prison.

Who no sooner were laid fast, but the whole Train Band desired Admittance
unto the Lords house which was denied them; whereupon some af the Train Band
Discharged upon the House, and beat down part thereof, at which the Lord being
affrighted, made an Escape, the Train Band entered the House, and searched it,
but could not proceed without some less, for 15. of them were slain by the
Papists who were in the House ready provided with Muskets and Bullets.

The Ringleader Starky himself was wounded, and by reason that he was not able
to fly with the rest, he was apprehended and committed to prison, who being
now ready to dye, confessed that they were encouraged to this Attempt, by the
Lord Thoomes, and that their intent was to have ruined most part of the City,
and to have slain all the Paotestants that they could reach, more he confessed
not, but with the extremity of pain, occasioned by his wounds he presently died.

The 3. was a general insurrection of the Papists in diverse places of this
Kingdom, which one M. Beal over-hearing the Discourse of two of the
Conspirators, as he was walking in the field, made discovery thereof.

There were many Letters conveyed by many Papists by the Assistance of one
Father Andrews to many places of this Kingdom. Letters were dispatched into
Buckiupham shire, Warwick shire, etc. who when the first blow should have bin
given unto many worthym^mbers of the House of Parliament, etc. that then the
rest of their confederates in the Country should bestir themselves and play
their parts also.

Notice of this was given to Alderman Soams, by M. Beal, by him to M. Pim. and
the rest of the House, and by this means their bloody procedings prevented.

The 4. and last, which at this present I shall relate, was a Conspiracy to
free father Wall, alias Walker, alias Ward, alias Slater, from the sentence of
death, which was immediately noised among the tribe of the Romish Faction.

Upon the 15. of that month, being July, a great Number gathered themselves
together to Curstors Alley in Chancery Lane, where this Priest formerly lodged,
where they held a long and dangerous Counsel, how they might debar him out of
the Hands of the Law and Justice, one of the Crew was resolved to go to
Newgate, and in Piety to so holy a Cause, would change Apparel, and redeem
him with the loss of his own Life, thinking by this means to merit the
eternal memory of a Romish Saint.

Having procured moneys of the rest of the Brethren, and now being gone to
wards Newgate, more pious thought concerning his own welfare came into his
mind, and diverted him from that Resolution, and having gotten a Salve for his
Poverty, his Resolution wa changed, and he resolved to let Fathe Waller undergo
his punishment him self.

He was resolved now for Rome, and meeting one Hodgskins a Porter, he sent back
his mind in a Letter to his Companions by that Porter, but the Letter having no
superscription, and the Porter being but of a reasonable memory, forgot the
parties Name to whom it was to be delivered.

Whereupon he opened the Letter, and having read the Contents, came to the
appointed place, found the Neast, but the Birds were flown, whereupon he
discovered all the News to a Gentleman of good worth, and by this means their
Plot was prevented, and Father Waller hanged.

FINIS.

