His Majesty's Whole ARMY in the West Conquered. And all Sir Ralph Hoptons
Horse and Arms delivered to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX: With the Copies of the
several Letters that passed between them. The Articles tendered by the
General, Sir Ralph Hoptons answer, with the Conclusions and agreements of the
Commissioners. Upon what terms all their Horse, in number 2000. and more, and
all their Arms, are surrendered to Sir Thomas Fairfax, besides 120. come in
from Pendennis Castle, and the last news from Prince CHARLES. The taking of
Truro, and the whole proceedings of the affairs in those parts.

These Letters are commanded to be printed, and are published according to
Order.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 16 March 1645.

A Copy of a Letter sent from Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Lord Hopton.
SIR,
THrough the goodness of God to his people, and his just hand against their
Enemies, your forces being reduced to such condition, as (to my sense the same
good hand of God, continuing with us, wherein alone we trust) they are not like
neither to have subsistence or shelter long where they are* or to escape
thence; nor (if they could) have they whither to go for better. I have thought
good (for prevention of more bloodshed, or of further hardship or extremity to
any, but such whose hearts God shall harden to their own destruction, to send
you these Summons; For your self and them to lay down Arms, and withal a
tender of such conditions, upon a present surrender and engagement, never more
to bear Arms against the Parliament, as may be b^tter then any thing they can
rationally expect by standing out.

1 Therefore, to the Soldiery in generally English and Forraigners, I shall
grant (...) to go beyond sea, or to their homes in England, as they please; and
to such English as shall choose to live at home, my Protection for the liberty
of their persons, and for the immunity of their estates, from all plunder or
violence of Soldiers, and all to go their ways with what they have, saving
Horses and Arms* 2 But for Officers in Commission, and Gentlemen of quality, I
shall allow them to go with Horses for themselves and one servant or more,
suitable to their quality, and with Arms befitting Gentlemen in a condition of
peace, and such Officers as would go beyond the Sea for other service, to take
with them their Arms and full number of Horses answerable to their Offices* 3
To all Troopers, and the inferior sort of Horse Officers, bringing in and
delivering up their Horses and Arms, twenty shillings a man, in lieu of their
Horses, to carry them home. 4 To English Gentlemen of considerable Estates, my
Pass and Recommendation to the Parliament for their moderate composition. 5
Lastly, for your self, besides what is merely employed to you in common with
others, you may be assured of such mediation to the Parliament, in your behalf,
both from my self and others, as for one, whom for personal worth and many
virtues, but especially for your care of, and moderation toward the Country,
we honor and esteem above any other of your party, whose Error, supposing you
more swayed with Principles of honor and conscience then others, we most
pity, and whose happiness, so far as consistent with the public welfare, we
should delight in, more then in your least suffering. These things, not from
any need or other ends then humane and christian, having offered, I leave to
your consideration and theirs whom it may concern* desiring your and their
speedy resolving which I pray may be such, as shall be most for the honor of
God, the peace and welfare of this poor Kingdom, and for your and their good,
so far as may stand therewith; and having herein discharged, as I conceive, the
duty of an honest man, a Soldier, and a Christian, if God shall see it good to
let your hearts be hardened against your own peace, I shall, though with some
regret to that ill, which shall ensue to any, yet with cheerfulnes and
rejoicing at the righteous judgments of God, pursue my charge and trust for the
public in another way, not doubting of the same presence and blessing which
God has hitherto vouchsafed in the same Cause, to the weak endeavors of

Tho. Fairfax.
5. March 1645.
A List of the particulars of Sir Thomas Fairfax his Victory at Castle, Dennis,
March 8.
Major General Pe^^ Captain Dutton. Captain Shore. Captain Farmer.
29 of the Princes Lifeguard, whose names are
Mr. John Wood. Mr. An. Dickson. Mr. George Carey. Mr. Rich. Creswell. Mr. Tho.
Pearce. Mr. Richard Rich. Mr. Rich Sargeant. Mr. Simon Wilmot. Mr. Tho.
Maddock. Mr. Philip Morris. Mr. John Stephens. Mr. John Tailor. Mr. Iemery
Boughs. Mr. Walt. Weyfield. Mr. Charles Bryre. Mr. Rob. O^^il. Mr. Mark Shaw.
Mr. John Thomas. Mr. Henry Pecket. Mr. John Bo^^^t. Mr. John Richard. Mr. John
Johnson. Mr. Will. Welsh. Mr. Laurence Dutton. Mr. Edw. Reynolds. Mr. John
Clark. M. Tho. Pearce. Mr. Tho. Sands. Mr. Richard True.
Five of the Lord Clevelands Lifeguard,
Mr. James Sout. Mr. Rich. Wilkinson, Mr. Hen. Timpson. Mr. Philip Spene. Mr.
Rich. Oliver.
Lieutenant Linhouse. Coronet Ellis. 14 Officers more. 180 Horse 100 Prisoners.
40 Slain. The Major-Generall mortally wounded. 800 Routed. 4 Of our men slain.
A Letter from the Generals head Quarters, to a Member of the House of Commons.
SIR:
I Shall continue the Intelligence of the proceedings of this Army since my
last from Bodman of the 8. instant, wherein you had the Relation of the taking
above two hundred of the Enemies Horse near Castle-Dennis, on Monday March 9.
the whole Army of Horse and Foot advanced from Bodman, and the Towns adjacent
to Tregny and Probus, within three or four miles of Truro; the march being not
above fourteen miles. Upon the coming of our forlorn hope near Probus, the
Enemies forlorn stood in a peaceable posture, not offering to charge; the
reason whereof being demanded; they said, There was a Cessation of Arms on
both Parties, and they hoped there would be a Peace; Comissary General Ireton
and other Officers there had much ado to persuade them out of their mistake;
yet told them, (...) ^hey were so possessed, they would not take (...)
^^vantage if they made have away; they retur^^^ (...) ranks for that civility
and retreated. This report was first raised amongst them out of a Politic
respect, that if our men had taken advantage, they might have a plea that we
kept no faith or engagement, and so make them the more desperate, but it
wrought a contrary effect; for that night, and every day since, many of the
Enemy come in with their Horses and Arms unto the General. About twelve of
the Clock that night, a Trumpeter came from the Lord Hopton to desire a
Parley, signifying his great inclination to make a speedy end: On Tuesday March
the tenth, about three of the Clock in the morning the Trumpeter was sent back
with our Commissioners names. viz. Commissary General Ireton, Colonel
Lambert, controuler of the Ordnance, Commissary Stains, and Colonel St.
Aubine; the place for Treaty was at Trestlea^^ Bridges near Truro, at a
Constables house, and to begin at nine of the Clock this morning, to continue
three hours; but the Lord Hopton sent not the names of his Commissioners till
after nine a Clock, but our Army, Horse and Foot (having a Rende^vouz in Serve
Fields on the East of Probus, at seven this morning were by ten of the Clock
marched within two miles of Truro: by this the Lord Hoptons Trumpeter came with
their Commissioners names, viz. Col. Goring, Col. Pont, Col. (...), Col.
Trever, and Sir Richard Prideaux, the Kings high Sheriff of this County, to
countervaile Col. St. Aubine, the Enemy further designed that Col. ^ote^^e a
French man might be added, which was granted, and a Capt. Herne ppoynted on our
side, and the safe convoyes from both Generals, sent to each other about 11
clock, with a Letter from the General to the Lord Hopton, to signify to his
Lordship, that he intended to quarter that night with his army at Truro, and
therefore desired, that his forces might draw out, and that in regard it would
be late before the business be ended, the bounds set for the quarters of both
Armies, there might be a Cessation of arms, till to morrow morning at six of
the clock, before which time I doubt not but the business will be determined,
and a good end made of the troubles in these parts, by an assent to the
Propositions which I sent to you, which will not only conduce much to the
settling of the Peace of the Kingdom, but afford a good number of horses and
recruits for the public service, the enemies fieldforces scattered, and the
joining of the Irish, if they should land, with so considerable a body of Horse
will be prevented. We are this Evening entered Truro, where we found many of the
enemies forces drunk, which we were contented to drive to their quarters,
though many were unwilling to leave their good Liquor: about half a mile
before we came to this Town, we had a sight of Pendenis castle 8 miles off.
Sir, within few days after this, I shall acquaint you with the issue of this
Treaty: till when, I always rest

Your most humble Servant, W. C.
Truro, March, the 10. 1645. I have sent you enclosed, the Lord Hoptons Answers
to to the Generals Propositions, I had not time to Copy out the Reply, and
other Letters of Intercourse, which you shall have so soon as I can have
leisure.



A Copy of Sir Ralph Hoptons Answer, to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX'S LETTER.
SIR,
I Received yours, bearing date the fifth of this month, wherein I must
acknowledge much kindness from you, and a very Christian consideration of
sparing of blood: But one thing there is, I am confident, you have too much
honor to expect from me, which is, that to avoid any danger, or to enjoy any
worldly advantage; I will renounce my Masters Service, to whom, I am both a
sworn Subject, and a sworn Servant, that I must profess; I am resolved, to
undergo all fortunes with him, and if there shall be cause, to suffer any
thing, rather then in the least point to taint my honor in that particular,
and I hope, there is not a man of any consideration in that Army, under my
command, that is not so resolved; yet in all honest and honorable ways, to
procure the Peace of this Kingdom, and the shedding of Christian blood, and
take God to witness, I am, and still have been most desirous: And I hear,
from good hands, our Gracious Sovereign, is at present so far advised in a
Treaty with the Parliament, as that he has promised to pass 14 of the
principal of their Bills proposed, whereof the intrusting the Militia for seven
years, in hands agreed between them is one. I desire you to deal freely with
me in that particular, for if that be so, it will show the labor of further
Treaty; being, for my part, ready to obey whatsoever his Majesty shall agree
unto: God indeed has of late humbled us with many ill successes, which I
acknowledge as a very certain evidence of his just judgment against us for
our personal crimes. Yet, give me leave to say, your present prosperity
cannot be so certain an evidence of his being altogether pleased with you. It
is true, we are reduced to a lower condition then we have been, yet have we a
gallant body of Horse, that being preserved to a general accord, may be for
good use against our common Enemies, and being otherwise pressed, I may say it
without vanity, want not a resolution, at least to sell our selves at a dear
rate against any odds: Your Propositions, though they be not wholly to be
consented unto, yet if a general accord, much more desirable, be not in a
likely forwardness to prevent them, I shall b^ willing, that eight Commanders
of ours, with three Countery Gentlemen, give a meeting as soon as you please,
to an equal number of yours at any indifferent place, to consult of that great
business, and to conclude of some Propositions that may be Reasonable and
Honorable for both p^rts, wherein, I hope, God will so bless our clear
intentions, as may procure a probable inducement to a general Peace, according
to the unfeigned desire of

Your Servant RALPH HOPTON.
March 8. 1645. A part of yours falling upon a guard of ours yesterday, it is
likely they have taken some prisoners; I desire the favor from you, to receive
a list of them by this Trumpeter, till I receive a positive Answer to the
contents of this Letter, I shall not permit any offense to attempt any thing
upon any of your Forces.

Your Servant RALPH HOPTON.



A Letter from the Generals head Quarters, to a Member of the House of COMMONS.
SIR,
THis last Night there came a Letter from the Lord Hopton, signifying, that
when he propounded the place of Treaty, he hoped it should have been at a
reasonable distance between both Quarters: but in regard our Army was advanced
to Truro, it would be inconvenient to have the Treaty three Miles within our
Quarters* whereupon Truro was appointed to be the place, and our Commissioners
we removed last night from Tresillian to St. Clemence, a mile and a half
hence, and both Commissioners are to meet this day at Truro.

W. C.
Truro, March, 11. 1645.
A Letter from the Scout-Master Generals Quarters.
SIR,
OUr Commissioners and the Lord Hoptons have now agreed, and all Colonels,
Lieutenant Colonels, Sergeant Majors, and Captains, are to March away with
every field Officer two Horses, and every Captain one, and so also late the
Ministers of the Army to march away with every one a Horse, but all others
without Horse and Arms, and those who will to go home, and others are to go
beyond the Seas, and all their Ammunition is ours, besides (...). Men and
Arms, came into us last Night from Peudennis, where they are in as real a
fear, and much distracted, as these in the Field were, where they are like men
agaz'd, and half frighred out of their wits: the General Quartred in Truro,
the head Quarters this light Nights where was quartred also Colonel Portescue,
Colonel Hammond, and Colonel inglesby, with their Regiments; the Prince is
still in the Isly of Sylly, from whence diverse have come away from him, making
some excuses to get away, and glad if they can procure any way; the General is
much troubled with many Tickets hourly coming to him, for Persons of several
degrees to come in: In the Articles it is agreed, to permit Forty Horse to go
to Oxford, the Army would have had 500. but that would not be granted; at last
they accepted of 40. and truly I believe the business of the West will be now
but short, so as that we may have it in a good posture, that the Country may
secure themselves. This day we are drawing to a Rendezvous, where I believe
diverse of our men will be mounted on the Enemies Horse: we shall have complete
2000. of the Enemies, and those very good ones to mount our men on, that is the
least, befides those allowed to the Field Officers, Captains, and Ministers,
which does so trouble the Enemies Officers (especially the French and Irish,
and such who thought to have advanced themselves by the ruins of this Kingdom)
that now they did (some of them) cry like Children that have bin whipped, and
wring their hands and vex extremely, wishing they had never come into England;
we shall now consider whether it be thought fit to go against Pendennis, or
leave it to the Country and return.

So I rest, yours to command, J. S,
Truro, the 12. of March, 1645. 10 a Clock.
FINIS.

