A LETTER From his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, SENT To both Houses of
Parliament June the 6. concerning the KINGS being brought from Holmby toward
the Army with all the perticulers about the same.

Wherein is set forth to all the world the clear and candid intentions of his
Excellency and the whole Army, for the good of the Parliament and Kingdom, in
their restless endeavors, for a sure and lasting true Peace.

Published to silence the many false reports already raised, and to prevent the
like for the future,

June 8th LONDON Printed for George Whittington at the blew Anchor in
Corne-hill, near the royal Exchange. 1647

A Letter from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, sent to both Houses of
Parliament, concerning the Kings being brought from Holdenby toward the Army.
Mr. Speaker,
BY my last of Friday the 4. instant, I gave you account of what I understood
from Holmby concerning the undertaking of some Soldiers on Wednesday last to
secure the King from being secretly conveyed away, and that Col. Graves being
thereupon secretly slipped away, I had sent Col. Whalley with his Regiment to
attend the Comissioners, and take charge of the guards there. On Satturday
morning being at a Randezvouze beyond Newmarket, and advancing the Army this
way in order quarter about Cambridge, I received advertisement, That the
Soldiers of Holmby had upon Friday morning (with his Majesty's consent)
brought him away from thence, together with your Commissioners. That they lay
at Hinchingbrook near Huntingdon on Friday night, and would be at Newmarket
that day; The ground of this remove was alleged to be an apprehension in the
Soldiers, of some Forces gathering toward that place suddenly to fall upon
them and force the King out of their hands, to withstand which, they thought
they might be too weak (having then no notice of Col. Whaleyes coming with his
Regiment) upon this immediately I sent after C. Whaley to advertise him thereof,
with order to direct his course toward Huntingdon, and (where ere he met his
Majesty and the Commissioners) to desire, that they would come on no further
this way, but rather to return, and suffer him to guard them back.

And to prevent any danger imaginable therein, I sent off from the Rendezvouze
two Regiments of Horse more, to march after Col. Whalley toward Huntingdon,
and so on toward Holdenby, to be assistant to him in the Guards about his
Majesty if it should be found needful.

And thus I held on the motion of the rest of the Army this way.

Toward Evening (after the Quarters of the Army were assigned, and taken up
hereabouts, and the Regiments marching off toward their several Quarters, I
understood from Colonel Whalley, that meeting the King and your Commissioners
upon their way from Huntington toward Newmarket, about four miles short of
Cambridge, they had forborne to come on any further; but his Majesty being not
willing to return back for Holmby, they had taken up his Quarter for present
at Sir John Cuts house at Childerley, being the next house of any conveniencie
to the place where he met them.

Hereupon I sent thither Sir Hardres Waller, and Col. Lambert, to inform the
Commissioners of my coming to Cambridge, and the Armies quartering hereabouts,
and to desire, that they would think of returning back with his Majesty to
Holdenby, and (because there might be many inconveniences in delay) that they
would not make any stay where they were, but remove back that way next morning
(though it were the Lords Day) the Commissioners refused to act or meddle any
otherwise in disposing the King, then by their Answer to me, (whereof I have
sent you a Copy here enclosed) you see. And his Majesty declares himself
very anwilling to go back to Holmby. I have thus given you a true and faithful
account, how his Majesty came to the place where he is, and how the Quarters
of the Army have fallen out to be so near him.

what ever (by the concurrence of events to make it thus) may be suspected of
design therein. This is the exact truth of the business, and I can clearly
profess, (as in the presence of God) for my self, and dare be confident of
the same for all the Officers about me, and body of the Army, that this remove
of his Majesty from Holmby was without any design, knowledge, or privity
thereof on our parts, and a thing altogether unexpected to us until the notice
of it came upon the Randezvouz as before; neither the Randezvouz or coming
hither to quarter with the Army from any purpose, or with any expectation to be
so near His Maj. as it happens. But the effect is so far merely
providentiall, and (to us) accidental, but the case being as it is (your
Commissioners refusing to intermeddle as before, and the King to go back) I
have placed and shall continue about his Majesty such a Guard of trusty men,
and under such Command, Colonel Whalley being chief in the charge) as I may
be responsall for to the Parliament and Kingdom, (so far as can reasonably
be expected from me) by the blessing of God to secure his Majesty's person from
danger, and prevent any attempts of such as may design, (by that advantage of
his Person) the best to raise any new war in this Kingdom. And truly (Sir,)
to prevent any such mischief as it is my own most earnest and humble desire,
so I find it to be the unanimous desire and study of the Army, that a firm
peace in this Kingdom may be settled, and the liberties of the people cleared
and secured accordingly, to the many Declarations by which we were invited and
induced to engage in the late war: and the Parliaments effectual and speedy
application to these two things (I find) would conduce more fully and surely to
a cheerful and unanimous disbanding; And yet (what ever may be suggested or
suspected) I do certainly find (and dare assure you, you may depend upon it)
That the sense of the Army is most clear from any purpose, or inclination, to
oppose the settling of Presbytery, or to have the Independent Government set
up, or to up-hold a licentiousness in Religion, or to meddle with any such
thing to the advancement of any particular party or interest whatsoever, but to
leave all such particular matters to the wisdom of the Parliament.

I shall by the next send you a full Account of the proceeding and unanimous
resolutions of the Army at the late Randezvouze (being not at present prepared
so fully to do it as is fit) The letter from both Houses I have received but
this night, the Quarters of the Army being lately altered before, will make the
Heath near Newmarket less convenient for a Randezvouze, yet I shall take
order (according to the desire of the Houses) to have a Randezvouze either
there or nor fame of on Wednesday next, I remain

Your most humble and faithful servant, FAIRFAX.
Cambridge June 6. 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
I Shall according to my duty, and the desires of the Houses, do my utmost to
keep the Army in good order, to which I find it absolutely necessary, that
there be some pay presently sent down.



For the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the honorable House of
Commons.
It was desired by his Excellency this Letter might be communicated to both
Houses.

