A LETTER From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, TO Mr. SPEAKER; CONCERNING A
Randezvouz of the Army, for the quieting of all Distempers therein, and
recovering the Antien^ Discipline thereof.

With the Desires and Proposals of the General Council of the Army, for the
easing the Country, and taking off Free Q^arter.

BY the Appointment of the General Council of the Army.

Signed WILL. CLARKE.



Nou: 11th London, Printed for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in
Cornhill near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

A Letter from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the Speaker of the House
of Commons.
SJR,
BEing very much troubled at the sad distractions of the Kingdom for want of
Pay, and such other necessary satisfaction as we have long waited upon you for,
not taking so much pleasure to say whence the Cause of all this trouble comes,
as to use my endeavor to give a timely and effectual remedy to so much
thereof, as is of nearest concern^ment to me. I thought fit to let you know,
That by the advice of the General Council of the Army, J have appointed a
Randezvouz very speedily, and they have very unanimously offered to repair to
their several charges, and improve to their utmost endeavors with the several
Regiments; for the quie^ing of them and recovering of the ancient Discipline of
the Army, thereby to render it more serviceable to the Parliament and Kingdom:
And to the end, your expectations, and the Desires of all good men may be
answered by a good issue in this work of so much concernment to the Kingdom. J
think fit by the same advice to offer unto you these particulars enclosed,
beseeching you, That if more weighty businesses of the Kingdom do not let you
would bring them to a speedy determination; That so your care of the Army may
appear, and my self and the Officer^ be thereby enabled to let the Soldiers
see we take such consideration of them, as becomes us, and have engaged our
selves unto. And J doubt not, but thereby we shall be enabled to let you see,
that this Army will appear as it has ever professed; to be really seeking the
good of this Kingdom, and approving it Self faithful in Your service, which
has been, and ever shall be the desire of

Your very humble Servant, T. Fairfax.
Putney 8. Novem. 1647.
For the Honorable Will. Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons.
The Proposals of the General Council of the Army to the Parliament.
I. IT is desired, That six Weeks pay (if possihle) if not a Months pay
presently sent down to the Army.

II That the Arreares may be voted to be paid out of the remainder of Bishops
lands, Deans and Chapters Lands to be sold in the same manner as the Bishops
Lands, reserving a competency to those that have a legal interest therein, and
have not forfeited the same by Delinquency, and two thirds out of Delinquents
Compositions, who have not yet compounded, and out of Forest Lands.

III. We desire, that the house will be pleased either to make provision; That
when this Months Pay is out, there shall be constant pay to enable the
Soldier to avoid the Oppression of the People by free quarter, then which,
nothing is more grievous unto Us: And in case they do so, we engage our
selves to make it death for any man to take free quarter, or if the Parl. do
find, That the Counties will not so readily bring in their Money, we shall
undertake, if enabled thereunto, so to dispose of the Army, and of the several
Counties, as that the Moneys shall be raised, and the People punctually
satisfied for their quarter; provided that there may be an increase of the said
Tax to an hundred thousand pound a Month, for the payment of this Army, and the
other Forces continued in the Kingdom, and those that are to go for Ireland,
and the disbanding of those that be supernumerary, until the Parliament shall
otherwise provide, by Excise, or otherwise, for easing the said Taxes.

IV. Lastly, we declare, That if this course be taken, that as we have
engaged, that none shall upon pain of death, take any thing from any Inhabitant
in this Kingdom against his will, wherein we shall be punctual depositive, so
also we shall give assurance. That no man shall be forced to be quartered upon
against his consent, provided there may be an allowance for lodging, firing,
and candle, or the owners upon whose houses quarters are assigned, to be had in
other places, to be allowed to those that shall quarter.

FINIS.

