The WEST Answering to the NORTH IN The fierce and Cruel PERSECUTION of the
manifestation of the SON of GOD, As appears in the following short RELATION Of
the unheard of, and inhumane SUFFERINGS of Geo. Fox, Edw. Pyot, and William
Salt at LANCESTON in the County of CORNWALL, AND Of Ben. Maynard, James Mires,
Ios. Coal, Ia. Godfrey, Io. Ellice, and Anne Blacking, in the same JAIL,
TOWN, and COUNTY.

AND Of ONE and TWENTY men, and women taken up in the space of a few days on
the HIGH WAYS of DEVON, as they were peaceably traveling thereunto, and from
visiting of the aforesaid Prisoners by ARMED GUARDS set up throughout the
COUNTY by order of the General Sessions for that purpose, and thrown in heaps
into the Common Jail of EXON amongst the Fellons, where diverse of them are
sick, and one of them, (viz.) Jane Ingram there lately DEAD; And of Katherin
Martingdale and Priscilla Cotton of PLIMMOUTH, and two others in the same Jail
at EXON, and of another in Bridewell in the same City.

ALSO A sober reasoning in the LAW with Chief justice GLYNNE concerning his
proceedings against Geo. Fox, E. Pyot, and W. Salt at LANCESTON ASSIZES 25. of
the 1. month 1656. in a Letter sent to him by the Prisoners.

And a legal ARRAIGNMENT of the Indictment of the HAT, the new founded FURNACE
into which are cast the children of LIGHT, who in obedience to the Lord cannot
BOW the Hat to the WILL of men, nor to their persons, who with such a base
thing are confounded.

And many other material and strange passages at their apprehensions and
trials at several Assizes, and Sessions, and in the Intervals of each, and of
the MONSTROUS Inventions of ETCETERA warrants, Watches, Wards, Armed Guards,
etc. to cause the Innocent to suffer, weighed in the BALANCE of LAW and EQUITY.

Behold the day, behold it is come, the morning is gone forth, the Rod has
blossomed, Pride, has budded, Violence is risen up into a Rod of wickedness.
Woe to the Bloody City, it is full of lies, and Robberies, the Prey departs
not, her Judges are Evening Wolves, they gnaw not the Bones till the morrow.
They have made ready their heart like an Oven, whilst they lie in wait; Their
Bakers sleepe^h all the night, in the morning it Burns as a flaming fire,
They are all hot as an Oven, and have devoured their Judges, and their Kings
are fallen, and their is none that calls upon me. And they consider not in
their heart, that I remember all their Wickedness; Now their own doings have
beset them about, they are before my face? Do ye indeed, speak Righteousness,
O Congregation? Do ye Judge uprightly, O ye Sons of men? yea, in heart you
work wickedness; ye weigh the Violence of your hands in the earth.

How long will ye Judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend
the poor and fatherless; Do Justice to the afflicted and needy; deliver the
poor and needy; Rid them out of the hand of the wicked: They know not, neither
will they understand, they walk on in darkness; all the foundations of the
earth are out of course. Arise, O God and Judge the earth, for thou shall
inherit all Nations, when he makes Inquisition for blood, he remembers them,
be forgets not the cry of the humble.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the West end of Paul's, 1657.

To the sober Reader.
WE are not the men to the intent who gives forth things to lay open
nakedness, but that men may take warning, and fear, and come to know
themselves, and what they act and practice, whereby with the Truth they may be
covered, and others may take warning by their examples, seeing such bad fruits
from such flow, whose intent from us is to cover that simplicity, and
Innocence might rule. Though these things be open, and laid open for their
understandings, and Instructions, that they may know both the Law of man, and
of God, and how they act contrary both to Reason, and the Law of God, whose
actions we cover, and do forgive, who we do forgive, who does answer the Light
in every man, which Christ has enlightened him withal, and might not appear
themselves to be a shame to the Nation, and a scorn amongst men to see them
act contrary to Reason, and Modesty, and the Law of God, and the Nation, but
if the righteous Law take hold of them, and make them smart, let them not say,
but that they have had warning: And that men should be clothed who are naked,
and their uncomely parts and shame covered, to the intent and end is this given
forth, that seriousness, modesty, truth, and Justice, and plainess, and
innocence, and righteousness, may be set up in Towns and Streets: of the things
whom they do concern, they may take notice.

The WEST Answering to the NORTH, etc.
ABout the middle of the eleventh month 1655. George Fox being on his Journey
with Edward Pyot of Bristoll, nnd William Salt of London, from the farthermost
parts of Cornwall toward Bristoll, was moved of the Lord in bowels of
compassion to the Ignorant in those dark corners of the Nation, to give forth a
paper for the directing their minds to the way of salvation, and the stirring
of them up to prize their time, and the day of their visitation, a true Copy
whereof is as follows.

THe migthy day of the Lord is come, and coming. that all hearts shall be made
manifest, the secrets of every ones heart shall be revealed with the light of
Jesus; which comes from Jesus Christ who lights every man that comes into
the world, Who says learn of me; This is my welbeloved Son, hear you him says
God, that lights every man that comes into the world, that all men through
him might believe, the world through him might have life: And Christ is come to
teach himself the second Priesthood; and every one that will not hear this
Prophet, which God has raised up, which Moses spoke of and said, Like unto me
will God raise you up a Prophet, him shall you hear: every one that does not
hear this Prophet is to be cut off; They that despised Moses Law died under the
hands of two or three witnesses, but how much greater punishment shall come
upon them, that shall neglect this great salvation Christ Jesus, who says,
Learn of me, I am the way, the truth, and the life, who lights every man that
comes into the world, which light lets him see his evil ways, his evil
deeds that he has done, but if he hate that light, and goes on in the evil,
this will be the condemnation, the light says Christ; Therefore now you have
time, prize it, this is the day of your visitation, and salvation proffered to
you, every one of you having a light which lets you see you should not lie, nor
do wrong, nor take Gods name in vain, nor steal, this is the light that shows
you these evil deeds, which if you love it, it will lead you to Christ, who is
the way to the Father, from whence it comes, where no unrighteousness enters,
nor unholiness; but if you do this light hate, this will be your condemnation,
the light says Christ, If you do it love, and to it come, you will come to
Christ, which will bring you off all the worlds teachers, and ways, and
Doctrines, to Christ who is the way to the Father, from the world and all the
deceivers in it.

Which paper as they journyed through the Parish of Madderne near St Ives? was
delivered to a man whom they met (altogether, then, unknown to them, but since
understood to be by name John Keate) to be communicated to the people, but he
instead thereof hastened and carried it to Peter Ceely Justice of the Peace, so
called at St. Ives, who gave him order to get together a party of new raised
Horse, of which the said Peter Ceely was Captain, and to follow after, and
apprehend them.

But they being come into the town of Saint Jves, before those Horse were
gotten ready, as they were riding thorough it, the said Keate being there,
stopped them in their way, and apprehended them, and seized on their Horses, and
Portmantue, which he violently took away, and brought them to the said Peter
Ceely, at his House in the town aforesaid, Where a great company of people were
gathered, And with them one Welstead the Priest of that town, before whom P.
Ceely made sport of them, as if he had gotten a prey, and with reviling
speeches abused them, and cursed; Whereupon they told him, he was to do the
things that were just, and neither to revile, nor curse. And of them he
demanded whether they would own the paper aforesaid or not? To which answer
being made they should deny the Scriptures, if they should not own it: A
heinous crime he made of it, calling it a sinful, wicked Paper, and fell to
riffl^ng of their Pockets for more, and what he found he took away, and
detained, and yet keeps from them diverse serviceable notes for the instructing
the minds of the simple, and their Books also; and examine he did them apart,
and tendered them the Oath of Abjuration, To which they answered, that O. P. had
said that oath was not intended for them; That they did in the command of Jesus
Christ abide, who said swear not at all; and that all Popery and Popish points
they denied, as they had declared to the whole N^tion in a Book, which they
gave him; And a pass he demanded of Ed. Pyot, for traveling, pretending him to
be a person unknown, when as one or two of that town then informed him, that
they knew him to be a Merchant of Bristoll, and that Bristoll was the place of
his habitation, and thither they were all traveling: Then he asked Ed. Pyot
for sureties for the goo^ behavior. He desired that a Law might be shown him
that he had transgressed, and he would find sureties; but no Law could he
produce, but instead of Law, he gave them many reproachful, and unsavory
expressions; And the Priest aforesaid called Ed. Pyot Jesuit. because he used
spectacles, and a wanderer, because to them he m^de not his estate to appear;
Notwithstanding the testimony of some of their own town, who knew him, as has
been men^ioned; and that he tendered P. Ceely, to buy a thousand pounds worth of
goods of him, or to sell him a thousand pounds worth, and also had declared how
he had been in Arms for the Laws of the Nation, and for Liberty, and in
command for the Parliament, (They all having been constant faithful friends to
the Commonwealth, and in arms for it.)

Nevertheless, without any just ground, color, or pretense in Law, Justice, or
Equity, or occasion given on their parts (for no other thing was done, than
giving forth the paper aforesaid, at the moving of the Lord, as has been
declared, which is left of God in every man's conscience to judge, whether it
is any just matter of offense, or cause of exception, or ground of suffering at
all, much less of so cruel sufferings, and unreasonable proceedings had
against them, as is hereafter expressed) contrary to Law, and the Government,
and all that is equal, and Just, or of good report, after they had been
stopped on their way, their Horses violently taken from them, their Portmantue,
and Pockets rifled, and searched; and their Papers and Books therein seized on,
and detained; after they had been scoffed, and reviled, and reproached, and
made sport of before the Priest, and the people, and cursed, and evil
entreated by P. Ceely, were they committed by him to Lanceston Gaol, and sent
in custody with a guard of Horse, first to Pendennis Castle, to Captain Fox,
with their Books, and Papers, leaving it to him, to detain or discharge them as
he should see cause; but he not being there, after that one of the Prisoner was
violently ran upon, and struck down in the Room, by on Smithwick a Kinsman of
Keates, to whom was not given the least provocation, and (whose violence the
said Keate being demanded, said, he would justify) were they carried toward
Lanceston by the said Keate, and guard, of which he had the charge, who abused
them very much on the way himself, and permitted others unhumanely so to do,
and brought them into a Room on the way, where was another of his acquaintance,
a desperate fellow standing with a naked Rapier; unto which Gaol as they were
passing, they met with General Desborow, who being acquainted with their
condition, and the cause thereof, sent them notice by a Lieutenant, That if
they would give under their hand, or promise that they would go unto their own
homes, and there live soberly, and quietly, they might have their enlargement;
but they returning in answer that they were passing on toward Bristol, until
they were molested, and stopped in their journey by P. Ceely, and that quietly,
and soberly they had lived, and behaved themselves; and that their time was not
in their own hand, but they stood in the will of the Lord, and should do as he
permitted; He departed out of the Country, leaving them in custody, instead of
doing them Justice, and they choosing a prison, with the freedom, answer, and
exercise of a good conscience, rather then liberty on such unreasonable
conditions, as the (a) ravishing of their Innocence; the unmanning of
themselves; and the betraying, and destroying of their undeniable liberties,
the price of so much blood (viz.) to go, and be, when and whence, To render a
man his liberty upon condition of his engaging to do, and be that of the
contrary, wh^^eunto h^ is falsely accused, under the pretense whereof he is
impr^soned, as to ^ender him liberty upon condition of his making himself an
offender, who is innocent, which if he does, he van^sheth his own innocence;
For though the things be good in themselves unto which such a condition seeks
to bind him, and that in which a man has his conversation, yet h^ being
accused of the contrary, and for it imprisoned, if he so engage, he justifies
the false accusation against himself, and the w^ong imprisonment, and so makes
himself to be that of which he is false^y ^ccused, and for it imprisoned, which
a man cannot do who knows his own innocence and understands what it is thus to
ravish it: and he that abides in a true s^nsibleness of this will chose death
rather than to betra^, and with his own hand, to murder the innocent t ing wh
ch lies in his bosom, which giv^s him the an^wer of a good conscience toward
God and man, be^ides the Law is not made for the ^ighteous, but for the
transgressor, he that makes a Law for the righteous is blind, and tu^ns the
sword backwards.
and as themselves should see occasion, in the Nation of England, and the
Dominions thereunto appertaining; and (so) rendering of themselves bondslaves,
who are freeborn English men; and men of unsoberness, and turbulent Spirits,
who are sober, and quiet men, and well known so to be; and under the
condemnation of binding themselves. in and to their own, and the will and time
of man, who know themselves, not to be their own, but bought with a price, and
so not to be guided, but by and in the will of the Lord, who has bought them;
as the subscribing of, and engaging to the Propositions aforementioned do
clearly hold forth, were carried to Lanceston, and delivered to the Goalor,
with a Warrant under P. Ceelyes hand, and Seal, of which this is a true Copy.

Peter Ceely one of the Justices of the Peace of this County, to the Keeper of
his Highness Gaol at Lanceston, or his lawful Deputy in that behalf, Greeting.
CORNWALL.
I Send you herewithall by the bearers hereof, the bodies of Edward Pyot of
Bristoll, and George Fox of Drayton and Clea in Leicestershire. and William
Salt of London, they pretend to be the places of their habitations, Who go
under the Notion of Quakers, and acknowledge themselves to be such, who have
spread several papers, tending to the disturbance of the public peace, and
cannot render any lawful cause of coming into these parts, being persons
altogether unknown, and having no pass for their traveling up, and down the
Country, and refusing to give Sureties of their good behavior, according to
the Law in that behalf provided, and refuse to take the Oath of Abjuration,
etc. These are therefore, in the name of his Highness the Lord Protector, to
Will and command you, that when the bodies of the said Edward Pyot, George Fox,
and William Salt, shall be unto you brought, you them receive, and in his
Highness prison aforesaid you safely keep them, until by due course of Law,
they shall be delivered. Hereof fail you not, as you will answer the contrary
at your perils.

Given under my hand and Seal, at St. Ives the 18th. day of January, 1655.
Sealed P. CEELY.


BY what has been already rehearsed is manifest, what unlawful, and Injurious
dealing they received from P. Ceely, and how evilly he entreated them, and how
his carriage toward them, was rather like unto one of the profane, and light
fellows, the Sons of Beliall, who are a shame unto a Nation (scorning,
sporting, reviling, and cursing) upon which the Sword of the Magistrate of God
is to pass, as evil doing, then a Justice, for no other cause, given on their
parts, than for giving out a paper, to direct the minds of the poor ignorant
people, to the way of eternal life according to the Scriptures of truth, and
against wickedness, as has been mentioned. In which they ought, to have been
by him protected, It being a true Profession of Faith in God by Jesus Christ,
Acts 10.38.
and exercise of the true Religion, and following of Jesus of Nazareth whom God
anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with power, who went about all the Cities,
and Villages doing good, Mat. 9.35.
as the Instrument of Government requires, Acts 37. See Government. Acts 37.
Which O. P. in his Speech to the Parliament 12th. the 7th. month 1654. calls a
Fundamental, one of the four Fundamentalls of his Government, which he set up
as the Issue of the late Wars, See O. P. Speech to the Parliament. painted
Chamber Sept. 12. 1654. page 31. 32.
and Blood, for liberty of Conscience; for which Fundamentalls sake, he has
said, All the extraordinary powers in the Government were taken up, and were it
not for it, he could be content to lay them down again: For the hopes of which
had it not been, (he says) all the Money in the Nation would not have tempted
men to fight, upon such an account as they have engaged; And that otherwise to
do, See O. P. Speech at the Dissolution of the Parliament Jan. 22. 1654. p 17.
was no part of the contest we had with the common enemy; And a Fundamental he
says, it is, and ought to be so, that it was for us, and the Generations to
come, rather than wilfully to throw away which Government, so testified unto
in the Fundamentalls of it, and that in relation to the good of these Nations,
and posterity, See O. P. Speech to the Parliament. Sept. 12. 1654 p. 36. 37.
he says, I can sooner be willing to be rolled in my Grave, and bu^^ed with
Infamy, than I can give my consent unto. And how dear a thing this was, and how
low it lay in the hearts of those, who carried their lives, and their all in
their hands, of which they were Prodigal, in the very face of the greatest
difficulties and hazards this Nation has encountered within the late Wars; in
which, and with whom, and for which cause the presence of the Lord so mightily
has appeared, beyond the example of former times, is not yet forgotten by
thousands, nor will be whilst they, and the memory thereof, and of them remain
upon the face of the earth. Nor will the Blood that has been shed for it, and
for Equity, and Justice, cease crying for Vengeance, whilst any of those
Righteous things are unaccomplished, upon the heads of those who are the
obstructers thereof. But with P. Ceely (as it appears) it is a thing of no such
value, nor the true holding forth of Jesus Christ, the light of the world, the
light, and life of men, to be the only way to salvation, according to the
Scriptures: but sinful, and wicked, And therefore he misuseth the powers he
lately has received under this Government, of being in Commission as a
Justice, and a Captain of a Troop of the new raised Horse, If to trample under
foot, pers^cute, and overthrow, by abusing, and imprisoning those
aforementioned, as has been said, for going about doing good, and directing
the people the way to salvation, casting thereby the greatest reproach, in that
kind, that may be on the Government that enjoins, and on the Erector, and
chief Ruler thereof; who declares the contrary, as has been expressed: thus
acting contrary to Law on them, whom if he had acted according to Law, he
ought to have protected.

And how brazened he is in his Iniquity, will be further evident, when his
Warrant aforesaid, being taken in pieces, i^ measured with the Rule of Law, and
weighed in the balance of truth, and Justice.

1. For first, whereas he charge them in the front, who go under the notion
of Quakers, and acknowledge themselves to be such; The end of the Law is to
preserve the Peace, and the Unity; and the end of the Administration thereof
is, to bring out of the division into the unity, and out of the strife into
the Peace; Now that which divides as he, whether he be Soldier, Judge, or
Justice, or what ever he be does, which distinguishes a Generation of men,
under one and the same Government, from the rest, and puts upon them a hateful
name of distinction, and term of reproach, whereby they, and others are set in
opposition) breaks the Peace, and destroys the unity, sets a family at
variance (and a Nation is a family) overthrows the end of the Law, and makes
void the Righteous Administration thereof, and into Wars leads, and
Contentions, and every evil work, as this Nation of late years has sadly
witnessed: (for from this very distinguishing of men, and branding them with
terms of reproach, was the fire kindled, and the flames of the late Wars
brought forth, and nourished, Whereby these three Nations being one against
another) and the very being of them were likely to have been overthrown, rased
out, and consumed.) And such an one is an evil doer, in a high degree, to whom
the Sword of the Magistrate of God, which punishes, and cuts off that which
transgresses, and so brings out of the division into the unity, and out of the
Wars, and strife, into the Peace, is a terror, and on whom it is to pass; But
P. Ceely, who calls himself one of the Justices of the Peace of the County of
Cornwall, by distinguishing a Generation of people in this Nation who fear, and
dread, and tremble, before the Lord, and the words of his holiness (as did the
holy men of God from the beginning and record in the Scripture) from the rest of
the people of ^his N^tion and putting upon them a hateful Term of
distinction, and brand of Reproach, whereby they are marked out, and set in
opposition, and appointed to all manner of abuses, scornings, and sufferings,
(as is experienced in all parts every where throughout the Nation where any
such are) with such barbarousness and cruelty, as exceeds the fiercest, and
most inhumane persecutions of the latter ages.) And himself under his hand and
Seal, branding them therewith, in the head of his Warrant, as a people,
because distinguished by him, and reproached with such a name, fit only to be
destroyed, and endeavoring their destruction, so far as a long imprisonment,
and the cruelties thereof, which they have lately felt, almost to the loss of
one of their lives, hereafter to be mentioned, (as have many of those innocent
people of the Lord, in other parts, from this Generation, whose lives they have
had in the prisons, which cry aloud for vengeance, in the ears of the Lord of
Saboath, for that they go under the hated name, and scorned term of Quakers)
has manifested himself to be a br^aker of the peace, a destroyer of ^he unity,
a setter of the whole family of a Nation at variance, an overthrower of the end
of the Law; one that makes void the righteous Administration thereof, a leader
into wars and contentions, and every evil work, and a minister of
unrighteousness and iniquity; on whom the sword of the righteous judgment of
God will pass to the cutting of him off, and dividing him his portion with
hypocrites, and sinners (and of this let him consider, for one day whether he
will or no, so he shall find it, except he repent.) And whereas he says, who
acknowledge themselves to be such, to fear, and dread, and tremble, and quake
at the presence of the living God, who makes the earth to shake, and the
Pillars thereof to tremble, as did Isaak, and Moses, and Jeremy, and Ezekiel,
and Daniel, and Habbacuck, and Paul, and the Church of Corinth, and the Saints
of the most high in all ages who knew his presence, this they own, as do all
the children of light, and acknowledge themselves to be of the Generation of
those who seek the face, and thus witness the presence of the Holy one of
Israel; But as he has placed it in contempt, and scorn, and as a hateful
brand, and heinous offense, by which they are appointed to all manner of
sufferings, that they deny, and the acknowledging themselves to be such, or
that they ever acknowledged themselves, or any others to be such, as they do
deny him, and this his Lie, and the Generation of him, who is a liar from the
beginning, he knows who it is.

Whereas he charge them, Who have spread several papers tending to the
disturbance of the public peace: No papers did they spread tending to the
disturbance of the public peace; the paper which G. F. gave forth, for which
cause he apprehended, abused, and imprisoned them, is already rehearsed, and
let the sober, judge, whether that be the matter of disturbing the public, or
any man's peace, But the man of Sin, the son of Perdition, whose kingdom Christ
Jesus is come, and coming to destroy, and his peace to break, and his Armor to
take from him, and of his goods him to spoil, against whom his war is
proclaimed, and his sword drawn, and brought upon the earth, to set a man at
variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against the mother in law, and a man's foes shall be them of his
own household? And this war brings peace to the Israel of God; And let such
judge whether P. Ceely makes not himfelf to appear to be in the possession of
that strong man armed, whose peace he would not have disturbed: Who charge
the declaring of Jesus Christ, the stronger than he to be Lord and King, and
the only way to salvation, to be tending to the disturbance of the public
peace, contrary to what the Government, Act. 37. and O. P. the chief Ruler
thereof has declared as aforesaid? And as for the several papers tending to
the disturbance of the public peace, spread by them, he has not to this day
made any such to appear, which if he could, no doubt they had not been to be
produced, or made use of at this time; nor indeed, have any such been by them
dispersed. And so this his Charge is a lie, from the father of lies, whose
peace only was disturbed, and in whose behalf P. Ceely charge. The declaring
of the mighty day of the Lord to be come and coming, wherein all hearts shall
be made manifest, the secrets of every man's heart shall be revealed, with the
light of Jesus, which comes from Jesus Christ, who lights every man that
comes into the world, who says, Learn of me, This is my well beloved Son,
hear ye him, says God, that lights every man that comes into the world,
that all men through him might believe, the world through him might have life,
and Christ is come to teach him self, the second Priesthood, and every one that
will not hear this Prophet that God has raised up which Moses spoke of, and
said, like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, him shall you hear, Every one
that does not hear this Prophet is to be cut off, They that despised Moses Law
died under the hands of two or three witnesse^, but how much greater punishment
will come upon them that shall neglect this great salvation Christ Jesus, who
says, Learn of me, I am the way, the truth, and the life, who lights every
man that comes into the world, which light lets him see his evil ways, his
evil deeds, which he has done, but if he hate the light, and go on in the
evil, this will be the condemnation, the light says Christ, with what else is
contained in the paper aforesaid concerning Christ Jesus the way to the Father,
and peoples being called upon to prize their time, and that day of their
Visitation, in the words, and according to the Scriptures of Truth, to be
tending to the disturbance of the public Peace, who will assuredly be paid his
wages, as his reward he shall also receive for affirming the paper containing
the things before rehearsed to be sinful and wicked, than which what higher
blasphemy is there, greater abomination, or more horrible wickedness?

3. Whereas he charge them with not being able to render any lawful cause of
coming to those parts. It is answered, For an English man to travail, or be in
any part of England, or the Dominions thereunto appertaining, which is his
Country and his habitation, is his right as a freeborn English man, his
natural Right, his Birthright, as essential to him as his being, and it is
as lawful as for him to be, and travel in those parts of it, where he was
borne, or usually has resided, and so to be without any consideration of
declaring of what is his business (unless in the cases provided by the Law)
viz. to hues, and cries, fellonies, gamings, begging, freeing the Parish from
charge, with such like) is his liberty, and to abridge him hereof, is to
abridge him of his liberty and right, unto which the Law is a defense, and
Guard, and which for to preserve, cost the blood and miseries of the late Wars,
in which the Lord so much appeared, and is as unreasonable, and unnatural as
to deny him air to breath in; And many cases there are as the causes of a man's
traveling, and changing his habitation lawful and good, which if a man should
declare might be his undoing, as it would be cruelty to exact it: Nor does the
Law set down affirmatively what is a lawful cause for a man to travel, or be
in any part of these Dominions, but understands this whole Dominion to be every
English man's Country, his habitation, wherein he may lawfully be, and
unaccountable, unless he by due information by two sufficient witnesses is
charged with any thing done by him that is contrary thereunto: And here as he
has shown his ignorance of the Law, which to execute he is sworn, in making
that a crime worthy of Bonds, which the Law takes no notice of, but is contrary
thereunto, as has been demonstrated, so this his charge is a lie, for he was
told, they were there to visit the People of the Lord, and to do good, which
the Lord required of them, and the Government allows, and says, that such
shall be protected and defended.

4. And whereas he says, being persons altogether unknown, and having no pass
for their traveling up, and down the Country, Persons altogether unknown they
were not; for as it has been already said, one or two of the Town came into
his house, and declared that they knew Ed. Pyot to be a Merchant of Bristoll,
and that there was his dwelling, and of none of them, But of Edward Pyot did he
demand a pass; So this that he affirms is another lie: nor does the Law require
those who travel up and down the Country upon their occasions to have passes,
And hereof the Law he again manifests his ignorance.

5. Whereas he charge them with refusing to give sureties of the good
behavior according to the Law in that behalf provided; Of the good behavior
they are according to the Law of an endless life, Nor any behavior that is
contrary to the Law of the Land did they manifest, whereby they ought to give
sureties of the good behavior according (as he says) to the Law in that
behalf provided, For but of one of them (viz.) of Edw. Pyot, who was known to
some of the town present, did he demand sureties, Who answered, show me a Law,
that I have transgressed, and I will find sureties, which not being produced,
he could not be charged with refusing to give sureties of the good behavior
according to the Law in that behalf provided, nor could he do so without
vvronging his Innocence, and making himself an offender. And they who were
not asked to find sureties at all (as were not the other two) cannot be said
to refuse so to do; And so a lie in every particular is this his Allegation in
this Warrant; as his Ignorance of the Law is also apparent; for had they indeed
misbehaved themselves, contrary to the Law, which provided in that behalf,
sureties to be given, or Imprisonment, The Warrant of a single Justice is not
sufficient in the Law whereby to imprison them, unless the misbehaviour had
been particularly mentioned therein, as is known to them who understand the Law
of this Nation; And because the impudency of this man, who when he had
molested, injured, and abused them, and toward them had so misbehaved himself,
contrary to the L^w, and all that is of good report amongst men, as has been
expressed, yet does he not blush to send them to Prison with a Warrant,
charging them with such a manifest lie, as their refusing to find sureties for
the good behavior according to the Law in that behalf provided, as the cause
of their Commitment, after he had thus villified, and abused them; And yet he
styles himself one of the Justices of the Peace of the County of Cornwall.

See the Proclamation for the Oath of Abjuration.
6. Nor is that all his pack, For in the next place he charge them with
refusing to take the Oath of Abjuration, When as the preamble of the
Proclamation manifests (as does also Equity, and Justice) that to such as deny
and vvitness against all kind of Popery, and Popish Religion, Root and Branch,
the Oath for abjuring Popery was not intended, but for Papists, Therefore it
says, For as much as of late time, there has been a great neglect, in putting
the Laws in execution, for Convicting of Popish Recusants, by means whereof the
penalties imposed upon such cannot be leavied, or required, which has been a
great encouragement to many to be seduced, and misled to embrace, and entertain
the dangerous, superstitious, and Idolatrous Doctrines of Popery, We. etc. And
all Popery, and Popish points, they to him denied, and gave him a Printed Book,
wherein they had so declared to all the Nation; As also for the Paper
aforesaid, because of which they suffered so much by him, makes to appear; And
they told him that O. P. whose Proclamation that is, had said, that Oath was
not intended for them; And further declared, that only in respect to the
Command of Christ, who says, swear not at all, they refused to take it. And as
to impriso^ing of those who refuse to take it, So in this he shows his justice.
and are intended thereby. T^a^ Proclamation gives no power, but only to
return their Names, and places of habitation to the Exchecquer.

7. After he had mustered up, and drawn together his black Troops and Companies
aforesaid of lies and ignorances, and of abusing of the Law to assault and
destroy the innocent under his hand and seal, that he might be sure never to
want additional supplies of the like forces, and qualifications it to
accomplish; in the seventh place, by a familiar spirit he raises up the ghost
of the great Monster ET CETERA, whose mouth is as large as Hell, and whose
depth is as the pit that has no bottom, and whose smoke ascends up for ever
and ever; who was begotten by the late Bishops on the Whore of Babylon, of whom
he is a branch, and damned by the Parliament, with that whole generation that
brought it forth, of whom it was the sudden overthrow, and destruction root and
branch. And now after their days is brought up from the depths of the Earth by
this Officer of the new raised Horse, and Commissioner of the Militia, and as
he calls himself, Justice of the Peace of the County of Cornwall, who is a
shame to the Government: When by the Law of the Land, all Warrants of
Commitment ought expressly to mention the name, the habitation, the calling of
the person committed, and the certain offense, which must be such as is so in
Law, according to which the Prisoner is to have his Issue. But whether this be
such, let him who reads and understands, judge; and whether P. Ceelyes Warrant
ET CETERA be not the Monster of this age in the Law, as was the Bishops Oath ET
CETERA of the preceding generation in Religion, and deserving the same, yea a
greater condemnation, that it may rise no more henceforth even for ever.

Being delivered in custody to the Jailer at Lanceston, they were there
detained Prisoners by virtue of the aforesaid Warrant ET CETERA, till the
general Assizes for the County of Cornwall, held at Lanceston; on the second
day of which, being the 25. of the first month, 1656. they were brought before
the Bench, where John Glynne, Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, sat Judge.
Multitudes of people being in and about the Court, and in the Town, who having
heard very strange reports concerning them, expected some great thing to be
laid to their charge, and proved equivolent thereunto, and to the misusages and
impri^onments they had sustained, of which the whole Country was ful^; as the
prisoners, considering their innocence and sufferings, had also cause to
expect, and justice of him, who was in Commission Chief Justice of England unto
whom in case^ o^ wrong judgment, appeals are made from other Judges, and
J^^^^ces, and Ministers of the Law, according to the Law, and his place, and
oath, and a suitable care and t^nderness of the liberties of men, according to
the Law, and Equity, whats^ever had been the contrary proceedings of others in
Commission, to the truth, and the Friends thereof. But what was produced as to
the one, and done by the other, and what justice they received, will appear to
the sober and wise in heart, when those few of the passages of that Assizes in
reference unto them, as they are rehearsed and managed in the Law in their
following Letter, sent by them, and delivered the last Assizes at Gloucester,
where he sat Judge, as to his carriage toward them, shall only be
considered, and weighed in judgment.

For John Glynne, Chief Justice of England.
Friend,
WE are Freemen of England, free born; our Rights and Liberties in and with
our Countries, with the Laws, the defense of them, have we in the late Wars
vindicated in the Field with our blood; and therefore with thee, by whose hand
we have so long, and do yet suffer, let us a little plainly reason concerning
thy proceedings against us, whether they have been according to the Law, or
agreeable to thy duty and office, as chief Minister of the Law, or Justice of
England; and in meekness and in lowliness abide, that the witness of God in thy
conscience may be heard to speak and judge in this matter; for thou and we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to what he has done, whether it be good or
bad. And so Friend, in moderation and soberness weigh what we have here to say
unto thee.

The afternoon before we were brought before thee at the Assizes at Launceston,
thou did cause diverse scores of our Books violently to be taken from us by
armed men, without due process of Law; which being perused, (if so be any thing
in them might be found to lay to our charge, who were innocent, and then upon
our legal issue) thou have detained to this very day. Now our Books are our
Goods, and our Goods are our Property, and our Liberty is to have and enjoy our
Property; and of our Liberty, and Property, the Law is the defense; which
says, -- No Freeman shall be disseized of his Freehold, Liberties, or
Free-customes, etc. nor any way otherwise destroyed; nor we shall not pass upon
him, but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, Magn.
Chart. cap. 29. -- Now Friend consider, is not the taking away of a man's Goods
violently by foree of Arms, as aforesaid, contrary to the Law of the Land? Is
not the keeping of them so taken away, a disseizing him of his property, and a
destroying of it, and his Liberty, yea his very Being, so far as the invading
the Guard the Law sets about him is in order thereunto? Calls not the Law this
a destroying of a man? Is there any more than one common Guard or Defense,
(viz.) the Law, to Property, Liberty, and Life? And can this Guard be broken on
the former, and the later be secure? Does not he that makes an invasion upon a
man's property and liberty, (as he does, who contrary to Law, which is the
Guard, acts upon either) make an invasion upon a man's life, since that which is
the Guard of the one, is also of the other? If a penny or pennyes worth be
taken from a man contrary to Law, may not by the same rule all a man has be
taken away? If the bound of the Law be broken upon a man's property, on the same
ground may it not be broken upon his person? And by the same reason as it is
broken on one man, may it not be broken upon all, sithence the liberty, and
property, and the beings of all men under a Government, is relative, a
Communion of Wealth, as the members in the body, but one guard to all, and
defense, the Law, one man cannot be injured therein, but it redounds unto all?
Are not such things in order to the subversion and dissolution of Government?
Where there is no Law, what is become of Government? And of what value is the
Law made, when the Ministers thereof break it at pleasure, upon men's
properties, liberties, and persons? Can thou clear thy self of these things
as to us? To that of God in thy conscience which is just, do we speak. Have
thou acted like a M nister, the Chief Minister of the Law, who have taken away
our Goods, and yet detainest them, without so much as going by lawful Warrant
grounded upon due information, which in this our case thou could not have,
for none had perused them whereof to give the information? Should thou
exerc^se violence, and force of Arms on Prisone^s Goods, in their
Prison-chamber, instead of orderly and legally proceeding, which thy place
calls upon thee above any man to tender, defend, and maintain against the
other, and to preserve the Guard entire of every man's being, liberty, life, and
livelihood? Should thou, whose duty it is to punish the wrong doer, do wrong
thy self? Who ought to see the Law be kept and observed, break the Law, and
turn aside the due administration thereof? Surely from thee, considering thee
as Chief Justice of England, other things were expected both by us, and the
People of this Nation.

And, Friend, when we were brought before thee, and stood upon our Legal Issue,
and no Accuser or Accusation came in against us, as to what we had been
wrongfully imprisoned, and in Prison detained for the sp^ce of nine weeks,
should not thou have caused us to have been acquitted by Proclamation? Says
not the Law so? Ought not thou to have examined the cause of our commitment,
and there not appearing a lawful cause, ought not thou to have discharged
us? Is it not the substance of thy office and duty, to do justice according to
the Law, and C^st^me of England? Is not this the end of the administration of
the Law, and of the General Assizes, of the Goal deliveries, of the Judges
going the Circuits? Have not thou, by doing otherwise, acted contrary to all
these, and to Magna Charta, cap. 29. which says, -- We shall sell to no man,
we shall deny or deferr to no man, either Justice or Right. -- Have not thou
both deferred and denied us, who had been so long oppressed, this Justice and
Right?

And when of thee Justice we demanded, said thou not; If we would be
uncovered, thou would hear us, and do us Justice? -- We shall sell to no man,
we shall deny or deferr to no m^n either Justice or Right, says Magna Charta,
as aforesaid. -- We have commanded all our Justices, that they shall from
henceforth do EVEN Law; and execution of Right to all our Sub ects, rich and
poor, without having regard to any man's per on, and without letting to do
Right, for any Letters or Commandments which may come to them from Us, or from
any other, or by any other cause, etc. upon pain to be at our Will, Body, and
Lands, and Goods, to do thereof as shall please us, in case they do contrary,
says S^at 20 Ed. 3. cap. 1. -- Ye shall swear, that ye shall do EVEN Law, and
execution of Right to all, rich and p^or, without having regard to any person;
and that you deny to no man common Right, by the Kings Letters, nor none other
man's, nor for NONE other cause. And in case any Letters come to you contrary to
the Law, that you do nothing by such Letters, but certify the King thereof,
and go forth to do the Law, notwithstanding those Letters. And in case ye he
from henceforth found in default in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at
the Kings will, of Lands, Body, and Goods, thereof to be done as shall please
him, says the Oath appointed by all the Judges, 18. E^. 3. Stat. 3. -- But
none of these, nor none other Law, has such an expression or condition in it
as this, (viz.) Provided, If he will put off his Hat to ye, or be uncovered.
Nor does the Law of God so say, or that your persons be respected, but the
contrary. From whence then comes this new Law, If ye will be uncovered, I will
hear ye, and do ^e Justice, this hearing complaint of wrong, this doing of
Justice upon condition? Wherein lies the equity and reasonableness of that?
When were those Fundamental Laws repealed, which were the issue of much Blood
and War, which to uphold, cost the Miseries and Blood of the late Wars, that we
shall now be heard as to Right, and have Justice done us but upon condition,
and such a trifling one, as the putting off the Hat? Does thy saying so, who
art commanded as aforesaid, repeal them, and make them of none effect, and all
the Miseries undergone, and the blood shed for them of old, and of late years?
Whether it be so or no indeed, and to the Nation, thou have made it so to us.
-- Whom thou have denied the justice of our Liberty (when we were before thee,
and no Accuser or Accusation came in against us) and the hearing of the wrong
done to us who were innocent, and the doing us Right, and Bonds have thou cast,
and continued upon us to this day, under an unreasonable and cruel Jailer, for
not performing that thy condition for conscience sake. But think thou that
this thine own Conditional Justice makes void the Law, or can it do so, or
absolve thee before God or Man, or acquit thee of the penalty mentioned in the
Laws aforesaid, unto which have thou not sworn and consented? (Viz.) And in
case ye be from henceforth found in default in any of the points aforesaid, ye
shall be at the Kings will of Body, Lands, and Goods, thereof to be done as
shall please him. -- And is not thy saying, If ye will be uncovered, (or put
off your Hats) I will hear ye, and do ye justice? And because we would not put
them off, for conscience sake, the denying of us justice, who had so unjustly
suffered, and hearing of us as to wrong, a default in thee against the very
essence of those Laws, yea, an overthrow thereof; for which things sake, being
of the highest importance to the beings of men, so just, so equal, so necessary
those Laws were made, and all the provisions therein, to make a default in any
one point of which provisions, exposes to the said penalty? Do not thou by
this time see where thou art? Art thou sure thou shall never be made to
understand and feel the justice thereof? Is thy state so high, and thy fence so
great? And art thou so certain of thy time and station above all that have gone
before thee, whom justice has cut down, and given their due, that thou shall
never be called to an account, nor with its long and sure stroke be reached?
Deceive not thy self, God is come nearer to udgement than the workers of
iniquity in this age imagine, who persecute, and evil entreat those who witness
the Just and Holy One for their witnessing of him, who is come to reign for
ever and ever. Says he not, he will be a swift Witness against the false
Swearers? God is not mocked. Surely, Friend, that must needs be a very great
offense, the not forbearing of the doing of which, deprives a man of justice,
of being heard, as to wrong, of the benefit of the Law, of those Laws before
rehearsed; the justice and equity of which for to defend, a man has adventured
his Blood, and all that is dear to him. But to stand covered, or with the Hat
on, in conscience to the command of the Lord, is made by thee such an one,
which is none in Law, and rendered upon us who are innocent, serving the living
God effectually, though the Laws of God and of Man, and the Oath, and Equity,
and Reason, says the contrary, and on it pronounces such a penalty. If ye
will be uncovered, I will hear you, and do you justice: But justice we had not,
nor were we heard, because the light of Jesus Christ, who is the higher power,
the Lawgiver of his people in our consciences, commanded us not to respect
persons, whom to obey, we chose rather than man. And for our obedience into it,
have thou cast us into Prison, and continued us there to this very day, having
neither showed us Law for it, nor Scripture, or instance of either, or example
of Heathens, or others. Friend come down to that of God that is just in thee,
and consider, Was ever such a thing heard of in this Nation? What is become of
Seriousness, of Judgment and of Righteousness? An unrighteous man, standing
before thee with his Hat off shall be heard; but an innocent man appearing with
his Hat on, in conscience to the Lo^d* shall neither be heard, nor have
justice. Is not this regarding of persons, contrary to the Laws aforesaid, and
the Oath, and the Law of God? Understand, and judge. Did we not own Authority
and Government oftentimes before the Court? Did not thou say in the Court,
thou wast glad to hear so much from us of our owning Magistracy? Pleaded we not
to the Indictment, though it was such a new found one as England never heard of
before? Came we not when thou sentst for us? Went we not when thou bidst us go?
And are we not still Prisoners at thy Command, and at thy Will? If the Hat had
been such an offense to thee, could not thou have caused it to have been
taken off? When thou had heard us so often declare, we could not do it in
conscience to the command of the Lord, and that for that cause we forbore it,
not in contempt of thee, or of Authority, nor in dis-respect to thine, or any
man's person; for we said, we honored all men in the Lord, and owned Authority,
which was a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that do well; And our
souls were subject to the higher powers for conscience sake, as thou causedst
them to be taken off, and to be kept so, when thou calledst the Jury to find
us Transgressors without a Law? What ado have thou made to take away the
Righteousness of the Righteous from him, and to cause us to suffer further,
whom thou knew to have been so long wrongfully in Prison contrary to Law? Is
not Liberty of Conscience a Natural Right? Had there been a Law in this case,
and we bound up in our Consciences, that we could not have obeyed it, was not
Liberty of Conscience there to take place? For where the Law says not against,
there needs no Plea of Liberty of Conscience: But the Law have not we offended,
yet in thy will for our consciences, where the Law requires no such thing, have
thou, and do thou yet cause us to suffer; And yet for Liberty of Conscience
has all the blood been spilt, and the miseries of the late Wars undergone; and
as O. P. says, this Government undertaken to preserve it, and a Natural Right
he says it is; and he that would have it, he says, ought to give it; And if a
Natural Right, as it is undeniable, than to attempt to force it, or to punish a
man for not doing contrary thereunto, is to act against Nature, which as it is
unreasonable, so it is the same as to offer violence to a man's life, and what
an offense that is in the Law thou know; and how by the common Law of
England all Acts, and Agreements, and Laws, that are against Nature, are mere
nullities, and all the Judges cannot make one case to be Law which is against
Nature. But put the case our standing with our Hats on, had been an offense in
Law, and we wilfully, and in contempt, and not out of Conscience, had so stood,
which we deny as aforesaid, Yet, that is not a ground wher^fore we should be
denied Justice, or to be heard as to the wrong done to us; If ye will not
offend in one case, I will do you Justice in another, this is not the language
of the Law, or of justice, which distributes to every one their Right, justice
to whom justice is due, punishment to whom punishment is due; A man who does
wrong, may also have wrong done to him, shall he not have right wherein he is
wronged, unless he right him whom he has wronged: The Law says not so, but the
wrong doer is to suffer, and the sufferer of wrong is to be righted. Is not
otherwise to do a denying, a letting of even Law, and execution of justice, and
a bringing under the penalties aforesaid, mind and consider.

And should thou have accu^ed, when no accuser appeared against us, as in the
particulars of striking P. Ceely, and dispersing Books (as thou saye'st^
against Magistracy, and Ministry, with which thou did accuse on^ of us;
Says not the Law that the Judge ought not be the accuser, much less a false
accuser; and w^s't not thou such a one, in affirming that he dispersed Books
against Magistracy and Ministry, when as the Books were violently taken out
of our Chamber, as has been said, undispersed by him or any of us? Nor did
thou make it to appear in one particular, wherein those thou so violently did
cause to be taken away, were against Magistracy, or Ministry, or gave one
Instance, or Reply, when he denied what thou charg'st therein, and spoke to
thee to bring forth those Books, and make them to appear. Is not the sword of
the Magistrate of God to pass upon such evil doing? And according to the
Administration of the Law, ought not accusations to be by way of Indictment,
wherein the offense is to be charged, and the Law expressed against which it
is? Can there be an Issue without an Indictment, or can an Indictment be found,
before proof be made of the offense charged therein? And have not thou herein
gone contrary to the Law, and the Administration thereof, and thy duty as a
Judge?

What just cause of offense gave G. F. to thee, when upon thy producing of a
paper concerning swearing sent by him, as thou said to the grand Jurors, and
requiring him to say, whether it was his handwriting, He answered, read it up
before the Country, and when he heard it read, if it were his he would own it?
Is it not equal, and according to Law, that what a man is charged with before
the Country, should be read in his, and the hearing of the Country? When a
paper is delivered out of a man's hand, Alterations may be made in it to his
prejudice, which on a sudain looking over it may not presently be discerned,
But hearing it read up may be better understood, whether any such alterations
have been made therein. Could thou in justice have expected, or required him
otherwise to do, considering also how he was not unsensible, how much he had
suffered already being innocent, and what endeavors there were used to cause
him further to suffer; Was not what he said as aforesaid, a plain and single
answer, and sufficient in the Law, though (as has been demonstrated) contrary
to the Law thou did act, and thy Office, in being his accuser therein, and
producing the paper against him. And in his liberty it was whether he would
have made thee any answer at all, to what thou did exhibit, or demand out of
the due course of the Law, for to the Law answer is to be made not to thy will.
Wherefore then wast thou so filled with rage; and fury upon that his Reply?
Calmly, and in the fear of the Lord consider: Wherefore did thou revile him,
particularly with the reproachful names of Jugler, and Prevaricator, wherein
did he juggle, wherein did he prevaricate? Wherefore did thou use such
threatening language, and such menacings to him, and us, saying, thou would
firk us, with such like? Does not the Law forbid reviling, and rage, and fury,
and threatening, and menacing of Prisoners? soberly mind, Is this to act like a
Judge, or a Man? Is not this transgression? Is not the sword of the Magistrate
of God to pass upon this as evil doing, which the Righteous Law condemns, and
the higher power is against, which judges for God? Take heed what ye do, for
ye judgo not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment,
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, Take heed and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts, said Jehosaphat to the Judges of Judah: Pride, and Fury, and Passion,
and Rage, and Reviling* and Threatening is not the Lords: It and the principle
out of which it springs is for judgment, and must come under the sword of the
Magistrate of God, and is of an evil savor, especially such an expression as
to threaten to firk us: Is not such a saying more becoming a Pedant, or School
Master, with his rod, or ferula in his hand, than thee who art the Chief
Justice of the Nation, who sits in the highest seat of judgment, who ought
to give a good example, and so to judge, as others may hear and fear, weigh it
soberly, and consider? Does not threatening language demonstrate an unequalitie,
and partiality in him who sits as a Judge? Is it not a deterring of a Prisoner
from standing to, and pleading the innocence of his cause? Provides not the
Law against it? says it not that Irons, and all other Bonds shall be taken
from the Prisonor, that he may plead without amazement, and with such freedom
of spirit as if he were not a Prisoner? But when he who is to judge according
to the Law, shall beforehand threaten, and menace the Prisoner contrary to the
Law, how can the mind of the Prisoner be free to plead his innocence before
him, or expect equal judgment, who before he hears him threatens what he will
do to him? Is not this the case between thee and us? Is not this the measure we
have received at thy hands? Have thou herein dealt according to Law, or thy
duty, or as thou would be done unto? Let that of God in thy conscience judge.

And did not thou say there was a law for putting off the Hat, and that thou
would show a law* and did not thou often so express thy self? But did
thou produce any law, or show where that law might be found or any judicial
president, or in what Kings Reign, when we desired it so often of thee, having
never heard of, or known any such law by which thou did judge us? Was not
what we demanded of thee reasonable and just? Was that a savory answer and
a^cording to law which thou gave us, (viz.) I am not to carry the law books
at my back up and down the Country, I ^m not to instruct ye? Was ever such an
expression heard before these days, to come out of a Judges mouth? Is he not to
be of Counsel in the law for the Prisoner and to instruct him therein? Is it
not for this cause that the Prisoner in many cases is not at all allowed
Counsel by the law? In all Courts of justice in this Nation has it not been
known so to have been? and to the Prisoner has not this been often declared
when he has demanded Counsel, alleging his ignorance in the law, by reason
of which his cause might miscarry, though it were righteou^, (viz.) the Court
is of Counsel for you? Ought not he that judges in the law to be expert in
the law? Could thou not tell by what act of Parliament it was made, or by
what judicial President, or in what Kings reign, or when it was adjudged so by
the common law, (which are all the grounds the law of England has) had there
been such a law, though the words of the law thou could not remember? Surely
to inform the Prisoner when he desires it, especially as to a law which was
never heard of, by which he proceeds to judge him, that he may know what law it
is by which he is to be judged, becomes him who judges for God; for so the law
was read to the Jews, hy which they were to be judged, yea, every Saboath day
this was the Commandment of the Lord, But to say instead thereof, I am not to
carry the law books at my back up and down the Country, I am not to instruct
ye, To say there is a law, and to say thou will show it, and yet not to show
it nor tell where it is to be found, consider, whether it be consistent with
savouriness, or truth, or justice?

And has not thy whole proceedings against us made it evidently to appear,
that thy desire was to cause us to suffer, not to deliver us, who being
innocent, suffered to have us aspersed, and reproached before the Country, not
to have our innocence cleared and vindicated? Does not thy taking away our
books as aforesaid, and the perusing of them in such have, before our trial,
and thou accusing us with some things, which thou said was contained in them,
make it to appear that matter was sought out of them, wherewithal to charge
us, when the Warrant ET CETERA could not stand in law, by which we stood
committed, and were then upon our delivery according to the course of law?

Does it not further appear by the refusing to take from our hands, a Copy of
the strange ET CETERA Warrant, by which we were committed, and of the paper by
which we were apprehended to read it, or cause it to be read, that so our long
sufferings by reason of both, might be looked into and weighed in the law*
whether just or righteous and the Country might as well see our innocence, and
sufferings without a cause, and the manner of dealing with us, a^ ^o hear such
reports, as went of us as great offenders, when we called upon thee often so to
do, and which thou ought to have done, and said thou would do it, but
did it not, nor so much as took notice before the Country, that we had been
falsely imprisoned, and had wrongfully suffered; But what might asperse and
charge us, thou brought in thy self contrary to law, and did call to have
us charged therewith? Is not this further manifest, in that thou did cause us
on a sudden to be withdrawn, and the pety Jurors to be called in with their
verdict. Who upon Peter Ceelyes falsely accusing G. F. with telling him
privately of a design, and persuading him to join therein, it was by G. F. made
so clear, and manifest a falsehood, and so plainly to be perceived, that the
cause of our sufferings was not any evil we had done, or law that we had
transgressed, but malice, and wickedness? And is it not abundantly clear, In
thy not permitting us to ans^er, and clear our selves of the many fowl slanders
charged upon us in the new found Indictment, of which no proof was made, but
when we were answering thereunto, and clearing our selves thereof, thou us
did stop saying, Thou mindest not those things, but only the putting off the
Hat. When as before the Country the new found Indictment charged us with those
things, and the pety Jurors brought in their verdict guilty of the trespasses
and contempts mentioned therein; of which except as to the Hat, not one witness
was produced, ^r evidence, and as to the Hat not any law, or judicial
President, upon the transgression of which, all legal Indictments are only to
be grounded: Now the law seeks not for cause whereby to make the innocent to
suffer, but helps him to Right who suffers wrong, and releeveth the
oppressed, and searches out the matter, whether that of which a man stands
accused be so or no, seeking judgment, and hastening righteousness, and it
says, the innocent and the righteous slay thou not, But whether thou have done
so to us, or to the contra y, let the witness of God in thee search and judge,
as these thy fruits do also make manifest.

And f^iend, consider how abominably wicked, and how highly to be abhorred,
denied and witnessed against, and how contrary to the law such a proceeding is,
as to charge a man with many offenses in an Indictment; which those who draw
the Indictment, and prosecu^^ and find the bill know to be false, and to be set
in purposely to reproach and wound his good name, whom with some small matter,
which they can prove, they charge and Indict, as is the common practice at this
day? Prove but one particular charge in the Indictment, and it must stand (say
they) for a true Bill, though there be never so many falsehoods therein and
lies, on set purpose to wrong him who is maliciously persecuted, This is known
to the Judges, and almost to every man who has to do with, and attends their
Courts, and how contrary to the end and righteousness of the law, which clears
the innocent and condemns the guilty, and condemns not the righteous with the
wicked and much it is cried out against, but of it what is there of
Reformation? How else shall Clerks of Assize, and other Clerks of Courts, fill
up their bags, (out of of which perhaps their Master must have a secret
consideration) and be heightened in pride and impudence, that even in open
Courts they take upon them to check, and revile man without reproof, when a few
lines may serve instead of a hundred? How else shall the spirit that is in men
that lusts unto envy, malice, strife, contention be cherished and nourished
to feed the Lawyers, and dependants on Courts with the bread of men's children,
and the ruin of their families to maintain their long Suits and malicious
contentions? I mind not these things, I Will not hear you clear your selves, of
what you are falsely accused, one thing I mind in your charge, the rest are but
matter of form, set there to render you such wicked men before the Country,
which the thing that i^ to be proved on you is not able. O abominable
wick^d^ess, and perverting of the righteous end of the law, wh ch is so
careful, and tender of every man's peace and innocence? How is the Law in the
administration thereof adulterated by the Lawyers. As the Scriptures are
mangled by the Priests? (...) th^^ w^^ch ^as made to preserve the right^ous and
to punish the (...) to the punishing of the righteous, and ^^e pr^se^^ (...) ^f
the (...)? An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, life for life, burning for
burning, a wound f r a wound, a stripe for a stripe; he that accuses a man
falsely to suffer the same as he should have suffered, who was falsely accused,
this says the righteous law of God, which is agreeable to that of God in every
man's conscience. Are not such forms of iniquity to be denied, which are so
contrary to the law of God and man, which serve for the gendring of strife, and
the kindling of contention? And of this nature was not that with which thou
did cause us to be Indicted? and this form did not thou uphold, in not
permitting us to answer to the many foul slanders therein, saying those things
thou mindest not? Will not the wrath of God be revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, Who hold the truth in unrighteousness?
Who are so far from the power of godliness, that they have not the form, but
the form of iniquity which is set up, and upheld instead of, and as a law to
overthrow, and destroy the righteousness of the righteous, and so to set him
up, as by the law he can never get out? Is not the cry think thou gone up?
It is time for thee to set to thine hand, O Lord, for thine enemies have made
void thy law, draws not the hour nigh? fills not up the measure of iniquity
apace? Surely your day is coming and hastneth, warned you have been from the
presence, and by the mouth of the Lord, and clear will he be when he comes to
judgment, and upright when he gives sentence, That of God in every one of
your consciences shall so to him bear witness and confess, and your mouths
shall be stopped, and before your Judge shall you be silent, when he shall
divide you your portion, and render unto you according unto your deeds.
Therefore whilst thou have time prize it and repent, for verily our God shall
come and shall not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and it shall
be very tempestuous round about him, he shall call to the Heavens from above,
and to the earth that he may Judge his people, and the Heavens shall declare
his righteousness, for God is Judge himself: Consider this ye that forget God,
least he tear you to pieces, and there be none to deliver.

And Friend, should thou have given judgment, against us, wherein thou did
fine us 20. marks apiece, and imprisonment till payment, without causing us
being Prisoners to be brought before thee to hear the judgment, and to move
what we had to say in arrest of judgment? Is not this contrary to the law, as
is manifest to those who understand the proceedings thereof? Is not the
Prisoner to be called before judgment is given, and is not the Indictment to
be read, and the verdict thereupon, and is not liberty to be given him to move
in Arrest of judgment, and if it be a just exception in the law, ought not
there to be an Arrest of Judgment? For the Indictment may not be drawn up
according to law, and may be wrong placed, and the offense charged therein may
not be a cr me in law, ^r the Jurors may have been corrupted or menaced, or set
on by some of the Justices, with other particulars, which are known to be
legal and just exceptions: And the judgment ought to be in his hearing, not
behind his back, as if the Judge were so conscious of the error thereof, that
he dares not give it to the face of the Prisoner: But none of those Privileges
of the law, this Justice, we who had so long and so greatly suffered contrary
to law received not, nor could have at thy hands, no not so much as a sight, or
Copy of that long and newfound Indictment, which in England was never heard of
before, nor that the matter contained therein was an offense in law, nor ever
was there any law, or judicial president that made it so, though two friends
in our names and behalves that night and the next day, and the day following
often desired it, of the Clarke of Assize, and his Assistant, and servants, but
it they could not have, nor so much liberty as to see it. And it is like it was
not unknown, or unperceived by thee, that had we been called as we ought to
have been, or had known when it was to be given, three or four words might have
made a sufficient legal Arrest of that newfound Indictment, and the verdict
thereupon; Therefore as our liberties, who are innocent, have not been worth
in thy account the minding, and esteemed fit for nothing but to be trampled
underfoot and destroyed, so if we find fault with what thou have done, thou
have taken care that no door be left open to us in the law, but a Writ of
error, the consideration whereof, and the judgment to be given thereon, is to
be had only where thy self is chief, of whom such complaint is to be made,
and the error assigned for the reverse of thy judgment, and what the fruit of
that may be well expected to be, by what we have already mentioned as having
received at hy hands, thou have given us to understand. And here thou may
think thou have made thy self secure, and sufficiently barred up our way of
relief, against whom [though thou know we had done nothing contrary to the
Law, or worthy of Bonds, much less of the Bonds and sufferings we had sustaind]
thou have proceeded as has been rehearsed; Notwithstanding, that thou art [as
are all the Judges of the Nation] entrusted not with a Legisllative power, but
to administer Justice, and to do EVEN Law, and excecution of right to all, high
and low, rich and poor, without having regard to any man's person, and art sworn
so to do, as has been said, and wherein thou do contrary art liable to
punishment, as ceasing from being a Judge, and becoming a wrong doer, and an
oppressor, which what it is to be, many of thy Predecessors have understood:
some by death, others by fine and imprisonment: And of this thou may not be
ignorant, that to deny a prisoner any of the privileges the Law allows him,
is to deny him justice, to try him in an arbitrary way, to rob him of that
liberty which the Law gives him, which is his Inheritance as a freeman, and
which to do in effect, is, to subvert the fundamental Law, and Government of
England, and to introduce an Arbitrary, and tyrannical Government against Law,
which is treason by the common Law; and treasons by the common Law are not
taken away by the Statutes of 25. E. 3. 1. H. 4. 1. 2. M. see O. St. John's now
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, his argument against Strafford, fol. 65.
etc. in the Case.

And these things, friend, we have laid before thee in all plainess to the end,
that with the light of Jesus Christ* who lights every one that comes into
the World, a measure of which thou have received, which shows the evil, and
reproves thee for sin, for which thou must be accountable, thou being still
and cool, may consider and see what thou have done against the innocent,
and shame may overtake thee, and thou turn unto the Lord, who now calls thee
to repentance through his servants, who for witnessing his living truth in
them, thou have cast into, and yet continuest under cruel Bonds and
Sufferings.

From the Jail in Lanceston the 4. day of the 5. month, 1656. Edward Pyot.


By which Letter it is manifest, that upon their trial, no accuser nor
accusation came in against them, as to the cause of their Commitment, nor
indeed could any of the allegations in the Warrant ETCETERA bear weight in Law,
as has been demonstrated; Nevertheless set at liberty they were not, though
they suffered nine weeks wrong Imprisonment, and such other abuses as has been
mentioned: but after all the diligent searchings of whatsoever could be thought
on wherewithal to accuse them, in order to their further sufferings, nothing
appearing as to what they could be charged, that the Law of the Land found
fault with, matter was sought after as to the Law of their God, in obedience to
which they were sure to find them, without respecting of persons [which who so
does, commits Sin, and is committed of the Law as a transgressor;] therefore an
Indictment grounded on no Law, was before hand made ready, upon confidence they
would stand in the Court covered, when they should be called: and they
appearing so when they were called, in conscience to the Law of God, not out of
any contempt of them, or of Authority, which they owned as has been said,
they were fined in twenty Marks a piece, and sentenced to prison till payment,
so and in such manner as has been expressed; and so to the Prison were they
returned by command of the Judge, and by order, signed John Glynne, [who has
caused, and taken upon himself the sufferings of the innocent, where P. Ceelyes
Warrant could not further reach] are they there kept to this day, and the
Country returned with this answer to their great expectations, that
notwithstanding the loud outcry that had been made, and strange reports
concerning these men, when it came to the trial, nothing could be laid to
their charge: but because in conscience to the command of the Lord, who
requires that the person of no man be respected, they could not put off their
hats, though they so declared to the Court, and that they stood not covered in
contempt of Authority, or in disrespect to any man's person, but for that cause;
and though they owned Authority, and pleaded* they were fined, and imprisoned
till payment for not putting off their hats, which no Law of God, or man
required, nor was any Law, or Instance of either, or example of Heathens, or
others on record in Scripture produced, upon their often desires in that
particular, instead of being freed after their long imprisonment, and other
sufferings without a cause: and this with what has been aforesaid is the
Justice, and measure, which the righteous and just one has received in these
in whom he works, and is made manifest from the chief Justice of England, for
that in obedience unto it they stood before him with their hats on, of which
all the Cases and Records in this Nation, of those who have preceded him,
affords not a parallel; and so has it pleased the wisdom of God, that by a
hat, such a base thing, all the Religion, and Justice of this high professing
generation should be tried and confounded; and by a thing that is not, the
things that are, should be brought to naught.

Upon their being returned to Prison, by order of the chief Justice as
aforesaid, the Jailer was somewhat earnest to know whether they would pay their
Fines, (being very desirous to be rid of them, for that their being there had
been a great curb to the profane swearing, and drinking, and cursing, and
blaspheming, and gaming, used by them who came to drink strong-drink in his
house, and to use vain pleasure in the prison green, and therein a hindrance to
his profit: for such Persons being by the prisoners often reproved, as they
were movings from the Lord, for the evils aforesaid, had little mind to
frequent his house) which Fines, when after a few days he saw they were
resolved not to satisfy, and so their imprisonment like to continue; The evil
spirit which to that time was much chained, began to be let loose in him, and
taking encouragement from the proceedings of P. Ceely, and the Judge against
them, and perceiving thereby how they were delivered up as Persons on whom any
manner of iniquity, and violence, and cruelty might be exercised without
being called to account, and punished for the same [Capt. Fox his Cornet having
also openly said in the Prison to these prisoners faces, that if they slew them
who should gainsay it? or killed them, or shed their blood, and that they were
not to be protected] he began to exercise his Salvage will, and beastly lusts
upon them, which had its effects in the batbarous, cruel, and unreasonable
usages now to be declared, and so now comes to act his part in their
sufferings, as had P. Ceely, and the chief Justice.

When they were first brought into prison by virtue of P. Ceelies Warrant
ETCETERA, the three prisoners aforesaid agreed with the keeper and his wife,
for meat and drink, chamber, and all other accommodations, at a certain rate
for themselves, and Benjamin Maynard [who for standing still in Lanceston
Steeple-house, and speaking not a word, till violent hands were laid on him,
and he haled near the door, was committed as is hereafter more at large
mentioned] with this condition, that if he or they should for the time to come
be unsatisfied with, or dislike to hold on according to that agreement, the
party so disliking might break of at any weeks end, and the prisoners were to
ptovide for themselves: and from the time of this agreement, they every week
paid the said weekly sum, and something over; Nevertheless he repined thereat
behind their backs, and grudged to the people of the Town and Countries: of
which the prisoners being informd, and that the Jailer had said a few days
before to his wife, make an end with them at the end of the week, with many
reproachful speeches before diverse people, when the week was at an end, one
of them asked the Gaolers wife, whether she and her husband were unsatisfied to
continue to diet them according to the foresaid agreement, acquainting her with
what they were informed her husband had said, and if they were not satisfied
they should speak plainly, for they so meant, and intended to deal with them,
and so to be dealt with desired, and not to be reproached, and abused behind
their backs, and this they were desirous to know, that they might otherwise
provide for their diet; to which she answered, that she and her husband were
both well satisfied to diet them as before, and so they continued as formerly.

Yet the evil spirit in the jailer, was not at rest, but manifested it self in
rage, and cruelty before that week was ended; For Benjamin Maynard having put
up a paper in the prison green against pleasures, the Jailer (the evening
before the last day of that week) broke forth in great fury against them, and
abuses, and by the hair of the head put Benjamin Maynard down into Doomesdale,
amongst the fellons, reviling, and reproaching him, and the other prisoners
exceedingly, which though they heard, yet they let the Jailer alone, neither
coming at him, nor speaking unto him, but kept their Chamber; Notwithstanding
at his return from putting Benjamin into Doomesdale, he came up to them in his
rage, and anger, and as before, so again to their faces he called them both the
night and the next morning, Rogues, Stinking Knaves, Jesuits, Salvages, and
Runnagats, with such other filty language, as it came into his mind, threatening
to put them into Doomesdale, and to put Irons upon them, with oaths and Curses
not fit to be mentioned, calling all their friends that came to visit them in
prison, Rogues, and Whores, saying that he would break their legs, and necks
if any came there again; and when they told him of his uncivil, and uncomely
behavior toward them, and of his filthy communication, and wicked Oaths and
Curssings, he reviled them the more, calling them Beggarly Rogues, and
affirming them to be the Scum of the Country; bidding them to kiss and put
their noses into that, which modesty forbeares to mention; and threatened to
order them as Rogues, deceivers and deluders, and to lay them fast enough,
before he had done with them, and so fastened the door upon them. And he then
declared that he would not diet them as formerly for Forty shillings a week,
and at another time not under forty.

Having thus declared his dislike to diet them, the week being ended (according
to their agreement at first, as has been said) the prisoners were at their own
dispose to provide for themselves, and to it were necessitated by him, in
regard he said he would not diet them as formerly for forty shillings a week,
and having given him a sufficient rate before, that his extortive demand they
could not answer, and therefore sent for a maid of the town, and agreed with
her, as their servant, to supply them with necessaries, promising her wages,
and gave her money to provide for them, according to their order, and to bring
it to them in the prison. But at the first meat she brought them, the Jailer,
and his wife were so enraged, that they abused the maid and them, calling her
filthy names, as she past forth, and threatened to make her suffer for it if
ever she came again; And told them, that they had an order to Victual all
prisoners in their custody; that it was against the Law, and order of the
prison, that any prisoner there should have any provisions brought into them by
their own servants, or others; that none should bring their meat, or drink, or
any provisions; and that if they would have any provisions of meat or drink,
they should have it of them, or they should have none; And although he had so
much repined behind their backs at the agreed Rate, and reproached them, and
had bid his wife at the end of the week to make an end with them; and both to
their faces, and behind their backs, had declared he would not do as he had
done for forty shillings a week, nor under forty; and though in their agreement
if either disliked, at any weeks end, he or they that did so dislike might
break off; and though he it was that did dislike as aforesaid, and so both by
agreement and necessity, were they to seek out to supply themselves, as has
been expressed; Yet from that very time aforesaid, would he not suffer their
servant to bring them any provisions at all; but when she came the next morning
to see what they wanted, he locked the door upon her, and kept her prisoner, and
would not let her come into their Chamber, whom he had made close prisoners,
but sent for a sergeant, and took her away with an arrest, unto which she
having given Bail, she came with a pitcher of water to the prisoners, and
called at the Jail door for it to be opened, that she might go in therewith;
But he coming to the door himself, denied her entrance, brake her pitcher,
threatened, and much abused her.

The prisoners hereby seeing the unreasonableness, and oppression of the
Jailer, and how he would have it of Necessity that all prisoners must be
provided for by him, and at what rate he pleased, whatever were their
Conditions; and how that in order thereunto he pretended, and pleaded a Law,
and order of the Jail, and a determination of it so by the Justices of the
County at Sessions, and the Judges in their Circuits, but could produce no such
thing. when of him they desired it. And being informed, that the under-Gaoler
had cruelly beat a prisoner for bying a loaf of bread at a bakers, which was
bigger and better bread then they had of the keeper, and that the woman
prisoners were not suffered to take in work from the towns people that gave
them money, but were kept at work by the Jailer, for which he gave them neither
bread nor money; And lest the Jailer should make them Presidents to those who
should come after in this case of provisions; as he would make those who
heretofore had yielded to his unreasonableness, Presidents to them, though they
could have been content that he should diet and make again upon them as
formerly; yet upon the considerations aforesaid, and for that he sought to
force them to that, which was in their freedoms to do, or not to do, and that
upon a pretense of Law and order, which there is none; they saw themselves
bound in duty to God, and love to their Nation, to bear their Testimony
against his Cruelty, and oppression, as against all unrighteousness, where ever
they find it, and to deny those his demands, whatsoever sufferings it should
cost them from his unreasonableness as the price thereof.

And because upon the necessary and just grounds aforesaid they denied him
therein, upon them he powered out his outrageous, and brutish Cruelty, and
into a low place in the prison called Domesdale, the 9 of the second month he
cast them, where the fellones are secured, out of which he took the fellons
before their faces, and put them into a Chamber over their heads, locking these
prisoners into this noisome, filthy stinking hole, where was a Puddle of Piss,
and filth over their shoes, and the excrements of the fellons, and the fellons
straw, almost broken to Chafe, with their long lying thereon, and full of
vermin, and wherein is neither Chimney, nor easing house; And in this poisonous
den having cast and made them sure, he refused to let the door be opened for
the cleansing of the place, or so much as for the bringing in of a little fresh
straw for them to lodge in; And when in the evening he opened the door, it was
to let in some of his Consorts, viz. Degorie Pearse, Francis Oliver, and
William Walsh, wicked and profane men, to abuse them, (who being filled with
strong drink, called them Rogues, Knaves, and Rascals, with other cursing,
envious, and revilling language; whom when it was told, that such were to be
ruled by the Law, and were asked whether they owned Justices, one of them
expressed himself exceeding filthylie of Justice:) but four of the prisoners
friends coming in to see them when the door was opened to let in those vile men
aforesaid: the Jailer would not let them go out again; but locked them in also,
and when the prisoners spoke to him to let them out, he called the prisoners
damnd dogs of Egypt, and kept those friends prisoners there all night, as he
beat and struck with a great staff two of them, till one of their arms was
black, for accompanying them from their chamber to this filthy hole; of which
they complained to the Major of the Town, but he took no notice thereof. Nor
was he with all this his inhumane and unmercifull dealing satisfied, but about
the 10. hour in the night, he came into the room over their heads, with a
company who were drunk, and stamped the dust down upon their heads and called
them rogues and other filthy names, and on purpose he threw a pot of
excrements, and pist down upon their heads, and on their fire, to put it out,
which was made to cleanse away the stinking air: and the next night he came
again, and stamped the dust down on their heads, and pist into this place where
he had set them, and threatened to put them into Irons, and to chain them
together to posts, and to nail their ears to a post, and gagge their mouths,
and called them hatchet-faced dogs, and damnd dogs of Egypt, and rogues and
bad them kiss, and lick, and put their noses into that which is offensive to
modesty to express, and said he would do what he could, that they might ly in
prison and rot, and threatened to put the fellons down to them: and whereas he
used to lodge at his house, he came and lay over their heads, that he might be
more ready to abuse them: and 12 s. he demanded, to have the door of that
loathsome cell to stand open, and 20 s. a week for a chamber.

Having received the injuries and abuses aforesaid from the Jailer, they asked
him who had the power of the Goal over him, he answered nobody, but that the
land and houses were Coll. Bennets, whom he said, he had fast enough under his
hand and seal, and when they answered him their demand was not whose land and
houses it was, but who had the power over the prison, as it was a Prison for
the County, and over him and the Prisoners, in case of wrong and abuse done to
the Prisoners; He answered, No body but himself had the sole power. Then they
asked him, whether there was no appeal above him? He answered, no. Then they
asked him, whether the Sheriff had no power over him, and the Prisoners, if
Prisoners should appeal to him because of abuse from their Keeper? He answered,
the Sheriff had nothing to do, neither with him, nor his Prisoners; and added
as an argument, that when any were condemned to be hanged, that the Sheriff had
nothing to do to come into the Castle Prison, but the Keeper was to deliver the
Prisoners at the Castle gate to the Sheriff. Then they asked kim, whether the
Justices of the County had any thing at all to do with him in the case as
aforesaid? He answered, that the Justices of the County had nothing at all to
do with him. Then they asked him, whether the Mayor of the Town had any thing
to do with him in such case? He answered, If the Mayor come there, (meaning the
Prison) he would put him by the heels.

This horrible tyranny of the Jailer, and impudent affirming that none had
power over him, to whom appeal might be made by the Prisoners, as to the abuses
they received of him: Neither Sheriff, nor Justices, nor Mayor, to call him to
account, but that he had the sole power, and that above him there was no
appeal, occasioned a Representation of the cruel usages aforesaid, and of what
he affirmed of his having the sole power of the Goal, and of his being
accountable to any for what he did, to be drawn for the Justices, whose
Sessions at Bodmin was near, unto whom it was sent for them, and delivered to
Captain Braddon by one of the Town, who witnessed to the particulars. Which
when Captain Braddon had read, he assured those Friends that brought it, to
acquaint the Justices therewith, and in a convenient season. When about a dozen
Justices were together, the Relation, and the Friend, who was an eyewitness of
passages, was called for, and before the Country did they cause it publicly
to be read, and manifested much sense of their injurious sufferings, which they
spoke unto in the behalf of the Prisoners, and against the Jailer, and
declared, that the Prisoners were not Rogues, nor Thieves, nor Murderers, nor
were committed or sued, neither should they be so used, and that their persons
deserved better usage; and sharply reproving the Jailer for his demanding 12 s.
to have Doomsdale-door open to them, and 20 s. a week for a Chamber, they asked
him, whether he had got men to make a purchase of, and told him they should not
pay a penny. And Captain Braddon publicly declared, that he would be security
for their true imprisonment, that so they might be delivered out of that
noisome den, and from out of the Keepers power and cruelty; and gave himself
security in a 100 l. of his own voluntary accord for their true imprisonment,
as he signified to the Prisoners in a Letter. And the Justices ordered the
Jailer to put them out of Dooms-dale. But further they proceeded not with him
than has been rehearsed, he being not theirs, but Colonel Bennet's Deputy, who
then was not at the Sessions. And thus did the Justices, (of which P. Ceely was
none) particularly Captain Braddon) carry themselves like men, who had a sense
of the injurious sufferings of others, and like Ministers of the Law, whom the
spirit of Justice ruled, which is noble, and honorable, and gives a good
savor.

The Justices declaring themselves in the behalf of the Prisoners, and ordering
their removal out of Dooms-dale, as aforesaid; and Edward Piot being fallen
very dangerously sick of a Fever, to the hazard of his life, by reason of the
poisonous stench of that unwholesome place, (which continued upon him many
days) put the Jailer under fear what would become of him, which not only
caused him to command the Prisoners (three days after his return from the
Sessions) out of Dooms-dale, after they had been kept there for the space of 13
days, (who till he so commanded them forth) had not freedom to stir, though
the doors were set open) into the Chamber where they were before, but kept him
somewhat orderly and quiet awhile, permitting provisions to be brought to them,
and Friends to v^sit them as they would. But in this temper he abode not long,
for seeing that he was not turned out of his place, which was threatened, and by
him feared; and that no justice was executed upon him, which he deserved, his
fears by degrees began to go off him, and his heart to be hardened, and the
beastly spirit in him to act as bad, yea, more wickedly than before; and not
only did he cruelly entreat them, and some other Friends of Truth in Prison
himself, as is hereafter to be rehearsed, but set on, and permitted other of
his prisoners, wicked and profane men, to deal with them after the same
manner, insomuch that their lives were often in danger by those bloody men, who
thirsted after them, (a wickedness not to be endured by any who savor the
least of justice or civillity; as to the Law it is contrary, and to all good
Government, but not thought bad enough to be exercised on the innocent servants
of the Lord by this generation) in which to be particular, as they were acted,
would exceed the bounds of this short Relation, being the daily sufferings in
this kind for several months, and therefore no more of them is set down at
this time, than was drawn up, and sent by the Prisoners to the Justices at the
General Sessions for the County of Truro, the 12. day of the 5. month, 1656.
which is as follows.

For the Justices of the County of Cornwall, at their Quarter Sessions held at
Truro, These.
Friends,
YOU that be in Authority, and have the Sword to do Justice, and are to weigh,
judge, and try things according to Equity and Justice, here is laid down before
you some of the violent dealings of the Keeper of the Goal toward us who are
Prisoners, of the World called Quakers, the ill manners, ill carriages, ill
behavior, and unchristian life, oaths, drunkenness, and profaneness, which
gives an ill savor, and an ill smell, which the Sword of Justice is to be
turned against, that Judgment may run down, and the ill savor stopped. More
honor would it be, and justice for such an ungodly one, who is set to rule
over us, and Prisoners, to be ruled over, and more fit to be put into Prison,
than to govern a Prison, and to be a chief Keeper in Cornwall, who is a
Swearer, a cursed Speaker, often drunk, almost every day, and many times at
twelve, one, or two of the clock at night, his Companions singing their filthy
songs, and sometimes fidling.

In our last writing unto you, we there acquainted you with what was past, here
are some fruits which have proceeded since from this unsavory Keeper against
us, that you may see and behold what rules and governs, which is not pleasing
to God nor Man, that has any gravity. As he has daily reviled us, reproached
us, and mis-named us, so has he encouraged others, fomenting his lies of us
both in Town and Country, stirring up the People to riot upon us, wishing
before several People, and in one of our hearing, that the Town would rise up
against us; giving us threatening challenges, This he would have performed on
May Day.
with Swords four to four; and had gotten a fellow, of whom he boasted, whose
name is George Roach, under a pretense of speaking to us of Scriptures, (who
was brought in for drinking the Kings health, as himself said) and when a
Friend spoke to him, he threatened he would run his knife in his chops. It was
told the Jailer, the plot was discovered, and afterward the same man in the
sight of the Goalers wife, came with a naked knife behind him, and wicked words
in his mouth; and it was asked, what he had behind him, and bid him let us see
what he had in his hand behind him, and after a little time we did see that he
had a naked knife in his hand; and this is the Goalers man to talk of
Scriptures. The Jailer being told of it, he answered, he could say nothing
against him, although he had but a little before, when he came with a knife
behind him, threatened to cut our faces in pieces.

And there came two women out of Wales to visit us Prisoners, one of which was
a Justices sister now in Commission; these the Jailer abused with vile
expressions, calling them Edward Pyot's Whores before many People, and said,
God damn him, and many noisome words and oaths, with threatening what he would
do to them, calling them, Scums of the Country. And a Prisoner very much
abused Edw. Pyot, and thrust him down off a place where he was reading, and
speaking some Scriptures. He acquainted the Jailer with it, but the Jailer
instead of reproving him that did the abuse, laid hands on Edw. Pyot, and did
thrust him up and down, calling him many bad and filthy names, threatening to
strike him, and put him into Dooms-dale; and Edw. Pyot telling him that he
should acquaint the Justices of the County of his carriage toward us, he
answered, he cared not for the Justices, they had nothing to do with him, nor
his Prisoners. And when it was asked him, whether the Justices had nothing to
do with him in case he abused his Prisoners, he answered, No Sirrah, they have
not; and denied that the Justices gave him any rebuke formerly for abusing
Prisoners.

The Jailer being drunk on a first day, (as he has been on many) and having
abused us, and mis-named us, and brawled at us in his drunkenness the most part
of the day, at evening a wild company came into the room under us, drinking,
swearing, and cursing till midnight; and after they had abused us much in
language, they said they would drink our damnation, and our childrens after us.
The second day at evening, he was drunk again, and Edw. Pyot not being well,
sent for some hot drink, and he would not suffer our Friend to bring it to him,
but called her Queen, and Whore, and swore he would kick her; and about one of
clock at night, he and they being beastly drunk, he came up in a rage, and
barred up the door, when as we did not give him any words: And the next night
came in drunk, and did as before, and called us Rogues, and Runnagates, and
reviled us with vile expressions, not fit to be mentioned. And this unsavory
smell goes abroad with stinks; and when he is told of the Justices rebuke for
abusing of Prisoners, he says, It Is a small matter for the Justices to call a
man Knave.

We having a Friend brought to Prison (though not transgressing any Law) for
speaking to a Priest after his time, James Myres.
sent by Justice Nicholls, and he being cast into Dooms-dale amongst Felons, a
Friend that came to visit us from Redding, Jos. Cole,
seeing his Friend was put into Dooms-dale amongst them who were accused for
murder and theft, and seeing no Law cited in the Mittimus, nor any thing
expressed therein according to the Law, that rendered our Friend a Transgressor
either by word or deed, he went to the Justice, to enquire of him whether he
committed his Friend to Dooms-dale amongst the Felons, (a filthy nasty place,
not fit for men, unless there were more air, and the room kept more cleanly) or
whether he might be with us his Friends who were Prisoners, judging it to be
rather the Keepers malice, than the Justices order, to keep him from us. But
the Justice, instead of answering his civil and reasonable question, asked our
Friend whither he would work, and so committed him also to Prison, although
nothing of the state of a Vagabond in the eye of the Law was found in him, but
much the contrary, as having a Horse to ride on, and money in his purse, and
himself coming in business, which the Law of this Nation owns, all which we may
make apparent in time convenient, (these things are an ill smell to the
Nation.) This Friend, who is called Joseph Cole, has been much abused in
Prison by the forementioned Roach, a Prisoner, whom the Jailer brought to talk
of Scriptures, who threatened to stab and cut our faces to pieces with his
knife. This wicked and profane fellow has beat Joseph Cole so, as he has
drawn blood of him, and struck his head against the wall, and astonished him,
and has taken away his hat, so that he has gone without his hat almost ever
since the time of his imprisonment. The rude fellow before mentioned, beat
James Mires Prisoner, committed by Justice Nicholls, so as he drew blood of him
also, and cut his flesh. And the same man did beat and strike Benjamin Maynard,
very nigh six months since committed by Recorder Gewen, (who stood in the
Steeple-house, and said nothing to the Priest nor People, till he was haled
toward the door.) And from time to time, this deboyst, unruly, and mischievous
fellow has abused friends, threatening their lives, breaking their bones,
tearing their flesh off their backs, sometimes swearing he would not eat nor
drink till he had done it; a common Swearer, a filthy Curser, and often drunk.
And when Friends have demanded the hat of him, and spoken to him to be
moderate, he has answered with an oath, that he would cut the hat in pieces,
and that which he had done he had order for. And the Jailer from time to time
being told of these abuses, never reproved him, but sometimes answered, he
could not help it, and that he could find no fault with him, (envy and malice
was always blind.) Another time, to uphold and countenance him in his often
wicked practices, accused us of Mutinies, who are sufferers under the abusive
tongues both of the Jailer, and Roach. And the said Roach threatens to tear the
flesh off William Salt's back, and that he would kick Edw. Pyot, swearing God
damn him, rot him, and sink him, what he would do unto us. And this is the
Goalers company, with whom he can find no fault, (as he says) but are drunk
together day by day, and in their drunkenness come brawling and beating
Prisoners, and glory in what they have done. And the Goalers wife hearing the
Prisoners were beaten, she said, if she were a man, she would beat them too.

And thus the bond of Iniquity is strengthened against the Innocent; and the
Jailer himself has not only encouraged, but done the same thing; for he
struck James Mires with a great cane, and beat Benjamin Maynard with a great
cane about his head, back, and arms, with many blows; he beat him almost from
Dooms-dale to the Castle-gate.

And there coming in a Maid of the Town, a Friend to visit us the Prisoners,
the Jailer locked her up in the Prison with Friends, and said, ye Rogues want a
Whore, and kept her in Prison six hours, and after came and tore her clothes
off her neck, and rent them to pieces, and stamped them under his foot, and beat
her with a cane out of the Prison, and after she was out, he beat her to the
ground twice; and the cruel merciless fellow beat her after he had amazed and
astonished her, and knocked her down, that her head was much bruised, her body
and arms exceeding black; and this before many Witnesses, which cried shame
upon him.

He has endeavored by all means to hinder Necessaries to be brought to us.
One of the Town, who served us in these things formerly, he arrested for coming
into his house, (which suit is yet depending) and he forbidding any of the
Town, we have a Friend that came from London, who provides for us our diet,
whom he has much abused, struck her on the back with a stick, another time
kicked her, and almost every day brawling at her, and threatening her, and
calling her the worst names he can think of. Another Woman, who brought
necessaries to the Prisoners, he met, and called her Whore, and Bitch, and if
ever she came there again, he said he would beat her so, that she should not be
able to go forth out of the Castle, but should be carried forth on a
Wheel-barrow. And he threatens Benjamin Maynard so, as that he would make him
kneel down, and ask him forgiveness; and said, he hoped to see him burned in
the shoulder, and naked at a Gallows.

Anne Blakeling coming to visit us before she was committed, he denied her to
come to us, and threw her out into the street, and there beat her with a great
cudgel, giving her filthy language, and names. It is hard to believe, and
harder to r^late the unchristian and inhumane carriage of this ungodly Jailer,
and his ungodly company, daily toward us, and our Friends that come to visit
us, calling us Rogues and Rascals, Thiev^sh Knaves, deluding Dogs, Jesuits,
beggarly Rogues, Vagabonds, and scums of the Country, damned Dogs, and
hatchet-fac'd Rogues. And the women he calls scums of the Country, Whores,
salt Bitches, and other unclean and filthy names and terms, not fit to be named
by modest men, threatening our Friends, and forbidding them to come to us,
driving some of them out of the door, and pretending an Order, that none shall
speak with us but what the Keeper should hear, and threatening us with
Dooms-dale, the Pit, and double Irons, saying, Sirrah I Will double iron thee,
and put thee in the Dungeon as far under ground as it is above. How now you
Rogues, you damned Dogs, ye scums of the Country. I Will order ye, and your
Whores and salt Bitches which come after ye, none of them shall come here. And
this is his common course; hardly a day passes, but we have more of this and
such like filth, and his wicked inventing of lies upon us, and reporting them
in his cups amongst his drunken Companions, who are in that generation which
says, report, and we will report it. He has reported, that some of us said he
should be hanged at his door, and that his children should be tossed on spears;
but no such words were sp^ken by us, neither any thing like it was ever in our
hearts. And there came the Widow Hambly, and her Sister, of this County, to
visit us, which because he slandred, and because we kneeled down to pray
together he reported that we bowed one to another, and crossed one another.

These and such like lying stories he tells to his Generation, that is given up
to believe lies, to stir up the rude people against us, and to fill the town
and Country with matter of reproaching of us, and when his drunken Companions
are stuffed with his lies, and drunk with his Beer, then they are fit to abuse
Prisoners, such are encouraged by our Jailer, those have free access who
believe his lies, and that will abuse Prisoners, such are encouraged by him,
who should preserve us from the injury of any. An abusive woman, a light
scoffing School Mistress (who is untaught her self and therefore unfit to
nurture, and teach children) is suffered to come unto the Prisoners, and to
abuse them with reproachful language, and to strike them, and a promise he
has that her Children shall put their hands to a Petition as it is said) which
he talks of, but our friends which come to visit us he affronteth, revileth and
miscalls with all the ill favored names his wicked invention can think of.

Two Justices of Peace now in Commission, and a Justices Brother, and one that
was a Captain of a Troop of Horse, these he called scums of the Country, and
Runnagate Rogues, and Raskals to their faces, and told one of them that he had
turned better of the stye, and set up the fore mentioned bad man, who is a
Cavalier, brought in for drinking the Kings health as aforesaid to examine our
friends as they went forth, which made the Justices to admire that ever such a
man should be put in place, and said he wondered that men that had any
moderation, or but a form of godliness, should suffer such a one to rule, or
be put into a place of trust who had no rule over himself, but deserved to be
ruled with that which should teach him better manners, and verily, where there
is any measure of honesty borne up, It will bear witness against such unworthy
carriages; yea some of the Heathen which knows not God could not own, nor would
they set up such a one to rule over men, he is so malicious, and so brutish,
as that he can neither be civil toward us himself, nor think any body should.

General Desborow wrote him a Letter dated in April last, that we should be
civilly used, and he is so far from observing it, or thinking we should be
civilly dealt with, as that he cannot believe the letter to be from General
Disborow, but says, it is a Counterfeit.

Degorie Pearse was reading a letter of lies against friends in the Castle, and
perverting some Scriptures with his own meanings of them, and giving Saul's
going to the Witch, and to that which she raised up, for an example or
Christians, affirming that was the Prophet Samuel that the Witch had raised up,
whereupon Edward Pyot coming into the Castle, and speaking to some of the
people against this Doctrine, the Jailer came to him, and laid violent hands on
him and tore his Coat, and punched him, and halled him, and thrust him toward
Domesdale, and said he would put him in, and put Irons on his heels, and
reviled him, and called him reproachful names.

Another time he denied our friends to come in to us, We civilly asked him why
he did so, and whether he had any order to deny our friends from coming to us?
He answered us with an oath, swearing by Gods blood, and holding his stick to
strike us, but his wife stepped between; and when he had been in his Cups with
his Companions, repeating their lies and slanders, and railing upon us, and the
malice, envy, and rage stood up, and being full of Beer, It has been as much
as his wife and some others could do, to keep him down from us, asking whether
he would murder us, saying she thought there would be murder one time or other;
and when we afterward told him of th se his miscarriages toward us, and of
his evil beating of Benjamin Maynard whom he said if he had killed he had but
his desert, and that he may expect to be questioned for these things by the
hand of justice he answered so stiff was he and so stubborn) that he would not
be ordered by the Justices, they should not order him, he would find sureties
fo his good behavior.

There coming a Cheese to us, which Edward Pyot sent for, the Jailer meeting
with it has taken it from us and as he said, would carry it to the Mayor to
have it searched, for (therefore was the ^atch set at every Gate) and when
William Salt told him he would unrip the Cloth the Cheese was in for him to
search it, he would not, but violently took it from him.

There was a woman prisoner committed for stealing of Cloth, who said when she
was apprehended she was a Quaker (as it is said) which is false, and since denied
by her, that she said so, but all such we deny; this woman is suffered to
abus^, and strike our friend Anne Blackling a prisoner, who asked that woman
why she took the name of Christ in vain, in her vain light songs; the woman
cursed, and came and struck our friend in the mouth twice with her fist, and
threatened to beat out her Brains, and to pull her head off, and took up a Pen,
and said she would strike it in her eyes, and that if she spoke to her again
she would be her death, though she died for it her self. The Jailer being made
acquainted with it, reproved her not, but on the contrary called our abused
friend Whore, and Witch, and locked her up close prisoner, in the common Jail
amongst those accused for Bastards, where accommodation fit for Prisoners is
wanting.

And this is the unrighteous measure we have received from this unrighteous
man, who measures to us evil and reproachful words, out of the evil treasure
of his evil heart.

And Captain Braddon who in civillitie to us, (which we much own, and a Cup of
cold water loses not his reward) giving himself in a hundred pound security
for our true Imprisonment, freely without our motion, that we might be freed
from the insulting of the Jailer, to be at some house in the town, has by it
purchased many slighting and unclean words, and threats of him from the Jailer,
and we denied the liberty of removing (which we press the Jailer too, both
formerly and now of late within this 12. days) unless we would give him the
security of two men, which he calls better security, which should we have
done, we had been partakers of his unworthiness in slighting Captain Braddons
security.

And these things are declared to you that you may see what is wanting to rule,
and what it is that rules your County Gaol, the fear and wisdom of God yea
humanity is wanting, and the transgressor (who is out of the light from the
truth, equity, and righteousness) rules, on which the sword of justice is to
be laid.

One prisoner was beaten down for reproving some at pleasure in the Castle
Green. Ben Mayna d.

James Myres.


Another carrying a Letter to an Inn was thrust out into the Street; Justice
Morish.
and about a dozen strokes given him over the head, so that he could scarce
see, and beat, and punch'd in the stomach so that he vomited. It Is said 'twas
done by a Justices man in Devonshire, but no justice was done to him for it,
but the prisoner was shut up close, not suffered to have a little warm drink
given unto him whilst the others went to pleasures in the Castle Green. And
here is so much profaneness, and wickedness, that the Streets is like Sodom, the
sword of justice is not a terror to them, neither is it executed to praise them
that do well.

Not that we look at man are these written, but that we may be cleared of the
wickedness of the wicked in the sight of God which is our strength, And ye that
are Magistrates to do justice; If ye are Christian Magistrates and rule for
God, Do your office that nothing reign amongst you but what is of God; that
roport gives a good savor; when righteousness and truth is set up, the
Ordinance which is to be obeyed for the Lords sake, which is according to his
will, in which we rejoice, in this we are subject to the higher powers, which
the soul must be subject to. This loses the bonds of wickedness, takes off
the heavy burdens, lets the op^ressed go free, and breaks every yoke. So
consider this in your time and generation that you are to fear God in. See from
whom you are, and whom you are serving, for of the Lord God must you have,
every one of you a reward according to your works, Therefore do justice, love
mercy, and walk humbly with God, This does God require, and the humility goes
before the honor. This is the day of your visitation, and salvation unto you;
I am the light of the world and do enlighten every man that comes into the
world, says Christ, by whom the world was made, who bears the Government upon
his shoulders, who is come to reign, who judges righteously without respect of
persons. Now every one of you having a light from Christ, that be come into the
world, from him who is not of this world, which light lets you see your sins,
which you have done, evil deeds you have committed, hard speeches you have
spoken, which if you love the light; that is it that makes manifest ungodly
ways, ungodly actions, ungodly words, which if you love, there is your teacher,
the light which comes from Christ, who says, Learn of me, It will be with you
as you are lying on your Beds, and and as y^u are in your occasions, and if you
hate th^s Light you forget God, and forget Christ, and seek not the honor that
comes from God only, but from one another. Now you that do so, this is your
condemnation, the light, says Christ, who hates it, this light which comes
from Christ, the way leads you off all world^y ways, all the worldly teachers,
and Doctrines, and worships, Christ the way to worship God in spirit and truth,
The Lord is coming to exalt his truth. The powers of darkness have long
reigned, but Christ now is come who will chain them, which will answer the
light in every man's conscience, and judge every one according to his works. The
Lord is come, and coming to teach his people himself by his spirit, and to
gather them into unity, and to turn them from darkness to light, and the power
of Satan to himself, and to bring them into Covenant with himself, which is
Christ his light, so to gather into the one truth that is in Christ, the light,
and into the one way, that is into the Light Christ, and into the one Baptism,
the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures and so to God the Father of Spirits,
with which they come to be written in ^ne another hearts, and so gather them
out of all sects, and opinions, and ways, where is all the strife, sedition and
quarrelling, and vain contentious spirits who be out of the light, that gave
forth Scriptures. Therefore now you have time prize it, It is the day of your
visitation, and salvation to you all proffered to the light in all your
consciences I speak, which is a witness for the the Lord Jesus Christ, which
from him does come which manifests the sin and evil, that is not of the
truth, which will make every tongue to confess Christ to the glory of God, and
make every knee to bow at his name, which is called Immanuel, which by
Interpretation is God with us, but you that hate this light, it will be your
condemnation.

From Lanceston Jail 12th. 5th. Month 1656. From them who are lovers of all
souls, truth, justice, and righteousness, and for the establishing of it, and
witnesses stand against all unrighteousness and ungodliness. Ed. Pyot. William
Salt.


THe Jailer being conscious of the wickedness he had acted, and the violence he
had exercised upon the Prisoners, was very fearful what should become of him,
if so be a Representation thereof should be made to ^his Sessions, as what he
had done before was to the last, (which he expected) and if the Justices should
as then incline to the Prisoners. Therefore he considered what he should do to
save himself, and having no better a refuge to repair unto, he invented a
parcel of notorious lies, (viz.) that some of the Prisoners should say he
should be hanged at his door, and that his Children should be tossed upon
Spears, and that they would tread his wife under foot, and put them into a
Petition to the Sessions in way of complaint against the Prisoners whom he had
used as aforesaid, thereby to cover his unmercifull cruelty, who as they had
never uttered any such words, (for vengeance the children of light leave to the
Lord, whose it is, and who will repay it, and such unsavouriness from them
proceeds not) so never entered such things, or any things like them into any
of their hearts; and having his under-keeper (who had been arraigned for
Felony) to swear to what he should say, to the Sessions at Truro he went,
taking with him Benjamin Maynarn, James Mires, and Joseph Cole, but Anne
Blacking committed by Richard Lobby for being in the Country, he would not
bring with him, though a Horse was for her provided by some friends. And
notwithstanding the condition he was in, yet unreasonableness and cruelty being
his nature, he could not forbear to exe^cise it on the Prisoners in the way
thither, though he knew not but that thei^'s might be his own condition ere he
returned, and that what he now did to them, might aggravate his ^ffence and
increase his punishment, For, the Prisoners having traveled the first day,
^hey put forth 20. long Cornish miles on foot, being weary, desired there to
rest that night, the place being convenient for lodging this he denied who was,
and the rest with him, on horse back^ and abused them exceedingly, and
endeavored to ride over them with his horse, and did thrust them forwards,
threatening to draw them at his horse tail; and when they asked him whether
there was not a S^atute, that Prisoners should not be compeld to travail above
eight miles a day, he answered he cared not for the Statute, and so had them
along six miles further, and when they came to Truro he put them into a little
close room, which though the Prisoners paid for, yet suffered he them there to
be abused by the under Keeper, and Roath aforesaid (whom he ought to have
protected from any such thing) and their friends that visited them to be also
abused, and some of them beaten, punch'd, and kick, and many unsavory words
given them.

To Thomas Gewen Judge of the Court, was the Representation aforesaid, of the
sufferings of the Prisoners by the Jailer delivered, who grasping it in his
hand, and wrumpling it, put it in his pocket, and said he would make Mum of it,
and abused the Messenger with slighting language, ana before him and Richard
L^bby (who commit ed Anne Blackling) and Justice Kendale, were those three
brought, but whether the same spirit of Justice appeared in these J^stices, as
ruled in the Justices the former Sessi^ns, and whether the same spirit had
Dominion in them as in the Jailer from whom they received those cruelties, or a
different, Let the sober by comparing what has been already said, with what
follows, consider and judge. For the Representation aforesaid it was not read
in the Court, and when those of the Prisoners present on whom was much of his
cruelty acted as has been mentioned, spoke of their sufferings by the Jailer,
he would not suffer them to speak, unless they would be sworn, which he knew
they could not do; but the Gaolers Petition of invented lies against the
Prisoners, that was commanded to be read and the Court to keep silence; which
paper o lies the Prisoners denied, and the spirit that gave it forth; But unto
it Tho. Gewen set his hand, and the Justices bad the Jailer present it to the
Judge at the Assizes, and T. Gewen commanded the Jailer to take away Benj^min
Maynard for saying he was not sorry for what he had done in reference to his
brea^h (as he said of Queen Mary's law, though he had suffered six months
Imprisonment for standing still in the Steeple house, and saying nothing till
the Priest calling to the people, Friends, I hope you will stand by me for the
truth, laid violent hands on him, and had almost halled him to the door, And
James Myres, and Joseph Cole he commanded to be taken away also, for refusing
to find sureties for their good behavior for coming into the Country (which
was all he laid to their charge; when they asked him what Law they had broken
for which he demanded of them to find sureties) though they had been about
eight weeks in prison, and they all under cruel sufferings, of which some
particulars have been already related: And not only this hard measure received
they from the Court, Instead of Justice according to the Law, who no Law had
transgressed, and who had so barbarously suffered, as has been said, but when
the Jailer (into whose cruel and merciless hands, thus strengthened by them in
his iniquity and encouraged in his inhumane brutishness) they had returned
them, was bringing them out of the Court, All that sat in judgment upon them,
Except Justice Kendale, openly scoffed at them, and I have said of laughter it
is mad, sai h Solemon the supreme Governor

Eccl. 2.2.


laughed (such was their sense of the cruel sufferings of the innocent and
their Justice) in which wanton lightness, and cruel sporting, and unmanly
behavior T. Gewen. who sat Judge of the ^ourt, exceeded and bad the Jailer
keep the Prisoners close, blaming him for that he had not kept them close
enough. Had the sentence pronounced on them been just, and had they deserved
the severitie of those proceedings against them, yet in a sensibleness of
Justice ought there to have been seriousness, and gravitie in those who give
judgment for God upon the evil doer: But for those who are in place to help
them to right who suffer wrong and to relieve the oppressed, whose office and
duty is so to do, not only to stop their ears at the c^y of the wrong, but to
encourage the wrong doer and oppressor, and into his hands to deliver them to
be further wronged and oppr^ssed; F^^ those who are in Comm ssion to do right,
to judge wrong, for them who ought to break the unrighteous bonds, to add
bonds of unrighteousness; who ought to do justice, and defend the innocent, to
slay the righteous and innocent, and vainly, and openly to scoff, and laugh
thereat when they have done, and at their sufferings, even whilst they are
sitting on the seat of judgment, and in the sight and hearing of the Country,
what abominable wickedness is this, what merciless cruelty? Have such things
as these been heard of before these days in England? Will not the ears tingle
of all that hear it? Is not this cruelty beyond expression, and lightness
without comparison? Are these Judges for God, or fit to judge for man, or to
bear Rule? Are not such a shame unto a Nat^on, and a reproach unto a people? Is
not th^s the spirit that cast Joseph into the pit, and then sat down to eat
bread? Are not these of the generation that slay the witnesses, and then
rejoice over them, and make merry, and send gifts one unto another? Is not the
day of the Lord at hand, and the hour of his righteous judgment, wherein he
will himself plead the cause of the poor and needy, who looks for judgment,
but behold oppression, for righteousness but behold a Cry? will not his soul
be avenged on such a generation as this?

The Sessions being ended the Jailer returned with his Prisoners again, rid of
his fears, and heightened in his cruelty, of which he was not wanting presently
to give demonstration, boasting much concerning what the Justices should say
against the Prisoners, and in his behalf to him, of which the Prisoners being
ear witnesses, as they had felt the rage of his cruelty (the effects of the
proceedings of the Sessions) that they might be clear of the blood of them all,
and that the Justices might not thereof be ignorant, Edward Pyot and William
Sale wrote to them two letters as follows, FRIENDS,
SInce the Sessions the Jailer has received such encouragement from you, (and
not reproof) as that he is much imboldned to act his wicked mind and will
against us who are Prisoners, he is so impudently wicked, as that he cannot (as
he thinks) speak bad enough to us, and of us, nor misbehave himself toward
us, we are his sport and his talk among his drunken Companions, and all sorts
of people where he comes; And reports that Captain Fox, and Justice Lobb, and
Justice Gewen said that Doomesdale was to good for us, and that we were worse
than Thieves and Murderers, and not fit to live in a Commonwealth, and another
Justice said that we could not be used bad enough, And that of thirteen
Justices there was not one that had a good word for us, nor one that had a bad
word for him; with this he is set up in his vainglory and laughter, and
scoffing and scorning with that profane fellow Roach and the rest of his
drunken Companions, and in his rage against us and our friends, so that the
hand of the wicked is strengthened by you to work his wickedness against us;
wicked he was, before, but now he is become m re desparately wicked, swearing
such oaths that it would grieve any heart that has any honesty, to hear, and
calling us such filthy names, as we have not usually heard, and threatening us
with Doomesdale, and double Irons, and the pit, and holding up his staff at
us, saying he would beat us down, And the very day he came home from the
Sessions, he could not forbear a day to abuse us, he called us many bad and
unsavory names, and said now he would take a course with us and order us to
purpose, we should not stay in his house, nor yet go into the town, but into
the Castle we should go to Domesdale, for all Bradens security for us, and his
Letter he sent to us, and that the Justices said Doomesdale was to good for us,
and that we were mistaken in the Justices they had not one bad word for him,
nor a good word for us.

And that night our friends coming home in the rain from the Sessions on foot,
he locked them up without fire, or bed, or straw to lie on, or victuals to eat,
or beer or water to drink, and denied them the opening the door to have
necessaries brought them Wi^liam Salt went to the Jailer, and desired him the
door may be opened for our friends to have necessary refreshments after their
journey, the Jailer answered how now Sirrah, you Rogue, you Rascal, you shall
have no door opened get you gone you Dog, or else I will kick you up stairs,
how now ye Scums of the Country, ye Runnagate Rogues, I Will put you fast enough
all of you, ye Rogues.

We asking him whether the Justices would allow him in this, he answered, If we
had been at the Sessions at Truro, we might have been kicked before the Justices
faces, as our friends were beat out of the Hall and kicked like Dogs, and the
Justices was there sitting upon the Bench at that time Here we do see and take
notice, who are the strengthener of the hands of evil doers, which is not a
praise to them that do well.

Surely if you consider the streets and the Countries how they ring like Sodom,
and sound like Gomorrah, you would find enough to turn your Sword against, and
not against the innocent, but this profane rabble of people you have pleased,
it is their day, you have given them content, drunkards, swearers, and such as
follow pleasures, this is their day, their mouths are set open and are
encouraged to act against the innocent, such as be of upright heart, but the
Lord is a refuge, And is not this an evil report and an ill smell, that you
should have no better rule to keep peace, but suffer Prisoners to be beat and
kicked like Dogs, as the Jailer reports among his drunken Companions, But this
shows that you use not the Sword, which is a terror to the evil doer.

And this is written (not that we do complain to man) but that you, who are
called Christian Magistrates may these things weigh and consider, whether this
be the Sword of justice and the ruler for God, and his glory for the praise of
them that do well, and for the punishment of vice and wickedness. And seeing he
has made you the Authors of his cruel actings and brutish carriages toward
us, and so shelters himself under you, We therefore lay it upon you, that we
may be clear of your blood in the sight of God who will not be mocked with
only a talk of Religion, and of the Scripturts, and be found out of the life
of the Scriptures, and the pure Religion.

And we do understand, that there was a lying, slanderous paper read in the
manner of a Petition against us, to cover his former wickedness (and as it is
said he was in fear he should be turned out of his place, for his cruel and
unworthy acting, toward us.) And there was a Letter which had part of the
abuses and wrongs, which we sustained since the Sessions before this, which was
sent to the Justices of the County, to be read among them, that they might
know of the abuses we undergo and have undergone, since the former Sessions,
now his paper was read openly in the Court, but this was not, but received by
Thomas Gewen, who graspt it up in his hand, and put it up in his pocket, and
said he would make mum of it: the petition we have not seen, but we do hear
that he says that we would toss his children on Pikes, and hang him at his
door, and tread his wife under our feet, and such like expressions: Can such a
thing enter into you, that ever we should speak such words, we put that of God
in you to judge, for such things we do utterly deny, and that part of it was
deposed of treading the Gaolers wife under feet, by the underkeeper, who (as is
said) have been convicted and punished as a fellon, who swear the word to be
spoken by William Salt and Benjamin Maynard. And the Gaolers wif^ her self have
since cleared William Salt of the words, and says he was not in place when the
words was pretended to be spoken; And if you took heed to the light of Christ,
wherewith you are lighted, and walked in the fear of the Lord, with it you
would see and discern when such false things are brought before you, and that
of God in you would witness for God in the truth, and against the false
accuser, And so wicked men would not dare to present you with lies and
falsehoods, and here your sword would be a terror to the wicked, and those
that refuge in lies.

On the third day after he came from Sessions, he clapped us up close Prisoners,
swearing oaths not fit to be mentioned, and a Company of Fiddlers came up into
the next room where was a profane Company swearing, and drinking and singing
profane songs, with that profane Prisoner called Roach, this now has its
liberty, and is tolerated, but those which reproves this are clapped up close
prisoners, and not fit to live in a Commonwealth, nor can be used too hardly,
as the Jailer reports the Justices said of us, and that we should be carried by
their command to the Common Jail, as the Gaolers wife said, which in two days
after we were taken out of the Chamber in the Gaolers house (into which we were
put when we were taken out of Domesdale, by order of the Justices at the former
Sessions, and the security given by Captain Braden for our true imprisonments)
and he put us into the room over Domesdale, where comes up the nastie smell of
the hole where the Fellons are, And as he locked up our friends which were there
before we came at his pleasure close prisoners, so he does us, he locked up
Edward Pyot and the rest close Prisoners in this place over Domesdale, not
giving any reason for his so doing, but when he is asked falls a reviling and
uttering forth his unsavorie and ungodly expressions, and calling us filthy
names.

The first night he put us in this place, he came drunk to us late at night,
swearing by the Lord in Heaven, and by Gods blood he would tie us neck and
heels, and double Iron us, and from us went up to the upper Jail where the
women are, there he abused Anne Blackling our friend in like manner, calling
her Whore, and Witch, and Runnagate, and threatened to double Iron her and put
her in the pit, and at his return from her, he came in a rage into the room
where we were, and put out our Candle, which was burning somewhat the longer to
get the room a little cleansed, and to settle our necessaries.

The next day a friend of ours named John Ellice, whose outward being is about
the farther end of the County, was sent to prison by P. Ceely and James Lance
for not doffing his hat to P. Ceely, and for saying it was false, that he had
gotten Arms into his custody, whom the Jailer being in Domesdale and the do^r
open, William Salt carried in some straw and a covering for our friend, whom
the rude fellow Roach ran upon, and thrust down, and the Jailer also ran upon
him and punch't him when he was down, and then thrust him out of Doors,
uttering many oaths and threatenings and held up his staff to thrust it at his
belly, And when William Salt asked him whether he would deny necessaries to be
brought the Prisoners, he answered I marry will I Sirrah, and up with his
staff and with it stroke William Salt a sore blow in the mouth, saying he
would cut the covering he brought to pieces, And John Ellice asking him why he
was so angry, he thrust and puncht him also, and af er to cover his wicked
carriage he said that William Salt would have rescued the Prisoner, And a
little time after he came to us over Domesdale, and abused us much in language,
and many fearful oaths he swore, as Gods blood, and such like not fit to be
mentioned, and thrust and puncht us up there, and held up his staff, and swore
he wou^d knock down Pyot. He was then so drunck as that he was ready to fall
himself with thrusting us, and could hardly utter a plain word.

And because the trial where ( Thomas Gewen sat Judge of the Court) went
against our friend, (a poor lame maid in the town, whom we hired as our servant
to provide us necessaries, and for it paid her wages, whom the Jailer locked
into his house whilst he sent for a Sergeant and arrested her, and he brought
his under-keeper to swear that the maid unbard our Chamber door, which
under-keeper was not seen to be there by not one of five of us, who should have
seen him if he had been there, and since this under-keeper has confessed to us
that our Chamber door was not opened till after the maid was carried away by
the Sergeant; This fellows oath was received in Court, although it was
signified in Court that he was convicted as a fellon, and that he was not
present while the maid was at the Chamber door till the Sergeant came. Let the
least measure of honesty judge of these proceedings) the Jailer is so set up
with this that now he threatens friends that come to us, both towns-people and
strangers what he will do to them by the Law, and also as one having authority
to do wickedly.

He formerly confined Benjamin Maynard to the Castle, who was serviceable to
fetch our provisions, and now he laid the like command upon William Salt, who
has done it since, and the rest of our friends which are prisoners are confind
not to go forth of the Castle, and all this he does in his will, so that by
all ways and means he endeavors to abuse us, and by threats, misnaming, cursed
speakings, and beating us, and bringing us into this nastie place, so also to
hinder necessaries to be brought us.

This useage is not according to General Disborow's Letter to him that we
should be civilly used, but he says, that was not from General Disborow, but
'twas a counterfeit, neither is it of such honor to you who are Justices of
the County (as your reproof of him was to you the Sessions before this) to
uphold or have such a fellow to be keeper of your County Jail, who is not
only ignorant of what belongs to a Christian, but also of a civil man.

These things ought to be considered of by you, and not to be lightly past
over, for to the Lord God must you give an account of your actions, and trust
committed to you.

Edward Pyot.


FRIENDS,
SInce the Sessions that this unmercifull Jailer has been imboldned by you,
who says, that the Justices said that Domes-dale was too good for us, moreover
he says, that the Justices said we were worse than the Fellons, and since that
time he has brought us to the Common Jail to Domes-dale, and put us there
into a nastie stinking place, upon it, though he had complained against us
that we had given him nothing, and yet he had forty shillings since Sessions
for lying in his sheets, though the sheets were such as we never lay in before,
they were so torn that our feet went thorough the holes, and they were so long
lane in that I have seen cleener on a stick to sweep an Oven, And the other
friends being walking in the Castle he took his opportunity, and he commanded
me out of his Chamber, calling me filthy names, and so bringing our things to
Domes-dale, and so commanded me thither, and there now keeps us, and this now,
we have seen what has been encouraged, that which gives a stink amongst men;
So he came full of his drink in the night, the room being bad, we being up a
little later, he comes swearing, and abusing us as formerly, and as we were
setting down his oaths, he came, and knocked out our Candle. Did ever any of
you taste since the Wars, did you ever taste of these things by the common
enemy, that now is done to the Children of light, to them that fear the Lord,
For the encouraging of such, I must declare plainly to you, it is not of good
report to you, or justice, that a drunkard, a profane person, a common
swearer, which cannot scarce speak without an oath, and a curse, and a foul
mouthed abusive man, as ever I heard speak, and for you to encourage such a
one, and against the just, and Prisoners, this I say to you, it is not of
Honor to you, but to bring your names to dishonor. For before he had received
some rebuke from some of you at the Sessions formerly, by which we were taken
out of Doomesdale, but now he having received encouragement, you have set up
profaneness more than ever I saw where ever I came in any Country, and
encouraged profaneness; never the like was beheld. And we that stand against
violence, surely you might have considered that your selves, that his Petition
was a false thing, for when we asked him, but a question, he had us kiss his
tail, kiss his tail, calling us Rogues, Runnagates, scums of the Country, and
binding it with an oath, and then says, the Justice says Doomesdale is to
good for you, ye Rogues, I Will double Iron you. swearing he would double Iron
Anne Blackling, and put her in the Dungeon, calling her Runnagate Whore, that
went about bewitching the Country, and not only abusing us, but those who
came to visit us calling them Whores and Rogues. Now we know what belongs to
Government a little, and what ought to rule, and not to set such over us to
slander us and abuse us, and beat such as bring necessaries to us Never was the
like beheld in any Country: but we are content who sees the end of profession,
though our souls are grieved to see the filthy conversation tolerated, and not
rebuked, and open profaneness encouraged, to that of God I speak, for this
cause has God brought his swift judgments, upon such who have been found in
these steps, and setting that up against the just, and that which is contrary
to God, which God has brought down, and exalted himself.

William Salt.
The enclosed is sent you to read, for that we do not understand it: it was
read amongst you at Sessions, It being sent you, that you might take notice of
part of the abuses which we have received between Sessions, and Sessions.






ANd not only upon the Prisoners persons was the Jailer encouraged to act thus
wickedly, but on others who were their friends, and had relation to them; Now
he saw it his time to bring to trial the Suit between him depending, and
Susanna Kemp one of the town of Lanceston, the Prisoners servant, who coming to
see what the Prisoners wanted, he locked the door upon, and kept Prisoner, and
being so, then sent for a Sergeant, and arrested her for coming into his house,
threatening and abusing her as aforesaid, which he bringing to Issue before the
said T. Gewen Recorder of the town, he declared against her in a matter of
trespass, for entering his house by force of Arms, and taking out the Iron Bar
of the door with such like: And Nicolas Freeleven the under-Keeper he produced
as a witness, who swore he took her from the door, when as he was not in the
place all that time, and Katherine Kingdom, who upon her Oath said, she saw
her sit in the Stairs, when as she sat not in the Stairs, nor any where else,
but stood still, after the door was shut on her, till the Sergeant came; And
although by two witnesses on the behalf of Susan it was proved, That she was
the Prisoners servant by agreement, for so long time as they had occasion for
wages; and by one of them testified that wages she had of them several times,
expressing the particular sums, Though he made his house their Prison from the
first time of their being delivered to him in custody, and so he making his
house their Prison, the way to them ought to be free, who were not committed
close Prisoners, especially for their servant; Though into his house which he
had made their prison, other friends had to them free access, during the time
of their Imprisonment, as they ought to have; Though contrary to Law he had
locked them up close Prisoners (for no Justice or Judge can by Law commit a man
close Prisoner, much less a Jailer, especially having no order from Judge or
Justice so to do) at this very time when she (their servant) coming to see what
they had need of, on whom the Jailer had executed such cruelty, was by him
made a Prisoner for so doing, and arrested whilst she was so detained; Though
Colonel Bennet a Justice present, spoke to the Jury to consider how a lame
Innocent Maid could be conceived to come with force of Arms, and in what want
the Prisoners might be who had their door shut upon them, yet the Recorder gave
such direction to the Jury concerning her coming into his house without his
consent, and for damages, declaring to what Colonel Bennet said, that if the
Prisoners had dyed for want, the peril would be on the Keeper, that the Jury
cast her, and gave the Jailer damages; which a^ it is contrary to the Law and
Justice, so is it such a piece of cruelty, as hardly can one find words fully
to express, but is thought very little by this generation, in whom the spirit
that is cruel, lodges, and has the Dominion to be executed upon the innocent.

By that time the Reader, who has any honesty, or bowels, or tenderness is
gone thus far, and has duly considered what has been rehearsed, he will find
these cruel oppressions and horrible wickednesses, a weight sufficient, and
load upon his spirit, to make him sigh out, oh when shall the wickedness of the
wicked come to an end: But these are not all, there are yet other abominations
to mention, more violence yet, and deeds of darkness; A Justice, a Judge, a
Jailer, a few Justices at a Sessions have hitherto acted their parts, and tried
their streng^h to weigh down and destroy the innocent, in such manner as has
been related; Towns and Countries now come in, consult and join together, and
rise up like a flood to lay their weight upon, to break down, and to devour
them who have no kindred upon earth, nor helper amongst men; whose bodies are
laid equal to the ground, that all may pass over, and over whom have passed
the cruelties, and oppressions already rehearsed, and much more which time
would fail particularly to instance, And by that time this latter part is
perused and weighed, the wise in heart will see, whether Justice is to be found
in the earth, or mercy amongst the men of this generation? oh how unreasonable
is cruelty, how blind is rage, and how brutishly inhumane is man, when drove
on by the spirit, and powers of darkness, against the truth of the living God?

In this kind of persecution the town of Lanceston leads, T. Gewen aforesaid
the Recorder thereof is of Counsel, Philip Page the Mayor begins the
execution; The Jailer has no power in the town, farther than his prison he
cannot go; there he sufficiently manifests his tyrannical beastliness, where
he says he is unaccountable, for what he does. The Mayor he has no power over
the prison, so says the Jailer, and that if he come thither, he will put him
by the heels, yet all this Gaolers heels he follows (without blushing) in
persecuting of the just, The cruelties executed upon them by the Jailer are not
enough, the sufferings they have sustained is not of value, Their friends have
free access from all parts to visit and comfort them, and the flocking of so
many troubles and torments; opportunities they have too many, and too much
liberty to send abroad the particulars of their sufferings, and to have
returns from friends of tenderness, and refreshing; suffer beyond measure that
Spirit would have them, and so shut up that none may know of their sufferings,
or any ways relieve or help them; The Mayor will try what he can do herein. And
for this end sets his Watches and armed Guards, at every Gate of the town to
examine, search and bring before him, those who come to visit them, the Letters
he finds on such, he breaks open, and detains as he pleases; their Clothes and
Pockets he searches, and rifles; their persons he abuses with filthy and
unsavory expressions; he searched a woman's head for Letters with his own hands,
taking her fowl Clothes out of her Hat, and searching them also. A Cheese sent
to Edward Pyott the Jailer violently took away, saying he would carry it to the
Mayors, for therefore was the Watch, and Ward set at every Gate, to stop all
things that should go to and from them, which is not restored to this day. And
William Salt after his being taken by order of the Sessions out of that noisome
poisonous hole, called Domesdale, where he had been ill in his body, walking to
Poulsons Bridge that parts Devon and Cornwall, being a mile or thereabouts out
of the town, to take the wholesome air, upon encouragement thereof, and of
Captain Bradens having given security for their true Imprisonment, for that
very end that they might not be closely restrained, and cruelly used as they
had been by the Jailer. This Mayor (having notice thereof) caused to be taken
and brought before him, (having set out Scouts and Watches to meet him at his
return) and having himself rifled his Pockets, and taken away his Letters, to
the dark house he committed him, telling him he would show him a Law to
morrow, and after he had lain two nights and a day there by his order, sent for
him, and scoffed him, and asked him whether he would go into Devonshire again;
and so sent him to the Jailer; who was a Prisoner in the County prison, a
prisoner upon security for his true Imprisonment, over whom the Mayor had no
power; but the same Spirit of cruelty ruling in him against the Innocent as in
the Jailer, he seeks and takes every opportunity to manifest it, and in this
merciless act has exceeded the Gaolers unreasonable practice and inhumane
brutishness. But by that time he comes to understand by feeling the wages of
his unrighteousness, what he has done herein, and in the disturbing of
peaceable people in their traveling, searching them, and breaking open their
Letters, taking away, and detaining their Books and Papers, and misusing them
as has been said, he will have little cause to boast or glory, but the
contrary.

And thus from this Jailer, Recorder, and Mayor have the Innocent suffered
without mercy. These are they who have joined hand in hand together, to make up
the threefold Cord of their cruel persecution. He that reads what has been
rehearsed of these three may see their faces, hearts, and hands, one and the
same, as is the Spirit that rules them: The first causes them to suffer, the
second helps on and then laughs at their sufferings on the seat of judgment,
instead of doing them right: The third reaches forth his hand to make them
further to suffer, where the two former cannot. But the Recorder is the
Counselor, from him proceeds the encouragement and strength of the other two.
This is he (as is said) that was one of the secluded Members of the long
Parliament, who after the Kings death being asked, in whose name the Orders of
Court should pass, answered in the name of T. Gewen Esquire Recorder of
Lanceston, when as the Act of Parliament said, In the name of the Keepers of
the Liberties of England, who in disdain and scorn asked who they were, Who in
the last Parliament, was very zealous for a King and a House of Lords. The
Mayor is he who was once put by that office for his disaffection to the
Commonwealth, and the prisoners in their day, having borne their testimony
against those interests, as they do now against all unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, no wonder if at
their hands they receive all manner of cruelties, now that they are put under
their feet, and delivered up as a prey, and a scorn to all; who as to the
interest of the Commonwealth, to which they firmly stood, could not be
overcome by the Sword or War, but overcame the Interests that these men
pursued, and therein these men and all their Accomplices. And no wonder to see
such men as these creeping into places of power, thereby to have their
opportunities of revenge on such, and of making the Government under which they
are to stink, and become intolerable because of oppression and cruelty, and
of separating between those who are chief in Rule, and their former constant
friends; And is it not a fair game thus to play, whilst it passes undescerned
acting under the power of authority, which when it is become sufficiently
naked, weak, and abort'd, if a blow then come it may be sure to hit, and
repentance may be too late. Men walk not in such mystery in these days, but
they are easily discerned, as opportunity serves; their old interest appears
to lie in the bottom sure, and unmovable, though their faces look another
way, thither they row, (has it not very lately appeared so throughout
England? is it not a fair warning?) Ethiopians cannot change their Skin, nor
Leopards their spots? Let not men be mistaken, so they shall find it.

In the sufferings of these Innocent servants of the Lord, who have been
thorougly faithful to the Commonwealth, mentioned in this relation in this
County of Cornwall, appear no less than two of the eleven Members whom the Army
impeached, (viz.) John Glynne then Recorder of London, dismissed of that place as
an enemy to the Commonwealth and Army, now Chief Justice of the upper Bench,
and Anthony Nicholls, who knows how much he had a hand in bri^gi^g in the
Scotch Army in 1648. into England, and how well known it was then, as was his
other actions, and its like may remember who it was that was proclaimed a
Traitor by the Army, and sought after as such a one, who its like should be
called to a strict account for what he has now done to the innocent contrary
to Law, would fly from it himself, and lay it on the back of the Priests, as
he did the former when the Army had him Prisoner, To whom he said, that the
Priests laying it upon them in the Parliament as no less than damnation, that
such a Company of Heretics and Schismatics as were the Army (should pass into
Ireland (which lay then ( viz. the honest interest) in a sad bleeding and dying
posture) was the reason of what they did, and of their attempt to break the
Army, which they endeavored under the pretense of the relief thereof, and
placing such Officers for conduct as might serve that end, under whom they knew
the Soldiery would not engage: Yet this man (now) oh how warm is he? how
secure does he think himself under the Government of the Army and the Chief
Officers thereof? Two inn^cent men he sent to prison, who have suffered as has
been in part related with the cause of their suffering, under which they yet
lie; and whosoever comes to him that are such as he and the scorners calls
Quakers, he says he will imprison, And Thomas Gewen makes up a third in the
same affection, for which by reason of the Army he sat not in Parliament.

But to proceed --

Lanceston having thus began, the County of Cornwall follows, strict Watches
and Wards are set up in the high ways, and towns thereof, who examine, and
bring before Justices, such as they reproach with the name of Quakers, thereby
to stop and hinder the going to and fro of such in that County to visit the
Prisoners, or to Minister the words of eternal life in those dark Corners of
the earth: But of this after a time they grew weary, who thereby thought to
weary out those people by tossing them from Constable to Just^ce, and from one
Justice to another, keeping them all night on Guards with such like, the rage
which the evil one stirred up in them, which put them upon such unlawful,
and violent actions became cool; and finding nothing wherewithal to accuse
them, and their innocence and harmelesness, began to have a witness in their
consciences, and so their Watches, and Guards ceased, which had continued for a
certain space of time, and those at Lanceston also, though the Mayor for a time
followed it with such blind zeal, madness; and violence. And this is the
better way to deal with the people called Quakers than the Protector, and his
Council could find: Anthony Nicholls its like can tell from whom came this
wicked invention, and who it was that said so, and what Justices set to their
hands to make this Warrant the more authentic, and to cover it from being seen
to be the Plot of one against the just (viz:) Anthony Nicholls, Anthony Rouse,
James Lance, John Treville, Ia. Daniell, John Fox, Dated at Truro.

By that time this Western most County, and the towns and Villages thereof
gave over, the County of Devon on the East of Lanceston began; Cornwall was
behind, and little in comparison. All England stood before Devon, and through
it must all pass that came to the prisoners, Its bounds extending from Sea to
Sea; surely grieved are the Priests to see and hear of such abounding of love
in visiting the Prisoners from all parts of England, (even from the borders of
Scot^and) tormented they are day and night because of the continual goings of
so many to and from the Prisoners, who witnessed that which made their Kingdom
to shake, and would be its overthrow; No rest are they in because of the
opportunities, such had to declare the name of the Lord from far, and his
everlasting Gospel to the ends of the earth, to the opening of the blind eye,
to see their deceit and filthiness, and to the turning of people from darkness
to the light, and from the power of Satan unto God, whom if they should be let
alone, the County would run after, Therefore the Cry is made, help, help, ye
Magistrates, ye Rulers, ye Officers of the Army, ye Soldiers, ye towns, and
Parishes, and Villages, help ye men of Devon, bring forth your Swords, your
Staves, your Bills, your Halberts, set the Watch in the high ways, in the
towns, on the Bridges, and passages, make strong your Guards, with men of place
and ability, and sufficient (carnal) weapons; Let no one of them pass you,
hale them to prison, Lay them fast enough, set your authority upon it, ye
general Sessions, make it a Law (for our Kingdom is of this world, and will
fall, if ye powers of the earth do not support it.) Why? What Is the matter?
What is the reason of this outcry? In plain english, and in open face, it is
this -- There are a generation of people whom we call Quakers, (for we must
reproach in the very first place, that we may be known of what generation we
are, Ministers of division, not of reconciliation) wandering up and down this
County, (as did the Prophets, and Christ Jesus, and the Apostles, and Holy Men
of God from the beginning) who plague us greatly, and the men of our
generation, in almost every corner of the Nation; who deny (us who thus act,
for by these our fruits, they say we are known) the godly Ministers of England
to be the true Ministers of the Gospel, (for the true Ministers of the Gospel
were Ministers of Jesus Christ, not of Man, or made by or in the will of Man,
or Nations, or Countries, but by the will of God, and the revelation of Jesus
Christ, who made them able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter,
but of the spirit, for the letter kills, but the spirit gives life, 2 Cor.
3.6. Gal. 1.16. And such were done too by the Ministers of the Countries, the
National Ministers, the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees, as we have done,
and would have you now do to them, as Christ foretold.) And they deny the
Scriptures (of which we make our trade) to be the word of God, (and if that be
not the word of God, no other word of God do we know, for we have neither seen
his shape, nor heard his voice at any time; and Revelation we deny, and so we
cannot be called M^nisters of the word of God) for they say, Christ Jesus is
the Word of God, which was in the beginning, before Letter was, which was with
God, which was God, and so is not the Letter, which was made flesh, and came
and dwelt amongst us, as John testifies, chap. 1. Which word of God is quick
and powerful, sharper than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit, of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, as says the Author to the Hebrews, chap.
4.12. By which word of God the Heavens were of old, and the Earth standing in
the water, and out of the water, and the Heavens and the Earth which are now
are kept in store, by the same word, reserved unto fire against the day of
Judgment, and perdition of ungodly men, as Peter, 2 epist. c. 3. v. 6, 7.
witnesses. Who sits on the white horse, clothed with a vesture dipped in blood,
(whose name is called the Word of God) riding on conquering, and to conquer,
having the Armies of Heaven following of him, as John describes him in his
Revelations, chapter 19.11, 12, 13, 14. And they say, the Scriptures are a true
declaration of this Christ Jesus the Word of God, as Luke bears record; who
having a perfect understanding of all things from the very first, says, he
took in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which were
most surely believed amongst them, even as they were delivered unto them by
those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and Ministers of the Word, it
seeming good unto him also to write of them in order, chap. 1.1, 2, 3. Which
declaration of his of him who is the Word of God, which he calls so who wrote
it, we notwithstanding call, and will have it to be the Word of God, and cry
out upon such as Blasphemers that say (as Luke said of it, who wrote it) it is
a declaration. And they say, that all Scripture given by inspiration of God,
holy men of God speaking (not from the Letter, for one Prophet prophesied not
what he saw in writing of the Prophesy of another; nor did John what he saw
written in the Prophets, but) as they were moved of the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.2.1. Nor spoke the Apostles, but as the spirit gave them utterance, Acts 2.8.
And is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God (not the man of sin; and we say, man can
never be free from sin while he lives; and he that is not free from sin, is not
free from the man of sin; and the man of sin is not the man of God for whom the
Scripture is profitable) may be perfect, (and we deny perfection as a damnable
doctrine) and thoroughly furnished unto all good works; as Paul affirms to
Timothy, 2 epist. 3.16, 17.) Who by venting and broaching many of such Heresies
and Blasphemies, and scat^ering Books and Papers of these things which we call
seditious, do undermine (with that which is perfect) the Fundamentals of our
Religion, these great truths which have been so long professed amongst us, and
cause many people (which being weak, have been deluded by us, to see their
delusions, and) to fall from us, notwithstanding the clear Sunshine of this our
Gospel amongst them, to the great dishonor of Almighty God, (whose name has
been taken in our mouths) the disturbance of the peace of the Commonwealth,
(which we have often set into Wars and Blood thereabouts) to the sadning of
every good and honest heart, and the grief of all pious and religious people,
who observe what pitiful Fundamentals our Religion has, which can be thus
undermined, when as the Kingdom the Apostles and Saints received, could not be
moved, Heb. 12.28. And the Rock on which their faith was built, the gates of
Hell could not prevail against, said Christ, Matthew. 16.18. Nor the storms, nor
the winds, nor the rain, to make that house to fall that is built thereupon,
Matthew. 7.25. And the things that are shaken are to be removed, as of things
that are made, (for this word, Yet once more I shake not the Earth only, but
also Heaven, so signifies) that those things which cannot be shaken may remain,
says the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 12.26, 27. And they that trust in the
Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever,
Psalm. 125.1.) And how dark our Gospel is, that notwithstanding the clear
sunshine thereof, the wicked man has sown such tares as these, which are
grown up exceedingly; especially that all this should be done by a people
wandering up and down the Country, whom we, and the World (which make up what
we call our Churches) do scorn, set at naught, and reproach with the weak and
contemptible name of Quakers; and do account and number them (as Christ Jesus
their example in sufferings) with Transgressors, sturdy Rogues, Beggars, and
wandering idle persons. Therefore it is high time for ye who are the
Magistrates, and the Authority of this County, (of which we are the Ministers,
who are in this condition) to appear, and do your parts for the supporting of
these great Truths, these Fundamentals of our Religion, which have been so long
professed amongst us, which are so undermined (by a wandering, trembling people,
which cry up perfection amongst us) of this our Gospel, whose clear sunshine
is thus dark, and so far from being able to commend it self to that of God in
every man's conscience, or to defend it self or us, that it needs your carnal
weapons, (which were not the Apostles, for theirs were spiritual, not carnal)
but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4. And
Ezra was ashamed to require of the King a Band of Soldiers and Horsemen to
help them against the Enemy in the way, because he had spoken unto the King,
saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him, but his
power and his wrath is against all them that forsake him, Ezra 8.22.) For the
preventing of that which makes ours appear so, yea to be even the great
contagion that has infected almost every corner of this Nation, and strikes at
the feet of our Images, (which are but Iron mixed with Clay) and not only make
your Law to the purpose aforesaid, but send your Orders abroad to the chief
Constables, and petty Constables in every division, earnestly requesting them,
as they tender the foundation aforesaid of all our hopes of being saved by our
Religion now undermined, and the peace of the strong man, whose armor now
begins to be taken from him, and his goods to be spoiled, to do their utmost to
see them put in execution, that so your dead orders may prove the destruction
of the living truth of God, which appears in contemptible Creatures, to destroy
our undermineable Religion, and dark Gospel, and shaken Fundamentals, and
tottering great Truths, and all the designs of Satan, of us his Instruments, to
support them; whose Ministers, that we may in all things appear in our
generation the same with our predecessors in the former, we advise you to put
them in the front and rear, in the wild beasts skins of disaffected to the
Government, and disturbers of the peace of the Commonwealth; and fill the
belly with blasphemy and heresy, and so throw them to the unreasonable
Multitude to be devoured; for so did the chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders,
our Predecessors, and the whole multitude of them by Jesus to Pilate, when
they desired him to crucify him. We have taken this fellow (said they, as we
say now of those who witness him) perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give
tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ a King, Luke 23.1, 2. And so
did the Jews which believed not, but were moved with envy, who took unto
themselves certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a Company, and
set all the City in an uproar, and ass^ulted the house of Jason, and drew him
and the brethren before the Rulers, saying, These that have turned the world
upside down are come hither also, whom Jason has received; and these do all
contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying, there is another King, one Jesus,
Acts 17.5, 6, 7. And thus said Tertullus, the high Priests and Elders Orator,
against Paul to Felix the Governor, We have found this man a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, Acts 24.1, 2,
5.

And whether this be not the plain English of the language of the order of
Sessions, and the Letter sent therewith to the Constables in every division
hereafter to be mentioned, at the instigation and instruction of the Priests;
and whether it be not the naked truth of the things contained in those Papers,
and their actions, without straining or wresting, let the sober judge. And what
is said, may also serve as some answer to the false accusotions and slanders
therein.

For the Priests being troubled and moved, as has been said, to see and hear
of so many to pass through the County to visit the Prisoners, gave the Justices
no rest, nor would suffer them to be quiet, till they had contrary to the
Fundamental Laws of this Nation, and to the liberty unto which every Englishman
is freely born as his Inheritance, of which Liberty the Fundamental Laws are
the guard and defense; which Liberty and Laws for to defend, has cost the
blood and miseries of many Wars heretofore, and those of late; and to true
Religion, which visits the Prisoners, and does violence to none; and to all
moderation and humanity, ordered as follows, which with the cruel effects
thereof, comes now to be related.

Devon. At the General Sessions of the Public Peace, held at the Castle of
Exon in the said County, the 18. day of July, 1656.
WHereas the number of sturdy Beggars, Rogues, and wandering idle persons, is
greatly increased; and although there has been excellent good Laws made for
the punishment of them, yet because of the remisness of some inferior Officers
the same has not been duly executed; and now lately diverse other persons
called by the name of Quakers, disaffected to the present Government, do wander
up and down the Country, and scatter seditions Papers and Books, to the
deluding of many weak people, undermining the Fundamentals of Religion, denying
the Scriptures to be the Word of God, and the godly Ministers of England to be
the true Ministers of the Gospel; and so as by them, many Heresies and
Blasphemies are by them vented and broached abroad, to the great dishonor of
Almighty God, and grief of all pious and religious people, and to the
disturbance of the peace of this Commonwealth. It is therefore ordered, that
the Constables of every Hundred within this County shall forthwith issue out
their Warrants to the several petty Constables of their several Parishes within
their Hundreds, We particularly requiring them thereby, upon receipt thereof,
to cause good Watches and Wards to be kept at the Bridges and Highways within
their several Parishes, where it shall be most convenient, for the apprehending
of all Beggars, Rogues, Vagabonds, and wandering, idle, and suspicious persons;
and such as shall be therewith apprehended, take care that they be punished,
and conveyed according to Law. And that they likewise apprehend all such
persons as travel under the notion or name of Quakers, without a lawful
Certificate satisfying from whence they came, and whither they are traveling;
or shall have, or do scatter publicly, or own any such seditious Books and
Papers as aforesaid; or shall interrupt or disturb any Ministers in the
Congregations, or otherwhere; and thereupon bring them, together with such
Books and Papers, before some Justice of the Peace of the said County, thereby
to be dealt with as the Law requires. And that this service may be the better
performed, it is ordered, that persons of place and abilities, with weapons
sufficient, be set to watch and ward; and if any shall refuse or neglect their
duties herein, the Constables are thereupon forthwith to certify the same to
the next Justice, who is desired by this Court to bind over such persons to
the next Sessions, to answer the said neglect. This Watch and Ward to continue
till further order.

Henry Fitz-Williams, Deputy-Clerk of the Peace.


That the Warrant aforesaid might prove the more effectual, it was sent
enclosed to the Constables in a Letter signed by Major Blackmore, as follows.

Gentlemen,
YOU will here enclosed find a Warrant from the General Sessions of the Peace
held for this County, which I hope seasonable and necessary in this juncture of
affairs. I suppose you will hardly judge it cannot but sadden every good and
honest heart to observe the great Apostasy that has happened of late, and that
notwithstanding the clear sunshine of the Gospel amongst us: yet the wicked
one has sown his tares, and they are grown up exceedingly; so that it is high
time for the Magistrates to appear for the supporting of these great Truths
which have been so long professed amongst us, and for the preventing of this
great contagion, that infects almost every corner of this Nation. Now the
Authority of this County having begun to do their parts in the enclosed Order,
I shall make it my earnest request unto you, that as you tender the foundation
of all our hopes of salvation by Jesus Christ, the good of poor souls, and the
peace of the Commonwealth, you would do your utmost to see this Order put in
execution, that it may not be a dead letter, but The Letter kills, but the
Spirit gives life, (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.6.) the power of God, the
Gospel of salvation. What Blasphemy is this, and horrible wickedness, so to
speak of a filthy Order made to persecute the life of God, the Gospel of
salvation, which is the power of God, and to limit the saint which gives life,
and the Children of Light, and to imprison them to death; and as such, to press
the execution thereof, which has proved the death of one of the Lambs of
Christ, whose blood on him and them all cries for vengeance.
living direction to all within your Division, to prevent, if the Lord please,
the designs of Satan and his Instruments; and therefore send several Copies of
the Order, and of this Letter, if you please, to all your petty Constables,
that so it may be put in practice; and wherein my small interest or assistance
for encouragement may be useful, both you and they may be confident of the
same, and that I am

Your assured loving Friend, John Blackmore.


The duty or office of Justices as well in Sessions, as out of Sessions, and of
the Judges, is, not to make Laws, but to see that the Laws that are made be
duly put in execution; with this they are entrusted, unto this they are sworn;
and where they swerve from this, they act arbitrarily, and are liable to
punishment. Were the power of making Laws, of such Laws as these, in them, what
need is there of Parliaments? To what end have been all the sharp conflicts,
industrious carefulness, hard strugglings, and bloody contests for many
hundreds of years past, especially of late years, in the behalf of
Parliamentary Authority, and the Fundamental Laws which from them sprang, and
which declare their Authority supreme and absolute? To what purpose have been
the hangings by the neck, the cuttings of the throat at Tyburn, the
imprisonments, confiscation of estates, and other exemplary punishments
executed on Judges, Justices, and Ministers of state, for arbitrary acting, of
which the Records of this Nation speak? Why was Strafford's head cut off, and
Canterbury's, and Charles Stuart's, as Traitors, for endeavoring to subvert
the Fundamental Laws of England? And what justice was there in all these, if a
general Sessions of a particular County may make Laws, such Laws as aforesaid,
beyond what ever they did, and go unpunished? Walk through the Records of this
Nation, where the instances aforesaid are registered, (those that are free
thereunto) search Strafford's Trial, and Canterbury's of late days, and see
whether it was ever proved against them that ever they judicially made a Law
against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Nation, and put in
execution? Whether ever such a Law as this was made, such Guards set up, such
Executions done by virtue thereof, as is hereafter mentioned? Canterbury
committed to Prison, and assigned not the cause in the Warrant of Commitment,
as is the Law of the Land, and it proved Capital to him. Imprisonments contrary
to Law were reckoned up against Strafford, making up the number of his
cumulative Treasons, which cost him his head. Charles Stuart and his Lords
committed men, is Canterbury aforesaid, and early he heard of it in the
Parliament, the third of his reign, and was constrained to submit unto the
Petition of Right, to keep that his wrong doing from being further questioned.
And for his other arbitrary actions, and what followed thereupon in these three
Nations, and befell his particular, needs not to be mentioned, being recorded
every where in the blood and miseries of the late Wars, and the destruction of
him, and his Family; the dreadful and sad examples of his righteous
judgments, who renders to every one according to his deeds.

But these things to the m^n of this generation, to these Justices, are of
little value. They can go over the Graves of these multitudes who have perished
for these things, without fear. They can gaze upon all the dreadful
desolations and transact ons because of these things without astonishment; and
can dare to do those things today, which yesterday were made before their eyes
the saddest examples of the vengeance of God; not fearing before the Lord,
because of his judgments which he has brought forth on the earth, but with a
hardened heart, and a stiffneck, and a brow of brass, proceed to act the same,
yea greater abominations and unrighteousnesses than those, for which things
sake he cut them off.

For although every Englishman is alike born free to travel, be, or abide in
any part of England, or the Dominions thereof; and to deny him this, is to deny
him his b^thright, and is as unreasonable as to deny him the air to breath in;
and a denial of this to one man, is a denial unto all, as has been said.
Though the highway ^s are equally free for all men to pass, as free for the
men of Cumb^rland in Devon, as for the men of Devon who live on the other side
of the way, and so for the men of Devon in Cumberland. Though to stop or h nder
a man in his peaceable travell^ng in the high way is a b^each of the peace, and
an overthrow of society amongst men. Though Magna Charta, cap. 29. says, No
man shall be taken, imprisoned, or exiled, (and to be barred from traveling
one part of a man's Country is a banishment) or any way otherwise destroyed;
nor we shall not pass upon him but by lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the
Law of the Land. Though the Law of the Land above all things takes care of, and
values the liberty of a man's person. Though for those who are by Commission the
Ministers of the Law, otherwise to act than in the execution of the Law,
renders them accountable to the justice of the Law, as it is perjury in them so
to do, who are sworn by the Law to execute. Though arbitrary proceedings in
such as are entrusted with the execution of the Law, have been adjudged by
Parliaments tyrannical and treasonable, and capital Executions have been done
accordingly, as has been instanced. Though any party of men under a
Government, to make Laws, being not lawfully authorized so to do, for the
binding of others, and thereunto to require obedience, be the setting up of
themselves above the Law, and treading it under their feet, and rendering of
them whom they do so bind, their Slaves and Vassals, and so is treason. Though
to raise men, and arm them, and to keep Guards with such, apprehend and
imprison, where the Law does not empower, (and no where does the Law empower
any so to do especially, in opposition to Law, and Liberty, and the destruction
thereof) is also Treason. Though Liberty of Conscience is a chief Fundamental
in the present Government. Though for the Liberties aforesaid, and for it, have
been the late wars, changes and revolutions which are the price thereof. Though
to go about, doing of good, be that which Jesus of Nazareth, and his Prophets,
and Apostles did; and to visit the Prisoners be that which he requires, even
he who is the Son of man, the King, who when he shall come in his glory, and
all his holy Angels with him, sitting upon the Throne of his glory, before whom
shall be gathered all Nations, whom he shall separate the one from the other,
says to the Goats on the left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; for I was in Prison, and ye
visited me not. (And they shall answer, when saw we thee an hungered, or
athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee? And then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, in as
much as you did it not unto one of these little ones, ye did it not to me; and
these shall go away into everlasting punishment, Mat. 25.). And so is an
exercise of faith in Jesus Christ the true Religion, which the Government
requires to be protected, as has been mentioned. Yet have these Justices by a
Law of their own making, (contrary to what has been aforesaid, (the Law of the
Nation) and to what might further be added in demonstration of the illegality
and unreasonableness of these their proceedings, could this short Relation bear
a full discussing thereof) set up armed Guards, under the name of Watches and
Wards on the highways and bridges throughout the County of Devon, requiring
them to apprehend all such, whom by and in their Law they reproach,
distinguish, and brand with the scorned name of Quakers, as travel thereon;
whom having a mind to destroy, and to keep from passing to visit their Friends
in Prison at Lanceston in Cornwall, suffering there for the testimony of Jesus,
as has been said; unto which place there is no passage out of England by land,
but through that County; and to hinder from going to and fro that County, lest
they should declare against, and manifest the wickedness in Priest and People.
And that these their cruel and tyrannical actions might have some pretense, and
cover and prevail with those in whom the same spirit rules, to execute them to
the purpose. They by and in their Law falsely accuse, and charge, and slander
all such whom they so reproach, distinguish, and brand, to be disaffected to
the Government, disturbers of the public peace, scatterers of seditious Books
and Papers, venters and broachers abroad of many Heresies and Blasphemies, with
much more of the like stuff. And that this service (as they call it, but poor
hearts! they will one day sadly know whose service it is, when the Master pays
them their wages) may be the better performed, they order that persons of place
and abilities, with sufficient weapons, be thus set to watch and ward; and if
any shall neglect their duties (as they term the obedience which they require
to their illegal and monstrous command) herein, they require the Constables
thereupon forthwith to certify the same to the next Justice, whom they desire
(by and in the name of this Court) to certify the same, and to bind over to
the next Sessions, to answer the said neglect.

So that, in plain English, he on whom they thus place the name of a Quaker in
scorn and derision, and by distinction, (who every where is surely known by his
obedience to the Lord, and to the Law of his God, which he dares not shift from
confessing openly before all, for the avoiding the unreasonableness and fury of
men, in whom the Prince of darkness rules, as the Professions and People of the
world can; which is a sure character on such an one by which to find him, in
whom no occasion or fault can be found, but concerning the Law of his God, as
it was with Daniel) must be such an one as they have made and described in and
by their Law, unsight and unseen, unknown and unheard, be he what he will, if
he be one whom in and by this our Law they call a Quaker, watch and wardsmen,
he is disaffected to the Government, a Disturber of the public peace, a
Scatterer of seditious Books and Papers, a Venture and Broacher of Heresies and
Blasphemies; we say it, we make him so, be he so or no, lay hold on him,
apprehend him we require you, bring him with his Books and Papers, (if he has
any) before one of us, to be dealt withal according to this our Law.

And that indeed this unheard of iniquity thus set up by a Law contrary to the
Law of the Nation, may be effectually executed, the strict provisions in the
order aforesaid (though such as has been said) are not thought enough,
(wickedness never thinks its dev^ces against the just to be too much, or too
sure, crucified, dead, buried, a stone rolled before the sepulcher, a guard of
soldiers) the countenance of that part of the Army in that County, so far as
the concurrence of a chief Officer may serve it, must be had: And for this
purpose John Blackmore, Major to General Disborow, and a Justice of Peace, must
be dealt withal, to render the Order effectual in the execution, as from him
proceeded the motion of the Order to the Sessions; who being prevailed with,
debaseth himself as low as Hell, turns Clerk to a Priest, and his back to his
long professed principles, and friends, and to the smoke of the bottomless pit,
from whence came the Order aforesaid, and the Letter, even from the black
generation, sets to his hand, and makes their his earnest request to all the
Constables, That now the Authority of that County having begun to do their
parts in the Order which he enclosed, (which is so and such as has been
expressed) they would do their utmost to see it put in execution, as they
tender the foundation of all their hopes of salvation by Jesus Christ, the good
of poor souls, and the peace of the Commonwealth, that so it might not be a
dead letter, but living direction to all within their Division; and assures
them of his interest and assistance therein for their encouragement, though he
has drawn his sword, and been at the shedding of a great deal of blood for
Liberty of Conscience, for the Liberties of England, of which he has made a
long and a large profession, when it was the case of the Army, and the honest
men (then) who owned them throughout England, against the Priests, and the
Common Enemy, who struck at the roots of the Liberties of the Nation, and of
Conscience, which now his pride has made him to forget. And so his painted
profession is (now) at an end, it will cover him no longer, his sepulcher is
open, and seen to be full of rottenness, and dead men's bones, the bones, the
mangled carcases, the blood and sufferings of all in the late wars for liberty
of Conscience, or the liberties of the Nation. Whom do thou pass in Beauty?
Go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised which are gone down to Hell
with their weapons of war. And they have laid their swords under their heads,
but their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of
the mighty in the land of the living.
Poor Major Blackmore! how have thou now descended into the pit, and made thy
grave with the uncircumcised.

And such was the encouragement of the Order aforesaid, coming enclosed in this
Letter of this Officer of tha^ Army which once was the sword or the Lord, and a
dread and terror on those whom this spirit ruled, and in whom it was now risen
afresh, and waited only for some such show of Authority as this, and
countenance. That though the Order bore date the 18. of the fifth month, called
July, yet by the 23. of the same month were the Guards up, and some Friends
traveling toward Berkshire from visiting the prisoners at Lanceston, were
apprehended, and the next day imprisoned, and by the 16. of the 6. month, in
the space of about 25. days, were no less than one and twenty men and women
imprisoned in Exeter of those whom those Guards apprehended, all of them except
one (who was accompanying some of them to direct them the way thither from
Exon, where he was born) being on their way to and from Lanceston, to visit,
and from visiting of the prisoners of the Lord there. And of these the Guards
demanded, Are ye Quakers? Will ye own the Quakers? Will ye deny the Quakers? We
have an Order of Sessions to stop and apprehend all Quakers; and so they fall
to rifling of their pockets, and taking away what Letters, Papers, or Books
they found about them, as did the Justices; one of whom, (to wit) John
Champion, called John Brown from the rest that were apprehended with him, into
his Parlour, and there beat him with his own hands, he standing still, and
saying nothing; and then sent him and the rest (one of whom, viz. Jane Ingram,
is since there dead) to prison, where he was laid in irons, and some of them of
their money did the Guards rob, (one man of 10 s. as they confessed themselves)
and spent much of it before his face in strong drink, abusing him, and setting
him forth a scorn throughout the Country as he passed; which he acquainted
Major Saunders, one of the Justices, (who sent diverse of those Friends to
prison) that he might do justice while the Constable was in Town who took away
his money, and so used him; but he refused so to do, or to meddle therein. This
is Major Saunders, and the end of his long and large profession also; but has
now forgotten it, and is j yned with them, and with them is gone down to the
pit, and his grave has he made with the uncircumc sed; who knew the day when
those at Exon rose up against him and his soldiers, as Heretics and
Schismatics. And another who was carrying money and other provisions to the
prisoners, the Constable robbed of 20 s. of that money at the eleventh hour of
the night on the Guard where they had him prisoner, though he said, if he took
his money from him, they robbed him. And one Parker, one of M jor Blackmore's
Troopers, charged the Innkeeper at Exon to detain Katherine Evans hired horse,
(who with John Bolton, James Naylor, and Thomas Hawkins, were brought from
Okehampton prisoners) whereupon the Innkeeper refused to deliver her horse,
saying, he had an order from the said Trooper to detain it, and that the said
Trooper said he had order from his Major so to do. And after she was so taken
from her, a Justice sent her on foot to her outward being from tithing to
tithing with a pass; which horse and the moneys aforesaid are yet detained, as
are the persons of those 21. in prison in Exeter to this day, as is
particularly instanced hereafter with their names, and by whom, and the
Justices that committed them, and the proceedings of Judge Nicholas with them
at the Assizes, to which the Reader is referred.

And as from the Priests arose this unheard of cruel persecution, so were they
not able (so full were they of it) to contain themselves from appearing openly
in acting therein; of which an instance or two shall be given. On the 20. of
the 6. month John Stubs, William Ames, and Hester Bedle, as they were passing
toward Lanceston, met with a guard at Pogel, and two Priests by them, the one
Priest of Pogell, the others name was Waldron, as said the people. The Guard
examined them first, and then passed them over to the Priests. The Priests
having took them in hand, one of them, (viz.) Parson Waldron, said to the
Guard, Watchmen, you were best keep them, for they are suspicious, and I do the
more suspect them because they came from B^istol. What are we suspicious of?
said one of them: That Priest answered, of being Quakers; and asked them
whether they were not such as were so called? They answered, they were. Then
said he to the Watchmen, you must not let them pass, for therefore are the
Watches set, that no^e might pass who go under that name. And the other Priest
them with much passion, they went about the Devils work, (who were going to
visit the Innocent in Prison) and with his message; and laughed and scoffed at
what one of them said to him in the dread and power of the Lord. And Parson
Waldron said, that he thought they must get the Country to knock them in the
heads, or beat their brains out; and that if the power were in his hands, he
would root them out of the land. And the Priest of Pogell said, it was pity
they were not all rooted out of the land. I Will warrant, said Parson Waldron,
this Parliament will root them all-out; and this he said several times. And
having spoken a notorious lie of one of those Friends before the people of
something that was unseemly, which the Priest said he should then do, which the
people present bore witness it was not so, having both seen and heard the
passages, though he was taken with a lie in his mouth; yet so far was he from
blushing, or being ash^med, that he laughed thereat, and said, Though he were a
liar, yet all were not like him. And having used much scoffings and railings,
the Priests departed that night, after they had given order to the Guard to
keep them prisoners. So by those two Priests order were they kept ten hours
prisoners. The next morning the Priest of Pogell came again, and railed at them
while they were prisoners: whereupon one of them drew near toward him, to
speak to him; he retired back, and bid him stand off; and when he was asked,
where his moderation was? he answered, he ought not to be moderate in the
things of God. And the woman he thrust from him, and threatened to kick her
about, and said to the Watchmen, that they must be carried to Exon. And of the
same mind was one Priest Ham at Lanceston, who in his farewell Lecture-Sermon
there exhorted the people to tread the bodies of the people called Quakers in
the street, and taught them how to write their names in the dust. And another
Priest drew the Warrant by which he was committed whom the Constable robbed of
the 20 s. of the money he was carrying to the prisoners as aforesaid, at the
instigation of that Priest. Which Warrant, for the rarity thereof, and that the
sober may see what unheard of Monsters this black generation brings forth, and
for that it has an ET CETERA in it, as has P. Ceelyes, as is aforesaid, and
because it is an interpretation of the Order of Sessions, and of the
proceedings thereupon, and of the pit out of which it proceeded under one of
the founders drawing and handwriting, take as follows.

To all Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Constables, Tithingmen, and all Officers
whom these may concern.
WHereas there was an Order issued from this Bench for the apprehending of all
Rogues, and Vagabonds, and in particular for the apprehending of those who pass
up and down the Country under the name of Quakers, as disturbers of the peace
of this present Government, and as underminers of the Fundamentals of Religion,
the spreaders of Heresies and Blasphemies, etc. Now there being one that owns
the name of a Quaker being apprehended, and brought before me, who has
Letters, and a Book tending to the spreading of the dangerous opinions of that
party, and without any Certificate at all from whence he came, and whither he
will. I do therefore in pursuance of the said Order issued from this Bench,
commit the said Quaker unto the Goal of this County, there to remain till he be
discharged by due order of Law. And by these presents I do require the Keeper
of the said Goal to take him the said Quaker, whose name as he says is Thomas
Rawlinson, into his custody, and him safely to keep, until by Authority he be
set at liberty. Given under my hand and seal at Telcot this 7th. of August,
1656.

Edw. Aiscot.


It would be too long to take this Monster in pieces, and fully to describe it;
nor will this relation, which has such variety of unheard of illegal and
monstrous proceedings necessarily to be spoken to, bear a large discourse of
this, or of diverse other material passages mentioned therein; each of which
(were it in the time of the former generation, wherein much was said of a
little, in comparison to what is in this day acted) would increase into an
entire and voluminous discourse, which scarcely with the bare relation is now
passed over. Such are the excesses of cruelty because of conscience, in this
day of the highest profession by the highest Professors, that that which
yesterday made the whole Nation to ring, and drew forth the sword of war to
relieve it, passes this day over in silence, and without observation, being
looked upon rather as favor than cruelty, as kindness than a furious
persecution; and it is accounted well where the extremity of sufferings are not
the Companions of those who have the testimony of Jesus. This Warrant lies
plain enough to be understood by him whose eyes are in the least measure
opened; who when he has read the Priest of Talcots name that drew it, which is
Whaire, and the Constable which robbed that friend of the prisoners money,
which is William Norcut of Clayton, is left to judge thereof as it is. The
Guard apprehends him whom they call Quaker, at Clayton, as he was peaceably
passing on the way with necessaries for the prisoners; the Authority is the
Order of Sessions; the Priest draws the Warrant, and in the Warrant utters
his mischievous desires; the Justice signs and seals it; the Constable robs him
of the money sent by him to the prisoners to supply their necessaries after
this commitment, whom so to do the Priest sets on, and then sends him to Exon
Goal with a Guard; so they wrap it up. But not a word is there in this Priests
Warrant of the Protector, no, they like not the 37. Article of his Government:
therefore a new Authority have they in this County found out, and raised, where
withal thus to persecute, (viz.) the General Sessions, and so the Warrant runs
in the name and authority, not of the Protector, though in his name all
administration of Government is to pass, but of this Bench; and yet charge
them, whom it called Quakers, as disaffected to the Government, one of whom
this Priest has much ado to call by his proper name, so full of malice is he,
but with a name of reproach, this Quaker, there being one that owns the name of
a Quaker brought before me, I do therefore in pursuance of the said Order
issued from this Bench, commit the said Quaker to the Goal of this County, etc.
And by these presents I do require the Keeper of the said Goal to ^ake him the
said Quaker, whose name as he says is Thomas Rawlinson, into his custody, and
him safely to keep until by authority (not a syllable of the Protector, or his
authority) he be set at liberty. Given, etc. Does not this show that the
Priests have as little mind to the Protector, as they have to the people
called Quakers? That the same spirit that imprisons them for coming into their
coasts, leaves his name out, and his authority, and yet directs it to all
Mayors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Constables, Tithingmen, and all Officers, etc. Does
not here appear from the grave the spirit that was in Christopher Love Priest,
and his fellow traitors, who being within the jurisdiction of this
Commonwealth, took upon them to commissionate diverse men to treat with Charles
Stuart, the proclaimed Traitor of the Government, at Breda, and with the Scots,
for the putting him into what they called his Father's Throne and Dominion in
England, for which and his other Treasons he lost his head at Tower Hill, the
22. of the 5. month, 1651. See the Book entitled, A short Plea for the
Commonwealth, and therein the Priests treasons. Does not the sprouts of the
Bishops appear in the ET CETERA in the Warrant? Is Christopher Love dead, and
the Scots and Charles Stuart overcome, and that Country subdued, and the
Presbyterian, Malignant power broken in pieces, and are the Bishops plucked up
root and branch, and these things so? Is it not time to look about? What is
next?

These are some of the fruits of the Ministry, Magistracy, Authority and
Profession of the County of Devon, Apples of Sodom, Grapes of Gomorrah,
clusters of bitterness, wine of the poison of Dragons, of the cruel venom of
Asps. These are some of the effects of the loud cry of the Order of Sessions,
some of the executions done by them to whom Major Blackmore makes it his
earnest request, as they tender the hopes of salvation by Jesus Christ, the
good of poor souls, and the peace of the Commonwealth, to do their utmost to
see this order put in execution. These are some of the living works of darkness
from them to whom his request is made, and his dead letter sent for their
direction, copies of which he desires, if the Constables please, (what a low
condescension is here?) to be sent to the petty Constables, that so it may be
put in practice; and lo here it is, here is the practice, a wicked, robbing,
bloody practice, as it has proved. Behold what his bidding them be confident
wherein his small interest or assistance (filthy hypocrisy, which conceives
that great which it expresses small, and would have it accounted great when it
expresses it little) for encouragement may be useful; and that he is their
assured loving friend (of which he would have them be confident) has brought
forth. See to what his interest, and assistance, and encouragement is; and
whether this be the preventing of the designs of Satan, and his instruments, or
his stratagems, and the carrying on of his designs, and the acting of his
instruments therein, and that in the name of the Lord, let the sober judge. And
yet this Major Blackmore, when the Constables have brought him some of the
Friends aforesaid, whom they have taken up with these armed Guards as they were
peaceably passing on the way to visit their Friends in prison at Lanceston, at
his earnest request in his Letter aforesaid, and by virtue of the Order for
that purpose, which he moved the Sessions to make, has seemed to be angry with
the Constables for bringing them to him, when they have brought such before him
so apprehended, and refused to meddle with their commitment* as if he disliked
the action, and had nothing to do in the Guards, and the raising and placing of
them for their apprehensions, as he has sought to be understood in his
discourse to some of the Prisoners, blaming the Justices for imprisoning of
them, and saying that he imprisoned none. Is not this man worse than Pilate,
who apprehended not Jesus, but sought to release him, knowing that for envy
they had delivered him; and often ask-asked them, what evil has he done? I
find no fault in him, nor Herod; and when he saw he could prevail nothing, but
that rather a tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands before the
multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person, see ye to
it. And is he not as bad as the high Priests, Scribes, Elders, and the whole
multitude of them, who when they had gotten Jesus to be betrayed, and with a
band of men with swords and staves to be apprehended, that they might crucify
him, sent him to Pilate to crucify him, but went not into the Judgment Hall,
(why do you bring them to me? I like this not, I have imprisoned none) lest
they should he defiled, and so not eat the Passover? They know not to do
right, says the Lord, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces.
Tremble O thou Earth at this, be thou ashonished, and horribly afraid, for the
day of the Lord which is at hand, with whom this is laid up in store, and
sealed up amongst his treasures, and the hour of his righteous judgments
because of these things hastneth, to whom vengeance belongs, and recompense.

But these are not the first fruits of this Vine of Sodom in these fields of
Gomorrah, this City of Exon, and County of Devon, the habitations of cruelty;
early did this cursed branch bud early did it blossom, and send forth its
poisonous fruits. The year 1645. witnessed this. This the Army knew full well,
against whose Garrison, under the command of Colonel Robert Hammond, the City
of Exon stood, turned out, and shut their gates, and kept from returning, as
they did whatever Forces the Army would have put thereinto, as Colonel Hardress
Waller, and his Regiment, which was once denied entrance, and being in, refused
to be billeted, can, witness; till the eleven membred grand wheel in London,
which rose up, and was overcome in the year 1647. was broken, whom they thus
did set against with an inveterate hatred, scorned, and branded with the names
of Heretics and Schismatics. And as such did those, who are called
Independents and Baptists, understand this, some of whom were apprehended as
Heretics and Schismatics, and clapped up as such. Baptists put in the stocks
for coming to the private meeting there on the first days out of the Country,
although they had Certificates from the Justices, and were men of outward
quality. And the Steeplehouse door shut against Stuckley, an Independent
Priest, who (now) is joined with those his (then) persecutors in persecuting
the Just. It would be too long to instance of the order from above read in the
great Steeplehouse by Parsons the singing-man against private meetings, the
sudden release of him out of prison, after Lieutenant Colonel Percy; Captain
Vernon, and other Officers of Colonel Hammonds Regiment then present, had
committed him for reading thereof; and of the sudden Order that followed for
turning the Regiment out, as aforesaid; also of the tumult that beset a private
meeting in Rocklane after Major Saunders (who, as has been instanced, is now
become a Persecutor with them) was Governor of the Castle, upon the Armies
prevailing against the eleven Members; whom the tumult so abused, that a Guard
of Soldiers were sent for, who could not appease it, nor Major Saunders
himself, but was both him and his soldiers abused also. It would be too large
to be particular in the rage of the (Viz.) Ford, Nicholls, Bartlet, two of the
Downs, the same that now are the Persecutorr of the Children of light under the
notion of Quake s.
Priests, who made it their business in Town and Pulpits to set the people on
fire against the Army, and the separation from that which they called the old
way, as Heretics and Schismatics, as Heresy and Schism; especially Priest
Ford, who in those things tutored the rest of the Priests in his Lecture at the
great Steeplehouse for a long time together in these things. Nor was he quiet
after General Disborow was Major General of the West, who (it is said) put him
by, as not able to bear him, but is since got in again; a volume is little
enough to contain these things; and what the Baptists so called received in
other places of the County, particularly at Plymouth, where has been 30. of
such clapped up at a time by Christopher Ceely, (the same who has barbarously
persecuted several of the Friends of Truth mentioned in this Relation) and by
him bound over to answer at the Assizes, of whom N^cholas Cole with two others
of them, after fourteen days being in Prison in Plymouth, were sent to Exon
Goal with a Mittimus expressing the cause (viz.) For maintaining damnable
Heresies, being obstinate Anabaptists, and preaching without Ordination, and
were threatened much by the Judge at the Assizes: but the face of things being
then changed in the Nation, nothing further was done to them: this was in the
year 1645. the same Christopher Ceely being then Mayor; who being again Mayor
about the latter end of the tenth month, 1655. caused Margaret Kellum to be
sent to Prison for speaking to him in his house the word of the Lord, as she
was moved after her first sending in to him that she desired to speak with him,
and his coming to her, and bidding her come in, when she told him she had
something from the Lord to declare to him; and what she declared to him from
the Lord, he confessed to be very good, and truth. Nevertheless he sent her to
Prison, where after a cruel entertainment, being kept the most part of two
days and a night in a wide room in a cold winter season, and his declaring
that he would examine all that came in the name of the Lord; and thrusting
Margaret Bestbridge, an aged woman (who desired with others to come into the
Town hall, where she was brought) with his own hands in a rage down the stairs,
to the endangering of her life with the violence of the fall, which might have
been, had not the press of people kept her from falling above two or three
steps. She was twitched up by a pully, and a rope fastened about her, with which
they lade their packs on a Carriers horse, and her arms being tied behind her,
and her legs under the horses belly with cords as a pack. She was driven ten
miles toward Exeter before she was loosned, and then brought to Exon Goal, and
tried at the Assizes there; and Katherine Martingdale and Priscilla Cotton has
he since imprisoned, as is mentioned in this Relation.

This is Christopher Ceely, an old Persecutor; and one Vowell was with him in
the persecution of Margaret Kellum, who afterward sat Judge of the Court at
Exon, by which she was tried.


Nicholas Cole was one, who is now persecuted by him, and Mary Cole his wife
also, as such as the world calls Quakers, and the Independents also, who
meeting has been tumulted, and the back door broke open, and the people met
beaten and wounded; so that they coming into the street, and thinking thereby
to avoid some of their cruelty, there they were fallen upon also; and when they
called to the Magistrates as they passed from the Steeple-house to restrain the
rude Multitude, they answered, they justly deserved what was done to them;
which so encouraged the tumult, that murder had been committed, had not some
Soldiers of the Town come and rescued them out of their hands. And of this the
Commonwealth had experience, whose Judges the Magistrates refused to accompany
as usual at the Assizes, which occasioned the removing of the Assizes once to
Tiverton from Exeter; and against whose government they exceedingly kicked,
after the death of the late King, as they have done at every thing that
savoured of honesty, of liberty of conscience, and of the Nation, which were
the workings of the Lord in the day of his power, and brought forth by him, and
covered with his presence, to the finishing of the wars, which was a figure of
that which is now come to reign, and in order to the reigning thereof, (viz.)
the seed of God, the principle of righteousness, the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
who is come, whose right it is, of whose dominion there shall be no end, let
the rage of the Heathen be never so much thereat, and the scorners make it a
derision, against which in this hour of its testimony finishing in sufferings,
it is risen up into a rod of wickedness, as is manifest by what has been said,
and by their other persecutions, some of which are Tho. Salthouse, and Miles
Halheads sufferings, entitled, The wounds of an Enemy in the house of a Friend.
, and others not yet brought forth, and made public: Heresy, Schism, Faction,
and a generation of Heretics and Schismatics are this Army, and those who own
them, break them to pieces, disband, destroy them, cause them to perish, the
pleaders for, and upholders of this cursed toleration, and hinderers of
coercion in matters of Religion, Worship, and Discipline, was the cry in 1645.
and forwards, and for an Ordinance against Blasphemy and Heresy, wherein all
sorts of professions differing from Presbytery, may read themselves; and what
this generation would do with such as maintain and publish by preaching,
printing, writing, or teaching, that the baptizing of Infants is unlawful and
void, or that such persons must be rebaptized; or shall re-baptize any person
so baptized; or that the Churches of England, their Ministers, or Ordinances,
are no true Churches, Ministers, or Ordinances; or that the Church government
by Presbytery is Antichristian, or unlawful; (there see a few of their claws)
call to mind the former days, and let the things that are past come into
remembrance, even what this generation would have done, their Synod, and
accomplices to conscience, and to whom this generation joined in the years
1648. and 1650. and so forwards, even with the common Enemy Charles Stuart, Q.
Mary, Fermin, and Percy, and the Scots by war and treason to effect it, (see
Christopher Love Priest, and his treasons aforesaid, in the Book entitled, A
short Plea for the Commonwealth for this) and forget not the wonderful
deliverance from them, all which the right hand of the Lord effected, whereby
the shoulder was then removed from the burden, and the hands delivered from
the pots. O my people, remember what Balack King of Moab consulted, and what
Balaam the son of Beor answered from Shittim unto Gilgal, that ye may know the
righteousness of the Lord. And the cry is now heresy, blasphemy, sedition,
deniers of the godly Ministers of England to be the true Ministers of the
Gospel, venters and broachers of heresies and blasphemies; Arm, arm, turn them
out, shut the gates against these Schismatics and Heretics, was the alarm
then; set up Watches, Wards, armed with sufficient weapons, supplied with men
of place and ability; let none of them travel the Country, no not so much as
to visit their Friends in prison; apprehend, imprison them, is the Law now, by
the men of the same generation, the Priests and their Disciples. The walls of
Exon were the bounds then, the whole circuit of the County of Devon is the
extent now. That a kind of a hurly-burly effected, this is done by a Law of
the general Sessions, by the Authority of the County, (not of the Protector) as
says Major Blackmore. That was to keep a Garrison of those they then called
Heretics out of the City, from guarding of them: This to set up armed Guards
to take up and imprison all such of them whom they now call Quakers, that
travel peaceably on the way without staff or weapon. And what may not this
generation be expected further to do, as they have power in their hands, and
opportunity, if in such things as these they may act and prosper? Have they not
now learnt a way to keep any sort of men from traveling, or passing, whom they
dislike? Put a brand upon them, fill up an order with monstrous and false
accusations, and set up armed Guards, make what themselves have forged the
pretense, and all such apprehend and imprison. Is not this a fine way to deal
with the present powers, if ever an opportunity should administer? Do they love
them, do they affect them, (though they make use of them against the people of
God called Quakers, whom they falsely accuse with dis-affection thereunto, and
upon whom they make an essay of what they can do, and of their Authority) did
the late public occasion manifest any such thing, or the contrary? Have they
not spread a plain lesson before every County to do the like? and what is next?
Are their eyes open who are chief in authority? Do they not yet see through
these men, and things, and to what they tend? Does it not concern them to look
about before it be too late? Have they not fair warning, and long and large
experience? Alas, what does it suffice us to deal with a few contemned Quakers,
whilst that stands which did put us by all our hopes of dominion over men's
consciences, and the State, and overturned us and all our designs with shame
and dishonor, with whom these Quakers were one, and some of them principal
Actors; and whilst the root is yet unpull'd up of that which has laid an
universal cursed toleration, and liberty of conscience, a chief fundamental in
the Government. If this does not concern you, O ye chief in Authority, and if
this be not so, let it pass.

To conclude, This generation have in this particular of Watches and Wards
exceeded the most bloody Persecutors that have been known to have been on the
face of the Earth; among whose thirsty ravenings after the blood of the
Innocent, there is not found one such example, no not among the red Records of
the Roman persecutions, or of Queen Mary's cruelty; only in the beginning of
the long Parliament some such thing was set at Whitehall gate to hinder the
multitudes of people which flocked up out of the City to Westminster to
complain of their sufferings by the Bishops, and oppressions, which Charles
Stuart called tumults, and so found fault with it, and by that Guard one of
them was slain, at the place of the shedding of whose blood was Charles
Stuart's head struck off, and his blood poured forth on the ground; a
remarkable record of the righteous judgment of God. And from the high Priests,
Scribes, and Pharisees, was the Band sent with swords and staves, to take Jesus
in the Garden in the night', who disturbed no man, whom Judas led, who hanged
himself, and whose bowels gushed out, though he returned the money, the price
of the blood of the Innocent, whom he had betrayed to the chief Priests,
saying, I have sinned, and repented himself, but for him there was no place
found. Consider this ye, who having these examples before your eyes, do
nevertheless dare to tread in their steps, setting up Guards, Watches, and
Wards, with swords, and staves, and halberts, betraying, apprehending,
imprisoning, and dealing with the Innocent, as has been said, who travel on
the highways quiet and peaceably, without sword or staff, to visit their long
and sore oppressed innocent Friends in prison, who witness the life of the same
Jesus (now) made manifest in them, which the same spirit that crucified Jesus
does (now) in you rise up against, and persecute for witnessing thereof, and
numbers amongst Transgressors, sturdy Rogues, and Vagabonds: but those who are
indeed such, and whom the Law calls so, not one of them is found in the
Calendar of those your Prisoners, whom these your Guards have apprehended by
virtue of your order: By which it is manifest who in your account were these
Vagabonds and sturdy Rogues placed in the front of your order, and who they
were whom you thereby sought to render vile and odious, and to apprehend, to
wit, the Innocent and harmless lambs of Christ, who traveling peaceably on the
way without staff or sword, you like Wolves have torn and devoured, and have
drawn the sword against, to stop and limit, when ungodliness and iniquity
passes every where without let, control, or punishment: Such for to stop your
Guards have no order, of which the Prisoners at Lanceston in one of their
papers given out upon your Guards, have let you understand, as follows.

Friends,
ALL ye who are turning the sword against the innocent, against the truth it
self, do ye not see drunkenness at liberty, look in your Alehouses: Do you not
see sports, profaneness at liberty? look in your streets: Do you not see
deceitful merchandise, cosening, and cheating? look in your Markets? Do you
not see oaths and curses! Do you lend your ears to this? But are you not
lending your ears which way the Lambs of Christ walk, to catch up them; the
strangers, to clap up them in prison; and this is the provision you make for
strangers, and the entertainment you give them, and yet ye cry up your selves
Christians, and the Gospel shines amongst you: but lusts, whoredoms,
uncleanness, drunkenness, profaneness, how is this looked after? This is your
own you may say, and the world love its own; this is recreation, to go to
pleasures, must take some recreation now and then, but must not travel to cry
against sin, and cry against pleasures, stop them, set Watches for them, they
are not fit to live in a Commonwealth, nor to suffer any to come at them, or to
visit them; these sow sedition, and disturb our peace, say the Drunkard and
Whoremongers, say they that are given to pleasures, and follow pleasures; they
disturb our peace, say coseners, cheaters, swearers, and cursers, that are
above yea and nay in their merchandise: These being reproved by the Lambs of
Christ, hale them before Magistrates, for they disturb our peace, say they, and
these break our peace, therefore put them in the stocks, put them in the
prisons, and put them out of the towns, cast them out, they are Quakers. Are ye
not of them that cry, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and cast
out them that tremble at the word of the Lord, that the Lord regards, as Isaiah
speaks of: so are ye not of them that Jeremy, speaks of, that love to have
those Priests and Prophets that bear rule by their means, which he saw to be
the horrible filthy thing committed in the Land, which cry, the Temple of the
Lord, and come to the House which ye call your Church; and do not such as steal
come thither, and such as murder come thither, and such as commit adultery
come thither, such as cosen come thither, and do not such make up your Church,
the coseners, the adulterers, the oppressors, such as trust in lying words, the
murderer, the covetous, back-biters, scorners, mockers, do not such make up
your Church, as they cried out, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord.
Have ye not read and heard of the people that said they were wise, and had the
Law of the Lord, which lived in these things beforementioned, which met
together at the Temple to serve God, but liars, swearers, covetous, idolaters,
proud, and heady, these cried, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord,
and the Law of God was with them; and do not ye cry now that are proud,
covetous, oppressors, persecutors, liars, swearers, cursed speakers,
reproachers, scoffers, drunkards, such as are given to pleasures, cry, cry, the
Church, the Church, and ye have the Scriptures amongst you, but out of the life
of them found, as the Jews were found before you; and you may see what is at
liberty among you, and what is set up, and what it is that turns against the
Lord, and his truth, and his power, which will be your ruin in the end, except
ye consider, and repent, and amend your lives and doings, and turn unto the
Lord; for do not ye, and have not ye plainly declared by your fruits, that them
whom ye in scorn call Quakers, are the Lambs of Christ, as haling them out of
Synagogues, haling them before Magistrates, and abusing them, as if that it
were your only work, and let all wickedness run its race, and have its
liberty; and this is as it were your only work to turn your swords against the
lambs of Christ. Does it not here plainly show that ye are of the world? Have
not you your selves plainly declared? For do not ye hate them, the children of
God? Do not ye persecute them, set watches, snares, lay baits for them, take
them up prisoners, and persecute? Does not Christ say, Who is not of the world,
the world shall hate you? Does not the Apostle bid the Saints not to marvel,
for the world would hate them, for they were not of the world, and the world
loved its own; they that are of the world, hear their own; they that are of God
hear us, who are not of the world. Mark this, they that are of God hear us,
were not such as held up Synagogues, Temple, first Priesthood, that took Tithes
of the world yea or nay. Was not the Temple worldly, and all to be judged and
denied? And are not your Teachers now made by the will of man, which persecute,
which be found out of the spirit of Jesus Christ, that now ye are haling your
friends, them that the Lord sends to do good unto you; now ye are haling your
friends, now ye are persecuting your friends, now ye are smiting your friends,
you will not have Christ to reign, you will not have sin to reign in your
markets and streets; and if they reprove sin in the gate, he is made a prey
upon that does it; you will have pleasures to reign, and not have them
reproved; he is called a mad man among you that does reprove you, or a fool;
you will not have drunkards reproved, nor swearers, nor cursed speakers in the
alehouses, or in the streets abroad, but he is looked upon to be a
peace-breaker, or a gatherer of tumults. And here you may see what you will to
reign; that which the sword should be turned against, which the Lambs of Christ
turn against, therefore against the Lambs of Christ ye turn your swords. And
again, hirelings, and such as seek their gain from their quarter, such as
divine for money, and such Teachers as teach for money, that go in Cain's way,
and Balaam's way, these ye will have to reign, and cannot endure they should be
cried against, and will not have Christ reign, but uphold them with a Law, that
none shall speak to them while they are speaking without a Prison? Was ever
such Christians seen? Are ye not gone beyond the Jews in the letter? for the
Jews in the spirit might speak to them. Were there ever so many imprisoned in
their time of any of the Jews in the spirit, as now by you who are Christians
in the letter, the Christians in the spirit, that be in the spirit, that gave
forth the letter, see ye now in the steps of the Jews walking, and rather
worse; but it is that which John saw, the Beast, the Dragon, and the false
Prophet should all make war against the Lamb, and the Saints, but the Lamb
should get the victory, and overcome. Let this be read among all the
Synagogue-teachers, and Professors, who call it either Synagogue, Temple, or
Church, who are crying up your Church, and the Scriptures among you, as you may
read the Jews did the Temple of the Lord; and the Law of the Lord was with
them, and the Prophet told them they did commit adultery, they did steal, they
swear falsely, they walked after their abominations, and they walked after the
vanity of their own hearts, both Priests and People given to covetousness, they
were all out of the old-way: Therefore for these things did the Lord visit
them, and does you who are found in these steps, and persecuting them that be
in the life, that gave forth Scriptures, and are come to the Church that is in
God.


During the time aforesaid was the general Assizes at Exeter for the County of
Devon, of which chief Baron Steel and Baron Nicholas were Judges; before one of
whom, (viz.) Judge Nicholas, were these who were thus imprisoned at the Assizes
brought, and the rest also, as they were taken on the highways in the time of
the Assizes of this Judge. Considering his place and office, justice might have
been expected, and a vindication of the Law, and a zealous helping those to
right who had thus suffered wrong: but no such thing found they from him, but
the contrary, even the same spirit ruling and working in him as made the Law
aforesaid, and put it in execution against he Innocent, who could not be found
Transgressors of any Law of the Nation: For as the Sessions made a Law, and set
up Watches to apprehend them, if they were but found traveling on the
highways, and did so apprehend and imprison them, without so much as making
proclamation, or giving public warning, forbidding such to travel in that
Country after such a day: but immediately as soon as they had made their Law,
put it in execution on those who were in their way before it was made, or had
public warning thereof, or the allotment of a certain space of time of it to
take notice, (which the Law of the Nation observes) so the Judge will have a
Law of his own making, as to the Hat, (for that there is no Law of the Nation
that requires a man to put off his Hat, and imprison him for not so doing, and
denies him hearing or justice, whatever be his innocence or sufferings, if he
puts not off his Hat to a Seat of Justice, will anon appear when this newfound
Indictment of Hats shall be scanned, as in some part it has already been in
the Letter aforesaid, sent to chief Justice Glynne) and presently he will have
it put in execution, though his Law be made after the fact done, after their so
appearing, unto which they could not bow in conscience to the Law of God, of
which he is convinced to be a Transgressor that respects persons, for he that
does so, commits sin. Nor can it be bowed to in respect to the Law of the
Land, which declares against arbitrariness, which Law arbitrariness subverts
and overthrows, which arbitrariness his duty is to do justice upon, being
entrusted with the execution of the Law, and this his Law standing in his own
will, the founder thereof, it is arbitrary, and not to be obeyed, but in the
overthrow of the Law of the Land, and a slighting of all the blood shed in the
wars against arbitrariness; and is less to be endured and submitted to in him,
than in any of the Judges and chief Justices that have gone before him, whom
justice has cut off for arbitrariness, or in Strafford, Canterbury, Charles
Stuart, or of any of these later generations, since it is but the other day
that these Nations came out of many years wars and dreadful desolations and
destructions, even to the hazarding of all, to vindicate the Rights and
Liberties of England, and the Laws, the guard of them, from will and power. And
this Judge was one who in that day appeared against that generation, and for
that cause was made a Judge by the Parliament, and therefore for him to act
against Law, which he is sworn to execute, not to make. And the Legislative
Authority that made him a Judge, and the righteous ends of the Wars for Liberty
and Law, in which he appeared, and these innocent servants of the Lord, who
have been all of them always faithful to the honest interest of the Nation,
and many of them for it have drawn the sword, and fought in the field from
first to last, because they cannot submit to this his will, which is contrary
to the Law of God, and the Nation, and the righteous ends of the Wars, is the
more abominable, and to be denied, and witnessed against.

Thus then, were the proceedings of this Assizes, as to these.

Before Judge Nicholas they were brought by Officers; before him they stood
covered in conscience to the command of the Lord; that their Hats should not be
taken off he commanded, that so within the compass of his will they might be
brought; Their names he asked one after another; they gave their names in
meekness, and in the fear of the Lord, and the Clarke of the Assizes wrote them
down to record the contempt of his will; he then commanded every one by name to
put off his Hat, This they could not do for conscience sake; Wrath and fury
presently appears, that in rage he commands the Jailer to have them away, who
with violence pulled and thrust them; suffer them to speak for themselves he
would not; nor enquired what were their offenses, or the cause of their
imprisonment, or wherefore they were brought before him; but caused them with
such misusages to be sent and returned to prison. And this was what generally
they all received at his hands, as they were brought before him, and thus
evilly were they all entreated.

The morrow after such returns in custody, were ^hey brought before him again,
and placed amongst the Fellons and Murderers; By that time Bills of Indictment,
as to the breach of his will, were made ready, Their Hats now he commands to be
taken off, which the day before he commanded not to be taken off, that he might
charge them with contempt: His Bills are read, and with many false accusations
are they charged therein; as being men of an ill name, fame, life and
reputation, and that they came into the Court with their Hats on in contempt,
when by constraint they were forced thither, and much more filth, too noisome
to rake up. And to these their Indictments he demands of every one particularly
guilty, or not guilty? thus numbering them amongst transgressors.) A Copy of the
Indictment whereunto to plead, was by one of them demanded, as the Law
required; this he denies; the Prisoner replied, that he was an Englishman, and
had served the Commonwealth of England from the beginning of the Wars, till
Worcester fight (at which he was) and had suffered imprisonment by the enemy,
and the loss of his goods, and was driven from his outward being by the enemy
four years together; and now desired as to all, but the privilege of the Law,
and that if he had come violently into the Court, there seemed to be some
ground for their Allegations, but by constraint he was brought in; Whilst he
was thus speaking, the Judge kept talking to the people to keep them hearing of
him, and then commanded him to be taken away; whom they had away throwing him
before them, and whilst he was away, he fined him 20. marks and imprisonment
till payment, he said, then he thought he should lie long enough, upon which
word the Judge bad them fine him 20. pound, which was done accordingly: Nor was
there a Copy of this Indictment granted to any of them, though every one of
them answered to the demand guilty, or not guilty in meekness, and in the fear
of God to this effect, that they were innocent, and had broken no Law, and that
they were not guilty of the things charged in the Bill, which they denied: And
liberty they desired to speak further and to the Jury to whom he spoke much
whereby to incense them against the Prisoners, and told them the Hat was the
chiefest matter they were to enquire into, but the Prisoners he would not
permit to speak to the Jury, as he would not let them make in their own
defense, commanding the Jailer to keep them silent when they attempted to speak
in their own behalf, and calling for a Gag, he commanded the Jailer to Gag
them; only one of them, (who was last called) being required to answer whether
he came in with his Hat on or no, saying if he might have liberty to speak he
should not only declare freely, and honestly, and with words of soberness,
and in the fear of God, as to his having his Hat on, but also why he did so,
and as to things charged against them, having got a little liberty so to do,
said, I shall declare freely from the light and life of Christ in my heart and
soul, that I came not in with my Hat on in contempt of the Court or of any man
therein, neither had I come there if I had not been brought, and I am free from
any prejudice in the least toward any man, and authority I own, and such as
rule well, ruling for God, according to the righteous Law of God, and are for
the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, such I
honor in my heart, but as for putting off my Hat, it is that which never was
required by any that ruled for God, nor yet of the Heathenish Kings, and
Emperors, as we read of, and in obedience to God I stand, and the same nature
that commands us to put off our Hats, the same commanded to Preach no more in
the name of Jesus, and such commands of men we cannot obey for conscience sake,
and the Heathenish Customs which are contrary to the holy men of God, and to
the righteous Law of God, and to all Scriptures, and also to all natural Laws,
I cannot be subject to; but unto God the higher power, which is of God which
rules over all, but the Customs of the people are vain. Jer. 10.3. But longer
the Judge would not permit him to speak, and called for a Gag as aforesaid, and
he attempting to speak a word or two farther, he and the rest were all forced
with violence from the Bar, and neither suffered to speak for themselves, or to
stay their trial; And the Jury being in confusion, some said they were young
in it, and desired time to consider; but the Judge asking others, and they
saying guilty, he presently commanded them to be fined in 20. marks a piece,
and to lie in Prison till payment, which Judgment (being called, and standing
without the Bar, for he said they needed not to come any further) the Judge
pronounced upon them, but as to the Infringement of any Law, or miscarriage in
word, or deed, in particular, nothing was laid to their charge.

And as for the women who were taken up and imprisoned as aforesaid, against
whom he could not have the advantage of a Hat, he returned to Prison till they
should find sureties of the good behavior, being taken up they and the rest as
they were peaceably traveling the high way to visit the Prisoners, and
imprisoned as has been said, whereby the Law was every way broke upon them,
who ought to have been protected; and justice to have been done them, upon
those who robbed them on the high way, and not to be instead thereof further
oppressed.

Thus has this Judge headed the Justices, and to their Arbitrary Law
aforesaid, and the wicked executions thereof, added another of his own, made
after the act was done, when they came before him to have been righted
according to Law; by which will of his he causes them further to suffer, as
has been said; not so much as enquiring, or asking wherefore they were
imprisoned, or what was the cause of their being brought before him, nor
permitting them to speak for themselves, or of the usages they had received,
but commanding that their Hats should not be taken off, that he might have
occasion against them, then commanding their Hats to be taken off, and
indicting them and denying them a copy of their indictment, not suffering them
to speak in their own defense, or to the Jury, but calling for and threatening
them with a The prisoner ought to have liberty to speak for himself, so is the
Law of the Nation, and all Equity, and the Judge ought to instruct him in the
Law if, he mistake, and not to call for a G^g, to Gag him, when he desires to
speak for himself: O cruel injust^ce, and horrible inhumanity; whetherto does
this age run in a blind, mad pers^cution of the just? was ever the li^e heard
of? a man imprisoned, and brought to his trial, and not permitted to speak for
himself? and for a Judge to call for a Gag, and to order him to be Gagd for
attempting so to speak, and so to proce^d against him, fine, and imprison him.
The Roman Governors cry shame on this. Thou art permitted to speak for thy
self said King Agrippa to Paul: and Felix told him he would hear him when his
accusers were come; and when Turtullus the chi f Priests Orator had accused
him, he beckned to Paul, and p rmitted him to speak for himself, and heard him
concerning the Faith of Christ, and his reason^ng of righteousness, and
judgment to come, and trembled, And Festus heard him also in his defense after
he had been accused, and before the Jews, and King Agrippa confessed after he had
heard him, that he found he had committed nothing worthy of Dea h, though the
Jews (he said) had cried out that he ought not to live any longer, and heard
him speak also of the Faith of Jesus. And the Pharisees said, Does our Law
condemn a Man before it hear him and know what he does? but beyond Heathens,
Romans, Jews, Pharisees; is this blind Generation, speak for himself? Gag him,
where did any of Heathens do so, Englishmen where are you after this rate, O
Monstrous Tyranny, and wicked in^ustice exce^ding Heathens, Pagans, Romans,
Jews and Pharisees.
Gag when they did but attempt to speak and when they yet sought to speak,
causing them to be forced away with violence, and passing upon them not so much
as with the consent of a Jury which he put upon them (for some said they were
young in it, and desired further time to consider) upon an Indictment which had
no offense charged therein that was an offense in Law, but his own will, which
he set up for a Law, and in his will thus fined, and sent to Prison till
payment, and for the good behavior, fourteen men and women, whose names with
seven more, as they were taken up in the high way and apprehended, with the
time when, and place where, and the Justices by whom committed are.

Dorcas Erbury taken 22. 5. month 1656. near Hunington committed by William Put
Justice. Elizabeth Catland taken 22. 5. month 1656. near Hunington committed by
William Put Justice. Anne Harrison 23. 5, month 15. miles off Exon, Mayor Tho.
Saunders Justice. Jane Bland 23. 5, month 15. miles off Exon, Mayor Tho.
Saunders Justice. Henry Godman 24. 5. month near Colhampton. Major Saunders
Justice. William Bailey 29. 5. month Axemister. Thomas Drake Justice. John ^ames
31. 5. month Sandford. Major Saunders Justice. Humphry Smith 1. 6. month
Buterly. committed by a Justice at Tiverton. John Bolton 2. 6. month
Okchampton. Mayor. James Nayler Nicholas Gaincliff 3. North Fotton. Constables.
Thomas Hawkins 2. 6. month Okehampton. Mayor. Samuel Cater 4. 6. month 12.
miles off Exon. Constable. Robert Crabb 4. 6. month 12. miles off Exon.
Constable. Tho. Rollinson 7. 6. month Telcot. Edw. Ascot Justice. John Brown 7.
6. month Apledore. John Champion Justice; Mary Erbury 7. 6. month Apledore.
John Champion Justice; Joan Ingram 7. 6. month Apledore. John Champion Justice;
Luce Field 7. 6. month Bascomb John Bare Justice. Luce Field 7. 6. month Audry
John Bare Justice. Joseph Meader 15. 6. month Lifton. William Morish Justice,
Mary Howgill 15. 6. month Lifton. William Morish Justice,
Where they remain Prisoners to this day, the most of them lying upon Straw
amongst the Fellons, with which hardship, and nastie inconveniences several of
them are fallen sick, and one of them ( viz. Jane Ingram is dead, being taken
at Apledore with John Brown, and Mary Erbury 7. of the 6. month, she was
traveling to visit the Prisoners at Lanceston from Wales, and committed by
John Champion Justice, who beat John Brown with his own hands, and then sent
him and them to Exon Jail where he was laid in Bolts, who has now, as has
Judge Nicholas, and the Justices of the Sessions aforesaid, from whom came the
Order of the Guards, and Major Blackmore, who so earnestly pressed the
execution of that order, as they tendered all their hopes of salvation, etc.
that so it might not be a dead Letter, (which has proved the Death of this
servant of the Lord) but leaving direction, as he blasphemously calls it; and
the Priests that set it on; and those Guards the blood of the innocent, for
which they shall answer before the Judge of all the earth, who judges
righteousness, however they escape the Justice of man, and yet so hardened are
those that notwithstanding her death, after some time of sickness, (which Major
Blackmore was told of before she dyed) and the sickness of others, and the ill
condition outwardly they are in, and their innocence, that they there continue
them Prisoners to this day; even the Sea Monsters draw forth the Breast, and
give suck to their young, but these are become cruel as the Ostrich in the
wilderness, where will ye hide in the day of Visitation, when the Lord shall
make Inquisition for blood and the sufferings of his Saints, where then will ye
flee, and ever will ye leave your glory? Take it to you, it is your portion,
for at the hand of the Lord God blood shall you drink, for ye are worthy? O ye
matchless Persecutors, such a proceeding as this the Records of this Nation
afford not before this day, being in all things wholy contrary to the Law of
England, cruel and unreasonable.

And this is the relief the innocent, who had suffered as aforesaid from and by
the illegal order of Sessions, and the executions thereof, received from this
Judge Nicholas; who not only thus threw the servants of the Lord by heaps
into the Common Jail, but Thomas Boyleston, an^ Thomas Powell, committed by
the Sessions to the Assizes, who being brought before him with those
aforementioned, were dealt vvithall as they were, having been about six
vveeks before in Prison; And Priscilla Cotton, and Katherine Martingdale of
Plymouth being imprisoned (the later for speaking in a Steeple house in
Plymouth the 13. of the 5th. month 1656. after the Priests time, these words,
Priest and people who live in Cains nature, in envy and malice, God regards
not that sacrifice, and the former for being with her not saying a word) and
brought before him, he fined Priscilla, who said not a word, in 50. l. and
imprisonment till payment, and Katherine, who was she that spoke, but it was
after all was ended, as has been said, there to abide till she found sureties
for the good behavior; though in that Steeplehouse they were assaulted by the
Constables and the people, who threw them down almost to the breaking of their
bones, and kept in Plymouth near three weeks, during which time the Mayor
denied friends to visit them, and would not accept the tender of friends body
for body for Priscilla that she might pass home to see her Husband, a
Shopkeeper in the town, who was taken very sick, and return again to Prison,
and when she was sent from thence to Exon Jail, because she staid but till
her servant brought her a pair of shoes, one of the two fellows that the Mayor
sent with them, laid violent hands on her and drew her along the Street, almost
to the murdering of her, and then produced an order of the Mayors for his so
doing; And six times was she brought before this Judge, and alterations made in
the paper of lies exhibited against her, which she denied and said that there
was no truth therein; which the Clerk of the Court altered, and the Judge said
let it be so; and because she took notice of their proceedings and spoke to
them to do that which is right, he caused her to be had away; and at length a
paper was formed against her by way of Indictment, to which he demanded guilty
or not guilty? She said it was a false paper, and because she did not say
guilty or not guilty, but as aforesaid (which was a sufficient Plea in Law
denying the Indictment, for to say the words guilty or not guilty is only
required in cases of Felony or life, by the Law of England) he grew
outrageous, whereupon she saying to him, art thou a man to Judge for God, and
can not rule thy self but art angry? be sober, man, and fear the Lord, and do
justice, and let not passion rule thee, he raged the more, and said, Jailer
have her away, have her away, I cannot endure there is for a certain space of
time, and being now brought they desired to know what it was they were
imprisoned f^r, seeing they laid nothing to their charge, but what was done
then in the Court, having shown no Law to which it was contrary; and one of
them, who had been in prison a quarter of a year askd of the Justice present
that committed him, what he had to say to him, and where was his accusers? but
he answered not a word; And they said in conscience to the Law of God they
could not put off their Hats, And that they were not guilty of affronting the
Magistrate, or the breach of any Law, But because they did not answer guilty,
or not guilty? in those their words (though what is expressed to have been said
(viz.) that they were not guilty of affronting the Magistrate, or of the
breach of any Law; with which crimes that Indictment did charge them, be a
sufficient Plea in Law, as is known to those who understand the Law) for that
the Indictment was not grounded upon the Law, but Will, and to say guilty, or
not guilty to that which is not Law, is inconsistent with liberty, and an
upholding of Will, as, and in the place, and authority of the Law, which they
could not do; They were had away with violence from the Bar to the Prison, and
then brought to the Bar again, and demanded guilty, or not guilty? and were
told that after they had answered guilty, or not guilty, a Law should be
shown them; but they refusing to answer in those words, till a Law was first
shown them, were not permitted to speak, but commanded away again, and one of
them (viz.) Joseph Cole thrown to the ground before the Court by the
under-Gaoler without reproof, and though the Judge said one of them should
speak, when he asked whether they could not have the privilege the Heathen
gave Paul? yet he caused them all to be had away, not suffering any of them to
speak (which the Country people disliked, saying it was truth which the
prisoners spoke,) and so to close prison they were had away again, the Judge
saying he would give judgment against them if they ansvvered not in those
words; And the third time (for three several days were they brought before
the Court, and some of them several times in a day they were brought to the
Bar again, and demanded as before, John Ellice having by that time got a Copy
of the Indictment, t^ld the Judge, that for that Swaunton the Clerk made his
wife pay thirteen shillings, saying that otherwise she should not have it, and
asked the Judge whether that was not extortion? To which he answered, Jailer
speedily have them away, which he did with violence; and because they only
said in answer first, show us a Law that we have broken, before we be demanded
to plead to an Indictment, guilty or not guilty; they were haled away to
prison, without being further permitted to speak, and the Jailer (who
pretended himself sick till he heard of the Judges usage of the prisoners)
being in Court that day struck Joseph Cole over the face with his staff, and
punchd John Ellice by the Arm, which filthiness the people saw and cried out
against. And there were they detained whilst the Jury past upon them, to whom
he said, that they (viz.) the prisoners had broken the Law of God, and of man.
Nor did he cause them to be brought before him when he gave judgment against
them, that they might hear the judgment, and have liberty to move in arrest
thereof as is the Law; But whilst they were in prison fined them in 20. marks a
piece, and imprisonment till payment; who had suffered so long, and with such
cruelty, as has been in part expressed; whom he would not suffer to speak of
their imprisonment, or cruel usage, or in their own defense; nor brought one
accuser; or witness to their faces; nor enquired into their sufferings, or the
cause of them. And this is the justice and relief the innocent at Launceston
received as their brethren and friends had hefore at Exon, from this Judge
Nicholas, whose will he set up for a Law, and because they could not in
Conscience to God, nor in respect to the Law of this N^tion, which judges
arbitrariness, bovv to his Image, or answer to his will, guilty or not
guilty; as the law requires to what it commands, and so could not obey,
and observe his will, equal with, and as the law; his wrath rose, and the
form of his visage was changed, and in the rage of his fury and passion,
prepared a Furnace (a Bill of Indictment) he heated seven times with the fire
of wickedness, into which he cast them bound because of the Hat and without
it (when as Nebuchadnezar an Heathen King cast the three Children into the
fiery furnace bound in their Coats, their Hosen, and their Hats and their other
Garments) which now comes to be spoken to, and weighed in the balance of
law and equity; and to be handled, even this new found monstrous instrument
of cruelty; into, and by which so many of the servants of the living God have
been cast, and continued fined and bound, and under the sufferings of which
this relation (to say nothing of what has been done to others, and in other
parts of this Nation) bears Record, which since the foundation of the earth
was laid, was never heard of before this day; nor such an unexpressible piece
of sottish Irreligion, pride, and tyranny, unto which whosoever does not
conform, be his sufferings what they will, and his innocence, the privilege
of the law of England he must not have, nor be heard, nor have Justice, but be
bound under the Chains of further sufferings, and oppressions because thereof;
Nevertheless this burning fiery flaming furnace can be walked in loosened and
untoucht, whilst the men of the powers of Chaldea, who take up the Children and
cast them bound thereinto, lie slain with the flame of the urgencie of the
command of that will, by which it is made so exceeding hot, as to the sober
and wise in heart will by and by appear, and be made manifest.

The Indictment of the Hat is insufficient in law; in short, thus --

Every Indictment, which has not contained in it an offense, either against
the Common law or Statute law, is void.

But there is not in the Indictment of the Hat any offense either against the
Common law, or any Statute law.

If the matter of the Indictment be said to be an offense against the Common
law, then it must appear so, either amongst the Records of this Nation, or the
judicial determinations, and conclusions of the Chief Courts of Justice.

If against the Statute law, then it must appear so either amongst the
Parliament Roles, or the Printed Books.

But that it is an offense either against the Common law, or Statute law,
there is not so much as the least tittle of law to prove it.

Those Adverbiall Words in the Indictment (viz.) Irreverently, uncivilly,
scornfully, maliciously, contemptuously, (with such like filth, of which it is
full, and not worthy the raking up) are, and have been always taken to be
added only in an Indictment the more fully to describe an offense, and to
aggravate the same; But if the act charged in the Indictment be not an offense
without these words, then these words cannot aggravate, or complete a
description of that which is not.

It is said to be done against good manners, evil communications corrupt good
manners, and whatsoever is more than yea, and nay, comes of evil, says
Christ Jesus the Son of God: and as to good manners, which you say it is
against, produce your Law for such good manners, and let us see what it is, O
sottish Generation.

It is said to be done against the usage and custom of England, It is the
usage and custom of England for men and women to salute one another with a
kiss, and to speak one to another, and to come into Courts with Cloaks and
Coats, and Gloves and Boots, and yet not an offense to leave it undone, or to
come without any of there coverings. Things which are in a man's power to give,
or not to give; and which he is content not to receive from others, when he
gives not the same to others (as such things as these are take them in the best
sense, as they are peculiar to every man, and at his choice whether he will
give them or not) cannot be made criminal, if he does not give them.

And therefore the adding any of these words in the Indictment, does not make
the not putting off the Hat to be an offense.

And as their refusing to put off the Hat, or to be uncovered is not an offense
against the Law of this Commonwealth, so neither is it an offense against the
Law of God, or the Law of Nature.

Not against the law of God, for there is neither precept, or president that
makes it so, but the contrary, as has been and might further be said.

Not against the law of nature, for nature makes no man free or a servant, but
man is either free or a servant, according to the spirit that rules and has
command over him.

And although it be said in the Indictment, that they being enjoined to be
uncovered refused so to do, yet this makes not an offense, for the Justices
sat there only to put the laws in being in execution, and it was not a
contempt to deny to obey their command in a thing, which neither the law of
God, nature, or of this Nation required to be done.

This act of putting off the Hat has been in this Nation always taken to be
an act of civil courtesy, and not of duty, and so the practice of it amongst
people of all sorts high and low, rich and poor, and in all places as well in
the high ways, as elsewhere does manifest, and it is no other in effect than a
mere volentary complement, the occasion whereof was never held to be an offense
till this present time, and that by some few particular persons.

It Is true, that people, for the most part stand bare in all Courts of Justice
in this Nation, but this is more than is required by any law, either of God or
man, for that which is required to be done to Magistrates is honor and
obedience, which is demonstrated by a submission to all lawful commands, and
not by any complement or act of courtesy.

Besides to command any person to put off his Hat is absurd, for that is to use
it contrary to the end for which it was made, which is to cover the head, and
to keep it warm, whereby sickness may be prevented, and not to be held in the
hand, and a wise man begins from the end of a thing, and weighs every thing
as it is there.

Again, whether the condition of a man's nature will give him leave to stand
bare or not, the Magistrate is not the Judge, and therefore it is against
reason, that it should be in his power to command the Hat to be put off; whose
nature cannot bear it from him that requires it, and is the same as to command
him to put off any of his other Garments.

From all which it is clear, that this Indictment, and the proceedings therein
are neither warranted by the law of God, nature or of this Nation, but on the
contrary, are merely arbitrary, against reason, and very absurd, and an
invasion upon the liberties of the Freemen of England.

And by what has been said (for to argue further is not necessary in so
frivolous a thing) the reasonable may see what there is in this business of the
Hat, which has made such a noise and kindled such a fire in this Nation, by
which so many of the innocent servants of the Lord have suffered without mercy,
as has been in part related; The tyrannical wills and lusts of men being in
this trifle set up above all that is called God, or man, or law, or nature, or
reason, or common humanity, and against all these thus violently prosecuted,
and cruelly, put in execution: As they may also see, what is become of this new
sound monstrous Indictment, and of all the abominable filthy lies, and false
accusations contained therein of which it is full; And of this Judge Nicholas
and his will in the Law, according to what has been now said, and also
declared in that Letter aforesaid to the Chief Justice; And of the consciences
of the Jurors who have upon their oaths brought them in guilty, of which they
have made shipwreck, as they have of their own, and the liberties of their
Country. For whereas in the behalf of liberty the law has carefully provided,
that no man shall be in body, life, or goods at the mercy of the arbitrary
breast of one man, who sits as Judge, but shall be tried by twelve
indifferent men of his Peers or equals of the Neighborhood, whose verum
dictum or sentence according to truth, the Judge is to declare, not to make
(which is one of the grand Privileges of the people of the English N^tion,
which distinguishes them free (viz.) that no Law is to be executed upon them
but by some of themselves: yet these Jurors not only come under the Office,
but the will of a Judge, and what he arbitrarily in his will sets up, they pass
upon as the Law of the Nation; and so do overthrow that which was established
by the Law for their safeguard, and defense, against arbitrary actings; and do
set up that, which to prevent, and overthrovve, as one of the sorest Plagues
that can happen to men, the law has given them such power and authority; so
sottishly blind, and outragiously mad are men when the Prince of darkness is
their leader against the truth of God, who that they may destroy those in whom
it lives, they mind not, neither care what becomes of their own consciences,
beings, Freedoms, and liberty; yea even of that which but the day before they
put their lives, and whatever was dear to them in their hands and their whole
Country unto hazard for to preserve, piercing the very life of their own
liberties through the sides of their friends, whom for the sake of the truth of
God, they seek to destroy, whilst they stand in innocence for the liberties
wherein all English men are equally concerned; and throwing away all the Blood,
and treasure, and care, and tuggings, and restless endeavors of the former,
and later ages for many hundreds of years, (we will not change the Laws of
England, has it been about thirty times resolutely declared in this case as
one man in Parliament, and those very words recorded, when the strongest
endeavors of Monarchy have been used there, to change the trials by twelve men
into the course of the Civil Law, which is only by a Judge, the manner of the
other Nations, who never knew the benefit of this excellent privilege) that
they may satisfy the revenge of the enemy of their souls on such, though when
this liberty is lost, and they come to feel on themselves what they now do to
others, they may be willing to give all they have to recover it when (perhaps
it is too late.) And how do this generation show themselves hereby to be led by
the same spirit as were the Jews, who that they might have Jesus the Messiah
(whom they long looked for) crucified, cried out we have no King but Caesar, who
above all Nations hated to be in subjection to any, and Jesus came to make them
free, as it was said of the Messiah, but they chose slavery before him, and
that which they chose, that so they might have a power to Crucify him (for the
Romans had taken away their power of putting any man to death, made an end of
them in that very generation from being a Nation, as he foretold them, as it
had before in the highest judicial power of life and death. O ye people of
England, mind this, and consider this, before it be too late, ye who talk so
much of freedom, of being freeborn English men, of the fundamental Rights,
and liberties of England, and glory in it over all Nations, who in comparison
of you, ye have said, are slaves and vassals to the lusts and wills of their
Lords and Princes, who have (ye and your Forefathers) gone through such
terrible wars, and Seas of Blood to make and preserve your selves so; if you
continue to set against that which has made and kept you so, and whose
presence has brought through your wars for it, who is now come that has been
so much expected to set you free both in body and soul, and to deliver you out
of the hands of all your enemies, that you might serve him without fear in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of your life, by raising up
his own image, his feed, which is come to, and must reign for ever and ever,
which, you every where persecute, and grow mad against; where it does appear,
and bear its witness, and throw away, your choicest outward liberties, the
value of the price aforesaid to effect its sufferings, you may expect the
thing, that you have feared, and abhorred, and fought so much against, to come
upon you in its perfection (viz.) will and power to be your Lord, and your
liberties and freedoms left to you desolate.

And thus much of the indictment of the Hat, and Jurie.

This Judge having proceeded with the Innocent as aforesaid, and sent them back
fined and bound to prison in and by his will, because of the Hat in stead of
doing them Justice. Ann Blackling received the same measure as those friends of
her Sex had by him at Exon, who speaking as she was moved of the Lord to two
priests in the steeple-house yard near Pendennis, was set upon with much rage,
and brought before Capt. Fox, Governor of Pendennis Castle, and by him with
great fury was she abused, and called whore, and witch, and told that she and
that generation (which the World calls Quakers) were not fit to live, scoffing
and raging, and gnashing his teeth, and charged her with oppressing the
Country, who asked wherein? he said in that her horse did eat his grass (the
horse grazing on the bank of the Castle whilst she was there brought, and
stayed till he came, and for that purpose as appears commanded off her horse
against her will, and therefore set to graze that such an occasion might be had
against her, what poor shiftings are here wherewithal to have something to
charge the Innocents, and asked her whether that horse was here is, she answered
it was so. He said he would have him, if the horse were here is. she replied the
horse he could not have justly, for that she had money to free her horse for the
grass he had eaten there in that time, and proffered him money and bed him take
as much of it, as would satisfy him for the grass the horse had eaten, that so
neither she nor her horse might be detayned as transgressors, or as oppressors
of any. Whereupon in much rage he sent for a Constable, she exhorted him to the
fear that should be in the hearts of all them that bear rule, and told him in
wisdom, and fear he should examine, else the Law of God would take hold of
him, and asked him what Law she had transgressed, and whether he did rule by a
Law? and would have spoken further, but he was so full of rage, that he would
not suffer her, and gnashing his teeth told her, that they would stop their
mouths, whom he called Quakers, ere it were long, she told him, those peoples
kingdom was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, and his kingdom was
of this world which was falling, and much more, till in fury he committed her
to the custodye of a Constable, where having been about 8. or 9. days, the
Constable went to him to know what he should do with her, he said it was well
enough to keep her there, till she had eaten, and spent her horse, that so
those people might be wearied out of their coasts: the Constable said she could
neither sell, nor take her horse, and that was not the way, for she had money
enough to redeem it, and so after a time she was set free, the Constable was
ashamed for what was done to her; But as she passed toward Truro, she was
stopped by a watch near Smethwick, and examined, and carried before a Constable
(for they said they were set to take all Quakers) who was in much fury when he
heard of the name of a Quaker, and brought her before Justice Lobb, who talked
with her concerning her faith, and declared against it, and said if she would
not deny her faith, to prison she must go, and so he sent her (after his wife
had also abused her) to Lanceston Goal the 21. of the 4. month 1656. with a
warrant filled with lies, as that she was a wanderer, where she was used by the
Jailer in that cruelty as has been in part expressed and being brought before
this Court, as she began to speak for her self, the Goalers wife stopped her
mouth, violently with her hands, and without any more ado the Court said take
her away, and being brought again to the Bar, commanded to have her away
without permitting her to speak for her self, though they sent for her, and
being had away to prison; sentenced her to lie there till she found sureties
for the good behavior, who so unjustly had been dealt withal; and cruelly had
suffered, having not offended so much as the shadow, or the least tittle of any
Law, nor had any accuser, nor accusation produced against her, nor had she
offended the will of the Hat; for that of her being a woman could not be
sought which to cause the men further to suffer, who had so much suffered
wrongfully before, and ought to have had Justice done them, was sought after
as an occasion.

But as for George Fox, Edw. Piot, and Will. Salt, and Benjamin M^inard, they
were not called by the Judge, or the Court, but the Judge caused the Goalers
petition aforesaid of his invented lies to be read against them, (viz.) that
they would hang him at his door, toss his children on spears, and tread his
wife under feet, and said, they should be brought forth to answer it, but he
never sent for them, nor examined them concerning it, whereby the truth might
be manifested, but ordered the Goalers wife to keep them closer, and confined
them for the time to come to the Castle, and whilst he should be in the Town
close prisoners, and she moved him to order them to be put into Doomsdale,
pretending that without such an order, they could not confine them to the
Castle, because of the security Capt. Bradon had given for their true
imprisonment; its said, he asked how the Jailer durst to take security for
them, and commanded they should be more strictly looked to, and took notice of a
complaint of Peter Killegrews, who is called a Knight (he was the Post between
the late King, and Parliament, in times of treaties) that he met them about two
miles from the Town, when it was about one, thereby strengthening their bonds,
and encouraging cruelty upon them, in stead of hearing their cause and
executing judgment for them, who had so suffered as has been said; whose
sufferings as they had been made very heavy by the Jailer, and the Recorder,
and the Mayor, as has been said, so now all endeavors were used, to keep them
from being made known to the Judge. And therefore Ann Downer, and Grace Burgis
standing on the first day of the week in the entry of the House, where the
Judge lodged (having leave from the people thereof so to do) to deliver him
papers from the prisoners, of the ground of their imprisonment; and their
sufferings, as he should come forth, were at the command of the Mayor, by his
officers carried to the dark house, and kept-there till the evening, and thus
much concerning this Judge, and his Justice, and his Assizes, and the usages of
the Innocent, and the condition wherein they were cast, and left, by him and
them.

Whilst these things were in hand, and these cruelties breathed forth, and
exercised on the oppressed, General Disborow came to Lanceston, who the third
day of the week in the afternoon being at a large house in the Town, with the
Sheriff and Justices, sent for Edward Pyot, and William Salt, and enquired of
them concerning the abuses they had received from the Jailer, and as they gave
them, took them particularly in writing with his own hand; and then examined
the Jailer, as to every particular, and took his answer, and heard the reply
made thereunto by the prisoners, till he had gone over all; then the General
heard the Goalers complaint against them, mentioned in his petition aforesaid,
which had gone about to Sessions and Assizes to cover his cruelty toward
them; by inventing words of cruelty, as if spoken by them, and then bringing
what he had so invented in charge upon them: And asked the Jailer whether any
heard the words besides himself, He ansvvered. yes, and named four of his
Companions, who were the prisoners greatest enemies, three of these the
General sent for, and examined them, whilst the prisoners were withdrawn, (the
fourth was the under-Goaler, who had sworn to part of it at Sessions, but by
the Goalers wife was contradicted, as to what he had sworn, when he returned,)
these three denied that ever they heard any such words, as the Jailer had
mentioned of the prisoners in his petition. He demanded what words they had
heard from them to the Jailer, and from the Jailer to them? they answered, that
they had heard the Jailer call the prisoners rogues, and the ptisoners call him
drunken-beast, and swine, which passages the General told the prisoners, after
he had caused them to be called in again, and said such as would be drunk were
beasts, and swine, and worse, and therefore might well be called so; and all
this was before the Sheriff, Justices, and many people of outward quality, and
others of the Country; and the Jailer he sharply rebuked, and reproved for his
abuse to the prisoners, and spoke civily of them to the Justices, and people,
that they were not to be abused, and of his knowledge of some of them in
particular: and vindicated they were openly from all the lies, and slanders
cast upon them, and the master did he sift and examine to the bottom thoroughly,
and with impartiality, wherein he did nobly, according to Justice, and said,
God forbid, but they should have their meetings in peace, and quietness, for he
was not against them, nor should such be molested who met together to pray to
God, and to edify one another: And the Justices excused themselves before the
General, as to what the Jailer had said of them, they should say against the
prisoners as aforesaid at the Sessions at Truro, and acknowledged the prisoners
had been abused by the Jailer, and so had they by his belying of them, all of
them, except Capt. Fox, Richard Lobb, and Thomas Gewen; denying what he had
said of them as aforesaid: And when the prisoners answered it were much if they
should be so wicked, and the reason why they did not then reprove the Jailer,
might be in regard the representation of their sufferings might not come to
their view, because Thomas Gewen receiving it, grasp't it up together and said
he would make mum of it, the General asked him whether that were so, and what
he meant by mum? He said he understood it was a Quakers letter, and so not to
be taken notice of, (so that the sufferings of the people, whom he calls
Quakers, whom he divides from the Nation, and the protection of the Law,
which is contrary to the Law and Government of the Nation, be they what they
will, and their innocence, are not to be taken notice of, but to be laughed at
on the Bench as he did, when being Judge of the Court, he had added to their
oppressions contrary to Law as has been said, would he be content that such
measure should be measured to him, and the people whom he ovvns? This is
Thomas Gewen Recorder of Lanceston, and his justice.) And the General owned
his letter sent in April before to the Jailer, to use the prisoners civily,
which they said was a counterfeit, and he gave the Jailer a charge not to
abuse them, and shortly after ordered him to be turned out of his place: This
just and even carriage of things by the General changed the face of Justices,
Town, and Country, so that even the enemies of the prisoners commended his
searching out the matter, and doing the prisoners Justice, and much altered
was it, from what it was but even then, by reason of the former proceedings,
and of the Judge at the Assizes toward the prisoners, who from that time
found from them quietness and civil usage: A wise King scatters the
wicked, and brings the wheel over them, says Solomon, by the Spirit of
the Lord, Prove. 20.26.

And in the close of that day the General propounded to them the liberties of
all the prisoners, upon condition if they would repair every one to their
Homes, if the Lord permitted, to which they then answered to this purpose, that
they stood in the will of God therein to be guided by his power, he bad them
consider of it till the next morning, and so they departed.

The next day an answer in writing was sent and delivered to General Disborow
from the prisoners to that his proposition, as follows.

Friend,
WE which be in the power of God, the ruler of all, the upholder of all things,
and dwell in his power, to it must be obedient, which brings us to stand out of
all men's wills not limited. Now in case to say we will, if the Lord permit, in
case to buy, and sell and get gain, which if the intent be so to do, may be
deceit, but the case standing in the power to do the will of God, standing in
the power to do his will, and to stand out of man's will, if he propound, he
shall have his liberty if he will say he will go to his outward Being, if the
Lord permit, if it be the will of God, and because he cannot say those words
for such a cause, shall not have his liberty, when he knows that the will of
God is that he must go to, and speak at some other place: so that here he
cannot speak these words true, for to say we will go to our outward habitation,
if it be according to the will of God, when we know it is the will of God
otherwise, now we cannot speak so true, and clearly, neither can a man say so
to him, that requires it of him, who stands in the power, which knows the
power of God, which leads him according to Gods will, and leads him to
another place than that which is called his outward Home: But the Son of God
has no where to lay his head, who came to do the will of God, who does the
will of God: the Apostles and many of the followers of Christ had no certain
dwelling place, now if these should have been restrained, because they would
not say they would go to that which the world calls their outward homes, if it
were the will of God, to satisfy that mind to speak these words, and they know
it is the will of God they should not, and they could not do the will of God
in doing so; Abram could not do the will of God, but in going from his native,
and who are of faith are of Abraham, of whom Christ came according to the
flesh. Now you may allege and say, this is to let all loose, and liberty to
idleness, no, such as be in the power of God do the will of God, come to
receive his wisdom by which all his creatures were created, by which to use
them to his glory. This we shall say, who are moved of the Lord God of glory,
and power to go to our outward beings, and habitations, such may of us go to
our outward Beings, and Homes to be diligent in serving the Lord God in their
generation, diligently serving him in life, and doctrine, in manners and
conversation in all things: And who are moved of the Lord to go to any other
place which stands in his will, who are moved by the power of the Lord, which
comprehends all things, which is not to be limited, we shall do his will, which
we are commanded to do. So the Lord God open your understandings that you may
now see this great power of the Lord, which is now manifesting among his
children in this his day, that you may not withstand it. Our friends that are
come to the power of God to him, and know him by whom the World was made, by
whom all things were created, that were created, and there was not any thing
made that was made, but what was made by him, and to him, and by him who is the
power of God, who does enlighten every one that comes into the world. Now our
friends being come to this light, which comes from Christ, and received power
from him by whom all things were created, who has all power both in Heaven and
Earth, given to him who is the wisdom of God, we having received wisdom,
and power from him, that with which the Lord does give us to know, how to use,
and order the creatures, to the glory of him, who is the creator of all things,
so our friends are here taught of the Lord to be diligent serving him, who
comes into the life that the Scriptures were given forth from, and of this we
in all your consciences have a witness, so if thou open the prison door, we
shall not stay there, if thou send a free liberate, we shall not stay in
prison, if thou will set us free, for Israel is to go out free, whose freedom
is purchased by the power of God, and the blood of Jesus, but going out of the
power of God, he loses his freedom.

Geo: Fox, and the rest who are sufferers for the truths sake in Lanceston
Goal.


To these their answers the prisoners heard nothing till the next morning by
Capt: Braddon, who sending for some of them a little after General Disborow was
departed the town, signified, if they would engage as aforesaid, and pay Fees,
they might have a let pass to depart to their homes, but thereunto they could
not consent, and so returned to prison.

The same proposition of liberty upon engaging to go to their several homes,
if the Lord permit, was sent to the prisoners at Exon, in answer whereunto they
wrote General Disborow, as follows.

We came into these parts standing in the will and council of the Lord, and it
is our freedom where ever we are to stand in that council, and if thou do
set us at liberty in the outward, which ought to be done, we stand in the
Council of our God, if he lead us to our outward habitations, we are free to
go, but if the Lord move any of us else where, we dare not to be disobedient,
for he is a consuming fire to those that are rebellious, and we standing in the
will, and council of the Lord must follow the Lamb whether he goes.

And the prisoners of Lanceston signified in writing to Coll: Bennet, the
unresonableness of demanding of them to take a pass upon necessity, when no
such thing is required of those who have been charged with murder and felony,
or any such thing found to be laid upon the Apostles in their travelings to
preach Jesus Christ, nor ought any such thing to be exacted of the Innocent,
for whom the Law is not made, but for the transgressor, and also of paying
Fees, who had been so long detayned in prison without being convicted of the
breach of any Law of the Nation, who indeed no Law had transgressed, especialy
to such a jailer under whom they had so suffered as aforesaid, as they had
given in their answer to the proposition of liberty upon engaging to go to
their respective homes, if the Lord permit.

But little heard they in answer thereunto till the 29. of the 6. month, at
which time Colonel Bennet came to the town, and sent for Edward Pyott, and
William Salt, and reasoned with them concerning the proposition, and let pass,
but obtaining nothing from them therein, but according to what they had wrote,
unto which they stood unalterable, and that if they lay there seven years, at
the end thereof, they should find them the same men, he friendly parted from
them, and some time after he and Capt. Braddon sent for Edward Pyot, and
William Salt, and freed them and the rest of the prisoners, without condition
of going to their homes, or let pass, or any other thing whatsoever, saying
that they would not press them to any engagement, which might be any offense to
that of God in their conscience.

Notwithstanding the jailer (though he was present when the Justices thus freed
the prisoners without consideration of Fees, or otherwise, for Fees they had in
their papers denied to pay) did not set them at liberty, and being demanded by
them the reason, he said, they were free by the Justices order, but he detayned
them for their Fees; and so now they became the Goalers prisoners, as they had
been before P. Ceelies, and the chief Justice Glyn's, who herein acted contrary
to the Protectors Government, notstithstanding they put it under his name, and
authority.

Of this they sent Colonel Bennet information, but nothing in answer they
received from him, till the 8. of the 7. month, the next morning after which
being the 9. of the 7. month, he came to Lanceston, and set them at liberty
freely, without any condition whatsoever. And so as innocently they came out of
prison, as innocently they were put in.

After they were thus set at liberty free from any obligation, as they were
cast into prison free of any offense, and during the time of their being
detayned there free of any crime proved against them, William Salt, one of the
late aforesaid prisoners, went to Peter Ceelie, and desired of him to restore
the papers, and the Book against Popery (called by him scandalous) which he
took from them, when he apprehended them, seeing nothing contained in them, as
the transgression of any Law was proved against them, P. Ceely answered he had
delivered them to General Disborow, and afterward said to Edw. Pyot, he had
delivered them to the Judge, see whether any truth be in this man (or any
credit to be given to what he said) and gave W. Salt high language, and said,
he would know where he had been, and whether he came thither without a pass?
The next day, being the first day of the week as W. Salt was walking alone
waiting on the Lord, P. Ceely, and Michael Vivian met him, as they were passing
to the high place to worship, in the Parrish called Guithion; and these very
much urged him to come to their assembly, which P. Ceelie called the Communion
of Saints, urging it again, and again, and asked him why he would walk there in
the field, and not come to their meeting place, saying he might come, and hear,
and then judge, he replied he stood not in their wills, but if it were the will
of the Lord to have him come thither, he should do it. And afterward being
moved of the Lord he went, and when the Priest, one Tregosse a youth, one of P.
Ceelies sisters sons (as is said) had done reading his notes, papers, and other
services, shaking his gold ring on his finger, and his broad cuffes on his
hands, like a lad acting in a stage play, W. Salt said, he came not there to
disturb them, but seeing they had done speaking, he had a few words to speak
unto them, whereupon P. Ceelie, (who had said to him, come, hear, and judge as
aforesaid) was offended, and his countenance fell, and became pale, and called
for a Constable to take him away, which was forthwith done, and then P. Ceely
passed a^ong with the young Priest, saying, such things were not to be
suffered, though what was done was against no Law, and was but what himself had
said, and urged him unto; and came directly to the house where he had set up
his horse, where he framed a warrant to send him to prison without any
examination, which when he had written, he gave to the Constable, requiring him
to take W. Salt into custody, bidding him if he wanted money to sell W. Salts
horse to pay the charges, and to W. Salt he said, he would warrant he now might
lie long enough in prison, (who after he had spoken to him to come there, to do
as has been said, with his other friends before mentioned, had layne two
hundred, thirty and five days before in prison upon occasion of his
commitment, and under the cruel sufferings, from which he was but then at
liberty, as has been said) and so went his way, and W. Salt was conveyed to
Lanceston, and delivered to the Jailer there in custody, with a warrant, a copy
whereof is as follows.

Cornwall.
To the Keeper of the Goal at Lanceston, or his lawful deputy. These,
I Send you here withal the body of W. Salt late of London, who came this day
into the Congregation at Guithen, and there irreverently demeaned himself, in
time of prayer keeping his Hat on, and at close of the exercise, before the
Minister came out of his pulpit, vilified him, and disturbed the Congregation,
contrary to the command of God, and Law of this Nation. These are therefore in
the name of his Highness the Lord Protector, to will and command you, that you
take him into custody, and him safely to keep until you he be thence delivered
by due course of Law, and hereof fail you not as you will answer the contrary
at your utmost peril.

Given under my hand and Seal this 14. day of September 1656. P. Ceely.


Into the Congregation. W. Salt came, being moved of the Lord, to which Pet.
Ceely, and his companion often urged him, as has been said, and now charge
him with so doing.

There he stood in the reverence and fear of the Lord God, who regards not the
prayers of the wicked, which are an abomination unto him, nor can his saints,
who pray to him in spirit, and worship him in spirit, bow to such, and modestly
and mildly did he there demean himself.

Vilify the vain Lad whom he calls a Minister he did not, nor interrupt him
(as they call it) but heard with silence, though he told the people a story of
a Mule clothed in a Lions skin, and then would tell them the Moral of it,
when he was the Lion in the mules skin, as it afterward appeared. The truth he
spoke, and the speaking of truth is not vilifying. He exhorted the people to
mind Christ the Bishop of their souls, that him alone might be their teacher,
where they would find rest to their souls, and told them that he that made
them, was come to teach them, and those who come hither, need not go forth.
This is what he said, and this it seems is vilifying in P. Ceelies account, as
he called the paper given forth by G. F. directing people to the way to
Salvation by Jesus Christ, only in the words of the Scriptures of truth,
mentioned in the beginning of this treatise, sinful, and wicked, and tending
to the disturbance of the peace, and therefore committed them, under which they
have suffered without mercy, as has been expressed, so let him who reads and
understands, see what a profane person, and unheard of blasphemer is this P.
Ceely, and when W. Salt asked P. Ceely, whether that was to vilify to bid
people turn to the light, and so to Christ the true shepherd, from all the
false Prophets, and blind guides, P. Ceely bad the people take notice. And in
his warrant he ought to have expressed wherein he did vilify him, in which he
is silent.

And speak he did not till the young Priest was gone out of his pulpit; so here
is another lie under his hand and Seal.

Nor did he disturb the Congregation, for the people were very attentive to
hear until P. Ceely stirred them up to hale him out, so P. Ceely was the
peace-breaker, as he has shown himself in this particular again a liar, and
one who in this whole action, and warrant has acted contrary to the command of
God, and the Law of this Nation, though he charge W. Salt. with both, which
are two lies more.

For, first, in obedience to the movings of the Lord he came thither; and at
his command spoke in the words of soberness, and truth as has been said: And
the Apostle says, ye may all Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and
all may be comforted; and if any thing be revealed to another that stands by,
let the first, hold his peace, 1 Cor. 14.30.31. but P. Ceely in stopping W.
Salts mouth, as he was speaking something, which to him was revealed, and which
to speak God had commanded him, and calling for a Constable to take him away,
and taking him away, and committing him to prison for so speaking, has acted
against the command of God, and persecuted him who the command of God obeyed,
for being obedient thereu^to: as he has also in affirming so many lies in his
warrant, as has been instanced, there being not one true sentence therein, nor
were the things true which are alleged therein, are they matter in Law
wherefore to imprison. Now God ordains his arrows against the PERSECUTORS,
Psalm. 7.13. and the Devil is the father of lies, who is a liar from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, and the liar is for the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, there to be tormented with the Devil and his
Angels.

And for the Law of the Land, there is not the least tittle thereof that W.
Salt has offended, no not Queen Mary's, which was made to defend the Mass
Priests, and Jesuits in time of their service, for that guards such, but
whilst the Priests are speaking, and declaring; But on the contrary the
Government Art. 37. says, such shall be not restrained from, but shall be
protected in the profession of their faith, and exercise of their Religion, who
profess faith in God by Jesus Christ; and that all may prophecy one by one,
and if any thing be revealed to another that stands by, let the first hold his
peace, is a true profession of the true faith, and exercise of the true
Religion, which the Saints professed and exercised on record in the Scripture,
and Paul commanded it, who was an Apostle of Jesus Christ not by man, nor the
will of man, which P. Ceely ^ath broken, as he has the other Laws of the
Nation, which have so carefully provided for the preservation of a man's
innocence, and the defense of his liberty. As he has outstripped the Jews, who
said to Paul and his Companions, men and Brethren, if ye have a word of
exhortation to the people, say on, Acts 13.15.16. and all manner of honesty,
and justice, in urging a man to go to the assembly to hear, and then judge, and
when he has heard patiently till all was ended, and every one silent, then
speaking a few words of soberness, and truth, to stir up the people to hale him
out, who before attentively heard him, to call to the Constable to take him
away, to call such words of truth vilifying, to say such things were not to be
suffered, to send him to prison, with a warrant filled with lies, and false
accusations, as there is non sense in that passage (until you he be thence
delivered) to bid the Constable to sell his horse to bear the charge; And
insultingly to tell him when he had done all this, that he would warrant, he
might now lie long enough in prison, who by reason of him had stayed 235. days
in prison a little before, as has been aforesaid.

This is P. Ceely, and his communion of Saints, this is he, whose unparalleld
wickedness is the burden of this relation, with whom it begins, with whom it
ends; whose iniquity has no end, whose rage has no bound, whose cruel^y is
without mercy; and whose inhumanity is without natural affection; who is
envious, malicious, proud, fiery, a boaster, a blasphemer, a filthy speaker, a
curser, a scoffer, a reviler, a railer, a liar, a persecutor, an oppressor, a
truce-breaker, a false accuser, a despiser of those that are good, a traitor,
heady, high-minded, cruel, implacable, unreasonable; whose heart is as hard as
the nether millstone, whose conscience is seared as with an hot Iron, whose
forehead is as Brass, and flint, and whose neck as of Iron sinnews, impudent,
hard hear^ed, who makes the last days perilous, who has filled up a large
measure of iniquity, as this very relation bears witness, one who has sold
himself to commit wickedness, who after the long, illegal, cruel, barbarous,
monstrous, causelesss, unheard of sufferings of the innocent, occasioned by
him, as has been said, and much more which is past over in silence, contrary
to the Law of God, and of man, civil and natural, to modesty, justice,
reason, honesty, and all humanity, as one not satiated therewith, still
ravening after the Blood of the Innocent, cast's W. Salt into the same prison
again, within 6. days after his release, from under the hand of his merciless
cruelty, and insatiable bloodiness, with such treachery, fa^shood, and
ungodliness, as has been in part expressed, thus treasuring up unto himself,
after the hardness, and impenitency of his heart, wrath unto the day of wrath,
and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of God; which shall destroy the
adversary, and render unto him, according to his deeds.

And all this is but part of what the Innocent servants of the Lord have
suffered in the Goal of Lanceston, in the County of Cornwall, and do yet
suffer in the Goal of Exon in the County of Devon, where they are still
continued, though one of them be lately, Jane Ingram committed by John Champion
Justice, so called, and recommitted by Judge N^cholas, one of the Fruits of the
Order for the Guards, for which the Justice of the righteous God they must
answer.
dead, and diverse others of them sick, with the poisonous nastiness of that
filthy place, where they were cast in heaps, together in and amongst the
fellons and murderers, first by the Justices, then by Judge Nicholas. And if
any man ask wherefore is all this? It is answered, for none other cause, then
for giving forth a paper in compassion to the ignorant, at the movings of the
Lord, stirring them up to prise their time, and showing them the way to
salvation in the words of the Scriptures of truth, as the paper it self, at
large in the beginning of this relation manifests, and for going to visit the
Innocent thus, and for this cause cast into prison, and under such cruel
sufferings: is this England? are these the people that have gone through such
wars, which have made the world to ring for liberty of conscience? Who talk so
much of Christ, and his glorious Gospel, and yet thus persecute the life of
the Son of God, now made manifest?

Not that our lives are in these things, is this written, but that every thing
may be shown, and laid in its own place.

But this is not all yet, this generation have yet to fill up the measure of
their iniquity in this their hour, and the powers of darkness; they must yet
show themselves to be more blind, and bru^tish, cruel, and unreasonable than
the generations whom they have succeeded, in persecuting of the just; and to be
such as are as unsatiable as hell, whom the sufferings and blood of the
Innocent does not suffice, or make them once to say it is enough; they must
make it to appear that one and the same spirit of ravening and cruelty is in,
and acts through the diversities of painted forms of Godliness, without the
power, and the glorious outsides of profession without the life, as is in, and
acts through the outwardly more dark; and filthy part of the world, against the
truth of the living God, where it is made manifest; and that they, and them all
are of the same stock lineage, and kindred, having all one Father, him who
abode not in the truth, the Devil, the murderous persecutor of the seed of God
throughout all ages from the beginning. Therefore the wisdom of God sent
again some of his Innocent servants, who had long and sorely suffered in, and
were released out of the Goal at Lanceston, as has been said, into that
County of Cornwall, to try and prove this generation further, and to bring
forth to the light what had layn hid in the bottom of the hearts of some under
the cover, and show of friendship, and sense of their sufferings. Which will
appear when that which follows of the apprehension, and imprisonment of Joseph
Coal, one of the late prisoners aforesaid by P. Ceely, and the return of him,
and W. Salt from the Sessions at Bodmin prisoners to Lanceston by Colonel
Bennet aforesaid, who sat Judge of the Court, and the carriage of Coll. Bennet
toward them in the Court, and the passages there now to be rehearsed, as the
close of this relation; being added to what has been but now said of the
imprisonment of W. Salt. by P. Ceely, shall together be considered with
moderation, and weighed in judgment.

Joseph Coal having been (after his imprisonment aforesaid) to visit some
friends in Cornwall, as he was traveling peaceably on the way about the 30.
of the 7. month, Peter Ceely met him, who envying to see him at liberty, and
free of adversity and bonds, out of his unsatiable cruelty, and murderous
malice, for no other cause than for seeing of him travel quietly on the
high-vvay, took him up, and sent him from Constable to Constable to the cruel
Goal at Lanceston, from whence he had been but a fevv days before delivered,
with a vvarrant as follovveth.

Cornwall.
To the Keeper of the Goal at Lanceston, or to his lavvfull Deputy.
I Send you herewithall the body of Joseph Coal late of Redding Clothier, who
was lately a prisoner in your keeping for misdemeanor, I have at this instant
taken him upon the highway, and cannot show that he is enlarged from his
restraint by due course of Law, but contrariwise straggling up, and down the
Country, having no calling, and refusing to return to the place of his
habitation, and spreads several papers up and down to the disturbance of the
people, begetting unlawful assemblies, these are therefore in the name of his
Highness the Lord Protector to require you to take him into your custody, there
to remain until he be thence delivered by due course of Law. Hereof fail you
not at your perils, given under my hand and soul at Camburne this 30. September
1656.

P. Ceely.
From Constable to Constable until he be delivered unto the keeper of the
Goal as above mentioned.




For misdemeanor he was not a prisoner, but for going to Anthony Nichols
Justice, and soberly desiring to know of him whether the putting of his friend
James Mines, whom he came to visit; into Doomsdale, and the barbarous usage he
there sustained was by his order, supposing it rather to be the Goalers
tyranny, than his command, who had sent him thither a prisoner as aforesaid,
who therefore committed him to the same Goal also, where the Jailer cast him
into the same den, and with the same barbarous usage entreated him as has been
said, out of which he and his friend had been but a few days before delivered.
-- Nor did he straggle up and down the Country, he was in his way, the
highway, upon his occasions, which he well understood. -- A calling he has
lawful and good, and in the very beginning of this thy warrant thou have said
him to be a Clothier, and yet do not blush (in the same breath as it were) to
say, having no calling, and so both to affirm agd deny one and the same thing
under thy hand and seal in three or four lines compass. -- Refuse to return to
the place of his habitation he did not. Hi^ habitation is in God, who fills
all things, whose is the Earth, and the fullness thereof, their he was in his
habitation, when he saw thee roving up and down in thy imaginations, compassing
the Earth, having no habitation; Cain the vagabond, the fugitive, who built a
City. In his habitation he was, in England his Country, his habitation, in any
part of which to reside, or be, he is borne free; And to his particular outward
being in England, when the Lord-requires him thither, who commanded him to go
forth from thence into these parts, its like he shall return, which he refused
not to thee to do, though in thy time and will, and at thy demand who have no
authority so to require him he might, and does refuse to return thither. -- Nor
did he spread several papers tending to the disturbance of the people, (thy
lying invention was here so checked, that thou could not extend it to the
disturbance of the peace, the true disturbing of which, according as the Law
declares it, not of the people, is matter of commitment in Law.) Thou art here
charged to produce one, and to make one unlawful assembly occasioned by him to
appear, who thou do charge with begetting unlawful assemblies. And when
these half dozen of thy lies are returned to thy self from whence they came,
(for when thou speakst a lie thou speak of thy self,) and thy lying pretense
of his not being able to show that he was enlarged from his restrai^t by due
course of Law (when as contrary to Law he was imprisoned, and against the Law
these barbarously used, and by authority was delivered without promise,
engagement, set pass, Fees, or any other condition whatsoever, of which thou
vvast not ignorant, and because thereof vvast grieved) is sent back into thy
bosom; from whence it preceeded; which makes up a seventh, there remains in
thy vvarrant, as the cause of his commitment, this particular only, (viz.) I
have at this instant taken him on the highway And this is the great crime, and
the heinous offense, for which thou do chain him again under bonds in the
very place, and under the same inhumane Jailer, where and under whom he had,
without a cause, so long and so cruelly suffered. And so have thou m^nifested
thy self herein, to be a merciless, blood-thirsty, insatiable tyrant, in this,
as in thy lies, and thy other wickedness mentioned in this relation, thou
appearest to be one who art impudent, and hardened in iniquity, without shame,
or blushing, having thy conscience seared past feeling, sealed up, and even
ripe for judgment, which will cut thee off ere long, and divide thee thy
portion with Hipocrites and Sinners; Therefore mind and take warning before it
be too late. For in the day of thy calamity, when the righteous judgments of
God shall take hold on thee, this shallt thou remember, that thou have been
warned, and that the long suffering of the Lord toward thee has been great,
which thou have despised, and his visitation of love, and silent shall thou be
before thy Judge, When these things, shall rise up in thee a worm that never
dies, and a fire that shall never go out; Therefore, whilst thou have yet
time, consider, and lay it to heart, least thou say time is past, and thou
perish in thine iniquities; From the Lord God thou art warned, whose Witness
shall I be for him in the day he shall reward thee according to thy works.

Shortly after this commitment was the general Quarter Sessions of the peace
for that County held at Bodmin, whither W. Salt (though the Jailer had denied
his carrying him thither for ten pounds) and Joseph Coal were brought, whom to
abuse being there, P. Ceely (as the men said themselves) sent Keale (who was
the cause of the apprehension of G. Fox, E. Pyot, and W. Salt, as has been
said) and two other rude fellows, who coming into the room where the Prisoners
were the night before their trial, offered them many incivilities and abuses,
which occasioned the following Representation to be drawn by them, and for the
Court, that thereof they might not be ignorant.

Bodmin, the 9. day of the 8. month 1656..
To the hands of Colonel Bennet, and the rest of the Justices, at their
Sessions at Bodmin.
Friend, and Friends,
IT is recorded in the Scriptures of truth, that Paul, a servant of the Lord
Jesus Christ, an Hebrew of the Hebrews, of the Tribe of Benjamin, when he was a
Prisoner under the Romans, that he was suffered to dwell by himself, and he
dwelt in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him, preaching
the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things that concerned the Lord Jesus
Christ with all confidence, no man forbidding him. And we do not read that
liberty of conscience was one of the Fundamentals of the Roman Government, or
that they had made provision by a Law for all that professed faith in God by
Jesus Christ, to be protected, though they were different from the doctrine,
discipline, and worship, as was then in being, and not to be compelled
thereunto, but won by sound doctrine, and the example of a good conversation,
as the Government of this Nation has provided, as in the 36. and 37. Articles
of the Instrument of Government. Neither do we read, that liberty of
conscience was held forth by them to be a natural right, that every man might
claim: Yet they that did not make this provision, suffered the thing; for all
that would come unto Paul, he spoke boldly the things concerning the Kingdom
of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, no man forbidding him; which was far from
sending men to abuse him, or make a sport of him, or asking people that came to
visit him, whence they were, or what they would have there, or why they did not
get them about their business, or why come they there to be seduced, as was
done to us the last night, who are Prisoners for the eternal truth, as Paul
was, and stand witnesses for the Lord in our measures, as he did; yet we in our
own Nation being Prisoners, who were causelessly cast into Prison without the
transgression of any Law, and here to be brought in order to our trial, to hear
what any man has to accuse us of, and in the face of the Authority of this
County, even while you were sitting, as we understand, to have three men come
into our chamber to disturb us, under a pretense to search for papers, asking
where the seditious papers were, and charging us of sedition and blasphemy, and
having designs, and having a plot in hand, calling us Jesuits, using other
reproachful words; and when we asked for their Warrant, or by what authority
they came in to disturb us, one of them, named James Sparnell, put his hand on
his sword, and said, that was his Warrant; another of them was Keale, a Trooper
under P. Ceely, who formerly falsely accused W. Salt unto him; and the third was
one Davis, an Exciseman, who it seems came along with them to make sport,
pointing at one, and asking whether he was not brought up at the University,
clapping Sparnell on the shoulder, setting him on to look after papers; whom we
asked, whether he came to make sport, who said, yes, and stood mocking us,
saying, yea, yea. And being unsatisfied, seeing their disorder, we pressed to
know their authority, and they told us at length, that Major Ceely had sent
them: So all may see here, what the sound doctrine is, and the example of a
good conversation, that Peter Ceely has to win others to be of his Religion,
and what are the weapons he uses to defend his Religion. Now, Friends, you who
are in place to ease the heavy burdens, and to take off every yoke, and to let
the oppressed go free, and to restrain the rage of them who smite with the fist
of wickedness; We lay these things upon you, for you to do us justice, that we
may not be made a prey upon by men in their wills, and that the cause for which
we are kept in restraint, and for which we at present suffer thus, may come to
a hearing, according to the right and liberty of Englishmen, which is after
your own Law, and not for any one man to be the Accuser, Judge, and Condemner
all at once, contrary to Law. From them who are now Prisoners for the Truth,
that stand Witnesses for the righteous God, against all deceit, ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of man whatsoever.

W. Salt. Joseph Coal.


On that day, being the last day of their Sessions, were they called into the
Court, Colonel Bennet sitting Judge, (who sent his man to the Jailer, as they
were coming into the Court, to bid the Jailer take off their hats.) Being
brought before the Bench, no Accuser came against them, nor Accusation, nor was
any thing found against them, nor did P. Ceely their Persecutor, who had
imprisoned them, appear, being (as was said) on his departure out of Town.
Nevertheless Colonel Bennet caused their Warrants of Commitment to be read, and
sought to pick what he could out of them against the Prisoners; who called for
their Accusers, but none appeared; and asked W. Salt what he had to say to
this, and what he had to say to the other thing contained in the Warrant: He
told him, he denied it all, and that there was not one true thing in it. Which
was so manifest, that even Justice Lance confessed openly in the Court, when he
had heard that their service was over at the Steeple-house, before W. Salt
spoke, and that W. Salt was invited into the Congregation, that he did believe
he had no intention to disturb them.

The Prisoners, after all that was or could be said against them, appearing
innocent men, having neither Accuser produced against them, nor any thing
mentioned in the Warrants of their commitment made to stick on them, or any
other transgression of the Law, might well have expected to have been set at
liberty, as is the Law, especially Colonel Bennet being Judge of the Court, who
had dis-owned their former sufferings, and seemed very sensible thereof, and
endeavored to make General Disborow the same, and had appeared in the behalf
of their liberty; by whose hand, and Captain Braddons, they, with the rest of
them their fellow prisoners, were enlarged, without promise, or engagement, let
pass, or fees, or any other condition whatsoever, who had appeared so much for
the liberties of the Nation throughout the Wars, and been in Arms for it; who
pretended so much to liberty of Conscience, and professed that which for it had
suffered persecution; who pretended an expectation and belief of Christ's sudden
coming on earth, to sit on the Throne of Judgment, executing justice, and
doing righteousness: But contrariwise, he was the man, who seeing their
innocence, and knowing that for very envy they were cast into bonds, and
delivered to him, nevertheless said, That for satisfaction of the Country, and
because the times were dangerous, they must do their duty; and so proposed to
them a question, which unless they would answer yea or nay to, he (who had
known the passages aforesaid of the proposition of liberty, if they would
promise to go to their homes, if the Lord permit, and the answers thereunto,
and the papers sent particularly to him thereabouts, and his reasoning with
them concerning it, and their opening to him the ground of their not so doing,
and how that in conscience they could not do it; and if they kept them seven
years, the same men they should find them at the end thereof, and after all
freeing them, saying, God forbid they should press them to any thing which was
against their conscience, as has been mentioned) even Colonel Bennet said they
must restrain them, unless they would answer yea or nay to that question. A. To
which they answered, We are peaceable men, and seek the peace of all men; when
the Law is broken, ye may inflict the penalty.

But to a more positive answer they were pressed, and therein Colonel Bennet
was more forward than the rest; and had away they were, and bid to consider it.

Being called in again, Colonel Bennet seeing them coming with their Hats on,
called out, Why do you let these men come in with their Hats on? And demanded
of them, whether they would answer yea or nay to the question. W. Salt asked
him, whether according to their own Law they were not to be freed by
proclamation, seeing there was none found to accuse them; and whether they had
kept them in Prison to bring them forth to put an engagement upon them: but
nothing of that he would hear. And W. Salt, after the Court had read, and heard
what they had against them, desired Colonel Bennet to hear him read what he
had in answer to P. Ceelyes VVarrant by which he was committed; and a Letter,
which he had prepared for the Court, of the abuses he had sustained by the
Jailer, and in Bodmin since they came in thither, These papers Colonel Bennet
called for from him, and instead of reading them in open Court, put them up in
h^s Pocket, (as Thomas Gewen the Sessions before at Truro, did the
Representation then given him, of them and the rest of their then fellow
prisoners cruel sufferings by the Jailer) saying he thought they had a fair
hearing, and bid the Jailer take them away. The prisoners called upon him to
consider and weigh things, but he rose up out of the Court; and went his way,
without causing the papers to be read, one of which was as follows.

For the Shiriff, and Justices of the County of Cornwall, who are in place to
do Justice, At their Session in Bodmin.
FRIENDS,
NOtwithstanding by order of the General my self and other my fellow prisoners
were enlarged by the Justice, yet P. Ceely has me again sent to prison; I
having been with him to demand a Book against Popery, and other good notes and
Books he took away from me and my friends, when he first apprehended us; and
being on my way five miles on th^^ side Ives, traveling Eastward, intended to
have gone along with my friends out of the Country, and staying there, it being
the first day of the week, P. Ceely meeting me and others with him, urged me
much to come to their assembly, and said I might come and hear, and then judge,
afterward being moved of the Lord I went, and they having all done, I told
them I came not there to disturb them, but seeing they had done speaking, I
had a few words to speak unto them, and this was according to P. Ceelyes words,
who said I might hear and then judge, who presently bid the Constable take him
away, and so went his way to make a Warrant, and without any further
examination sent me to prison, as the enclosed herewith sent does more fully
express: And since I came to Lanceston, the same Jailer of whose miscarriages
you have formerly heard, endeavored to make a prey upon me, when I was
delivered up to them, of their own accord, being placed at a private house, the
Jailer came some few days after, and took me out thence, and put me into a
victualling house, where he said he would confine me, telling abroad that he
had agreed with the man of the house to give ten shillings a week for a Chamber
for me; and reported that it should cost me above forty pound before I came out
of prison, For when we had been among his Companions, as his manner is tippling
and drinking, it seems then I was bought and sold for money, so to me he came in
his authority full of Beer, to command me to go to such a place where he would
put me, having given out that if I did not like the place where he would put
me, then I should into Domesdale; So, whether this fellow be at his own
pleasure to put me into Domesdale, or is allowed to make a prey upon me, I
shall leave with you, who are in place of authority to redress such things,
and to judge; And asking the Jailer, whether I might not be heard at the
Sessions, seeing I was not committed for the breach of any Law, who said he
would not carry me thither, for I was to be delivhred by due course of Law,
which he said was meant the Assizes; Now I understood that what is done by your
Court, is done by due course of Law, where petty larcenie and such like
causes are heard and determined; and may not that which is under petty larceny,
and less then that, be heard also by you, but must be referred to the Judge, of
Assize? When as it is not criminal matter or wrong done to any one, that they
have to charge against me, nor for acting contrary to the Law of the Nation,
but only questionings about words, P. Ceely saying I reviled, when he sets not
down what the revilings were, and to speak truth to any man is not reviling,
and that I stood Irreverently as he says with my Hat on, when although my Hat
was on, I stood reverently and in the fear of the Lord God, who is my witness,
all that time: But if I be an offender, or have committed any thing worthy of
bonds or Imprisonment, I refuse not to suffer, making it appear to be according
to Law and justice, but if there be none of these things whereof I am accused
can he proved against me, I desire according to the Law I may be quitted, and
n^^ be kept in durance, as I have been formerly, by the same man who with my
other friends stood until the Assizes, and when the Assizes came nothing was
brought forth against me, nor my fellow prisoners, for which we were committed
to prison, and there had lain several weeks, as if we had been sent to prison
only to find some new matter whereof to accuse us: how agreeable this is to
the rights or liberties of English men, to ast thus one toward another, or
whether this be Christianlike, I leave to them who are come out of the
rashness, hardness, and perverseness into the sobriety, reasonableness, and
moderation to judge, and how contrary this is to the proceedings of former
ages, I can produce some instances of Scripture even of those whom the true God
knew not, neither did they profess themselves to be Christians, Claudius Lysias
a Roman Captain, having rescued Paul the Lords Prisoner, who contrary to the
Law was abused by the rude multitude, him he therefore sent to Felix, that
according to the Law he might be judged, and gave Commandment also to his
accusers, to say before him what they had to say against him; and whether was
not Lycias more courteous to Paul, and pitiful to preserve him, that bid make
ready so many Soldiers, and beasts to set Paul on, to bring him safe to whom
he sent him, then P. Ceely was to me, who bid the Constable, if I had not
money, take my beast and sell him? Did not Lysias outstrip him here that calls
himself a Christian, who would not do any thing dishonorable as he was a
Roman, who preserved Paul from the men that laid wait for him, when as it has
appeared P. Ceely laid wait himself for me, bringing me into a snare, inviting
me to come to his assembly, and there hear and then judge, and when I came and
there spoke, sent me to prison: And when Paul was brought to Felix the
Governor, to whom Lisias had sent him, he was not put presently into
Doomesdale, or some other nastie stinking hole among other prisoners, but
until his accusers came was kept in Herod's judgment hall; and afterward the
Governor commanded a Centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have his liberty,
and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister or come unto
him; he did not set such over him, that threatened if he did not pay for his
liberty, he would double Iron him, or put him into the bottom of the pit, or
chain him to a post, and arrest such as came to get provisions to him, and sue
him at the Law to get damages against him; and Felix went further than this,
when the Jews had gotten an Orator to plead for them, who having forged many
things against him, which they could not prove, beckned to Paul for him to make
answer, who spoke to some things, and told the Governor such and such ought
to have been there, for proof of what they had against him, which when Felix
had heard, he deferred to give judgment against Paul; notwithstanding the high
Priests and Elders from Jerusalem came thither, deferring the business till
Lisius, that sent Paul thither, came down, that he might hear the uttermost of
the malice: yet these men that acted this were such, that our professors in
England call Heathen, but such now as call themselves Jews, and rest in their
forms, and outward observations, making their boast of God, and the Scripture,
to them I shall mention the Apostles question, and leave it with them to
answer; If the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted to him for circumcision, and shall not circumcision,
which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the Letter and
Circumcision do transgress the Law? Afterward. Festus another Roman
Governor came into Felix room who likewise entreated Paul nobly,
notwithstanding he was esteemed of that sect, which was every where spoken
against, whom he called noble Festus, not because he had finer clothes on him
than other men, and sat in a seat above them, for such was Herod the
persecutor, whom the Angel of the Lord smote, notwithstanding he had so much
eloquence to be admired at for his oration; but because the high Priest and
chief of the Jews, whom he did not so much respect because of their greatness,
nor scorn and despise the prisoner, who was but one, and had so many enemies to
encounter withal, all which did not swerve him, nor turn him aside from doing
justice, though the Priests and chief of the Jews besought him and desired
favor against Paul the prisoner that was in bonds, but all the chief Priests
greatness, nor the rest would not take place with him, to make him partial, or
respect persons in judgment, but he told them whether he should send Paul,
where himself should be shortly, where any that were able to accuse him of any
wickedness might go with him; Mark, accuse him of any wickedness, not at all
granting the high Priest, and chief of the Jews desire to send him to
Jerusalem, who thought thereby to have had their purpose against him, either to
have killed him in the way, or to have brought him within their own
jurisdiction, where themselves, that were his accusers, might have sat as
Judges upon him and so have dispatched him quickly, having aspersed him
sufficiently, before the former Governor Felix; yet all this took not place
with Festus, though the Jews laid many and grievous complaints against Paul,
which they could not prove, yet him he heard patiently, and this is the noble
spirit, wheresoever it appears, that Paul did see to be in Festus, and
notwithstanding the Jews labored so much to render him odious, yet he minded
the doing justice, having not so much as an ear open, to what the Priests or
the chief of the Jews could suggest unto him, and afterward brought him out
before Agripa and Bernice to whom he declared Paul's case, giving him an account
of the passages, him, that sat before in judgment on him, telling how the
chief Priests and Elders of the Jews had informed against Paul, desiring to
have had judgment against him, which he assented not to, pleading being a
Roman (he did not say a Christian, it was not their manner to deliver up a man,
or give judgment against him, before he that was accused, had his accusers
face to face, and had license to answer for himself, concerning the crimes laid
against him, and when he saw that Paul's accusers (though his accusations were
many and grievous) brought no accusation of such thing as he supposed, not
being satisfied to bring the matter to an Issue, he leaves Paul to his choice
to go to another, to whom he had appealed, that was in authority above him,
and least he should wrong the Prisoner in laying any thing to his charge he had
not done, for this cause he would have Agripa to hear him, telling that to him
it did seem unreasonable to send a prisoner, and not withal to signify the
crime laid against him, whom Agrippa slighted not, nor did not scorn, as
looking upon himself above it, but desired to hear him, and when he was brought
out into the place of hearing, there Festus again spoke in his behalf (which
may be exemplary to those who sit Judges in Courts, and are of Council for the
Prisoner, to deal impartially, and not themselves to be false accusers)
saying, King Agrippa, and all men here present with us, you see this man about
whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me about, both at Jerusalem
and here also, crying, that he ought not to live any longer, but when I found
that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and that he himself had appealed
to Augustus, I have determined to send him, of whom I have no certain matter to
write, etc. whom when Agrippa had heard, he saw so little against him, that he
declared openly, that almost he had persuaded him to be a Christian, and when
they were gone aside, he told Festus he might have set him at liberty, if he had
not appealed unto Caesar. Now these men came not with prejudice and enmity
lodging in their minds, they did not say they would warrant he should lie long
enough in prison, to add affliction to his bonds, because he was not one of
that sect that every where was spoken against, but labored to do him right,
not to wrong him, to hear both sides, and then themselves to judge what they
had heard, declaring boldly and nakedly like men of courage, notwithstanding
the high Priests and chief of the people) their thoughts concerning him, not
passing* judgment, or entertaining prejudice because of the report they had
heard of him, and this was manly and of a good report, to keep themselves
clear; And when he came to Rome, they d^d not put him into the Common Jail
among other Prisoners, or commit him to a man to make a prey upon him, to put
him where he should spend most money; or else be put into Doomesale, but when
the Centurion delivered up his Prisoners to the Captain of the guard, Paul was
suffered to dwell by himself, he dwelt two years in his own hired house, and
received all that came in unto him, preaching the kingdom, and teaching those
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, withal confidence, no man
forbidding him; Now we do not read that liberty of Conscience was one of the
Fundamentalls of the Roman Gevernment, yet they suffered it; none not so much
forbidding any to come to the Apostle, which was far from making laws against
them that visit prisoners, men for visiting their friends to be taken up and
put in prison for it: Again, you that be men in authority to do justice between
man and man, and to execute the Laws, this would I know of you, whether a law
once made and afterward repealed, be again of any force yea or nay? or whether
the privileges of the law extend to any but those whom the law qualifies
thereunto, and makes capable thereof? whether then by the Act of 1. Eliz. Cap.
2. last clause, that of the 1. of Mary be not repealed, which says, all Laws,
Statutes, and Ordinances, wherein or whereby any other services, administration
of Sacraments, or Common Prayer, is limited, established, or set forth to be
used, etc. shall be henceforth void and of none effect? and that of the 1. of
Mary is for the establishing of the Mass and all Popish services: and whether
Nicholas Hide when chief Justice of England, gave not his judgment that it was
wholly repealed? And if Queen Mary's law be repealed, what Priests are they
that fly for refuge to it, to uphold their Ministry now? Or is it reasonable
to put men in prison, as many have been, and some are, and there be kept when
they have nothing to plead for their so doing but that law? And whether the
Priests now claiming the privilege of Queen Mary's law, made for the defense
of the Jesuits and Priests in the exercise of the Popish and Idolatrous
worship and services, against the servants of the Lord many of which then
suffered Imprisonment, and some in flames of fire, for witnessing against them
then, do not manifestly declare themselves to be no Ministers of Jesus Christ?
And whether these are otherwise to be accounted of then such by which that law
was made, that fly to it to guard them? If the whole body of Popery be
removed, whether then that law be not also null and void, seeing the effect
cease with the cause? whether he that has the law has not the supremacy,
and so whether he that has the Popish Law to guard him, have not the
supremacy of the Pope to guard him? And why is not the oath of abjuration to
be tendered to such Priests, if the intent of it be to extirpate Popery rather
than unto them who have both declared and writ against Popery publicly, and
all them that are in the likenesses, imitations, and traditionall invention^,
out of the power of God? So you all being kept in the dread and fear of the
Lord God, no unjust thing will proceed from you, your hearts will be tender,
there will be a loving of mercy, and doing of justice both, and here you come
to answer the end of Magistracy, a terror to the evil doer, and a pra se to
them that do well, rightly qualified, men fearing God, ruling others in the
fear of God men of truth to find out the truth, and judge down the deceit, not
covetous, nor given to filthy lucre, for that blinds the eye of the wise; such
were them that were Judges at the first, and Counselors at the beginning, and
when the dross is taken away such shall be restored again, according as the
Lord has promised; Now ye all coming to the light, by it to be led which comes
from Christ the light of the world, who enlighteth every man that comes into
the world, who was given for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to
the people, the light which you have received from him, you following and
obeying it, you come under his command and leading, this will bring you to s^e
the foundation of many generations raised up and here the restoration will
come to be witnessed, for the law of the Lord restores the soul, and the law
is light; he that has an ear to hear let him hear. From one who is a lover of
all souls, truth, righteousness, and peace, who waits for the establishing of
it, and against all injustice, cruelty, envy, and oppression, now stands a
witness in outward bonds.

William Salt.


The next morning the Prisoners wro e to Colonel Bennet, concerning his
proceedings with them, and sent it to him before he was departed the town as
follows.

Bodmin the thirtieth day of the eighth Month 1656. Friend,
THou have denied to hear my papers in open Court, (as thou did those that
were against us) either concerning the wrong I sustained from P. Ceely, or the
Jailer, or the abuses we received from those whom P. Ceely sent, since we came
into this town, so that we are on all sides wronged, and none we have found
has the courage, or that will appear to right us; instead of righting us,
thou thy self have proposed a question to us, which unless we answer yea, or
nay, thou say we again must go to prison; but what sattisfaction or redress
is there made us for being wronged? we gave a clear and full answer in the
Court to the satisfaction of all, forasmuch as we could perceive, besides thy
self in the Court; and when we had spoken the words, thou thy self had little
to except, only did say it was somewhat darkely, as was thy own expression,
yet thou denyedst our friend, Humphery Lower, to let us have our liberty,
unless we would make a promise; Now promises or engagements we do utterly deny
to make to any man whatsoever, neither can we enter into engagements with any
man; for we are come to him who is the Covenant, to Jesus Christ the light of
the World, who was given for a Covenant to the people, a Light to the Gentiles;
So that Covenants with Death we cannot make, neither are we at an agreement
with it, nor have we fellowship with the dead and unfruitful works of
darkness, but are bid to reprove them; for that peace which the world lives in,
we cannot have unity with, that live in the earthly mind, in the subtilty, in
the deceit, out of the simplicity that is in Christ; for that is corrupt, who
are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is
their shame, who mind earthly things; and the peace we seek of all, that they
may be brought to the light, to Christ the King of Righteousness, the King of
Peace, out of all the unrighteousness; Peace we wish unto all* and are
endeavoring to bring men out of the strife, out of the contention, unto the
light, and so to Christ, from under the power of the Magistrates sword, that in
him they may find rest to their souls; but peace with them; who are out of the
Covenant of God, we cannot preach, nor we cannot with them make; for that were
the way to bring us out of the Covenant with Christ, who is our light and life,
into covenant with man, who is in the strife, in the lust, in the envy, out of
Gods Covenant. Israel in Covenant with God were out of Covenant with other
Nations, who were Strangers to this Covenant. There was a time when we were
Strangers from the Covenant of promise, and without God in the world, and then
it was a light thing for us to say or unsay: but now we dare not do it, for
Condemnation will take hold upon the Transgressor; and men's wills we seek not
to do, but the will of him who has called us out of darkness into light, by
which the very appearance of evil is denied by us. Josuah, through the wiles of
the Gibeonites, was led into a snare; and we see it clearly, this thing will be
a snare unto us; for two or three have been already with us, wild, heady, rash
fellows, who would quickly signify, once we declaring against them, that we
had broken their peace, which is but the peace of the wicked; and such a thing
would easily swear, that we were disturbers of the peace, for reproving
iniquity, and so thereby make our selves their prey; Which we lay upon thee
seriously to consider and weigh; and whether to accomplish this thing, be the
way to do us justice.

W. S. J. C.


Notwithstanding he did nothing as to their liberty; but the two Goalers,
Coals and Squire, he sent to them, as he had often before, to have their
answer to his question, yea or nay; and the said Squire said, he would warrant
he would make them promise: He told him, (as it is said) if he did, he should
be a brave fellow. But when Squire saw he could prevail nothing with the
Prisoners, though he was with them many times, he tendered himself to be Surety
for them, and said he would get another to be Surety with him: but that they
denied, and sent to him to have nothing to do with that accursed thing, for
that they could neither make promise, nor be brought under bonds and
engagements themselves; neither would they that any should do it for them, and
to do so both in word and writing they denied.

And so they were remanded to Lanceston Prisoners, being thus returned in the
Calendar:

William Salt, and Joseph Coal, for refusing to behave themselves peaceably
while they be in the Country. Reply. For those who live and behave themselves
peaceably in the Country where they be, and both in life and doctrine preach
and press unto peace, and to the bringing of people out of strife, and the
occasion thereof, into peace; who resist not evil, but bear and endure
patiently in their bodies all manner of abuses, and cruel usages, without
lifting up the voice, or seeking deliverance, committing it to him who judges
righteously, and rewards every man according to his doings: for such as these
to be required to promise to be peaceable men, and not to disturb the Country,
who of any such thing were never convinced, as they are not guilty, but on the
contrary, as has been said.

And because such cannot in their own, nor in the time and will of man, promise
what they will do for the future, nor make engagements nor covenants with
death, nor be at agreement with hell, so as not to reprove and testify against
the deeds of darkness, (which to reprove and testify against in this high
professing age, wherein iniquity abounds more than has been known in former
generations, is accounted a disturbing of the peace, and an unquiet behavior;
for the preventing whereof, and that Iniquity may have its swing, and revel it
without contradiction, are these new engagements invented by the powers of
darkness) and for that they cannot by making such promises, wrong their
innocence. To be therefore imprisoned, returned to Prison, who by imprisonment
had so wrongfully suffered, and out of it ought to have been delivered, as is
the Law, and into the hands of that cruel Jailer to be cast, who made them so
to suffer, as has been aforesaid, out of whose cruelty they had been but a
little before delivered, and to have a manifest lie recorded as their offense,
viz. for refusing to behave themselves peaceably whilst they be in the
Country, who neither had misbehaved themselves unpeaceably, nor refused
peaceably to behave themselves: But to the question answered, we are peaceable
men, and seek the peace of all men; where the Law is broken, ye may inflict the
penalty; is so abominably unjust, cruel, and tyrannical, as those who are
called Heathens would have blushed thereat; nor have the Records of the former
generations afforded of it a parallel.

Poor Colonel Bennet, how is the day of the Lord come upon thee? How are all
thy coverings ripped off? Thy hidden things, how are they searched out?
Stripped how art thou, and naked and bare how have thou made thy self? How is
thy Sepulcher opened, and in thee how is there found the same spirit that
rules in P. Ceely, T. Gewen, and the Jailer aforesaid, even the same spirit
that rules in the children of disobedience, which has oppressed and
persecuted the seed of God from the beginning? O how art thou blinded, and thy
later end worse than thy beginning? How has the Spirit of the Lord strove with
thee, and sought to save thee from the untoward generation? How has he in thee
raised up his Witness to testify in the behalf of his innocent suffering
servants, and to the making of thee in some sort serviceable for their
deliverance, which now testifies against thee, doing the same things, and is
thy condemnation? What warnings have thou had? What seekings to cover thee has
there been, that thy nakedness might not have appeared, and so men might not
have not seen thy shame? But thy heart has been divided, therefore thou have
not prospered; thou have been unstable as water, therefore thou have not
excelled; thine own shame have thou brought forth, and inexcusable art thou, O
man, for that thou have done the same things against the Innocent, for which
thou judgedst and reprovedst others, and did the contrary, and therein have
given sentence against thy self. Thy profession is at an end; all that thou
have done and suffered for liberty, for liberty of Conscience, and the Nation,
thou have spilt upon the ground, it rises up in thy face, and thee does judge;
and amongst the oppressers and persecuters art thou found, even in their
spirit, whom thou have fought against, against whom God has ordained his
arrows. Turn thee to the light, which will show thee what thou have done, and
how contrary thy actions have been each to other, and how thou art taken in an
evil snare, for so has the day of the Lord been upon thee, which he has made
manifest, and brought the secret head in the bottom of thy deceitful heart to
light, and left thee to record thy folly and shame to future, generations. And
tremble thou before the Lord in this hour of his righteous judgments, who
searches the heart, and tries the reins, and renders to every one according
to their deeds; and be not as those who will know no shame, lest the hand of
the Lord be stretched forth to harden thee, and cut thee off for ever: And talk
no more of the Scriptures, nor of what was the life of the Saints, and holy men
of God, nor of the Kingdom of Christ, nor of liberty, till to that thou art
turned and ruled by, even the light, the life which comes from Christ, which is
in Christ, unto which they were turned, in which they abode, and by which they
were guided, who oppressed none, nor persecuted, but were persecuted and
oppressed by those in whom the spirit that is in the world ruled; who have
oppressed the innocent, and persecuted the same life in these, which ruled in
the holy men of God, which life the world ever persecuted, and put to death the
Son of God, who is the light of the world, the light and life of men, the true
light which lights every man that comes into the world, who is come to reign
and rule for ever, thousands in this Nation witness him so to be, eternal
living praises be to him for evermore, who will destroy the Oppressor, and none
shall hurt in his holy Mountain. Therefore say thy mouth unto the dust, and be
thou ashamed, yea, be thou confounded, and turn to him against whom thou have
kicked, if so be there may be hope, and a healing of thine error: then thou will see love in this, and contentedly will thou bear the shame of thine
iniquity; and the unworthiest of all, yea one not worthy to be counted a Saint,
will thou then reckon thy self to be, because thou have persecuted the Church
of God. In love unto thy soul are these things wrote, and a warning from the
Lord God is this unto thee, and his voice is unto thee to turn at his reproof,
and to thee his visitation of love it is: therefore mind and consider; which
if thou do not, a witness for the Lord God shall I be eternally against thee:
and if thou think these things too hard, look into thy actions, and now in
the cool of the the day, and with the light of Jesus Christ search thy self,
and with it do thou, and let all that are sober, see, and judge, whether it be
any more than the reward of thine own hands which is given thee, right measure,
and just weight, which every one must receive at the hands of the Lord. And if
thou have yet to say wherefore am I made public? Thou have spread the tent of
thy iniquity upon the house top, and committed thy lewdness before the Sun, on
the Seat of Judgment, there have thou done unrighteously, and oppressed the
Innocent, whom thou had helped, who now had no helper; and therefore openly
art thou reproved, who have sinned openly, who also have had many private
admonitions. And constrained have thou this Relation to end with thee, which
began with P. Ceely, and would have ended with him, but that thou have put to
thy shoulder, which is a lamentation.

The End.
A short account of the Barbarous sufferings of Margaret Killam, Priscilla
Cotton, Mary Cole, and Barbara Pattison, by the Government of the Town of
Pleymouth, in the County of Devon, during the Mayoralities of John Page, and
Christopher Ceely.
MArgret Killam being come to Plymouth the 19. day of the 10. month 1655. was
Her coming and speaking to Christo: Ceely in his house the word of the Lord, as
she was moved, which he acknowledged to her to be very good and truth, is the
occasion of her inhumane, and barbarous sufferings, hereafter mentioned.
moved of the Lord to speak to the Mayor of Plymouth, and taking Margery Dier,
of the same Town with her, she went to the Mayors house (whose name is
Christopher Ceely) of whose being within having understood by the officer that
waited at the door, she sent in to the Mayor that she desired to speak with
him; after a little time, the Mayor came to her to the door, she told him she
had a word from the Lord to speak to him, he bad her come in, and so she
declared to him what she had to speak from the Lord. He confessed it was very
good, and truth, but commanded the Constable, which he had sent for, to carry
her to prison; her friend demanded what transgression she had committed, no
answer he made, but to prison she was brought, and she, and their friend there
locked up together.

About two hours after, the Mayor, and John Page (who was Mayor the year
before, in which he cruelly persecuted Miles See the book of Miles Halh^^ds,
and Tho. Salthouse sufferings, entitled The wounds of an enemy in the house of
a friend.
Halhead, and Thomas Salthouse, as is manifest in the relation thereof,
entitled, The wounds of an enemy in the house of a friend, etc.) and the
Town Clerk (who stirred up and carried on that persecution) came to examine
her, and demanded her name, and the place from whence she came: both which she
declaring, the Mayor rose up in much fury, and threatened to send her away with
a pass, from tithing to tithing, and to make a ring of her through the Country;
and if she came again, he threatened to send her away with a whip; and of her he
demanded a pass, and an account of her coming thither: she answered, that in
obedience to the Lord she came thither, and to declare to him the truth; and
that he should know of a truth, that the Lord had sent a Prophet to warn him;
and of him she demanded to show a Law that she had transgressed; and how he
would prove her a vagabond, who did not beg, and asked him whether he was not
partial in judgment, in examining her, and whether he did examine every one
that passed through that Town, for a pass, yea, or nay; He replied, Who will
may pass the Town of Plymouth without examination, but all those who come in
the name of the Lord, Christopher Ceely says he will examine.
that all that came in the name of the Lord he would examine, and because she
refused to tell him again; what her name was (for that she saw he demanded it
to ensnare her with a pass,) he rose up in a fury, and ordered her to prison,
and that none should come at her, and went his way, without convincing her of
the least bre^ch of any Law.

After she had been there about three or four days, John Page aforesaid, and
the Town Clerk came to her again, saying the Mayor had sent them to examine
her, and demanded again her name, and her husbands name, which was told them;
then the place from whence she came; she said she had told them it once
already, but had said she should not tell them again, which if she should do,
having so said, she should tell them a lie, so they departed.

On the 25. of the 10. month, the Mayor sent for Edw. Dyer of Plymouth, and
asked of him whether he would be bound that she should answer at Exon Assizes,
for that she had refused to be examined (which was a notorious lie, for she
submitted to examination, and was examined by them, as has been said.) He
replied, he would be bound for her appearing, and for her answering what should
be laid against her: then the Mayor said, he must be bound for her good
behavior. He answered he knew of no good behavior she had broken; She
refuses to be examined, said the Mayor, and to give in her name. He replied,
she told her name: the Mayor answered, the truth is she did declare her name,
but I, said he, have forgot it, (and indeed he was in such a rage when he
examined her, that he remembered not what it was, though she told him; and yet
this he would make in her a misbehaviour, and for it requires sureties.) He
replied, he would be bound she should not be drunk, nor beg, borrow, steal,
play the whore, nor offer violence or wrong to any, (which is matter for the
requiring sureties for the good behavior in the Law, but to this generation,
declaring against such things, is accounted ill behavior, and for so
declaring, sureties for the good behavior they require, so the Law, and
judgment is turned backward,) the Mayor bid him go to the Town Clerk, and what
he did he would allow of. The Town Clerk would have him be bound for her good
behavior; he refused to do otherwise than he had said to the Mayor, the Mayor
having declared, as has been said, that she had misbehaved her self in
refusing to be examined, (which she did not) and to give her name, (which he
confessed she did) and that he had forgot it. Yet the Mayor said again, he
would take no security unless he would be bound for her good behavior; he
answered again, he knew not what they meant by the ill behavior, for in the
Bishops days, when people met together in the fear of the Lord, it was
accounted a conventicle, and a breach of the good behavior, and that since on
the same account doors had been broken open by the rude multitude in Plymouth;
as he the said Mayor well knew (for indeed, it was done in the time of his
former Mayoraltie in the year 1645. as has been instanced in the former
relation,) then John Martingdale of Plymouth being with Edw. Dyer, asked the
Mayor what they would call the ill behavior, the Mayor replied, what the
Justices should judge to be the ill behavior, was ill behavior, (so the Law,
it seems by his reckoning, is not, but the breasts of the Justices, the rule of
behavior, who (after this rate) may make what they will a misbehaviour, and so
what innocent man can be free, if they have a mind to make him an offender? and
to their lusts in this kind how wicked, and unreasonable so ever if he will not
submit, and subscribe himself a transgressor, who is innocent, the penalty of
the Law in case of that which it says is indeed misbehaviour, must be
inflicted on him, as if he had broken the Law; and so their lusts prescribe the
Law, and the Law of the Nation must serve for the punishment of the
transgression of their lusts, as of the Law;) further he asked him, whether to
say thee, and thou; which was Scripture language, was a breach of the good
behavior; to this the Mayor answered not: but some that stood by said it was:
he also told the Mayor that he knew the place from whence she came, and that
she was no wanderer, and was well known to many in Plymouth besides himself,
but the Mayor would not hear him; so the discourse broke off, and ended.

But on the 27. of the 10. month, a Constable, and another man with him came to
her; and bad her provide to go with them; she spoke to them to show her their
order. They said they would not: she said she was not free to depart thence
till she saw the order; they denied her again; and haled her forth of the room,
and through the street, which when they had done, and drawn her a pretty space
out of the Town, she demanded of them to show by what order they did it, or
whether they had a pass, otherwise she was free to go no further. Hereupon
the Constable pulled out a paper, she bad him let her hear what was in it, he
said she should not; so she returned back into the Town, into which being
come, the Constable brought her to the Mayor again; who upon seeing her waxed
wroth, and his countenance changed, and he said, must he still be troubled
with her? would she not be bound to the good behavior, nor nothing? She
answered him, she was bound to the good behavior by the Law of God, and asked
him wherein she had misbehaved her self in word or action, and what Law she had
transgressed; and said, that if she had transgressed any Law, she was willing
to suffer by it: but he answered her not a word. She asked him why he dealt so
with her, and demanded to hear her Pass, that she might know whither he meant
to send her, seeing they had declared they knew not the place from whence she
came; he said, she should not hear it; and bid her depart out of his house, and
commanded the Constable to have her out of the Town: so the Constable charged a
man to aid him, who laid hands on her, using her with violence, and much
rudeness. But a woman speaking to him in the fear of the Lord, he let go his
hold, and would have no further to do with her: whereupon the Constable said,
he knew not what to do with her; but the Mayor commanded to put her in Prison.

Whereinto being brought again, the Mayor, and two or three more, came into the
Hall, and consulted together, but spoke not to her, and so went out at the
door, where were many Friends waiting, who were not permitted to come in to
her; of which some of them spoke to him, and that they might have liberty to
see her. But instead of answering their equal, and just, and legal desire, he,
being filled with rage, laid violent hands on Margaret Restbridge, and pushed
her from him down the stairs, which had endangered her life, she being an old
woman, but that many Friends being there, the press of them kept her from
falling above two or three steps. And others of them he threatened with the
Clink, and the door by command was opened to put them thereinto, for but
desiring leave to see her, and command he gave that none should come at her,
and caused her to be k^pt so two days and a night in a wide room without a
fire, in that season, which was very cold and bitter weather; out of which she
was put into a room, and fire permitted her, upon the speaking of one to the
Mayor against his cruelty therein, he being moved of the Lord so to speak.

On the 31. of the 10. month, the Mayor, Justice Vowell, (who was Judge of the
Court at the Sessions at Exon, before whom she was afterward brought, with
others called Justices, being met, sent for her down into the Court, and demand
they did her name, and her husbands name, and the place of their habitation,
which she refused to give them, having given it before to them, and her Friend
having given it also, (the Mayor confessing the one, but not caring to hear the
other, as has been said) having before declared she should not give it them
again, because she saw they thereby sought to send her away with a Pass, as a
Vagabond, which she was not; and which by the Law they could not do, unless she
had been taken begging, and her name and place of habitation in the Pass
expressed: but content she was to submit to the will of God, as to what power
they had to do with her; and so they returned her again to Prison.

A few days after, viz. on the third day of the 11. month, between the ninth
and tenth hour at night, came a Sergeant, and would have her open her chamber
door; but it being so late in the night, and she alone, she told him she was
not free to open her chamber door; so he bid her prepare to be going to Exeter
Prison at six of the clock the next morning; and about four of the clock the
next morning came the Constable, and some others with him, and bid her open the
door, which she was not free to do, being alone, as has been said, and it
being two hours to the day: but such was the immodesty and unreasonableness of
the Officer, that he called for a Smith, and broke open her chamber door at
such an unseasonable and unlawful hour, and haled her out of the room through
the street to a stable, where was a Carriers horses, and kept the stable door
fast, refusing to let her Friends come in to her, who hearing of the violence,
and inhumane dealing with her, came to see her before her departure; and on
them out of the stable did they cast water. She demanded of the Officers,
wherefore they dealt so with her, or whether they had a Mittimus? They refused
to show it her, but said, they would have her away; and because she was not
free to get up on horseback her self, unless they would show her a Mittimus, or
by what Authority they used her after that manner, they put a rope about her,
with which they load their packs, and with it at a pully twitcht her on the
Horses back* and bound her arms behind her, and tied her feet under the Horses
belly with cords, and so drove the Horse, and her on it as a pack, yea even as
if she had been a Creature without life, sense or feeling, for the space of ten
miles, bound with ropes after the manner aforesaid, (such an unmanly piece of
salvage bruitishness, and inhumane cruelty, especially to an innocent woman,
tenderly bred, and of a considerable estate, as to the outward, has not been
heard of in this Nation, but is the monstrous and unnatural fruit of the
Government of Plymouth, and of Christopher Ceely the Mayor thereof in
particular, by whom the Witnesses of the Lord have cruelly suffered, as has
been, and is yet to be mentioned. Are these Christians? Or are these Men? Would
not the worst of Heathens have blushed at the very relation of such barbarous
inhumanity? Nor have they left behind them on record (so far as is remembered)
such a noisome smell to posterity. But it is Plymouth, it is England, that
leaves these filthy stinks to future ages, which is a lamentation.) After
which, he that drove her having satiated his cruelty over which she bore, and
had dominion, he loosened her cords, and told her he had a Mittimus to carry
her to Exeter Goal, unto which he brought her, and there was committed a
Prisoner till the general Sessions of that County.

Before whom being brought, many untruths (which the Mayor of Plymouth had sent
against her) were read, but not one witness appeared to convince her of the
transgression of any one Law of the Nation; nor would Justice Wowell (who was
Judge of the Court, who had to do in her persecution at Plymouth, as has been
said) permit her, nor any of her Friends of Plymouth who were present, to speak
in witness of the truth on her behalf; but he said, if she would go to her
husband, she should have her liberty, otherwise they would will and require her
so to do. To which she answered, In the will of God I stand, do with me what ye
have power: for when they were not able to lay any breach of the Law to their
charge, they thought to have blemished her with being from her husband, (such
was their justice to an innocent woman, who had suffered, as is aforesaid) But
her husband (who as the Lord had ordered it, was but a little before come to
the Town) being in the Court) and endeavoring to speak, to take off that
pretended aspersion, they would not hear him. Then a man standing by, said
something concerning his having heard her say as if the Scriptures were not the
Word of God: she looked upon him, and bid him mind what he had spoken, and let
that in his conscience witness whether he heard her speak any any such word
(for what she spoke was no such thing, as is hereafter made to appear, even
under his own hand, it being in discourse with him at an Inn, as she was on
her way from Plymouth Prison to Exon Goal.) This the Judge of the Court caught
hold on presently, (for instead of delivering the oppressed, as is the Law,
they sought after cause to make her to suffer) and demanded of her whether she
owned the Scriptures to be the Word of God, yea or nay? She answered, what she
had spoken, she would not deny; the Scriptures she witnessed to be a true
Declaration, but Christ was the Word; mentioning the saying of Christ, Search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they are they
that testify of me, says Christ. And the man that accused her, declared to
the Judge of the Court, that she so said, viz. the Scriptures were a true
Declaration, but Christ was the Word: Yet much ado the Judge made for her to
say yea or no to his question, that so he might ensnare her: And though she
answered him in the words that she spoke to the man that accused her, which was
as much as legally, or in reason could be expected; and he who accused her,
affirmed it was so, as has been said, yet commanded he the Jailer to take her
away, and required the man who accused her, to prepare a Bill of Indictment
against her; which contrary to his mind, and to what he had said in evidence,
the Clerk of the Sessions, and the grand Jury drew up, wherein she was charged
as a Felon, and (as they said) the Bill was found by the grand Jury: but what
ground they had in Law to form a Bill contrary to the Evidence, or to make that
matter of an Indictment (suppose it had been spoken by her, as they placed it,
and would have it to be) which is none in Law; for all Indictments are invalid,
where the offense charged therein is not bottomed on a Law; or to make that
Felony by form, which is no offense in substance; and what consciences such a
grand Jury have, as to form or find such a Bill for the taking away of life,
made (as has been said) without ground in Law, or truth, or honesty in form,
nay contrary to the Evidence, yea to the witness his declaring to them at what
they had drawn up, was not according to his mind, is plainly manifested, and
their cruelty therein to the sober, and men of understanding, by what has been
already said; and what a generation of blind and bloody Monsters, exceeding in
impudent wickedness all that have gone before them, this age so high in
profession, and so eminently delivered by the hand of the Lord, brings forth
against his living truth, and innocent servants, but is made further apparent,
and the due weight and right measure of this charge, by the witness against
himself, who wrote to Edw. Raddon, Secretary to General Disborow, who with
General Disborow was then at Exon, as follows.

To his honored Friend Edward Raddon, Secretary to General Disbor^w, these
present.
Sir,
MY service presented to you. Being at Exon l^st Sessions, I came forth, and
witnessed against one Margaret Killam what I heard her speak, viz. That when in
discourse we sp^ke concerning her walking according the light within; I said,
it is true, but the Scriptures, or the Word of God, is the rule for us to walk
by. Said she, Jesus Christ is the Word. It is true, but there is a written
word. O thou art an ignorant person, and do not understand the Scriptures,
said she. At which words the Judge of the Sessions demanded of her whether the
Scriptures were the Word of God, or no? She did not confess it, or deny it
before them; but they enjoined me to draw up a Bill of Indictment against her,
which, as the Clerk under you drew up, but not according to my mind, but as
both they and the grand Jury said, it must be so according to the form of the
Law. In that case I only can witness neither more nor less than above: but I
cannot, neither ever did I swear that she should say the Scriptures were not
the Word of God, but it was a Declaration of the mind of God.

Jan. 25. John Cawse.


And how far Justice Vowell, the Judge of the Court, was of the same mind,
appears, in that being spoken to by a Friend that the Law might proceed on her,
and that on her, if she had transgressed, the Law might have its course; he
replied to that Friend to this effect, Will ye have them hanged out of hand?
Whereby he intended with her, Richard Lippincot of Plymouth, and Thomas Hooton,
who were then Prisoners for some such thing. And so by his question it appears,
that to say that Christ is the Word, and the Scriptures a true Declaration of
him, (for those were the words which she only said, and which her Accuser
witnessed to be so) in his judgment is matter of hanging: Was ever such a
thing heard of before this day to come forth of the mouth of a Judge professing
Christ? The Jews, who put him to death, denied him; and they which persecuted
his Apostles and Witnesses, dis-owned their testimony of him whom they
declared: but this generation profess him in words, and call themselves
Christians, and yet seek to murder them who testify of him; Hang them that
say Christ is the Word, and the Scriptures a true Declaration of him: what more
blasphemous bloodiness, damnable Antichristianism, and Mohammedan hellishness?
Can a Turk say more? What would not this generation do to the Truth, and the
innocent Lambs of Christ, were there power in their hands? How soon then would
his Doctrine be made Blasphemy, and his Disciples Blasphemers, and their blood
poured out on the ground, for owning of him to be that which he is, and which
the Scriptures testify of him? Is not the spirit of giddiness and of deep
sleep poured forth on this generation? How are they drunk with blood, and
besotted with rage and madness, who would kill a man for witnessing what
themselves profess? Own him in words to be the Word, and the Scripture to be
Truth, which declare him so to be, and yet hang them who say and witness him to
be the Word, and that of him the Scriptures are a true Declaration. O monstrous
contradiction! whither would not this rage run, what cruelty would it not
effect, were it not he that puts the sands as a band to the S^a, says unto
it, hitherto shall thy rage proceed, and no further? O ye Lambs of Christ, what
quick havoc would be made of you, and speedy riddance from off the face of the
Earth, were it not that ye are kept in the arms of the Almighty, and hid secret
in his pavilion, where ye are preserved, even your Enemies themselves being
Judges?

That Sessions ended without bringing her to a trial on that Indictment,
notwithstand^ng that the Friend aforesaid desired that the Law might have its
course; which he moved, lest they should put her off to the next Sessions. And
continued in Prison she was till the 15. of the 12. month, 1655. at which time
she, and the other two Friends, viz. Richard Lippincot, and Thomas Hooton, were
^eleased by a VVarrant from Colonel Copplestone, Sheriff of the County of
Devon, as follows.

THese are to will and require you, on sight hereof, to set at liberty Richard
Lippincot, Thomas Hooton, and Margaret Kellum, wife of John Kellum now in your
Goal, for which this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given under my hand and seal this 13. day of February. 1655. John Copplestone.
To Thomas D^ght, Keeper of the Goal near the Castle at Exon.




And so Margaret Kellum, for coming to Plymouth, diverse hundreds of miles from
her outward habitation, and speaking as she was moved of the Lord, to
Christopher Ceely, Mayor of Plymouth, the word of the Lord in his hou^e,
whitherto she came, and into which she was bid by him to come, after that she
had sent in that she desired to speak with him, and had told him, upon his
coming to the door, that she had a word from the Lo^d to declare to him; which
word of the Lord so declared, he confessed to be very good, and truth, was
imprisoned by h m, and continued a Prisoner for the space of seven and fifty
days, and used with that inhumanity, barbarousness and cruelty, as has been
expressed. This is Christopher Ceely, who professes Christ, and the
Scriptures; this is the Governor, and the Government of Plymouth, a people
professing Religion; this is the Authority of the County of Devon, and the
justice of their Judge Vowell; these are the fruits of them all, and of their
Ministry of the Gospel, and of its shining so long amongst them, of which they
so loudly boast, and unto which they and their generation would conform all, or
cut them off; and for that purpose have made such wars, and shed so much blood
in these Dominions; these are some of the fruits found in England, a Nation
saved by the Lord, to the astonishment and dread of all Nations, and bearing
his name, in return of all his mercies and deliverances: All ye that pass by,
stay your selves, and wonder.

Barbara ^attison.
Barbara Pattison speaking to Thomas Martin, Priest, whilst he was divining a
Funeral Sermon at Plymouth, was imprisoned by Christopher Ceely, Mayor of
Plymouth, and sent to Exeter Goal; and at the Assizes, the beginning of the
second month 1656. indicted, and returned to prison with judgment to suffer 3.
months imprisonment, according to Mary's Law, which was made to guard the
P^pish Priests, and Jesuit^, from ^he witnes^ of God then in the Protestants,
which now is made the guard of the Priests in these days, and by them for
de^^nce, against the witness of God now is recoursed unto; there make ng it to
appear, that they are of the same generation; and much longer was she kept in
pri^on then three m^nt^^, the judgment of Mary's Law, and of the Assizes for
er ^estifying from the Lord against this Priest; and in lik^lyhood that there
had been kept beyond the double of that time, which was near approaching, h^d
not Colonel Copplestone, the Sheriff of the County of Devon, tendered her
suff^ring (which she patiently, an^ with me kness did b^ar) and set her liberty.

Priscilla Cotton, and Mary Cole of Plymouth, on the 19. day of the 6. month
called August 1656. Priscilla Cotton b^i^g moved of the Lord, went, and Mary
^ole with her to the St^e^l^-house at Plymouth, where they sat silent till
George Hughes the Priest had ended his divination, and then Priscill^ Cotton
stood up, and spoke to the people, and to them she said, People why do ye spend
your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which does not
sati^fie? hearken di igently to the eternal word, that your souls may live:
when she had spoken these words, said the Priest, to whom do you speak? if you
have any thing to say come home to my house; I have been at thy house, said
she, and have wrote to thee, but all to little purpose; i^ it not the word of
the Lord (said he) that I have preached to the people? Nay, rep^i^d, ^riscilla,
it is a divination of thy own brayn; whereupon he (lest he should shamed before
the people) called out to the M^gistrates, (thereby showing of what generation
he wa^) to have her away, to which Mary Cole, (who till then was si^ent)
rep^yed, did ever Christ Jesus, or his Apostles call for the assi tance of
M^gistrates? but so did the Pharisees of old, and the Apostles were drawn out
of the Synagogues. But nevertheless what ^he Priest said, prevailed, and so
violent hands were laid on them, and they haled out of the Synagogues,
fulfilling the words of Christ; whereupon Priscilla said to the Priest, woe unto
thee that laughs now, for thou shall mourn and weep. Being drawn out of the
high place, they were both put under the Town hall, and there kept with
Halberts, and were mocked, and derided. The next day they were called before
John Page Mayor, and Richard Spurwell, and Rob^^^ G^bbes Justices; Rich.
Spurwell, who was one of the members of the Priests Church (so cal^ed) bi^ the
Clark, write that Priscilla, (whom they first examined) come to oppose the
Minister, and di^^urbed the people; nay said Priscilla, let not lies be ^rote,
and to the Clark she said, I charge thee to wri^e no lies, but truth; whereupon
the Clark said, I will write nothing but what your self spoke: said R.
Spurwell, you came in pride and pr^sumption; nay I came in the fear of the Lord
God said she, and in obedience to him whom I ought to obey before man; what
said ye more, said ^e? so she declared what she had spoken, and exhorted them
to mind their teacher within, the light which would teach them not to be
envious, nor partial, nor hateful, and told them the Lord would pluck his
people out of the teeth of the devouring greedy shepherds; and that the Priest
made the disturba^ce if there were any, for they heard him and said nothing
till he had ended his divinations, and deserved the punishment (if any were
due) for what they spoke, it was by commandment; and that it was matter of
admiration that they were so deluded by him, who was their servant for their
money, and that they were so subject to his lusts, as if he were their Lord;
vvhereupon they lo^kt one upon another, and had her away. Then Mary Cole was
cal^ed, and of her many needless questions they asked, and whether she did not
deny all preaching? she ansvvered, she vvish't that all the Lords people were
Prophets, and that his spirit was poured on them all, and with many
exhortations, she persuaded them to mind their conditions, and to turn the
Lord, and to mind him who did call upon them for amendment of life, and told
them, she was grieved to see them neglect their teacher, which would
instruct them continually, if they would hearken to him, and so to prison they
returned them both, and after some time Priscilla was called, and tendered her
the Oath of Abjuration of Pop^ry, do thou think I am a Papist, said she to
the Mayor; no I think in my conscience, said he you are not; why then, said
Priscilla, do thou tender me the Oath? the Mayor said, because it is
according to the Protectors order; vvhereupon she declared, I renounce the
Pope, and all popish opinions, but I will not svvear at all; then presently
Mary Cole was called, and the same Oath was tendered to her, to which she
declared, as had Priscilla; then the Mayor told them, by the Judge they must be
tried, and asked them whether their husbands (who were shopkeepers in the
Town,) would be bound for them, or they must to Exeter on foot; and so the next
day he sent them to Exeter; but the day they came t^ither, the Assizes was
ended, so they were delivered to the Jailer, and very evilly entreated by the
people of the Town, as they passed along, with dirt, and mocking^. At the
Assizes the second month 1656. they being before the Court, and attending there
several days during the time of their sitting, no accusation was laid in
against them, so the last day of the Assizes they were discharged, the Mittimus
by which they were sent to Exon Goal was as follows.

Devon.
WE John Page Merchant, Mayor of the Borough of Plymouth, and Richard Spurwell,
and Robert Gibbs Merchants, three Justices of peace within the said Boro^gh, to
the Keeper of the Goal for the County of Devon at the Castle of Exon, or to
his Lawful Deputy, greeting, we herewith send you by the bearers hereof the
bodies of Prisci^la, the wife of Arthur Cotton of Plymouth, and Mary Cole wife
of Nicho^as Cole of Plymouth Mercer, lately apprehended ^ere for dive^s
misdemeanors, of a high and hideous nature, who refuse to give sufficient
sureties for their personal appearance before his Highness the Lord Protector
of this Commonwealth, and his Justices of Assizes, and general Goale-delivery
at his Castle ^t Exon, at the next Assizes to be holden there for the County
aforesaid, and in the mean time that they hold, and be of good behavior
against his Highness the Lord Protector, and his leige-people, and for refusing
to take the Oath of Abjuration by us tendered them: these are in the name of his
Highness the Lord Protector to will and command ye, etc. whereof fair not at
your perils,

Given under our hands and seals at Plymouth the twentieth day of August, 1656.
John Page, Mayor. Richard Sp rwell, Justices. Robert Gibbs, Justices.



What they were apprehended for, and what were their answers at their
examinations, is before mentioned; which whether it be diverse misdemeanors, or
of a high and hideous nature, by comparing the one and the other, let the sober
judge, and what a pitiful, silly, and so^^ish g neration this is who are
neither ashamed so ridiculously to express themselves, nor are sensib^e how
thereby they lay open their nak^dness; and by the other filthy stuff, with
which the Mittimus is filled, (not worthy the taki^g up, or the taking to
pieces) r^c^rd under their hands and seals their fol y to posterity, and leave
their names a curse to the chosen of the Lord, as the Mouth of the Lord of
Hosts, concerning this gene^ation has spoken, Isaiah 65.15. there re^d your
portion ^r^m the 11. verse of the Chapter to the 15. and wi^h the vv tness o^
God in your consciences which shows ye evil, and co^d mus ye for
unrighteousness, consider, whilst you have time, and whilst the hour of y ur
vi^^tation is not past over, for your transgressions are great, and your cruel
persecutions of the Innocent not a fevv.

The End.

