NEW PROPOSITIONS FROM His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Lieutenant General
Cromwell, and the Council of the Army, concerning the Kings Majesty, His
Royal Consort the Queen, Charles Prince of Wales, and James Duke of York,
Presented to His Majesty at Hampton Court. With His Majesty's Gracious Answer
and Desires.

Signed, CHARLES REX.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE English royal blazon surmounted by a crown

7ber 16. Printed at London, for Robert Williamson, 1647.

ANOTHER MESSAGE FROM The Kings Majesty at Hampton Court: Sent to the
Honorable House of Peers, together with his new propositions, and Desires
therein.
Enclosed in a Letter from Hampton Court, September, 15.
Right Honorable,
YOu have ever pursued me with your favors, that I am made capable of no other
pleasure in the world but to entertain them: insomuch, that should I offer up
my being to you, it is impossible for me, but in part to dis-ingage my self; so
that of necessity I must want both words and services to express how
unfeinedly I honor you: Nevertheless, I shall embolden my self, to make my
earnest desire visible unto you, by imparting that, which all Loyal Subjects
desires to be partakers of; and therefore, for general satisfaction to your
self, and the whole Kingdom, I thought it expedient to communicate his
Majesty's last Message and Resolution unto you, that so the whole Kingdom may
take notice of His gracious inclination toward a firm and well settled Peace,
together with His Majesty's Proposalls and Desires therein, to His two Houses
of Parliament assembled at Westminster, and how far He declares him self for
the Army; All which I shall make manifest in his Majesty's enclosed Message,
signed Charles Rex.

In the intrim, I humbly crave your favorable ac-acceptation, to vouchsafe the
serious perusal of these ensuing Proposals, to which, his Majesty does so well
approve of, viz.

1. An Act to be passed to take away all coercive power, authority, and
jurisdiction of Bishops, and all other Ecclesiasticali Officers whatsoever,
extending to any civil penalties upon any.

2. That there be a repeal of all Acts or Clauses in any Act enjoining the use
of the Book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties for neglect thereof,
as also of all Acts or Clauses in any Act, imposing any penalties for not
coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere, for prayer, or other religious
duties.

3. That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, or any penalties
imposed upon the Refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take it against
their judgments, or consciences, but all Orders oa Ordinances, tending to that
purpose to be repealed.

4. That (the things here-before proposed, being provided, for settling and
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the Kingdom) his Majesty's
person, his Queen, and royal issue may be restored to a condition of safety,
honor, and freedom in this Natton, without dimunition to their personal
rights, or further limitation, to the exercise of the Regal power, than
according to the particulars aforegoing.

5. That there may be a general Act of Oblivion to extend unto all, etc.

All which Proposals, together with many others, were debated and agreed upon,
by the General, and the Council of his Army, and presented to the Kings most
gracious Majesty; who after some perusal of the same, his Majesty declared a
great affection toward them, and immediately declared himself to both Houses of
Parliament, as follows:

His Majesty's gracious Message (or Declaration) to His two Houses of
Parliament assembled at Westminster.
CHARLES REX.

HIs Majesty cannot choose but be passionately sensible (as he believes all
his good Subjects are) of the late great distractions, and still languishing
and unsettled State of this Kingdom; And He calls God to witness, and is
willing to give testimony to all the world of his readiness to contribute his
utmost endeavors for restoring it to a happy and flourishing condition.

His Majesty having perused the Propositions now brought to him, sinds them the
same in effect which were offered to him at Newcastle. To some of which, he
could not then consent without violation of his conscience and honor; so can
he neither agree to others now, conceiving them in many respects more
disproportionable to the present condition of affairs then when they were
formerly presented to him, as being destructive to the many principal
interests of the Army, and of all those whose affections concur with them.

And his Majesty having seen the Proposals of the Army to the Commissioners of
his two Houses residing with them, and with them to be treated on, in order to
the clearing and securing the rights and Liberties of the Kingdom, as the
settling of a just and lasting Peace.

To which Proposals, as he conceives his two Houses not to be strangers, so he
believes they will think with him, that they much more conduce to the
satisfaction of all interests, and may be a fitter foundation for a lasting
peace, then the Propositions which at this time are tendered to him.

them the more capable of his Majesty's full concessions, wherein he resolves
to give full satisfaction to his People for whatsoever shall concern the
settling of the Protestant Profession, with liberty to tender Consciences, and
the securing of the Laws, Liberties, and properties; of all his Subjects, and
the just privileges of Parliament for the future.



Scotland mentioned in the Propositions, his Majesty will very willingly treat
upon those particulars with the Scotch Commissioners; and doubts not but to
give reasonable satisfaction to that his Kingdom.

For the Right Honorable, the Earl of Manchester, Speaker of the House of
Peers, pro tempore, to be communicated to both Houses of the Parliament of
England,and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland,
SIR,
IT is hoped that this Answer will give very much satisfaction to the Kingdom,
and therefore I desire you to use your utmost endeavors for the publishing
thereof, that so the world may take notice of the great forwardness and
readiness of his Majesty to contribute his utmost endeavors for restoring of
this poor languishing kingdom to a happy and flourishing condition, and also
the real and candid intentions of the Army, toward his Majesty, the Queen,
and Royal Issue. Thus, for the present, I must restrain my pen, but shall for
ever hereafter set my hand to the Paper, to express how much I am

Your faithful friend and servant, Jo: Hall.
From Hampton Court, this 15. of September, 1647.



