Sir Thomas Fairfax's LETTER TO The Honoble William Lenthal Esquire Speaker to the
Honorable House of Commons.

Concerning THE AGREEMENT Between Sir Tho: Fairfax's Commissioners and Sir
Ralph Hoptons at Truro in Cornwall.

Together with a true Copy of the Articles, agreed on by both parties.

Which Articles and Letter was brought by Master Peter's, and were read in the
Honorable House of Commons, 21 Martii, 1645.

APpointed by the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons, to be printed and published.

London: Printed for EDW. HUSBAND, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
March 23. 1645.

TO The Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
SIR,
Whilst I lay at Bodman for the necessary refreshment of the Army, and to
block up the passages from Bodman to the North and South sea, I sent a Summons
with Propositions to Sir Ralph Hopton, and the Army under his command: A Copy
whereof I have herein enclosed, being encouraged thereunto by some of the
enemies Officers and Soldiers, who came into me, and informed of there
inclineablenesse to conditions; and hoping thereby either to bring them to such
terms as should be to your advantage, or would distract and weaken them; and
withal understanding by the intercepted Letters I sent you, that an Irish
infantry was ready to be shipped for England, I thought fit to try all means
which in probability might break their body of Cavalry upon the place: when I
had dispatched these Propositions to the enemy, I advanced upon Monday withal
the Army from Bodman toward Truro, Truro being then the enemies head quarters,
and to Tregmon where I quartred that night: Sir Ralph Hopton sent a Trumpeter
to me with a Letter, desiring to have Commissioners appointed on both sides, to
meet at Tresilian-Bridge the next day with power to Treat and conclude, which I
assented to: The Treaty accordingly began, the Commissioners meeting about four
a clock in the afternoon, and I in the mean time advancing the quarters of the
Army to Truro and St. Allan: After some time spent between the Commissioners,
this Agreement was made, a copy whereof I have here also enclosed, and in
execution thereof this day we began to disband the French Brigade under Col.
Lapland: To morrow we proceed with three other Brigades, they having nine in
all, and shall endeavor to shorten this work as much as may be. Truly, Sir,
this must needs be acknowledged for an admirable mercy from the same gracious
hand of providence, that has hitherto gone along with you, that so
considerable a force as this should be so baffled: First at Torrington, and
afterward should put themselves as it were into a net; whereby they were
necessitated to take terms to the utter ruin of so great a body of Cavalry,
which according to all our information, and the confession of our enemies was
not less at the time of the Treaty then four thousand five hundred horse: The
Articles of Agreement will speak the mercy, and needs no comment; yet I hope I
may make this observation upon them, that hereby not only so great a body of
Cavalry is broken, but so many both officers and soldiers disobliged from
taking Arms against you, and this is at such a season when a foreign aid so
ready as the Earl of Glamorgans Letters sent up formerly (and now sent you)
speak at large, the timely freeing of us for other services that remain, with
the discouragement put upon the enemies Garrisons in these parts, which we hope
will cause them the more speedily to come in, we trust will be good
consequences of this work: Its the desire of us all, the praise of all may be
returned to God, to whom it is only due: The reputation of this has already
produced a surrender of Saint Mawes Castle, wherein we found about 13 Guns and
good proportion of Ammunition, which place gives you a better interest in
Falmouth harbor then the enemy has; for by the advantage hereof you may bring
in shipping without hazard, which they cannot; It has also occasioned the
coming in of between three hundred and four hundred foot of the enemies with
their Arms to me, and given the Countries such heart against them, That in
Peryn (a Town formerly not very well affected) and in Saint Ive they stand upon
their guards against the enemy: For further particulars concerning this
business, I refer you to Master Peter's, who since he came into this Country
(where he was born) has very much furthered the service in the bringing of the
Country in so freely to the protection of the Parliament. I remain

Your most humble Servant Tho: Fairfax.

Truro, March 14. 1645. Articles of Agreement, concluded betwixt
Commissary-General Ireton, Colonel John Lambert, Colonel John St. Aubin,
Commissary-General Stane, Captain Edward Herle and Richard Dean Comptroler of
the Ordnance, Commissioners appointed on the behalf of His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Parliaments Army of the one part; and
Colonel Charis Goring, Colonel Marcus Trevor, Colonel Thomas Panton, Colonel
Jordan Bovil, Sir Richard Prideaux Knight, and Major Goetree, Commissioners
appointed on the behalf of the Right Honorable the Lord Hopton, General of His
Majesty's Army on the other part, as follows;
1. IT is concluded and agreed, That no person in the Lord Hop^ons Army, not
formerly by name excepted by the Parliament from pardon, shall be excluded from
the privilege of this Treaty, either as being a forraigner, or for having
formerly served the Parliament; but shall equally have the benefit of what
shall upon this Treaty be granted to other persons of that quality that they
are of in the Army: And for any persons by name excepted by the Parliament,
they shall have present liberty (if they desire it) to go beyond Seas, with
like recommondation and equipage; at others of like quality; or if they desire
to live at home in England, to make their addresses to the Parliament; For
that, or other purpose, they shall have leave and reasonable time so to do, and
the Generals protection to live quietly, and at liberty in any place they shall
nominate and choose within the Parliaments Quarters, until they have received
the Parliaments Resolution; And if the Parliament shall not think fit to grant
such their desires, they shall then have leave and Passes to go beyond Sea, as
before, or to any of the Kings Armies or Garrisons, as they shall think fit.

2. That the Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton, shall within
six days after the date hereof, be wholly disbanded and discharged by the Lord
Hopton, and the General, Officers, Colonels, and other Officers under his
Command, according to the several Charges in manner hereafter expressed.

3. That all common Troopers; Corporals of Horse, Farriers and Saddlers; that
are mounted, being of or belonging to the Forces under the Command of the Right
Honorable the Lord Hopton, shall bring in and deliver up their Horses, with
their Bridles and Saddles, and all their Arms unto his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, or unto whom he shall appoint to receive them; in manner, time and
place, as is hereafter expressed; Provided, that all Corporals and such Common
Troopers; as shall appear Gentlemen of Worth, and such other Troopers as shall
go beyond Sea, shall be allowed to keep, and carry away with them their Swords.

4. That upon performance hereof, they shall receive 20 s. a man, or keep their
Horses, and shall have their Passes to go to their homes in England, or beyond
Sea with their Bag and Baggage, which they shall have leave to carry with them,
or dispose of them as they please; and those to whom Swords are allowed as
before, to pass with their Swords.

5. That the Commission-Officers of Horse under the Lord Hopton, for their
several Troops respectively, shall cause the said Horses and Arms to be duly
delivered in without changes, spoiling or imbezzlement among themselves,
according to the effect of the first Article before going.

6. That this being performed, all the said Commission-Officers of Horse in
present command, and all Trumpeters belonging to them, shall have liberty to go
away, either to their homes in England, or beyond the Seas with their Bag and
Baggage: And also, they shall have such number of Horses and Equipage as is
hereafter allowed, according to their several qualities: That is to say,

First, For those that shall choose to go beyond the Seas, the full number of
Horses and Firearms, if they have so many of their own.

To Trumpeters one Horse a piece, and their Trumpets. To Quarter Masters, two
Horses and one Case of Pistols. To Cornets three Horses and two Case of
Pistols. To Lieutenants four Horses and three Case of Pistols. To Captains,
Majors and Lieutenant-Colonels, six Horses and four Case of Pistols. To
Colonels eight Horses and six Case of Pistols. To the Adjutant-General six
Horses and four Case of Pistols. To the other Adjutants of Brigades three
Horses a piece, and one Case of Pistols. To the Scout-Master-General six Horses
and two Case of Pistols. To the Quarter-Master-General six Horses and two Case
of Pistols. To the Marshal-General four Horses and one Case of Pistols. To the
Deputy Quarter-Master-General two Horses. To the Deputy Scout-Master one Horse.
To the Major General twelve Horses and six Case of Pistols. To the
Commissary-General of Horse Provisions three Horses and a Case of Pistols. To
the Commissary-General of Victuals three Horses one Case of Pistols. To
Quarter Masters of Brigades three Horses one Case of Pistols. To the
Chirurgion-General three Horses. To Chirurgions of Regiments two Horses. To all
these, except Chirurgions, their defensive Arms, and Swords for themselves, and
their Servants; and unto every Field-Officer, one Carrabine, and Chirurgions
their Swords.
II. To those that shall choose to abide in England, with the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax his protection, and to live at home, shall have their
proportions as follows.

The Trumpetters one horse a piece, and their Trumpets.
To Quartermasters, one horse a piece. To Cornetts and Livetenants, two horses
a piece and one case of pistolls. To Captains, three horses a piece and one
case of pistolls. To Majors, four horses a piece and one case of pistolls. To
Livetenant-Collonels, five horses a piece, one case of pistolls. To Colonels,
six horses a piece, and two case of pistolls. To the Major General, ten
horses three case of pistolls. To the adjutant General, six horses one case
of pistolls. To the adjutant of Brigades, one horse a piece, and one case of
pistolls. To the Quartermaster General six horses, and one case of pistolls.
To the Marshall General three horses, and one case of pistolls. To the deputy
Quartermaster General, two horses. To the Scout-Master-Generall, four horses,
and one case of pistolls. All these to have swords for themselves and their
servants. To the Commissary of horse provision, two horses and a case of
pistolls. To the Commissary of victnalls, two horses, and a case of pistolls.
To the deputy Scouts Master, one horse. To the Quatermasters of Brigades, two
horses. To the Surgeon General two horses. To Chirurgions of Regiments, one
horse. To Chaplains, two horses. All these, except Chaplains, to have Swords
for themselves and their servants.
VII. That the precedent Articles concerning the surrender o^ Troopers horses,
etc. being performed; if any Officer in Command, that chaseth to live at home
shall approve to have more horses of his own, than what he is before allowed
by the last precedent Article, the Commissioners of Sir Thomas Furfax his part
will recommand it to his Excellencies favor, That they may enjoy the benefit
of such horses of their own to the same number as Officers of like quality
that are to go beyond Sea.

VIII. That of the Reformadoe Officers that choose to live at home in England,
Reformadoe Quarter Masters shall have the same conditions as Corporalls in
Command; Coronetes and Livetenants shall go away with one horse a piece,
Captains, Majors and Livtenant-Collonels, with two horses a piece, and
Collonells with three horses a piece, if they have so many of their own, and
one case of pistolls, those Reformadoes that desire to go beyond Seat to half
the proportion of Horses and Arms allowed in that case to Officers of the like
quality in present Command if they have them of their own and all of them to
go with Swords Bagg and Baggage, or dispose thereof at pleasure.

IX. That all Gentlemen of quality in Arms or not in Arms, but living under
the protection of the said Army, shall have liberty either to go to their own
houses, or beyond the Seas, with Bagg and Baggage, and equipage according to
their several qualities, as follows, That is to say.

A Knight with four horses, three servants, one case of pistolls and their
swords. An Esquire with three horses, two servants, one case of pistolls, and
their swords. A Gentleman with two horses, one servant, one case of pistolls
and their swords. A Gentleman of lowest rank with one horse for himself and
a sword. Scholars and Clergymen to have one horse at the least, or more
according to their different degrees, at the Generals discretion.
X. That to all those who according to the effect of these Articles shall
choose to go beyond the Sea, passes shall be granted from the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax accordingly, and to those who being English shall choose to live
at home, passes for that purpose and protections for their liberty of their
persons, and also for the freedom of their estates from all plunder or violence
of Soldiers, and that such Gentlemen or others that have considerable estates,
may have the Generals Letters of recommendation to the Parliament (if desired)
for their moderate composition.

XI. That after the performance of these Articles so far to disbanding and
delivering up of what is to be delivered: All Officers and Soldiers that shall
according to these Articles choose to go beyond the Seas, shall have sufficent
Quarters assigned them by Sir Thomas Fairfax, near convenient Ports for their
transportation, and that they shall have twenty eight days allowed to stay in
England from the day of their several disbanding, and that the charge of
quartering their horses be discharged by themselves after the first fourteen
days for the time of their further stay, That the General will appoint men to
take care that shipping shall be provided for transporting the persons, Arms,
Bagg and Baggage, they paying the accustomed rates.

XII. That a certain number of Officers of the Lord Hoptons Army not exceeding
forty, upon the Lord Hoptons Commissioners request shall be permitted to have
passes for themselves, and their servants horses and necessaries to go to
Oxford, provided that their servants exceed not the number of two, their horses
three, to every one respectively.

XIII. That the Lord Hopton shall be allowed for his own use all his horses,
provided they exceed not the number of forty, and Arms for himself and twelve
men; And that the Lord Wentworth shall have all his horses, provided they
exceed not five and twenty and arms for himself and eight men, and places
assigned them for convenience of Quarters.

XIIII. That such english men as shall choose to abide in England at their
homes, and all Forraigners of the said Army, shall engage themselves by
promise in such form as is herewith agreed on, not to bear Arms any more
against the Parliament of England, nor to act any thing wilfully, prejudicial
to the Parliaments affairs, without first rendering themselves Prisoners to the
Parliament; And likewise all such English as shall choose to go beyond Sea,
shall engage themselves in the like promise for three years next ensuing the
date hereof, or otherwise shall lose the benefit of these Articles, excepting
the Lord Hopton and Lord Wentworth, and the number of Officers allowed to go
to Oxford, in the twelfth Article before-going, who are by the intention of
these Articles left free from such engagement.

XV. That all Horses, Arms, and furniture of war belonging to, or in the
hands of any person of the said Army, not allowed in the precedent, or
subsequent Articles, to be carried away, shall be delivered up to such
persons, and at such place near Truro, or Sir Thomas Fairfax his
Headquarters, as his Excellency shall appoint, within six days after the date
hereof without fail, or in bezelment; At the care as well of the Generals
Officers of the said Army, and all Commanders in their several charges, as by
the persons themselves to whom such Arms or Furniture of war do belong, or
in whose custody they were.

XVI. That whosoever shall after the conclusion of this Treaty, purposely
break, spoil, or imbezill any of the Arms, Horses or furniture agreed and
concluded to be delivered up in this Treaty, shall forfeit the benefit due
unto him by any Article in the Treaty. And if any of the said Army after the
conclusion of this Treaty, shall plunder, or wilfully do any violence unto any
Inhabitants of the Country, they shall give satisfaction unto the persons so
wronged, or lose the benefit of the Treaty, And that the Commissioners of both
parties, or any three of them, whereof one or more to be of Sir Thomas Fairfax
his party, and one or more to be of the Lord Hoptons, shall have power to
hear and determine all such cases accordingly.

XVII. That the said Army and Forces under the command of the Lord Hopton;
from the time of the Conclusion of this Treaty, until the time of their
drawing out to be disbanded, as in the ensuing Articles, shall be quartered
in such places Westward from Truro as Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, which
shall be large enough for their accommodation, and that the Cessation of Arms,
and of all acts of hostility betwixt the two Armies, shall continue unto the
time of the complete disbanding of the Lord Hoptons Army.

XVIII. That for the disbanding of the said Forces, and delivering up of
Horses, Arms, etc. In performance of the precedent Articles. Every Brigade and
Regiment under the Lord Hoptons command, shall by their respective Commanders
be drawn out into such places of Rendezvous, within two miles of Truro, or Sir
Thomas Fairfax his Headquarters, And upon such days as Sir, Thomas Fairfax
shall for them jointly or severally appoint notice of the time and place being
given to his Excellency in writing sixteen hours beforehand, under the
Commissioners of the Lord Hoptons party, or any of them, two or more of whom
shall for that and other purposes continue at Sir Thomas Fairfax his head
Quarters, until the disbanding be finished, and that the Quartermaster
General, or Adjutant of the Lord Hoptons with one horseman from every Brigade,
shall also be there with them, and that none of the said Brigades or Regiments
shall be drawn out of their Quarters, (which shall be assigned to them as
before) otherwise then upon, and according to such notice from Sir Thomas
Fairfax as before, except to and for their ordinary Guards.

XIX. That to or before the drawing out of the several Brigades or Regiments
such Randezvouz as before: The chief Commanders of them respectively shall
deliver unto whom Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, a true and perfect list of
the Regiments and Troops in the several Brigades, and of all Officers and
Soldiers in their several Troops, expressing by name which of them do
choose to go beyond Sea, and which do go to live at home; Or also, who are
Reformadoes, and in what degree of command they have served in, and that at the
same times and places, the Horses, Arms, and Furniture, by virtue of the
precedent Articles to be delivered up, shall be delivered accordingly: And
all the Officers and Soldiers disbanded and discharged, and there shall
receive their Passes with Warrants for quarters by the way for one night in a
place, and be conveyed toward their several homes, as far as Chard, if
they go so far, or unto Quarters assigned them for their transportation
according to the preceding Articles.

That for the further peformance of these Articles, two Colonels of each Army
shall be mutually delivered and kept as Hostages.

H. Ireton. Jo. Lambert. Io. S. Aubin. William Stane. Edward Herle. Richard
Deane. Charles Goring. Marcus Irevor. Thomas Panton. Jordan Bovill. Richard
Prideaux. Iean. Goteere.


FINIS.

