Honest, Plain, Down-right-Dealing WITH THE PEOPLE CALLED Episcopal-Men, and
Presbyterians.
In this Seasonable ADVICE given unto them, and their TEACHERS.
FRIENDS,
YOU both pretend in words to be friends to the King; now let your actions show
forth the same, lest ye (in this Cause concerning the King) be found like unto
those who in words professed to know or love another King, but in works denied
him. Tit. 1.16.
Therefore, labor not to persuade the King to set up either of your forms of
Worship in this manner, (mark) as to compel by outward force all others to
conform thereunto, or else to persecute them; for if you do thus, and if the
King should hearken unto either of you, and fulfill either of your wills in
this particular, (mark) you to whom he so consents unto, would shortly be made
manifest to be the greatest Enemies to the King in the Nations. And not only
the Kings Enemies, but Enemies to your selves also, even to the endangering of
the destruction both of the King and your selves; For if the King shall set up
either of your Forms, and compel all others thereunto, or else persecute them;
(mark) you two are so inveterate one against another, and have acted already so
cruelly one against another, that thus it will be with you, (mark) you that the
King so sets up will seek to avenge your selves, and to lord it over the other,
and neither of you are able to suffer in patience, Mat, 5.44, 16
(and to forgive your enemies) as the Ministers of Christ were to do, Mat. 6 15
that so which-soever of you were put under the other, you will be watching to
plot both against the King, and them that are set over you; and if you that are
put under, can but get an advantage against the other, which soever of you it
be (mark) even the Mercies of you would be cruelty toward those that kept you
under. And if either of your Forms should be set up, as beforementioned, you
who be set up in that manner will be in great danger of being destroyed, and
that for these reasons.

First, Because it is not owned by the Lord, that any should set up a Worship,
and compel others to it by outward force or persecution; and this is the way in
which either of you would proceed, if ye had power, and thereby you would
engage the Lord against you and your Worship; for the worship which he owns,
John 4.23 24
is in the Spirit and in the Truth, and nothing but the power of his Spirit can
compel thereunto, and they that Rebel against this power in matter of Worship,
are for it to be punished thereby.

Secondly, Because the Lord has decreed to remove oppression and persecution,
and to judge and blast that spirit which has exercised cruelty against the
Saints, and to set up Righteousness, and to give his people their just Liberty
to worship him according to the leadings and requirings of his eternal Spirit
in them; (mark) and if either of your Forms should be set up (as
beforementioned) it would strongly oppose this Decree of God which cannot be
broken, and therefore it would engage the Lord to destroy you.

Thirdly, if one of you be set up, and ye be empowered by the King to compel by
outward force all others to your Worship, or else to persecute them; (mark)
this will exasperate the Spirits of most of the other Sects against the King,
and you that shall be so set up; and it will engage all them of the Sects that
are in the fighting nature, and can use a carnal Weapon for their own defense,
to join together as one man against the King, and either of you that he should
so set up. Therefore if you would be true friends either to the King, or your
selves, and your Nation, labor not with the King to establish either of your
Forms (or any other) as before mentioned; but if ye own CHARLES STUART to be
King, be content that he may rule over all, as one, keeping the outward peace
among you all, by providing just Laws, to punish any that would hurt any man's
Person or Estate upon any unjust account whatsoever, or any that shall run into
open profaneness; Mat. 7.12
and be content that others may have as much liberty to worship their God in
that way they are persuaded to be right, as ye desire to have in that ye think
is right; and lay by all these Carnal Weapons, as Prisons, Fires, Gallows,
Stocks, Whips, and all outward violence, and use none of them (mark) about
compelling to a Worship: But you that are Teachers, 2 Cor. 1 ^4
come forth with your spiritual Weapons (if you have them) and smite at the
spiritual wickedness that is exalted in the creatures, if ye be able, wrestle
with that, and not with the creatures; and if without using outward force and
compulsion, Ephesians. 6.12.
ye can plant a Vinyard, (as the Apostles did) then eat of the fruit thereof,
and if ye can thus gather a flock and keep them, then eat of the milk thereof;
and if ye can sow spirituals, then reap of their carnals that receives you and
your Testimony; and if you be sent forth by Christ, Luk 22.35
then you will not lack any thing; but if you dare not come to this trial, then
it will plainly appear that you are such as serve not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but your own bellyes; Ier. 23.32
and that you are not sent of God, but run, and he has not sent you; and
speak, but he has not spoken unto you, and therefore you cannot profit the
people; (mark) And if the outward peace be kept by the Kings Law, that so none
may do violence to any man's person or Estate, then you need not fear if you be
in the Spirit of Truth, 1 John 4.4.
but that ye shall overcome them that are in the spirit of error, and make them
manifest when they do oppose you; but if you dare not come to this trial, Acts
6.9, 10.
then it will plainly appear, that you are in the spirit of error, and such as
cannot stand except they be upheld by the Powers of the Earth.

Again, and if God should suffer this, that either of you could prevail thus
far with the King, as that he should set up either of your Forms, and give you
a Law to compel or persecute outwardly, (mark) thereby you might make many
hypocrites, who might pretend to foyne unto you, (to save their Bodies or
Estates) until they could find an opportunity to destroy you; but by all your
outward force, you can never convert any unto God; for it is Christ, the
Immortal, ingrafted Word, which is only able to convert unto God; and it is the
work of the true Ministers to turn people from darkness to light, Act. 26.18
and from Satan's power unto the power of God; Romans 10. 8
and to direct them to the Word which is nigh, Acts 20.23
in the mouth, and in the heart, Iam: 1.21
and to commend and keep them to that; and to exhort them in meekness to
receive the ingrafted Word, which is able to save their souls; 2 Cor. 10.4
and they must not use any Carnal Weapons to do their work withal, but
Spiritual: Therefore if you would be counted Christ's Ministers, lay by your
Carnal Weapons, and use them no longer about Religion; neither press the King
to set up or uphold either of your Forms of worship by outward force (as
beforementioned) lest thereby you become Instruments to destroy the King, your
selves, or the Nation.

So though King CHARLES be accounted and suffered to be Head in things between
man and man; yet let CHRIST JESUS the everlasting King be accounted and
suffered to be Head of his Church, Ephesians 5.23. and 4, 13.
that so He may have that which is due unto him; Col. 1.^8
and this were the way for the true Church, and the King, and these Nations to
prosper, and the way for the false Church, the false Prophets, and all plotting
usurping self-interested men to be confounded.

And this is the desire of me who am a sufferer for Righteousness sake,
contrary to any Law of God, or known Law of the Nation.

Geo. Fox the younger.
From my Chamber (the place of my confinenient) in Lambeth-House, ( the 14th.
of the 4th. Month, 1660.) where I have perfect peace with God through Jesus
Christ, in whom I have true Liberty as a Son, according to the appointment of
the Father. I cannot flatter any, but must spe^k the naked truth unto all; and
I seek the peace of my Nation, and the good of all men; and I cannot fight with
any Creature, but I can fight with the spiritual wickedness, though it be in
the High Places.

G. F.



LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill in Martins L' Grand, 1660.


