SAVL's ERRAND TO DAMASCVS: WITH His Packet of Letters from the Highpriests,
against the disciples of the Lord.

OR, A faithful Transcript of a PETITION contrived by some persons in
Lancashire, who call themselves Ministers of the Gospel, breathing out
threatenings and slaughters against a peaceable and godly people there, by them
nicknamed QVAKERS.

Together with the Defense of the persons thereby traduced, against the
slanderous and false suggestions of that Petition, and other untruths charged
upon them.

Published to no other end, but to draw out the bowels of tender compassion
from all that love the poor despised servants of Jesus Christ, who have been
the scorn of carnal men in all ages.

Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness;
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you, falsely, for my
sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven: for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. London, printed for
Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's. 1653.

To all that love the Lord Jesus Christ.
Dear hearts!
YOu love the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and not him alone, but Christ, with all his
Train. Great shall be your compensation: for your Love, you shall have a Cant.
7.12.
Loves, Amores, a plurality, an infinity of Loves; which none but God in Christ
has to bestow. The best of his Relations upon earth, have but Single Love (and
it is happy they have Love) to the Brethren; But Christ has Loves for the
meanest of you, the least of his. May you, and all his (in whom there are yet
but buds, scarce visible appearances of Graces) prove fruitful Vines, grow from
Buds to Blossoms, from Blossoms to abundance of fruits; That when the Lord
shall get up early to visit his Vineyard, you may feast him with pleasant
fruits new and old; you may bless him for his Loves of former and later days,
and be ever to him an humble, holy, and thankful, and to his brethren a
comforting people. Glory in your habit; you wear the signal Favors of the King
of kings, and Lord of hosts, the Great and Mighty JEHOVAH, Love: By which I
know to whom ye belong, because ye love the Brethren.

TO The Contrivers and Subscribers of the Petition.
Poor hearts,
IS this a time to chide, and be angry, and pick quarrels? and (if you must
needs do so) can you find no other objects of your indignation, but the Lords
Disciples? but peaceable, holy, humble, self-denying men? Is not the work of
the Ministry to preach the Gospel? Is not the sword of the Magistrate
appointed to the punishment of evil doers, and to the praise of them that do
well? Are you incumbent in your duties? are you laying out your Talents to the
end they were given you? or are you mistaken in the thing? When did you
proclaim war against Drunkards, Swearers, common Blasphemers, enemies to the
Lord and his people? have you none of those amongst you? or are your high-flown
contending spirits gone beyond such slender wrastlings, that you scorn to
encounter with any below the degree of a Saint? The Lord open your eyes, and
let you see, and give you hearts to consider your several duties. But tell me,
ye sons of Levi (as ye call your selves) ye that pretend a Jus Divinum to
Persecution; What will ye say, when the Son of man shall come in his glory, and
all the holy Angels with him, and shall sit upon the Throne of his glory, and
all Nations shall be gathered before him? mind ye what will be the great work of
that great day; your Petition will surely then be heard. I beseech you read the
paper of Causes set down to be first heard at that Tribunal, in Matthew. 25.31.
to the end of the Chapter: And the Lord let it dwell upon your hearts for ever.

To the Christian Reader.
THese are to let thee know, that the only wise God at this time has so by his
providence ordered it, in the North-parts of Lancashire, that many precious
Christians (and so for many years accounted, before the nickname Quakers was
heard of) have, for some time past, forborne to concorporate in Parochial
Assemblies, wherein they profess themselves to have gained little of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ: And it is, and has been put upon their hearts, to
meet often (and on the Lords day constantly) at convenient places, to seek the
Lord their Redeemer, and to worship him in Spirit and in truth, and to speak of
such things (tending to mutual edification) as the good Spirit of the Lord
shall teach them; demeaning themselves without any offense given to any that
truly fear the Lord.

But true it is, that some men and interests of those parts do take great
offense at them, and their Christian and peaceable exercises; some, because
they have witnessed against pride and luxuriant fullness, have therefore come
armed with Sword and Pistols (men that never drew a Sword for the interest of
the Commonwealth of England, perhaps against it) into their assemblies in time
of their Christian performances, and have taken him whom the Lord at that
instant had moved to speak to the rest, and others of their assembly (after
they had haled and beaten them) and carried them bound hand and feet into the
open fields, in the cold of the night, and there left them to the hazard of
their lives, had not the Lord of life owned them, which he did in much mercy.
Others have had their houses broken in the night, and entered by men armed as
aforesaid (and disguised) when they have been peaceably waiting upon God with
their own and neighbour-families: and yet these humble persecuted Christians
would not (even in these cases of gross and intolerable affronts acted equally
against the peace of the Nation as against them) complain, but expressed how
much (in measure) of their masters patience was given them in breathing out
their Masters gentle words, Father forgive them; they know not what they do.
Who have at any time born such unheard of persecution with so mild Spirits?
only they in whom persecuted Christ dwells: these poor creatures know how
their Master fared, and rejoice to suffer with him, by whom alone they hope to
be glorified; and are as well content to suffer, as to reign with Christ: but
how unwillingly do we deny our selves, and take up our cross and follow Christ?
and yet a necessity lies upon us (if we will be the Lords Disciples) to take up
our cross daily and follow him: How is it then, that the crown of Pride is so
long upon the head of Persecutors? how is it that such men should dare to
divide the people of England, to trouble the Council of State (in the throng of
business concerning the management and improvement of all the mighty Series of
glorious providence made out to this infant-Commonwealth) with such abominable
misrepresentations of honest, pious, peaceable men, who desire nothing more
then to glorify their God in their generation, and are and have been more
faithful to the interest of Gods people in the Nation, then any of the
contrivers of the Petition, as will easily be made appear, if we may take for
evidence what they themselves have often said of the Parliament and Army, and
their Friends and Servants, publicly and privately; and it is well known their
judgments are the same; but that the publication thereof will not safely
consist with the enjoyment of their large Vicaredges, Parsonages, and
Augmentations, whereby they are lifted up above their Brethren, and exalt
themselves above all that are called Gods people in these parts.

However, Reader, we need not fear; we hope the Lord will never suffer that
Monster Persecution again to enter within the gates of Englands Whitehal: They
that sit in Council there, know well enough who it was that so often assembled
to consult how they might take Jesus by subtilty and kill him: they were men of
no lower condition then Chiefe-Priests, Scribes, and Elders of the people: and
if ever these Petitioners should but appear before them to whom they have
directed their Petition, my heart deceives me if they be not accounted such.

Reader, I would not preface thee into a good opinion of these suffering
objects of such men's wrath; but read their paper here put into thy hand, by
them written, upon the occasion of this Petition, and several snares and
temptations laid before them, on purpose to entrap them; and if by them thou
can find cause to pity these oppressed little-ones, have them in thy
remembrance when thou go to the throne of Grace, where my prayers shall meet
thine, for them.

To the Right Honorable The Council of State: The humble Petition of several
Gentlemen, Justices of Peace, Ministers of the Gospel, and People, within the
County of Lancaster, whose names are subscribed.
Shows,
THat George Fox, and James Nayler, are persons disaffected to Religion, and
the wholesome Laws of this Nation; and that since their coming into this
Country, have broached Opinions tending to the destruction of the relation of
Subjects to their Magistrates, Wives to their Husbands, Children to their
Parents, Servants to their Masters, Congregations to their Ministers, and of a
People to their God: And have drawn much people after them; many whereof (men,
women, and little children) at their meetings are strangely wrought upon in
their bodies, and brought to fall, foam at the mouth, roar, and swell in their
bellies. And that some of them affirmed themselves to be equal with God,
contrary to the late Act, as has been attested at a late Quarter Sessions
holden at Lancaster in October last past; and since that time, acknowledged
before many Witnesses; besides many other dangerous Opinions, and damnable
Heresies, as appears by a Schedule hereunto annexed, with the names of the
Witnesses subscribed.

May it therefore please your Honors upon the consideration of the Premises,
to provide (as your wisdoms shall think fit) That some speedy course may be
taken for the speedy suppressing of these evils.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, as in duty bound.

1. George professed and avowed that he was equal with God.

2. He professed himself to be the Eternal Judge of the world.

3. He said he was the Judge of the world.

4. He said he was the Christ, the way, the truth, the life.

5. He said, Whosoever took a place of Scripture, and made a Sermon of it and
from it, was a Conjurer, and his Preaching Conjuration.

6. He said that the Scripture was carnal.

James Milner, a follower of the said Fox, professes himself to be God and
Christ; and gives out Prophecies,

1. That the day of Judgment shall be the 15 day of November.

2. That there shall never Judge sit at Lancaster again.

3. That he must ere long shake the foundations of the great Synagogue, meaning
the Parliament.

Leonard Fell professes that Christ had never any body but his Church.

Richard Huberthorn wrote, that Christ's coming in the flesh was but a figure.

The Answer of George Fox, to the matters falsely charged upon him, by the
Petition and Schedule aforesaid.
Object. THat George Fox and James Nayler, are Persons disaffected to Religion.

Answ. Whereas we are accused as Persons disaffected to Religion, it is false;
for pure Religion we own in our souls, which is, to visit the Fatherless and
relieve the Widows, and to keep our selves unspotted from the world, and
dwelling in purity; this we own in our souls. But he that does seem to be
religious, Jam. 1.26, 27. Mat. 23.27
and has not power over his own tongue, his Religion is vain; and that
Religion we do deny: and all them that do profess the Scriptures in words, and
live not the life of them but live in drunkenness and uncleanness, envy and
maliciousness; J^^ 5.31.
and all they that do profess Religion, and make a trade of the Scriptures,
both Priests and People, we do deny.

Object. Disaffected to the wholesome laws of the Nation.

Answ. Justice (the wholesome law of God) we own; Romans 13 4,
and this is a terror to the unjust, unwholesome, and unclean: and he that
bears that Sword is a Minister of God; Isa. 33.22,
and who does not obey the law of God within, then that takes hold upon him
without; but who does obey the law of God within, it brings them from under the
occasions of all laws without: for it will not let man lie, nor let him be
drunk, nor proud, nor follow oaths, nor cursed speaking, nor whoredoms,
quarreling, fighting, wrangling, nor railing: and every one who walks in the
law of God, denies all that which is unwholesome, and that which is according
to the course of the world; and they be all of one heart, and are all one in
unity, if ten thousand; and have all one law written in their hearts; which
those that live in uncleanness cast behind their backs; and yet they profess a
law in words, but are not subject to the power of God: and such are they who do
accuse their brethren which walk in the law of God; and yet they pretend
justice; but their souls are not subject; for that soul that is subject to the
higher power which is of God, denies all filthiness and corruption.

Object. That since their coming into this Country, they have broached
Opinions tending to the destruction of the relation of Subjects to their
Magistrates, Wives to their Husbands, Children to their Parents, Servants to
their Masters, Congregations to their Ministers, and of a People to their God.

Answ. We were moved to come into this Country, of the Lord; and the Lord did
let us see, that he had a people here, before we came in it. But as for
broaching Opinions, We deny; but those that profess truth, and walk in it up to
God, we own. Opinions do tend to break the relation of Subjects to their
Magistrates, Wives to their Husbands, Children to their Parents, Servants to
their Masters, Congregations to their Ministers, and of a People to their God;
but Opinions we deny; for they are without God; and there you are: and justice
and purity is but one, and that we set up and own: purity and walking in the
Spirit, does make a separation from all uncleanness, and can have no fellowship
with them who are unfruitful workers of darkness; Romans 1.2.
but there is a separation from them; the one has fellowship with God, and the
other has fellowship with darkness, which be unfruitful: the one is separated
to God, the other is separated from God.

Object. Have drawn much people after them; many whereof, Men, Women, and
Little-Children, at their meetings, are strangely wrought upon in their bodies,
and brought to fall, foam at the mouth, roar, and swell in their bellies.

Answ. The meetings of the people of God, 1 Pet. 4.12 Psa. 71.7.
were ever strange to the world; for it was as though some strange thing had
happened to the Saints, as ye read in the Scripture; which show ye are in the
same generation, Act. 13.41.
wondering and stranging at the work of the Lord, despising, and casting
scandals, slanders, and false reports upon them: and where the works of God are
now, they think them strange things now, as was then who are alive in the
flesh. Act. 9.4, 5.
It would be a strange thing to see one now fall down, Dan. 10.9
as Paul fell down and trembled, and as Daniel fell down and trembled; and to
see one as Habakkuk his belly to tremble, and his lips to quiver, Hab. 3.16.
and as David, to lie roaring all the day long, who cried till his sight was
grown dim, and his flesh failed of fatness* and till he could number his bones;
and to see one as Isaiah, to rent his garment and his mantle, and pluck his
hair off his head, and off his beard, and sit down astonished: Isa. 66.5.
and would it not be strange to see such an Assembly as came to Isaiah* which
had all trembling hearts? Hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his
word; Work out your salvation with fear and trembling: Before their faces the
people shall be much pained: Joel 2.6.
all faces shall gather blackness. The Prophets and Ministers of God have all
one Spirit (according to measure) and did encourage those that did tremble;
wherein it shows that you have not the same Spirit, but seek to persecute, and
fix scandals, and accuse them falsely. The Ministry of truth ever drew from all
the Ministry of the world, and from under all the laws of the world, up to God,
and from all the Gods of the earth and then they witnessed that the Lord was
their Lawgiver, the Lord was their King, the Lord was their Judge.

Object. George Fox professed and avowed that he was equal with God.

Answ. It was not so spoken, as George Fox was equal with God: but the Father
and the Son is one: John 14.9, 10.
I and my Father are one; and where the same is revealed, this is witnessed:
but where the same is not made manifest and revealed, Christ is persecuted; for
the world knows him not. Let the same mind be in you, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7.
that was also, in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God, and yet made himself of no reputation: And this I
witness to be fulfilled; for the same Spirit where it is, is equal with God:
for he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one; and it
is God that sanctifies: Heb 2.11. Jude 1. Joh. 1.1. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48. 1 John
3.7.
He that has the Word has God, for God is the Word; and our fellowship is
with God. There is a natural man, and there is a spiritual man: the the first
is of the earth earthly, the second is the Lord from heaven: the new man, which
is created after God in righteousness and true holiness; and he that does
righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. And this I witness, what
the Scripture says, Let no man deceive you.

Object. He professes himself to be the eternal Judge of the world.

Answ. He that was a Minister of God, said, that the Saints should judge the
world, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
yea, Angels: herein they do show themselves to be no Ministers of God, who
seek to persecute them who are judged of God, and justified by him; where
judgment is brought forth unto victory, Mat. 12.20
and set in the earth; and that which is eternal, has judged all the carnal
nature in himself; and where it is judged, thereis no unity with it, where it
is alive; and he that has not true judgment, Mat. 5.13, 14.
and Salt in himself to savor withal, is good for nothing, and he cannot
endure that Christ should speak where he is made manifest. I am the way, says
Christ; Christ is but one in all his Saints, 1 Cor. 11.3 Mar. 13.11
and he speaks in them; but he does not say that George Fox is Christ: I am the
way, the truth, and the life: Christ is the light, and ye are the light, and
Christ lives in you, and Christ is the head of the man; and it is the Spirit
of the Father that speaks in you, and spoke in Christ, and he is but one in
in all his Saints: Isa. 5.20.
without are many Christ's; Lo here, and lo there; but know you not that Christ
is in you except ye be Reprobates? and if Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin; and there Christ Jesus speaks, the same Christ to day,
yesterday, and for ever. And thy judgment, which is not eternal, is carnal;
and with evil thoughts thou judge: thou put darkness for light, and light
for darkness; and here thou show thy judgment to be carnal, and no Minister
of God, but a Minister of the Letter, and not of the Spirit; for the Ministers
of the Spirit have true judgment, and did imprison none, nor persecute, as you
do: but it is, that fools may utter forth their folly.

Object. He said he was the way, the truth, the life.

Answ. The old man cannot endure to hear the new man speak, John 14.6.
which is Christ; and Christ is the way: and if Christ be in you, must not he
say. I am the way, the truth, and the life? John 10.4.
Now if Antichrist speak, he is owned of the world; but he cannot witness it;
while the old man reigns, the voice of God is not known, nor Christ himself to
speak in man, but Christ's sheep know his voice.

Object. He said, Whosoever took a place of Scripture, and made a Sermon of it,
or from it, was a Conjurer, and his preaching was Conjuration.

Answ. He that puts the Letter for the light, John 8.12.
when the Letter says that Christ is the light, he is blind; and they that say
the Letter and the Spirit are inseparable, when the Spirit says the Letter is
death, and kills, and all that do study to raise a living thing out of a
dead, to raise the Spirit out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and draw points,
and reasons, Jer. 23.16. Jer. 27.9, 10.
and so speak a divination of their own brain: they are Conjurers and Diviners,
and their teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the mouth of
the Lord and the Lord is against all such; and who are of God, are against all
such; for that doctrine does not profit the people at al, for it stands not in
the council of God, but is a doctrine of the Devil, and draws people from God;
but he that speaks from the mouth of the Lord, turns people from their
wickedness: Heb. 8.11.
but that Ministry which God has not sent, and that Assembly must be
disaffected: for the Lord is coming to teach his people himself, by his Spirit.

Object. George Fox said the Scripture was carnal.

Answ. The Letter of the Scripture is carnal, and the Letter is death, and
kills, but the Spirit gives life, Heb. 7.16.
which was in them that gave forth the Scriptures and that I witness, which is
eternal and not carnal: for the Jews which had the Letter, persecuted Jesus
Christ the Substance: and so do you now, which have the Letter, and not the
Substance; there were Ministers of the Letter then, and Ministers of the
Spirit, so is there is now; the same Christ being made manifest, Col. 1.27.
is unknown to the world; for the whole world lies in wickedness; and Christ
Jesus is a Mystery to the world, and is hid, though you may profess him,
because the Letter speaks of him; 1 John 3.8.
but ye persecute him where he is made manifest; and where he is made manifest,
the works of the Devil are destroyed, and there he speaks, and is King, and is
the way, and is the truth, 1 John 5.12. Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 6.17 2 Cor. 6.16.
and is the life; and he that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the
Son, has not life; and he that has the same Spirit that raised up Jesus
Christ, is equal with God: and the Scripture says, that God will dwell in man,
and walk in man; as Jesus Christ, which is the mystery, has passed before, so
the same Spirit takes upon it the same seed, and is the same where it is made
manifest: According to the flesh, I am the son of Abraham; according to the
Spirit, the son of God, says Christ. Col. 1.27. Heb. 2.16.
All the plotting of the Priests is, and ever was, against Christ where he is
made manifest: and the Beast shall make war with the Saints, and with the Lamb;
but the Lamb shall get the victory: praises, praises be to our God for ever,
for evermore.

Object. Richard Hubethorne writ, that Christ's coming in the flesh, was but a
figure.

Answ. Christ in his people, is the substance of all figures, types, and
shadows, fulfilling them in them, and setting them free from them; but, as he
is held forth in the Scripture-Letter without them, and in the flesh without
them, he is their example or figure, which is both one, that the same things
might befulfilled in them, that was in Christ Jesus: 1 Pet. 2.21 1 Pet. 4.1.
for even hereunto were ye called, because Christ has suffered for us, leaving
us an example that we should follow his steps: forasmuch as Christ has
suffered for us, arm your selves likewise with the same mind. 1 Pet. 1.15.
Christ was our example in suffering, and in holiness; and as he which has
called you is holy, Joh. 13.15.
so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy
as I am holy. He is our example in humility: I have given you an example (says
Christ) that ye should do even as I have done unto you; And as he is, so are we
in this world; He is our forerunner, Captain of our Salvation, and in all
things our example. Tit. 16.
As they have done unto me, so shall they do unto you. But all they who have
not Christ dwelling in them go about to persecute him in all them in whom he is
made manifest; they neither follow him as an example themselves, nor suffer
others to follow him as an example and walk in the same steps; but deny him
both as the substance and example, of his people: but they who are taught of
him, do confess him both as he is the substance of all things, and their
example in all things; for without me ye can do nothing, says Christ: and it
is so I witness it.

And as for James Millner, though his mind did run out from his condition, and
from minding that light of God which is in him, whereby the world takes
occasion to speak against the truth, and many friends stumble at it; yet there
is a pure seed in him.

Object. Leonard Fell said that Christ had no Body but his Church.

Answ. There is one Body, and one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.4. Col. 1.18. 2 Cor. 5.19
even as ye are called into one hope of your calling; and Christ Jesus is the
head of the Body the Church, and ye are made free from sin by the Body of
Christ; and Christ came to redeem his Church; God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself, for his body's sake, Col. 1.24. Ephesians. 5.30, 32. Ephesians. 22.23
which is his Church. For we are members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his
Bones: this is a great Mystery: but I speak concerning Christ and his Church.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church, which is his body, The fullness of him that fills all in
all. In whom also we are builded up together, for an habitation of God through
the Spirit.

W W.

More Objections against George Fox, charged upon him, by the Contrivers of the
foresaid Petition; and Answered by him, as follows.
Object. 1. THat he did affirm that he had the Divinity essentially in him.

Answ. 2 Cor. 6.1. Ephesians. 4.6. 2 Pet. 1.4.
For the word essential, it is an expression of their own: but that the Saints
are the Temples of God and God does dwell in them, that the Scriptures do
witness; and if God dwell in them, then the Divinity dwells in them; and the
Scripture says, Ye shall be partakers of the divine nature: and this I
witness; but where this is not, they cannot witness it.

Object. 2. That both Baptism and the Lords Supper are unlawful.

Answ. As for that word unlawful, it was not spoken by me; but, the Baptism of
Infants I deny; and there is no Scripture that speaks of a Sacrament, but that
Baptism that is into Christ, with one spirit, Gal. 3.27.
into one body; that I confess according to Scripture: and the Lords Supper I
confess, and that the bread the Saints break, Job. 6.53, 55.
is the body of Christ; and that cup which they drink, is the blood of Christ;
this I witness.

Object. 3. He did dissuade men from reading the Scriptures, telling them that
it is carnal.

Answ. For dissuading men from reading the Scriptures, that is false, for they
were given to be read as they are, but not to make a Trade upon; 1 Cor. 2.10,
16.
the Letter is carnal, and kills; but that which gave it forth, is spiritual,
eternal, and gives life; and this I witness.

Oject. 4. That he was equal with God.

Answ. Heb. 2.11.
That was not so spoken; but that He that sanctifies, and they that are
sanctified, are of one, and the Saints are all one in the Father and the Son,
of his flesh and of his bone; this the Scripture does witness: And ye are the
sons of God; Ephesians. 5.30.
and the Father and the Son are one; and they that are joined to the Lord, are
one spirit; and they that are joined to an Harlot are one flesh.

Object. That God taught deceit.

Answ. That is false, and was never spoken by me; God is pure.

Object. That the Scriptures are Antichrist.

Answ. That is false; but that they which profess the Scriptures, and live not
in the life and power of them, as they did that gave them forth, that I witness
to be Antichrist.

Object. That he was the Judge of the world. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.


Answ. That the Saints shall judge the world, the Scripture witness it* whereof
I am one, and I witness the Scripture fulfilled.

Object. That he was as upright as Christ.

Answ. Those words were not so spoken by me; 1 John 4.17. 2 Cor. 5.21. Ioh.
17.21, 22. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
but that as he is, so are we in this present world; That the Saints are made
the righteousness of God; That the Saints are one in the Father and the Son,
that we shall be like him, 1 John 3.2. and that all teaching which is given
forth by Christ, is to bring the Saints to perfection, even to the measure of
the stature, of the fullness of Christ; This the Scripture does witness, and
this I witness. Where Christ dwells, must not he speak in his Temple?

Quaeries propounded to George Fox, by some of the Contrivers of the Petition,
and by him Answered.
Querie. WHether there be one individual God, distinguished into the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, or not?

Answ. Herein thou would know, whether God be individual, yea or no which is
but a busy mind; for had thou the witness in thy self, thou would know
what he is; but the Heathen know not God, and all that know him not, are
Heathen, living in the wicked imaginations of their own hearts; and that is thy
condition: For God is a Spirit, and none know him, but the Son, and he to whom
the Son is revealed; the Son and Word is one. He that has ears to hear, let
him hear what the Spirit says; for thou, natural man, thou know not the
things of God.

Qu. Whether a believer be justified by Christ's righteousness imputed, yea, or
no?

Answ. He that believes, is born of God; and he that is born of God, is
justified by Christ alone, without imputation.

Qu. Whether he that believes that Christ has taken away his sin, is clean
without sin in this life, as Christ himself, or not?

Answ. He that believes, is born of God; and he that is born of God sins not,
neither can he sin, because his seed remains in him; as he is, so are we, in
this present evil world.

Qu. Whether a believer be without all sin in this life, or not?

Answ. Christ being made manifest, is made manifest to take away sin, and in
him is no sin at all; he that abides in him, sins not; he that sins, is of the
Devil, and has not seen him, neither known him: herein are the children of God
made manifest, and the children of the Devil. All you that read these Queries,
read these things in your selves, whether ye be the children of God, or the
children of the Devil; and whether ye understand what ye write, yea, or no.

Qu. Whether his works, as well as his person, be perfectly holy and good, or
no?

Answ. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; and if the root be holy, the
branches will be holy also; and every one that does righteousness, is
righteous, even as he is righteous. But as for that person, it is a busy mind
in thee, that askst thou know not what; for God is no respecter of persons:
he that respects persons, commits sin; and he that commits sin, transgresses
the Law.

Qu. Whether Saints in this life, without any addition hereafter, are perfectly
just, perfectly holy, completely glorious, in this life, and are not capable of
any addition after death, in the least degree, but only of manifestation?

Answ. If that thou know what a Saint is, thou would know a Saints life,
for they passed through death to life; but thou art yet alive to sin, and dead
to righteousness; see if it be not so: but he that is dead to sin, is alive to
righteousness, and lives in God, and God in him. The Lord is our righteousness,
and he says, Be ye holy, as I am holy: for, without holiness, no man shall see
the Lord. Be not deceived. God will not be mocked. Thou hypocrite, dissemble
not with him: he that is perfectly holy, is perfectly just: where this is
revealed, there needs no addition; for the man of God is perfect.

Qu. Whether the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the breaking of Bread, ought
necessarily to continue in the Church, or not?

Answ. Thou ask thou know not what, concerning two Sacraments, which
there is no Scripture for: Thou ask a question, which is an addition to the
Scripture; and thou that do add, the plagues of God are added to thee. Who
come into the true Church, are baptized with one Spirit, into one body; but as
for sprinkling Infants, there is no Scripture for it: I deny it in the true
Church of God there is no talk of such carnal things. Thou Sot, the bread which
the Saints break, is of the body of Christ; he is the bread of life. The Church
is not the steeplehouse, but the Church is in God, and those that eat the bread
of life, live for ever: the Church is in God, and the bread of life is there;
and it shall continue for ever.

Qu. Whether Christ in the flesh, be a figure or not; and if a figure, how, and
in what?

Answ. Christ is the substance of all figures; and his flesh is a figure; for
every one passes through the same way as he did, who comes to know Christ in
the flesh; there must be a suffering with him, before there be a rejoicing with
him. Christ is an example for all to walk after; and if thou knew'st what an
example is, thou would know what a figure is, to come up to the same fullness.

Qu. Whether there be any heaven or hell, for the Elect or Reprobate after
death, but in man in this life, or not?

Answ. There is no knowledge of Heaven or Hell; but through death the wicked
shall be turned into hell, and all them that forget God there to be tormented;
there is a hell, thou shall find it: Heaven is Gods Throne; and heavenly
notions within shall be shaken; for God is pure, and nothing that is unclean
shall stand before him; and he has said he will dwell in man.

Qu. Whether the ministration of the Ministry by man, is to continue till the
end, or not?

Answ. The ministration of the world, is the Ministry of man, and does not
lead to an end, but keeps in time, and that must have an end; for it is not of
God. The Ministry of God, is to draw people up to himself; but that is not of
man, nor by man, nor according to man; for Paul was made a Minister according
to the will of God; who had not received it of man, neither was it taught him
of man; and was a Minister of the Spirit: but the Ministers of the world
receive their learning at Oxford and Cambridge, and are taught of men, and
speak a divination of their own brain, which is conjuring; and bewitch the
people with those things which are carnal: as, to sprinkle Infants, and tell
them of a Sacrament which there is no Scripture for; and saying they are the
Ministers of Christ, and act those things which he forbids, as, to have the
chiefest place in the Assemblies, the uppermost room at feasts, the greetings
in markets, and to be called of men Masters; and with pretense make long
prayers, which Christ forbids; and profess and say, they are the Ministers of
Christ: wherein they show themselves to be Antichrists. And see if thou do not
uphold these Antichrists, and say they are the Ministers of Christ.

Qu. Whether the written Word, I mean the Scriptures, be the power of God unto
salvation, to every one that believes, or not?

Answ. The written Word is not the power of God, nor the Scriptures are not the
salvation; but he that does believe, has the life of them. Who is born of God,
shall never die, as it is written; he that believes, is born of God; and he
that is born of God, has the witness in himself, that God is the cause of man's
salvation, and not the Scripture, nor the Letter.

James Nayler's Answer, and Declaration, touching some things charged upon him,
by the men aforesaid.
HAving heard of diverse untruths cast upon me by some of the Priests in their
high places, though I stand only to the Lord in respect of my self; yet lest
any that love the truth should be led on, by these false reports to speak evil
of these things they know not; I shall lay open the truth, as it is revealed in
me, touching those things whereof I have been falsely accused. Jude 1^.


First, Concerning Jesus Christ, That he is the eternal Word of God, Revel.
19.13. 1 John 1.2, 3, 4, 5. Joh. 1.14.
by whom all things were made, and are upholden; which were before all time,
but manifested to the world in time, for the recovery of lost man: Which Word
became flesh, and dwelt amongst the Saints; who is the same yesterday to day,
and for ever; who did and does dwell in the Saints; who suffered, and rose
again, and ascended into heaven, and is set at the right hand of God; Ephesians. 1.20.
to whom all power is given, in heaven and in earth; who fills all places, is
the light of the world, but known to none, but to those that receive and follow
him, Joh. 8.12.
and those he leads up to God, out of all the Ways, Works, and Worships of the
world, by his pure light in them, 2 These. 2.8
whereby he reveals the man of sin; and by his power casts him out and so
prepares the bodies of the Saints a fit Temple for the pure God to dwell in;
with whom dwells no unclean thing: and thus he reconciles God and man; and the
image of God, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
which is in purity and holiness, is renewed: and the image of Satan, which is
all sin and uncleanness, is defaced: and none can witness Redemption, 2 Cor.
5.18, 19. Col. 3.10.
further then Christ is thus revealed in them, to set them free from sin: which
Christ, I witness to be revealed in me in measure, Gal. 1.16. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Colos. 1.27.

2. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21.
Concerning the Scriptures, That they are a true Declaration of that Word which
was in them that spoke them forth, and are of no private interpretation, but
were given forth to be read and fulfilled in the Saints, Rev. 22.18.
as they were given forth by the Holy Ghost, without adding or diminishing; and
were not given forth for men to make a Trade on to get money by: but as they
are, they are profitable for Doctrine, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in righteonsness, that the man of
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work. But they who trade
in the Letter, and are ignorant of the Mystery, deny all perfection; and none
can rightly understand the Scriptures, but they who read them with the same
Spirit that gave them forth; 1 Cor. 2.14, 15.
for the natural man understands not the things of God: for they are
spiritually discerned.

3. Concerning Baptism: The true Baptism is that of the Spirit, with the Holy
Ghost, and with fire: Baptized by one Spirit, into one Body; not the washing
away the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ; Acts 1.5.
without which, no other Baptism can save us, Gal. 3.27.
they being but figures or shadows; but this Baptism of Christ is the
substance, whereby we are Baptized into his death; and those that are baptized
into Christ have put on Christ.

4. Concerning the Lords Supper: Matthew. 26.26, 28. Joh. 6.51, 53, 54, 55, 56. 1
Cor. 11.24, 25. Col. 2.10.
The true Supper of the Lord is the Spiritual eating and drinking of the flesh
and blood of Christ, Spiritually; which the Spiritual man only eats, and is
thereby nourished up unto eternal life: without which eating, there can be no
life in the creature, profess what you will; And all who eat of this bread, and
drink of this cup, have real communion in Christ the head, and also one with
another, as members; and are of one heart, and one mind, a complete body in
Christ. Now the world, who take only the outward signs, 1 Cor. 11.27, 28, 29.
and are not brought in discerning of the Lords body, eat and drink damnation
to themselves, and become guilty of the body and blood of Christ; and calls
this a Communion, but lives in envy, strife, and debate, fighting, and going to
Law one with another, for earthly things.

5. Concerning the Resurrection: Joh. 5.29.
That all shall arise to give an account and receive at the last day according
to their works, 1 Cor. 15.38. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44.
whether good or evil. These bodies that are dust, shall turn to dust, but God
shall give a body as pleases him; that which is sown in corruption, shall be
raised in incorruption; it is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual
body; Phillip. 3.21. Rev. 2.6.
and as we have born the Image of the earthly, so we shall bear the Image of
the heavenly: but flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of heaven; neither
does corruption inherit incorruption; for we must be changed. 1 Cor. 15.20.
But they who cannot witness the first Resurrection within themselves, know
nothing of the second, but by hearsay; and therefore, say some of your
Teachers, that Christ is in Heaven with a carnal body. Now that Christ, 1 Cor.
15.47.
who is the first fruits, should be in Heaven with a carnal body, and the
Saints with a spiritual body, is not proportionable.

6. Concerning Magistracy: It is an Ordinance of God, Ordained for the
punishment of evil doers, and an encouragement for them that do well; Where
Justice and Righteousness is the head, and rules without partiality, that Land
is kept in peace; and those that judge for the Lord, I honor as my own life,
not with a flattering honor, putting off the hat and bowing of the knee, which
is the honor of the world having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage for self ends; Jude 16.
but from my heart, for conscience sake, as to the power which is of God, and
not to men's persons; for the Scripture says, he that respects persons, commits
sin, Jam. 2.9. Jam. 2.1, 2, 3, 4.
and is convinced of the Law, as a transgressor; and the Apostle James commands
the Saints not to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons; for says he such are partial in themselves, and
become Judges of evil thoughts. Romans 13.1, 2.
And says Paul, Let every soul be subject to the higher power; for, says he
there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God; and that
whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God: and says, We
must needs be subject, Romans 13.5.
for Conscience sake: and therefore, though the Prophets were often sent by the
Lord, to pronounce Judgment against unjust men, who had the power committed to
them and did not judge for God, Hosea 5.12
but for self ends; yet they never attempted any violence against them but used
all means to persuade them to love mercy, Mica. 6.8.
do justice, and walk humbly with God, that they might be established and the
wrath of God turned from them; for those that be of God, cannot rejoice in the
sufferings of any, but would have all to turn, and find mercy.

7. Concerning the Ministry: The true Ministry of Jesus Christ have always
been, 2 Pet. 1.21 Ephesians. 4.7.8, 11.
and are still, such as come not by the will of man, but by the will of God;
neither are they fitted for the work, by any thing of man, but by God alone:
for the true Ministry is the gift of Jesus Christ, and needs no addition of
humane help and learning; 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
but as the work is spiritual, and of the Lord; so they are spiritually fitted
only by the Lord, and therefore he chused Herds-men. Fishermen, and Plow-men,
and suchlike; and as he gave them an immediate call, without the leave of man;
so he fitted them immediately, without the help of man; and as they received
the gift freely, Matthew. 10.8.
so they were to give freely; And whenever they found any of the false
Ministry, that taught for hire, they cried out against them, and pronounced
woes against them, and showed them that they lay in iniquity, Act. 8.20 Joh.
10.13 Mic. 3.10.
because they thought that the gift of God could be bought and sold for money:
and Christ calls them hirelings, and says they care not for the sheep: Jer.
5.30, 31. Jer. 6.13.
and Micah cries out against the Priests that taught for hire; and (says he)
they build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity: and Jeremiah cried
out against the Priests in his days, that bare rule by their means and calls
it a horrible thing; and says, that from the least of them to the greatest:
they are all given to covetousness: Isa. 56.10, 11.
And Isaiah cries out against those in his days, and calls them greedy Dogs,
that can never have enough; and says he they all look for their gain from
their quarter. And Peter says of such as should come, 2 Pet. 2.3.
that they through covetousness should make merchandise of the people; 2 Pet.
2.14, 15.
and says they have hearts exercised with covetous practices, who have
forsaken the right way, and have followed the way of Balaam, who loved the
wages of unrighteousness: 2 Cor. 11 15.
And Jude cries Woe unto them, for they go on in the way of Cain in his murder,
Jude 11.
and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward. But those that were
sent out by Christ, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17, 18
counted it their gain to make the Gospel without charge; neither eve^ had they
any set means, but went about, having no certain dwelling place; never were
masters, but servants to all for Christ's sake; 1 Cor. 4. ii.
nor ever went to Law for Tithes, or any other carthly thing.

Now all people, try your Priests by the Scriptures, 1 John 2.3, 4, 5, 6. 2 John 9.11
whether they be of God, or of the world; and never think to hear the Word of
the Lord from their mouths, who walk contrary to the Scriptures; for such were
never sent of God: for had they been sent of God, they would abide in his
doctrine: 2 John. 9.10, 11.
and says John Such have not God: but he that abides in the Doctrine of
Christ, has both the Father and the Son. And if there come any to you, and
bring not this Doctrine, you are forbidden to receive them into your house, or
bid them God-speed: for if you do, you are partakers of their evil deeds. And
unto the wicked says God, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, Psalm.
50.16, 17.
or that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth? seeing thou hate
instruction, and castest my words behind thy back and art a partaker with the
Thief, the Adulterer Evil-speaking, Psalm. 50.21.
Slandering, and Deceit; and such as these, think God to be like themselves.

Diverse particulars of the persecutions of James Nayler, by the Priests of
Westmerland.
I Ames being at a meeting at Edward Briggs house on the first day where many
people met, he was desired by diverse friends to meet the day following at Widow
Cocks house, about a mile from Kendal; whereof the Priests having notice,
raised the Town of Kendal against him; but being long in gathering together,
the meeting was done; but spies being out upon the Steeple top, and other
places, notice was given what way James passed from thence: and coming down
toward Kendal, two Priests, being accompanied with a Justice of peace, and
some other Magistrates of the Town, with an exceeding great multitude of people
following them, met him, saying, Nayler, I have a message from the Lord Jesus
Christ to thee, but that there is not a convenient place. To which James
answered, The Lord Jesus Christ is no respecter of places. The message that he
had to declare, was this: I conjure thee that thou tell me, by what power thou
inflictest such punishment upon the bodies of creatures. James answered, Do
thou remember who it was that did adjure Christ to tell if he were the Son of
God and asked by what Authority he did those things? for James saw him to be
one of that Generation. But the Priest still conjuring him to tell by what
power he did it; James answered, Do thou acknowledge it to be done by a
power? Yea (says he) I have the Spirit of God, and thereby I know it is done
by a power. James said, If thou have the Spirit of God, as thou say thou
have, then thou can tell by what power it is done. The Priest said, When God
comes, he comes to torment the souls and not the bodies. James said, He comes
to redeem the souls.

But after much jangling, the Priest began to accuse him before the Justice and
Magistrates, of many things; As, that he taught people to burn their Bibles,
Children to disobey their Parents, Wives their Husbands, People to disobey the
Magistrates and suchlike accusations: To which James answered, Thou art a
false accuser: prove one of these things if thou can, here, before the
Magistrates. But not being able to prove any one, he began to accuse James for
holding out a light that does convince of sin, which, says the Priest, all
have not. To which James said, Put out one in all this great multitude that
dare say he has it not. Says the Priest, These are all Christians; but if a
Turk or Indian were here, he would deny it. James said, Thou go far for a
proof: but if a Turk were here he would witness against thee.

The people beginning to fight, the Priest turned away, saying, Here will be a
disturbance. Said James. These are thy Christians, and this is the fruits of
thy Ministry. But the Justice, with some others, did endeavor to keep the
rude people off him, so that they could not come to their purpose there: But he
being to pass over the Bridge, and through the Town, they that were of the
Priests party ran before, swearing they would throw him off the Bridge into the
Water; but coming thither, and seeing their purpose, he was encouraged in his
God, who gave him assurance of protection, and did wonderfully keep him, and
those that were with him: for when he came unto the Bridge, the word of the
Lord came unto him, and he was made to cry out against their rage; and the
power of the Lord was with him, so that he rereceived no harm, though he was
made to speak all along, and in the Marketplace, and till he came out of the
Town. But the raging Priests continued shouting, crying, and throwing stones at
him, a quarter of a mile out of the Town: But such was the power of the Lord,
that neither he, nor any with him, received any harm. The work was wonderful,
and we were brought much to admire it, and praise the Lord, who is blessed for
ever and ever.

Another time, James being desired of many Christian Friends to be at a meeting
at Orton, there to wait upon the Lord for what he would make known to his
people, did accordingly; and many friends and brethren accompanied him; but the
Priests having intelligence some days before, five of them were gathered
together, and many people from all quarters. A friend in the Town desired James
to come to his house; and being come into his house, a message was sent from
the Priests, desiring him to come into the Field, under pretense of a more
convenient place for the great multitude. To which James answered, It is my
desire that all may be edified: and coming into the field, the Priests came
with a great multitude, and asked him by what authority he came thither, and
had gathered together so many people to break the peace; and tempting him,
said, Will thou be bound that none here shall break the peace? To which James
answered, We come not hither to create offenses; but if any break the Law, let
him suffer by the Law: for he perceived they intended violence, as it appeared
afterward.

But seeing they could not prevail in that, another of them desired him to go
into the Church, as he called it, tempted him, saying, The people may all sit
and hear better: But James perceiving their deceit, said, All places were alike
to him; he would abide in the field. Whereupon, they pulled out an Ordinance of
Parliament, forbidding any to speak, but such as were authorized to speak
either in Church, or Chapel, or any public place; and bad him speak at his
peril, as he would answer the contempt of it. To which he answered saying. This
is not a public place. No? said one of the Priests, Is not this a public
place, the Town-field? and charged the Constable of the town to do his office;
and examined his authority: James answered, Those that are sent to declare the
things of God, have not their authority from men. But they bad him prove that.
He said, Paul received not his commission from man nor by man. To which one of
them answered, That was his Gospel; but they would prove that Paul had a call
from man to preach; and for that end he named that place in Acts 13.2. where
the Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnab as and Saul: and the Apostles laid
their hands upon them; which, said one of them, was the laying on of hands of
the Presbytery; But when he had found that place, James asked him if that was
Paul's call to the Ministry (three times) but he answered nothing. Then said
James, If that was his call he had preached long without a call before that;
and instanced to prove it, Gal. 1.

Whereupon that business ended; But another Priest stood up, and said, Thou
ought to give an account of thy faith to every one that asks; whereupon,
he asked diverse questions; whereunto James answered, insomuch that some who
stood by, cried out, Answer not all but ask him some. A while after, James
asked him how he would prove himself a Minister of the Gospel, and live upon
Tithes? To which he would not answer. Then said James, Neither will I answer
thee, if thou ask me twenty more.

The next question he asked, was, Whether Christ was ascended, or no: but James
said, I will not answer thee. Whereupon, he cried out to the people, and said,
He denies the humanity of Christ; and made a great outcry among the people of
it. But the people cried out, saying, Let us hear him; you have often told us
many things against him; let him speak, and then if he speak not truth, you may
then reprove him. James hearing the desire of the people, began to speak; and
the people gave audience and were very silent. But beginning to hold out Christ
a lone to be the Teacher of his people inspirit and truth, one of the Priests
cried out, I cannot endure to hear this Seducer any longer. Upon which. James
said, Prove me a Seducer before all this people, or else thou art a false
Accuser. But he had not one word to say against any thing that he had spoken;
But said, If thou will not answer me that Question I asked thee, I will call
thee a Seducer as long as I live.

Whereupon, seeing there could be no peace there, nor liberty to speak, they
desired James to go into the house; and they kept close about him, to keep him
from the violence of some that came along with the Priest: but they raged so,
that he and some other friends received stripes, and with much ado got into the
house; But the raging Sodomites waited about the door to do mischief, and kept
shouting about the house, all the while he was speaking; but the house being
filled with People, they could not come to their purpose; and the Lord so
ordered it in the Evening, we came away without any more harm: but not long
after, there came some of the Priests party about the house and asked if Nayler
was gone: and when they heard he was gone, they said, He may thank God of that.
Thus by the wisdom of God he escaped their violence at that time.

But the Priests missing of their purpose there, the next first day after, they
prepared their Sermons suitable to what they intended, possessing the people
that he was a Blasphemer, and denied the Resurrection, and the Humanity of
Christ, and all Authority; and that the Parliament had opened a gap for
Blasphemy, and, as it was said by some of their heaters, they did God good
service that would knock him down. Thus having stirred up the ruder sort, the
next day they prevailed with one called a Justice of Peace; the Priest's son
got him to come twelve miles from his own house; he was one that had been in
actual arms against the Parliament, for the bringing in of the Scots; And
having armed a great multitude against the next morning, they came very early
to the house where he was; where many Christian friends should have met that
day, and asked for Nayler threatening to knock out his brains against the stones
in the wall, and that they would pull down the house, if he would not come out;
though the door was never shut against them. But some of them came into the
house, and commanded him to come forth, under pretense to dispute with the
Priest. But James seeing what they intended, answered, You did not use me so
civilly the last time I was amongst you; but if any have a mind, they may come
in, the doors are open. Which answer they told the Priests; whereupon, they
rushed violently in, and took him by the throat, haled him out of the door,
into a field, where was a man whom they called a Justice, and with a Pitchfork
struck off his Hat, and commanded him to answer to such Questions as the
Priests would ask him. Whereupon, the Priest began to ask many Questions; as,
concerning the Resurrection, the Humanity of Christ, the Scriptures; and diverse
other Questions, as the Sacrament, and suchlike: to which he answered, and
proved Scripture. But at last, being asked if Christ was in him, he said he
witnessed him in measure. The Priest asked, if Christ was in him as man. James
said, Christ is not divided. But he urged him to tell whether Christ as man was
in him or no. He answered, Christ is not divided; for if he be, he is no more
Christ: but I witness that Christ in me who is God and man* in measure. But the
Priest said, Christ is in heaven with a carnal body. To which said James,
Christ fills Heaven and Earth, and is not carnal, but spiritual: for if
Christ be in heaven with a carnal body, and the Saints with a spiritual body,
that is not proportionable; neither was that a carnal body which came in among
the Disciples, the doors being shut: for Christ is a Mystery, and thou know
him not.

Then after much jangling and tempting, the Priest not having got the advantage
he waited for, he cried out unto the people not to receive him into their
houses; and alleged that in the second Epistle of John, verse 10. Now how
suitable that place was for his purpose, all people may see, who have eyes; for
there they are forbidden to receive any into their houses but such who abide in
the Doctrine of Christ, and confess themselves that they had both the Father
and the Son, and preach that Doctrine: but the Priests say that is blasphemy.

Then the Priest turned away from him; upon which, the armed Multitude began to
be violent against diverse friends that were there. James hearing friends cry
out, said to the Justice, You will surely set us peaceably into the house
again: But seeing him to go away, and leave them in the hands of the rude
multitude, he gave himself up, saying, The will of the LORD be done.

Upon which, the Justice turned again, saying, We will see him in the house
again; and going toward the house, many friends kept close about James,
exposing their own bodies to the danger of their weapons, to save him
harmeless; and so with much ado we got into the house, not receiving much
harm. Which being done, and as James was praising the Lord for his wondrous
deliverance from their malicious intents, some heard them say, If we let him go
thus, all people will run after him. Whereupon, they agreed that he should be
brought before the Justice again; and came with violence, and haled him out
again. Then the Justice and the Priest getting a horseback, they caused him to
run after them to an Alehouse on the other side the water, where they went in,
not suffering one friend to go in with James. And when he came before the
Justice, he told him, if he would not put off his hat, he would send him to
prison, and also because he Thoued him; for the Justice said, My Commission
runs Ye. To which James answered, I do it not in contempt; for I own
Authority, and honor it according to the Scriptures; But I find none such
honor commanded in Scripture, but forbidden. Then they concluded to commit him
for that, and also as a wandering person, and said none there knew from whence
he came; for those who knew him were kept out. Then said he to Arthur Scaife,
Thou know me; I was in the Army with thee eight or nine years. It is no
matter, said the Justice, thou art no Soldier now.

Then they writ a Mittimus to send him to prison; and carried him to
KirkbyS-teven that night, and shut him up in a Chamber, and set a guard upon
him; but diverse of our friends following into the Town, where a great multitude
was gathered together for meeting, then did the people come from the
Steeple-house, where another had been preaching; for diverse of the Priests were
gathered together that day; some preaching, some plotting, and some
persecuting: Iezabel's fast was a preparation for Naboths death. But friends
not being suffered to go into the house where James was, they abode in the
streets; and some of them being moved to speak to the people, the Priests
perceiving the people to give audience to what was spoken, made complaint:
Whereupon, some were sent forth, and with violence fetched in one Francis
Howgill, a friend; who was speaking to the people, and brought him into the
Highpriests hall, where were five Priests assembled, with many other of their
party, but not one friend. And bringing him before the Justice he was commanded
to put off his hat. He answered, I know no such law. The Priest said, He will
tread both Ministry and Magistracy under his feet. He said, Thou art a false
Accuser; prove wherein. But one that stood by, took off his hat, and cast it
into the fire. Then said the Justice What is this thou speak against the
Ministers? He answered, What have thou to accuse me of? Whereupon, one affirmed
that he said. All the Ministers that taught for hire, and in Steeple Houses,
were enemies, and Liars against Jesus Christ, and no Ministers of Jesus Christ.
Upon that, the Justice said, Thou speak against the Law; for the Law gives
them their maintenance. He said, I meddle not of the Law but of their practice.
Then said Francis to the Priest Did thou ever know a Minister of Jesus Christ
that was a persecuter, or did labor to imprison any? And after some more
discourse, he said to the Priest, I have seen a great deal of tyranny and
persecution in this days actions. Then said the Justice to the people, Take
notice, he says the Law I act by is Tyranny and persecution. To which the
people assented. Then said Francis. Thou may give out to the people what thou will; but I speak not of the law but of your Actions. Upon that, he was sent to
prison; a guard of eight men was set over them who spent the night in drinking
swearing, and filthy and unclean talking; and the more they were desired by the
people to take heed of sin, the more filthy they did appear: but these are the
fittest instruments for acting the Priests intentions, being Members of their
Churches.

The next day they were guarded to Appleby: but some friends following could
not be suffered to pass on the streets that way, so great was their envy
against all that set their face that way. And the Prisoners being brought
thither, much means was used that none should come at them, but such as were
sent to tempt them. There they were kept until the Sessions; in which time
they sent up and down the Country to seek for any who would witness any thing
against them, and improved their utmost interest for their advantage. A Jury
was chosen; diverse of them were resolved on the business, so that it was told
the Prisoners what would become of them, before the day of examination came;
and it was accordingly: For the day came, and judgment passed; but the
Prisoners never saw their Accusers, nor know who they are; but against that
day, the Priests had prepared three large Petitions stuffed with most filthy
untruths and slanders, raised out of the bottomless pit; but not one of them
proved though one of the Justices said to them, It is fit they should be
proved; neither was there any thing in them, which they could charge upon the
Prisoners, save only the power of the Lord had manifested at their meetings in
shaking proud flesh, and pouring out his Spirit upon many, especially, as they
said, upon little children; which the Priests concluded was Sorcery and
Witchery, and of the Devil: hereby declaring themselves to be of that
generation, who called the good man of the house Beelzebub; and if they should
not do the same to them of his household, the words of Christ could not be
fulfilled.

Likewise they had gathered up all reports, true or false of things done by
many that the Prisoners had not seen the faces of, nor ever knew; thinking
thereby to make them odious to the people. They also brought two Priests out of
Lancashire, to swear things that another man had spoken in the presence of four
Justices of the peace, and for which the man had been tried and cleared: And
these they brought, thinking to add afflictions to the Prisoners bonds. But he
is kept in great peace and joy, having not any comfort from man, but from God,
who has appeared to him in this condition, and has given him assurance of his
love, in whom he rests. To whom be praise, honor, and glory, for ever. Amen.

The Examination of James Nayler, upon an Indictment of Blasphemy, at the
Sessions at Appleby, in January 1652.
Justice Pearson. Put off your Hats.


James. I do it not in contempt of Authority: for I honor the power as it is
of God, without respecting men's persons it being forbidden in Scripture. He
that respects persons, commits sin, and is convinced of the Laws a Transgressor.


Just. Pear. That is meant of respecting persons in judgment.


James. If I see one in goodly apparel and a gold Ring and see one in poor and
vile Raiment, and say to him in fine apparel, Sir thou in a higher place then
the poor, I am partial, and judge of evil thoughts.


Col. Brigs. If thou were in the Parliament House, would thou keep it on?


Jam. If God should keep me in the same mind I am in now, I should.


Col. Brigs. I knew thou would contemn Authority.


Jam. I speak in the presence of God, I do not contemn Authority; but I am
subject to the power as it is of God, for Conscience sake.


Just. Pears. Now Authority commands thee to put off thy Hat; what say thou
to it?


James. Where God commands one thing, and man another, I am to obey God rather
then man.


Col. Benson. See whether the Law commands it, or your own wills.

The Indictment was read, wherein James was Indicted for saying that Christ was
in him and that there was but one word of God.


Col. Brigs. Where wast thou born?


James. At Ardislaw two miles from Wakefeild.


Col. Brigs. How long livedst thou there?


James. Until I was married: then I went into Wakefeild Parish.


Col. Brigs. What Profession wast thou of?


James. A Husbandman.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou a Soldier?


Jam. Yea; I was a Soldier betwixt eight and nine years.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not at Burford among the Levellers?


Jam. I was never there.


Col. Brigs. I charge thee by the Lord, that thou tell me whether thou wast or
no.


Jam. I was then in the North, and was never taxed for any Mutiny, or any other
thing, while I served the Parliament.


Col. Brigs. What was the cause of thy coming into these parts?


James. If I may have liberty, I shall declare it. I was at the plow,
meditating on the things of God, and suddenly I heard a voice, saying unto me,
Get thee out from thy Kindred and from thy Fathers house: and I had a promise
given in with it. Whereupon, I did exceedingly rejoice, that I had heard the
voice of that God which I had professed from a Child, but had never known him.


Col. Brigs. Did thou hear that voice?


Jam. Yea, I did hear it; and when I came at home. I gave up my Estate, cast
out my money; but not being obedient in going forth, the wrath of God was upon
me so that I was made a wonder to all; and none thought I would have lived; but
(after I was made willing) I began to make some preparation; as apparel, and
other necessaries, not knowing whither I should go. But shortly afterward going
agateward with a friend from my own house, having on an old Suit, without any
money, having neither taken leave of wife or children, not thinking then of any
journey, I was commanded to go into the West, not knowing whither I should go,
nor what I was to do there: but when I had been there a little while, I had
given me what I was to declare; and ever since I have remained, not knowing to
day what I was to do to morrow.


Col. Brigs. What was the Promise thou had given?


James. That God would be with me: which promise I find made good every day;


Col. Brigs. I never heard such a call as this is, in our time?


James. I believe thee.


Just. Pears. Is Christ in thee?


James. I witness him in me: and if I should deny him before men, he would deny
me before my Father which is in heaven.


Just. Pears. Spiritual, you mean.


Iam. Yea, Spiritual.


Just. Pears. By faith, or how?


Jam. By Faith.


Just. Pears. What difference then between the Ministers and you?


Jam. The Ministers affirm Christ to be in heaven with a Carnal body, but I
with a Spiritual body.


Just. Pears. Which of the Ministers say Christ is in heaven with a Carnal
body?


Iam. The Minister so called of Kirkby-Steven.

Priest Higginson stood up, and affirmed it again openly before all the Court.


James. If Christ be in heaven with a Carnal body, and the Saints with a
Spiritual body, it is not proportionable; neither was that a carnal body which
appeared among the Disciples, the doors being shut, and appeared in diverse
shapes.


Quest. Was Christ man, or no?


James. Yea, he was, and took upon him the seed of Abraham and was real flesh
and bone; but is a Mystery not known to the carnal man; for he is begotten of
the immortal seed, and those that know him know him to be Spiritual; for it was
the Word that became flesh and dwelt amongst us; and if he had not been
Spiritual he had not wrought my Redemption.


Just. Pears. Is Christ in thee as man?


James. Christ fills all places, and is not divided: separate God and man and
he is no more Christ.


Just. Pears. If we stand to dispute these things, we should have the
Ministers.


James Perceiving Priest Higginson offended, because he had told of his saying
that Christ was in heaven with a carnal body, James said, Friend I had not
accused thee, had I not been asked what was the difference between the
Ministers and me: for I am not come to accuse any; for I am against accusations.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not of a Kirk about Sawrby?


James. I was a member of an Independent Church at Weedchurch.


Col. Brigs. Wast thou not excommunicated for thy blasphemous Opinions?


James. I know not what they have done since I came forth; but before I was
not, to my knowledge.


Col. Brigs called of Mr. Coal, saying, Did you ere hear such a call as this?
did you hear it?


Coal. Yea, I heard part of it.


Col. Brigs. Did not thou write a paper wherein was mentioned, that if thou
think to be saved by that Christ which dyed at Jerusalem, thou art deceived?


James. If I cannot witness Christ nearer then Jerusalem, I shall have no
benefit by him; but I own no other Christ but that who witnessed a good
confession before Pontius Pilate; which Christ I witness suffering in me now.


Col. Brigs. Will thou deny thy hand?


James. I will not deny my hand, if I may see it; and I desire that I may have
so much favor, that that paper may be kept as an evidence either with or
against me.

A large Petition being read, wherein was something against quaking and
trembling.


Just. Pears. How comes it to pass that people quaks and tremble?


James. The Scriptures witness the same condition in the Saints formerly; as
David Daniel, Habakkuk, and diverse others.


Just. Pears. Did they fall down?


James. Yea some of them did so.


Coal. David said all his bones were broken, but they were whole.


James. So are these now.


Coal. Moses trembled; for he saw the face of God, and all Israel.


James. Did all Israel see the face of God? that crosses the Scriptures.


Coal. They saw his glory. I shall see the Lord with these eyes; putting his
fingers to his eyes.


James. They must first be made spiritual: he cannot be seen with carnal eyes,
for he is a Spirit; and no flesh can see God, and live.


Coal. That light by which I am justified, is a created light.


James. That light by which I am justified, is not a created light.


Coal. That is true.


Just. Pears. To the Word: What say thou to the Scriptures? are they the
Word of God?


Jam. They are a true Declaration of the Word that was in them who spoke them
forth.


Higginson. Is there not a written Word?


Jam. Where read thou in thy Scriptures, of a written word? The word is
spiritual, not seen with carnal eyes: but as for the Scriptures, they are true,
and I witness them true, in measure fulfilled in me, as far as I am grown up.


Just. Pears. Why do thou disturb the Ministers in their public worships?


Jam. I have not disturbed them in their public worships.


Just. Pears. Why do thou speak against Tithes, which are allowed by the
States?


Iam. I meddle not with the States; I speak against them that are hirelings, as
they are hirelings: those that were sent of Christ, never took Tithes, nor ever
sued any for wages.


Just. Pears. Do thou think we are so beggarly as the Heathens, that we
cannot afford our Ministers maintenance? We give them it freely.


Iam. They are the Ministers of Christ, who abide in the doctrine of Christ.


Just. Pears. But who shall judge? how shall we know them?


Jam. By their fruits you shall know them; they that abide not in the Doctrine
of Christ, make it appear they are not the Ministers of Christ.


Just. Pears. That is true.


Accusations against Jo: Lawson, by him answered.
THat Joh: Lawson of Lancaster, did affirm, December the fourth, 1652.

Object. That he was dead, and rose again.

Answ. Thou art a witness against him that is risen risen from the dead,
whereof the Apostles were witnesses. Here thou show thy self to be a witness
against the living, and show thy self to be in the death, and no Minister of
Christ: for the Ministers of Christ justified them which were raised from the
dead: Ephesians. 2.1.
Even when we were dead in trespasses and sins has he quickened us together
with Christ, and has raised us together, and has made us to sit in heavenly
places in Christ Jesus. Romans 6.10, 11.
Likewise reckon you also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ: for in that he died, he died once unto sin; in that
he lives, he lives unto God. Here thou show thy self to be no Minister of
Jesus Christ. He that believes, has passed from death to life, because be
loves his brethren: here thou show thou do not believe, but art in the
death, and art in envy; so thou show forth thy self to be Cain, and hate
thy brethren. We know that we are translated from death unto life, because we
love our brethren: he that loves not his brother, abides in the death; and
there thou art. Whosoever hates his brother, is a manslayer; and you know
that no manslayer has eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3. And this is thy
condition, and here thou art an Antichrist in the world, envying those who are
raised from the dead; and thou seek to bring them to the death, whom God
has raised from the death. Thou have not seen thy self to be the prodigal; yet
the Scripture says, Luke 15.24
This my son was dead, and is alive again: but thou art without God in the
world.

Object. 2. That the day of judgment was past.

Answ. Mat. 12.20
Christ speaks, The bruised reed he will not break, the smoking Flax he will
not quench, till he bring forth judgment into victory. Here thou show thy
self to be ignorant of the Scripture; but only as a hear-sayer thou speak,
and the outside of the Letter, and not Christ; and can not witness him, who
brings forth judgment into victory, but stand as a witness against them who
witness the Scriptures fulfilled in them, and Christ bringing forth judgment
into victory: and here thou show thy self to be unacquainted with Christ,
and thy nakedness and ignorance thou make appear.

Object. 3. That he had been in Hell, and is now in Heaven.

Answ. Here thou show thy self to be a witness against the holy men of God.
Jonah says, Out of the belly of hell cried I, Jon. 2.
and thou heardest my voice, and the Lord delivered him out of hell; and might
not he confess it? (thou hypocrite.) For thou will not leave my soul in hell,
neither will thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. Psa. 16.10.
Thou have delivered my soul out of death: bless the Lord, my soul, and all
that is within me, bless his holy name. Psa. 103.1.2.
How dare thou profess the Scriptures, and the holy men of Gods-conditions,
which were raised and brought out of death; and if any witness the holy men of
Gods condition, thou persecutest them? O thou blind hypocrite! here thou
show thou never saw hells mouth yet, therefore thou never cryedst in hell
yet.

Object. 4. That he was come to the infinite company of the firstborn, and the
Spirits of just men made perfect.

Answ. Paul said (who was a Minister of God) But ye are come to Mount Sion,
Heb. 12.22
and unto the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
innummerable company of Angels, to the general Assembly and Church of the
firstborn which are written in heaven; unto God the judge of all, and to the
spirits of just men made perfect. Paul was A Minister of Jesus Christ by the
will of God, who encouraged the Saints who were brought hither; but thou now
persecutest them, and art a witness against them that confess they are brought
hither: here thou show thou have the spirit of error, openly; and art no
Minister of God, no not of the Letter; but art against the Letter as it
speaks, persecuting them that have the life of it.

Object. 5. That he had heard the last Trumpet sound, and seen the new
Jerusalem.

Answ. Here thou show forth thy spite and venom: If John was here, which
saw the great City and holy Jerusalem descend out of heaven from good (John
said, I saw the holy City New Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven) thou
would be a witness against him; and thou show thyself in the generation
that was ever persecutors slanderers, and opposers of the power of truth. Where
the same spirit is that was in John. he sees these things now, as he did then:
but where the same spirit is not, which thou show thou have not, but a
contrary spirit that persecutes them which do see those things; but is as a dog
to bite and devour, John saw the last trumpet sound, which shows thou art not
come to the first. Blow the trumpet in Slon, Joel 2.1.
sound an alarm in my holy mountain; let all the inhabitants of the earth
tremble. Here be thou a witness against thy self, that thou art a witness
against the truth, and in the generation of them that ever slew the righteous
seed.

Obj. 6. That John Lawson said he had seen God face to face.

Answ. Here thou show thy self to be a witness against them that know God,
and make thy self manifest to be a heathen: for all are heathens that do not
know God; and no man knows God saving he that is born of God; and who are
born of God, are owners of the truth, and not against it, but against the
deceit. Jacob said, I have seen God face to face. Genesis 32. Isa. 6.5. Job 42.5.
Isaiah said, Mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts. Job said, I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear; but now mine eyes have seen thee. Exo.
33.11.
And God spoke to Moses face to face. Here you may take your oaths, and swear
against Jacob, against Isaiah, against Job, and against Moses. Where the same
Spirit is made manifest; and who are born of God, know God face to face, as
they did: but they who are born of the flesh, persecute them who are born of
the Spirit; and there you show your selves to be, taking oaths and swearing
against them that know God, seeking to bring them to prison or bondage: for you
never read in all the Scriptures, that the Prophets or the Apostles took their
oaths against any which confessed they had seen God, or put up a Petition to
the Magistrates, or witnessed it with oaths against any of them: the Ministers
of God said, Swear not at all. And here you show your selves to be no Ministers
or friends of God, but without God; for the Ministers of God are to bring
people to know God, and to the Church in God, and to the heavenly Jerusalem,
and to the innummerable company of Angels, and minister to that which is in
prison, and in death; but if any come to witness these things fulfilled, you
are witnesses against them with Oaths, and would bring the bodies of such into
prison, where the seed of God is raised out of prison within; showing your
selves to be Antichrists, persecuters of the power of truth, and beasts which
shall make war against the Saints, and against the Lamb: but the Lamb shall
get the victory.

Job cried when the Lord hid his face; and David cried when the Lord hid his
face, and said, O Lord, I will seek thy face. And here you show, you neither
know his face, nor have seen it; but are persecuters of them who know it and
seek it.

Praises, praises be to the Lord for ever.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 14. l. 18. after the word death put a, p. 16. l. 2. for were. read was.
p. 18. l. 25. for the second word Ministry, r. Ministers. p. 20. l. 11. before
the word saying r. one. p. 21. l. 31. for Priests, r. people. p. 24. l. 17.
after the word That, r. some say. p. 25. l. 1. after proved, r. by. l. 2. after
the word him, r. in him. p. 28. l. 4. r. save only what. p. 29. l. 5. r. of the
Law as a Transgressor. l. 9. r. judged.


