Strange News from York, Hull, Beverley, and Manchester. OR A continuation of
the proceedings passages, and matters of consequence that has passed this last
week in his Majesty's Army before Hull, with some occurrences from York during
the Kings absence

As also of my Lord Stranges coming in a warlike manner against the Town of
Manchester and slew three of the Inhabitants thereof.

Being all that passed here from the 16 of July to the 23.

Sent in a Letter from a worthy Knight, now resident in York, to a Gentleman
in Kings Street in Westminster, July 25. 1642.

ALSO The humble petition of Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Baronet, to the
Kings most Excellent Majesty.

With his Majesty's Answer thereunto. EDW. NICHOLAS.

London, printed for John Thomas. 1642.

STRANGE NEVVES from York, Hull, Beverley, and Manchester. July, 23. 1642.
Worthy Sir.
MY Service first presented unto yon, I have thought it not unnecessary in
these distracted times, to acquaint you with some passages about Hull, where
his Majesty's Army lies strongly entrenched; As also of diverse other
Occurrences that has passed of late in these Northren parts, whereof I shall
impart unto you the truth in every particular this last week.

On Saturday the 16. of July, my Lord of Holland presented a Petition from both
Houses of Parliament to his Majesty at Beverley, touching a Pacification,
betwixt his Majesty and both Houses of Parliament? His Lordshipp kneeling,
offered to kiss his hand, which his Majesty refused, saying, how durst he
look him in the face; with diverse other passages, and at last Commanded him to
depart out of his presence: But his Lordshipp replied, after his departure from
his presence, in the hearing of diverse Gentlemen (who thronged to see and hear
of the passages betwixt his Majesty and him) That he must have another Answer
from his Majesty, before he Returned. This night my Lord took Coach and Ridd
to York, and returned upon Sunday morning to Beverley again, and there
attended his Majesty for an answer of the Petition until Tusday at night, And
after came to York again, where he, and Sir Phillipp Stapleton, and Sir John
Holland, who accommodated him; took Post for London on Wednesday morning, and
my Lord, is to attend his Majesty again on Wednesday next at Beverley July 27.

This Thursday, July 24. His Majesty took His Journey toward Leicester, and
it is reported he will will go to Northampton from Leicester, to see the
Commission of Array put in Execution; as also to see how those Counties stands
affected to him, and his return is expected at Beverley again, on Wednesday
next; The King has a great strength, both of Horse and Foot, before Hull,
where they have entrenched themselves betwixt Beverley and Hazell, being 6.
Milles a sunder; At Hazell his Majesty has builded a Fott, being within 3.
Milles of Hull, where he has planted 4 Culverings or field pieces, which was
sent him from Sheifeild, by the Lord Maltravers, which came through York on
Saturday last, and was convayed a way upon Monday morning to Beverley to his
Majesty, for his Service.

My Lord of Lindsey is made Lord General of his Majesty's army before Hull,
who sent Captain Leg. and Captain Wilmot (who lately came over from Holland,
and both delinquents to the Parliament,) to fire some windmills betwxt them and
Hull, these two Captains with a troop of horse, and a 100. Muskieters and
Pikes, sallied out of their quarters on Tuesday at night about 12. a Clock, to
fire these two Windmills, but Sir John Hotham either by having intelligence of
their intention, or by seeing of the Mills on fire, let fly some pieces of
ordinance at them, which caused all the foot to run away, leaving all their
arms behind them, and the horse retired as fast after them, holding it the
greatest policy to save their lives by sudden flight, but they came no more
to fetch their arms they had left behind them, for they heard Sir John Hotham
had surprised them, it is reported that they lost as many arms as was worth an
100. pounds the next night after Colonel Munroe sallied out in another quarter
to burn a windmill that stood within half a mile of the Town, which Sir John
Hotham had notice of, yet could not prevent, though he shot above 100 pieces of
Ordinance off that night, and yet no man was hurt, but Colonel Munroe, who was
shot through the Arm, with a Muskett bullet from the town; he is since he
received that shot in the arm made Leivetenant Colonel to my Lord General;
Yesterday, Sir John Hotham took 3. pieces of Ordinance, which was goeing to
Barton upon Humber, in a Vessel from Hazell, and brought them into the town.
It is reported, Sir John Hotham has since taken another Vessel laden, which
was going to York to his Majesty; wherein was 150. tun of Bear, 50. tun
of Wines, with great store of Wheat, Salt, Fish, and other Comodityes. Here is
Suppley of Horse, and Foot, from all parts on this side Trent, that daily
repair to his Majesty's Army at Beverley, and all that comes are entertained
and entered into pay, so that provision begins to grow de^re and very scarce.
There is a Captain at York, who is an Engineere, that now is in practizin to
cast Brass Mortar pieces, wherein to shoot Grenades, which when they are
finished are to be sent to Beverley, and are intended for fireing the Town, by
shooting of fire balls into it; from which calamity God protect them The Earl
of Warwick has sent 3. ships to relieve Sir John Hotham in Hull,

Yesterday was mustred in York a Troop of Horse which came from Berkeshire,
under the Command of the Lord Howard, who are this day gone toward the Kings
Army, being in all 44. and well appointed it is this day reported by diverse of
good credit, that my Lord Strange on tuesday last, came with diverse troops of
horse and foot, to Manchester, to put the Commission of Array in execution,
according to his Majesty's Proclamation, but was opposed by the whole town;
whereat, some of my Lord Strangs troops discharged some Carobynes at them
being charged, and slew 2. or 3. of them, and after they had committed this
bloody outrage, departed all a way, whereby we are informed the town of
Manchester remaides in a great distraction and fear, by reason of this
combustion. Drumes beat up in York this day for Volentiers, that would serve
the Lord General the Earl of Lindsey, in his Majesty's service, against the
town of Hull, to repair to the Holy Lamb, in Petergate in York, where they
shall be entertained, and receive pay. This day the Lord Cromwell came to
York, from the Parliament.

These Sir, Receive as an information of nothing but truth, these Northern
counties in general, are in great distractions and fears, expecting daily
when to be supprised, and bereaved of their lives and estats if God in his
mercy prevent it not; Let all true Protestants pray for a happy Union, and a
good agreement, betwixt King and Parliament, else destruction lies at every
man's door, Sir, until the next occasion, I Rest.

Your unfeined friend and Servant A. F.
York in Petergate July 23. 1642.
To the KINGS most Sacred MAJESTY
The Humble Petition of Sir Francis Wortley Knight and Barronet; In behalf of
Your Majesty's Commons of the County of YORK.
VVHeareas Our lives and Fortunes are unavoyable contigencies, liable to trials
at Law, as well in Criminal as Civil Causes, and depend upon matter of Fact
upon Iuries, which for the most partare men and Mercynary men; and labored by
the one side or the other to appear upon the Iuries, as Tales men; and the
ablest are by Connivency or corrupt Composition left at home, and spared by the
Bayliffe of several Weapontakes.

For Redress whereof, May it pleace your Most Exceellent Majesty, to give your
Princely Command, That the Sheriffs Book of Freeholders, may be brought in at
least every Easter Sessions* That a competent number of such as are ablest and
fitest to appear and do Services, may be appointed by the Justices Assembled
in the several Riddings of this County; their knowledge of the Country
Assisted by the Baliffe; and Books for the services at the Assizes and
Sessions: And that they have particular Summons (as by the Statutes of this
Kingdom) they ought to have? which also allows a Fee to the Sheriff and
Bayliffe for every Jury Impannelled and Summoned; and that at the end of every
Assizes, one or two Justices of every Riding, may examine the appearances and
defaults with the Clerks of the Court? that such as appears and do service,
may be acquitted. and no issues rune out against them; and that such as neglect
their duties may not be spared, allowing such reasonable Fees for their pains
therein, as shall be thought meet? so that issues may be awarded and levied,
and not Compounded for (as usually they are.) And that none who has his
Quit-Writ, may be imforced at every Assizes to plead his exemption, and pay for
it. So shall our Iuries be full, and the Service not done by the tales men, but
by the ablest, as well for as Understanding, and the opressed be eased by your
Princely favor therein; conceiving Your Majesty to be not only Rex Regni, but
Comes Commitatus, and all the office and power of your under Sheriff to be
derived from your Majesty, as the Fountains of all Honors Justice and
government, humbly beseeching your Sacred Majesty, that accordingly your
Sheriffs may be commanded by you, that this your Princely favor may be
acknowledged, not only by us, but our Childrens Children may reap the benefit
thereof. We further humbly beseech your Majesty, to commend this our Petition
to the care of the Honorable Houses of Parliament, that a law to establish
this your Princely favor may be made and enacted, with what additions shall be
thought convenient by their Wisdoms: And in the mean time, this your command
be observed and kept inviolable by the Sheriff and other Officers.

And we shall as in Duty bound, Pray for Your Majesty's long and happy Reign
Over us.
HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER.
HIs Majesty in answer to this P^tition, is graciously pleased to commend that
the Sheriffs for the future time shall at every Christmas and Easter Sessions,
cause their under-Sheriffes to bring the book of Freeholders to the several
Sessions held in every Riding, that the ablest men for Estates and
understanding may be appointed, by advice of the Justices to serve at the
Assizes and Sessions, according to Law; and that hereafter the Bayliffes of
liberties, and Sheriffs Bayliffes, give particular summons (as by law they
ought) to every freeholder to be impannelled upon Iuries to appear at the
Assizes that he may know of what juries he is to serve, and may be unexcuseable
if he appears not. And his Majesty will be further graciously pleased to give
his royal assant unto a Bill to be preferred and passed the Houses of
Parliament for the purposes aforesaid the same tending to the advancement of
Justice, and the public good of his people.

At Our Court at York the 18. of July, 1642. EDW. NICHOLAS.


