A MANIFESTO From His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND The ARMY under his
command; concerning the XI Members impeached, in the name of themselves, and
the Kingdom of England.

WITH Seven Propositions for the present peace, and settlement of the Kingdom;
which being granted, they assure the Parliament to draw back.

PRESENTED, To the COMMISSIONERS at UXBRIDGE June 27. to be by them humbly
presented to the PARLIAMENT.

JUNE, 27. 1647.
BY the appointment of His Excellency Sir T. FAIRFAX and the Council of War.

Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed for Benjamin Ridley, for the use of the Army, under his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Anno Dom. 1647.

A MANIFESTO From his Excellency Sir Thomas, Fairfax and the Army under his
Command, etc.
Whereas the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament have desired to know
from us, what things we do desire to be granted, before our drawing back the
Quarters of the Army to a further distance from London, upon the granting
whereof we will engage to draw back. We do in answered thereunto humbly propose
these particulars following, as what are of present necessity to us, and we do
desire at present to be granted, in order to the Armies, and Kingdoms present
safety, in the further debate, transaction, and settlement of those other
things contained in our former representations, and Papers, which will require,
and may admit more time; Upon the granting of which things we shall willingly
draw back (as is desired) to have those other matters debated and transacted at
a further distance, with deliberation answerable to the nature and weight of
them.

I.
That the Parliament would be pleased to recall the Declaration inviting men to
desert the Army, and promising their Arriers in case they do so, and to declare
for future, that whoever shall desert their Colors or charges in the Army,
without the Generals particular license, and dise^arge, shall not have any of
their Arriers paid them.

II.
That the Army may be paid up, equally to those that have deserted it: This we
desire may be immediately granted, or resolved before we draw back, and to be
performed (at least) to the private Soldiers fully, and sin part, to the
Officers withal speed convenient.

III.
That those that have deserted the Army may be instantly discharged, and
dispersed, and receive no more of their Arriers, till the Army be first
satisfied.

IV.
That both Parliament and City, may be speedily and effectually freed, from the
multitude of reformad^es, and other Soldiers before mentioned, that flock
together in, or about London, by a speedy dispatch and discharging of them from
the City.

V.
That all such listings and raisings of new forces or drawing together of any
(as in our Remonstrance and all our papers are expressed) and all preparations
toward a new war, may be effectually declared against, and suppressed; as also
all invitations and endeavors to draw in foreign forces, either from
Scotland or other foreign parts.

VI.
That the continuation of the Army in the pay of the State for some competent
time, (while the matter in debate relating both to the Army and Kingdom, may
be concluded and settled) be at present ordered and declared for, (before our
drawing back) and the same with all speed to be effectually put into one
established way, that the Army may be enabled to pay Quatters for the ease of
the country where it must lie, and the Soldiery the better kept from abuse to
the Country, and reduced to that good order and discipline, which has
formerly been happily kept in this Army, though of late, (through want of pay,
and other justdiscon^ents which the late provocations put upon them,) unhapilie
interrupted:

VII.
That during the same space the Parliament would resolve not to propose any
place for His Majesty's residence nearer to London then they will allow the
quarters of the Army to be.

NOw for our former desire of present suspending the impeached Members from
sitting in the House.

I. Whereas we understand the House has voted, that it does not appear that
any thing has been said or done by them within the House touching any Matter
contained in the Papers from the Army, for which the House can in Justice
suspend them, though (if way were given, and opened without breach of
privilege for us to charge them with, and for others to be examined freely to
testify unto such things,) we should not doubt to make such proceedings and
practices of theirs in the House to appear, for which according to former
Presidents, they justly might and ought to be suspended; yet we are so tender
of privileges of Parliament, as that we shall at present forbear, to reply or
press further upon that point for the houses proceedings therein, upon their
own cognizance.

2. Whereas the house of Commons has voted, that by the Laws of the Land, no
Judgment can be given to suspend those Members from si^^ing in the house upon
the papers presented by the Army, before particulars produced, and proofs
made; though we think good reasons may be given, and presidents found to the
contrary, even in the proceedings of this Parliament, as in the case of the
Earl of Strafford the Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Keeper Finch, and
others: Yet we do declare, that we have both particulars and proofs against
them ready to produce; but considering that the procedings thereupon, will
probably take up much time: And the present unsettled affairs of the Kingdom,
in relation to these greater matters proposed by us, do require a speedy
consideration. We shall be willing, that those greater and more general
matters of the Kingdom be first considered of, and settled, before the Censure
of those Members be determined; And therefore because they may apprehend it
some prejudice to them to have their particular Charges given in, and lie upon
the (...) long undetermided, we shall b^e willing to forbea^ the giving in of
the particulars against them, till they may without interruption to the
general affairs, be immediately proceeded upon; But if the house do think
fit the particulars against them be first delivered in, we shall be ready to
do it.

3. Whereas we understand, that the Members charged have desired leave from the
houses to withdraw themselves: We cannot but take notice of the modesty
thereof, so far, as that we are contented therewith for the present more
quiet proceeding to settle the perplexed affairs of the Kingdom (which without
any private animosities against persons) is our greatest end in what we do;
only we declare, that (as we suppose the Gentlemen themselves from the same
grounds that induced them to offer this, will still forbear to offer the
contra^^, till the matters concerning them be heard and determined, or to make
any new interruption or disturbance to the proceeding upon, or setlement of the
general (...) of the Kingdom. So we hope and shall confidently expect that the
wisdom and justice of the house, will not (...) any thing to the contrary, or
leave, it to an hazard thereof ^ut will use sufficient care and caution,
against such things, and for the bringing of those Members to trial, when the
House shall judge it more seasonable and safe, as before expressed.

By the appointment of His Excellency, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and His COUNCIL OF
WAR. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.
Vxbridge June 27. 1647.
Vxbridge Junii 27.
WHereas without Order from the Genenerall, or the Council of War, Nicholas
Cowley Commissary General of provisions, has issued out Warrants to some
Hundreds within less then a mile of London, to bring provisions from thence
into the Army, which he pretended to be Randevouzed between London and
Uxbridge; Whereas there was no such thing ordered either by the General, or his
Council of war. It is therefore this day ordered by the General and his
Council of war, that the said Commissary Cowly shall stand committed, and he
is hereby committed to the Marshal, from whence he is not to be discharged,
until he has given satisfaction to the Commissioners for the city of London
residing at Uxbridge.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Council of
War. Signed John Rushworth, Secr.

FINIS.

