Truth's Defense AGAINST the Refined Subtilty OF THE SERPENT Held forth in
diverse ANSWERS to several QUERIES made by men (called Ministers) in the North.
Given forth by the Light and Power of God appearing in GEORGE FOX and RICHARD
HUBBERTHORN

And they watched him, and sent forth Spies, which should feign themselves just
men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver him
into the power and authority of the Governors. Luke 20. 20. Printed for Tho:
Wayt at his house in the Pavement in York. 1653.

To all general Professors of CHRIST in the World.
WHat think ^e! Is it not yet time to cease from strife, but ye must be still
beating your fellow Servants, even when your Master is at the Door! Have ye not
yet understood the Parable of the Tares and Wheat, that they should grow
together till the Harvest, and now is not the Harvest almost ripe! Has not the
wisdom of Man had a long day of judging the righteous Seed, But now that Seed
i^ rising up to judge it: be silent then, and ceas^ from Man ^ while, and thou
shall see his highest wisdom declared to be his greatest folly: what will it
profit thee to resist the breathings forth of the Spirit of Righteousness in
any? will it not add fuel to that unquenchable fire, which already burns as an
Oven, tho it may be thou see it not yet. but as it was of old said, In the last
days shall come Scoffers, men which only have a Form of Godliness, but deny
and oppose the Power where ever it appears; it is well if it happen not to this
Generation as it did in the days of Noah, the Preacher of Righteousness, the
world then being drowned in the sensual life, they could not hear nor
understand, therefore the Flood came and swept them away. He not high-minded
but fear, for though ye have heaped to your selves many Teachers, and clothed
your selves with many Forms of Worship, yet these will not abide the ^ier, nor
defend you from the Judgment that is coming upon you; consider what a Night of
Confusion is already upon you how are ye shattered and rent asunder, that you
cannot give a true account what ye are, or where you are; this is the Lords
doing, that will spoil you of all your Idols, and make you ashamed of your hard
speeches against the innocent. Cannot you be content to suck what sweet you can
as long as you can out of the pride and vanities of this World, but you must
push with you Horns the low and contemptibl^ Servants of Christ, who through
his mighty power is now raising up those Valleys whereon himself will sit, in
them, and with them, to judge that spirit in you, both quick and dead.

Diverse QUERIES of great importance, propounded by Thomas Atkinson of Cartmall
in Lancashire, TO Gabriel Camelford Parson of Stafley-Chappel: with his Answers
to them.
Also,

REPLIES to the ANSWERS, wherein is laid open the subtilty and deceit of the
Priest, and his Invencions, Snares, and Baits, and false Imaginations:
discovered by the pure light of God, which has shined in our hearts, and has
given us to see the darkness which he and the World live in, hating this Light
which has appeared and enlightened every one that comes into the World, John
1. 9. and all who are guided by this Light, and have a pure eye opened in them,
which is the light of the body, may see and discern the darkness, blindness,
and ignorance of the Priest.

I Have received many confused Queries, which came from a dark mind, which
would know the conditions of the Apostles, or have another meaning to the
Scriptures, and that mind I do deny, for if thou have the Spirit, that gave
them forth, then thou would witness us; but as a Serpent full of Venom, have
thou showed forth thy self, spuing forth thy venom, which must be turned into
Hell, who errest not knowing the Scriptures, and the power of God. Friend, in
thy Queries, thou ask thou do not know what; for some Queries were sent to
thee, and thou lookedst upon them to be frivelous and absurd things, so thou
may look upon that which Christ spoke, and the Apostles, and the Prophets,
and say that is frivolous and absurd; for they were given forth all by one
Spirit according to measure, as they ever did in that Generation, they are so
with thy frivolous and absurd mind, though thy frivolous and absurd mind
^^serve such things for thy ends. Thou say they were condemned to the fire to
be burned, which if they had, it would have been a figure to thy self, which
Nature could do no other, for they came to torment him and thee, who are for
the fire, as it is written, The Beast and the false Prophet shall be turned
into the fire: you might as well have condemned the Scriptures to the fire. And
I have received certain Papers, in which there is confusion, which thou call
thy Answers, and many confused Queries, which has come from a Babylonian
Merchant, which has sent some of his stuff to me, who art the scarlet-colored
Beast, and the well-favoured Harlot, proceeding from a confused mind, which
art confused and come out of Egypt, from a dark understanding in whom the
Prince of the Air lodges, who maintainst the Devils Kingdom with all thy
force and might, and power, as it does appear, which would be satisfied, who
art in the unreasonable nature, thy satisfaction must be Death; therefore for
the simple ones sake have I freely let forth my self in a few Answers and
Replies to thy unlearned and confused Queries, Questions and Answers, that thy
deceit might be discovered, and the power of truth known, and the simple ones
directed, and God alone glorified.

To all professed Ministers, who have taken the title of Ministers of the
Gospel of Christ, who is the end of the Law and the Prophets, and Shadows,
which shadow him forth, a few Questions to you who have taken this Office upon
you.

Querie 1. Whether thou have that Light which enlightneth every one that comes
into the world (which Light is Christ) yea or no.

Pr. Answ. Through grace and love displayed and shed abroad in my soul, I am
able to say, that my beloved is mine, and I am his; and therefore all he has is
mine, at least for my advantage, his light as a Prophet, and his love as a
Savior is mine, and all to teach me and lead me to my Fathers house, but thy
inference thereon is absurd and foolish: thine do I say? I mistook, the
inference of thy Master or Scribe, for it is not thy handwriting; and in that
I wonder, but that it is usual with you, how you can be so contradictory to
your own Principles; for you generally charge others with speaking that which
is not their own, and yet thou come in the face of the Congregation and
give that which is not thy own, thy self: for shame either deny your
Principles, or act and speak according to them. But to let that pass, thou
proceedest with this inference; if so, why do thou deny and say that every
one has not that Light to teach them and guide them to God; Is this a
sufficient inference, that bececause I have it, therefore it must not be denied
but that all have it? Let any, that God has given an understanding to, judge;
surely God has left you, you have even lost your common Reason among you.

A Reply to the Pr: An. Thou say thou art able to say through grace, that thy
Beloved is thine, and thou art his; so do the false Prophets say, He says it,
Jer. 23. 31. but thou know nothing of the Beloved nor of Jesus Christ which
is the Beloved, nor through grace. Thou say all that Christ has is thine,
his Light for thy Prophet, his Love as a Savior to guide thee to thy Fathers
house; as a Thief thou have gotten the Letter, Jer. 23. 30. and a form which
Christ spoke, and that thou call thine; but (thou enemy of Christ) thou
neither know the Light which is Christ, that enlightneth every one that
comes into the world, John 1. 9. that thou can not witness according as the
Query was put to thee, nor the Prophet, nor the fathers house, nor the Savior
which the Scripture speaks of; but thy fathers house thou know, and thy
beloved which is the God of the World, and thy imagined Light which leads thee
to thy fathers house, which we utterly deny, thee and thy fathers house, and
thy beloved thou have showed, thy beloved is thine, which is thy Lust for thy
gift.

Qu. 2. Whether your Gospel be the same that the Apostles preached? and if it
be, Why go you to Oxford and Cambridg, when the Apostle said the Gospel he
preached was not after man* neither was he taught it by man, neither received
he it from man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.

Priests Answer. I shall speak as to my own particular, and this through grace
I have to say, God has carried forth my spirit to preach and to declare
Christ, and him crucified, as the Apostles preached, 1 C^r. 22. and to declare
the manner of Gods giving this gift to sinners, as the Apostles did, and that
freely through grace Romans 3. 24. the Doctrine of grace appears to be the
Doctrine of the Gospel, Gal. 1. 5, 6. compared with the 9. and 10. verses. And
he that preaches another Gospel than this, is a perverter of the Gospel of
Christ, and under the curse, though he seem to an Angel from Heaven, 7, 8. v.
Thy Inference is, If it be so, why do you not live on the Gospel? I do live on
the Gospel, and that is thy trouble and grief it seems: but thou addest, when
as it is said, Freely ye have received, freely give, Matthew. 10. 8. If thou
examinest well what is cited by thee, thou would find that this is
principally spoken of healing the sick, cleansing the Lepers, raising the dead,
and casting out Devils, which were things at that time more likely to get them
money than preaching the Gospel: but again, if thou will take no notice of
that, but apply it wholly to the gift of preaching, this I say, that Christ did
even there approve that the Labourer was worthy of his hire, Luke ^^. 7, 8.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Thou say, that God has carried forth thy
spirit to preach and declare Christ, and him crucified, as the Apostles
preached; I utterly deny thee to be any Preacher of Christ, or to know God or
Christ, or the Word of God: and the Apostles condition thou know not, and
the grace of God thou art an enemy to, and thou art one of them that crucisies
Christ; Matthew. ^7. ^^. wheresoever he is rising thou would know him and
crucify him, who art giving thy Exposicions upon the Doctrine of Christ, and
wresting the Scriptures to thy own destruction, Gal. 1. 8. being unlearned; and
thou art he that preaches another Gospel, which art a perverter of the Gospel,
which art cursed, as thou have made it openly appear in thy Queries: and thou
speak of Angels from Heaven, them thou know not. Friend, thou say thou
live upon the Gospel, but it is upon that which the Apostles spoke (the
Letter) a Declaracion, that is thy Gospel, which was made manifest to the
Apostles, which is not to thee, and that thou live on and tradest withal, as
a Thief and a Robber, Ier. 32. 30. and so deceivest poor people, who art a
Minister of the Letter and not of the Gospel: and thou say, that the Labourer
is worthy of his hier, but what pay did Christ give to his Laborers that he
sent into his Vineyard? Did not he say, they might have but a Penny? Will thou
be content with his wages? O thou Enemy to him, who art without God in the
world, and thou have showed that Christ never sent thee to preach, therefore
tho^ know not his wages that he gives, but the Devil he leads thee, and thou
take his hier, and he is thy Master, for thou receivest the wages of
unrighteousness, showing thy self worse than Balaam, who loves the wages of
unrighteousness, Jude 11. which woe was upon, who art without, perverting
Christ's words, and wresting the Scriptures, and like a Thief would be like
one of them in thy words, but like the Devil in thy practice; and thou say,
the doing of Miracles, and the casting out Devils, and raising the Dead, were
things at that time more like to get money than preaching the Gospel; O thou
Enemy of God! where do thou find any of the Ministers of God that took money
for working Miracles? Simon Magus would have bought the Spirit to have wrought
Miracles withal* but the gifts of God is not to be bought and sold for money,
thou sellest thy carnal gifts, but thou and they must perish that do so, for it
is your perishing mind, for thou can not witness one of the gifts of God,
nor of the Miracles of Christ, neither the dumb to speak nor the blind to see,
nor the deaf to hear, but art a silthy Beast, which art spued out from God, dead
in thy sins and trespasses, Ephesians. ^. 1. and whereof thou would have the
Scripture answer thee, thou art dead from hearing of them.

Query 3. Whether you can give another meaning to the Scriptures than they are,
and whether the Apostles did not give the right meaning to them, when they
spoke them forth, or no, and if they did, what need learned men to give another
meaning to them.

Priests Answer. What a man can do is one thing, and what he does or desires to
do is another, if no man can give an Exposition, besides the meaning of the
Scriptures, me thinks you should be quiet in that particular, and not spend
your breath so vainly; the same Spirit of God that gave out the Scriptures,
being in the hearts of his chosen ones, does instruct them to compare one
Scripture with another, and to give out the meaning of one Scripture by
another, and so it is not another meaning to the Scripture, but their own
meaning though covered and veyled, till cleared and opened: and yet thou go
on, and say, we give another meaning to them, which if thou can charge me
with, and make it good, spare me not, if not, this in the paper is of no
validity, for it was given to me, but that the Apostle's meaning was often dark
to a weak eye, before expounded, thou must needs confess, if thou shall but
view two or three for a trial, and clear up the meaning of the Apostle in Romans
5. 14.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Thou say, what a man can do is one thing,
and what he does or desires to do, is another thing: here thou show thy
self to be complete in thy self. And thou say, that no man can give an
exposicion besides the meaning of the Scriptures; and thou think we should
be quiet: we cannot let thee be quiet, who live in thy thinkings, and
deceivest peeple with thy imaginacions, whom God is come to scatter, and God is
against thee, who art giving exposicions upon the Scriptures, and would have
them who live in the power of the Scriptures, to let thee alone; but thou art
he who wrests the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 3. 16. who ever was denied; therefore
thou art discovered to them who live in the power of them; all Scripture is
vayled and covered from thee, and so thou would give a meaning to them, and
so under a color make peeple believe it is the same meaning; but thou art
discovered, who say I charge thee, I can; do thou not say, the Scriptures
are dark, I charge thee to have spoken a Ly, and art a liar, and do not see
the Scriptures at all, and all thy imaginacions of them are lies: thou say
the Scriptures are dark to a weak ey, here I charge thee to be a Liar before
the Living God; the darkness is in thy self, and not in the Scriptures, Luke
11. 33. 34. therefore thou do wrest the Scriptures, and do make a Ly upon
them, and turnest them into a Ly, Ier. 5. 22. O thou enemy of God, tremble
before him, thou have nothing to do with the Scriptures. Friend, thou would
have me to vieu one Scripture or two for a trial; the Scriptures we know, but
thou say they are dark, thou art full of darkness, and they are as they
speak; he that can receive it, let him, he that has an ear may hear what the
Spirit says: thou would have me to give Exposicions upon the Scriptures as
thou do, whom the plagues are aded to, for as it is written, the plagues are
added to ^h^m that adds to the Prophecy of this Book, Rev. 22. 18. and there
is thy portion; but we know the Scriptures, and own them as they speak, but
all thy Expositions of them we do deny, for with them thou do bewitch the
peeple, but the plagues of God will be poured upon thee, for thou do neither
know the Scripture nor God, but art a liar and of thy father the Devil, John 8.
44. Thou do also bid me clear up the meaning of the Apostle in the fifth
chapter to the Romans, verse 14. so here I charge thee again that thou do
wrest this Scripture, for men of corrupt minds do wrest them, and so thou art,
but the Scriptures are clear; it is thy corrupt mind and heart that must be
cleared: Let the Scriptures alone, thou have nothing to do with them; thou vayn
man, do thou talk of clearing up the Scriptures who art full of filth and
corrupcion! woulst thou have that cleared which was spoken from the Spirit of
the Lord! thou blind hypocrit and Pharisy, all peeple who walk in the light,
may see how thou have uttered forth thy folly, and record against thee.

4 Query. Show me by the Scriptures where the Ministers of Christ ever took
Tithes, or Augmentacions of the world.

Pr. Answer. I shall answer but for my self, seeing the paper was sent to me
in particular: and my Answer is, that I take no Tithes, no nor Augmentacions,
from the world; and that thou know well enough, but that thy Kainish nature
in thee, to use thy own expressions, has made thee blind: it is not any
Augmentacion unless it have something added to what I had before: now thou
know I have nothing besides it, nor before it, from any of you all: All I
have is a Gift from the State, and why may not I take a Gift from the State
(call them the world or what thou will) as well as George Fox and James Nayler
take a Gift from the world among you, I know not, but I would willingly be
resolved in this.

A Reply to the Priests Answer, Thou say, thou take no Tithes nor
Augmentations of the world, but thou confessest thou take a gift, who go
in the way or Balaam, for gifts and rewards, Jude 11. and art in his
generation, so art one of these filthy dreamers, which Jude speaks of,
therefore woe unto thee who shall perish in the gaynsaying of Core. 1 Pet. 3.
16. O thou false accuser, where can accuse either George Fox or James Nailer
of taking gifts of the world, as thou do here, thou would make them like
thy self, and a color for thy own filthiness, by accusing George Fox and James
Nailer, because they bear testimony unto the truth, and testify against thee,
and thy gift, that thy deeds are evil, and would fetch up the Apostles to
maintain thee in thy filthiness, Acts 20. 33. he did eat no man's bread for
naught, and so colored Beast would color thy self with the Apostles words,
to maintain thy self in the generation of Balaam, which the Apostle cried woe
against, and woe is thy portion, therefore own it, and there is thy resolve.

Priests second Answer to the fourth Query. Besides, God has said, The Earth
shall help the Woman, and did the Woman reject that help, because it is from the
Earth? Answer me. He has said, Kings shall be nursing fathers, and Queens
nursing mothers to his people, shall Gods people then refuse to take their
fatherly and motherly kindness? Answer me, Are we not to be thankful, and take
their refreshing as from Gods hands, for, he stirs up their hearts to it,
whosoever they be that do it; Paul did not run away and refuse kindness when it
was offered him by the Barbarians, Acts 28. 7, 10. neither did he refuse a
lodging from them, which no question was of some value.

A Reply to the Priests Answ. Thou would be answered whether the Earth
helps the woman yea or no. Answ. Yea, the earth does help the woman against
all such Dragons as thou art; the Scripture we do witness is fulfilled, and
Kings and Queens which are nursing fathers and mothers, thou art an enemy to,
Isai 49. 23. and know not, but as a Thief have gotten the words of the
Apostles, and so with them would maintain thy gift: O thou blind Pharisee!
are these thy meanings that thou will give to the Scripture with thy carnal
mind to maintain thee, and to hold up thy carnal gift, and these things which
Christ forbids his to do so, who said, Freely you have received, freely give,
but here thou art not, and it shows that thou have not received it freely,
therefore thou sellest that which thou call thy gift, which the Apostles
never did, 1 Cor. 9. 18. Paul was not hired, when he was refreshed with the
necessaries of the Barbarians; O thou Enemy! why do thou accuse Paul, and
would make him like thy self? let him alone, for thou know him not, nor his
Ministry, for he was a prisoner of the Lord, a traveller of the sea, when the
Barbarians lodged him; what is that to thee, to maintain thee to bear rule by
thy means, which Jeremy cried against, Ier. 23. 14. and hold up the horrible
filthy thing that is committed in the Land, to justify thee, to be a hierling,
and to receive thy gift, and here thou have openly showed thy self to be an
accuser of the Apostle, and would make him like Balaam, like thy self: and
would have the woman to help thee, and those are thy nursing fathers, Kings and
Queens which hold up thy gift, which the Prophet cried woe against, but it is
that fools may utter forth their folly, and be taken in their own snare, Prove.
13. 16. here thou art answered, the Beast that has held up the false Prophet,
and the false Prophet shall both into the fire: And thou say, thou do not
take gifts of the world, but if any Prophet of the Lord come among you, son or
daughter, you show your selves to be of the world, you show your selves to be
strikers, and of the Devil, halling them out of the Synagogues, Matthew. 10. 17.
and to be no Saints* nor no Church of God, nor no Ministers of Christ; and here
thou show thou take of the world, and thy self to be a Liar, for thou
never read of any of the Churches of God, if any of the world came in among
them, that they halled them out and beat them, but it shows the effect of thy
ministry and blasphemy, which says, ye are Jews, and are not, but are
Synagogues of Satan, Rev. 2. 9. and 3. 9. we have found thee out and tried thee.

Query 5. Whether the Plagues be not added to him, that adds to the Prophecy of
the things written in this Book.

Priests Answer. It Is true, the Spirit of God says so, Rev. 22. 18, 19. I do
believe it, yet again, the expounding and opening of it, by the Light of the
Spirit of God given in, comparing it with other Scriptures, is not that which
brings the curse, for then the Apostle himself would have been under it* 1 Cor.
9. 9, 10. Romans 4. 3, 6. Romans 11. 3, 4, 5. For expounding it, wherein I have
added or taken away is not yet discovered by any of you, and that is the weight
of the business when thou did write to me or any other; the Lord judge, and
let all the Lords people judge, whether he be not more apt by far to add to the
Prophecy of this Book, who by his doctrine begetsi^ slight esteem of the
Prophecy of this Book, and persuades his hearers, that his words are as true as
any Scripture, and he cannot err, and therefore all is to be believed that he
speaks, and not to be questioned, though many things are contrary to this
Prophecy; than they that are so much blamed by them, and reproached daily.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Thou say it is true, that the Spirit of God
says, that the Plagues are added to him that adds to the prophece of this
Book; here thou speak a Lie; thou say it is true, the Spirit of God says,
He that adds or diminishes to the prophecy of the Book, which had thou not
seen the Letter, then had known no spirit; and because the Letter says so,
that is thy spirit, but as I find thee adding, wresting and lying, I do see
that the plagues are added to thee, by the same Spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, and of them thou know nothing, in that thou speak a Lie, in
that thou say thou do know it, for thou know it not to be a truth,
though the Letter speak it, as they swore the Lord lived* and swore falsely,
Jer. 3. ^. if thou did, thou durst not add nor diminish: thou say comparing
one Scripture with another is not that which brings the curse, for then the
Apostle would have been under it, and so with thy corrupt mind do accuse the
Apostle falsely, and would make him like thy self: and who speaks of the
Scriptures fulfilling, which thou can not witness, but make a trade of them
without thee, and would have Points and Reasons of them, as thou would have
made a point of the Resurrection in thy former writing, and here the plague of
God is due to thee, and here I charge thee again, and here the Fool is out of
the truth, and the Rod is for the back of the Fool, Prove. 10. 13. Prove. 18. 28.
and here is the Scripture fulfilled upon thee, and thou say it is not
discovered by any of us, whether thou addest or diminishest, here thou have
showed thy self to be a Liar, thou have been told both publicly and privately
of it, and of thy deceit: and now seeing thou have openly showed thy self to be
a Liar, here openly do I make thee manifest as a Liar, who would justify thy
self in thy deceit, but thou harlot art made bare and discovered, Nah. 3. 4, 5,
6. who have sitten long under a color, and here is the Scripture is fulfilled
upon thee, and the Prophets words true, we find them fulfilled, Praises,
praises, be to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth for ever, who gives his
servants victory over the Beast, and the false Prophet, Rev. 15. 2, 3, 4. such
as thou art, who have been ensnared by thee, therefore we see that Plagues are
thy portion; thou say that plagues are the weight that we give thee, it is
so, it is thy due and portion: thou say, the Lord judge, and let all the Lords
people judge, 1 Cor. 6. 2. the Lord does judge, and the Lord has judged, and the
Lords people does judge all such as thou art; Him that thou do accuse, as to
add to the prophecy in the Book, he does not, but witnesses it, thou having not
the same witness can not believe, and neither sees him nor the prophecy of
the Book, thou see the outside of the Letter with thy visible eye, as they
did which saw the outside of the Vision of Daniel, Dan. 10. 7. But we that do
believe him, do believe his Doctrine, not an outward testimony, but we have the
witness in our selves which are one with him, and it does witness that he has
the Spirit of truth, which cannot err, but we do know thy spirit by the same
Spirit to be the spirit of error, and here thou would not have the Spirit of
God to be believed on; but here thou show thy self, that would question
truth, for there is nothing in thee born up in thy understanding to receive
truth withal; here thou show thy self to be an open Liar, to say he acts
contrary to the Prophecy who is one with it, and bears testimony to it, and the
truth of it, against all such false accusers, 2 Timothy 3. 3. as thou art, for
false accusers should arise, Tit. 2. 3. and here thou show thy self to be
one, who accusest the Spirit of the living God, to be more false than those
that have the spirit of Antichrist, who shall be consumed, and turned into the
Lake, by the brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. the mouth of the Lord of
Hosts has spoken it.

Query 6. What Scripture have you that speaks of the word two Sacraments, which
you tell the people of, and what Scripture have you to act such things.

Priests Answer. Certainly Satan has blinded your minds, you would never have
put forth such a Question else, for the substancial Word the Lord Jesus, that
we preach, of him the Scripture speaks every where; and for the Word, as the
Declaracion of the mind of God, in and by Christ to poor sinners, the
Scriptures are plentiful, take two or three, John 5. 24. John 8. 31. John 12.
48. John 15. 3. John 17. 20. Ephesians. 1. 13. Many more I might add, but that I
have a check on my spirit, for gratifying your folly so far as I have done in
this particular.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. In thy Answer thou say that Christ is the
substancial Word, thou say so, because the Letter declares he is the Word,
but no other knowledge have thou; but this is no answer to the word two
Sacraments, for Christ we know who is the Word, but the word two Sacraments,
which there is no Scripture for, which you tell people of, which is an addicion
to the Scripture, and a thing that never was practiced among the Saints, as
thou being one with thy fellows that hold up those things, the Query was,
what Scripture you have to act such things? but Satan has blinded your eyes, 2
Cor. 4. 4. 1 John ^. 11. which will not let you justify those things which you
act, which shows that you serve but an ill Master, that will not bear you out,
neither can you own the Scriptures as they are, but you must give Exposicions
upon them, and points, and your imaginacions and conceivings, who would have
the Scripture cleared, but it is thy evil eye and mind that must be cleared,
Matthew. 6. 23. for the Scriptures are as they speak; thou say the Word you
preach, (Alack for thee!) thou never knewst the Word, if thou did thou
would not speak of clearing up the Scriptures, as in thy other Queryes thou
speak of.

Query 7. What Scripture have thou to stand praying in the Synagogues, before
Sermon and after, and where the Apostles did so, or ever took a Text to treat
upon.

Priests Answer. Observe that place, Matthew. 6. 5. and thou shall see that the
thing Christ ayms at is not so much the posture nor the place, but their end of
praying in the Synagogue, and that was to be seen of men, for he did not before
nor after condemn the duties of fasting, praying, alms-deeds, but taught his
Disciples how to do the same things, though to avoid the hypocrisy of others
in doing of them; and though another may be in the same place and posture as
they were* yet he may have other ends than they had, which thou can not
lightly judge of, as Christ did, for Christians in prayer with upright hearts
are not bound up to any place, 1 Timothy 2. 8. And for praying in the public
meeting place, and among the Assembly it was so common and usual, that the
place even had its name from it, it was called the House of Prayer, Matthew. 21.
13. Isai 56. 7. and the hours of prayer were known by the Apostles, Acts 3. 1.
And that it was so in the times of the Gospel may be seen by Paul's Doctrine
about it in the 1 Cor. 11. from the 9. to the 18. verse. and in 1 Cor. 14. 13,
14, 15. For the times of prayer before Sermon and after, the Apostle gives a
general Rule, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done to edifying: now what way
is more edifying and building than for the servants of God to way^ on the great
Builder God in Christ, for help in the beginning of their work, and in the
close after mercyes received, in speaking or hearing, to speak good of the Name
of our God in blessing* and praises; the thankful heart shall not want
goodness from God; but more fully the Apostle is clear in it; 1 Timothy ^. 1. That
first of all prayers must be made, to begin with that, and that the thing is
no^ without example, to conclude our speech with prayer; see that in Acts 20.
36. This was likewise his manner in the close of his Epistles, as may be seen
in seven of his Epistles, which I could never see in any of your Letters, you
like not prayer so well it seems. And after that comes in thy frivolous and
simple Question, this is all I see thy hand to, and therefore I call it thine.
[Or ever took a Text to treat on.] I may well answer thee as Christ did the
Saduces, Thou errest, not knowing the Scriptures; for look Acts 8. 35. whether
Philip took not a Text to treat on to the Eunuch out of Isai 53* 7. Acts 10.
34. where Peter took a Text out of Deuteronomy. 10. 7. and Acts 13. 17. out of Ex^d.
3. 14. and above all we have the example of Christ in this, in his Sermon Luke
4. 17, 18. who took his Text out of Isai 61. 1. in the Synagogue, and he took a
Book to read it too, though I believe he had the Scripture more in his heart
than any of your Teachers: thus having answered this Query, I have one word to
say to thee, or the Inditer of it, before I go on,* and that is this, you have
in this to me discovered a profane spirit, that finds fault with our often
seeking and calling on God, and blessing his Name; I am jealous that you are
acted by the spirit of Satan amongst you,* you are so like those spoken of in
the 3 of Mal. 7. 14, 15. Read, and God give you to understand it well, for to
me it appears, that the Spirit of God is quite of another nature, that says
Pray continually, and without ceasing, in every thing give thanks, Ephesians. 6.
18. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17, 18. it calls and encourages to the thing, Psalm. 50. 15.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. A Scripture thou wrests to maintain the Answer
of it, in Matthew. 6. 5. Christ bids his Disciples pray not as the Pharisees did,
for they prayed standing in the Synagogues, but [when thou prayest, enter into
thy Closet, and shut the door;] and here thou art a Liar of Jesus Christ, and
pervertst his words, who took his Disciples off from the customary praying of
the Pharisees, and bade them not pray as they did, but thou go about to
maintain the Pharisees Kingdom, which Jesus Christ cried woe against, and wrests
several Scriptures to hold it up withal, which is nothing to thy purpose: and
another Scripture thou bring, 1 Timothy 2. 8. [he would that men pray every
where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and doubting:] thou nor the world
can not witness this, nor your hands to be holy to lift up to God, therefore
they are abomination, and is to be denied; the Apostle to Timothy did not bid
him go stand praying in the Synagogues, but thou wrests his words, to maintain
thee in the chiefest place of the Assembly, Pharise like. Another Scripture
thou bring out of Acts 3. 1. Now Peter and John went up together into the
Temple, at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour. They were commanded to
pray not as the Pharisees did, who went to show forth Christ Jesus the
substance, of all those types and figures which they lived in, (all these
Scriptures will not maintain thee to hold up thy Pharisees seat) they went to
cry woe against them, and so do we now cry against thee, and thy beastical
worship; and here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to be an adder to
the Scripture, Psalm. 56. 5. and a wrester and a perverter of it, 2 Pe^. 3. 16.
For thou can not find any of these Scriptures thou bring to hold thee up
in thy Pharise like worship, but ar^ a Rod for thy own back, and openly thou
show thy self to be Antichrist, and one that does maintain the Kingdom of
the Pharisees: another Scripture thou bring, 1 Cor. 14. 26. and here I charge
thee again to be a wrester of the Scripture, let all people look upon the
Scripture, and see if it will maintain thee to have the chiefest place in* the
Assemblies, and to stand praying before and after Sermon; here thou show thy
self to be out of the commands of Christ, and art disobedient to him, and he
that does pervert his words, and wrests the Scripture; O thou subtle twining
Serpent! how fain would thou have a place in the earthly Letter, but there is
no place nor corner for thee, but thou art found out and discovered, Obad. 6.
For the Apostle which spoke to the Corinthians spoke to them, to whom the end
of the world was come, which were Brethren, one had a Psalm, another a
Doctrine, another a Tongue, another a Revelation, and another an
Interpretacion, that all things might be done to the edifying, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
and they might speak one by one, and if any thing were revealed to him that
stood by, the other should ^old his peace, that all things might be done to
edifying, that God in all things might be glorified: but let all people
consider how this Scripture does confirm thee, to have the chiefest place in
the Assemblyes, and to stand praying in the Synagogues before and after Sermon;
let all people see if thou be not a wrester of the Scripture, and a perverter
of the Apostles words, and the conditions that the Saints were in; thou openly
show thy self not to be in, and thy Church not to be in the condition as the
Corinthians were in, for they were a gathered people out of the world, but thou
art without in the world, in the Church of the Pharisees, who had the chiefest
places in the Assemblyes, Matthew. 23. 6. and so art an Enemy to Christ, here
openly thou show it: thou speak of waiting on the great Builder God in
Christ; Do thou speak of waiting upon God, who justifiest the seat of the
Pharisees, who were Enemies to Christ, and teach people to do so? Acts 13.
10. O thou Enemy of Righteousness, and full of subtilty, a child of the Devil!
I cannot but deal plainly with thee: thou speak of the great Builder, and
waiting upon God in Christ, and art a maintainer of the Scribes and Pharisees
Kingdom, and art justifying them in their ways, and so does teach Babylon which
is confusion: thou speak of concluding thy speech with prayer, Psalm. 28. 9.
Thy prayers are abominacion, and so are thy conclusions of them, so long as
thou walk in the steps of the Pharisees, all thy blessings are cursed, and
thy seed is corrupted, ^s Mal. 2. and as he saw them then, so we see thee now
in the same generation by the same spirit as he did, the Lord has spoken it,
and thou can not hide thy self from him, Praises be to the Lord God for ever,
who has discovered your abominacions: and friend, another Scripture thou
bring, [ Acts 20. 36. He kneeled down and prayed with them all, and they all
wept sore, and fell upon his neck, and kissed him, sorrowing that they should
see his face no more:] O thou filthy Beast! What have thou to do with this
Scripture, that art an hierling and take the worlds gift, and without God in
the world? and this Scripture, Do thou take him as an example to pray after
thy beastly worship, which Jesus Christ forbad to stand praying in the
Synagogues? and here again I charge thee before all the world to be a perverter
of the Scripture to thy own destruction, to whom the Plagues of God are added,
Revel. 22. 18. Thou speak of the seven Epistles of the Apostle, which thou
have nothing to do withal, but as a busy fellow make a trade upon them;
neither do thou know the Letters that are given forth by us now, which are
given forth by the same spirit, which cannot be divided; and thou art an
accuser; for if thou did see our Letters, thou might see the same as was in
the Apostles, but in the Letters that are sent to thee, judgment is thy
portion, and that is given thee, showing thy filthiness and abomination which
thou live in: the testimony of love to thy soul is plainess of speech: as for
accusing us that we do not love Prayer so well, here thou art an open
Blasphemer, but thy Prayers we do deny, for they are abominacion to the Lord,
The prayers of the wicked are abominacion, Psalm 28. 9. No Prayers can we send
to thee, but for thy destruction, thou man of sin, and Enemy of Christ; whereas
thou do accuse us of erring, not knowing the Scriptures, here thou have taken
Christ's words not knowing him nor the Scripture, and wrests them all along, as
thou have discovered it, so thou make thy self a Liar and a Thief, taking
Christ's words and accusing others with them who live in the life of them, for
Christ spoke that Scripture as touching the Resurrection, which thou would
have turned into a Point, therefore to thee that Scripture belongs, that thou
errest not knowing them, nor the power of God, Matthew. 22. 29. as thou have made
it plainly appear: And thou bring another Scripture as concerning Philip,
thou say he took a Text to treat upon, and here I charge thee to add to his
words, Philip did show forth Christ which was the substance, he finding him
riding in his Chariot; and thou Beast do wrest this Scripture and pervert it,
and so take a place of Scripture and rais^st Doctrines, Points and Uses, as
thou call them, and what thou conceivest and imaginest of it, and so sellest
it for money, and so make an hours talk of it, and art in one of these Text a
month, or more, and speak thine own inventions of it. Did they do so? O
thou Blasphemer! Philip had not a set wages of him, but he was moved of the
Lord to go to the Eunuch, when he was going to Jerusalem to worship; so if any
were moved of the Lord to come unto any of you, who are going to worship, and
reading of the Scripture, and should show you the substance of it, such as thou
art, would fall a raging, for it takes away your Trade; we do witness that
which Philip did, but we deny thee to be in Philips place* but only Antichrist
like has gotten his form, O thou Enemy of all Righteousness! who has wrested
many Scriptures, and perverted them to thine own way, Acts 23. 6. to maintain
thee in thy filthiness, and to make a cover for thee, but thou art discovered
with all who are uncovered and stand naked before the Lord God Almighty:
Praises be to him for him. And above all, thou say thou have Christ for an
example, for taking a Text, the words which Christ spoke, he said it was
fulfilled, Luke 4. 17. Isai 61. 1. and if thou take his words for an example,
Is thy Text which thou speak fulfilled? then why do thou*ly so long in a
Text, Christ said his was fulfilled that day, who said the Lord had anointed*
him to preach, Luke 4. 21. which thou art not, nor ^anst witness; and Christ
did not take it and raise Doctrines, Reasons, Uses, Trials and Motives, and
have a set time, and a set wages, and preach out of it a month or more, as
thou do, but said it was fulfilled that day, which thou could never witness
nor yet say: O thou impudent and brazenfaced! how dare thou take Christ for
an example to maintain thee in thy silthiness? Christ's words we own to be true,
and to be fulfilled, pray^ed be the Lord for ever, which thou have nothing to
do with, but wrests them with thy corrupt carnal mind to thy own destruction,
2 Pet. 3. 16. but as the Prophet did speak of the Merchants of Babylon, as thou
art one of them in the mystery of Witchcraft, and so with thy craft do
deceive simple ones, and the Scriptures I know cannot err from that which gave
it forth* and thy spirit I know to be the spirit of error, which is the same
that ever deceived the Nations, and we witness the Scripture in our hearts as
Christ did. And as touching thy Belief, we deny it, for thou neither believe
Christ nor us, for if thou were of God tou would own us, as they said, who
needed no man to teach them, but the anointing, 1 John 2. 27. but that thou art
without, and in the world, an Antithrist, and there I leave thee. Whereas thou
do accuse us of a profane spirit, it is the profane mind and spirit in thee
which judge the spirit of truth so, because it does show that which the
profane nature cannot bear: and whereas thou do accuse, that we find fault
with your often calling and seeking to God, that is false, for we would have
all to call upon the Lord, while he is near, and to seek him while he may be
found, Isai 55. 6. and that is the intent of all our writing and printing, or
coming to your Steeple Houses, or coming abroad for your souls good, which you
shall eternally witness, though* your corrupt filthy minds do reject it; but
thou Hypocrite and Pharise, and Enemy of all Righteousness! all thy prayers we
utterly deny, for they are abominacion to the Lord, and all thy blessings are
cursed, as in Mal. 2. Your praying in the Synagogues as the Pharisees did,
Christ did deny, and we also do deny the same, and so will every one where
Christ is risen deny thee, and such as thou art, for he is but one, the same to
day, yesterday, and for ever, whom thou art an Enemy to, and in the Generation
of them that ever were so: Friend, thou say, thou art jealous that we are
acted by a spirit of Satan, and do accuse us to be like those spoken of in
Mal. 3. these are thy companions eternally; I witness it, and there thou art
present now among them in the same nature, and one that walks out of the
commands of God, as I have proved before, and out of the commands of Christ,
following thine imaginacions, and therefore are we all witnesses against thee,
that thou art in the Sorcery* in the Witchcraft, and in the Adultery, and in
the corrupt seed, whose blessings are cursed, the same light sees it now, and
sees thee in the same Generation: And whereas thou do accuse us concerning
Prayer, thou gatherest many Scriptures in thine imaginacions; the Saints prayed
continually, and from them Scriptures thou imitatest a Form, and accusest us
who live in the praying continually; and to thee it cannot appear in thy carnal
form, neither do thou know our spirit, for it terrifies thee, nor the spirit
of the Apostle, and we do witness the condition that the Apostle speaks of
praying continually, and in every thing giving thanks, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 1 Timothy
2. 8. But this thou can not witness to be fulfilled, to that which should
exercise thy conscience do I speak, which shall eternally witness we, for thou
art dead, and the dead cannot praise God, and that which should praise God in
thee is in the Grave, and none in the Grave can praise him, Isai 38. 18. and
thy carnal mind in thee is limiting God in thy carnal form and custom, and
with a pretense of thy Prayers Pharise like, which is but mocking God, and
hateful, and abominacion to him, and all who are of him, thy Prayers and
spirit will be denied by them; and thou accuser art without, in the world among
the false accusers, 2 Timothy 3. 3. and thou must deny all thy prayers, and all
thy customs, and all thy worship, and all thy imitated Churches* as thou
call them, and all thy praysings, and all the worlds ways before ever thou
know God or us.

Qu. 8. Show me by the Scriptures where the Apostles went into the world, and
gave the world David's Psalms to sing in Meeter? these things that ye practis^,
answer them by the Scripture, or the Apostles practice, without consequence and
imaginacions.

Priests Answer. That the Apostles went into the world, that is, up and down in
several parts of it, is clear by all their Epistles. That the Apostles
Commission from Jesus Christ in their going forth to preach to all Nations, was
this, [Teaching them to observe all whatsoever I have commanded you] is as
clear, Matthew. 28. 20. That the Apostles were men that were under the same
commands that were generally commanded of all men, cannot be denied, and if so,
then they were to teach this very Lesson of singing Psalms to the world where
they went, see Psalm. 100. 1. and 96. 1. and 117. 1. and 61. 32. and 148. 11,
12, 13. and 145. 21. and 150. 6. Now because you generally keep such work about
this particular, but further least you should evade this, the New Testament is
not altogether silent in this case, for we read of Christ, that he sung a Hymn
with his Disciples after Supper, according to the manner of the Jews at their
Feasts, which say some, was a Part of the 116 Psalm, Paul and Silas sung in
Prison, and besides this Paul observed the command of God in this particular,
for he taught the Churches this very thing, Ephesians. 5. 19, 20. ^ol. 3. 16. yea
and the Apostle James declares the very extent of the command, James 5. 13.
holding it forth as a general duty without exception, he says, Is any merry,
let him sing Psalms. For singing them in Meeter, I would ask thee such a
Question, whether a truth in Meeter holding forth the goodness, greatness,
majesty, or mercy of God, do not remain a truth, instructing, comforting,
edifying, as well as the same in Prose. If so, the Devil has befooled you
exceedingly, to make you so busy without cause as you are in this thing, and
while you pretend for truth of one hand, you are beating down truth on the
other hand publicly and visibly; but besides this, the Psalms were penned by
the Spirit of God, so no question they were directed to be sung in the Temple,
to that end David sent the Psalms to the chief Musician or Master of the
Music, to put them in Meeter for singing, and gave them grave Tunes to sing
them forth in, for the Hebrew Psalms were sung in Meeter in the Temple, and in
Tunes invented, and what makes it worse now than it was heretofore? God has
required the singing of Psalms even of English men, as they are a part of the
world, then to that end Scripture-Psalms which were Themes and Verses are
translated into English Psalms, which Themes and Verses in like sort that we
might sing them: besides all this I would have thee to know, that we are not to
live only by examples, but by precepts, also now I have discovered general
precepts for the practice of this; and as we are to do it, so we are to do it
spiritually, orderly, and most to edificacion, and so the general Rule is 1
Cor. 14. 26, 40. the Apostle in the 26 verse specifies this particular of a
Psalm, now what can be more for edificacion, and decency, and order, than to
follow that order that had been used so long before, with the approbacion of
God himself; Hezekiah set the house of God in order, and this was one thing he
did, he put the singing of David's Psalms in order, as in the 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
and in chapter 7. 30. 26. God blames him not for it, but says he, There is
none like him from the days of Solomon, and to this day the order is not
contradicted by God, that I know, if thou know more discover it. Last of all
exception is taken, because they are given forth to the world; any Assembly of
Christians coming together to worship God are not bound up so close, but a
company of the world may come in amongst them, and join with them in those
things which are required of all men, as hearing the Word, praying, or singing
of Psalms; and Christians are not to refrain because they are there, for this
see that place 1 Cor. 14. 23, 24. Now whatsoever thou judge, I dare not, but
judge that God has some of his people in our meetings, that are Christians
indeed, and though there may be more of the world, I know not that this should
be a ground to forbear that which all in the Congregation are required to do*
viz* to speak good of God.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Whereas thou go about to maintain the
singing of David's Psalms in a Meeter, and that the Apostles did so, and went
into the world to give to the world David's Psalms to sing in a Meeter, which
David says, The dead cannot praise the Lord; here I charge thee in the
presence of the Almighty God to be a perverter of Scriptures and of the
Apostles words, and David's words; and do bring in a consequence to bring them
into the same carnal invencion that thou art in, and would make them like thy
self: and thou bring a Scripture Matthew. 28. 20. that the Apostles went into
the world to give to the world David's Psalms to sing in a Meeter; there is not
a word in the Scripture that Christ sent his Apostles into the world to give
them David's Psalms to sing in Meeter, here thou accusest Christ, and would
make him like thy self, and would make the Apostles like thy self; here again
I charge thee to be a wrester and a perverter of the Scriptures: thou speak
of Paul and Silas singing, and them thou do bring to confirm thy going into
the world to give to the world David's Psalms in a Meeter; here thou have showed
forth thy blindness, sottishness, and ignorance; Paul and Silas when they sung
praises to God they were in Prison, which condition thou never knew* and
another Scripture thou bring concerning Christ and his Disciples, when they
did sing an Hymn, which thou art ignorant of, but art in the Generation of the
Pharisees and Priests that ^ought to put him to death, who has gotten the form
of his words, therefore as Amos says, The songs of the Temple shall be turned
into houling, Amos 8. thy songs and all your songs: another Scripture thou
bring in the Ephesians and Colossians, to maintain thy beastly end, of going
into the world, who are ignorant, and live in darkness, and giving them David's
Psalms in a Meeter contrary to all the Scripture, and the practice of all the
Saints, and would compare the Church who are gathered out of the world, the
Saints, to be like the world, and thy beastly worship, who sung with the
spirit, and with understanding, and with grace, making melody to the Lord in
their hearts, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Heb. 2. 12. but the world turns the grace of God
into wantonness; and how dare thou compare them with those that lives and
dwells in the grace of God, and sings with grace and with the spirit; but here
thou have showed forth thy ignorance and blindness, and it is that fools may
utter forth their folly, and that blind Guides might appear openly; and here I
charge thee again to wrest the Scriptures: and David thou bring for the
justifying of thy going into the world, and giving them his Psalms to sing in
Meeter, who said, Sing unto the Lord a new Song, and none can sing a new song,
but who are rede^med from the earth, Rev. 14. 3. and who are not of the world;
and here thou art an adder, and the Plagues are added to thee, therefore all
thy consequence and Songs we utterly deny, and thy vain imitacions: thou
would fain get a color out of the Apostles words to maintain thee in thy
filthiness, but thy shelter is taken away, and thy coverings, and thou art
discovered to be without, and not in the practice of the Saints: Friend, the
singing with the spirit as they did we own, that singing in grace we own, and
making melody to the Lord in the heart we own, and the singing of a New Song we
own, and witness, as the Saints did, but thy singing we do deny, and witness
against it, Glory, glory to the Highest! Another Scripture thou bring to
maintain the singing of David's Psalms in Meeter, that the Apostle gave them to
the ignorant world, which is James 5. 13. where there is not a word in the
Scriptures for it, but he said. If any be merry, let him sing Psalms, which he
spoke to the Saints, scattered abroad, and not to the world; and there thou art
a Liar of him, and a false accuser of him, the Apostles said, they would sing
with understanding, and here thou show that thou have no understanding, nor
no grace that thou live in, its not to be given to people that turn the grace
of God into wantonness, and have no understanding in things that be eternal,
nor of the Saints conditions, that were gathered out of the world, here thou
have made thy self void of the knowledge of God, and of Christ, and of the
Apostles, and all the Saints; thy Meeter we do deny, and they who turned them
into Meeter are like thy self, therefore do we witness the beating down of all
thy strong holds, and singing in Meeter; thou have got another man's condition
into Meeter, and all people I take to record, if thou should see David
roaring, quaking, and trembling, and water his Bed with his tears; Psalm. 32. 3.
and ^. 11. and ^. ^. and 42. 3. and have this turned into a Meeter, and get up
into a Pulpit among ignorant people, of beastical minds, and then say, Let us
sing to the praise and glory of God: Let all people judge what thou justifiest;
and this is thy imitated singing, which is altogether to his dishonor, and this
is thy Psalm: but who are moved to sing with understanding, and making melody
to the Lord in their hearts, we own; if it be in Meeter we own it. O thou
blind Hypocrite! was David of the world when he did sing praises? and did
David send his Psalms to the chief Musician to havo them put in Meeter, and so
to give them to the world? thou neither know the Example, nor the Precept,
which thou would have us to know, nor David; and all thy Precepts we do deny,
and that mind in thee which does discover them, as thou say, which is thy
own practice, and not the practice of the Saints, for there is nothing proceeds
out of thee, but what comes out of thy imaginacions and invencions; but the
Precept which the Scripture speaks of we know and witness, which thou art
ignorant of, as thou make it to appear; and all those Psalms which you have
turned into an English Meeter we deny, and such as thou art, who keep people in
blind forms and customs; but the singing praises to God as David did we own,
and witness, Psalm. 104. 33. and 144. 9. which thou art without, and ignorant
of, and an Enemy to, and to them who witness the same condition as he was in:
And friend, another Scripture thou bring 1 Cor. 14. 26, 40. to maintain
thee, that the Apostle went into the world and gave them David's Psalms in a
Meeter to sing; and here I charge thee in the presence of the Lord to wrest the
Scripture, and to add to the Scripture, for the Apostle spoke this not to the
world, but he spoke to the Brethren; if thou were not blind thou might see
it, the very Letter declares it: O thou slanderous Beast! why do thou slander
the Church of God, and would make them like the rude world, strikers and
fighters? Ps. 33. 2. and 89. 5. but it is that thou might show forth thy
folly, blindness, sortishness, and ignorance; thou Hypocrite, if thou would
sing now as David did then, where is thy Harp, Lute, and thy loud Symball? here
thou show thy self that thou art neither in David's condition, nor the
Apostles, nor in the Saints condition, but art without, following thy own
filthy imaginacions, living in the cursed nature, which holds up all these
abominacions, and the abominable invencions of men, which God forbids: Thou
say, God has required the singing of these Psalms of English men, in this
thou art a Liar; O thou Liar! God never commanded these Psalms to be sung of
English men which you have turned into a Meeter, but they are your own
invencions, and when you read them Hats you keep on, and when you sing them
Hats you put off, and here you worship the works of your own hands: thou say,
you ought to do it spiritually, which is thy own invencion and applicacion, and
thee and thy application we do deny, and there is nothing of the spirit born up
in thy understanding to guide thee; now here thou show to be in the same
nature that the world is in, they say they ought to do such things, and does
not; here thou show thy self to be one of them without, and not in the same
mind the Apostle was in, who said, We will sing with the spirit, and we will
sing With understanding, and with grace; but we do deny all thy imitacions: And
^riend, another Scripture thou bring to hold up giving to the world David's
Psalms to sing in Meeter, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. and here I charge thee in this
Scripture to be a Liar in the presence of the Lord God Almighty, and an adder
to the Scriptures, for they sang praises to the Lord who were Brethren, that
came to the house of the Lord, as the Scripture says, and Hezekiah did not
give them David's Psalms to sing in Meeter, which were Enemies to God, but these
did sing when the House was cleansed; and this is nothing to thee to hold up
thine abominacions, and to give the world David's Psalms in Meeter, but openly
to all people have thou showed thy self; thou say God blamed him not, there
was none like him; therefore thou may see thy self, he was not of the world,
and here thou show thou do not know the old Covenant, and hastraced thy
self out of them both, and have made thy self stark blind: thou say, to this
day the order is not contradicted by God, Did not Steven witness and say, God
does not dwell in Temples made with hands, Acts 7. 48. and for witnessing forth
the substance was stoned to death; and the Apostle Paul witnessed against all
the Figures, Types, and Shadows, and all their Customs, and outside
Observances, and all their offering, and contradicted that which God had
commanded, when the everlasting Offering was come, and against the outward
Temple; but thou art blind and can not see it, Pharise like, but thy mind
is seen to be contradictory, who would contradict the truth, and does not see
the end of God, in fulfilling his Types and Figures, and when they are
fulfilled, he does contradict them, and therefore do we contradict thee, which
actest these things God never commanded; that which God had commanded was
contradicted, as Circumcision, and the outward Temple, and the Sabbath, and all
the Priests were denied, with them who had received Jesus Christ; and here thou
have showed thy self to be a blind Pharise, which know not the precepts nor
commands of God, but followest thy own imaginacions and thy own invencions,
which I have charged thee withal formerly: and here I charge thee to be a
blind Guide, Matthew. 23. 16. and therefore came the Apostle to contradict all
the Jews, who held up the Figures after the substance was come, but thou art
blind as the Pharisees were, and worse, for when the Apostles had received the
substance they contradicted the Pharisees, which held up the Types and Shadows,
which God had commanded, and killed them that did witness the substance come;
but thou natural brute Beast, who know nothing of God nor his truth, must be
consumed by unquenchable sier: thou speak of an Assembly of Christians
coming together to worship God, but a company of the world may come and thou
joynest with them, here thou show plainly that thy worship is no true worship
of God, for they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth, John 4.
23, 24. for such are they which he seeks to worship him, but not in the
Steeple-house; the mighty day of the Lord is coming, and God that made the
world does not dwell in Temples made with hands, therefore come down thou
painted Beast which deceivest the people, God will overturn thee and thy
worship, and all such as thou art; and them who are of God God is sending them
forth to give you the Cup double that ye have given to them: thou say, an
Assembly of Christians coming together to worship God are not bound up so close
but a company of the world may come in and join with them; here thou show
that thy Assembly are all of one spirit, and here thou show plainly that thy
spirit and their spirit is the spirit of the world, and not the spirit that was
in the Apostles and Saints, which said, What concord has Christ with Belial,
and what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? 2 Cor* 6. 14. and
here thou have raced thy self out of the true worship of God; and I know thy
spirit is not bound up, but it is at liberty in the world, in the broad way,
and therefore with them it can join, and so here thou show thy self to be of
a contrary spirit to them that preached the Word; the Ministers of the Word are
not Ministers of the Letter, wherein it does appear that thou art a Minister of
the Letter, and a wrester of it; those who are the Ministers of the Word speak
forth freely, and testify against such hierlings as thou art, (who art bound
up in thy form and set place) and against all thy customary praying and
singing, for the preaching of the Word is to declare freely to all, it is not
bound up, but such as thou would limit it, who does keep poor simple people
in bondage under thee: I do believe God has a people which is in captivity
under thy dark imitated Forms, and such as thine, and who are misled by such as
thou art, for we were all under such blind Guides as thou art, until God of
his infinite love did show us his way, and his light, and your ways, therefore
in the presence of the Lord God do we testify against all such practices as
thine, and for the simple ones sakes, (who are under such blind Guides as thou
art) do we let forth our selves, that they may see how such as thou bewitchest
them, and keep them from worshipping the living God, by thy imaginacions,
Gal. 3. 1. Thou bring a place 1 Cor. 14. 23, 24. to maintain singing of
David's Psalms in a Meeter, but in that Scripture there is no such thing in it:
here again thou openly show thy self to be a perverter of the Scriptures,
and a wrester of it, what communion has the believer with the unbeliever? here
thou show thy self to be one of Babylon, full of confusion, and confused in
thy words, contrary to the Scripture, and a wrester of it, for the world knows
not God by all its wisdom: Thou say, that your Congregation is required to
speak good of God; O you Generation of Vipers! how can you being evil speak
good things? Mat. 3. 7. Here thou crossest Christ's words, thou would have the
Generation of Vipers to speak good things, An evil tree cannot bring forth good
fruit, how can you speak good of God, that speak nor good of his people? the
Pharisees when they met together, did they speak good of God, when they said
Christ was a Devil, and gathered together with the chief Priests, and sought to
put him to death? John 11. 53. and in this generation thou art taking counsel
against Christ, and against his anointed, incensing the rude multitude against
them, and is this speaking good of God?

Query 9. Whether a man shall overcome the body of sin, while he ^^ on the
earth, yea or no?

Priests Answer. There are diverse and several victories over sin, as first a
victory over the dominion, and reigning power of sin, Romans 6. 14. this is not
given by the power of man, but by the power of grace: there is a victory over
the condemning presence of sin, sin cannot so hurt any elect Vessel, as to
throw him into ^ell, and eternal wrath and condemna^ion, Romans 8. 1. There is a
victory over the being of sin in the flesh, and whatsoever curse thou say on
me for the same, I must profess that I am of the mind, that victory ^s not
fully enjoyed while we are on the earth, for then and not before, when this
corruptible shall have put on incorruption, Death is swallowed up in victory, 1
Cor. 15. 54. and the Apostle calls the body of sin the body of death, Romans 7. 24.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Friend, thou bring so many Scriptures, which
is to the throwing down of thy own self, as Romans 6 14. and thou desire to be
satisfied to the contrary to thy belief, for thou believe that man shall not
be made free from sin as long as he is here, and here I will show thee that
thou have a lying spirit, for in Romans 6. they said, they were made free from
sin, for while they were servants of sin, they were made free from
righteousness, and here thou show a contrary spirit to that which was in the
Apostle; and thou desire to be fully satisfied in those Scriptures, in Romans
7. 18. 25. Paul spoke his condition that he was in to the Saints, and what he
had passed through, which yet thou art alive in the flesh, and not come to know
the Law of God* therefore thy carnal mind rules and reigns in thee, and so
thou art making a distinction in the Apostles words, and wresting of them, who
witnessed that there was no condemnacion to him that was in Christ Jesus, and
witnessed the condition under the Law, and without the Law, and was made free
from the Law through the Law, which thou know not, so thou being a dead man
can not hear; thou speak of a Victory and reigning power of sin, and yet
in the conclusion of thy words thou speak to the contrary again, and that
thou art of that mind, that Victory is not fully enjoyed while we are on the
earth, and here thou speak contrary to the Scriptures, and there is a
confusion in thy words; for first thou say there is a Victory and Dominion
^ver the reigning power of sin, and then again thou denyest it, and here thou
show Babylon, for the Apostle said, We are more than conq^^rours through him
that loved us, and there is no condemnacion to them who are in Christ Jesus:
Another Scripture thou would be satisfied in, 1 Cor. 15. 54. the Apostle did
speak what he saw in this Chapter which thou have taken a word or two of, and
we witness and see the same, yet death reigns in thee, and corruption reigns in
thee, and the natural mind which does despise the glory of God, therefore is
this Scripture hid from thine eyes, but it is as it speaks, we witness it to be
fulfilled; and the Apostle was in the condition that he spoke of, for he
witnessed the Victory, and said, Thanks be to God, who has given us the
Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. and said, O death!
where is thy sting? O grave! where is thy victory? Romans 5. 9. and thou have
raced out thy self from the Apostles and from the Saints conditions, and
show that death yet has dominion over thee, and that sin has dominion over
thee, and that the mortal has dominion over the, and that corrupcions have
dominion over thee, and that that thou art in the grave, and that Victory
cannot be witnessed, and art an enemy to it, and have not so much as a belief
in thee of overcoming of sin; and here thou have showed thy hypocrites hope, as
thou say, and so keep poor people in death, in corruption, and in the
mortal and carnal mind, and in the grave, and in unbelief, as thou art in thy
self, and show that thou art damned openly, he that believes not is
condemned already, he that believes is born of God, and does not commit sin,
but is passed from death to life.

Query 10. Whether any natural man can preach the Gospel, yea or no?

Priests Answer. I do believe they may preach the historical part of the
Gospel, I believe Judas did preach and was not behind in his gift, to outward
vie^ of the eleven Apostles, for the Apostles had no ground to have any ill
conceits of him, for had they, they would soon have reflected on him, when
Christ said, One of you shall betray me, but they questioned themselves and not
him, Matthew. 26. 21, 22. And God gives great gifts many times to wicked men, Rom
2. 18, 19, 20. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Ministers of Satan may be transformed
into Ministers of righteousness, Gal. ^. 8. They cannot preach the mystery of
the Gospel nor Christ, from their own experience or enjoyment, for this they
know not, it is folly to them, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Here thou art pleading for the natural man, for
Judas and the false Apostles, and it is true, in that generation thou art among
them, and therefore thou must needs love thy own, and stand up for them, for no
other generation thou know, I am a witness against thee, and I know thee,
and have tried thy spirit, to be one of these false Teachers, which would
transform thy self into an Angel of light, and which do intrude into these
things thou never knewst, and so thou puffest up thy fleshly mind, there thou
art, I witness thee there eternally by the Eternal spirit: Thou say,
Ministers of Satan may be transformed into Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor.
11. 15. here thou would make Satan and righteousness one, and show forth
thy error, not knowing the words as the Apostle speaks; and if they cannot
preach the mystery of the Gospel, how can they be transformed into
righteousness? for the Ministers of Satan transform themselves as the Ministers
of righteousness, but he does not say, he transforms into it* here thou show
thy self to be a Liar, and thy self to be one of those who are no Ministers of
the Gospel, getting the form, but denying the power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. which ever
was to be turned away from, whose end is destruction according to their works,
and so thou show all along that thou have but only the form of the Apostles
words, for thou pleadest for them who are without, and against those who are
within, who are in the power and life of the truth, thou pleadest against the
truth and the life which the Apostles were in, and the life of the Apostles,
for the Apostles did discern the false Apostles, and those who did transform
themselves, so with the same spirit we discern thee to be in the same
generation among them, and there thou must own thy portion, and own the
Scriptures to be true, and thy portion in it, which it speaks of to the false
Prophets and false Apostles: Another Scripture thou bring 1 Cor. ^. 14. thou
bring a Scripture which says, The natural man receives not the things that
be of the Spirit of God, they are foolishness to him, that is thy own
condi^ion, own that Scripture for a truth to thy self, for the preaching of
Christ, and the Cross is foolishness to thee, as it was to them that held up
the Jewish Synagogues which yet thou hold up; another in imitation from the
carnal Letter, being carnal, and blind, and ignorant of the mystery and of
Christ, and of the Gospel; but the mystery, and Christ, and the Gospel we
witness and own, but we have not re^^ived it of man, neither were we taught it
of man, but by the revelacion of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. 12. and we do witness
forth the substance as the Apostle did, and therefore we do deny all such as
thou art, who art not so much as a Minister of the Letter, and have not yet got
the form of it to speak it true as the form is, but thou have showed forth thy
ignorance and foolishness of the form of the Letter.

Query 11. Whether the Tree be not known by its fruits, yea or no?

Priests Answer. No question but it is, Christ himself says so, but I pray thee
tell me, did ever a good Tree bring forth Despe^a^ion for its fruit, it was
Cain that despaired, Achitophel and Judas that went and hanged themselves: Is
that a good Tree that brings forth wrath, strife, sedicion, heresy, cursings,
and such like? Is that a good Tree that brings forth fruits of disobedience,
and slighting of those whom God has commanded us to honor? Is that a good
Tree that has for his fruits a casting by of the Ordinances of God, and a
slighting of, and reviling and reproaching the servants of God? Is that a good
Tree that has apparent fruit on it, of justifying themselves, and condemning
all that are not of their mind, how precious soever in the eyes of God? Is that
a good Tree whose fruit is brought forth in Satan's dress, very like him, for if
they once believe your opinions, the thing they look for is to tremble, James
2. 19.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Here thou desire to know whether a good Tree
brings forth desperation, as Judas, here thou accusest Christ, for Judas denied
Christ when he did despair, and Christ found him out, so he does thee, and all
who deny the good Tree, Christ finds out now; and all who do despair, deny the
good ^ree as thou do, who accusest Christ now, as they did then, and Cain
when he slew his brother Abel, then he despaired, when he slew the righteous
seed, Genesis 4. 5. and so are all you now in the generation of Cain, and God does
no more accept your Sacrifice, than he did Cains, who live in envy, and you are
in the same desperacion who slay the righteous, as daily may appear; and in
answer to this Query, in that evil Tree thou art, and bringst forth wrath and
strife, for in this very Answer thou have showed it, and showed forth Cain, and
malice, and false accusacions, and ignorance: and in thy former Query thou
can not witness the overcoming of sin, and is not sin of the Devil? and is
not sin the cause of despair? and is this the good Tree? and Christ says, Be
ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew. 5. 48. and here thou
show openly, that thou art that evil Tree, which cannot bring forth good
fruit, for he says, An evil Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, nor a good
Tree bring forth evil fruit; and this I witness fulfilled; therefore I see
thee, and discover thee, to be that fruitless Tree, which art cursed, and for
the fire: and again, thou pleadest for the honor of man, Jesus Christ says,
How can ye believe that receive honor one of another, John 5. 44. And thou
show thy self to be that evil Tree, that casts the Ordinances of Christ
behind thy back, and show thy self to be the Reviler, and the Reproacher of
the servants of God; for does not Christ say, They are called of men Master,
and have the chiefest places in the Assemblies* Matthew. ^3. and art not thou
there? and he bids his Ministers not to be as they were, and here thou show
thy self to disobey the commands of Christ, and to be the evil Tree: because we
deal plainly with thee, this thou call reviling and reproaching; we speak
the words that Christ himself spoke, which testify against thee, who live in
thy filthiness, and with all thy might and main, would hold it up against
Christ and his servants, and would pervert his words, but the Lamb has got
the victory; praises, praises, be to the Lord God Almighty for ever, Rev. 17.
14. Thou ask if this be the good Tree that justifies it self, thou
hypocrite! can a good Tree condemn it self? here thou would not own it to be
a righteous Tree to bring forth good fruit, would thou make a good Tree to
accuse it self? here thou blasphemest and accusest Christ, and he that does
witness this good Tree does witness against all who are not of the same mind,
for all who are this good Tree are of one mind, and of one soul, and of one
heart; and here thou have showd forth thy ignorance, and thou art a false
accuser, that a good Tree can condemn that which is precious in the eyes of God,
here thou art an accuser and an enemy of righteousness, and know not what
thou speak, did ever Christ condemn that which was precious in the eyes of
God, but nourished and cherished it? but such a false hypocrite as thou art he
condemns, and cries woe against thee, who art got up into the chiefest place of
the Assemblyes, standst praying in the Synagogues devouring widows houses, and
painting thy self with other men's words, and so Serpent l^ke, and here thou art
a Serpent, and the evil Tree, blaspheming against Christ which is the good
Tree, here thou show thy self to stand in the same place which Christ cried
woe against, which called him a Devil, as thou do now, where he is made
manifest; thou believe there is a God, and here thou show thou art not
come to the says of Devils, for the Devils believe and tremble, James 2. 19.
and they condemn thee and thy faith; and the power of God which makes to
tremble thou know not, as the Apostle when he came among the Corinthians, he
was with them in much trembling, 1 Cor. 2. 3. and thou might say the Apostle
was in the Devils dress, when he trembled, for the same po^er of God that made
him to tremble, the same power of God we witness now which makes us to tremble;
and here thou have openly showed thy self that thou do not know the
Scriptures, but make thy self manifest to be in the Devils dress, and a
blasphemer. And as touching opinions they are thy own, for opinions we do deny;
and here thou have showed that the power of God thou know not, nor never
heardst his voice, whose voice shakes the earth* Psalm 46. 6. and show that
thy wisdom is of the earth and earthly, and all thy Gospel notions to be
earthly, and all thy knowledge to be earthly, and all thy manifestacions and
gifts (as thou calst them) to be earthly, for thou denyest the power of God
which shakes the earth, Psalm. 2. 18. and so have here showed thy self to be in
the natural state, and in the first birth, and as a fool have uttered forth thy
folly, showing thy mind to be full of iniquity, and being the Tree which
bears no fruit, which is cursed, Hebr. 6. 8.

Query 12. Whether a man shall grow up to that condition under your Ministry
that he shall need none to teach him but the Lord, yea or no?

Priests Answer. Truly I do believe that God has given so far many of his
servants to grow up amongst us, as they see God alone the only Teacher of
himself in all that is discovered by his servants, they know him to be the
worker of all their works in them, that Christ is all, and in all, the Alpha
and Omega, the teacher of his Fathers mind to us; and yet notwithstanding I
believe few are grown up to that desperate folly and madness, as when God has
afforded means of discovering his will and mind, to cast them all by, and ty
God up to work immediately without means, to humor their fancy, this is to tempt
him, Mat. 4. 6, 7. to confine him, which God cannot like, he will not take it
long from proud flesh: I am persuaded the Scripture you bring in, Isai 2. ult.
Cease from man, will not serve your turn, for many Prophets, and Apostles, and
men of God, taught after that, even by the command of God and Christ; besides
you cry, Cease from man, but you practice quite contrary, witness the running
of many of you many miles to hear George Fox; and you use writings, and
printings, which are outward means of teaching.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Here thou have showed forth presumption and
lying, to say that many are grown up under your teaching to see God alone the
only Teacher, and that Christ is all in all, the Alpha and Omega, and thou thy
self not to know the first Principle, nor they whom thou teach, Heb. 5. 12.
for if it were so, that they knew the second Covenant, and the Law of God
written in their hearts, they would all deny thee, for it teaches them to know
God, and need not to say, Know the Lord, and needed not any man to teach them,
who witnessed the Anointing, and need not any of thy carnal means, as thou
talkest of, for the means that God does teach his people, is by his Spirit,
Gal. 3. 5. for they that did draw them from the spirit within them, bewitched
them, and so do thou, and they that drew them from the Anointing within them,
bewitched them, and so do thou, which tellest people of a carnal means; so
that Scripture which thou bring Matthew. 4. 6, 7. it is for thy self, for thou
temptest Christ, and would have him to bow down to thy false worship, to thy
carnal means, as the Devil did Christ, then own it and witness it, for it is
thy condition, herein thou have showed thy self to be a false Prophet, sowing
pillows under the peoples arm-holes, and flattering and keeping them in carnal
security, and tellest them that Christ is their Teacher, when thou who art
blind and carnal art set up for a Teacher, who make a Trade with the
Scriptures, and neither know Christ nor the Spirit, nor the teaching of
Christ, (as thou speak of) and so keep all people in blindness and
ignorance from waiting upon Christ: and friend, whereas thou do accuse us of
tying God up to work immediately, herein thou show that all that thou have
is but fancy, and lying in thy carnal state, who tempts God, and draws all
others to tempt him, and show thy self void of all them that spoke forth the
Scriptures; for all Scriptures being given forth by the inspiracion of the
Spirit, and holy men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, was not all
this immediate and eternal; and here thou have openly showed thy self to be
carnal, and not knowing them that gave forth the Scriptures, and would draw
all others into the same carnal state with thee, and it is thou that would ty
up and do ty up with thy carnal mind, and limit the holy One, as may appear
by thy blindness and ignorance, and the people that thou teach, who drawest
them under the carnal Form, and here thou have denied the immediate teaching of
God, Isai 54. 13, 14. which all the Saints of God witnessed and followed the
ways of, and all that ever know the Lord, and here thou have showed that thou
do not know the Lord, but live in high blasphemies, and in the state of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who professed God and Abraham, but were of their Father
the Devil, and there thou art in the same generation doing the lusts of thy
father the Devil, who was ever an enemy to Christ, as thou may read thy self
in the generation of all them Teachers, as thou have openly showed thy self:
Friend, it is thy own proud fleshly mind, that does confine God, but thou art
discoverd, and it shall not be long but thou shall be more manifest to thy open
shame, thou have walked long enough under a cover, but now thy skirts are
uncovered, and thy nakedness appears; and a Scripture thou bringst Isai* 2. 22.
Cease from man, which thou say will not serve our turn, but it does serve our
turn, for we own it, and witness it fulfilled, therefore do we cease from all
men, which hold up the carnal means, which thou speak of, and all hierlings,
and all them that bear rule by their means, and all them that seek for their
gain from their quarter, and all them that are called of men Master, and has
the chief place in Assemblyes, and all they that paynt themselves with other
men's words, and all them that go in the way of Cain and Balaam for gifts and
rewards, Jude 11. and all those that have the form of godliness and not the
power, and all those that wrest Scripture to their own destruction, and give
meanings and carnal senses upon it, and all such as lead ^illy women captive,
(which thou have said to be us) ever learning and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7. for thou say, they shall never overcome
as long as they are here; and thou believe here; but thou art one that live
in thy lust; here thou have showed that thou art one that the Prophets and
servants of God cried against, who were taught immediately by the Spirit of
God, and this was not after man, neither according to man; the Apostle said,
the Gospel that he preached was not after men, for he had not received it of
man that taught it, all such we own, but all such as are in the way of man, as
thou art, we utterly deny them, which holds up these abominacions, which all
the Prophets of God cried against; and here thou have raced thy self out from
among them all; those that God sent and commanded, as thou say, since the
Prophet bade them cease from man, Isai 2. 22. those were not made by the will
of man, neither was their teaching according to man, but it was immediate and
eternal, which thou know nothing of, as thou make it appear; and such we
own* but thee we do deny, for thou art blind and know it not: And as
touching the Books, and Writings, and Printings, which thou accusest us of, and
running so many miles; the Queen of the South came to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, and the Prophets of the Lord sometimes they were moved to speak against
such as thou art, (who live in the abominacions) and sometimes were moved to
write, as one of the Prophets did; and here thou show thy self ^gnorant of
the Scripture, and envious against the same power, and the same eternal Word
which is now discovering your abominacions, as the Word did then, so the
eternal Word does now; and thy mind being carnal and outward, looking up at
things outward, and so thou show thou have nothing eternal born up in thy
understanding, and so thou look upon the same which we speak or give forth
in writing, to be the same carnal mind that thou art in, and so thou judge
all the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles, to be in the same carnal state
as thou art, judging Scripture according to thy carnal mind, 2 Cor. 3. 6. and
3. 4. and so to thee, truth is a savor unto death, as it was ever; but we are
moved of the Lord to write forth or to speak; it is not an outward means as
thou look upon, but it is to the conscience of every man, from that which is
eternal to that which shall eternally witness it; but thou art high up in thy
hypocrisy, and have men's persons in admiracion, because of advantage ( for the
gift;) therefore it grieves thee to see the immediate and eternal teaching of
the Lord alone, who is teaching of his people, and guiding them up to himself
by his Spirit, whose Sacrifice God does accept, Genesis 4. 5, who are in the
second birth; but thou art Cain, and because thou see the works of God, and
God accepts not thy Sacrifice, therefore thou show forth thy envy against
the righteous Seed in all thy words.

Query 13. Whether they be not Antichrists and do disobey Christ, that have the
chiefest place in the Assemblyes, stand praying in the Synagogues, called of
men Master, which things Christ did forbid his to act, and cried woe against
them that acted such things?

Priests Answer. No question, what is against Christ in the flesh is a part of
Antichrist, and to be destroyed, but as yet none of you all that I know have
proved, that the uppermost seats in the Synagogues were Pulpits, there seats
were more for honor than for service, that Christ forbids and reproves, and
these places were taken out of love to them: and for the Title of Master, I
would to take off the offense, if that would do it, that all would agree to
call me by my name, I take not the Title in love of it, nor to have dominion by
it, and the Woe is against this, yet I know there were Masters of the
Assemblyes, so called by as wise a man as any amongst you, for ought I know,
Eccles. 12. 11.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. In thy Answer to this Query, thou can not
justify the chiefest place in the Assemblyes, therefore thou must own the Woe
upon thee: and Friend, thou bringst a Scripture in Eccles. 12. 11. to cross
Christ's words, herein thou show to be a fighter against christ for to
maintain thy Mastership, that thou may be a Master of an Assembly; and here
openly thou show thy self to be a Pharise, and in the Pharisees state; says
Christ, A greater than Solomon is here: Now thou have showed forth thy venom
and ignorance indeed, and openly to act against Christ, and openly to be an
Antichrist, and a Pleader for the state of the Pharisees, and to contradict
Christ. Thou say, no question but that which is against Christ in the flesh
is a part of Antichrist, thou have showed thy self to be an actor against
Christ in the flesh, and an Antichrist, and show that thou never knewst him
in the flesh nor in the spirit, for he that walks in the spirit does not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, but has crucified them, and all things are
become new, Romans 8. 13. but as thou say and do believe, that a man shall
never overcome as long as he is here, so showing forth the old Bottle, and what
is within thee, Matthew. 9. 17. here is poured out, which neither knows God nor
Christ in the flesh nor in the spirit, but have poured forth thy blasphemy
against Christ and his Doctrine, and all who hold up his Doctrine, and live in
it, and love Christ.

Query 13. Whether those be not Antichrists, and of the Devil, and no Ministers
of Christ, which do not abide in the Doctrine of Christ, yea or no, and which
hold up those things Christ forbad?

Priests Answer. Thou strainest at a Gnat, and swallowest a Camel; thou take
great care of Mint and Annis, and neglectest the weighty things of the Law, who
preachest up that which Crist for bad, prove what thou speak; if thou dare
trust God, as I desire to do, wait with me for the time that God shall
discover, who abides with him and in his Doctrine, and who does not, so far as
it is revealed and open.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. In thy Answer to this Query, thou say we
strain at a Gnat and swallow a Camel, because we deny that which Christ denied;
who were called of men Masters, as the Pharisees were, who strained at a Gnat,
and swallowed a Camel; Matthew. 23. 7. and thou may say that Christ did so, for
Christ spoke against them who were called of men Masters, and taught his not to
be so, nor to call any man Master, and here thou have justified that which
Christ forbids: And thou do accuse us that we do take care of Mint and Annis,
because we say, Whosoever abides not in the Doctrine of Christ is a Devil; and
here thou have showed thy self that it is thou that take care for those
things that pass away, which Christ did forbid: thou bidst me prove thee to
preach that which Christ did forbid; here in thy very words thou preachest up
that Christ forbids and cries Woe against, and here I chargethee in the presence
of the living God, who will render vengeance in flames of fie^* Jer. 51. 6.
Nah. 1. 2. and here thou have showed thy self to be in the Doctrine of the
Pharisees and of the Devil, and accusest us with tything Mint and Annis, who art
a Liar, for all those things you hold up, and we deny, and it is thou that do
justify them; Do thou not hold up these frivolous things? the chiefest place
in the Assembly, and to be called of men Master, laying heavy burdens upon the
People, and stand praying in the Synagogue, this thou strivest to hold up,
which we deny; the commands of Christ thou call them Mint and Annis, which
is a Ly; and here thou wrests the Scripture to thy own destruction; I charge
thee here, and have proved thee to preach that which Christ forbad, and shut
thee forth to be any Minister of Jesus Christ eternally, or knowing any thing
of him: thou would have me to wait with thee, if I dare trust God; I waited
with thee too long, but thou art now revealed and discovered thou man of sin
and son of perdicion, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. who art exalted above all that called God,
and thy Doctrine is discovered, and the end of it, for it leads to perdicion,
for out of the bottomless Pit it came, and thither it must go: and in thy
Queryes thou desire to know which is most like Antichrist, and here thou
show that thou do not know Antichrist, but we know thee to be Antichrist,
1 John 4. 3. and acting in those things which Christ never commanded, contrary
to Christ, and yet thou professest thy self to be a Minister of Christ, and yet
know not Antichrist.

Query 15. Whether they be not Seducers that draw People from the Anointing
within them, and tells them they must have a Teacher without them, when as he
who was a Minister of the Gospel said, You need no man teach you but as the
same Anointing teaches, and the promise is to him that abides in it, eternal
life.

Priests Answer. If thou can prove and make good thy charge, that I draw
People to look from the Anointing within them, to the Teachers without them,
spare me not, God has taught me to instruct those whom I speak to, not to look
on, or rest on the outward Teacher, but to look unto the Spirit of Christ, the
Teacher even within them, where he is, to have that made out to them by his
light and power that they here speak of, the Ministers without, and that thy
own conscience must needs convince thee of to be true, unless thou art wilfully
blind, which is, I fear, a judgment upon many of you: The Lord make out and
discover more and more, let it fall where it will, who are Seducers of the
People, and whether they be not so that teach and persuade People, that every
man has the Anointing in them, and a Light that will lead them to Heaven
without any more ado: I am much mistaken if the Preacher of the Gospel that
thou speak of prove not the very thing in 1 John 2. 18, 19, 20, 26. read
and consider, and God give thee to understand; note what John says in that
place cited by thee, 1 John 2. 27. and you need not that any man teach you, but
as, etc. in this to me, not quite taking off men from speaking and hearing, but
only from speaking and hearing what is not agreeable to the Anointing, men are
to speak as the Anointing speaks, and then they are as the Oracles of God, 1
Pet. 4. 11.

A Reply to the Priests Answer. Thou would have it proved, and have the
charge made good, that thou drawest People from the Anointing within them to
the Teacher without them. I answer, thou do openly show that thou do draw
People from the Anointing within them, for he that is taught of the Anointing
need not any man to teach him but as the Anointing, and he that said so did not
bear rule by his means, as thou do, and have got the Form of words, and may
speak those words, but if any come to witness that they need not any man to
teach them, Heb. 8. 10, 11. as the Saints did them, thou say, he denies the
means which God has afforded, because they will not hold up thee, and justify
thee in thy beastly and carnal worship, and call that tempting of God, and
fancy, and desperate folly, when we come to witness the Anointing that they
need no man to teach them; herein thou have showed forth thy folly, and fancy,
and desperate wickedness, foolishness, and madness, as Balaam did when the dumb
Ass rebuked him: thou say, God has taught thee, but thou art a Thief and a
Liar, and have stolen the word, for thou denyest that which should teach thee,
the Light which God teaches by, the Light which enlightneth every one that
comes into the world, John 1. 9. yet thou denyest the immediate teaching of
God; I charge thee, for if any witness to be taught alone with the Anointing,
and deny all men's teaching but only the immediate Spirit, which all the men of
God were taught by, that thou say is a tying up of God, and herein thou have
showed forth thy self, that thou do not know the immediate Teaching, nor the
Anointing, for those who are taught with the Anointing, do deny thee and all
such as thou art. Thou say, God has taught thee to instruct others; thou
have nothing from God to instruct others withal, but keep them in thy
immitated Forms, and Customs, dead and husky prayers, and what thou do get
with studying and devising of thy own Brain, that thou feedest poor ignorant
people withal, and say God instructs thee; here I charge thee to be a
Liar, and the woe was denounced against such as thou art: therefore we deny thee
as the Prophets of God denied them, for the same is made manifest to us now,
which lets us see thee, as it did them then: Praises be to God for ever.
Friend, the Light and power of God thou deniest, and art ignorant of, and that
which should exercise thy Conscience, for thou deniest the Light that
enlightneth every one that comes into the world: And why do thou talk of the
Light and of the power of God, who art ignorant of the Light, and disobedient
to it? but the God of this World has blinded thy eyes, 2 Cor. 4. 4. and
therefore thou endeavourest to keep others in the same heathenish nature thy
self art in: wherefore to my Conscience thou speak nothing, nor can speak
to the Conscience, for thou deniest the immediate Teaching, and call that a
tying up of God, O thou blasphemer! Thou desire to let the Plagues and
Judgments fall where they will, upon them who are Seducers; thou need not
desire the Plagues, for they are thy portion, and here thou have showed thy
self to be blind and ignorant indeed; for thou do not know a Seducer, nor
thy own condition; therefore thou art not fit to teach others.

A Question thou ask, Whether they be not Seducers, that teach and persuade
peeple, that every one has the Anointing in them, a Light that will lead them
to Heaven without any more ado? Answ. Here thou show forth thy foolishness
indeed; for thou would bring peeple forth into the doing the works of the
flesh, into the broad way, which work is death, and the End of all thy Ministry
is to draw peeple from the Anointing, and from the Light within them, and to
draw them to thy Teaching, whereby thou make thy self manifest to be a
Seducer: All who do witness the Anointing, and walk in the Light, 1 John 2. 8.
such thou look upon to be Seducers, with thy dark mind, who can not see
them who draw peeple from thy dark Ministry, to mind the Light of God within
them, as the Apostle said, take heed to the Light of God within you: and this
thou do look upon to be seducing, and that it is not sufficient for to guide
them to Heaven, but* that they must come out from the Light within them, to thy
Doing, which we deny, and all thy preaching practice, and Invencion, which is
witchcraft; and here I charge thee to be a Witch, and to bewitch the people.
Thou do bring a place of Scripture 1 John 2. 18, 19, 20. which thou exhortest
to read, which is a Rod for thy own back, concerning you need no man to teach
you but the Anointing: for many came out with us, but it is manifest they were
not of us, because they did not continnue with us: but thou art uncome-forth,
and thou know not this condition, but art in the world among Antichrists
false prophets, and Beasts; and yet thou would be busy among the Saints
conditions: but this I say to thee, All who are come out from among such as
thou art, need not any man to teach them, but as the Annoynting. But they who
do not continu, they turn from the Annoynting: and he that denies the Father
and the Son, is a Liar and an Antichrist; he that has the Son, has the Father
also: therefore we do know thee to be Antichrist, who should come. Friend thou
speak of Speaking and Hearing what is not agreeable to the Anointing; be
silent, O flesh, for thou know nothing of the Anointing; thou art one of
those whose mouth must be stopped, thou art one of those dumb Prophets, who have
nothing from the Anointing, but denyest it, but only thou have got the form of
words to make a Trade of it, and denyest the thing it self.

Query 16. Whether they do not bewitch People, that draw them from the Spirit
within, to observe the Ordinances of the world? when as the Apostle said, They
did bewiteh you, that drew you to observe Circumcision, which was the command
of God, when he who was the substance of those Types and Figures was come.

Priests Answer. The Lord rebuke this lying spirit that is amongst you; who is
that which goes to draw people from the Spirit within to observe the
Ordinances of the world name them, and blame them: those that are lead by that
Spirit of God, and have him in good earnest, do make use of the Ordinance of
Christ, in a more spiritual manner, not to draw them from the Spirit, but but
to draw them into the Spirits likeness, possession and enjoyment, the Lord
rebuke that profane Spirit among you that dares to call the Ordinances of
Christ the Ordinances of the world, that cares not what dishonor you put on
Christ, his Truth, his Ways, his Servants: The Lord judge, and let all the
Lords People judge whose Eyes are open, whether they do not bewitch poor
creatures that carries them from beginning in the Spirit to end in the Flesh,
Gal. 3. 1. 3. from the Gospel to the Law, from Justificacion by Faith, to
Justificacion by works, from loving the Appearance of God, to Strife, Malice,
Hatred, and to the Appearance of Satan; from Peace, to a constant restlesnesse
either in their own Spirits, or outwardly troubling others, by Writing,
Printing, bra^en-faced-Rayling, and Reproaching, without heeding whether they
speak Truth or a Lie.

A Reply to the Priests answer, Thou art he that goes about to draw people from
the Spirit within them, to observe thy carnal Tradicion, and Imitacion, and to
observe the Ordinances of the World, and it is thy Spirit which is that Lying
Spirit which thou mencionest, which the Lord will rebuke and must rebuke; for
thy Lord and God I do deny, for the living Lord God of Heaven and Earth, thou
know not, no more than a natural bruit Beast Jude 10. for thy God is the
God of the World, and he is thy Lord, and the Lying spirit rules in thee, as
thou have made it to apear; thou art he, therefore I name thee, and blame thee
Camelford, and the Lord will blame thee and rebuke thee. Friend, none of the
Ordinances of Christ do thou know, for all thy Preaching is of thy self,
Christ never commanded it, nor never commanded thee, nor thy Praying, nor thy
Singing, Christ never conmanded it, but it is the Invencion of thy Brain, and
the invencion of man, and to the Ordinances of Christ thou art an Enemy: Thou
do openly show thy self to be a witness against them who are the Ministers
of Christ, and who abides in the Ordinance of Christ, that witness against
such as thou art, but all the Ordinances of Christ Jesus we witness and own,
but thou to them art an Enemy* therefore thee and all thy Ordinances do we deny,
and all that which thou calst spiritual manners for this is but thy Gloss and
Color, that thou may appear beutifull with thy spiritual nocion, but thou
art discovered! Praises be to the glorious Lord God Almighty for ever. Thou
say thou do not draw them from the Spirit, but drawst them into the Spirits
likeness; here thou have made a graven Immage, and the likeness of a thing,
and the Lord forbids that thou should make to thy self any graven Immage, or
the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven or in the Earth, and here thou
have showed thy spirit to be a contrary spirit; in this thou showest thy self
to be a Liar, for thy worship is not so much as the likeness of a spirit, for
the Spirit is one, and it we own, but thy likeness of Spirit we deny. Thou
say again, the Lord rebuke that Lying-spirit, and I say to thee, thy Lord we
deny, and the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, does now rebuke thee thou
Lying-spirit, for him thou know not, and calest it a Lying-spirit, for thou
prayest to thy Lord to rebuke the Spirit of truth, which shall confound thee
and thy Lord; here thou have showed forth thy profaneness, and blasphemy, and
it is made manifest what God thou servest, even the God of the world. Thou
say, let the Lord judge and all whose eyes are opened: The Lord does judge, and
has judged, and all the Lords people does judge whose eyes are opened, they
judge thee and all such as thou art, in Righteousness, and see thee clearly;
Praises be to the glorious Lord God. The day from on high does spring. A
question thou ask, whether they do not bewitch poor creatures, that turn
them from beginning in the Spirit, to end in the Flesh? Ans: yea I say they do,
and thou art one, for as thou saydst before in thy Query, when thou askedst
whether the Light was sufficient to lead people to heaven without any more
ado, thou show all thy doings tend to draw People from the Light, into the
works of the Flesh and from waiting to be justified in the Spirit, and to lead
them into condemnacion, and there thou art, one that bewitches the people, who
know not the Spirit, but those who are led and guided by the Spirit and walk in
it, deny thy Freedom in the flesh, and thy liberty, and all thy carnal
Ordinances and Tradicions, And it is thou that drawest people from the Apostles
doctrine, and from the Law of God within, and from Justificacion to the Law of
works, into thy carnal imitated way: but the Law of Faith, and the Law of God,
and the Teachings of the Spirit, this we witness and own, as that which the
Apostles was taught by, and by this we seek to bring all People from under thy
carnal teaching, and we deny it all, and thee both. And whereas thou do
accuse us for drawing people from the Appearance of God, to Strife, Malice,
Envy, and Hatred, and to the Appearance of Satan; herein thou have showed thy
self to be a false accuser, 2 Timothy 3, ^. and a Liar, in saying we draw people
from the Appearances of God; we draw People up to God, from Wrath, and Malice,
and the Appearace of Satan, for in Wrath, Malice, and Envy, and Strife thou
live in; for who are drawn from thee, and the Appearance* of Wrath, Malice,
and Strife, lives in Joy, and Love, and Unity onewith another: and as for what
thou speak of constant restlessenesse it is thy own, for all who are drawn
from you are drawn into steadfastness, and the Spirit of them that are drawn
from you thou know not: Thou who art restless and keep all other in
restlesnesse, ever learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the
Truth, 2 Timothy 3, 7. and therefore thou judge them like thy self: and it seems
our Papers, and Writings, and Speakings do torment and trouble thee as ever the
power of Truth did the Pharisees; for the Prophet who was moved to write the
Roll, when he sent it to him unto whom it was directed, he burned it; so does
Writing now torment and trouble thee: And whereas thou accufest us of
brazen-faced Railing, and reproaching, without heeding whether we speak Truth
or a Lie: Ans: All this state and condition thou art in: Brazen-faced thou art,
for thou art a Beast, and brazen-faced in uttering forth thy Lies, and thy
Railing, and thy venomous filthy Speeches, and thou it is that do not heed
whether thou speakst Truth or a Lie; for Truth thou can not speak, for thou
can do no otherwise, for thou art of thy Father the Devil Who was a Liar
from the beginning, for the truth yet thou know^st not, but we speak the Truth
as it is in Jesus, and lie not, and testify to that which should exercise thy
Conscience 2 Cor. 4. 2. and eternally shall all you witness us ^ Cor 5 11
though the lyng-Spirit in you now judge the power of Truth to be a Lie, which
ever the lying-Spirit did, but thy Spirit is tried, and we know what thou art,
an enemy to the Truth, and without God in the World

Query 17. Whether you have the same Spirit as was in the Apostles, and Christ,
and the Prophets, which gave forth the Scriptures, seeing you act contrary to
the Scriptures, and follow your own Invencions and Tradicions, and so have
erred from them all.

Priests Answer. The same Spirit that Christ had, the Prophets, and Apostles
had, and the same have all that are Christ's; there is but one Spirit of Light,
Truth, and Peace in the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 9 14. and all Dispensacions are
given forth by this one Spirit. Yer I do believe this Spirit is given forth in
several measures, and degrees, to the Body of Christ, Ephesians: 4, 7. 1 Cor: 12.
from the 4 Verse to the 12. Yea I do also believe; no man to this day, in the
world, has so full a measure of the Spirit, as the Penners of the Scriptures
had: they had the gift of Toungs, and were by the Spirit enabled to preach to
any part of the world; I do not know any that has such a gift by the Spirit;
they had a gift of healing the Sick, and curing the Lame in their bodily
infirmities: I know non such, no not the perfectest among you; they had by the
Spirit a gift of Prophecy, which was true, and came to pass: and though you
have had those among you that have pretended to this, yet all that has been,
is but a discovery of that Lying-Spirit they were led by, enough to make you
blush, but that you are brazenfaced: They erred not in discovering the mind of
God to us; I know none that can rightly boast of such a measure.

I have taken the Pains to answer thy Queries particularly; excuse it not, but
answer me. I have propounded so again, that is particularly. The Lord open your
eyes, that what is of God, and Truth, may fix on many of you, that you may
escape out where the Snare of Satan is broken, and I shall rejoice in my Pains*
Farewell.

A Reply to the Priests Ans: Friend, here thou have confessed that all has the
same Spirit that are Christ's, and here is Confusion in thy words, and thou
show that thou can not witness it thy self, but say others has it thou
do believe, and yet after, thou come to deny it, and say no man in all
the world, has so full a measure of the Spirit, as the Penners of the
Scripture had; and Friend, here thou show thou have not the same Spirit that
was in Jesus, and he that has not the same Spirit is none of his, Romans 89. and
it does show, that thou readst the Scripture with thy Carnal mind; and say,
thou do beleiv the Spirit is given forth in several measures, and degrees;
thou say it because the Scripture says it, but thou know not Christ,
neither art thou a Minester of him; and the working, and Operacion of the
Spirit, thou know not, as thou showedst it before, neither do thou know
the gift of God, but art querying the Conditions of them that had received the
gift, and afterward fell away, after they were made pertakers of the heavenly
gift, which shows that thou know not the gift of God, nor art not made
pertaker of it (but art in the Fall, and so showest forth thy Ignorance) for if
thou were made a pertaker of the heavenly gift thou would leave of buying and
selling the Letter, and making Merchandise of it Rev. 18, 11. Thou say, thou
do not know any one, that has such a gift to preach in any part of the
world, nor the gift of Tongues, here thou shamest thy own Profession in the
natural state, and the natural preaching, and all thy fellows who profess
Tongues* and your carnal Original; thou say thou know not any that are so
gifted, to speak in all parts of the world* here thou show thy self that
Christ never sent thee, for whom Christ sent to preach, he said, Go preach to
all Nations, to every Creature, Matthew* 16. 15. but he did not send them for
gifts and rewards, for it was Balaam that looked after such things, and in that
generation thou art, envying the righteous: thou say thou do not know the
same gift amongst us; neither do thou see it among the Apostles; for the same
that was in the Apostles, we witness, the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame
walk, and them that have laid long under such false Physicians as thou art are
cured, the dumb speak, and therefore thou ragest (as thy Example the Pharisees
did) and sons and daughrers prophecy, Joel 2. 28. but such were called mad men
and fools by such as thou art in their genera^ion, who art out of the truth;
and whereas thou do accuse that we have had such amongst us, as pretend to
this Prophecy, thou art a Liar, there is none pretends Prophecy, and the lying
spirit speaks in thee, and thou neither art ashamed, neither can thou blush;
thou say thou do not know such amongst us, therefore thou discoverest thy
self, that thou know nothing; Thou deaf Adder and Serpent, who art full of
Cockatrices, Psalm. 8. 4. for if thou could see, but thou art blind, thou
might see the same gift amongst us as was among the Apostles, for we witness
the same by the same spirit, according to the operacion, but the lying spirit
in thee can judge no otherways of truth it self but to be a lying spirit, for it
is in the generation of them that know nothing of the truth, for that Spirit
that we are led by thou know not; for if thou were led by the same Spirit we
should be one with thee: but Friend, thy spirit is tried and known to be the
spirit of Error; thou say, the Prophets erred not in declaring the mind of
God to you; thou know not the Spirit that the Prophets were guided by, nor
thou know not the mind of God, though thou have the outside, a declaracion
which is to the visible eye without thee, but* art in the generation of them
that could tell by the Prophets words where Christ should be born, yet they
sought to put him to death, Mark 14. 64. the chief Priests, and so thou art one
of them which is an Enemy to Christ, where he is born now, as they were them,
and as Iannes and Iambres witstood Moses, so do thou resist the truth, out of
a corrupt mind, in the state of Iannes and Iambres, out of the faith, a
Reprobate, as thou have openly showed it, but thou shall proceed no farther,
for thy folly is and shall be made manifest, 2 Timothy 3. 9. Thou say, thou have
taken pains to answer these Queries, thou have wrested many Scriptures, as it
is made manifest, to maintain thee in the state of the Pharisees, and to
maintain thee an Enemy against Christ, and to maintain thee to be one of
Balaams Prophets, and to maintain thee to be one of the hierlings, and to
justify that which Christ forbids, and to maintain thee to hold up that
horrible filty thing that is committed in the Land, and to bear rule by thy
means, Ier. 5. 30, 31. which the Prophets cried against, and with the Prophets
words, and Christ's words; and with the Apostles words thou would shelter thy
self, and make thy self a cover to maintain thee in thy filthiness; but the
Lord God of power is coming to uncover thee, and lay thee more and more open,
and make thee bare, that thy filthyness may appear, to the end that the simple
ones who are in captivity under thy subtlety, and snare of iniquity, may be
delivered, and peoples minds directed unto God, that ^e alone may* be exalted
to whom be all praise, honor, and glory for ever. And Friend, thou say, that
thou desire that the Lord would open our eyes; thou tempter of the Lord, thy
Lord we deny, and thy Prayers we deny, the Lord has opened our eyes, Praise and
glory be to him for ever, the Lord has opened our eyes without thy Prayers,
Matthew. 20. 34. (therefore we deny them, they are abominacion) and contrary to
thy means has the Lord opened our eyes? 1 John 1. 1. neither is there any thing
of God in thy Answers, but thou and thy imaginacions are raced out for ever;
and all thy pains thou speak of, are the works of thy own hands, which were
ever cried out against. Thou desire we may escape out of the snare of Satan*
where it is broken, we have escaped out of thy snares where they are broken,
Psalm. ^24. 7. and therefore out of thy dominion, and from under thy power are
we come, and see thee to be one that the Devil ensnares, who art one of his
Soldiers, and not of Christ's, fighting for the Devils Kingdom, and fighting
against the Saints with thy carnal weapons, and against ^he Lamb, but the Lamb
has got the victory over the Beast; Praises, praises be to the Lord God*
Almighty for every.

Amen.
FINIS.
QUERIES sent by Gabriel Camelford, to the People who out of reproach and envy
of the blind and dark world are called Quakers.
Answered by the Spirit of the Lord, which does enlighten and shine in our
hearts: and those that live in the pure light of God, and can read with the
Spirit, may see him taken in his own Snare, and condemned out of own mouth, and
his Deceits laid open.
Query 1. WHat is a Reprobate? 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Answer. Whereas thou would know what a Reprobate is, thou art out of the
truth, hated of God, a Child of the Devil, an Enemy of Righteousness, the Son
of Perdicion, in whom Christ rules not, but the works of the flesh, who knows
not the Light that enlightneth every one that comes into world, but denies it
and hates it.

Query 2. Whether Christ be in a Reprobate to lead him to God?

Answ. Thou ask thou know not what, Shall ever a Reprobate enter to God?
Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated; and Christ condemns the Reprobate, and
the Reprobate hates the Light, John 3. 19, 20. as thou do, which shows forth
the works of darkness, and there thou art a Reprobate, and one that knows not
the Light that enlightneth every one that comes into the world, and this Light
shall condemn thee who keep others in the same nature with thy fair glosses
and colors which thou set upon the Scriptures, which must go into the
Lake, and into perdicion, who live in thy filthy and fleshly imaginacions,
which ever was cursed from God, Psalm. 101. 5. an Enemy of Righteousness, whom
the Lord according to his promise will scatter, who live in thy imaginacious
and conceivings, Romans 1. 21. and there thou art.

Query 3. If so, why are not all men brought to God?

Answ. Because they hate the Light as thou do, and love the darkness tather
than the Light, because thy deeds are evil; Do thou profess thy self to be a
Minister of Jesus Christ, and queriest why all men are not brought to God? here
openly thou have showed thy self to be a Hater of the Light, for shame give
over and blush. Christ says, I am the Light which enlightneth every one which
comes into the world, Ioh. 1. 9. which thou art ignorant of; he that loves the
Light, and walks in the Light, there is no occasion of stumbling, but thou that
hate the Light, thy deeds are evil, and therefore thou stumblest, John 11. 9,
10. and there is thy condemnacion, which is the Light, and with such blind
Guides as thou art are poor people lead from the Light within them which should
guide them to God, to hearken to thy imaginacions, and to fall down to thy
images, but the Plagues of God will be poured down upon* the Beast and the
false Prophet, Deuteronomy. 28. 59. and thou art one which keep people from God.

Query 4. Whether any man has power to resist in the day when he comes to draw
the soul to himself?

A^sw. Here thou show that thou do not know the power of God, neither have
tasted of it, but standst in the power of Satan, and do resist and deny, but
a day of power and vengeance, Ier. 51. 6. will come upon thee, which thou shall
not be able to resist, though now thou art querying, and can not tell whether
man can resist or no: by thy Query thou have showed forth thy subtlety Serpent
like; the children of Israel which had tasted of the mighty power of the Lord,
when they murmured they were destroyed, Numb. 14. 28, 29. but this thou knew
not, but art shutting up the Kingdom of Heaven against men as these did, who
were called of men Masters, which stood praying in the Synagogues, which Christ
cried woe against, in Matthew. 23. read thy portion there, who hated Christ, and
there thou art; for shame give over professing thy self to be a Minister of
God, who know not the power of God, but art querying whether any man can
resist it, yea or no.

Query 1. Who were they the Apostle spoke this word to? Ephesians. 2. 12.

Answ. They were they that were made nigh by the blood of Christ, whom thou art
an Enemy to, and without God in the world, in the generation of the Pharisees,
and a child of disobedience, Light shines, and Darkness does not comprehend
it: the god of the world has blinded thy eyes, Romans 11. 8. and thou have showed
thy self to be a Tempter.

Query 2. Whether you dare own this as a truth, made out by the Spirit of God
in the Apostle?

Answ. We do witness in us what the Apostle speaks, by the same Spirit that was
in the Apostle, therefore we witness against thee, who have nothing but the
Letter and the lying spirit to be thy witness, and we do witness what the
Apostle says, He that believes has the witness in himself, 1 John 5. 9, 10.
and this do we own, therefore tremble before the Lord thou child of the Devil,
Psalm. 99. 1. and blasphemer, and Enemy of Righteousness; who art querying
without.

Query 3. If so, whether your opinion is not contrary to truth, and so a Ly?

Answ. Opinions we do deny, and here thou have showed forth thy dark mind,
thou can not witness that ever thou were in the Light, for darkness cannot
comprehend it, John 1. 5. and there thou art, for thy mind is full of
confusion and frivolousuess, and the Lie speaks in thee, and there is nothing
of truth born up in thy understanding, and that which should exercise thy
conscience thou art an Enemy to, and to the Apostles life thou art an Enemy,
and know it not, though thou can and do make a Trade of his words, and
Christ's words, and the Prophets words; O thou falsehearted dissembling
Hypocrite! the Plagues of God are due to thee, and that is thy portion, Rev.
18. 8.

Query 1. Whether there be not a time that men are darkness? Ephesians. 5. 8.

Answ. Thou art in darkness, and the man of sin is darkness, and the Light
shines in darkness, and thou do not comprehend it, John 1. 5. Thou hate the
Light thou child of darkness, and therefore thou art in darkness, which Light
shall condemn thee, John 3. 19. the righteousness of God is revealed upon thee
in flames of fire, thou child of disobedience.

Query 2. Whether there be a possibility to hide Christ the Son of
Righteousness quite under a cloud, where he really is?

Answ. Thou Enemy of God, thou do hide the Talent in thee under the clod of
earth in thee, If thou have an ear thou may hear, 1 Pet. 3. 19. the Ministers
of God they speak to the spirits in Prison, and the Prisoners shall come out of
Prison; Art thou a Teacher and show thy self to be so sottish, and to be
ignorant of the Form, and must be taught the Letter? therefore thou show thy
ignorance, because the son of perdicion is above all that is called God in
thee, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Thou blind Hypocrite! was not he in Egypt while Herod was
King, and out of Egypt have I called my Son, says the Lord: Who have thou
preached all this while? or who has sent thee to preach? Here thou have showed
that thou never knewst Christ, nor Christ never sent thee; O thou dark dumb
Prophet! thou were speaking of the Prophet, and of Grace, which has appeared
to all men, Tit. 2. 11, 12. which thou turnest into wantonness, for this Grace
is the Saints Teacher, those who are taught of it deny thee, and thou art one
that keeps the Light in Prison in thee, and the Devil is exalted above all that
is called God in thee, who art for condemnacion and destruction, as it is
written.

Query 3. Whether the Devil be stronger than Christ, the flesh than the spirit?
or where do thou find he was ever a Prisoner in Satan's chains?

Answ. We witness that he was in Satan's chains, and is in thee, else how could
they crucify him afresh? thou Enemy of Righteousness, who have showed forth
thy ignorance, and thou art he that keeps him in them; here thou show thy
self to be ignorant of the Letter, but art one of them that imprisons the
truth; Christ says, I was in Prison, and is kept in Prison by thee, and ye
visited me not, Matthew. 25. 43. The Devil shall cast some of you into Prison,
Rev. 2. 10. And Christ says, Saul why persecutest thou me? and in that
generation thou art persecuting, but in all these things thou show thy self
to be ignorant of the life and power within, but art querying without with thy
busy mind, looking with the eye that cannot see, and harkening with that ear
which cannot hear, which shows that thou never knewst Christ, but do imprison
him; The same which descended did ascend, which said, He had overcome the
world, John 16. 33. If thou have an ear thou may hear, but thou art he that
quenches the spirit, and despisest prophesying, who lives in the lusts of the
flesh, who art for destruction and the fire, does not the Letter say, he was
taken from Prison, from Judgment, and was he not in Prison when Barnabas was
delivered, when a company of rude fellows came from the high Priests (such as
thou art) to take him and lead him to Prison, and he it is which is imprisoned
still, the cause of it is, thou and such high Priests as thou art, Mark 15. 1.
which stir up the rude company to bring him to the Magistrate, and to the
Prison still, Matthew. 26. 59. O thou Enemy of Righteousness! do thou inquire
whether Christ was in Prison, thou art born after the flesh, and persecutest
him who is born after the Spirit, here thou art answered.

Query 1. Whether it be not a needless expression to speak of drawing the soul
to Christ, if Christ be so near us as in us a Teacher and Leader already, John
6. 44.

Answ. Thou Enemy, the Tempter and Serpent, Christ has called thee to
repentance, and thou have been convinced with the Light which is Christ, but
thou live in the flesh and in the filthiness, in the mystery of iniquity, who
would have the Scripture to be answered without thee, who art an Enemy to the
life that gave it forth, Mark 15. 1. therefore to such as thou, and to thy
generation the Woe was ever preached, for thou art one of them which was in the
generation of the Pharisees, who tempted Christ, who were Enemies to him, though
they professed the Prophets words, and Moses words, but thou art for
destruction, and misery will be thy end.

Query 2* Whether it be not an improper speech of Christ, to say, You will not
come to me, when he is in them, and they in him before? according to what you
affirm.

Answ. Thou blind Hypocrite and Pharise, here thou have showed thy self to be
a blind Guide indeed, that neither knows Christ, nor the drawing of Christ;
how dare thou say there is improperness in his speech, but it is that thou
being an Enemy of him might utter forth thy folly, who art one of them that
will not come to him, that thou might have life, John 5. 40. but thou art
seeking the outward Letter, which is a testificacion of him, standing up in thy
own imaginacions, and would have the Scripture answer thee; so thou Serpent
would have dust, but with imaginacions I will not feed thee* but with
judgment (as it is written) but thy mind I do deny, and to the Spirit that is
in Prison I speak, 1 Pet. 3. 19. whom thou art an Enemy to, and to thee the
Plagues of God are due.

Query 1. Whether the time of dark Natures power be not a night to the soul?
John 11. 10.

Answ. This is thy own condition, thou need not to have asked it, for thy
soul thou know not, but the dark power reigns and rules in thee, therefore
thou stumblest, because there is no Light in thy understanding, John 12. 10.
thou art in the night, and there is stumbling, and know not whither* thou
ghost, one that hates the Light, a child of disobedience.

Query 2. Whence it is that they that walk in the Light stumble, if they have
such a pure leading Light in them.

Answ. Thou stumblest in these Queries, because thou art disobedient to the
Light, and hate it, as others do, and these are frivolous Queries that
proceed from a frivolous mind, who bring Scriptures, and art ignorant, as a
natural bruit Beast made to be taken and destroyed* (as Peter says) now the
evil nature in thee at this may rage, but in that generation thou art, one that
hates the Light, and stumbles and walks in darkness, and know not whither
thou go, John ^. 11. and here again thou have showed thy self ignorant of
the Letter, and of Christ's words.

Query ^. Whether the Reason given by Christ be a true and solid Reason, yea or
no?

Answ. Thou with thy damnable Doctrine would compare Christ like thy self,
with thy filthy Reason, who art one of the false Prophets, who denyest the
Lord, therefore thou art questioning Christ's words, which shows thee a Pharise,
who did question Christ; thou Enemy of God, where can then accuse Christ that
he spoke unsolidly or unsoundly, or spoke a Ly? O thou busiminded fellow! what
have thou to do to question Christ's words? Mark ^. ^. but thou show forth
thy busy filthy mind, Luke 23. 2. that thou might accuse him where he is
made manifest; thou Pharise and Hypocrite.

Query 4. If so, whether they that say Every man has a sufficient Light, be
not Liars and Deceivers of the People, yea or no?

Ans. Here thou show thy self to be a deceiver openly, and all thou speak
is deceit, and from thy dark mind, that comprehends not the Light that
enlightens every one that comes into the world, who hates it stumbles at
noonday, John. 5. and there thou art, who have put forth so many stumbling
Queries, and in that generation thou art; the same Spirit is made manifest as
was in the Apostles which does comprehend thee, who shall eternally witness me,
who cannot flatter thee; and have showed thy self openly to be without the
Light of God in darkness, yet art pleading for it* Therefore thou make Christ
a Liar and a Deceiver, and art in that generation that ever called him so;
Jesus Christ said, I am the Light of the world which enlightens every one that
comes into the world, John ^. 9. One he loves the Light and walks in it, and
there is no occasion of stumbling; the other hates the Light because his deeds
are evil, and because it will reprove them, and this is the cond^mnacion of the
world, and of thee.

Query 1. Whether all men are lead by the Spirit of God? Romans 8, 9, 14.

Answ. No thou art not lead by the Spirit of God, but art lead by the Prince of
darkness who rules in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. ^. so thou art
one that hate the Light, and quenchest the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 5. 19. crucifiest
Christ, and show thy self openly blind; Do thou profess thy self to be a
Minister of God, and queriest whether all be lead by the Spirit? here thou
make thy nakedness and foolishness appear.

Query 2. Whether all men without exceptions are the sons of God?

Answ. No, thou art not, nor none of thy flock, we know thee so to be, Except
ye be born again, John 3. 3. ye must first be born again, but thou art a child
of wrath and disobedience; and here thou have showed forth thy natural birth,
and as a bruit beast which Jude speaks of, Jude 10. and this must thou own
before thou know what it is to be a son or servant, which yet thou art an
Enemy to.

Query 1. Whether the preaching of the Gospel be not a spiritual husbandry and
warfare? 1 Cor. ^. 9, 13, 14.

Answ. We do witness the preaching of the Gospel to be a spiritual warfare and
husbandry, to pluck up such fruitless Trees and Briars and Thorns as thou art
which cumber the ground, 1 Cor. 3. 9. and to war against such Pharisees as thou
art, which has long stood in the Vineyard cumbring the ground, whose fruit
stinks, as it is written, Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit is
hewn down and cast into the fire, Matthew. 3. 10. which thou art one, and the
cursed Fig Tree, so the warfare is against such as thou art, who live in
spiritual wickedness, which Christ cried Woe against, Matthew. 11. 21. that had
the chiefest places in the Assemblyes, Matthew. 23, and there is the war that
wars against such as thou art.

Query 2. Whether men go to war at their own Cost. 1 Cor. 7. 9 13 14.

Answ: A Query out of the Scripture thou bring, who goes a warfare at his
own Charge, but the same Apostle said, he did use none of these things, neither
have I written these things, that it should be so done unto me, I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to glory of; Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel,
Cor. 19. 15 61. Thou wrestest his words, to maintain thy gifts, and thou have
planted no Vineyard, nor never wast in the Warfare, and art not come to know
it, and the Flock the Apostle speaks of, thou know not, but art an enemy to
it; neither know thou the Milk that was given to the Flock, but thou art one
of them that fayl with thy Feet, Ezekiel: 34. 18. that have nothing but the Husk,
which is fit for nothing but the Swine, but as a Theif would be up in the
Apostles Condition. The Apostl spoke the Truth, which thou art out of, and to
the flock he spoke of it, and the Vineyard thou art an enemy to, and that with
all thy power and might, would wrest the Scripture: but thou art thrust out,
and discovered, with them who are within and seen by us, and so, I bid thee
Farewell; unto Perdicion thou must go.

Query 3. Whether the Apostles did not give a true Exposicion, of the 9* verse
in the forecited ^hapter, and in the 10 verse; And if so, then he that
Plougheth, and Thresheth, may do it in hope, and expectacion of outward
preservacion in his labor; not to have his mouth muzelled.

Answ: Thou would not have thy mouth muzeled, the mouth of the false Prophets
must be stopped, as the Apostle says, Evil Beasts, Slow-b^llies, whose mouths
must be stopped, Tit. 1. 11 12. and thou art one of them who takes the Apostles
words for thy carnal ends, and would have Exposicions upon his words, who
perverts his words, and say, he gave Exposicions, who spoke plainly, and thou
showest thy self to be one of them that the Apostle spoke unto

Query 4. Whether there be not the same equity that those that wait on the
Gospel should have maintenance, as well as those that waited on the Temple,
and on the Altar.

Aensw: They that waited on the Altar, lived upon the Altar, and they that
preached the Gospel, lived on the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9* 13. but repent, thou
know neither, but art a deceiver, and make a Trade upon the Scripture, but
praised be the Lord God, who has given a Light to discover thee, and to draw
from under thy bands, for thou neither waitest upon the Altar, nor can not
witness the Gospel, but only that Scripture thou bring to maintain thy gift,
which thou confessest thou receivest: worse then Balaam, 2 Pet. 2. 15.

Query 5. Whether the Ordinances of Christ in this be out of Date, yea or no?

Answ: Christ is the same he was, where he is made manifest, and his Ordinances
the same, but thou art one that do deny them, and disobey them; Did not
Christ command his whom he made Teachers, Mat. 23. 8. 10. that they should not
be called of men Masters? and that they would not have the chiefest place in
the Assemblies? for they were all Brethren. Come down thou painted Beast, and
proud Pharisy, who ever wast an enemy of Christ. Woe is thy Portion, for thou
art out of date with them, for thou do not observe them.

Query 6. Whether simply taking of Wages make a Hierling yea* ^r no?

Answ: Thou robest the World, whereas the Apostle says, he robed the Churches,
2 Cor. 11 8. and thou robst the world, for the Church of God is the ground and
Pillar of Truth* 1 Timothy 3. 15. Thou blind Sot, and colored Beast, does not
wages make a Hyerling; thou can not deny but thou art an Hyerling: thou
receivest a gift, Balaams wages of unrighteousness, therefore Woe is thy
Portion. What have thou to do with the Apostles? who spoke against gifts.

Query 7 If so, How could Paul be excused from being a Hierling, he taking
wages as well as others?

Answ: Art thou as Paul was? or would thou make him like thy self? who robest
the world, and he took of other Churches. O thou filthy Beast! who slanderest
the Church of Christ, and the Apostles with thy filthy mind, who would make
the Apostle an Hyerling, like thy self, who have nothing to do with the
Apostle, nor the Church of Christ* but as a filthy fellow, thou make a trade
upon the Letter, and other men's Conditions, to deceive withal; but thou art
discovered to be worse than Balaam, who denied the gift of Baalack, though he
loved it, Number. 22. 18. but all thy Pleading, and Querying, is for the gift,
showing thy self to be worse than Balaam.

Query 8. Whether the worlds wages does not imply some kind of contract
between them yea, or no? because he had wages of other Churches, for preaching
to those of Corinth, Phil. 4. 17 18.

Answ: Thou ask, whether Paul did well or no, in receiving a gift of the
Phillipians; thou wrestest his words in saying he received a gift, for says
he, in the Scripture, not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may
abound to your account: But I have all, Phil. 4. 17 18. How fain would thou
make the Apostle like thy self, an Offender, so thy eye is blinded with a gift,
(as it is written) and here I charge thee to accuse the Apostle falsely,

Query 9. Whether if Paul received a gift, why may not others supply their
necessaries?

Answ: Paul said, not because I desire a gift, in the same verse, which words
thou pervertest, but that fruit might abound, for he denied Balaams gifts. Thou
enemy of Righteousness, how dare thou slander the Apostle who was a true
Minister of God; all thy end in thy Querying is for thy gift, to maintain thee
in Balaams Seat; here I charge thee by the Lord to be a perverter of the
Scripture, who art in the way of Kain, Jude 11. I can scarce compare thee to
Balaam, for he denied the gift which thou pleadest for, and wrestest the
Scripture to maintain it, and therefore Woe is to thee, who love the wages of
unrighteousness; but thou art one who servest not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
thy own Belly, and by good words, and fair speeches deceivest the hearts of the
simple, Rom: 16 18. Phil: 3 19.

Query 10 Whether David was not in a heavenly condition, while on the Earth, as
well as any of you, being a man after Gods own heart? Acts 2 34.

Answ: He was in that heavenly Condition, which thou shall never see: David we
witness and his Condition, whom thou art an enemy to, and with thy aspiring
mind would know; but it is the subtle Serpent which is shut forth, which
Christ cried, Woe unto you Serpents, which paint your selves with the Prophets
words, Math 23 33 and so thou art painted, and would be painted, and Woe is
thy Portion, as it was theirs, Math: ^3. 33.

Query 11 What Heaven is this, that he is not ascended into?

Answ: ^hou would know what Heaven David is not ascended into: thou never
kn^west David's Condition that he was in, that Mind of thine must first know
Hell, where the wicked are turned into Psalm: 9 17. Thou have nothing to do to
know where David is ascended, for thou never knew his first estate, nor thou
art not brought into his Condition, but he that knows the Heaven of heavens,
knows what heaven it is; he that has an Ear let him hear, but thou art in the
generation of them that hated David.

Query 3. If not ascended into Heaven, where was he all that time, being dead
long before? discover this by Scripture any of you all, if cleared to any of
you.

Answ. Here thou Beast art got up, and show forth thy pride, when thou
know the Heavens thou shall know where David is, would thou have a meaning
to that which the Apostle spoke, another meaning to his words? he said it was
so plainly, and we witness the same; David is not yet ascended, what say thou
to that? we witness it is as the Apostle spoke, Acts 12. 34. would thou
pervert his words? here thou have showed forth thy dark mind; David's Sepulcher
we know and see, and it is with us as the Apostle said, Acts 2. 29. if thou
have an ear thou may hear; but thou art blind, and therefore do thou rage
and cavil, and there thou would have another meaning to the Scripture, in
this Query, which shows that thou have not the same Spirit that gave them
forth, and plainly have showed forth thy blindness and ignorance; would thou
have the Scripture cleared up to thy dark mind and carnal eye? as Job said, It
is hid from thee; the Scriptures are as they speak, we witness them; here I
charge thee again, thou would have another meaning to Scriptures than they
are, and thou would have us to clear them to thy covetous eye, but thou must
have thy eye cleared, for Darkness cannot comprehend the Light, John 1. 5. (as
the Scriptures says) for the natural man knows not the things of God, 1 Cor.
2. 14. thou know them not, nor no Serpent, nor Scribes and Pharisees, who are
in thy nature; but God is Light, in him is no darkness at all, who has made
himself manifest unto us, and we do witness that they are of no private
interpretacion, 2 Pet. 1. 20. and we deny all thy clearing which thou would
have us to give of them, for we own them with that Spirit which gave them
forth. And in the same Query thou speak of George Fox, who as thou say, is
our cunning and subtle Leader; the name of George Fox is carnal, and thou with
thy carnal eye, and by thy carnal imaginacions lookst and imaginest our Leader
to be carnal, such as thine is, the carnal Letter, but herein thou art under
the power of witchcraft, and the deceit has blinded thy eye, for our Leader is
not carnal, but eternal and spiritual, Romans 8. 14. which leading yet thou never
knewst nor can not witness, therefore do thou blaspheme* but art lead by
thy imaginacions, as in this thing thou make plainly appear, and art guided
and lead by him who is the subtlest of any Beast of the field, the cunning
Serpent, under whose dominion and government thou art, and that which all the
true servants of God in all generacions were guided by do we witness to be our
Leader, who was before time, when as George Fox is in time, and so not the
Leader of the Saints, but him we own as one with us in the eternal unity.

Query 1. What they were that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgressions, he being the public head of mankind in the first Creation.

Answ. Thou would know what they were that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgressions, but thy knowledge is brutish, and they are
hid from thee, without thy understanding eternally; and here thou have showed
forth thy self not to have the same Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, for
if thou had thou might see them, and if thou knewst Adam as he was in the
beginning, as he was in the head, (as thou say) thou might see them, but
thou do not see thy self in the fall, and the death passed over thee, which
has passed over all men, Romans 5. 12. and art in the trangression of Adam in
the fall, eating of the Tree of knowledge which God forbad, but those we do
know, which thou with that eye shall never see, who art a busi-body.

Query 2. Wherein was Adam a Figure of him that was to come?

Answ. Would thou have the Figure cleared to thy dark mind, he was the
Figure of him that was to come; here thou show thou neither know the
Figure nor the Substance, if thou had known the Figure or the Substance thou
would have known the Apostles meaning, we witness as it is; and here I charge
thee again that thou would have another meaning than the Apostle spoke, who
would have the Scripture cleared, showing that thou have not the same Spirit
that the Apostles had, R^m. 5. 14. here thou make thy self manifest to be a
stranger to the life of God, death reigns in thee, and thou neither know
Adam* nor Moses, and there is the Scripture cleared up to thee, it is thou that
must be cleared; and there is thy meaning to it.

Query 1. Who were they that were baptized for the dead? 1 Cor. 15. 29.

Answ. Would thou have another meaning of them, who are baptized for the
dead? it seems that the dead is not risen in thee; and here th^n standst in thy
imaginacions, and that dead mind in thee shall never know any thing of the
Scripture, nor any thing of God, but art dead from the truth, 1 Cor. 15. 29.
but we witness it to be fulfilled.

Query 2. What his meaning is in being baptized for the dead?

Answ. Here is the evil mind in thee, that would be aspiring to know the
Baptism of the Dead; here thou show thou never knewst Christ, nor the
Apostles, nor Baptism, nor Death in thy self, Romans 6. 3. but make thy
ignorance and foolishness to appear, when ever thou know Death to that which
is alive in thee, and that thou must before ever thou come to know the
Scriptures, that which would have a meaning to it, we do deny, for we witness
it through the death of that nature which is alive in thee, who art blind and
can not see, which never shall know the meaning of that Scripture (but Death)
with thy carnal eye, Romans 8. 6.

Query 3. How this makes to the proving of the Point of the Resurrection, the
Apostle instancing it to this end?

Answ. When thou know the Baptism, thou shall know the Resurrection, but to
make a Point of Resurrection I utterly deny; here thou have showed thy
witchcraft, I charge thee in the presence of the Lord God Almighty to make an
Image for thy dead mind, as touching the point of the Resurrection; Psalm 73.
^0. the Resurrection thou would have a Point made of it, and the proof of
this Point to thy dead carnal mind: I utterly deny thy Points with thy dead
mind, raised out of the dead Letter, which was given forth from a living and
an eternal Spirit, but thy dead mind is an Enemy to the Resurrection; and here
thou show thy self plainly unlearned, 2 Pet. 3. 16. and untaught of God, for
before thou know the Resurrection, thou must deny all thy dead Points and
Proofs; and openly have thou declared it in these Queryes, that thou neither
knewst Life nor Resurrection.

Query 4. What guile and craft was it he taught them by? 2 Cor. 12. 1^.

Answ. O thou vain man! thou would know what guile and craft the Saints were
taught by, not thy guile, and witchcraft, and Sorcery, which thou live in,
Ier. 27. 9. which thou drawest People from the truth withal, by thy fair
colors and imaginacions, and so feedest them with thy corrupt stuff^ and it is
that which thou art an Enemy to, and never knewst, for thou art in the gall of
bitterness, buying and selling the Letter, catching with thy witchcraft, and
this is thy guile, giving thy imaginacions upon the Scriptures which Paul gave
forth, Romans ^. 21. showing forth thy spiritual whoredom from the life of them
that gave it forth; thou art not come so far as Simon Magus, who would have
bought the gift of God for money, but the wisdom of God takes the wise in their
own craftiness; and here thou have showed thy self to be ignorant of the
Ministers of God, and thy self to be full of subtilty and a fool.

Query 1. What enlightening this is? Heb. 6, 4, 5, 6.

Answ. It is the enlightening which thou know not of, which is not born up in
thy understanding, which thou art an Enemy to, which is the Light of God, which
Light thou hate, John 3. 20.

Query ^. What heavenly gift it is they tasted?

Answ. If thou knewst the gift of God, John 4. 10. thou would not buy and
sell the Letter, for the gift of God is not to be bought and sold, and that
gift shall thou never know, which is the gift of God, Romans 6. 23.

Query 3. How or in what sense they were made Pertakers of the Holy Ghost.

Answ. Would thou draw the Holy Ghost to thy sense, and to thy carnal reason?
with which thou shall never know it, but art blind, without God in the world,
and would intrude into the Saints conditions, Ephesians. 2. 12.

Query. What world to come is this they tasted of?

Answ. Not of the dark world which thou art in: that world which thou shall
never see, for that world and the Holy Ghost we witness, therefore we see thee
in the dark world without God, Romans 5. 13.

Query 5. Whether such as these did fall away?

Answ. Thou have showed forth thy ignorance of the Form of the Letter, many did
taste of the power of God, and did eat of the spiritual meat, and did drink of
the spiritual drink, and were destroyed, 1 Cor. 10. ^, 4. this meat and drink
thou know not, nor art not come to eat of it.

Query 6. How or in what sense they cruci^ied the Son of God afresh* and put
him to open shame?

Answ. Thou would know in what sense they crucified the Son of God afresh,
and thou art he that crucifiest him where he is risen and made manifest, and
they are they which crucify him afresh, who have tasted of the heavenly gift,
and draw back from it, which gift yet thou art not come to know, had thou an
ear thou might hear, Rev. 2. 11. but thou art in the estate of the chief
Priests and Pharisees, who could tell by the Letter where he should be born, but
were they that put him to death. In these six questions thou have showed forth
thy self that thou do not know the Light which the Saints were and are
enlightened by, nor thou do not know the heavenly gift; now here thou have
showed thy self openly to be a blind Minister of the Letter, and what do
thou speak to People but the carnal Letter, which do not know the gift of
God, and thou have showed that thou do not know the Holy Ghost, but would
have a carnal sense upon that which is eternal; and here thou have showed thy
self to be a natural man indeed; for shame blush and give over thy Trade, and
prating about other men's matters; thou busi-body, thou have openly showed thou
do not know the world which is to come, Heb. 6. 5. but have showed thy self
to be one that keeps People in the dark world; and here thou make it manifest
that thou never tastedst of the world to come; and here thou have raced out thy
self, and shut thy self up in the dark world; and here thou art taken in thy
craftiness, and catched in thy subtle guile, because thou have showed thy self
that thou never were in the way; therefore thou do not see them; and here it
is that makes it manifest, thou art in the fall, and in the by-path, and in the
dark, and in the broad way, and there thou keepst poor People; and thou have
showed that thou art he that crucifies Christ, Mark 15. 13, 14. and bringst all
others to crucify him, and do not know that condition of them that crucified
him afresh, but art spending all thy strength to keep People from him, which
eternally thou and they and all People shall witness us to speak the truth;
whereas thou have said thou have given me a taste, least thou should tyer me;
but Friend, thy spirit I did taste before I did see thy Queryes, which is the
spirit of Antichrist, and knowing nothing of the true Christ, which thou have
openly showed, that spirit of thine cannot weary us, for it is for destruction.

Thou blind Sot, how dare thou speak to People, that neither know the
enlightening nor the Holy Ghost, nor the gift of God, nor the world which is to
come, therefore what do thou lead them out of? nor what is it to crucify
Christ afresh, nor the condition of them that fall away, which shows that thou
art not out of the fall; therefore all People who hear this fellow, take notice
of this blind Guide, how ignorant he has showed himself of the Doctrine of
Christ, 2 John 1. 9. and raced himself out to be no Minister of Christ, as not
knowing the Apostles conditions; all these things we witness fulfilled, Acts
13. 33. the Holy Ghost, the Enlightening, the world to come, and the heavenly
gift, but not by any such Teacher as thou art, Praises be to the Lord alone for
ever* the Lord alone is our Teacher, therefore do we deny and testify against
all such as thou art, all these things has God fulfilled in us, Romans 8. 4.
therefore we witness them, Praises be to the Lord God for ever.

Query 1. Whether the Old Testament discovering the mind of God to man, be of
any esteem with you? yea or no.

Answ. We witness the New Testament and Old both, and thee to be without both,
but only to make a Trade of them, and there they are in esteem to thee, for
thou have never come out of Egypt yet, for when he lead them out of Egypt he
gave them a Covenant, Judges 1. 2. but thou neither know Moses, nor the
Prophets nor Christ, but they are in esteem with us, and we witness against
thee.

Query 2. Whether thou can or dare deny the generality of the Precepts given
in this particular before cited?

Answ. The Precepts of God we own all, but thou neither ownest Prcepts, Law,
nor Command, nor Statutes, nor Ordinances; therefore a busy fellow thou art,
querying whether we own them or no, that thou might accuse; for if thou did
own them, thou would own us and Christ, but thy Precepts and Commands we
deny, and Doctrines, and Ordinances, for they are not to be tasted, touched,
nor handled, for they are to perish with the using of them, Col. 2. 21, 22.

Query 3. Whether it be not the work of Satan on your spirits, to endeavor to
stop the greatest part in the world from giving that to God which he calls for?

Answ. It is the work of God to stop the mouths of the world, that we witness;
and it is the work of Satan to open the mouths of the world, and he opens their
mouths, who keeps open thy mouth, whose mouth must be stopped, Tit. 1. 11. and
that which the world gives to the living God is abominacion, for the whole
world lies in wickedness, and thou would have the worlds mouth kept open, and
that which is abominacion to the Lord God set up; but the Lord is coming in
power to throw down the abominacion, and to stop the mouths of the world, which
thou would justify and set open, showing thy self to be a Friend of the God
of this world: It is the work of God to stop the mouths of the world. Friend
thou would have an Answer to these Scriptures and Queries, Ro^: 7. 18, 25. 1
John 19.

Query 1 Whether thou do own the Scripture for a Truth?

Answ: We witness the Scripture to be a Truth, and thee to be a Liar, not
knowing any thing of them.

Query 2 Do you not deceive your selves in saying you have no sin?

Answ: Here thou errest in not knowing that Epistle which thou bring to
accuse us withal, for the same that gave it forth, said, If ye confess your
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive and to cleanse you from all
uncleanesse 1 John, 1. 9. here thou have showed thy self that thou art not
come yet to the confession of thy sins, therefore far short from cleansing
from all thy filthiness of Flesh and Spirit; but blessed be God the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is making manifest himself to destroy the works of
the Devil, 1 John 3 8. and here thou show that Jesus Christ is not made
manifest to thee, and that the works of the Devil are yet standing in thee. O
thou enemy of God and Righteousness! what have thou preached all this while to
poor ignorant blind people? now thou have showed here that thy Faith is vain,
and that thou art yet in thy sins, (as the Scripture shows plainly) He that
beleives is born of God, and cannot commit Sin, 1 John 3 9

Query 3: How can thou justify thy self to be in the Truth, and the Truth in
thee, when thy words make it a very Token and Sign that the Truth is not in
thee?

Answ: Thy Token and thy Sign is without thee, and here thou show thy self
to be in the generation of the Pharisees, looking for outward Signs, and
outward Tokens, and say, how can we justify our selves, Thou dark Sot, did
ever Truth come to justify Self? Truth ever comes to condemn Self; Here thou
have showed forth thy Confusion in this Query, and in thy dark mind: If we say
we have not sinned, we deceive our selves, and make him a Liar, and the Truth
is not in us, 1 John 1. 10. But where Jesus Christ is made manifest, he is made
manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, and he that sins is of the
Devil, 1 John 3. 8. Here are the Children of God made manifest, and the
children of the Devil, for he that commiteth Sin never knew God; if we had not
sined, we had needed no Savior, and here thou showest thy self to be a Child
of the Devil, and never knew God, but stand for the Devils Kingdom,
making thy self manifest, not to be in that condition as they were that spoke
forth the Scriptures, but art without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. hating
those now who have the life of them made manifest, and Jesus Christ, who is
come and made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil; this I witness to be
fulfilled, and the taking away of sin, and the cleansing from all
unrighteousness, therefore I clear my conscience. Praise to the glorious God
for ever, who is coming to lead poor simple People from their blind Guides,
for to the children of God ye are discovered to be the children of the Devil.

Query 1. Are the Scriptures owned for a Truth? yea or no. James 3. 2.

Answ. Here thou have showed forth thy busy mind, one question had been
enough to have asked, whether the Scriptures be true yea or no? We witness the
Scriptures to be true, and we witness thee to be a Liar, and erring from the
Scripture not knowing them, Matthew. 22. 29. Many Scriptures thou have stolen to
maintain thee in thy sin, and to uphold the Devils Kingdom, who live wholly
in offenses, and bringst them into the same offenses like thy self, and would
make the Apostles offenders like thy self, for the Apostle says, Whosoever
offends not in words, the same is a perfect man, and able to bridle the whole
body, and whosoever has not power over his own tongue, his Religion is vain,
James 3, 2. and here thou show thy Religion to be vain.

Query 2: Is there a greater Privilege or Freedom now for Christians, than
there was for the Apostles or Brethren in those times? if so, discover it by
Scripture.

Answ. Here thou have showed thou know nothing, for thou art desiring to know
their Privilege, which mind in thee never shall, for the same Privilege the
Apostles did enjoy we enjoy, and the unity is but one, Ephesians. ^. 13. and the
same word they did enjoy we do enjoy, and the same Christ we enjoy, and the
same God they did enjoy we do enjoy; here thou would make two, which shows
thou art in the con^^sion; there is a greater Privilege and Freedom now than
there was then, yet the same; and in thy query thou have showed, thou know
nothing of Scripture: and again thou say that as for what any of us say,
besides, or above it, or against it, thou weighest it not, And all Scripture is
for the perfecting of the man of God, Ephesians. 4. 1^. which we witness, but thou
show thou know nothing of the Scriptures, but have spoken besides it, and
against it, as often I have showed thee in thy former Writings and Queries, and
added to it* and perverted it, therefore are the Plagues du to thee, and are
thy portion. Clear thy self if thou can, let that in thy conscience clear
thee, but it cannot I know: thou would be satisfied (if we can) what are the
Reasons that so many questions should never be answered till our days, though
God had still a People in the world; and where did thou see such questions
put forth before, for the darkness has reigned long, and Gods People did ever
stand against such things; thou may read of many Martyrs that suffered
Death, who witnessed the truth against the pretended truth, for the dark time
and power of Babylon has long reigned, and the works of the Beast; but now God
is raising up Light in Peoples hearts, 2 Cor. 4. 6. by which ye are descended
that profess the Scripture to be your Rule and Touchstone to try withal, for
the queries are put forth to you that ye might see your selves, 1 Cor. 4. 5.
that there is no Scripture for what you act, and that you might show forth your
filthiness; and here in thy queryes and writings thou have made it appear
openly, the dark power that has reigned in thee has been an upholder of this
Babylon, that never knew any thing of the life of the Scripture come to be
opened to thee, but now thy torment is but beginning, and so fare thee well,
and if thou have an ear thou may hear, Rev. 2. 11. but thy carnal filthy
blind mind in this will not be satisfied, nor never must, but must first know
destruction, and is for desruction, which is an Enemy to God; therefore do we
not flatter thee, nor few Pillows under thy armholes, that thou maystly soft.

Query. A question thou ask, Which is most likely to be Antichrist, and of
the Devil, he that* preaches a Power in all men to obey.

Answ. Now here thou show thy self openly to be Antichrist, and of the
Devil, and knows not the first Principle, for Jesus Christ says, I am the
light of the world that enlightens every one that comes into the world, he that
loves the light brings his deeds to the light, that the light might prove them,
and he that walks in the light there is no occasion of stumb^ing, and the other
he hates the light* because his deeds are evil, and the Light will reprove
them, John 3. ^^. The Light is the condemnacion of the World, which Light is
Christ, who says* He is the Light; here thou have made thy self openly to be
blind, and one of the children of disobedience, who disobey the Light, and
would have all others to disobey it, and to follow thy imaginacions, and so
thou do not only deny it thy self, but thou would have all others to deny
it; For the Grace of God which brings salvacion, has appeared to all, and
teaches us (the Saints) to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 11,
12. this is the Saints Teacher, but thou show thy self to be blind and
ignorant of the Letter: this Grace has appeared to all freely, and this Grace
of God is the free Teacher, but such as thou art in the world, turns this grace
into wantonness, and sets up Teachers without you, and so denies the Grace of
God to teach, and so lives in ungodliness and unrighteousness, and tempts God
for Grace when the Grace of God has appeared to all; and here thou show thy
self to be a Tempter of God, James 5. 5. and void of grace and understanding,
turning it into wantonness, which should teach thee, and drawst ot hers from it.

Query. Another question thou ask^st: Who is more likely to be Antichrist and
of the Devil, he that says he is Christ and the Light of the world, or he that
preaches that false Christ's should come?

Answ. The same that said false Christ's should come, the same Christ said he
was Christ, and the Light of the world, this Christ and this Light we witness;
here thou call Jesus Christ Antichrist, and have showed forth thy blasphemy,
James 2. 7. Thou blasphemer, how dare thou profess thy self to be a Minister
of Christ, and blasphemest Christ? 2 Timothy 3. 2. and questionest whether he that
says he is Christ, be not of the Devil or no; and here thou have showed thy
self to be in the generation of the Jews that blasphemed Christ, and called him
Devil, John 10. 33, 36. for the same Christ we witness made as manifest as
ever, and thee to be a Reprobate without Christ, and thou have made thy self
openly to appear to be a Reprobate without God and Christ in the world, Ephesians.
2. 12.

Query. Another question thou ask* who is like to be the man thou speak
of, he that says he is equal with God and Christ, or he that preached Christ
the Head?

Ans. Here in this question thou have openly showed thy self not to have the
same mind the Apostle had, for says he, I would the same mind were in you
that was also in Christ Jesus, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
and yet made himself of no reputa^ion* Phil. 2. 5. and here thou have showed
thy self that thou have neither the mind of Christ, nor his Apostles, but art
an Antichrist, and an Enemy against them that witness these things, which the
Apostle said, I would that ye were of the same mind; and again the Apostle
says, Our fellowship is with the Father and the Son, 1 John 1. 3. and he did
write to others that their fellowship might be with them, and he that has the
Father has the Son also, and he that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, and
he that is joined to an Harlot is one flesh, and there thou art, harloted from
all the Saints, Christ and the Apostles, and have showed thy self to be an
Enemy against them who are in the same mind and condition as the Apostles and
Saints were; here be thou a witness against thy self, that thou art witnessing
against the life of the Saints, he that preached Christ witnessed the Head and
the Members, and wished the same mind to be in them as was in Christ, who
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6, 7. which thou art
ignorant of, but thou have showed thy self that thou neither know the Head
nor the Members, nor the Body, but would seek to take the pre-eminence from
Christ, who have got the chief place in the Assembly, and art called of men
Master, but Christ said, Call no man Master on earth, for you have one Master
even Christ, Matthew. 23. 7. and there thou have taken the pre-eminence which
Christ says, He that will be greatest must be servant to all, Matthew. 23. 8,
11. but thou art got above all, in the place of them that the Woe was preached
to, and there is thy portion, own it.

FINIS.
Certain QUERIES occasioned by a Printed Paper of Richard Farnsworth, sent to
be answered, and no Name subscribed: From dark minds which be full of
subtlety, not knowing the first Principle.
1 Query. WHether that Light within unto which thou exhortest all to attend, be
in unbelievers, as well as in believers? yea or no.

Answ. Friend, in this first Query thou would know, whether the Light be in
others, which shows forth thy dark mind, which cannot comprehend the Light,
neither have thou the Light which the Scripture speak of? Jesus Christ says, I
am the Light that enlightneth every one that comes into the world, John 1. 9.
the one he loves the Light, and brings his works to the Light, and walks in the
Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling, John 11. 9. the other he hates
this Light, because his deeds are evil, and this is his condemnacion, the
Light; be silent all flesh! Friend, thou art one that hates this Light, thy
spirit is tried, for if thou were in the Light, there would be no occasion of
stumbling, but thou art Antichrist, without this Light, John 4. 3. therefore
thou do not see the Light which has enlightened every one, the believer and
the unbeliever, which is his condemnacion that believes not.

2 Query. If in unbelievers as well as in believers, whether is it one and the
same Light, with that Anointing thou speak of? yea or no.

Answ. It is one with the Anointing, and if it were not one with the Anointing,
it were one against the Anointing, an imagined Light, wherein thou have showed
thy blindness, and thy ignorance thou make appear, which neither know the
Light nor the Anointing, for thy dark mind cannot comprehend it, Light shines
in darkness and darkness comprehends it not, John 1. 5. and there thou art
exalted in the foolish wisdom which is of the world, which is foolishness to
the wisdom of God, swelling in the lying vanities, one of them that are
disobedient to the Light, without God in the world, the son of perdicion, which
is exalted above all that is called God.

3 Query. Whether it be not the new Law of Righteousness written in the heart
to condemn sin in the flesh, which thou say a man may say he is above the Law
by the Gospel, be not the pure and true Gospel manifested by Jesus Christ? yea
or no.

Answ. That is thy own condition, for thou art got above professing the Gospel,
or the new Law of Righteousness, which know neither in the power of truth
through the death, for if thou did, there would not be such a confusion in
thy Queryes, and in thy words, for thou professest the Gospel, with thy busy
mind, and would be informed as touching those things, and would be up in
the highest place professing the Gospel, but thou must come down to the first
Principle, Heb. 5. 12. and see thy self a child of disobedience, in whom the
Prince of the Air yet lodges, for hence it is so many do profess the Gospel
and the new Law of Righteousness, and are not come through the Law, for the Law
has power over a man as long as he lives, and who are made free from the Law
are made free from sin through the Law, 1 John 3. 4. I am dead to the Law,
where this is witnessed, and the Gospel known and the new Law of Righteousness;
but Friend, this is out of thy dark mind, for thou art drunk yet with the
Earthly spirit, and appearest something in thy comprehension, which is gathered
in with imaginacions and conceivings, but the promise is, thou must be
scattered, and if ever thou witness that fulfilled, thou will witness what I
say, but thy dark mind comprehends me not.

4. Query. Whether thou make any distinction between the new Law of
Righteousness, written in the heart, by the life of Jesus, and the Law
administered by Moses, which says, Do this and live; and if thou make any,
wherein lies it?

Answ. Thou would be comprehending with thy Reason, to know a difference
without thee, which shows forth thy blindness, Death reigned from Adam till
Moses, and that it does in thee yet, for that which should see is in the death:
the Law and the Prophets they were until John, and John until Christ, he that
can receive it let him, if thou can receive it thou may, and when thou
come to go through Moses, and through the Prophets, and through John to come
to Christ, then shall thou see the Light is but one, but thou art making a
difference betwixt Christ and Moses as the Pharisees did, who knew not Moses,
nor the Prophets, nor John, nor Christ, and in that generation of the Pharisees
thou art; I must deal plainly with thee, thy spirit is known and tried, which
is not the spirit that raised up Jesus; therefore thou who would be
comprehending with thy Reason, thou and thy Reason are comprehended, which
shall never search into the things of God, the pure wisdom of God is shut up
from that vulterous eye, Job 28. 7. and venomous Beast, who art come out of the
bottomless Pit, and thither must return again, and in the viperous generation
thou art: And as touching the outward commands and observances, where the life
of Jesus is made manifest, the substance of all Types and ^igures is come, Romans
10. 4. there is no more observing them, being made free from all them by him
who was under the Law, made under the Law to fulfill the Law, and the
righteousness of the Law fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh but
after the spirit, Romans 8. 2. and who are here denies all the carnal outward
Observances and Tradicions, as the Temple outwardly which God had commanded,
and Circumcision outwardly, and the Priests outwardly, for they had received
Jesus Christ the high Priest who is the end of the Law, Romans 10. 4. so the
carnal mind had carnal Types and Figures and Shadows of heavenly things, but
he that is made free from the Law, is made free from the curse, which thou art
not, which gave forth these Queries, if thou had thou would not have showed
forth thy busy mind; but it is now as the Apostle said, it was then, there
was some doting about questions, and the Law, which thou show thy self to be
one of them who have uttered forth thy folly, therefore be ashamed and lay thy
hand upon thy mouth.

5 Query. Whether New Jerusalem and the holy Temple therein be but newly come
down from Heaven, as in this our Age, or the like, wherein the true worshipers
worshipped the Father in spirit and truth, or has it always been the place and
Temple, wherein the Saints of God have worshipped the Father in spirit and
truth, John 4. 23. from the beginning of the world, seeing our Savior speaks
that Abraham saw his day and rejoiced, and that the time is coming, yea now is,
that neither at Samaria nor at Jerusalem?

Answ. Thou would know whether New Jerusalem be newly come down in this our
Age, and it is that which ever was, and ever did come down to the Saints, they
witnessed this; but Friend, to thee in thy age and generation where thou art
in, it is not come, (but thou art a stranger querying without) nor never did,
nor never shall come, in that generation thou art among the Serpents which the
Woe was ever preached to, Matthew. 23. even that generation which got the form to
speak of Jerusalem, and the Temple, but are the Synagogues of Satan, and full
of dead men's bones, and who are whited outsides, and beautiful outwardly, but
full of corruption within; and in that generation wherein was and is all the
righteous blood shed, and in that nature which thou would know these things
in, it was ever hid from, who have the chiefest places in the Assemblyes, and
called of men Master, Matthew. 23. 7. and in that generation thou art, which the
Woe was ever preached to, try thy self, for to that in thy conscience which
should exercise it do I speak, 2 Cor. 4. 2. and when it does appear, it will
witness me, 2 Cor. 5. 11. the time is coming, and now is, that not at Jerusalem
in your highest profession of Christ, nor your highest glorious nocions of him,
which you live in, nor none of your Steeple Houses, nor none of your Exercises,
as you call them, nor the daintiest Dish you have will be meat for the true
worshipers of God, for they have run to this Steeple-house and that
Steeple-house, and to this mountain and that mountain, and here is a dainty
Dish, and there is a dainty Dish, says the Harlot, which has long deceived
the simple ones, but now all you Harlots are discovered, which have deceived
the Nations, and now Abraham shall arise, who is the Friend of God, whom thou
know not, but art in the generation of them who professed Abraham and
freedom, and God to be their Father, but were of their Father the Devil, John
8. 44, 4^. doing his work, who was a Murderer, crucifying the just, who are in
the fall, and not come to the beginning, for thy Father was a Murderer since
the beginning, and Dives must be turned into Hell, and the Dives with your
dainty Dishes must be laid low, and you who profess the New Jerusalem, will be
found to be in the old Jerusalem, where the Lord Jesus Christ was and is
crucified in your Jerusalem now, in the highest place of Worship, the true
worshipers of the Father in Spirit and Truth, witness it to be so, and the time
is come that the Scripture is fulfilled, and the words of Christ, John 4. 23.
Praises, Praises, to the Eternal glorious God of Heaven, and Earth, for ever,
and ever, who now has made his Power known, by which we see the Deceits of you
all.

6 Query Whether it be not Gods Ordinance that the inward, living, spiritual,
powerful word of God, whereby all the Saints of God are taught, and the true
inward spiritual Worship of the Saints, should in the outward appearance of
them be held forth in earthen vessels, as under a form of Speech, or word, yea
or no?

Ans: Friend, in this Query thou have uttered forth thy weakness, and thy
ignorance in the form of the Letter does appear, yet Serpent-like thou art
full of Subtilty; but thy nakedness does appear openly. The word of God is as
a Fire, and cannot be limited, no not with thy carnal Reason: It is as a Hammer
to beat thee to pieces, and as a Sword to cut thee asunder, whenever thou
come to know this powerful word of God. And this is the word which the
Prophets spoke from, who cried Woe against all them that said the Lord says,
and he never spoke to them, and cried against all them that bear rule by their
means, Ier. 5 30 31. the horible filthy thing is committed in the Land, which
is and was held up with Priest and People, but now the same living, spiritual,
eternal Word, is made manifest, and is preached abroad, against all you
Hyerlings and greedy dumb Dogs, which have not a word from the Lord, but seek
for your gain from your quarters, and get up into the chiefest place of the
Assemblies, and are called of men Masters, and stand praying in the Synagogues;
he that is the Word cried Woe against all such, and them that had this Word, he
bade them not to be as they were, Math. 23. 8 9 10. And this Word is made
manifest in the Saints, which is declared abroad: but thou who live in
Appearance, and would see things in Appearance, in thy carnal wisdom and
Reason, ^hou art shut out from this knowledge, for to thee it is death to thy
carnal mind; therefore freely do I publish the Eternal Truth abroad, and as
knowing you that you have not a word from the lord, but are in that generation
of those that did shut up the kingdom of Heaven against men, neither go in your
selves, nor suffer others, laying heavy burdens upon the People, and will not
toutch them with one of your fingers, but what you do, you do it to be seen of
men, making broad your Philacteries, and devouring Widows houses, Math. 23.
45. who art desolate from Christ, who have got the Form of Christ's words, but
art in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees, who had got the form of Moses and
the Prophets, and were enemies and strangers to the Life of God. Moses and the
Prophets, and their Form you have got in your comprehension, in the earthly
vessel, and that is your heavenly Treasure, but now you are tried, with what you
hold forth in a Form of words (but the word of God is powerful) and in him is
no Form, but thou art a Theif and a Robber, who stealest the Prophets words,
Ier. 23. 30. who art without, who know not the Word, nor the Lord, nor the
true Ministers of the Word, shutting out thy self in the dark world, and
Querying whether the Word should be held forth in earthen vessels, if thou
had an Eye, or if thou had an Ear thou might hear and see it preached
daily; but as I said to thy first Query, thou know not the Light, whith
enlightneth every one that comes into the world, but art ignorant, deaf, and
blind, one that hates the Light, that makes thee let forth so many stumbling
Queries, for had thou the Light, thou would not stumble, but be as a City
set upon a Hill; but thou art without, who have showed forth such a dark mind,
but that mind is for destrukcion, for if thou did walk in the Light, and
love it, it would lead thee to the Day, which would let thee see all things,
and there would be no ocasion of stumbling, but thou art him that hates the
Light, so all thy Preaching as thou call it leads from God, being blind and
leads the blind, and must both go into the Ditch together; but we who are
Ministers of the Eternal Word, see it, and dwell in the Light, and declare
freely without a Bag or a Staff: without Brass, and Silver, or two Coats, for
the workman is worthy of his meat, freely you have received, freely give, Math.
10. 8. therefore we do deny your preaching, and for the simple ones sake who
are in the Simplicity, who have been ensnared by you who are in the Subtilty,
and such as you are, who have let forth these Queries, for we know your
Spirits, though you have not let forth your names: so who are in the
simplicity, seeking after the Truth, for their sakes have I let forth my self,
and showed forth your folly.

Query 7. Whether the Idols Temple, and the Worship that is done therein, be
only visible things, as a house of Wood, and Stone, and outward appearances,
as Forms, and Rites, and Customs that were observed therein? Or the Idols
Temple, and the Worship that's done therein, be not also in man's Spirit, and
Mystical, Inward, and Invisible, as to sense according as it is begotten of
the spiritual Prince of Darkness, yea or no?

Answ: Whereas thou would be informed, who art querying without, in whom
lodges the Mystery of iniquity, which mind holds up the Forms, and the Rites,
and the Customs, and the Idols Temple of Lime, and Stone, which is the
mystical Spirit, which thou speakst of, for if thou own the Light which
enlighteneth every one that comes into the world (which is Christ) it would
bring thee into the Cross, which is to thy carnal mind, and let thee see the
Prince of the Air rule in thee, who art a Child of disobedience, where the
Mystery of iniquity lodges, and this light would let thee see the carnal
mind in whom all the Images lodge, and the Idols Temple, and the carnal part
being wrought out within, and the Devils tremble, and the Earth shaken, Isay.
2. 19. and thrown down there, which is the foundation of all images; for that
within holds up these without, the carnal part within holds up the carnal
Temple without, and that looks at all these Rites, Customs, Forms, and
Tradicions thou speakst of, and the mind that is perishing is that that holds
up all these perishing things, in whom the Mystery of Iniquity lodges, 2 These.
2. 7. but if thou were obedient to the Light, and loved it, it would bring thee
to know God, and to escape the prince of the Air, which holds up all these
things without thee; for Israel when he had forgotten his Maker, builded
Temples, so thy carnal mind ruleing, and disobeying the Light which would
guide thee to God, that carnal mind within, brings thee to hold up Temples
without thee, and so thou art in the Pride and the Highness of mind, for out
of Pride (whose Dominion is Satan) came these Queries, but who are made the
Temples of God are holy, and deny all your outward Temples of the Priests, and
and all your carnal Observances, which you live in, who profess the
New Covenant, or the Gospel, or Christ, or the Word: but I will deal plainly
with you: you are not come to know the old Covenant, for from the inward does
all Idols, and Images arise, and there is many Idols and Images which thou
bowest down to, with out thee, then look within thee, and thou art full of
Imaginacions and Images both within and without, Pro. 6. 18. for as the
spiritual Prince of Darkness, as thou speakst, they have their Idols and
Images without, as ever it was in all that Generation, which thou live in;
and when thou have denied the outward Idols all of them by the Light of God,
which thou hate, then thou shall see them within thee, thou that stumblest at
the Light art he that holdst up all these Images, Ezekiel. 7. 20. in whom the
mystery of iniquity lodges, for the Light of the body is the eye, which shows
all these things, and that it is which I said to thee before, thou know not,
(for thou art full of Images within) thou know it not, born up in thy
understanding to guide thee, for it is the Light that enlightneth every one
that comes into the world, John 1. 9. which thou art an Enemy and a stranger
to, and stumblest at, which Light shall be thy condemnacion, John 3. 19.

8 Query. If the inward living invisible Word of God, which is the Teacher, in
no way held forth under a Form, as to outward appearance to men, in earthen
vessels, why do I see thy Expressions and Exhortations come forth in Print?

Answ. To the eighth Query; Thou full of subtlety, spuing forth thy Venom, and
ask in the Query before, whether the word should be held forth or no, and
now thou do hear something that is published abroad, which is a cross to
thee, and which makes manifest you are stirred up, and does torment you,
therefore do thou push with thy ten Horns, nevertheless thou sendest not the
Queryes to him whom thou do accuse, and say, why see I thy Expressions in
Print, and sendest them to another, but such is thy rage and fury, and now it
does appear to all men, though it has layn close, the eternal Word has
stirred him up; but Friend, I declare plainly to thee, God Almighty of Heaven
and Earth, has raised up a Light in the hearts of People, 1 Pet. 2. 9. (and he
is coming to teach them himself) whereby your abominacion and filthiness is
discovered to the sons and daughters of the Lord God Almighty, and according to
his promise he has poured forth his Spirit that his sons and daughters begin
to prophecy, Joel 2. 28, 29. Praises be to the Lord God Almighty, who now is
setting up his Kingdom, who sends his sons and Daughters abroad, some to
prophecy, and some to preach, and to declare his Name, Freely ye have received,
freely give, Matthew. 10. 8. and some write, and some speak face to face, so you
shall see it nearer you ere long, and as the Prophets of the Lord who spoke his
Word, sometimes spoke, and when they were moved to write they writ and published
it abroad, so do we the same, being absent in body, sending forth writings or
Printed Books to declare to the simple minds the deceits that ye who are
blind Guides have led them in; but Jesus Christ the Light now shines, by which
ye are seen and discovered, therefore stop your mouths and be ashamed, who have
never had word from God, Micah 3. 7. for the Lord God is coming to stop your
mouths, ye dumb Prophets, and Dogs, Thieves, and Robbers, who have stolen the
words of others, whom ye know not, Jer. 23. 30. but the Earth has got the
Declaracion, which is Earth, and so speaks the Earth for the Earth, but O
Earth! hear the Word of the Lord, for woe is to ye that inhabit the Earth; and
now the Devil begins to rage, because the Word of God is sounding abroad, and
the Trumpet is blowing, which makes the Inhabitants of the Earth to tremble:
but all your Preaching we do deny, and all your Blessings; for as it is
written, as the Prophet said, their blessings were cursed, and their seed were
corrupt, Mal. 2. 2, 3. and in their generation you are, the Light which is
Christ is made manifest, which lets me see you to be in that generation, which
has gathered us up to God, and lets us see thee without God.

9 Query. Whether to exhort a man to attend to that Light which is within,
which his eye can see, and which his ear can hear, and which his understanding
can comprehend, and of which ^e can give a Reason, be not to draw men to attend
to visible things, and to worship in the Idols Temple, and to bow down to the
Image of things, which he has seen in Heaven and Earth, yea or no?

Answ. to the ninth Query; In it thou art complete, if thou did see thy self
in the mystery of iniquity, fencing with thy weapons, which are spiritual
wickednesses, which lodges in the highest place, and with thy thoughts and
imaginacions as it does openly appear to him that obeys the Light, so thou
drawest People to look after visible things, and to worship in the Idols
Temple, 1 Cor. 8. 10. to that which thy Reason can understand, and thy carnal
eye can see, and thy carnal ear can hear, so thou worshipest the Host of
Heaven, and that is thy Heaven, and thy Earth; but Heaven is Gods Throne, and
thou with thy carnal eye can never see that, but drawst all under to thy
worship, and that thou bowest down to, to thy own imaginacions within, and then
thou set up something without thee, and bring others to bow down to thy
Images and Idols without thee, which thou ^ast set up, which flows from the
spiritual wickedness within thee, in the highest place, and there thou do
climb up to the highest Pinnacle, and he that will bow down and worship thee,
thou give thy glory to him, if he will not thou drawest out thy carnal
weapons to murder him, for all the Ministers of the Letter are Persecutors of
the Spirit, where thou show thy self to be one; but Friend, the* Light which
is exhorted to take heed unto, 2 Pet. 1. 19. thy dark* mind cannot comprehend,
thy ear cannot hear, thy eye cannot see, therefore do thou stumble, as he who
was the Light said, and he that waits in the Light (which Light is Christ) it
guides him up to God, and to the Church in God, and to bow down to nothing bu^
God, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1. and it teaches to know things that be eternal and
invisible, by which Light we deny all thy Images, Forms Rites, and Customs, all
thy Images within thee, and the Idols without thee, for thou art full of them*
Praised be the Lord God Almighty, who is come to teach his children, and has
gathered us from your mouths, who made a prey upon us, who wandered from
Mountain to Mountain, but now the Lord has fulfilled his Promise, and is
fulfilling it; for thou art full of Images, and art the well-colored Beast,
and have the well-colored Robes, and art the Harlot out of the truth, Nah. 3.
4. who deceives with thy evil eye to draw People to visible things.

10 Query. Whether to say, obey the Light that is within, and that is life, and
disobey it, that is death, be not to speak according to the tenor of the old
Covenant, which says, Do this and live, yea or no?

Answ. to the tenth Query: In the Observance of outward things and Tradicions
there is a difference, in the obeying of the Light within, and observing things
without, as the Apostle said, Take heed to the Light within you, until the day
dawn, and the daystar arise in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. who witnessed the
new* Covenant, and they that did obey the Light within, saw through the old,
and saw Christ, so a new command I give unto you, yet not a new but an old, if
thou have an ear thou may hear, but as I said to thee before, it is that
which thy Reason cannot comprehend, nor never shall, and ye are sanctified
through the obedience of the Spirit, John 17. 19. 1 Pet. 1. 22. and thy intent
in these Queryes is to draw into disobedience from the Light of God within
them, to follow the imaginacions of such as thou art, but who does obey the
Light, thou art discovered to them, and thou and all who hate this Light, it is
thine and their condemnacion, and eternally shall thou witness me, for to the
Light I speak, which thy dark mind cannot comprehend, and all who disobeys the
Light, holds the truth in an unrighteous mind, Romans 10. 16. but the Lord Jesus
Christ is coming, Who will render vengeance in flames of fire, upon all them
who know not God, and that obeys not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. now thou may call this the old Covenant, and the Covenant of
Works, who live in the mystery of iniquity, and art disobedient, who art one
in that generation that is disobedient to the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and seek to keep others in the same generation from obeying the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, with all thy beastical power in these ten Queryes, who
have uttered forth thy ten Horns, that pusheth with them, against the Lamb and
against the Saints, Dan. 7. 7. but the Lamb has got the victory over the
Beast, and over the false Prophets, the Light that does enlighten every one
that comes into the world, this Light he dwells in which sees thee, which
has answered these Queryes, who art without, yet so as not to the feeding of
that mind and reason which must die in thee, for Plagues, and Woe, and
Judgment, and Vengeance, and Flames of Fire, will the Lord render upon thee,
who does not obey the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. and so fare thee well, for in the
Pit and Fall thou art, one that does disobey the Light, and hate the Light,
and stumblest at it, and there thou stand condemned, for to that in thy
conscience do I speak, 2 Cor. 4. 2. which shall eternally witness me, 2 Cor. 5.
11.

FINIS.
Certain QUERIES given forth by a sort of high Professors that dwell in Farnez
Fels in Lancashire, and sent to George Fox, which are answered by him, and
their subtlety and deceits discovered and laid open.
1 Query. WHether Jesus Christ have a Body in Heaven, if he has, whether it is
the same that appeared among men in the flesh, or what manner of Body has he?
Is he a particular Man or Person, encompassed with a Body, to live in for ever?
or is it the Body which the Saints shall have, when all flesh shall be raised
to the last Judgment?

Answ. Thou would know, whether Jesus Christ have a Body in Heaven: he
remains in the Heavens; if thou have an Ear thou may hear: And whereas thou
would know whether it be the same that appeared amongst men, it is the same
that did descend, the same did ascend, Ephesians. 4. 10. he that has an Ear to
hear let him hear: and whereas thou would know, what manner of Body he has;
here thou art disputing as the Devil was about the Body of Moses, with Michael
the Archangel, who said, The Lord rebuke thee, so say I now, the Lord rebuke
thee, who art disputing about the Body of Christ, for the Body of Christ is but
one, which makes free from the Law and sin, and he is the Head of the Body,
which is the Church; but this to thee is a mystery, and he lives in his Body,
Romans 7. 4. and whereas thou would know whether it be the Body, which the
Saints shall have, Col. 1. 18. when all flesh shall be raised to the last
Judgment; here thou have showed forth thy ignorance, not to discern the Lords
Body, and to be of them that would make a division in the Body that is spoken
of in the Scripture, for the Body of Christ is but one, as it is written, being
many members, yet one Body, 1 Cor. 12. 20. and Christ is the Head and Members
of this Body, and lives in it, I in thee, and thou in me, that they may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, John 27. he that can receive it,
let him, but thou art he who does not discern the Lords Body, therefore thou
eatest and drinkest damnacion to thy self, 1 Cor. 11. 29. and to thee it is a
mystery, and damnacion thou must know, and with that Eye thou shall never see
it, for it is evil as Herod's was, who sought after the Child to worship him,
but would have slain him Matthew. 2. 13. he that raises the Body he is the judge
of the world: in flames of fire, and in flaming fire, and in vengeance shall
thou know, and in judgment, 2 These. 1. 7. 8. who art without, in the world,
querying about his body who is the Resurrection, John. 11. 25. and in this
Query thou have showed forth thy dark mind, which is full of Confusion, and thy
self to be ignorant of the Body of Christ, and with thy fleshly understanding,
which is for destrukcion, thou would know it, and this mind which has asked
this Question; but the Righteousness of Faith speaks on this wise, not to say
to fetch Christ from above, or descnd into the deep, that is, to bring up
Christ again from the dead: But what says it, the word is nigh thee even in
thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of Faith which we preach, Romans
10. 6. 7. 8. wherein thou have showed thy self that gave forth these Queries,
that you never heard this word of Faith preached to you, and he is the Head,
and the Saints are the Body, Ephesians. 4. 15. and in him we live, who sit with
Christ in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6. and his body is but one, and he lives in
it for ever, whom the Heavens must receive until the time of Restitucion of
all things Acts 3. 21. but you dark Sots, this is a mystery to you, as Christ
is who is the Head of the Body; and this Body of Christ which thou desire to
know, thou shall never know, nor see, for thou art for judgment, and
condemnacion* ordained of Old, Jude 13. and in darkness thou live, who art
dead in Sins and Trespasses, Ephesians. 2. 1. and who art querying after Christ,
whether he be a particular Person, showing forth the same mind that was in the
Jews, who knew not Christ, but queried whether he was the Carpenters Son or
no, Math. 13. 55. who was not born by the will of man, and is born now but not
by the will of man, him you know not, nor cannot se John 1* 13. nor believe
where he is made manifest, and he is but one in all his Saints, who is their
Head, Romans 7 4. and their Life, who comes into the World from above, and
redeemes and makes free from Sin and the Law, with the Body of Christ; he that
has an Ear may hear; to us it is plainness, who are in the Gate and Fold, but
to you it is a mystery, who live in the mystery a^ Iniquity, who are without
the Gate, and Christ is the Resurrection, and the Judge, John 11. 25. that shall
thou find when he comes upon thee to render vengance in flames of fire, John 5
22. who art a Child of Disobedience.

2 Query. With what Bodies shall the Saints arise with, and dwell, and live in
for ever, shall there be given to every particular Saint, a particular Body.

Answ. Whereas thou would know with what Body the Saints shall arise, In that
Body which Christ does live in, for he is the Savior of the Body, he is the
Head of the Body, he is the Resurrection and the Life of the Body, and his Body
is but one, So we are many members, yet one Body, Cor. 12. 20. and here thou
have showed thou do not discern the Lords Body, but art under the Damnacion:
Thou Fool, whereas thou would know whether there shall be given to every
particular Saint a particular Body, and with what Bodies they shall arise, as
they said in the Corinthians, with what Bodies shall they come, and how should
the dead be raised. Paul makes answer, Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not
quickened except it die, and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body
that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of Whear, or of some other grain,
but God gives it a Body as it has pleased him, and to every seed his own
Body: All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one kind of flesh of Men,
another flesh of Beasts, another of Fishes, and another of Birds: there are
also Celestial Bodies, and Bodies Terrestiall, but the glory of the Celestial
is one, and the glory of the Terrestiall is another. There is one glory of the
Sun, another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the, Stars, for one Star
differs from another Star in glory, So also is it in the Resurrection of the
dead; if thou have an Ear thou may hear; but thou Fool art never the wiser
here, but thou art a Conjurer, and live in Conjuracion, Ier. 27. 9. Zach. 10.
2.

3 Query With what Bodies shall the wicked arise, with natural, or spiritual?

Answ. With thy corrupt natural spiritual wickedness, to Condemnacion; with
that Body does the wicked arise that thou live in; thou Enemy of God shall
find it, and the Eye in thee shall see destruction, and eternal Condemnacion,
who queriest with what Bodies the wicked shall arise: thou art risen high in
thy spiritual wickedness, Ephesians. 6. 12. who live in the corrupt nature, and
high art thou risen in it, whose Judgment is appearing, and Judge stands at the
door, and lingers not, whose damnacion slumbers not, 2 Pet. ^. 3. If thou have
an Ear thou may hear, and there read thy Portion, and thy Answer to the
Query.

4 Query. Whether is there, or shall there be a Local Place of Heaven and
Hell, to be inhabited and dwelt in, for the Saints to enjoy, and the Wicked to
suffer in, with their Bodies? And how shall they be tormented, with material
Fire and Brimston, or how? And if every Saint and Devil, have a particular
Body, must there not be a particular Local Place? Can Bodies be* no where?
Must they not rest and stand upon some place, the Saints singing Hallelujah, to
the Highest for evermore?

Answ. In thy Query thou have uttered forth thy Confusion, who have joined
Heaven and Hell together; and whereas thou would know, whether there is, or
there shall be a Local Place of Heaven and Hell: here thou show forth thy
blindness, in that thou know neither Heaven nor Hell, and in the Local
Place, as thou calst it, thou art, and there is a Hell, thou shall find it, and
there thy sinful body shall suffer, who art separated from God. Heaven is Gods
Throne, which the Saints do enjoy (he that can receive it, let him) but thou
art shut out of it, and that which asks the Question shall never know it, for
thou art without the Gate, as I said to thee before. And whereas thou would
know how the Wicked should be tormented; here thou would learn thy Portion,
Rev. 20. 131, 4. with that Fire that cannot be quenched; look upon Fire and
Brimston and it may teach thee, and thou may read thy Figure daily. Whereas
thou would know, if every Saint and Devil have a particular body, thou art of
the particular body of the mystery of Iniquity* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. who art to be
tormented from the presence of the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, and all his
Saints and Angels, Rev. 20. 10. and if thou call that a Local place, take it.
The Saints shall stand upon Mount Sion, who are redeemed from the Earth by the
Blood of Jesus Christ, who sings Hallelujah for evermore. Rev. 14. 1. Rev. 21.
10. whose Body is but one, and Christ is the Head of the Body, Col. 1. 18. If
thou have an Ear thou may hear, for without this Body thou art kept, from
making any division, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. Thou Enemy of God, and man of Sin, for
destruction thou art ordained, to go therein, thy fear of it does begin, and
the Lake that burns, and the Pit thou art for to be turned into Eternally:
thou shall know me that I speak the Truth, for whosoever thou art called by
Name, thy Spirit I know*

5 Query. Whether Jesus Christ be the Eternal Father, and fullest Fountain of
Bliss, and that besides him, and above him there is no God? Was he the first
Contriver, Determiner, and Former of all things; the Creator of every thing,
the giver of every good gift? Or was he the begotten of the Father* so not the
Father, and Fountain, but set apart from him, being by him when he gave to the
Sea his Decree; so Christ is not truly God in the Original, but a Son, being
always by the Father, to see what works he does, the Son may do likewise? Is
he but the Gift, and Dispensator, or Maker-out of the Fathers Love to Sinners,
as a Mediator and Advocate betwixt the Father and them; so not the substance,
and Fountain in the Bult and Dignity. Therefore what is Christ? has he a body
and the Father none? how may he be distinguished from the Father? So not the
Father: So no God, unless there be two or three distinct Gods, and no more one
God?

Answ. Whereas thou would know, whether Jesus Christ be the Eternal Father,
and fullest Fountain of Bliss; thou Serpent, thou ask a question, and art
giving an answer thy self, as the Serpent did, Mich. 7. 17. 2 Cor. 11. 3. he is
not thy Eternal Father that pu^st forth this Query, nor Fountain, for of
another Fountain thou drinkest, and Bliss (us thou calst it) which is one of
thy Conjured words; and thou say, besides him, and above him, there is no
God: God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, 2. Cor. 15. 19. he
that has an Ear to hear let him hear. Whereas thou would know, whether
Christ was the first Contriver, Determiner, and Former of all things; him who
is the First, and the Last, shall thou never know, but death and destruction,
for thou art the Contriver, Determiner, and Former; who would point out God a
way, and who art contriving with thy Serpentine wisdom, to intrude into the
things of God, and to know God, and Christ, Col. 2. 18. who art cursed above
all the beasts of the field, from God and Christ, Gen 3. 14. In the world thou
may make a division, but betwixt God and Christ, thou can make none, as it
is written, A Virgin shall have a Child whose name shall be Emmanuel, which is
by interpretacion, God with us, Math. ^ 23. Luke 1 31 32 he that has an Ear
to hear let him hear, but thou have none, who art making divisions: He that is
the Father, is the giver of every good gift, and the Creator of all things, and
he that was in the Father, and the Father in him, by him were all things made,
and by him does all things consist, visible and invisible, Col. 1. 16, 17.
whereas thou ask if Christ was the Begotten of the Father, which shows thou
neither know the Father nor the Son, for he that knows him that did beget,
knows him that is begotten of him, for the Son is in the Father, John 5. 1.
who is not born by the will of man, and thou in thy will shall never know him,
John 14. 10, 11. for thou art Herod that seek to know, but it is to destroy,
Matthew. 2. 13. if thou knewst the Son thou would know the Father, who cannot
be divided, for the Father and the Son are one, from whence all good and
perfect gifts flow; and as he said to the Disciple, Have thou seen me and not
seen the Father, I am in the Father, and the Father in me, John 14. 9, 10. and
he that has the Father has the Son, and if there come any among you, and
bring any other Doctrine, receive him not into your houses, neither bid him God
speed. Friend, thou art the subtle Serpent, the Tempter, who show forth thy
presumptuous blasphemy; thou say, Christ is not truly God; in that Original
thou have no more knowledge of him than the outward Original, for through thy
subtlety thou have conjured up these many Queryes, which must go into perdicion
again, who art making a differen^ and distance betwixt God and Christ; for as I
said to thee before, God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, and he
that sees the Son sees the Father also, the Mover of all things, and Maker of
all things; but here with thy busy mind thy blindness and ignorance does
appear, who art scraping in Hell to gather up your conjured stuff, who neither
know God nor Christ, and it is Christ that you crucify: Friend, here thou
sit as a Judge of the Father and of Christ; thou Enemy of God, who say,
Christ is not the Father and Fountain, but set apart from him, being by him
when he gave to the Sea his Decree; God was in Christ who is both Father and
Fountain, reconciling the world to himself, and it was he that gave to the Sea
its Decree, and he that sees the Son sees the Father also, for the Son is in
him; but thou that make a difference to set God in one place and Christ in
another, art in the same nature that the Jews had, that could not discern the
Father that spoke in him, as he said, It is not you, but the Spirit of the
Father that speaks in you, Matthew. 10. 20. but thou live in Philosophy and
Logic, which are of the Devil, Col. 2. 8. who art storming with thy Reason,
but Truth has comprehended thee, who art for destruction, thou high Blasphemer
and Lucifer like: Whereas thou ask whether is he but the Gift, and
Dispensator and Maker out of the Fathers love to sinners* as a Mediator and
Advocate betwixt the Fater and them; he is him whom the Father loves, who is
the Mediator, who is thy destruction, God so loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever believed on him should not
perish but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. Friend, thou art but querying to
seed thy fleshly mind, who art one of them that crucifiest him, high in thy
presumption, so to thee he is no Mediator, and to thee he is no Gift, nor made
manifest, but art querying without of him, and one of them that say, Lo here,
and lo there, Matthew. 24. 23. and thy knowledge is the Letter, and that is the
Original, and Gift, and Manifestacion, which is dust, which ^eeds thee Serpent,
which the Curse is upon, and it is the Seed of the Woman that must bruise thy
Head, as God who has promised and said, Genesis 3. 15. and this must every one
witness who witness Christ, thou with thy evil eye look at Christ and God at
a distance, and the Father and the Son at a distance, as thou saydst before, he
set him at a distance, which crosses the life of Christ, who said, I in thee,
and thou in me, Father as thou and I are one, John 17. 21. and he that has the
Father has the Son, and the Son is in the Father, and in the Fountain, but
thou to this art ignorant, who art scraping with thy carnal Reason, to get up
to the highest Pinnacle to tempt Christ, who sit as a Judge upon the Father
and Christ, and who crucifiest him, and know not God, but thou must be
judged with him, even the spiritual man, and as it is written, the first man is
of the Earth, earthly, and the second is the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 47.
but thou say, Christ is not truly God; O thou false Judge* who know neither
God nor Christ* who art making a separacion betwixt the Son and God, and who
art setting Christ at a distance, who says, he is in the Father, and who
make a Ly upon the Scriptures, and speak contrary to them, which thou
call the Original, for it says, In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was God, and became Flesh and dwelt amongst us, John 1. and they knew him not,
no more do ye know him now, who dwells amongst us, but seek to crucify him
where ever he is made manifest, who has his being in the Father; thou Enemy of
God and of all Righteousness, who says so, not the Substance* and Fountain in
the bult and dignity, in thy bult and dignity he is not; here thou have showed
forth thy self, thou Liar, who say, Christ is not in the bult (as thou
call it) and dignity, who presumptuously would sit as a Judge upon him to
whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given, to the Son, Matthew. 28. 18. who is
in the Fountain, and the Fountain in him, who is in power and dignity, who
shall overthrow thee and thy dignity, thou who art raced out from God and the
Son: and again thou queryest what is Christ* it is him thou crucifiest, and
seek to crucify and slay; and here thou Tempter, who art without, art
querying whether Christ has a Body, and the Father none, showing thy self not
to know the Lords Body, for the Son is in the Father, and they are one; and
with thy carnal eye look upon him to be like thy self; if thou know his
Body thou know the Fathers, for they are both one; thou full of subtlety,
who art querying how the Son may be distinguished from the Father, he that
knows the Son knows the Father, and he that sees the Son sees the Father, for
he is in the Father, and they are not to be distinguished, but it is thou who
art without, in the world, who art making many Gods, as the world does, 1 Cor.
5. 8. Ier. ^. 28. and art distinguishing, who art distinguished from the Father
and the Son, who art making and make three Gods, and know none, nor have
none but the God of the World to rule thee; and here thou twining Serpent, who
art ensnaring art ensnared, who art full of subtlety, and caught in thy wile,
who have been rabbling upon thou know not what with thy filthy mind, and
talkest of thou do not know what, so thou art turned and must be turned into
that which to thee will be hot; and the Son and the Father are one, I and my
Father are one, John 10 30. and not two, but to thee; he that has an Ear let
him hear, but here thou have none, who have a busy mind, meddling with that
which does not concern thee, and so thou show thy self where thou art*

6 Query. Whether there be a pure and an eternal Light in every Male and
Female, if a true and saving Light, in and to every one, how is it that there
shall so many perish? Is Satan stronger than God? Shall or can flesh and blood
quench and extenuate the Spirit in his operacion, and so the arm of the
Almighty shortened, frustrated, and made void by the disobedience of flesh? Is
there a power in every man as he is man, to be saved if he will?

Answ. Christ says, I am the Light of the world that enlightneth every one
that comes into the world, John 1. 9. The one he loves the Light, and brings
his works to the Light, and walks in the Light, and to him there is no occasion
of stumbling, John 3. 20, 21. and you that hate the Light, you stumble, and
know not whither you go, who have put forth so many stumbling Queryes, and with
thy dark mind thou can not comprehend the Light, but Light comprehends thee,
and sees thy end and intent, which Light shall be thy condemnacion, John 1. 5.
and thou say, How is it that there shall so many perish? that which asks
the question must perish; who hates the Light as thou do, and gayusays the
truth, shall perish as Core did, Jude 11. and the Eternal pure Light shall be
thy condemnacion, in thy own mouth shall thou be judged, who live in the
disobedience of the pure Light, and slightest his mercyes, and turnest the free
Grace of God into wantonness; the mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it,
who is the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, and my arm is not shortened, says the
Lord; and Satan is exalted above all that is called God in thee* 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
thou son of perdicion, and that which is of God in thee is imprisoned, and thou
with thy fleshly mind crucifiest the just, and quenchest the Spirit, as the
Jews did who crucified Christ, as thou read in the Letter, John 19. and in
that generation thou art, if thou have an Ear thou may hear, thou Enemy of
God have none, who crucifiest Christ now, who art he that frustratest* and
quenchest the Spirit, who must be consumed with the breath of his mouth, and
destroyed by the brightness of his coming: thou queryest whether there be a
power in every man as to be saved if he will; here thou subtlety who art ditted
full of Eearth have showed forth thy ignorance of the power of God, 2 Timothy 3.
4, 5. Man in his will would be saved, as thou would, but the power of God is
contrary to thy will and destroys it, which saves, and as many as receives
Christ, to them he gives power to become the sons of God, John 1. 12. but here
thou son of perdicion have made manifest thy self, not to love Christ, nor
receive him, therefore thou wantst power, and there thou have showed thy self
to be that wicked and slothful servant which hidest thy Talent in the Earth,
Matthew. 25. 26. and there is that Light and Power in every man, which if he take
heed to it, and wait within, there he shall find his Savior, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
but if he hate this pure Eternal Light, it shall condem him eternally whose
deeds are evil, John 3. 19. as thine is, and so all stumbling is by being
disobedient to the Light, as the Jews who stumbled at Christ* who said, he was
the Light that enlightneth every one that comes into world, so thou do now
at the same Light, which shall be thy condemnacion, eternally thou shall
witness me; it is the same Light as ever was: to that which should exercise
your consciences do I speak, which will witness me, and condemn you, though God
is greater than Conscience.

7 Query. Whether there shall be a general Resurrection of all flesh, all
summoned to one place, and to what place, to receive a true and du Sentence of
Judgment, yea or no?

Answ. Christ Jesus is the Resurrection of the just and unjust, some to
salvacion, and some to condemnacion, the same that saves the same condemns,
Matthew. 25. 31, 32, 33, 34. And thou desire to know the place, it is the day
that God will judge thee and the world in righteousness, whom he has ordained;
thou busy fellow who art querying of others conditions of the world without
thee, but it is that thou Fool might utter forth thy folly, and here thou
have made it appear, and in thy Queryes thou art little wiser, and there is a
place where thou shall find a Judge, and his Trumpet is sounding, but thou art
deaf yet, and can not hear it, and the Sumpter-horse is gone forth.

8 Query. Whether may the Scriptures by the Spirit of God be opened, and
unfolded, and expounded to the People, yea or no?

Ans. Here thou Serpent art full of subtlety, High Priest like, under a color
come and would be taught, but in thy other Queryes thou art teaching and
judging, and thou did show thy self to be one that did not know the Light
which enlightneth every one that comes into the world, and what do thou talk
of opening the Scripture, who hates the Light and stumblest at it, and art
disobedient to the Spirit, Col. 3. 6. to it thou art an Enemy, Ephesians. 5. 6. but
it is that thou may be kept in the high place of wickedness, Ephesians. 2. 2.
but by them who dwell in the Light thou art comprehended and taken in the
snare, and art without the Truth of God, and an Enemy to that which should
guide thee, and to be a Cloud without water, Jude 12. and the same Spirit where
it is made manifest, and lived in, and walked in, and not the lusts of the
flesh, it opens the Scriptures in the People, and fulfils them, for it is the
same that gave them forth, and where this is witnessed it needs not be queryed,
whether it opens the Scripture to the People or no, for it does open them in
the People and to the People, but thou art without the Gate of Truth, what is
this to thee, one that art without, stumblest at the Light, a Child of
Disobedience, whom the wrath of God abides upon, John 3. 36. but it is the
Serpent that would be wise, and would paint thy self with other men's words,
who pretendest to have the Spirit, but art a Deceiver in the world, in thy
Fathers Kingdom, and Dominion, and this shall thou see when thou ownest the
Light, which is thy condemnacion, and witnessest me to speak the truth.

George Fox.

FINIS.
Certain QUERIES given forth from one Robert Lucas, of Kellet in Lancashire,
who is wise in his own conceit, professing in words that he knows something,
but i^ here found out to know nothing but what he knows naturally, as a bruit
Beast, and in those things has corrupted himself, as Jude 10* and that through
his wrath, bitterness, envy, and malice* against the wonderful and mighty
power of God, which he has manifested in his People, which now makes the Devil
to rage, persecute* and blaspheme, and to set all his Servants a work, to
tempt, to minister Questions, to despise, falsely accuse, and to slander, and
contemn all those who are redeemed from the Earth, and are Servants to the
living God, and walk in the Truth; judging, and condemning, and overturning all
those who profess the Truth in words but walk contrary: which Questions were
propounded to one who is despised of the Despisers for the Truths sake, whose
name among men is Richard Hubberthorn, but are answered by the Spirit of the
Lord, from the mouth of the Lord, as follows:
I Have here received a Paper, whose name subscribed to it is Robert Lucas, in
which are many unlearned Queryes, proceeding from the subtle mind,
Serpent-like* which mind is full of mischief, and dark, about Questions and
strife of words, 2 Timothy 2. 23. being full of darkness, and in them are many
temptations; yet because thou Fool should not be exalted in thy pride and
foolery, a few things in Answer I have given forth to the uttering forth of thy
foolery, thou that have been a Professor so* long, and art querying what Faith
is, and whether Faith be attained by hearing the Word preached, and whether all
men have not Faith, and whether it is possible to please God without Faith; and
thou queryest how Christ is in man, and whether any be elected to Salvacion,
and whether all men be conceived in sin* and queryest how it is done away:
after thou have showed forth thy foolishness, thy blindness, and thy ignorance,
as not knowing any thing, thou have made a Profession of Christ, and here thou
show thou know him not: for shame give over thy Profession, and lay thy
hand upon thy mouth and be silent; but to us the uttering forth thy folly is
serviceable, as it is written, Fools are uttering forth their folly, and thou
have showed thy self to be one, Prove. 13. 16.

1 Query. What Faith is?

Answ. Faith is the Gift of God, and that which asks the question is without,
and shall never know it, for thou art a Reprobate concerning it, the Faith, and
art one of them that art ever learning, and led away with diverse lusts, never
able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, 2 Timothy 3. 7. Faith is that which
leads out of the World, up to God, from all the Worlds Teachers, 1 John 5. 4.
and denies all them as Christ did, and does, who are called of men Master, and
stand praying in the Synagogue, and which lay heavy burdens upon the People,
which Woe was pronounced upon, Matthew. 23. and is upon all such now, he that has
an ear to hear let him hear the mystery of Faith, 1 Timothy 3. 8.

2 Query. Whether is Faith obtained by hearing the Word preached?

Answ. Have thou been a Hearer so long, and art querying whether Faith comes
by hearing of the Word preached, Romans 10. 17. it shows forth thy subtlety,
Serpent like thou feedest upon Dust, which is the Letter, and the Word thou
never heardst, the Word which is God, and Faith is the gift of God, and comes
by the hearing of the Word, and the Word became flesh, John 1. 14. but thou art
in the generation of them that ever persecuted them that heard this Word, where
it spoke forth, and as for thee, thy Faith is vain, thou art yet in thy sins, 1
Cor. 15. 14.

3 Query. Whether have all men Faith?

Answ. No, thou have none, but art vain in thy imaginacions, but as I said
before, thou art a Reprobate concerning the Faith, 2. Tim. 3. 8. and thou art
one of them that art unreasonable, 2 Thessalonians. 3. ^. which have not Faith, which
the Apostle prayed to be delivered from, and thou that doubts art damned
already, Romans 14. 23.

4 Query. Whether is it possible for any man to please God without Faith?

Answ. Thou can not please God, for thou have not Faith, for whatsoever is
not of Faith is sin, Romans 14. 23. and all that ever thou do is sin, all thy
Profession, all thy reading, all thy hearing, and all thy praying is
abominacion to the Lord, for they are not offered up from the pure heart, but
thy heart is rotten, filthy, and corrupt, and all thy hearing, and all thy
prattling of that thou call the Word, by it thou shall never get Faith, which
is the Gift of God, but it is all the Serpents meat which feeds thee; thou
Serpent which art cursed above all the Beasts of the Field, who in these
Queryes have showed forth thy subtlety and temptations, Matthew. 22. 35. who
would have us to deny the Scripture, but it is ours, we own it, Heb. 4. 15.
and thee we do deny, for thou art without the life of it, as the subtle
Serpents were which tempted Christ, can thou deny it? but thou hold up
such as have the chiefest place in the Assemblyes, and stand praying there, and
with pretense make long Prayers, and lays heavy Burdens upon the People, and
called of men Master, which Christ forbids; and these are thy Teachers of the
Word, and Ministers of the Gospel, as thou call them, but ye are Antichrists
and Enemies to all the commands of Christ; O thou blind Hypocrite, and dark
Beast, why do thou question things contrary to the Scripture? but thou
would make a Lie of it as ever thou and thy Fathers did, John 8. 44.

5 Query. How is Christ in man?

Answ. O thou carnal man, and Enemy of Christ! do thou query how Christ is in
man? thou art of the same mind with the Jews which doubted whether that was
the Christ yea or no: Light shines in darkness and darkness does not comprehend
it, John 1. 5. I am the Light which enlightneth every one that comes into the
world, John 1. 9. and that Light shall condemn thee, who stumblest at it, being
without God in the world, it shall be thy condemnacion, the Light, for thou
walkst in darkness, and know not whither thou go, but art led with thy
blind Guides, and both shall fall into the Ditch together, Matthew. 15. 14.

6 Query. Whether Christ as Christ be in all men?

Answ. No, in thee and thy dark understanding there is no room for Christ, for
thou art one of them that hates the Light, which Light is Christ, which has
enlightened every one that comes into the world, which is the condemnacion of
thee and all the world, and thou art one of the Builders, Mark 12. 10. that
builds and stumbleth, and rejects the Cornerstone, Acts 4. 11. 1 Pet. 2.
7, 8. who live above the Light in thee, in thy vain imaginacions, which Light
should guide thee to the Father, which Light thou stumblest at, and hate, and
do not obey, so in flames of fire will he render vengeance upon, all such as
thou art, who do not obey the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
and do not wait for his appearance.

7 Query. Whether has God elected any to Salvation?

Answ. We are elected to Salvation, we have the witness within us, praises be
to the glorious Lord God for ever, who has elected and chosen us, before the
foundation of the world; but thou art ordained of old for Condemnacion and for
Perdicion among the ungodly ones, and art a Reprobate, one that hates Christ,
and art blind, doting about Questions and strife of words, 1 Timothy 6. 4. in
that untoward generation which the Apostle prayed that the Saints might be kept
from. I know thy spirit, it is tried to be the spirit of Antichrist, and the
spirit of Error, which is in the world, which the Woe is to, and that is thy
portion, read Jude 11.

8 Query. Whether has any man, or but only he that is elected to Salvacion, a
sufficient Light in himself, to lead him to Christ?

Answ. Here thou stumblest again at the Light, asking whether every man have a
sufficient Light to lead them to Christ, when Christ says, I am the Light of
the world, John 8. 12. and enlightneth every one that comes into the world,
John 1. 9. One he loves the Light, and walks in it, and is a Child of Light,
and there is no occasion at all of stumbling, John 11. 9. the other he hates
the Light, because his deeds are evil, and will not come to the Light, lest the
Light should reprove him, John 3. 19, 20, 21. which Light would lead to the
Father of Light, living in it, and taking heed to it, which Light shall condemn
thee, and all who hate it, whose deeds are evil; there thou art to be condemned
by the Light, which would teach thee, and draw thee out of the World, and from
all the Teachers of the World, and would lead thee up to Salvacion, but thou
hate it, therefore it is thy Condemnacion, that love Darkness more than
Light, following thy own imaginacions, which are raced out from God for ever,
and which Light shall be thy Condemnacion from God, John 3. 19.

9 Query. What is original sin?

Answ.

That which thou live in is the Root and Author of all Sin, so if thou can
read thy self thou may know what Original Sin is, as thou calst it, which is
cast out from God, and shall never enter into God, where thou, and all you are,
who are disobedient to the Commands of God, and stumble at the Light, because
it will overthrow thy Pride and High-mindedness, who art Lucifer-like, tempting
with thy Queries, as the Serpent did Eve, Genesis 3. 5. So here thou art cursed,
and cast out Eternally.

10 Query. Whether all men are conceived in Sin.?

Thou art conceived in all Sin, and live in Iniquity. What have thou to do to
meddle with other men? stop thy mouth with that, thou evil-Beast, and
Slow-belly, whose mouth must now be stopped, Tit. 1. 10. 11. 12

11 Query. How is it done away?

It is done away in destroying of thee, thou Man of Sin, and Enemy unto all
Righteonsness, and Son of Perdicion, whom Jesus Christ shall consume with the
Spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the Brightness of his Coming, 2 These. 2.
8. but this thou man of Sin putst far from thee, verse 3. but this shall thou
know, before thou know thy Sin taken away, and witness thy Queries to be vain:
thou do not yet know Sin taken away, but live in Iniquity and Sin, which
thou wast brought forth in; and as a Theif thou have named Christ, but not
departed from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. and Christ comes to destroy the work's of
the Devil, 1 John. 3. 8.

12 Query. Whether is it a Righteousness in Christ imputed unto us by Faith? Or
a Righteousness of Works in our selves, by which we are justified before God?

Answ. Here thou have tempted to thy own destruction, for thou art not yet come
to know the Righteousness of the Law of Works in thy self, nor the state of
the first Covenant, and the Faith of God thou art a Reprobate to, which
justifies alone without imputacion, Romans 3. 28. and thy imputed Faith we
utterly deny, which Faith is dead without Works, and thou art dead both to
Faith and Works, and thy imputacion to thy dead Works without thee, we do deny,
Romans 4. 5. 6. for that is your Cloak for your Sin and Filthyness: Abraham, to
whom the imputacion was spoken, he was come from his Fathers house, which thou
art not, and he was a Friend of God, which thou art an Enemy to, Romans 4. ^2.
and God will wound the Head of all his Enemies, Psalm. 68. 21. for thou have not
Faith, we are witnesses against thee; The Righteousness of God, which is by
Faith of Jesus Christ, Romans 3. 22. this we own, which was witnessed of, by the
Law and Prophets, therefore we are witnesses against thee, and all thy blind
Guides, to be without the Faith of Jesus, and the Prophets, the Law, and not
yet come to see the Death reign in thee, which has passed over all men, and
there thou art, as it is written, Death reigned from Adam till Moses, and Death
and Destruction says, we have heard of the fame thereof with our Ears, and
this is thee, Job 28. 22. and thou may read the Chapter through it is
serv^cable to thee

13 Query. Whether a man may keep the whole Law?

Answ. Thou ask a Question, whether a man may keep the whole Law, as though
thou wast afraid, and durst not keep the Law; if I should say yea, thy Master
would be angry with thee, for thou and thy Master says nay: Our Master Christ
Jesus is the end of the Law, and fulfileth the Law in us who walk not after the
Flesh, but after the Spirit, which makes us free from the Law of Sin and Death,
Romans 8. 12. and we love God because we keep his Commandments, 1 John 5. 23.
and to us they are not greevious; and God says, if ye love me, keep my
Commandments, 2 John 1. 6. 1 John 3. 14. and thou ask a Question, whether a
man may keep his Law, here thou have showed thy self to be one that has cast
his Law behind thy back, for God calls for the walking in, and keeping of his
Law: and thou queriest whether a man may keep it or no, therefore thou have
cast away the Law of God, and despisest the word of the holy One of Israel,
Esaias. 5. 24

14 Query. Whether Christ is an Advocate for all Believers, if some be without
Sin?

Answ. Thou full of all Subtilty, and full of Sin, and Tempter, Christ is the
Advocate for all Believers, and does take away their Sins, and destroys the
works of the Devil, which are yet standing in thee, therefore do thou stumble
at the Scriptures; and here have thou shown forth thy Envy, Kain-like: I know
the intent of thy Queries, and the mischief of thy mind, who art in the
Generation of Kain, seeking to slay the Righteous Seed which cannot Sin, but
thou that Sinnest art of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. 9. and there is no Mediator for
thee, but thou art for Destruction, for thou that sinnest art of the Devil, and
never kn^wst God, but art a Transgressor of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. To that in
thy Conscience do I speak

15 Query. Whether is the Blood of Jesus Christ, that was shed upon the Cross
at Jerusalem, the Price that bought us?

Answ. In the Query thou pervertest the Scripture, and the same mind thou have
there that the Pharisees had. The Blood of Christ is but one, as ever it was, by
which we are redeemed from our vain Conversacion, and by which all are
redeemed, Ephesians. 1. 7. which thou make light of, who live in thy vain mind
and Conversacion, for this Blood is our Witness, and Seal, by which we are
redeemed, but not at Jerusalem only, but made manifest in us; Glory Glory, to
the Lord God for ever, who has begotten us from the Dead, and brought us again
by the Resurrection of Jesus; and the same do thou seek to crucify now,
Math. 3. 34. the same mind being in thee as was in them that crucified him at
Jerusalem: and the Savior thou look for at Jerusalem, his Blood is upon
thee, as it was upon the Jews, and the Price of Blood thou know not no not
in the first Covenant, nor the Blood of Lambs and of the Goat^, which was a
figure of the Everlasting Covenant, which makes perfect; but thou art one of
the filthy Swine, wallowing in the Mire, and without are Dogs, Rev. ^2. 15.

16 Query. Whether is Faith counted for Righteousness to him that beleiveth?

Answ. Faith is Righteousness, and was counted to Abraham for Righteousness,
Romans 4. 9. and is so still with them who are of Abraham: And the Righteousness
of Faith speaks on this wise, not to say in thy heart, who shall ascend into
Heaven, that is, to bring Christ down from above; or who shall descend into the
deep, that is, to bring up Christ from the dead: But what says it, the Word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: this is the Word of Faith which
we preach, Romans 10. 6 7, 8. and this we witness, and are witnesses against
thee, and all thy Train, who are Reprobates concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3. 8.
and know not Abraham, but draw out from the Word within, for where Faith is, it
is walked in, and it purifies the heart, and brings to walk in the Steps of
Abraham; but thou as a busy Fellow art querying whether Faith be counted for
Righteousness to him that beleiveth, whereby thou would have an addicion to
the Scripture, or would have it wrested, or would thou have us to speak
contrary to the Scriptures? for it we witness, and the Righteousness of Faith
we witness, Romans 4. 11. 12. 13. 16. and if thou should say the same, we know
thee to be a Liar, as they that did swear God lived, and swore falsely, because
we know thee to know nothing of it, but as the history speaks, who have showed
thy self here to be an Antichrist, one of them that has the Form but not the
Power which ever is to be turned away from, 2 Timothy 3. John 4.

17 Query Whether has not Christ Ordained a Ministry in his Church?

Answ. Christ is the Minister to the Church, Heb. 8. 2. he is the Head of the
Body, and Savior, he is the Members and the Head of the Body the Church, Col.
1 18 19. he has Ordained a Ministry, but it is that which thou art an Enemy
to; what is it to thee what is in the Church of Christ, for thou art an Enemy
to the Church of Christ, for thou art in the worlds Assemblies, and among the
Hyerlings, going in the way of Cain, and after the Error of Balaam, Jude 11.
which the Woe was to, and among them which are called of men Masters, which are
pearkt up into the chiefest place of the Assemblies, which were Enemies to
Christ, which be cried Woe against, Math 23 Read thy Portion, and thy Church
there

18 Query, Whether did the Apostle Paul command Timothy to Ordain Ministers, by
laying on of hands? and whether Timothy himself, was not so Ordained?

Anws, Whereas thou would know whether Timothy Ordained Ministers by laying
on of hands; the same that made him a Minister, the same Ordained other
Ministers, by laying on of the same hand; if thou have an Ear thou may
hear, for it is one Word of Life which the same hand laid on: what their Eyes
saw, what was from the beginning, 1 John 1. 1 2 3 which was made manifest,
which was the Word of Life, which was made manifest even from the beginning,
which they did declare* but Friend, what is this to thee for the maintaining of
thy Imitacion, and the likeness of it, and thy laying on of hands, which thy
Ministers imitate, who walk out of the Steps of Christ, and of the Apostles,
and are made Ministers by the w^ll of man, and your laying on of hands is by
the will of man, and your Ordinacion stands cut by the will of man, which is
all Carnal, and we do deny it all, as the Apostles did, who denied the carnal
commandments, Col 2 22 23

19 Query, Whether has not Chrst Ordained a Maintenance for that Ministry?

Answ, They that Preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel, 1 Cor 9 14 and freely
they have received, freely do they give, Man 10 8 and he that ministers
spiritual things to the Brethren, they minister unto him carnal things, Rom
15. 27. but Friend what is this to thee to maintain thy Church, and thy
Ministers, who bear rule by their means, and who go in the error of Balaam,
receiving the wages of unrighteousness, Jude 11. and who su men at the Law that
will not pay them. A horrible filthy thing is committed in the Land, Jer. 5.
30, 31. by those who profess themselves to be Ministers of the Gospel, which it
is slandred by you all, and Jesus Christ his worthy Name is dishonored and
blasphemed by you all, and these are the Ministers of thy Church who are
ordained by laying on of your hands, who walk contrary to Christ and the
Apostles, for they did never su men at the Law; here under a color thou ask
whether Christ has not ordained a Maintenance for that Ministry, whereby
thou would have a Cloak to maintain the Ministers of the World, which seek
for their Gain from their Quarter, Ier. 5. which the Lords Prophets cried
against, and seek for the Fliece which Ezekiel cried against, Ezekiel. 24. 2, 3.
and Hierlings which Micah cried against, Micah 3. 11. and them that loves the
wages of unrighteousness, which the Apostle cried Woe against, Jude 11. and the
Woe is upon thee now, which stand up for Balaam with a color.

20 Query. Whether were Tithes paid before the Levitical Priesthood, and when?
and how do thou prove by Scripture they were taken away?

Answ. Abraham paid Tithes, and the Levites received Tithes, and they that are
the sons of Levi, who receive the Offices of the Priesthood have a Commandment
to take Tithes of the People, according to the Law, that is, of their Brethren;
but the Priesthood being changed, there is also a necessity of changing the
Law, Heb. 7. 12. and here is a proof for thee, and here I prove thee to be
under the Curse, and to stand up for the Law, and to be a Deceiver, and an
Antichrist, because thou deniest Christ come in the ^lesh, 1 John 4. 3. and
there thou art holding up that which Christ came to put an end to; and here I
will prove all your Teachers (as y^u call them) to be without Christ, and that
Christ never sent them* for whom he sent forth he said unto them, Freely ye
have received, freely give: and what a stir is here for your Tithes, and Gifts,
and Augmentacions, you make it manifest where your heart is; for you are
wrangling for these things which are earthly, and su men at the Law, contrary
to Christ's command, and the Apostles practice, who coveted no man's Gold nor
Silver, God was their witness; and here you are raced out from Christ, and from
all the servants of God, for they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ
but their own belly, Romans 16. 18. whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 19. evil beasts, and slow-belleys, whose end is destruction.

21 Query. Whether did Christ command his Disciples to baptize with Water? and
whether did they baptize with Water?

Answ. Here thou have showed forth thy subtlety, that thou art ignorant of the
Letter, what do thou read in the Letter, Christ sent them forth and bade
them Go teach all Nations, baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28. 19. the Baptism and Water we witness,
John 3. 5. for the Water is a witness which the Apostles baptized withal, 1
John 5. 8. He that has an Ear let him hear, but thou have none, neither did
thou ever come to this Baptism, Christ did not send forth his Disciples to
sprinkle a little durty Water upon Childrens faces, as your filthy Dreamers do,
and tell them it is an Ordinance of Christ, who are Liars of him, for Christ
did not mention any Water to his Disciples when he sent them forth, but bade
them teach the People all things whatsoever he had commanded them, and said* he
was with them to the end of the world: in this Query I see thy intent, thou
would have a Cloak to hold up thy beastical Tradicions which never were
commanded, thou Eenemy of God; and with thy carnal Tradicions and beggarly
Rudiments thou art full of Earth, pleading for the earthly Tradicions and
Commandments, and keep poor People in ignorance and blindness in those
things God never commanded; and here the Plagues of God are added to thee, who
addest to the Prophecy written in this Book, Rev. 2^. 19.

22 Query. When Christ commanded his Apostles to baptize all Naci^^s, where do
you find Children excepted?

Answ. In thy Query before thou askedst, whether Christ did command his
Disciples to baptize with Water, now thou say in thy next Query, when Christ
commanded his Apostles to baptize all Nations; here thou full of all subtlety,
who layest Snares, and art taken in thy Snare* What have thou to do to talk of
Christ's Baptism, or the Apostles? seeing thou walk contrary to them all* and
with them would make a Cloak to hold up another thing which Christ never
commanded, as to sprinkle Infants, for says he, Believe and be baptized, to
the washing away of sin, which thou art full of, and live in; first they were
to be preached to, and to come to repentance, and to believe and be baptized;
but thou dark Sot, what is this to thee in maintaining of the sprinkling of
Infants with a little Water, who understand nothing? all thy Baptism I do
utterly deny, they are excepted, thou and all are excepted, but the seed; and
the Promise is to the seed not of seeds as of many, but one, Gal: 3. 16 he that
has an Ear to hear let him hear; but thou art dead in thy sins, and
uncircumcised in heart, and know no Baptism but the sprinkliug of Infants,
which Christ never commanded, and live in the lust of thy ignorance, having
thy understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, and art a
stranger from the covenant of Promise, a child of disobedience, who the wrath
of God abides upon, Ephesians. 2. 12

23 Query. Whether was not Christ baptied with Water, who was above both Faith
and Repentance?

Answ. Thou Hypocrite, what is this to thee? to the sprinkling of Infants with
Water, who are neither come to Faith nor Repentance, who thirty or forty years
after do tell them of Faith and Repentance, who know neither thy self; and
what have thou to do to talk of Jesus who went out of the Water, Matthew. 3. 16.
and so the Heavens were opened, and he saw the Spirit of God, Mark 1. 9, 10.
but this makes thee never the wiser in thy fleshly understanding, for thy
curious mind and fleshly understanding is to be destroyed before thou come to
know this Baptism, for thou art in the nature of Herod, that queryed for the
Child to see him that he might worship him, but would have destroyed him: but
for the simple ones sakes have I discovered thee and made thee bare and naked.

24 Query. Whether did not Christ institute his last Supper with Bread and Wine?

Answ. Christ does not speak of Bread and Wine, but he took Bread, and brake
it, and said, it was his Body; and he took the Cup when he had given thanks he
gave it to them, and they did drink all of it, and he said unto them, This is
my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many, Mark 14. ^3. and this I
have witnessed, and we witness the breaking of the Bread, which is his Body,
and drinking the Cup which is his Blood, Luke 22. 17, 20. for wear many
Members and but one Body, but the Cup which thou drinkest we do deny, for thy
Cup is the Cup of Devils, and thy Table is the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 16,
17, 21. which is an Idol and Imitacion, and thy Sacrifice is to Devils, and not
to God; and as the Apostle said, I would not you have fellowship with Devils, 1
Cor. 10. 20. for do not Drunkards meet at thy Table, and Swearers, cursed
Speakers, and Fighters, and who follow all manner of filthy pleasures, and
Idolaters, and Covetous, who live in all manner of Pride and filthiness, and
these are thy Companions, and thy fellowship at thy Table; and what have thou
to do to talk of the Cup of Christ, who sits at the Table of Devils, and drinks
the Cup of Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 21.

25 Query. Whether did not Paul administer the Lords Supper to the Corinthians
with Bread and Wine?

Answ. Thou carnal Sot, where did the Apostle give to the Corinthians Bread and
Wine? did not the Apostle say, The Cup of blessing which we bless is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ, the Bread which we break is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? ^ Cor. 10. 16, 17. for we being many are one
Bread, and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that one Bread; we witness
this, who cannot drink the Cup of Devils, nor sit at their Table, where thou
do, for it is forbidden, 1 Cor. 10. 21.

26 Qu. Of what concernment is it to others, and how long to continu in the
Church, seeing the Apostle says, [As often as you eat of this Bread* and drink
of this Cup, you show forth the Lords death till he come?]

Answ. Thou desi^est to know of what concernment it is to others, He that
eats and drinks, not discerning the Lords Body, eats and drinks
Domnacion to himself, until the Lord come, 1 Cor: 11. 29. Thou ask how long
it shall continu in the Church, this Bread and this Cup does continu for ever
in the Church; it is so, As often as they eat of this Bread and drink of this
Cup, they show forth the Lords Death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. but Friend,
what have thou to do to talk of this who art in the generation of them that
were Enemies to Christ, holding up the chief Priests which sought to put him to
death, who persuaded the multitude against him, Matthew: 26: 59 and who persuaded
the Rulers against him, John 11: 53 so do all thy Priests now, where he is made
manifest, and in that Church thou art, as thou call it, and of the same
nature of them who ever sought to destroy the just: This Cup thou never
tastedst of, nor of the Bread, but they were them that were gathered off from
the Priests, and from the Temple, whom this was spoken to, for these were
Figures of the substance: but Friend, all thy Imitacions, and Priests, and
Suppers, and Bread, and Wine, is an Imitacion, and an Image, which is the
likeness of a thing which the Lord forbids, Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing, and thou that eatest and drinkest
not discerning the Lords Body, eatest and drinkest Damnacion to thy self 1 Cor.
11. 29. and there thou art

27 Query Whether the Scripture being Carnal, and the Letter Killing, as you
say, we may read them without danger?

Answ. The Letter which kills, 2 Cor. 3. 6. is dangerous, for thou take it
here to war withal against the Saints, with thy Carnal mind, giving out thy
Carnal Exposicions upon it, and the Ministers of the Letter are the Ministers
of Death, which is to Condemnacion, and you take it to make a Trade with it,
and with what the Prophets, Christ, and Apostles said; and again you take it to
make a Trade upon it, so that some have 30, some 40, some 50, some 60, some a
100 pounds a year: where was ever such things practiced, or heard of, amongst
all your Fathers the false Prophets! you do exceed them all in wickedness, and
Paint your selves, and are Hyerlings, and get up in the room of Christ: you
seem like Christ in words, having painted your selves with Christ's words, and
the Apostles words, but Christ cried Woe unto such whited walls: and here you
read with danger, who speak of them and speak a Lie, Ier 5 2. because you speak
not what is in you, because you speak of your selves; and it is dangerous to
read that, and to make a Trade of that which the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles spoke forth freely, and to give meanings to it contrary then it is,
and to raise Points, Trials, and Motives, and Uses; here is adding, and the
Curses and Plagues, are added to him that adds to the Prophecy written in this
Book, and there you are, for destruction is your Portion, Rev. 22. 18. But I
say, blessed is he that does read, and does understand, and he that does
neither add, nor diminish, for he walks in the Paths of the Prophets, of
Christ, and the Apostles, and in the Steps of Abraham; and the Apostle said, I
charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read among all the holy Brethren,
but you are Ignorant and unlearned, 2 Pet: 3: 16: and you wrest the Scriptures
to your own destruction* Psalm: 56: 5: and to you it is dangerous to read or
speak of it, who know not the Life of it, even as the Pharisees, who were
learned in the Letter, but knew not Christ; and some of the Apostles who were
not learned men in the Letter, did not wrest the Scriptures, as the same Peter,
was learned in the Life, though not in the Letter: but you are in the state of
the Hypocrites and Serpents, which garnish the Sepulchers of the Righteous: Fill
ye up the measure of your Fathers: ye Serpents, ye generation of Vipers, how
can you escape the Damnacion of Hell, Matthew: 23: 2^: 23* and the Letter is
carnal, and kills, and Dust is the Serpents meat, Gen: 3: 14: and that is
thy meat; and Cursed is the Serpent which beguiles, and thou art he: look not
for him without thee, for he is in the Letter, and you get the Letter into your
mouths, and come and say, The Lord says, when he never spoke to you: Woe is
unto you, and the Harlot which is dect with so many Colors, and there you are,
read your own Portion, destruction: he that has the same Spirit that gave the
Scriptures forth, reads them without Conceivings, or Imaginacions* and
witnesses them fulfilled, but thou art Proud, and live in thy Imaginacions
and Conceivings, and thou Conceivest of the Letter, and whatsoever thou
buildest must be scattered, Luke 1: 51, 52: so to thee it is dangerous.

28 Query. Whether they were written for our Instruction, and are profitable,
that we may be thoroughly furnished?

Answ. They are for the perfecting of the Man of God, for the furnishing of him
through Faith in Christ Jesus; and they were written to instruct them whom they
were written to, which had an Eye to see them, and an Ear to hear them, and an
heart to understand; whom the Apostles spoke to for instruction, till the ends
of the world was come; and they are for instruction, to instruct and to
admonish, but not to make a Trade of: but Friend to thee I speak in this Query,
thou art a Tempter, and that mind in thee knows nothing of them, that they
were not spoken forth to instruct, for that is for destruction, for look within
thy self, and thou will see thou art full of Corrupcion, and the man of Sin,
and he it is that talks and prattles of the Scripture, who must be consumed,
but we witness that they are for the perfecting of the man of God, through
Faith in Christ Jesus, for to Convince, and to Reprove, and to Instruct, but
not thee thou man of Sin, and Son of Perdicion, who sitest in the Temple of
God, above all that is called God, and gattest the form of words, and deceivest
the Simple, as a colored Beast, and the Plagues of God are thy due and
Portion: for thy instruction they were not written, who walk contrary to the
Commands of God who art exalted above all that which is called God in thee, in
whom the Mystery of Iniquity, lodges, and the Son of Perdicion, which shall be
destroyed 2 Thessalonians. ^.

29 Query. Wherefore does Christ command John to write to the Angel of the
Churches, in the Revelacions, and not teach Immediately himself, seeing you tell
us that God Immediately teaches his People, and that all men have this Teacher
within them?

Answ: Thou Enemy of Christ, and of all Righteousness, what have thou to do to
question Christ's commanding John? thou full of all subtlety, and busy fellow,
what have thou to do to question Christ, who art exalted above all that is
called God; here thou show thou would not have him to reign: the same that
spoke to John was immediate, and that which John spoke was immediate; if thou
have an Ear thou may hear what John spoke to the Church; but I see thy intent
in thy Query, to me thou art discovered, for in thy Query thou would have a
Cloak to keep up the Teachers of the World, and your imitated Churches, who
walk in the path contrary to Christ and all his Apostles: God immediately
does teach his People by his Spirit, by which he draws them up to himself into
the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 8. 11 by which they need no man to teach them, 1
John 2. 27 and every one is enlightened with the Light, which is Christ; but all
such blind Guides as your Teachers are, who draw People from this Light within
them, to hearken to their imaginacions of the Letter without you; such I say do
bewitch them, and draw them into the uncleanness, and into the flesh that the
fruits of it shows it self, Gal: 5. 21 drunkenness, fighting, wrangling,
quarrelling, railing, disputing, and slandering, envying, persecuting, lying,
swearing, and taking the Name of God in vain, idle talking, and foolish
jesting, scoffing, scorning, and mocking, and all manner of filthiness and
uncleaness; and these are they that are led from their Teacher within them,
which is the Light, by you blind Watchmen, Isai 56. 10, 11, 12 from the Light
which is Christ, which he has enlightened them withal, and he that loves the
Light brings his works to the Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling to
him that walks in it, and loves it, and this Light is not a Chapter without,
which the Teachers of the World read, Thou that hate this Light, thou have
it, it lets thee see that all thy Deeds are evil, if thou bringst thy works to
it, it will reprove thee, John 3. ^0 and this is the condemnacion of the World;
and here every one has a Teacher, whose minds are informed: John 8. 12 to
that in every man's conscience do I speak, which should exercise it, which shall
eternally witness me, and eternally condemn thee, and you all who are haters of
Light; and what have thou to do to talk of John, and of Christ, and of the
Churches, and of the Angels, and know not the first Principle yet? Heb: 5.
12 which should guide thee out of the World, and bring thee to Repentance, but
to this thou art an Enemy to, and among the Antichrists, which say, Lo here,
and Lo there, Matthew 24. 23

30 Query. Why do you teach, exhort, write Papers, and print Books?

Answ: In thy Query before thou ask whether the Scriptures were written for
our instruction; and now thou ask, why do we exhort and teach; here thou
show forth that thou art tormented, and thy terror begins: for our giving
forth Papers or Printed Books, it is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God,
to the showing forth the filthy practices of the Worlds Teachers, and thine,
who with a pretense and fair colors and glosses, and with a seeming Religion
deceives the simple, and thy own soul too; we have bin long under captivity by
you, and such as you, following your imaginacions, but God has raised up a
Light within us, by which we see you Deceivers without us, and all the blind
Guides, Matthew: 23: 16. so for the simple ones sakes, who are led by the blind,
as we are moved by the immediate Spirit of Christ, to write, to teach, or to
exhort, or to put in Print, and this is it which does torment thee, but it is
but the beginning of thy sorrow, and this is from the immediate Spirit of
Christ, which thou art offended withal, as ever the Pharisees were; but thou
shall see more Papers and more Printings, and as the immediate Spirit grows,
there will be more abominacions, and filthiness laid open, and all Deceit will
be discovered, and the Truth spread abroad and cherished, which will and does
trouble thee, as Herod was when Christ was born, Matthew: 2: 3

31 Query. What is Conscience? where is it seated in man? and what is its
office and duty?

Answ: Thou hard-hearted Pharaoh, have thou been a Professor so long, and yet
ask what is Conscience! thou full of subtlety, and Tempter, it is that which
thou make shipwreck of, 1 Timothy: 1: 19 shut up from thy dark understanding, and
thy dark Reason; it is seated below the hypocrisy in thee, thou art a Tyrant
to it, and rulest over it, yet in thy carnal knowledge thou would know it to
talk of it; but Plagues and Curses are du to that nature, which thou must know
before thou know the office or duty of it, as thou speak, for yet thou art
in the hardness of thy heart; and here thou have overturned thy self: thou have
before asked many Queryes, but the intent is to maintain thy carnal state,
which seares the Conscience, the tender part in man: but Friend, if thou
hearken to the Light, to that in thy Conscience do I speak, 2 Cor. 5. 2. it
will let thee see what Conscience is, thou hard beart, and it will exercise thy
Conscience toward God and toward man, Acts 24. 16 and here shall thou see its
duty and office, and where it is seated, and by it how thy understanding is
enlightened, and by it how thy heart is cleansed; if thou have an Ear thou may
hear* thou that would be taught what Conscience is, and where it is seated;
for shame lay away thy filthy Profession, who would know where Conscience is,
it is under thy hypocrisy, who art comprehending Conscience with thy carnal
Wisdom and Reason, but thou must be confounded and condemned with that which
should exercise thy Conscience, 2 Cor: 5: 11 and here thou have showed forth
thou do not know the first Principle, but art without* and one of them whose
Conscience is seared, 1 Timothy: 4: 2

32 Query. If thou have the Spirit of Christ, and in a large measure, as some
give out of thee, taking upon thee to be a Teacher, as also sending many
Queryes to others; I require of thee an Answer to these Queryes not in
ambiguous and doubtful terms, as the Devil in his Oracles, but in plain
Language affirmatively or negatively, full and clear according to the Spirit in
the Gospel Times, that he that runs may read it; or else confess thou art led
with a spirit of deceit and darkness which would not willingly descover it self?

Answ: Thou say, if I have the Spirit of Christ, which I have and witness it,
but as taking upon me in the will to be a Teacher as you are made Teachers,
that I do deny; I do deny the will, and you both, 1 Cor: 2: 17 and all who are
made Ministers by the will of man: but the sending forth Queryes which grieve
thee* to others, is that you may show forth your folly as you have done in
answering them, by your dark mind which cannot comprehend the Light, in which
they are given forth, but shows forth your darkness, blindness, ignorance, and
folly, and despite against the Spirit of Grace, being Enemies to Jesus Christ
which is the Light in us, and has discovered and laid open your deceits and
blindness, and to all who have their Eyes in their Head your folly is made
manifest. 2 Timothy: 3. 9 And thou have here discovered thy ignorance, and showed
forth thy folly in these Queryes, thou do require an Answer to these Queryes
in plain Language which thou have sent. I have spoken plainly to thee, and not
flattered thee; and as touching ambiguous terms they are thy own, as the Devil
in his Oracles, thou art guarded with them; I comprehend thee, and see thy
Clothing, and thy Affirmative, and thy Negative proceeds from thy cursed
mind, but sound and clear I have answered thee, according to the Spirit that
is in the Gospel, but to thy dark mind they will be dark, for thou neither
know the Spirit nor the Gospel, for I have answered thee in the Gospel-time,
and he that has the Spirit may run and read it, and read thy spirit to be
the spirit of Error* erred from all them that did preach the Gospel, which ever
were: we are not led by a spirit of Error, but it we do deny, therefore we do
deny thee; therefore openly, and freely, and nakedly do I declare my self to
the discovering of the spirit of Error, which is in thee, and all thy blind
Guides: who is led by the Spirit of Truth has discovered you to be in the
deceit, and in darkness, without God in the world, the Plagues of God are to be
poured upon the Beast and the false Prophet, and the Beast and false Prophet
are to be cast into the fire, Rev: 20. 10 there is thy portion; now do not call
this railing and rash judgment, for thou know the Letter thunders, and
speaks forth such words to such as thou art, who live in that nature; Friend,
this is thy day of visitacion, 2 Cor: 5. 11 to that which is in thy Conscience
I have spoken, which shall eternally witness me, and condemn thee, 1 Cor: 4. 2
The mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

The Preparacion of the Heart in Man, and the Answer of the Tongue ^^ from the
Lord, Prove: 16. 1
FINIS.
NOw all you who are doting about Questions, and are Ministers of Questions,
and not Ministers of Grace, nor Edificacion, but are busi-bodyes, tempting, and
laying Snares, and digging Pits, lie are now fallen into the Pits which ye have
dug for others, and you who are wise are taken in your own craftiness* and
you are now answered from the mouth of the Lord, and discovered, and to every
one is rendered his du and portion; but you sollowing the steps of your fathers
the Jews, you (as they did marvel at his Answers, though he was the Son of God,
Luke 20. 26) now you are answered, own your portion, for I have kept back
nothing, what I received freely from the Lord, freely I have declared unto you
without parciality, or having men's persons in admiracion, because of advantage,
not favoring deceit, nor giving liberty to sin, for the Lord has given us a
mouth, and wisdom, which all our Gainsayers are not able to resist, and we
walk in the pure wisdom of God, and wisely toward you that are without,
redeeming the time, and our speech is with Grace, seasoned with Salt, and we
know how to answer every man, Col: 4. 5, 6

Praises, Praises to the Lord for ever, who takes the wise in their craftiness,
and confounds, and brings to shame all his Enemies, and discovers all Serpents,
with their twistings, and twinings, and subtle and cunning temptacions, and
has fulfilled his Apostles words in his Sons and Daughters, in making their
folly manifest to all men, and they shall proceed no further, 2 Timothy: 3. 9 and
now the painted Serpents, the well-favoured Harlots, the diverse colored
Beasts, and the wily Foxes, are discovered to his Sons and Daughters, that they
cannot spoil the tender Plants which the Lord himself has planted in his
Peoples hearts, the Plants of his Renoun grows and flourishes; Praises,
Praises to the eternal, powerful God for ever.

Let all the Sons and Daughter of the Lord praise the Lord* Let all the Fathers
and young men, Children and Servants bless and praise the Lord for ever, who
reigns for evermore.

Richard Hubberthorn.


