THIRTY OF THE Priests Errors Published.
I. THE Teachers of the World profess the Scriptures to be their rule, and say
it is a Touchstone to try 2 John 1. 9. Isa. 8. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 21.
withal: But he that walks contrary to the Scriptures, the Declaration of the
Eternal Word, is a Seducer, and has the Spirit of Error.

II. That which makes a Minister of the world, is the learning at Oxford and
Cambridge; and they are so long there, and gives so much for their learning;
and when they have done they have so much for their preaching. The Prophets and
Apostles, Gal. 1. 12. Ezekiel. 3. 1. Jer. 23. and 22. 32.
did not so; Christ gave no such command. And here they act contrary to the
Scriptures, and have the spirit of error.

III. The Teachers of the World will let none preach but themselves, and such as
come from Oxford or Cambridge, or are elsewhere learned. Here they act contrary
to the Scriptures; for the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 14. 30. 31.
Ye may all prophecy one by one; and if any thing be revealed to him that sits
by, let the first hold his peace. Here they limit the holy one, and show the
spirit of error.

IV. The Teachers of the World have set-Wages of the World; and if any man
refuse to pay them, they sue them at law. The Prophets 1 Cor. 6. 6. Act. 20. 23
1 Pet. 5. 2. Mat. 5. 40.
and Apostles did not so. Here they act contrary to the Scripture, and have the
spirit of error.

V. The Teachers of the World take a Text, raise Doctrines, Uses, Points,
Trials, Motives, and have a Clark to say Amen. The Apostles Deuteronomy 4. 2. Prove.
30. 5 6.
did not so. Here they act contrary to the Scripture, and show the spirit of
error.

VI. The Teachers of the World sing David's quakings, tremblings, cryings,
wastings, praises, prayers, and prophesies in meeter, and have a glass to
preach by the hour; When they read the Psalms, Hats must be on; but when they
sing them, hats must be off; but the Priests Rev. 22. 18, 19. Psalm. 5 6, 7 1
Cor. 14, 15.
have one or two Caps on their heads. The Apostles did not so when they spoke
unto the world. These act contrary to the Scriptures, and have the spirit of
error.

VII. The Teachers of the World cry, Let us sing to the praise and glory of
God; and give the ignorant and profane people words to sing; as, O Lord I am
not puffed in mind, I have no scornful eye; when as they are puffed in mind, and
have scornful eyes. Here they dishonor the Lord, causing the people to lie,
showing the spirit of error. Psalm. 131. 1 Mat. 28 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. chap. 23. 11.
Mat. 6. 5, 7, 8, 9. 1 Ioh. 2. 22


VIII. The Teachers of the World have the chiefest places in the Assemblies,
are called of men masters, laying heavy burdens upon the people, stand praying
in the Synagogues. Jesus Christ forbad such things; but the Teachers of the
World act such things, contrary to Christ's command and practice, showing
themselves to be Antichrists, Seducers, Dissemblers, having the spirit of error.

IX. The Teachers of the World hold up the outward Temples, calling it the
Church, when as the Church is in God; and calls it the 1 Cor. 8. 10 1 These. 1.
1 Acts 17. 24, 25.
House of God. And thus acts contrary to the Scriptures, and are Seducers, and
have the spirit of error.

X. The Teachers of the World sprinkle Infants, telling people it is an
Ordinance of God. Which is contrary to the Scripture, never commanded Gal. 3.
1. Luke 1. 60. 62, and 63. Genesis 21. 3. Genesis 29. 33.
by the Lord; but these hold it up, and so bewitch the people, and are
seducers, having the spirit of error.

XI. The Teachers of the World calls people to a Sacrament, for the which there
is no Scripture: Here they act contrary to the Scripture, the Declaration of
God. Here they are seducers, and shows forth the spirit of error.

XII. The Teachers of the World marries people, and takes money for it. The
Apostle did not so; here they act contrary to the Scripture, Genesis 29. 28
showing the spirit of error.

XIII. The Teachers of the World takes money for burying the dead; the Apostles
did not so. Here they act contrary to the Scriptures, showing the spirit of
error. Mat. 10. 8.


XIV. The Teachers of the world takes money for churching of women; the
Apostles did not so. Thus they act contrary to the Scriptures, showing the
spirit of error. Mat. 8 12.


XV. The Teachers of the World have Easter-reckonings, and Midsummer dues, and
money out of servants wages. The Apostles did not so, These act contrary to the
Scripture, showing the spirit of error.

XVI. The Teachers of the World preach Funeral Sermons over the dead, and have
ten shillings, more or less, as they can get it for their pains, The Apostles
did not so. These act contrary to the Scriptures, showing forth the spirit of
error.

XVII. The Teachers of the World agree for so much in the year for preaching.
The Prophets and Apostles did not so; it is contrary Mat. 1 ^ 8 1 Cor. 16. 18.
1 John 2. 16, 17.
to Christ's command; Freely ye have received, freely give: Thus they act
contrary to the Scriptures, showing the spirit of error.

XVIII. The Teachers of the World go in double cuffs, white boothose-tops,
living in the lusts of the flesh, following the fashions of the World. Which
the Apostles spoke against. Here they act contrary to Rom 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 14 1
Cor. 7. 31. Deuteronomy. 26. 12.
the Scripture, and show the spirit of Error.

XIX. the Teachers of the World take Tithes, the Tenths of men's Estates. In the
old time Levi which received Tithes, the fatherless, widows, and strangers,
was to come and be relieved within his Gate: But the Priests of the world do
not fill the Fatherless, Widows, and Strangers. Here they act contrary to the
Scriptures, and show the spirit of error.

XX. The Teachers of the World say that men shall never be perfect here. When
the Scripture says, Be pe perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect: And, We
preach Wisdom to them that are perfect: Mat. 5 48 1 Cor. 2. 6. Phil. 3. 15.
Col. 4. 12. Luke 6. 40
And, Every one that is perfect, must be as his Lord. And, As many as are
perfect, be thus minded. Stand perfect and complete in the will of God. Here
they act contrary to the Scripture, and show the spirit of error.

XXI. The Teachers of the World say, that men shall never overcome the body of
sin so long as they are here, neither be made free from the body of sin. But
the Scripture says, We are made free Col. 4. ^2.
from sin, and have put off the body of sin; and they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts thereof, and all 2 Cor. 5. 1
7.
things are become new. Here they act contrary to the Scripture, and show the
spirit of error.

XXII. The Teachers of the World say, that men shall not be sanctified
throughout in body, soul and spirit, but in part as long as men are here.
Herein they plead for a hold for Satan in them, and are seducers and deceivers;
For the scripture says, Ye are sanctified throughout Jude 8. 1.
in body, soul and spirit: And he that does righteousness, is righteous, even
as he is righteous: Let no man deceive you, he that sins is 1 Ioh 3 7, 8, 9.
of the Devil, and never knew God. Here they go about to keep people in their
sins, when Christ comes to take sin away, and to destroy the Devil who is the
Author thereof; and so they speak contrary to the scripture, and show the
spirit of error.

XXIII. The Teachers of the World say, that the Letter is the Light; when the
Letter says that Christ is the light; the Letter is the declaration of the
Light which was in them that spoke forth the Ioh. 8. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 6.
Scriptures. Here they speak contrary to the Scriptures, and show forth the
spirit of error.

XXIV. The teachers of the World say, the Letter is the Word. Which is false;
for the Letter says, that God is the Word; Joh. 1. 1 Heb. 4. 12 Romans 8: 10: 8
Jer. 23. 29
the Letter is a declaration of the Word, which is as a fire, and sharper than
any two-edged sword; and the Word is nigh thee, in thy heart, and in thy mouth.
And so they draw people to the Letter, telling them it is the Word, and are
dissemblers, seducers, and no Ministers of the Word, but are in error.

XXV. The Teachers of the world say, that the Spirit is in the Letter, and that
they are inseparable. When the Spirit says, The 2 Cor. 3. 6 Ezekiel. 13. 3 6, 7
1 John 2. 26, 27 2 Cor.
Letter kills, and is death; and thou that would raise-the spirit out of
the dead Letter, thou ar^ a Diviner and a Conjurer, following the imaginations
of thy own Brain. Here you are seducers, and show the spirit of Error.

XXVI. The Teachers of the world say, that salvation is in the
Scripture-Letter, and that the power goes along with the Letter. 2 Cor.
Which is death; For God is the cause of man's salvation; Here you are seducers,
and show the spirit of error.

XXVII. The Teachers of the world say, that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is the
Gospel. Which is but the Letter, and a declaration of the Gospel, Jesus Christ
the Power of God, and the 1 These. 2. 5 1 Pet. 1. 19 20
Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, and is glad tidings to
imprisoned souls. And here they are seducers, and show the spirit of error.

XXVIII. The Teachers of the world pretend the Scripture to be their Rule and
Guide to walk by, and acts contrary. Therein Mat. 23 27, 18
they show themselves to be seducers, dissemblers, and hypocrites, and are
guided by the spirit of error: For they are the sons of God that are guided
Romans 8. 14
by the spirit of God; For they live the life that they did that gave forth the
Scriptures.

XXIX. The Ministers of the World watch for means. And if men do not give them,
they bite and devour them. The Prophets and Apostles, and Christ did not so;
but they watched for the souls, the one the Carnal for the Carnal, and the
other for the living. And there they show Heb. 13. 17
the spirit of error.

XXX. The Teachers of the worlds weapons are carnal, crying, help Magistrates,
help Powers; put them into Cages, Goals, and houses of Correction, such as in
the fear of the Lord ask them but a question. 2 Cor: 10: 4
Contrary to the Apostles of Christ, whose weapons are spiritual, and not
carnal. And thus you show forth the spirit of error.

G. F.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand. 1660.


