NEW PROPOSITIONS Sent from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax To the Honorable
House of COMMONS; CONCERNING The preservation and safety of the Kings Majesty's
Realms and Dominions.

Together with the Parliaments Answer thereunto.

ALSO, The Armies new Propositions in reference to the whole Kingdom, and
their further Resolution c^ncerning the same.

Printed and published, for the speedy dispiercing of the foregoing
Propositions to each respective County throughout the Kingdom of England, and
Principality of Wales.

Printed at London for Adam Marshe, and are to be ^o^d near the Royale Exchange
in Cornhill, 164^. July 22

A DECLARATION CONCERNING The gallant Message and Propositions sent from his
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, to the Honorable House of COMMONS.
SIR,
HAving lately received a Copy of the gallant Message and Propositinns sent
from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax to the Honorable House of Commons;
together with the Answer and Votes of the said House, to his Excellencies
Message and Propositions; All which being of great concernment to the Kingdom,
and worthy of public view, I thought fit to represent unto you a Copy of the
said Papers; to the end, they may be printed, and dispierced throughout each
respective County within the Kingdom of England, and Principality of Wales.
viz.

1. His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax declares, that by reason of the great
numbers of several distinct and dis-joynted Forces which (now) lies dispierced
and scattered abroad within this his Majesty's Realm of England, and Dominion
of Wales, which were sufficient, together with the assistance of this Army
(being united and well managed) both to preserve the peace of this Kingdom,
and give present relief to that poor distressed and bleeding kingdom of
Ireland, without putting this Kingdom to the charge of raising new Forces at
present for that service.

2. That the high and honorable Court of Parliament would be pleased to put
all the Forces under one and the same Command, Discipline, and equal
establishment for future pay and maintenance, which being done, it would give
much encouragement to some of the Forces that may be spared out of all the
Forces mentioned from England, to go more cheerfully into Ireland.

3. That if there were some present course taken to provide for Arreares, for
such Forces as might be spared for Ireland, there might in probability be an
effectual Relief sent over into Ireland before this Summer be quite spent.

All which particulars, were humbly tendered to the serious Consideration of
the Honorable Court of Parliament, by Englands renowned General, His
Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, for the safety and preservation of this his
native Country, and for the speedy reducing poor bleeding Ireland, from the
tyranny and oppression of the bloodthirsty Rebels, who have for many years
layn waitering in its own blood, occasioned by that wicked and Jesuitical Party.

To which Propositions, we have lately received the Answer and Votes of the
House of Commons, which I shall here insert, to the end they may be all printed
together, as also the ensuing Papers to be annexed thereunto.

The Answer of the House of Commons to the foregoing Prepositions.
AFter a long and large debate in relation to the reducing of Ireland, and
settling the peace of this Kingdom, the House of Commons came to this result,
and voted.

I. That all the Land Forces within this Kingdom, and Principality of Wales;
as also the Isles of Iersey and Garnsey, shall be under the immediate command
of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the care of seeing the Forces
disbanded which left the Army, was left to the General.

II. That those Forces which left the Army before, being designed for Ireland,
and yet remain here shall be speedily disbanded.

The proceedings of the late Council of War appointed by his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, for the speedy drawing up of certain Propositions, to be
presented to the Parliament of England assembled at Westminster, for the
present settling of this Kingdom in peace, etc.
UPon Friday last, there went about one hundred Officers, viz. Colonels,
Lieutenant Colonels, Majors, and Captains, etc, to consult and debate at a
Council of war, for the drawing up of certain new Propositions, and grand
Proposals, which they conceive necessary to insist upon, and to present them
speedily to both Houses of Parliament, viz.

1. It is said, that they much desire the honor and safety of the Kings
Majesty and his Royal Posterity.

2. That there be an effectual Declaration forth with published to the
Kingdom, against the inviting, bringing, or coming in of any foreign forces,
under any pretense whatsoever.

2. That the Army may be paid up equal with the defectors thereof, according
to the late Vo^es of Parliament, And that the army may be forth with put into a
constant course of pay, that they may not be so burdensome and oppressive to
the Country; for the more speedy performance whereof, We desire, that the House
of Peers would be pleased to concur with the Desires of the House of Commons
(so often proposed to them) for reviving of the Committee for the Army, and
also that the Treasurers and Committee of Weavers Hall may be speedily called
to account, in what manner, and by what warrant the two hundred and thirty
thousand pounds, lately entrusted in their hands, have been in so short a time
consumed.

3. That the Militia of the City of London, and the Committee of the same, may
consist of such persons, and speedily be returned into those hands, who
formerly during the worst of times, have therein given large testimonies of
their fidelity to the Parliament and Kingdom, which besides the real
security, will be to the Parliament and Kingdom in preventing of dangers,
repreparing toward a new war, would conduce so much to the removing of
jealousies, and give such a ground of confidence to the army, as that we might
the better dispose it to larger quarters in several parts, for the ease of the
Country. Thus having represented to your view, the perfect Copies of the
foregoing papers, I humbly take my leave, and remain.

Your humble servant, A. MARSHE.
Redding 21. July, 1647,
FINIS.

