VILL. PROBLEMS Propounded to the CAVALIERS: FOR Conviction of their
Consciences; With a Discovery of certain Plots and Conspiracies, Declared by
Captain FRANCIS FREEMAN. WITH An Answer thereunto returned by Colonel FRANCIS
WINDHAM. And a Reply to the said Answer.

These are Printed by the Original Papers, and Published according to Order of
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by BARNARD ALSOP dwelling in Grubstreet, 1646.

To Colonel Francis Windham, Governor of Dunster Castle, these present.
SIR,
I Have sent you here enclosed this Manuscript of my poor weak labors, which
is by way of Problems, containing in them eight particular questions, with your
Cavaliers own answers to each particular question briefly handled by the
Author; together with a brief description of certain Plots and Conspiracies
which the Enemies of God have completted, contrived, and conspired against the
Church and People of God, to bring their wicked Designs to pass; and if so be
I could with convenience have sent you the Kings Cabinet Letters taken at
Naesby sight, it would have been a strong confirmation of this truth: I pray
you to peruse these lines through out with a diligent carfulness, and weigh
each particular according to its several weight, and conscionably practicing
all things herein c^ntained in your life and conversation, for the good of your
poor soul, it will be a re die means for the good and welfare both of soul and
body for time to come, and in so doing I shall for ever remain

Yours to command, FRANCIS FREEMAN.

For Colonel Windham.
SIR,
I Have made bold to write unto you, proposing certain several questions, with
your own answers (as I suppose) to each particular question, upon what grounds
you stand to maintain the true Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of
the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament (as you say) and yet by your actions
you seek to destroy them all. The first question, what profession are you?
Answ. A Gentleman, and a Soldier. The second, what Religion are you off? Ans.
The Protestant Religion. The third question, who do you fight for? An. For the
King. The 4. question, Does the King stand to maintain the true Protestant
Religion, the Laws of the Land, Liberties of the Subject, and Privileges of
Parliament? As. Yes, he does so, witness all his Declarations, Proclamations,
and Protestations. The fifth question, Why does the King suffer all the
Papists, and Irish Rebels (some who have been proclaimed traitors both by King
and Parliament) to join with him against his Parl. to destroy it? An. Because
they are better Subjects then his Parliament are, who endeavor to deprive him
of his Sinck-Ports, and all his shipping, and also his Prerogative Royal. The
6. question, But do all these things of right belong unto the King only? An.
Yes, they are all to be at his disposing for the good of his Kingdoms, or else
I would not fight for him. The 7. question, but now I pray you tell me what you
think of the Parliament: what Religion are they off? An. I must confess, that
I think they are Protestants, but there are a great many Sects and Schisms
among them, which makes them far worse then any Papist, or Irish Rebels; there
is the Puritan, alias Roundhead there is the Brownist, the Anabaptist, the
Separatist, some Antinomians, and some Independants, and these are the men that
seek to deprive the King of all His Rights and Privileges, and raise up arms
to fight against their King. The 8. question, But what do you think would be
become of the Law if the Parl. should be destroyed? An. I think we should enjoy
the same still, for our King have set forth many Declarations, wherein he has
made many gracious promises, and bound it by many Protestations, that we shall
enjoy all our own with advantage, if we will but stick close to him, and fight
for him against those Parliament Rebels and Traitors, and that man is worse
then a Rebel or a Traitor that will not take the word of a King, and believe
his King: these and the like grounds, I suppose you have to fight for your
King, which you so much deifie, that if it were possible you would set him in
Gods throne, or above him, as you do in your heart, which does appear plainly
by your answer to some of these Questions, or else you fawn upon him for some
by-sinister ends of your own to be great in the esteem of the world; but I
shall by Gods blessing endeavor to give you certain evident Rules, in the
handling of each particular, that will demonstrate unto you, what gross
errors you have committed, what dangers you are in both soul and body, and a
remedy how to avoid and escape these dangers. I shall handle them in order, and
so make particular application according to the times. I shall begin with the
first answer, which is touching your profession: you say you are a Gentleman
and a Soldier. I answer, If you are so, then you are in a very good condition;
but I must tell you, that all Soldiers are called Gentlemen Soldiers, and
those are Gentlemen Soldiers in a more special manner that fights the Lords
battle, he that fights under Christ's banner, he that fights against sin and
Satan and to destroy the works of the Devil, he that endeavors to beat down
Popery, Superstition, Idolatry, and Tyranny, he that endeavors to set up
Christ in his heart, and regulates his life and conversation according to the
Rules he has prescribed in his Word, he that endeavors a Reformation, and
loves the Brethren, which are the Members of Christ, and will join with them,
and fight for them, to free them from wrong and oppression, he that keeps
himself free from plundering and spoiling the Country, and doing any wrong or
injury to any man by his will, or the like: these are true properties of a
Gentleman Soldier. I could wish Gentlemen Soldiers to be better advised, and
not rashly go to war; but first look into their own heart, and see what
grounds they have for it, and ask council of God, for he is the God of war;
he taught David's hands to war, and his fingers to fight, and if you see your
enterprises tends to Gods glory, then you may assure your selves of the victory
by him, who is only the Almighty, and can turn all flesh into dust with the
breath of his mouth, and now I shall appeal to your own conscience to make
particular application, if it be so that Gentlemen Soldiers must be thus and
thus qualified, what will be become of all you Cavaliers? I would entreat you
in the fear of the Lord to begin first with your self, and examine your own
conscience, see by your actions whether your enterprises tends to Gods glory,
or no; and then I presume your actions will be a shrode evidence against you
(if you try your self by the touchstone of the Sanctuary, and now I shall tell
you, how true Gentility first came in, Gentility came in first by some heroic
virtues by the sword, or by some extraordinary valiant acts of Chivalry, or
else by some extraordinary gifts of Learning, whereby they were had in high
estimation above other men in respect of their qualifications and endowments;
but most of your Gentlemen have bin so notoriously wicked along time, that they
have cast a foul stain upon their Gentility, and at this present day, there
lies a stain upon their souls as black as Hell it self; besides there have
bin many Generations, since Gentility first came in, and so consequently many
bastards; for all Cavaliers do but do the Devils drudgery they do the works of
the Devil; [ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye
will do] John 8.44. Now certainly if the Devil be their Father, they must of
necessity be bastards, and so I come to the second particular; You say you are
of the Protestant Religion. I answer, that the Protestant Religion, is a
Christian Profession of the Gospel of Christ, according to the Word of God,
wherein men did enter into a Covenant, and bound themselves both to God and Man
each to other, protesting that they would stand to maintain the true Faith in
Christ Jesus and him crucified, which they then professed, even to the hazard
of their lives, lands, and personal estates; and hence it came to pass that
so many godly and holy Patriarks, suffered martyrdom in the time of Q. Mary,
and this protestation of theirs was in the nature of our Covenant that was
lately set forth by the Honorable Court of Parliament, and both for God and
his Glory, for Gods hand shall be either for us, or against us, according to
the performance of the duty, either by truth, or deceit: those godly men in
their Protestation entered into an Oath, and into a Curse, Neh. 10.29. and so
have we in our Covenant so that every one that takes an oath, does bind
himself either to the performance, or to the punishment, Number. 30.2, 3. so that
we make God our witness, our Party, and our Judge; besides we entered into a
Covenant in our Baptism, there we promised to forsake the Devil and all his
works, etc. and Baptism is a Seal of the Covenant of Grace: but we have
committed all manner of actual rebellions since that time all manner of sin and
impiety, and now at this time here is a National sin reigning amongst us, and
it deserves a National judgment and punishment and when a Nation, or a People
are a guilty of an extraordinary heinous sin, it is both lawful, and
needful for them to enter in a Covenant, and to renew their Covenant, to bind
themselves against sin, to forsake it in their own persons and to hinder and
punish it in others, Esa 10.3. -- 8. and this shall suffice for the second
particular.

I come now to the third you say you fight for the King, but because the fourth
particular have so near a relation and dependencie on the third I shall
therefore handle them, both jointly and severally; you say likewise that the
King stands to maintain the true Protestant Religion the Laws of the Land, the
Liberties of the Subject, and Privileges of Parliament, and call all his
Declarations, Proclamations, and Protestations to witness. I answer, Its true,
there have bin many set forth in his Name, and signed with C. R. although he
never knew of the publishing of them, therefore do not deceive your self: there
are and have bin many evil Counselors about him, and a Porter keeps the
Seal; besides, how can you say that you fight for the King, whereas the King
himself fights to destroy his Kingdoms; Its true, you fight for him so far
forth, as to help him do it. To proceed farther, suppose the King should offer
violence to his own Person to destroy Himself (which God forbid he should)
would you help further him in it? Certainly you are in a most miserable
condition as the case stands; but if it were lawful for the King to go to
war against his Subjects, then it were lawful for you to fight for him: but
I shall make it evidently appear, that you fight clearly against him, against
God himself, his Church and People, against your self, and against the whole
Kingdom and State.

First, you fight against the King, in striving to set up an Arbitrary
Government, which no Earthly King can have (unless of Subjects we should
become Slaves as they are in France) but the King of Kings who sits in Heaven,
and sees all things here below, and is present in all places, and disposes of
all things according to his own will and pleasure; but if it were possible that
our King could be present in all places as the King of Kings is, then he might
claim and chal^enge an Arbitrary Government to himself, and govern his People
according to his own will, and we as Subjects would obey him according to the
French fashion.

Secondly, you fight against God, and against Christ; nay you fight against all
the members of Christ; for all those which make a profession of Christ, and
endeavor to regulate their lives and conversations according to the gospel of
Christ you do not only hate their person, but their very profession. Thirdly,
you fight not only against you self, but against the whole Kingdom and
state; for you fight to destroy the law by which every men ought to possess
and enjoy that which he had successive^y from his predecessors, or purchased
with his own money. 4, You fight against the Parliament, which the King
himself both by law and oath is bound to maintain, besides all this although
you Cavileeres have stole away the Kings Person from his Parliament, yet his
Power is their with them still: for the King is subject to his inferior Courts
of Justice, much more is he subject to his high Court of Parliament, which
commands all other inferior Courts; for if the Kings Writ be issued out of his
inferior Courts of Justice, and put in due execution, although he be a
hundred, or two hundred miles off, yet the Law goes on in as full force and
power as if he himself were personally present, and the King himself ought to
be with his Parliament, in which he ought to join with them in the ordination
and establishment of Laws. Thus you see, you fight against God, and against
Christ and all his Members, you fight against your self, and against the whole
Kingdom and State; you fight against the Law, and endeavor to destroy the
Parliament the representative body of the whole Kingdom, and so consequently
you fight against the King: [But the Lord sits in Heaven and shall laugh, he
will have you in derision] Psalm 1.2.4. He lets you alone, till the measure of
your iniquities be full, as it was with the Amorites, Genesis 15.26. Then the Lord
will power forth the cup of his fury, and will destroy them utterly because you
are so incensed and enraged against the Church and people of God, Isa 41.11.
you shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught, verse. 22. Now is not this a
foolish madness for you, to rage and vent your malice against Gods people, and
all in vain; for says the Prophet DAVID in the 2 Psalm. 1. [Why do the heathen
so furiously rage, and the people imagine a vain thing] and in the next verse
he says [the Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers take counsel
together against God and against Christ,] and although they stand up and take
counsel together, and rage and rent their malice against the people of God,
yet the Lord shall speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure as in the 5 verse, and in the 10 verse, there the Prophet gives
them wholesome instructions, and exhorts them to repentance. [Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth serve the Lord with
fear; etc. and thus you may see plainly, that all you Cavaliers do fight
against the King, and the King against himself and his Kingdoms: and now I shall
show you who you fight for, you fight for the Devil and the Pope, and Goring
and his soldiers are of the Devils Lifeguard (as his soldiers say themselves)
Goring is Captain, and the Devil is their General over that black Regiment,
whose foul sins are as black as Hell it self; for you strive to set up Popery,
Superstition, Idolatry, and Tyranny, the Kingdom of Antichrist above Christ's
Kingdom; you join with all the Papists in the Kingdom, both English, Dutch,
French, Walloons, nay Irish Rebels too, who have had their hands imbrued in the
blood of many thousand poor Protestants there, and yet these cursed Rebels must
be called his Maj. Catholic Subjects, and must fight for him against his best
Subjects for the Protestant Religion too: O monstrous, horrid, and prodigeous
prodegie, is there any man can be so sottishly ignorant as to believe it, I
shall endeavor to clear it by the testimony of many wicked Plots, Trecheries,
and Conspiracies, which the Popish faction those wicked Enemies of God have
used, conspired and contrived against the Church and People of God, in K. James
his time, and ever since the beginning of this Kings Reign, to bring their
wicked designs to pass: First, in K. James his Reign that desperate
Powder Plot, never to be forgotten, whereof many of the Contrivers suffered for
it as traitors and yet not many years after the Papists prevailed so far
with the King as to grant them a toleration of Religion, he being a timorous
fearful man granted their desires, it being done, they might the better
contrive and work some other mischief: but that tolleration did not long
continue, the King was better advised by his Council; yet notwithstanding they
would not leave their design so naked, and without hopes, but that they went
again to the King and prevailed so far with him as to grant a tolleration for
all manner of Sports and Pastimes on the Sabbath day, dancing at May-poles, and
the like fooleries; this continued till his dying day, and since revived by K.
Charles, and thus came the sluice and fludgate to be opened to all manner of
licentiousness and liberty, together with a strange wife, as if they were
twins born at a birth: then the Bishops and rotten Clergy saw which way the
King and Queen, and the young gallant Lords and Courtiers were inclined; then
they began presently to fawn upon them like so many puppie Dogs, and some
pillowes under their elbowes; and make such flattering Sermons with so much
quaintness of wit, and flashes, as they termed it, that you should have them
so hum'd up, as if they had been at the Blackfriars, or the Cockpit at a
St^ge-Play; but I must tell them, that such fawning Spannels, are far worse
then dumb Dogs; but yet they grew more and more in favor at Court, insomuch
that godly and painful conscientious Ministers were disfavoured and
discountenanced, and many of them put to s^lence that could not endure their
foolish superstitious sopperies, then there must be new Canons imposed on them
for a Church Government; the Communion Table must be turned Altar-wise
forsooth, where you might see so much bowings, curchings, and cringings, as if
they were going to dance an Antic; but yet they endeavored to make the people
believe, that Gods special pre^ents was there, and these actions were a part
of Gods Worship, when alas they worshipped they knew not what like unto the woman
of Samaria, John 4. [where she told our Savior Christ, that our Fathers
worshipped in this Mountain and Jerusalem is the place where men ought to
worship; but our Savior Christ says unto her, [woman believe me the hour
comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the
Father; ye worship ye know not what;] but the hour comes, and now is, when
the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth: then after
this they must have the new Oath, etc, that men should swear to that they know
not, or if they refused it at their own peril be it and so many an honest man
suffered deeply for it: then after this began all the Monopolies that could be
devised To back Pattents, and Soap Pattents, and the like and by this time the
Court was grown to a mighty height of pride, Superstition and Idolatry; and
sometimes you might find the Bishop of Canterbury at White Hall to see a Masque
or a Stage Play on the Sabbath Day in the Afternoon insomuch that it was a
great grief to the godly to see Popery so countenanced, and creep in by
degrees, yet durst not speak against it, for fear of punishment in the high
Commission Court, either by silencing or by suspention: But then it pleased God
after a little while, our Brethren the Scots had a fellow-feeling of our
miseries, and somewhat sensible of their own, what would follow after; then they
began with their own Bishops, and presently took them off, of their Episcopal
Dignities; then our Bishops began to stir and wince and presently must labor
with the King to call a Parliament in all post-hast, certain Articles of
Church Government must be propounded unto them, and a new book of Prayer sent,
but the Scots refusing their Popish kind of Discipline, would not condescend
thereunto; then presently a Proclamation of Rebellion must go forth against
them; the Parl. must be dissolved, an Army must be raised to stop this
Rebellion all manner of unjust taxes and imposition must be laid upon the poor
Subjects, as Coat and conduct money, and the like; the unjust pressing of Train
Soldiers, and buying and selling them by Deputy Lieutenants, and Popish
Commanders, like horses in Smithfield: then the King must go himself in Person
into Scotland; the Nobility and Gentry must wait on him; the Bishops and rotten
Clergy, whose war it was, must contribute large sums of money to uphold their
Hierarchy; hence it came to pass, that it was called Bellum Episcopale; but
howsoever they found the Scots a stout and sturdy Nation, their cause being
good they met us upon our English ground; then the Bishops found it not
according to their expectation, a treaty of Peace must be proclaimed, and a
Pacification must be concluded the Scots received into his Maj. gracious
favor, and called by this Epethite, our Brethren the Scots, then there must be
a Parliament summoned, differences must be composed and reconciled, there must
be an Act of Oblivion betwixt our Brethren the Scots and Us and the Kingdoms
must be settled in peace and tranquillity, but that the Lord had otherwise
determined it: the Parliament began, and had not sat long, but presently the
Rebellion in Ireland burst forth, their bloody Plots being contrived
beforehand, and what they did they had good warrant for it under the Kings own
Hand and Seal (as they said) but certainly it was signed with C. R. and it
might very well be so, for a Porter kept the Seal as I said before, but it did
not always lie dorment with Endimion, but howsoever Delinquents must be
punished here in England by the Parl. Straffords head must be cut off, Finch
and Windebank must fly for it, an Act had passed for the continuance of this
Parl. and for a tryannal Parliament under the Kings own Hand, signed with C. R.
so that it could not be dissolved; after this, the King with his Cavaliers came
to the Parl. to demand the five members and Kymbolton as traitors, and
proclaimed them so, but being crossed and disappointed of his purpose and
resolution, he returned in much wrath to White Hall, where the Queen was
exceedingly vexed and troubled, being crossed in her design; then the Bishops,
with the Popish, Spanish, and French Factions, together with the Monopolists,
and such as were not Parliament proof, seduced the King from his Parl. into the
North Country, the Standard must be set up at Nottingham, the Commission of
Array must be put in execution in those Heathenish Northern Counties by the E.
of Newcastle, and others of the like stamp; the Commission of Array must b^ put
in execution in the West Country by the Marquis of Hartford, and Hopton, such
as had a kind of profession of Religion, having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, and they as the Devils Instruments set a work, drew
on all their ungodly Tenants, and acquaintance, which were not grounded upon
good principals, to be on that side; Rupert and Maurice must be Overseers of
the ruins of their Unckles Kingdoms; they must see the ruins of those who
gave them their first milk as it were, and have paid for the very breeding of
them ever since they were born: Thus I have showed you who you fight for, what
sort of people you side withal, and how and where the King have raised his
Armies; he has got them from all parts of the Earth even among the very worst
of the Sons of men, the very scum of the Earth (as it were a company of
Dammee-boyes) such heathenish and ungodly wretches, as if he had raked Hell,
and scum'd the Devil for them, and so from Bellum Episcapale, it was come to
be Bellum Regale: the Bishops stirred up the Wales, and the King with his
Monopo ists blowed them up into a flame. I had almost forgot the cessation of
arms in Ireland (after the surrender of Bristol) a most divellish Plot, hatched
in the bottom of Hell it self, merely to cut the throats of the rest of the
Protestants, and do the like for us if they can; for the greatest Rebels that
were in that grand Rebellion were sent for hither, and received into great
favor, and called his Maj. Catholic Subjects: then after the cessation of
arms in Ireland, there must be a new Fast proclaimed here in England, as if all
had been well in Ireland, but it was for nothing else but to blind the eyes of
the world, to make them believe it was out of pure zeal to the Protestant
cause, and the public good of his Maj. Kingdoms; but certainly your Fast was
invented of your selves; Did you fast un^o me says the Lord? do I approve it?
and when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did you not eat for your selves,
and drink for your selves? Zach. 7.5, 6. you did abstain according to your own
fantisies, and not after the prescript of the Law of God, nor yet looking upon
the right object for which Fasting and Humiliation was ordained, and so I pass
to the other particulers, which shall be very brief in the handling; because I
know that any thing that has a savor of Religion and Godliness will be very
tedious to you Cavaliers, although Godliness is profitable to all things, it
has the promise of this life, and of that which is to come. I shall give you a
hint of the particulers, and but a little touch them and so come to the
application according to the Times, and so conclude. First, you say that
Papists and Irish Rebels are better subjects to the King then the Parliament
are: and that the Parliament seek to deprive him of his Prerogative Royal his
Sinck-Ports and Shipping, you say also, that they do of right belong to the
King only, and are to be at his disposing, or else you would not fight for him;
Furthermore, you do believe that the Parliament are Protestants, but because
there are so many Sects and Schisms amongst them, that they are far worse then
Papists and Irish Rebels for you say they raise up arms against the King and
seek to deprive him of his rights and privileges: And lastly, you do believe
that if the Parliament should be destroyed, that you should enjoy the same Law
still as before, and that you shall enjoy all your own with advantage, if you
stick close to the King, and help him to destroy the Parliament rebels and
traitors. Now if it be so, that the Parliament do seek to deprive the King of
his Prerogative Royal his Sinck-Ports and Shipping as you say they do; then
certainly they are worse then Papists and Irish Rebels, but the Parliament have
always strived to maintain him in all these, witness those many Petitions
sent unto him in the North, with this gracious Epethite, Your sacred Majesty,
etc. with many solicitations, and invitations, expressing much sorrow for his
absence, with loyalty, obedience and fidelity toward him humbly praying his
Sacred Majesty to return home unto them and forsake those wicked Councillors
that they might receive condign punishment according to their several
offenses, ergo, the Parliament are his best Subjects; for his Sink-Ports and
Shipping do not of right belong unto him only but to the whole Kindgdom and
State in general for their preservation from all foreign invasion; for if so
be they did of right belong unto Him only, then he might join with those wicked
Councillors that are about him (without the knowledge or advise of his good
Council) to let in the Turk or any foreign Enemy to invade his Kingdoms and
would do it, rather then to be crossed in their wills; for I am persuaded, that
they had rather the Turk or the Pope should enjoy his Crown, then the
Parliament, together with all his best Subjects, should enjoy their Laws,
Liberties, and Privileges; which does evidently appear by his entertaining so
many Popish Rebels, and Traitors, and all to cut the throats of his poor
Protestant Subjects, but certainly he have had many a free pardon and
indulgence for these things, and those many Declarations, Proclamations, and
Protestations, for of all that ever was yet set forth in his Name, there has
not been any performance at all in the least tittle, if it be so that you can
tell me of any one Proclamation or Declaration that has been performed on his
part, then will I turn Cavaleer, and join with you to fight against the
Parliament; and as for His Prerogative Royal so much talked off, certainly it
was ever maintained by the Law, and what would become of it, if the Parliament
should be destroyed; besides the glory of a King, is to govern His Kingdoms
with his Subjects love; and Mercurius Problematicus will tell you, that the
safest Armor for a King is his Subjects love, and a good headpiece and if he
had had such Armor, he need not have set up his Standard, nor put the
Commission of Array in execution, which was done contrary to Law, unless it
had been against a foreign Enemy; for what necessity was there for the
execution thereof, when as the Parliament had made provision for the defense of
the whole Kingdom, against any foreign Enemy, such was their provident care
for the Kingdoms safety, but that the Lord had a scourage for his People for
their sins, and made you Cavaliers to be the Executioners thereof, but it was
to bring them more near unto himself, and although you rob, plunder, and
spoil them of all their goods and good Name, yet they will be but afflictions
unto them and will take away their sin; for by this the Iniquity of Jacob
shall be purged, Isai 27.9. and this is all the fruit of it; nay sometimes the
Lord sets wicked Kings to reign over his People etc.

But I hasten and this much I can assure you, that the Parliament have always
stood faithfully for the Vindication of the Kings Honor, Crown and Dignity,
for His Laws, Rights, and Privileges, for the Liberty of the Subject, and
Privileges of Parliament, as much as ever any PARLIAMENT did since the
Kingdom ever Being.

And whereas you scandalize them by the Name of Schismatics, Roundheads,
Rebels, and Traitors, I can assure you they are Religious, Godly, and Holy
Patriarks, placed there by God him else for the Vindication of his own Honor
and Glory: for they endeavor a Reformation, which is the main cause of your
inveterate hatred and malice against them.

You cannot endure such a curb for your sins, and your old course of living,
which you so often accustomed your selves unto, which makes all you Cavaliers
to hate a Reformation, you are so opposite to the Doctrine of Christ; but
commonly where God will have his Church, there the Devil will have his Chapel,
and you Cavaliers are as Instruments and Fellow Laborers, set on work by him,
against the Church and People of God; and although there are Errors in the
Church now, (as there has bin in the Apostles times) yet it is but error in
judgment and opinion, but we will agree in the Fundamentals, and it is sometimes
necessary that there should be errors, that the truth may the better appear in
its luster and glory, and shine the more clearly in its purity; besides, if the
Parl. and their Armies are Rebels and Traitors to the King as you say they are,
yet I am confident their Rebellion is lawful as the case stands; for if you do
but look into the 2 of Kings 17.7. there you shall find that Hezekiah rebelled
against the King of Ashur, and served him not, and yet he prospered in all
things he took in hand, he put down the brazen Serpent, and destroyed their
Idols, and this you may see clearly in the text, that it was for their
Idolatry: Then how can you look to prosper in your Armies, where Idolatry is
set up, and so highly prised amongst you: but the Lord sees your doings, and
puts up all your iniquities in a Bag; and although you may prosper and flourish
for a while, yet the Lord will suddenly cut you off: for the very prayers and
supplications of his servants will ascend up unto Heaven, which will cause the
Lord to make you destroy one another, as he did the Children of Moab and Ammon,
2 Chr. 20.23. certainly the Lord will be glorified in his own work, and will
deliver his People out of your hands; so if you look into the 32. chap. of the
same Book of Chron. there you shall find how Zenacharis King of Ashur came to
war against Judah and Jerusalem, and if you please to read the whole Chapter
throughout, it will be worth your pains there you shall find how Zenacharis
blasphemed God saying What God is be that can deliver his people out of my
hands, and this is just the condition of you Cavaliers; for you will blaspheme
the Name of God, and are so over-sweld with pride, that you think your selves
able to resist and overcome even God himself, and comparing foolish and vain
Idols (which were invented and made by Man) to the living God, as in the 19.
verse. of that chap. and in the 20. verse. there you shall see how Hezekiah and
the Prophet Isaiah prayed unto the Lord against these things, and cried unto
Heaven; and in the 21. verse. there you shall find the issue and success they
had by prayer, the Lord heard their prayers, for he sent an Angel and
destroyed all the valiant men, and the Princes, and the Captains of the Host of
the King of Ashur, and what became of the King of Ashur and his mighty great
Army, which contained in number one hundred fourscore and five thousand: why
surely they came to nothing, for they destroyed one another, and the King
himself returned with shame to his own Land, and as the text says, when he
came to the house of his God they that came out of his own bowels slew him
there with the sword; intimating unto us, how prevalent and effectua l the
prayers of the faithful are with God, especially against such Tyrants, for
where a Tyrant and an Idolator reigns, there can be no peace and quietness;
for the very plagues of God are always among such people: And thus you see how
these Kingdoms are disquieted by Tyranny and Idolatry, and what distractions
and distempers there are, and have bin even among Kings and Princes, and mighty
men of this world and you your self have a share in the exercise of their
cruelty, in upholding Idolatry and Tyranny against the people of God; and now
by this time I have showed unto you who you fight for, and what dangers you are
in both soul and body; and now I come to show you how to avoid and escape
these dangers, which shall be by way of exhortation and admonition; let me now
exhort and entreat you in the fear of the Lord to repentance and humiliation;
humble your self before the Lord in dust and ashes come out from among those
cursed Crew of Infidels, whose tongues speaks nothing but blasphemy, and so
long as thou continue there with them, thou cannot but participate of their
filthy abominations and transgression, for if you do but conive and wink at
other men's sins you are as guilty of the same sin, without reproof, as if you
your selves had personally committed it; therefore if you will avoid sin, and
escape the danger thereof, then you must shun the occasion of it, and
consequently shake off such wicked company. David said [depart from me ye
wicked, I will keep the Commandments of my God] intimating thereby, that he
could not set himself to the performance of any holy duty as he ought, so
long as such wicked company were about him; yea, it has been a grief to the
godly to have bin in the company of ungodly persons, as Let living in Sodom,
when he saw their filth and abominations it vexed his righteous soul; and this
was it that made David bemone himself, and his estate and condition, when he
was constrained to live among the uncircumcised people: [Woe is me, that I
remain in Mesech, and to dwell in the Tents of Kedar, my soul has long dwelt
among those that be enemies to Peace. Now you see how careful these god^y men
were to shun and avoid the lewd oompany of the wicked, and if you will imitate
them in goodness, you must carefully labor to live in the practice of
holiness, and avoid the company of such Idolatrous Papists and Atheists as are
amongst you.

Sir, I have wrote to you somewhat largely, and the truth of it is far more
largely then I intended, but yet I hope it will not be labor in vain, but that
it may please God to make me an Istrument of your conversion, if you will but
carefully, diligently, and seriously read over this poor weak piece, and weigh
every particular according to its several weight, and conscionably practice it
in your li^e and conversation, walking in newness of life, and obedience to
the Gospel of Christ, with earnest and fervent prayers to the Almighty God of
heaven, to create a new heart and renew a right spirit within you, and if we
humble our selves, and turn from our wicked ways then the Lord will be
merciful to us, and will heal our Land, 2 Chronicles 7.14. and if otherwise, that
we do not humble our selves, it will prove to be misery upon miseries and we
shall heap up wrath against the day of wrath; and so the Lord of his mercy
direct your heart, and divert his Judgments from Us and give us patience to
undergo these afflictions, and then the Lord in his due time will accomplish
his own ends, and send us a happy and blessed peace, by a blessed Reformation.
Now I would entreat you in the name of the Lord, and for your own souls
healths sake, that you will take this my counsel and admonitions to shake of
your wicked company, or if it be possible to reduce them to the obedience of
the Parliament; but if there be any thing herein expressed whereof you make any
scruple or doubt of the truth of it, I shall be ready to give you more full
and ample satisfaction, if you please to appoint the time and place, (God
willing) I will give you a meeting, or any Cavalier whatsoever, there to use
liberty of Conscience, and freedom of Spirit to dispute the point without any
manner of wrong or violence, each to other, and that there may be nothing but
reality intended betwixt us, let there be sufficient engagements to each and I
shall for ever remain

SIR, Yours to command, FRANCIS FREEMAN.

For Mr. Francis Freeman in Dunster, these. Three -- in Print.
Sir,
I Have perused your Manuscript, and would willingly have thoroughly weighed
(as you drsire) your (as you well call them) poor weeak endeavors: but truly
they proved weightlesse, and however you please to style them, more powerful
then ordinary, even converting me from my self sometimes to Democritus, then
to Heraclitus, and from him again to the former, making me smile, pity, and
again laugh at your ignorance, impudency and folly, even in one and the same
minute. I had thought to have concealed your shame in part, and not have
hazarded the becoming equally ridiculous with you, in going about to blaze what
your self have more then sufficiently already done; I would willingly have
kept silence, and not answered a word: but finding by late speeches over the
walls, that you take occasion thereby, to think wickedly, that I am even such a
one as your self, and that your frivolons (what shall I call them) are
unanswerable, and also harkening to the wise man's advice, who wills to answer
a fool sometimes according to his folly, lest he be (over) wise in his own
conceit: I have forced my self now (though unwillingly) to return answer unto
some of your particulars (to all were endless:) but (believe me) where to
begin, what first to say, or what order to observe in answering so disorderly a
piece, I well know, not: so great is your confusion, so immethodicall your
proceeding, that I should bewray a great deal of indiscretion, should I
endeavor to tract you: but jacta est alea) we must on some way or other. At all
adventure then, we will undertake your first, -- you call it a Problem, (you are
well read in Aristotle, it seems, learned you nothing else thence but this
specious appellation?)

Surely this needed no Oedipus, the meerest Davus in our Castle had been able
enough to have shaped you a ready answer thereunto: however (thanks to your
charity) it seems you will help, if not prevent us therein: for you answer in
our names, a Gentleman and a Soldier; and we must take these two terms
forsooth on your bankrupt credit, for convertible, and so naturally, or rather
supernaturally joined together, that it were impiety to sever them, as though
all Soldiers were Gentlemen, and all Gentlemen Soldiers, -- risum teneatis
amici: A quaint device to Gentilize your Pedlar, Dishmaker, and the like, and
to make the young Squire a Martialist. But Lord, how this fine military youth
must be qualified, what precise rules he must follow, he must, and he must, he
must not and he must again, (any thing I warrant you but fight for his King)
but whence learnt you this? out of Alian the young Artillery man, or your new
Edenburgian, trow? Fie on it, are you not ashamed to dally thus, and confound
things so foolishly together? speaking of a mere Soldier, simply considered
as such, must we presently conceive him metamorphosed, and become a spiritual
one? Was Hector, Alexander, Caesar, or any of the Othoman race, ever so? and
yet they were Gentlemen, they were Soldiers, if we may confide in their
Heraldry; were they acquainted with, did they observe these rules? But why
trifle I thus, and wonder at nothing? The spirit we know, is at your command,
the flesh your handmaid, and you love copulation hugely: surely, you were at
some conventicle when you thought on this; but did not you do the Devils
drudgery then too? Speak truth, and shame the Devil, and never wrest any text
of Scripture so profanely, to put your bastards on him, but father them your
selves a Gods name, they may prove babes of grace; ten to one but some of your
holy sisters were their mothers, however to the pure all things are pure, and
your faith is strong, and can easily conceit what you would have be, as though
it were, even as easily as his that first (I know not what to call it) turned
Quadrata rotundis. -- But hark, Sir, should we be so bold with you, as to ask
you the same question, What profession are you of? what would you answer, a --
a -- a, or as you do for us, a Gentleman and a Soldier? Good truth, we can
hardly believe you, not that our charity is pinioned, but out of reverence to
the truth, speaking much otherwise in their actions: for truly (for all your
late Bug-beares) you have showed very little of the one, but far less of the
other since your sitting down before us: we could instance your incivill,
inhumane, and treacherous dealing with -- you know whom, contrary to faith
given, contrary to all Law of Arms. But let that pass, the General no doubt,
in due time, will thank you for it; and we our selves may ere long peradventure
make you requital.

Your second question is, Of what Religion are you? and you answer for us (more
then you can for your selves) The Protestant. Well, we acquiesce therewith, and
seeing you have nothing to say against us therein, (which may be well scor'd up
too) we will pass on in quiet, and not make an enemy where we find none, as you
do. Yet we cannot choose here but smile at your weakness, or rather
wilfulness, in going about hence so absurdly to countenance your rebellious
covenant, and your quoting of the Prophet, Esra 10.3.8. to prove God knows
what. Brother, brother, this was a great oversight, and confirms clearly what
upon good ground we gues'd before, that you pin your faith more closely on
other men's quotations, and marginall notes, then on the Text it self.

But to let these things and the like pass, and to come to the grand question
between us, viz. Whether ye be Rebels, or no? We confidently a verre ye are;
and ye can but faintly, and as it were with blushes deny it: for if ye be so,
ye say, ye are confident your rebellion is lawful, the case standing as now it
does. And why so confident, forsooth? Why? because Ezechiah rebelled against
the King of Assyria, ye say, and prospered. O ridiculous! Did ever any
understanding man produce examples as rules or proofs of the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of a thing in controversy? let me tell you Sir, I think none but
your self. Examples may illustrate indeed, but prove nothing at all. But
because you add, As the case now stands, pray, let us examine how it stands,
and what compare, or disparity there is between yours and Ezechia's rebellion
as you call it: Ye were (or should have been) subjects, so were ye born, I am
sure, and enjoyd such wholesome laws, such large privileges, liberties, and
immunities, as few subjects in any neighboring Kingdom can boast the like.
His Majesty, your only and undoubted Sovereign, such a Prince as Envy
herself could not, till she borrowed your tongues, tax with any personally
addicted vice (humane infirmity the best may have) such a one as went not about
any way to alter either law or religion, to infringe your privileges, or debar
ye of any the least your just claimed immunities, but endeavored only to
preserve his own regal authority, defend his loyal subjects, and rule all
accodring to the common and known laws of the Kingdom: and yet ye, because ye
might not have your own ways to innovate, and turn upside down all things both
in Church and State, must needs rebel, rob him of his shipping, Ports,
Castles, Cities, Towns, Lands, Revenues, and all, driving him out of doors,
leaving him not so much as one of his own houses to put his head in, nay, and
worse yet, persecuting him from place to place, endeavoring still, as much as
in ye lies, not only to take the crown from his hea^, but even his head from
his shoulders too. And thus stands the case with you.

Let us look upon Ezechiah, good Ezechia, a t^ow sincere worshipper of the
immortal God, (not likely then to run into so horrid a sin) a free absolute
King himself (a condition somewhat incompatible with rebellion) legally
succeeding his fore fathers in the throne, and no way subject (for ought I can
find) to Senacharib, that hethenish, hellish tyrant, otherwise then the Lamb is
to the Lion, or the weaker to the stronger. Yea, but he rebelled (say you)
against him, the text is downright, and seems plainly to imply, that he was
his subject. He rebelled. But stay, Sir, all is not gold that glisters, you will
play at small game I see rather then sit out, when you c^nnot explisitly prove,
you will implicitly believe, and (as one ready to sink) catch at any thing,
though never so weak) that may but seem to uphold your accursed rebellion. But
tell me, friend are you so well acquainted with the original, or have you so
thoroughly conversed with the 72. and the learned train of orthodoxal
expositers, that you can of your self, or from any joint consent of theirs,
assure me, that this word must needs be tied up so strictly, and rendered
precisely thus, and no otherwise? I presume you will not say so: for, Sir, I can
assurre you, that language was freeborn; and cannot endure such strict
restrain; it will, it must have its liberty: and this word may be, nay and is,
I have been informed, elsewhere somewhat otherwise rendered. Me thinks you being
so great a Marginalist, might have observed some such thing, and your charity
have taught you the rule in such cases, to make the best construction,
especially when so good a man is concerned in it Surely the holy Penman hereof
meant nothing less, then to appeach his good King of that bewitched sin
here; for it is plain enough, he was not in the least kind guilty thereof.
However, let this be taken notice of to your shame, that he guilty or not
guilty (policy so requiring) acknowledges a fault, and submits to the tyrants
pleasure, 2 Kings 18 14. (your good King could never find ye yet guilty of so
much ingenuity or grace:) but I observe withal, that though he acknowledge an
offense, (now offense may be taken when not justly given) yet he will not
acknowledge himself a rebel; he says indeed, I have offended, but adds not,
in rebelling against thee, which he would assuredly have done, had he known
himself guilty therein: fear may make him do much, but not so much, not
acknowledge himself, rebel contrary to all truth. But when, I pray you, does
his supposed rebellion appear to you, by what circumstances is it manifested?
For my part I know not, and I think he must be wiser then you that can tell me.

It Is true indeed that Ahaz his Father being vexed by Israel and Aram on the
North, the Edomites and Philistines on the South, and so in soore distress,
entreated aid of Tiglat Phileser the Assirian, and to the end he might the more
readily obtain it, sent him the silver and gold both of the Temple, and his
Exchequer the Assyrian came, destroyed Rezin at Damascus, and so rid him of
some of his fear: but his other enemies were not strong, so that Ahaz was
little the better for what he did, nay far the worse, for besides those his
former enemies, the Assyrian himself being become a new one, distresseth him,
2 Chronicles. 28.20. and helped him not, verse the 21. yet must p^ore Ahaz say
nothing, but for fear of displeasing the Tyrant, give him more gold: Bu^ what
of all this? nay, suppose further, that the Lion saing he had done him a
curtysie, and he not daring to den ieit, out of fear promise to give him a
yearly tribute in requital, (which yet, neither the text, nor any ancient
historian I have met with acknowledge) is Ezechia bound to perform it? would
not you if you had been in his case have endeavored to have shaken off such a
Yoke? and yet have thought your self free enough from any the least blemish
of rebellion? especially he being neither your native nor any way lawful
Prince: I believe you would: and why then do you call it rebellion in him? --
But lets observe Ezechi^as proceedings: did he do as ye do? surely no, far
otherwise: he confesses an offense, submits himself, and pays the fine
imposed on him: but the proud Tyrant, not contented therewith proceeds further,
sends a great host against Ierusal^m, and under color of demanding hostages
endeavors to ensnare him and swallow up all: and what does Ezechia then? why
he betakes himself in the first place to the weapons of the Church, Prayers
and Tears, then prepares himself against the siege, and lastly that he might
be sure to go in a right path, sends to the Prophet for his advice, and being
encouraged by him sets up his resolution to stand upon his just defense, and
expect the Salvation of the Lord: O that your party had but done thus: then had
ye bin blameless, and neither Church nor State groaned under the heavy
pressures they now do: but your Spirits were of another temper, as impatient
of delay as any the least thwarting: ye must have all after your own wayward
minds, and in your own time too. And if heaven smile not, you are confident
hell will hy for Acheren in all post, the Witch of Endor must be consulted with
(Rebellion and Witchcraft are near akin) and that under a religious pretense
of speaking with the Prophet, to know the will of the Lord. But what, will the
father of lies tell truth? Yes sometimes, when he is forced to it: what comfort
thence then? Small God wot, for ye: let Iezabel speak else, and cast forth her
Problem, Had Zimri peace that killed his master? O Sir Rebel, think on this,
and tremble: take heed of a worse fire then he (conscious of his own demerits)
fired himself in, 1 King. 16.18.

How can ye be thus wilfully, thus affectedly stupid and blind? but Surdis
Canimus; ye have set up your resolution, and it must stand: let the Charmer
charm never so wisely, ye like the Adder stop your ears; yea though wisdom
her self cry aloud, ye are resolved ye will not hear: it is bootlesse
therefore for me, to use any more words: and the truth is, my patience will
hardly give me leave, if I would: -- we will but review then the strength of your
Argument, and conclude: it stands thus: Ezechiah rebelled and prosper'd,
therefore we may lawfully rebel, therefore we shall assuredly prosper: O
weakness! produce nothing but an example, to prove the lawfulness of an act
flatly forbidden, and that but one singly, grounded upon one word, ambiguous,
admitting a more candide interpretation (which in such cases is always to be
admitted) an example no way consonant to the business you aim at, but even
di^-dia-paeson differing, and making more against ye, then for ye! and can this
make you so confident that your rebellion is lawful? fie on it, fie on it, God
open your eyes, and turn your hearts: surely if your hands prove as weak as
your heads: you will gain but little here: but I forget my self: yet nondum
manuum de tabula, for taking notice of your kind expectative conclusion, I can
not choose but meet you in the same tract of Charity: -- Let me entreat you
therefore, in the Name of God, to lay aside all prejudicacie, to weigh things
with a single heart: not to dote so much upon examples and presidents, but to
make the divine precept the rule of your actions: -- you cannot but know and
acknowledge, that Kings (though wicked as Saul, though heathen as Cyrus, Esa.
45.1. are the Lords anointed; by him they reign, Prove. 8.15. In his hand are
their hearts, and he turns them as he pleases, Prove. 21.1. Take not too much
then upon you, meddle not with Gods Prerogative: think on Abishai, and David's
neperdas to him, 1 Samuel 26.9. together, with his reason: Though that Saul were
his, and the Churches enemy, though he had a fair opportunity, and as good a
culler as could be imagined to cut him of, and though Abishai, were importunate
to have it done, yet David who best knew the will of the Lord herein, forbids
it, with a neperdas, destroy him not: the Lords anointed must not be
destroyed, no nor touched, 1 Chronicles 16.22. not a hand, not a finger to be moved
against him, no nor a foot neither, Prove. 30.31. no rising, no stirring a
foot against him: it is dangerously wicked, it is wickedly dangerous, so to do:
the Lord will not hold him guiltless that does so: think on Ioab, 1 Kings
2.28. the 2. Traitors Ester 2.23. Absolon 2 Samuel 18.14. Sheba 2 Samuel 20.22. and
the like; and tell me did these prosper in their rebellion? surely no, but came
all of them to untimely (though merited, ends, and no doubt so shall all such
as tread in their steps: beware then in time, and take example now by others;
least ye be made your selves hereafter examples unto others: it is high time for
ye to return into the right way, ye have stragled too long already, Salius e
dimedia via etc. it is better late then never: be not ashamed to acknowledge an
error, when ye perceive your selves in it, it is no dishonor: St. Aug. got
more credit by his retractations, then any other piece he wrote: and let not
any by or wordly respect hinder ye, for what will it profit a man to gain the
whole World, with the glory thereof, and lose his own Soul (as all such as go
on in this accursedly cursed rebellion, are likely, without Gods great mercy,
to do) think upon these things, seriously consider them, and it will not
repent thee, God in his mercy, dirvert his judgments from us, and guide all
our feet in the way of Peace.

Your Servant, Fran: Windham.

To the Governor of Dunster Castle, these present.
SIR,
I Have received a Letter (as I suppose) signed with your own hand; but
composed by those two scandalous malignant priests of Baal, Adrie and King:
pretending it to be an answer to that which I formerly sent you: when indeed
there was no answer at all; but a most lamentable frothy piece of nonsense, as
if your heads had been gvilly of a cup of muddy ale, a bundell of stuff
bumbasted together, with three or four mouth-fulls of Lattin, taken upon trust
by you without due examination: subscribed with your own hand; for which I
shall hereafter chide you, and shall advise you to take better council, and
not to follow such blind guides that shall build with one hand and destroy
with the other, which argues abundance of imbecility and weakness in you; I
shall therefore set it forth in print, that the world may but judge of your
folly, and the title of it shall be Three -- in print: but what shall I say,
but use the very same words of our Savior Christ in the 15. of Matthew 14. And
if the blind lead the blind they both shall fall into the ditch. Truly you
may justly be compared unto the false Prophets spoken of in the 5. of Jeremiah
and the last verse, the Prophets Prophecy falsely: and the Priests bear rule by
their means. and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end
thereof? surely your end will be miserable, unless it please God to give you
grace speedily to repent and amend your life; for you wrest the Scriptures to
your own perdition: not knowing the ways of God because they are spiritually
discerned, therefore let me advise you to cast those wicked scandalous Priests'
over the walls; it may be a means to avert Gods judgments and somewhat abate
the rage and fury of him that may yet prove to be.

Your friend, Francis Freeman.

Postscript.
There is no news worth the vvriting, but that Hereford and Westchester are
taken, and Colonel Birch made Governor of Hereford, but I cannot as yet
rightly inform you who is Governor of VVestchester, if I could I should
gladly impart it unto you.

I have sent also a Catalogue of all those Parliament Rebels and Traitors, as
you call them, which are to be made Dukes.
Northumberland Essex. Pembroke. Warwick.
Marquesses.
Salsbury Manchester
Earls.
Say and Seal Fairfax Wharton. Roberts. Howard. VVillowby
Viscount.
Densi^ Hollis.
Barons.
General Fairfax. Lieutenant General Cromwell. Sir William Waller. Sir Henry
Vane, Senior.



There is some other news flying, but how true it is I know not: and that is,
that Goring, Hopton, and Miller, are gone into France. But the next news, God
willing, I shall bring my self, and we will have it all in a Diurnall.

FINIS.

