The Promise of God Proclaimed; Which is Christ the everlasting Covenant of God
to the Jews, Gentiles, and all people upon the earth, which God spoke by his
Prophets, and was preached by the Apostles, and by his Servants and Messengers
sent forth since for Barbados, New England, Virginia, the East and West
Indies, and the South and North parts of the World, to go to them all.
THE promise of the most High God that lives for evermore, which he promised to
them Gentiles by his prophets in the days of old, Isa. 11. 10. the Earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, mark, and in
that day, mark, there shall be a root of Iesse, Iesses root which shall stand
for an ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek, mark, to it shall
the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious.

Second Promise, behold says the Lord God that lives for ever, behold my
servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights, I have put my
spirit upon him, and the Isles shall wait for his Law, he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles, mark, judgment to them, though they lived as the
wild beasts, this is the promise which sets up judgment in the Earth, and
the Isles shall wait for his Law, he that Creates the Heavens, the Lord God, and
he that spreads forth the Earth, and that which comes out of it, and he that
gives breath unto the people, and spirit to them that dwelt therein, and has
called his Covenant in righteousness, and will uphold his hand; I will give
thee for a Covenant of the people, and a light to the Gentiles to open the
blind eyes, and to bring the prisoner out of the prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the prisonhouse, Isa. 42. 1. 6, 7.

The Lord he will not give his glory to graven Images, and his Covenant of
light is a new thing he will bring to pass in the Earth, who measures the waters
in the hollow of his hand, and meteth out Heaven with a span, and comprehends
the dust of the Earth in a measure, and weighs the Mountains in scales and
the Hills in a balance, the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, that is the God of
the spirits of all flesh, and has all souls in his hand, God that lives for
ever and ever, whose hand is his power, all Nations are as a drop of a bucket,
and are accounted as the dust of a balance, behold he takes up the Isles as a
very small thing, all Nations before him are as nothing, and they are accounted
to him as less then nothing and vanity, then to whom will you liken God that
lives for ever and ever, Isa. 40.

And the living God says concerning Christ his Covenant, is it a light thing
that thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and restore
the preserved of Israel? I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles (mark,
the Heathen) which shall gather Israel, and be my Salvation to the ends of the
Earth, to him that the Nations shall abhor and man shall despise, but thou
shall say to the prisoners go forth, and to them that be in darkness show your
selves, then the Heavens shall sing, and the Earth shall be joyful, Isay 49. I
will lift up my hand says the Lord God that lives for evermore to the
Gentiles, mark, the heathen, and set up my standard to the people, ver. 22.

And thou shall break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed
shall inherit the Gentiles, and the desolate Cities shall be inhabited, Isa.
54. mark, the Gentiles shall inherit the seed, and so become heirs; and this is
the Covenant says the Lord God that lives for ever, my spirit that is upon
thee.

Arise shine, for light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen, the
Gentiles shall come to thy light, and the Kings to the brightness of thy
rising, and thou shall see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear and be
enlarged because the abundance of the sea shall be converted, mark, the Sea
unto thee, and the force of the Gentiles shall come unto thee, and these shall
show forth the praises of the Lord that lives for ever, and the Isles shall wait
for me says the Lord, Isa. 60. 2. 5.

And says the Lord that loves judgment, that makes the everlasting Covenant
with the Jews, their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their
offspring among the people; rejoice in the Lord my soul and be joyful in God
that lives for ever, for he cloatheth me with a garment of salvation, and
covers me with the robes of righteousness, who causes righteousness and
peace to spring forth before all Nations, the Gentiles shall see thy
righteousness and all Kings thy glory, and righteousness shall go forth as
brightness, and salvation as a Lamp that burns, the Lord God shall be an
everlasting light unto thee, and thy God thy glory, and the Lord God shall be
thy everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended, and thy
people shall be all righteous, and they shall inherit the Land for ever, the
branch of my planting, the work of my hand that it may be gloryfied for ever, a
little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, I the Lord
will hasten it in its time, Isa. 61. 9. chap. 62. 2.

I will gather all Nations says the living God and tongues, and they shall
come to see my glory, and I will set him for a sign among them, to the Isles
and them afar off that have not heard my fame, and they that heard my glory
shall declare my Name among the Gentiles, as the new Heavens and the new Earth
that I make shall remain before me says the Lord, so shall your seed and your
Name remain, Isa 66. 19. 22. For thou O Lord that made the Heavens, Ier. 14.
The Gentiles shall come from the ends of the Earth, and say surely our Fathers
inherited lies wherein there is no profit, Ier. 16. here the Gentiles come to
see their own vanities with the light that comes from God; Proclaim among the
Gentiles says the mighty God, let the Heathen be awakned, come all ye Heathen
and gather your selves together, let the Heathen be awakned and come up to the
valley of Iehosaphat, for there I will judge them round about, for the harvest is
ripe and the press is full, and the sickle is ready, Joel, 3. and my name shall
be great among the Heathen says the Lord of hosts, from the rising of the Sun
to the going down of the same, shall my Name be great among the Gentiles, in
every place shall incense be offered to my Name, Mat. 1.

Mat. 12 He shall show judgment to the Gentiles, and he shall not strive, a
bruised reed he will not break, nor the smoking flax he will not quench, and
shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles; and Simeon Prophesies who said his
eyes had seen his Salvation, a light to enlighten the Gentiles, and the glory of
Israel, Luke. 2.

The Lord sent Paul atter he had opened his eyes and had chosen him to bear his
name among the Gentiles, Act. 11. and many of the Gentiles received the word of
the mighty God, through Paul, and God granted repentance unto the Gentiles unto
life, and the Gentiles glorified the word of the Lord as many as knew the life
eternal, and the Gentiles besought the Apostles to preach the word, Acts. 13.
And Christ suffered and rose again, that he might show light to the people and
the Gentiles according to the Prophets, Act. 26. and so many of the Gentiles
were called in the days of the Apostles and came to see the Glory of God.

And the Gentiles that seeked not after the righteousness have obtained to the
righteousness of faith, and the Gentiles did by nature the things contained in
the Law which judged the Jews, that had the Law, Romans 9. For both Jews and
Gentiles was concluded under sin that he might have mercy upon all, and God was
the God of the Gentiles as well as the Jews, Romans 3. So glory and honor be to
the Jew and Gentile that does seek the glory and honor and eternal life, Romans
2. And that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, as it is written,
for this cause I will confess thy Name among the Gentiles and sing forth thy
Praise, and Isaiah says there shall be a root of Iesse, mark, shall a rise and
shall reign over the Gentiles, and in him shall the Gentiles trust, and God
revealed his Son in the Apostle that he might preach him among the Gentiles,
who is now revealed that he might be preached, and the blessing of Abraham
might come upon the Gentiles that they might receive the promise of the spirit
through faith, Gal. 1. and 3. chap. That the Gentiles should be heirs and
partakers of the promise of Christ by the Gospel, Ephesians, 3. To whom God would
make known what is the riches of his Promise to the Gentiles, Christ in you the
hope of glory, Col. 1. And great is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in
the flesh, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World that it might
be fulfilled that was written, the Land of Zebulon and Naphtali by the
Sea-costs beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles spoken of by the Prophet
Isaiah, they that sat in darkness and the Region and shadow of death, to them
Light sprang forth, Mat. 4.

Paul in his confession said, he was sent to open the eyes of the blind, and
turn people from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, this
he confessed before the Heathen Rulers, at which they thought he had been mad,
which preached to the Gentiles Repentance, to turn to God from dead works, Act.
10, 11. chap. And Paul declared in the midst of Mars-Hill the unknown God,
which set all the Heathen in an uproar, Acts 17.

And the Lord put on Righteousness as a breast plate, and the Helmet of
salvation upon his head, and the garments of vengeance, for clothing, and clad
with zeal for a Cloak, Is^. 59. 1^.

George Fox.

London, Printed for Thomas Simmons 1660.


