A TESTIMONY Of the TRVE LIGHT Of the WORLD.

Which is given to every man that comes into the world, and of the true measure
of the gift of God, given to every one to profit withal.

And a True Witness, and Faithful: Witnessed of Christ Jesus unto this
generation, that every one may believe in the Light of the World, and receive
eternal Life; or that every one may be left without excuse, by the Light, which
is the condemnation of all that believe not in it, but hates it: Wherein all
may learn the way of Life, or know the condemnation from Life, into the pit of
Darkness.

Given forth for the good of all people, in pity to all souls, by him who is
not known to the world, but a stranger in it, Geo. F^x.

John 3. He that loves the Light, his deeds are wrought in God, but he that
hates the Light his deeds are evil.

LONDON Printed for Giles Calvert, and sold in his Shop at the black
Spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1657.

The Preface.
O Earth, the Testimony is true and everlasting, which God has given of the
Son, and which the Son has given of the Father, and it abides for ever; the
T^stimony of Life in all that does believe, and the Testimony of Death to all
that believe not, even the light of the world, which lights every man that
comes into the world; the entrance unto eternal life, or the condemnation into
destruction: and who ever turn from the light of the Son of God within them,
and walks not in it, goes into the Error, and into the way of Perdition; bu^
who walks in the light, stumbles not, because he sees the light of this world,
Christ Jesus, the Author and the Finisher of the Faith, and there is no other
Savior then he which was, is, and is to come, the light of the world; and
who-ever preaches a Christ to beli^ve in for salvation, who has not lighted
every man with the true light, preaches a false Christ, and not that Christ
which the Prophets and John bore witness of, and which the Apostles witnessed:
So that this is truth from the Lord God, there is no other name given for
salvation, but the name of Jesus: nor there is no other Christ Jesus, but he
which lights every man that comes into the world with the true light; and
except this Christ Jesus be revealed by the spirit of the Father within,
salvation is not received by him: Therefore, all friends who have received the
t^stimony of the light of the Son of God within you, and have believed the
report of the Father, and of the Son, hold f^st the word of that Testimony, and
dwell in it, and walk in it up to the Father of light and life: and this is the
power of God, in which you will be kept unto the day of salvation; and this is
the power of God which will keep you from all unrighteousness, and so from
condemnation: and if any turn from the light, they run into the evil, and
backslides from the Truth: and such shall bear their own shame and
condemnation, in the sight of God, and all his children: For this is the
message which was, and is, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
All that dwells in the light, their habitation is in God, and they know a hiding
place in the day of storm; and they that dwell in the light, are built upon the
rock, and cannot be moved, for who are moved or shaken, goes from the light,
and so goes from their strength, and from the power of God, and loses the peace
and the enjoyment of the presence of God; for the light is the eye by which
Gods presence is seen and felt: and all that ever com^s to the knowledge of
God, must own the light which Christ has lighted them withal, for there is no
other way to the Father of life: And this is the testimony which in the power
of the Lord has been born and given through Nations by his servants, and the
day of your visitation is upon you Nations, and Peoples: and hitherto the
Father has wrought, and the Son has wrought, and the voice of Wisdom has
been heard, but the night comes when no man can work, and all that have not
received the witn^ss which God has given concerning this Son, and all that
goes from the testimony of the light within, and continues not therein unto the
end, they shall be given up to fulfill the measure of Iniquity, and to run their
race in the way to perdition, till they be sealed in the pit of darkness and
condemnation, where there is no repentance: and the Lord God Almighty is clear
from all their blood, and their blood be upon their own head for ever, because
they hate the light, and believes not in it, nor continues not unto the end, to
walk therein. And this is the testimony which is given to me, to testify, who
is not of this wrrld, but a servant to him, whose Testimony never changes,
which is light.

London, 1st of the 11. mon. 1656. E. B.

Concerning the Light.
HEre you may perceive that be in the light, a distinguish between them that
walk in the light, the converted, and them that shines in darkness, that be
unconverted; which are the state of darkness, and the state of the Apostles
preaching to the world, and the Jews in the unconverted estate, and the estate
of the Apostles writing to them that were converted, the Believers; and the
state of them that opposed Truth, who was out of the light, as you see the Jews
which professed the Scriptures of Truth, declared forth from the Spirit of
Truth, and themselves out of it out of the Spirit; they knew not Christ the
light, the end of all the holy men of God speakings and writings, and the end
of all the types, and shadows, and figures; Him whom all the holy men of God
gave test^mony of, and the Prophets of the Lord God. To all you that now be
called Christians, and believes not in the light that enlightneth every man
that comes, and yet profess Scripture, you are in the same nature the Jews
were in, for they professed Scripture, but did not believe in the light which
did enlighten every o^e that comes into the world, Christ Jesus: So you and
the Jews being one in professing the Scriptures in words, but not believing in
the light, you be both out of Covenant, so you cannot convert the Jews, for the
conver^ing of them, is to bring them into Covenant with God, who brings them
into Covenant with God, must be in the light, and believe in the light, which
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, that all men through him
might believe: for says God, I Will give him for a Covenant of light: God speaks
by his Prophet before Christ is come, to put an end to the types and shaddows;
I Will give him for a Covenant of light to the Gentiles, to enlighten them, and
I Will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah: Mark,
a new covenant with the House of Israel and Judah, was Christ the light: So
they that hold up the first covenant, and come not to the new, they was
unconverted, for those was out of the light; so out of the light, out of
conversion: and I Will give him for a covenant of light to the Gentiles, to
enlighten them, so the Gentiles being in the light in the covenant, the Jews in
the light in the covenant, they are both one with the Father; and this throws
down the partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile, and brings them to be both one
in the covenant, in the light, and both one out of the covenant, out of the
light, and to measure the Jew and the Gentile out of the light, out of the
covenant, the Gentile shall judge the Jew, and make his circumcision
uncircumcision, for the Jews having the Law of God, and was commanded to do
such things according to the Law, and did not do them, the Gentiles doing by
nature the things contained in the Law, showing the Law of God written in their
hearts, without an outward command, so it was by Nature, for that which may be
known of God, was man^fest in them, for God showed it unto them, which when
they acted contrary to it, they knew the judgments of the Lord did come upon
them* so the Jews here having the Law in the letter, and was transgressors of
the law of the outward, he who acts contrary to that of God within him, and the
Gentiles who acted according to that of God in him, fulfilled the Law, this
judged the Jew: so the one was a command as in time, and the other was not as a
command, but he did it by nature, so according to the Apostles natural son.

So you that stumble, and say Christ Jesus does not enlighten every one that
comes into the world, that all men might believe; Mark, God said, he would
give him for a light, for a covenant to enlighten the Gentiles, and those was
called Heathen: and God said, I Will make a new covenant with the House of Israel.
These were called the people of God, and Christ was this covenant of light to
the Jews, and to the Gentiles; and the Jews not believing in this covenant, nor
the Gentiles, they were both in the unconversion, and John a man sent from God
to bear witness to the true light, he said, he was not the light, but said,
This was the true light that did enlighten every one that comes into the
world, and in Christ was life, and the life was the light of men. Ma^k, the
light of men, and the light shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not: This was he that was in the world, and the world knew him not, though
all things was made by him; and this was he that John came a witness of, that
all men through him might believe; and this the true light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, which light shines in darkness, and
da^kness comprehends it not. Now mark, it is there. What? Does it shine in
darkness, and darkness comprehends it not? Is not this the state that the
world knew him not, nor the Pharisees knew him not, though the Kingdom of
heaven was with^n them, Luk^ 17. and light shined in darkness, and darkness
comprehended it not. Her^'s the unconverted estate; so he came to his own, and
his own received him not; light shines in darkness, and darkness comprehends it
not: You were d^rkness says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. but now are ye light in the
Lord. Walk as children of the light. Now mark, Here Is sometimes: here is times
of darkness, but now they were light in the Lord. Now here was the converted
and the unconverted, and these were to have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness; the light shines in darkness, though darkness does not
comprehend it, and ye are sometimes darkness, and light shines in d^rkness, and
darkness does not comprehend it; there is the unconverted estate, and the
converted esta e: an^ God has commanded light to shine out of da^kness, and
has shined in our hear^s, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ. Now mark, here is light shines out of darkn^ss,
God had commanded it to shine out of darkness: What? Was it not there then? Now
it is come forth; before it was in darkness, light shined in darkness, and God
has commanded it to shine out of darkness, and sometimes ye were darkness, but
are the light of the Lord, which light that shines in the heart, gives the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God, here is the conver^ed estate. Now
while light shines in darkness, and darkness does not comprehend it, there is
the unconverted estate; 2 Cor. 4. John 1. and the Apostle was sent to turn
people from the darkness to the light, from the power of Satan to God. Now this
was the estate of preaching to them while they were in darkness, whom the God
of the world ha^h blinded their eyes, left the light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ should shine in them. Mark, shine in them, therefore the god of the
world has blinded the eye of the mind, and to such the Gospel is hid; for the
light darkness cannot comprehend, while the god of the world has blinded your
minds; therefore the Apostle was sent to turn them from darkness to the light,
light shines in darkness, so the god of the world has blinded them, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel should shine in them. Now wh^re it shines in the
heart, it gives the knowledge of the glory of God, where it comes fo^th, now
where it shines in darkness, and darkness comprehends it not, there is the god of
the world that has blinded the mind, and to such the Gospel is hid, which is
the power of God, and the light of the glorious Gospel is not comprehended,
which is the Image of God, and it does not shine in them, to give them the
light of the knowledge of God. Now such as are turned to the light, the eye
comes to be opened, and from the darkness these comes, and from the power of
Satan, the god of the world, that has blinded their eye, that the light of the
glorious Gospel shines in them, to give them the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God, and to such the Gospel is not hid: So by the manifestation of the
Truth commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God. Now
here is the state not turned from the darkness to the light, and their eye is not
opened; then the god of the world has blinded them. Such be in the unconverted
estate, to such the Gospel is hid, though light shines in darkness, and the god
of the world blinds their minds: so this is the time they are darkness not
turned from the da^kness, and the darkness does not comprehend the light. Now
where God has commanded the light to shine out of darkness; Mark, out of
darkness, such are come to be turned from the darkness to the light, such
witnesses conversion, and the Image of God shines in them. But the other, the
darkness cannot comprehend it, Acts 26. that Christ should suffer and rise
again, and show light to the people, and to the Gentiles, and this was the
Apostles confession before the heathen, when that they thought he had been mad,
when he confessed the light the Heathenish Rulers did; and said, that he was
sent to turn people from the darkness to the light; Now light shines in
darkness, says John: and you were sometimes darkness says the Apostle to the
converted, and these that were to be turned from the darkness to the light, was
the unconverted. But where God has commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, to give the light of the knowledge of God, these be the converted:
here is light comes out of darkness. So all you that does not see the light which
does enlighten every one that comes into the world, which shines in darkness,
and darkness does not c^mprehend it, and where light shines out of the
darkness, it gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God: you that do
not see this, are the darkness yet, which do not comprehend the light; and the
god of the world has blinded their minds, and their eyes are not yet opened,
and from darkness you are not yet turned, and in the unconverted state you yet
be, that the god of the world has yet blinded your minds, lest the light of
the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine in you, which does enlighten every
man that comes into the world; so what communion has light with darkness, it
is an unequal yoke, 1 Cor. 6. for light brings to have fellowship with God,
communion with God, but darkness cannot comprehend it: and thus the Apostle who
was sent to turn people from the darkness to the light, warning both small and
great, which made the heathenish Rulers to think that he was mad: To turn
people now from the darkness to the light, and to profess the light is the same
as it was then, and them that are wondering, and thinks them besides
themselves, that speaks of the light to them, their eyes are not yet opened; so
your eyes must be opened before you see the light: so he that believes the
light, shall not abide in darkness, but he shall have the light of life. Mark,
the light shines in darkness there, but he that believes in the light, shall
not abide there; but he shall have the light of l fe: so if any man walks in
the night, he stumbles, because there is no light in him, in him that walks in
the night. Mark, he walks in darkness, and it is his time of darkness, and
these are them that sees not Christ the light, that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, yet light shines in darkness, but he that walks in
the light, there is no occasion of stumbling in him; but he that walks in the
night, he stumbles, because there is no light in him, for he is from the light,
for light shines in darkness, and darkness compreh^nds it not. Here you may see
him who ab^des not in the truth, but walks in the night, endures not light, he
that w^lks in the night goes from the light, and hates the li^ht, because his
deeds are evil, and will not come to the l^ght, because the light will reprove
him, John 11. so while you have the light, walk in the light, lest darkness
come upon you: for he that walks in the darkness, knows not whither he goes;
and while you have the light, believe in the light, that you may b^come
children of the light, so b^lieving in the light, you become a child of the
l^ght: I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes in me, should
not abide in darkness. Mark, he is to come out of darkness, he is not to abide
there, he that believes in Christ the light of the world. Now whosoever says
he believes in Christ, and abides in darkness his belief is false, John 12.
but whosoever believes in the light, should not abide in darkness, he comes to
have death abol shed, and has brought life and immortality to light through
the Gospel, that's the power of God, 2 Timothy 1. and who sees this, knows him who
has immortality dwelling in the light, here is the converted estate: And
Brethren, ye are not in darkness, that the day should overtake you as a thief,
but ye are all the chi^dren of the light, and of the day; and not of the night,
nor of darkness. Mark, the Apostle says, they was not in da kn^ss, and so the
day should not come upon them as a thie^; and mark, how the day will come upon
them who be in the darkness that comprehends not the light; that be in the time
of light shining in darkness, and d^rkness does not comprehend it, upon such
the day will come as a thief. Mark, ^he day will come as a thief. What a wo^d
is this upon them that are not the children of light, but upon them that be
darkness, where light is not comprehended? 1 These. 5. A light to the Gentil s,
a glory to Israel. Mark, a light to them that are called heathen, and a glory
to the people of God, Luke 2. And here one saw the fulfilling of the prophets,
he that saw his salvation, saw the glory of Israel, and the light of the
Gentiles: so does every one that sees their salvation, they see the light that
ligh^eneth every one that comes into the world, the glory of Israel, and the
glory of the Gentiles. Now says Christ to his Disciples, what I tell you in
the darkness, that speak you in light; and what I tell you in the ear, that
preach you on the house top, and be not afraid of him that kills the body. Mark
what condition these was in when this was spoken to them, when he told them
there was nothing covered that should not be revealed, and hid that shall not
be known, Matthew. 10. and says Christ, the light of the body is the eye, if
therefore thy eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of light. Mark, if
thy eye be single, make search, and see if it be so, Matthew. 6 but if thy eye be
evil, thy whole body is full of darkness: Mark, there is place for it, if
therefore the light that be in thee be da kness, how great is that darkness?
such are se^ving Mammon, and the contrary master, to such here is the
distinction, and laying up for themselves treasure upon earth, where the eye is
not single; and such puts light for darkness, and darkness for light: So Christ
was called with the Jews a Prince of Devils: So the light that was in you was
darkness, yet Christ told them the Kingdom of Heaven was within them, and the
Kingdom of Heaven is light; and John says, Light shines in darkness, and
darkness does not comprehend it; and the Apostle says, God has commanded
light to shine out of darkness; so the light comprehends darkness, and gives
the light of the knowledge of God, and the people of God that sat in darkness,
saw a light, and to them that sat in the shadow of death, light is sprung up.
Here was the unconverted estate, and the converted estate, when they sat in
darkness, and the shadow of death, there is the unconverted, but them that was
converted, light was sprung up, but darkness could not comprehend it, Matthew. 4.
but who is come to witness the day Zachary speaks of, that the light would not
be clear nor dark, but at the evening it shall be light: This was the day when
the living water was to go out from Jerusalem, Zach. 14. who sees that which
Habakuk saw, Hab. 3. the glory of the Lord covered the earth, whose glory was
his praise, whose brightness was as the light, and the judgments of the Lord
God and his Son, are as the light that goes forth; for who acts contrary to
the light, God who is light, his judgments are according to the light, and are
one with the l^ght, and answers the light in every one, Hosea 5. Lam. 3. he saw
when he was broug^t out of the darkness into the light, so there is a time in
darkness, and a time out of darkness, but he saw each condition, who come under
that which was transgress^d, such as provokes the Lord to anger, to such the
Lord said he would take away their light of the candle, such as transgress the
ways of the Lord, Ier. 25. but such as hears the word of the Lord, they come to
witness the state, where they shall not need the light of the Sun, nor the
light of the Moon, nor the light of a candle: but who transgress the word of
the Lord, shall want the light of a candle; so to the Law and the Testimony if
they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.
Mark, how should they when they have transgressed it, and loves darkness more
then light, and are gone from it, so gone from the testimony; which is the
Spirit of Prophecy, which is the testimony of Jesus, and speaks not according
to the word, which is light in them; so who are gone from the word, are gone
from the light, and where the word is transgressed, the light condems them, for
the light comes from the word; Christ whose name is called the word of God,
which enlightneth every man that comes into the world; and the law is light,
and here is the state of darkness, where there is no light in them which
comprehended not the light, which be in the transgression, and there is the place
for the familiar spirit to enter. Now if ye say the Letter be the Testimony,
and the Letter be the Law, Isa. 7. the Pharisees they had the Letter, which
stood against Christ the ligh^, and they had ^he Law, if that be the Law, and
if that be the word, and they stood against Christ the light, which had the
words of the Law: for mark, them that have transgressed the light, which is the
Law, they are from the testimony, and they are from the light, and then there is
no light in them, and such was the Pharisees, which professed the Scriptures,
and does not believe in the light when it was come, yet light shines in
darkness, but darkness does not comprehend it, and there is that which is dead in
sins and trespasses, which before conversion must be quickened; so the people
that have walked in darkness, have seen a great light, and they that have dwelt
in a land of the shadow of death, has light shined. I say, and they who
transgressed, who were from the Law and the Testimony, called darkness light,
and and put light for darkness, this was the darkness which could not
comprehend it in the Transgression, now with the light these were comprehended.
The Prophet comprehended these who was not in the light, and spoke not
according to the Word, they spoke not according to Christ, which the Prophet
said that God would give him for a covenant of light to the Gen^iles, and to
op^n the blind eyes, and to bring out the prisoner from the prison, and them
that sat in darkness from the P^ison-house, Ma^k, what is, the Prisoner must
come out here, that must come into covenant with God, does not the light come
to shine out of darkness here, where the Prisoner comes out, and is he not in
darkness till that? I have long held my peace, and have been still, I w ll
bring the blind by a way they know not, and will lead them into paths that they
have not known, I will make their darkness light; now you that a e bl^nd cannot
comprehend the light, such stands against the covenant of God, and sees it not
that be blind, but such now ^he Lord God is come to lead, to make darkness
light, and to lead them the way they have not known, Isa. 42. Moreover, says
the Lord, the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light
of the Sun as the light of se^en days, Isa. 30. and says the Lord, is it a
light thing that thou should be as my servant, to ra^se up the seed of J
cob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. Mark, to restore them, here is
Covenant with God, I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvation to the ends of the earth: Mark, Now you that say h^ does
not enlighten every man that comes into the wo^ld, you see not the salvation
of the ends of the earth; Isa. 49. who is among you that fears the Lord, and
obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light.
Mark, that walks in darkness, has no light, while he walks in darkness, what l
ght has he there, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his
God; then he stays upon the light, but if he walks in darkness, he goes from
the light; and whosoever fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his servant,
that will lead him out of darkness into the l^ght, Isa. 50. and such comes to
find the help of God: But such as walks in darkness, goes from the light and
fear of God, and stays not upon the Lord, and such comes to have no light, for
darkness cannot comprehend it, though light shines in darkness, yet darkness
cannot comprehend it, so they will put light for darkness, and darkness for
light, which is comprehended with the light, which reaches to the light which
shines in darkness: Darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the
people: Mark, cover: and light shines in darkness, but the Lord shall rise upon
thee, and his glory shall be seen in thee, and the Gen isles shall come to thy
light: Arise, shine, for the light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen;
then shall thy l ght break forth as the morning, and thy light speedily; and
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the Sun shall be no more thy light
by day, nor the Moon give light to thee, but the Lord God shall be thy
everlasting light: here is conversion, thy light rises in obscurity, and thy
darkness shall be as the Noonday: read that condition, here is conversion again,
Isa. 58. and 60. such as came out of bondage, out of captivity, out of
transgression, the Lord had enlightened them, and given them a nail in h s holy
Place. Mark, a nail, a fastening. Mark, and read what a nail does, but such as
be in the captivity, transgression, and bondage, darkness, covering, therefore
light shines, and darkness comprehends it not, thou will save the afflicted,
and b^ing down the proud. Look, thou will lighten my candle, oh Lord! and
enlighten my darkness. Mark, as the afflicted is saved, proud looks is brought
down, the candle is lighted, and there is enlightening of darkness. Mark, the
enlightening of darkness, that l ght sees over it, Psalm. 10. and they looked to
the Lord, and unto him, and were enlightened. Mark, as there is a looking to the
Lord, there is an enlightening, yea which makes the face to shine, Psalm. 34. but
looking from the Lord, and going from the light, and ^ates it, he goes into
darkness, and there he stumbles, if it be at Noonday, they were stumbling when
Christ was among them, the Pharisees, the Scribes, the Jews, which had
Scriptures, but were darkness, and in darkness, and the light shined in them,
but they could not comprehend it, and the kingdom of heaven was within them,
but they were observing it to come, Lo here, and lo there: and of David
according to the flesh Christ came, said his lightning enlightened the world,
and the earth saw and trembled. Mark, enlightened the world; you will say he
enlightens Saints, but his light enlightens the world, and the earth saw and
trembled, Psalm 97. He spread the cloud for a covering, and fire to give light
in the night. Mark, who be in the night, there was fire to give them light in
the night to stay upon, whereby they might stay upon the Lord, which was to the
children of Israel, which had the figures of the everlasting substance Christ
Je us, the entrance of thy words gives light. Ma k, the entrance of the words
of God gives light, it is a true word, but you see the Pharisees had the
words, and the mind that transgressed; so they hated the light Christ, they
that had received the words from others: but the entrance of the words
received from God, gives light; if I say surely the darkness shall cover me,
even the night shall be light about me, yea the darkness hides not from thee,
take notice of this, but the night shines as the day, the darkness and the
light are both alike to thee, for the Lord sees over it, who is one with the
light that shines in darkness, Psalm. 139. ye are the light of the world, says
Christ, who says he was the light of the world, said his Disciples was the
light of the world, Mark, the light of it, a City set on a hill that cannot be
hid, neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel, but on a
candlestick, and is gives light to all that be in the house; let the light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father
which is in heaven: here they answer the light which every man is enlightened
withal, that are the light of the woe ld, which makes them to glo^ifie their
father which is in heaven: and think not says Christ, that I come to destroy
the Law, but to fulfill it, Matthew. 6. the paths of the just are as the shining
light, which shines more and more to the perfect day: the way of the wicked is
as darkness, and they know not at what they stumble at, Prove. 4. the light of
the righteous rejoiced, but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out: Mark, he
goes from it who hates light, and transgresses and abides not in it, and so
has not God, Prove. 13. the poor and the deceitful man meets together, and the
Lord lightens both their eyes: Now mark, here is the poor and the deceitful man
^oth enl^ghtened, but he that does ev^l, leaves the light, and does not come to
it, because his deeds are evil, and that is his condemnation: And you that say
the wicked man is not enl^ghtned, the deceitful man is not enlightened, you deny
the Scripture; read Prove. 29. and I say, that wisdom did excel folly, as light
darkness, Eccles. 2. Mark, and know this light, and know this wisdom, that
excels folly and darkness, and com^rehends it, which gives to see the salvation
Christ Jesus, the light of the world, that does enlighten every man that comes
in^o the world, the Covenant of God to the Jews and Gentiles, and salvation to
the ends of the earth; so he that believes in the ligh^, shall not abide in
darkness, but shall have the light of life, and he that believes in the light,
shall become a child of light, and Christ the Savior of the world does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, and this light from him will
let every man see his salvation, which believ^ng in the light, receives power
to become the Son of God, but hating the light, it is his condemnation, and he
does enlighten all men that c^meth into the world, that all might believe this
is his end, but he that does not believe, is condemned, and this is his
condemnation, the light, that light is come into the world: mark, into ^he
world, he does not say altogether in his Saints, and men love darkness rather
then the light: mark, men that darkness are in the world, and hates the light,
and does evil, and will not come to the light, left his deeds should be
reproved, but he that does truth comes to the light that his deeds may be
manifest that they are wrought in God: Now he loves darkness, because his
deeds are evil, and every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved: mark, th^se be of the world,
and has these the light, yea, how should they know their evil deeds else? and
will not come to the light, because the light will reprove them, therefore men
love darkness rather then the light; for every one that does evil, hates the
light, and this is his condemnation, the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, says John, he does not say every Saint that comes
into the world, but every man; and light shines in darkness, and darkness does
not comprehend it. Now the Apostle writes to the Corinths, and told them, God
had commanded light to shine out of darkness, which shined in their hearts,
which did give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, these were them that were troubled on every side, and had the
treasure in earthen vessels, and the excellency of the power of God in them,
which was, which was not of the world, and these were not of the world that
told the Corinths the end of the world was come, so this was a converted state;
so he has enlightened every one that comes into the world, that all might
believe, and he that does not believe, is condemned already, but so many as
receives him, he gives power to become the sons of God, John was a burning and
a shining light, and many did rejoice in that for a season, but Christ had a
greater witness then John, and they received honor of men, but Christ received
not honor of men, which enlightneth every m^n that comes into the world;
neither does the light which they are enlightened withal rec^ive honor of men;
and says Jesus Christ, who does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, the Prophets had prophesied that God would give him for a Covenant of
light to the G ntiles, and a new covenant to the house of Israel, and salva^ion
to the ends of the earth; and John was s^nt to bear witness to the light, and
said, he was the true light that did enlighten every one that comes into the
woe ld, when Christ Jesus the covenant of light to the Gentiles, and glory of
Israel was come into the world, says he, I am come a light into the world, he
that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life,
John 8. Now he that follows not the l^ght, abides in darkness, and they that
were sea^ching the Scriptures, and thought to have life there, and would not
come to Christ the life, they had not the word of God abiding in them, neither
heard they the voice of the Father at any time* nor see his shape. These were
them that professed the Scriptures, but in the transgression of the life that
gave them forth; and John writ to the converted, and told them the darkness was
past, and the true light shined. Mark, here is a time they were in darkness, and
a t me when light shined in darkness, in the unconv^rted state, and a time when
light shined out of darkness in the converted estate: He that says he is in
the light, and h^teth his brother, is in da kness until now: He that hates the
light, is in darkness; out of the light, out of covenant; in the enmity he that
loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling
in him; but he that walks in darkness, is he that hates his brother, and knows
not whither he goes, because darkness hat^ blinded his eyes, 1 John 2. and this
was the message the Sain^s declared, that God was light, and in him was no
darkness at all. Now whosoever says he has fellowship with God, and walks in
darkness, is a liar, and does not the truth, for the truth is in the l ght, out
of darkness, 1 John 1. and the Apostle tells them that was of the Royal
Priesthood, that was the chosen generation, an holy Nation, a peculiar people,
that they was called out of darkness into his mavelous light: mark, out of
darkness, there was a time they was in it, that light shined in darkness, which
while they was in darkness, they could not show forth their fruits to the
praise and glory of God, but being called out of darkness into the light, which
comprehends darkness, 1 Pet, 2. and so such as are stumbling at the light which
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, are stumbling at every good
and perfect gift, which comes down from above from the Father of light, with
whom there is no variableness nor shadow of changing, Jam. 1. the night is far
spent, and the day at hand, let us therefore put off the works of darkness, and
put on the true light, which witness the night far spent, and the day at hand,
that was to put off the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of light; the
light is the Armor, that which manifests the works of darkness and the night,
is the light, and that is the Armor, Romans 13. The J ws stood against the light
when the Apostles preached Christ Jesus, therefore says he to them that had
the Scriptures, showing to them what the Prophets had said; I have sent thee a
light to the Gentil^s, and salvation to the ends of the earth, Acts 13. when
the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, Now the Professors of this age which
are wrangling against the light, they are wrangling against the salvation, for
the same which is a light to the heathen, is salvation, yea to the ends of the
earth; and Christ says to the Pharisee^, Take heed that the light that be in
thee be not darkness: Now the Pharisees did not own Christ the light, so they
was in the state Isaiah speaks of, that put light for darkness, and darkness
for light; and which John sp aks of which light shined in darkness, which
darkness could not comprehend; yet no man when he has lighted a candle,
puts it in a secret place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick,
that they may come to see the light; they was to ligh^ the lamp, Exodus 25.
Numb. 8. Aaron was to light the Lamp, the seven lamps shall give light over
against the Candlestick, and Christ says, let your lights be girded about, and
your lights burning. Mark the substance, Luke 12. The Philistims sought to
quench the light of Israel, so them that be in the same nature, now do: and war
against it, 2 Samuel 21. the Lord had promised to his people a light, 2 Kings 8.
which the wicked hates, and wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,
says Job? Now he that is in misery, has light given to him, you may see Job.
3. and why is light given to him whose way is hid, to bring him into the ways
of God; it is the way, and therefore it is given to him, and therefore his way
is hid: a land of darkness, and the shadow of death, without order, wh^re the
light is as darkness in that land, as it is in this, which is stumbling at it,
Job 10. they grope in the darkness without light, which are hating it, but God
discovers the deep things out of darkness, and brings to light the shadow
of death, Job 12. and Bildad said, the light of the wicked shall be put out,
the light shall be dark in his Tabeanacle, and his candle shall be put out with
him, and he shall be driven from the light into darkness, and chased out of the
world: of whom Job said, How long will ye vex my soul? and told them they had
reproched him; the light going from it, condemns out of the everlasting world,
and he goes into the world of wickedness, and upon whom does not the light
arise, says Bildad, Job 25. and says Job, the Lord brings the thing that is
hid, forth to light: Now all come to know the thing that has been hid come
forth to light; you will all know what has been in prison, and by his light
says he, when I walked through darkness. Mark, by his light he walked through
darkness, through it. So here is light shining in darkness, and light shining
out of darkness, and leading through it, to bring back his soul from the pit,
to be enligh^ned with the light of the living, Job 29. and h^s lightning is to
the ends of the earth; from the wicked their light is with-helden, and the high
arm shall be broken, The Lord (says David) is my light and my salvation, and
my God lightneth my eyes; now he that is the salvation, is the light, Psalm. 27.
for with thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light we see light, Psalm. 36.
He shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the
Noon day. Mark, Righteousness, Judgment, Light. Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart, but is condemna^ion to the
wicked, Psalm. 97. unto the upright there arises light in the darkness, and so
it shines forth, and this is the light which gives the light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God; here is a time out of darkness, joined to the light, and they
who are joined to it, are one with it, so they that are joined to the Lord, are
one Spirit; and God has showed us light, said David, who said in the light he
should see more light; He said, God had showed him light, Psalm. 118. O house of
Jacob, come let us walk in the light of the Lord. Mark, who come to walk in the
light of the Lord, they come to walk in covenant with God, Isa. 2. for the Lord
h^th sent his word to Jacob, and has enlightened Israel, and the people that
walked in darkness, have seen a great light, and they that dwelt in the land of
the shadow of death, has light shined; this is in the Covenant with God, this
do many hundreds witness, praises be the Lord. The light of Israel shall be for
a fire, and it shall burn and devour the B yars and Thorns in one day: Now
Thorns and Briars that which Thorns and Briars comes out of, stands against the
light, their feet are swift to run to do evil, and to shed innocent blood; and
because of these actions, they grope like blind men, they waited for light, but
obscurity was found there in that path and way, Isa. 59. and God will make dark
the bright light of heaven, I will cover the Sun with a cloud, and the Moon
shall not give her light, Ezekiel. 32. and there shall be no night there, no need
of a candle, nor of the Sun, for the Lord God gives light, Christ Jesus is the
light which the Lord God has given, Rev. 22. Are not you such that be
Teachers, and be stumbling at the light, and guide the blind that be in
darkness; such as need to be taught your selves, which cause the name of God to
be blasphemed among you, Romans 2. and Christ says, as long as I am in the
world, I am the light of the world, and this the condemnation, the light, says
Christ, he is the light of the world, John 9. and light of the world, him by
whom all things was formed, the lights was formed, the lesser and the greater,
the Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall cease her shining, and I beheld
the earth, and lo it was without form, and void, and the heavens they had no
light, Isa. 13. Jer. 4. and says, after the tribulation the Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, the stars of heaven shall fall,
and the powers of heaven shall be shaken; for as the lightning that shines
from one part of heaven to the other part of heaven, so shall the coming of the
Son of man be: So the Son of man comes in the clouds with great glory, but many
shall say, Lo here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, but says the true
Christ, go not forth, who has enlightened every man that comes into the world;
so every man having a light being turned to it, you will see him, and here is
salvation to the ends of the earth; but who hate the light, it is their
condemnat^on, the light of the Kings countenance is life, Prove. 16. have you
light that be out of the Kings countenance, God is light, and he covers himself
with light, majesty, and honor, Psalm 104. beware lest you come to that end
that stumble at the light, that shall go to the Fathers, that shall never see
light, and shall perish like the Beast, such hates light, which is their
condemnation, Psalm. 49. the Arm of the Lord, and the light of h^s countenance
did save, but who are from the light of the countenance, and out of his Arm,
they be out of the way of salvation, Psalm 44. in thy light we shall see more
light, says David, O send out thy light, for it is truth, Psalm 45. Christ is
the light, Christ is truth, who is come, and take heed you that stumble at the
light, lest it be with-helden from you, as it is from the wicked, for they a^e
with-helden from it, for it is their condemnation, from the wicked light is
with-helden, for they hate it, Psalm 38. Consider me O Lord, and lighten mine
eyes, lest I sle^p the sleep of death, the light leads from the sleep to the
day from the night, for such as be in the night, in the darkness, though in it
the light shines, Christ comes upon them as a thief, the day is the Lords, and
the night is the Lords, he prepares the Moon and the Sun, and these were made
by Christ the light, which does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
Psalm 49. God spreads forth light, and all the lights that were made, were
made by Christ, by what way is light parted, which scatters the east wind
upon the earth, and when I sit in darkness, the Lord will be a light to me.
Mark, when he sits in darkness, therefore heed the light, you may feel the
light, then you may feel it bringing out of darkness, Mic. 7. and the
brightness of God is as the light, which made persecuting Saul fall to the
earth, which did not believe in the light which did enlighten every man that
comes into the world, when the light shined about him, at last he came to find
the light shin ng within him, and told others, that the light shined in their
hearts, and them that were turned to the light, they come to be made partakers
with the Saints in ligh^, such as were translated into the kingdom of the Son
of God: and the Apostle told the Saints they had a more sure word of prophecy,
to which they did well to take heed, until the day dawn, and the day star arise
in their hearts: Now you that are stumbling at the light, how far short are you
of this sure word of Prophecy, as a light that shines in a dark place, until
the day dawning, and the day star arising in the heart, 2 Pet. 1. and are not
you judging before the time, and the Lord will bring to light the hidden things
of darkness, and make manifest the counsel of the heart, you that are judging
and stumbling at the light, are you not found in this condition, 1 Cor. 4. and
the Sun and the Moon praises the Lord, and the Stars of light which was made
by Christ, and you that are standing against salvation, Christ Jesus that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, that calls this ligh^, this
salvation, a natural light, you have not yet seen your selves to be that woman
that lights a candle to sweep the house, and has found the piece of silver,
Luke 15. so the Teachers that does deny the light Christ, that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, you are the Ministers of Satan, that
transforms themselves into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11. and so you that do
deny the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, you
l^ghtly esteem the Rock of your salvation, which does enlightlighten every man
that comes into the world, Deuteronomy. 31. but you are them that lay the h^avie
burdens upon the people, which makes them haavier, not lighter then your
fathers, as you may read 2 Chronicles. 10. 1 Kings 12. and see what burdens they
laid upon the just, they that did transgress, but when you come to see the
Ang^l come down from heaven, that lightens the earth with his glory, then shall
you know the fall of Babylon, then may you come to see the light that lightness
every one that comes into the world, Rev. 18. but all things that are
reproved, are made manifest by the light; awake thou that sleeps, and arise
from the dead, and Christ will give thee light; so they that sleep, sleep in
the night; he that comes to the day, he comes to Christ, he is awakened and
risen from the dead, and witnesses Christ light he has enlightened him withal:
he is arisen from the dead, and he is awakened, and he sleeps not: he is out of
sleep, and among whom you shine as lights in the world, the children of the
light, that are in the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the
world, they are in Christ, these shines as lights in the world, these are
converted, answering the light in every one, Phil. 2. That which does make
manifest is light, and that which does reprove is light, and all things that
are reproved are made manifest by the light, for whatsoever does make manifest,
is light; for every one that does evil, hates the light, and will not come to
the light, because it will rep^ove him; this is the true light that does
enlighten every one that comes into the world: What is the drunkard
enl^ghtned, and the swearer, and the adulterer, and the Heathen: yea
drunkenness is an evil deed, and theft is an evil deed, and adultery, and the
murderer, and these does evil, and these comes not to the light, lest the light
should reprove them; and these with the light knows they should not do so: and
this is their condemation says Christ the light, and their works are wrought
out of God, and these are the children of disobedience; now he that loves the
light, he comes to the light, and brings his works to the light that they
may be m^nifest that they are wrought in God, and he is not condemned, so times
of darkness, the light not comprehend^d with the darkness, and the light shines
in darkness, and a time of putting light for darkness, and this the time when
the word has no place in them, and this is the time of the children of
disobedienc^, the Prince of the power of the Air rules i^ them; this is the
time of the unconverted under the power of Satan, in the darkness not turned to
the light; for this is the time that the god of the world blinding the eyes,
that the light of the glorious Gospel should not shine into them: for God
having commanded light to shine out of darkness, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God: Here the salvation is known, the everlasting
Covenant is known, and and all who denies the light, denies the salvation of
God to the ends of the earth, and him the Prophet Moses wrote, which God would
raise up which the people should hear; which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, which is the Treasury of Wisdom and Knowledge, which
light being turned to it, which comes from Christ, which shines in the heart,
it gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ: Now the first Priestho^d and his lips was to preserve th knowledge of
the people; and they was to hear Moses, the Jews was, which there was a
separation between them and the Gentiles; the second Priesthood Christ, is a
light to the Gentiles; the Gentiles shall hear him, and the Jews shall hear
him; and this is the Prophet Christ Jesus that Moses wrote of, which God would
raise up, that people should hear, and does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, that all men might through him believe, so they were to hear
Moses, and he that does not hear him is to be cut off, he goes from the light;
they that walk in the light have unity one with another.

G. F.

TO all you Professors, Priests, and Teachers who are in the darkness, and
knows not the spirit in prison, and knows not the light that shines in
darkness, and darkness does not comprehend it, but are the Infidels, whom the
god of the wo^ld has blinded, to whom the Gospel is hid, though they have the
four Books, yet the Gospel is hid, who are now stranging at the work of God,
and do not believe that Christ has enlightened every one that comes into the
world; so I shall give you some Scriptures to read, which will prove the
Spirits and try them how contrary they be unto the Apostles spirit, Christ and
the Saints; Christ went ministering to the spirit in prison; he that reads,
let him understand whether this be a measure of the spirit yea or nay, or the
spirit without measure which he ministered to, for he whom God has sent,
speaks the word of God, John 3.34. for God gives not the spirit by measure
unto him; Here Christ had not the Spirit by measure given unto him; and the
Apostle Paul said 2 Cor. 10. they would not boast themselves above their
measure: now here was measure, and not by measure, and Christ says, who
retained not the spirit by measure to his Disciples, that he would send them
the Comforter, the spirit of Truth, that he should guide them into all Truth,
for he shall not sp^ak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he
speak, and show things to come, he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine, says Christ, and show it unto you who believe the measure, receive of
mine, whose is not by measure, and the Comforter when he comes, he is to
reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, of judgment, and unbelief; of
sin, because they do not believe. Now mind all the large Book of God, the
spirit of Truth, which leads the Saints into all Truth, which receives of
Christ, and shows it unto his Disciples, who be in their measure, he shall
reprove the world because they do not believe, and of sin, of righteousness,
and of judgment. Now the Comforter whom Christ will send, take of his, and
show it to the Disciples who reprove the world: Now mind this, and read this,
whether this be a measure yea or nay, which c^mes from him who received not the
Spirit by measure, John 16. He that leads the believers into all Truth, reprove
the unbelievers in the world of sin, of judgmens, and righteousness, so he that
is led into all Truth sees that which is reproved with the spirit of Truth that
leads, and when Christ says he shall take of mine and show it unto you,
whether this be a measure yea or nay, from him whom God gave the spirit not by
measure too: And says the Lord by his Prophets and Apostles, It shall come to
pass in the last days, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, and my sons
and my daughters shall prophecy, young men shall see visions, old men shall
dream dreams, and on my handmaids will I pour out my spirit in those days, and
they shall prophecy; Acts 2.17, 18. Look you Deceivers, Here the Lord says he
will pour out of his spirit: mark the word, out of it upon all flesh: What?
young men, and old men, and sons, and daughters, and maids? All these to have
the spirit of the Lord upon all flesh poured! Here say they, these deny the
means: then here mark the word out of the Lords spirit, and the notable day of
the Lord is coming, and whosoever calls on the name of the Lord shall be
saved, Numb. 16.22, the God of the spirits of all flesh is known: and says the
Apostle Paul, who would not boast himself above his own measure, that which may
be known of God is manifest in them, God has showed it unto them, with this
which was of God manifest in them, they knew covetousness, malice, murder,
deceit, and ungodliness, who knows the judgment of God was upon such things;
Romans 1. and that they were worthy of death that not only do the same, but have
^leasure in them that do them, therefore is the wrath of God revealed from
heaven against all the ungodliness and unrighteous of men; so whether this of
God manifest in them, which God showed unto them, with which they knew
unrighteousness and Gods judgment upon them that do it, and they are worthy of
death, whether this be a measure yea of nay which is of God which he has
showed to them, and what was that in them that did by nature the things
contained in the Law, which showed the works of the Law written in their
hearts: M^rk, written: But shall not this judge them that have the outward Law,
but are out of the life of it, and says the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 12. the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit withal: Now mark
here the spirits manifestation is given to every one to profit withal; there
are diversities of gifts but by the same spirit, and so the manifestation of it
is given to every man to profit withal: Mark, to one is given the spirit of
Wisdom, to another the spirit of knowledge, to another the gifts of healing, to
another the spirit of discerning, to another tongues, but all these works the
one and the self same spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will; now
to every man severally as he will: And says the same Apostle, Tit, 2.11, 12.
the grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared to all men, teaching us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live soberly and righteously: Now
you that turn this grace that brings salvation into wantonness, may deny it,
and say it has not appeared to ^ll men, which teaches the Saints which by
grace are saved; and says Jude, behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of
his Saints to ex^cute Judgment upon all, to convince all that are ungodly
amongst them, of their ungodl^ deeds they have ungodly committed, and of all
their speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. Here mark against
him, that comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to convince all of ungodly
deeds, and their hard speeches* now is here all of their hard speeches and all
of their ungodly deeds, none left out but all? Look you blind what is that
which convinces all of their ungodly deeds and hard speeches, is not that the
spirit of the Lord which is now come and coming to reign, and to reprove the
world, who will reign, and be king and Judge, and have not you all something in
you that does reprove you for your hard speeches and your ungodly deeds, the
ungod lie of you all, and who live in your hard speeches, and the Apostle
writing to the Gentiles, he says: But unto every one of us is given grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, now mark: here is the measure
of the gift of Christ, who lights every man that comes into the world, that
all men through him might believe; he that believes is saved and he that does
not, is condemned, and this is the condemnation that light is come into the
world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their deeds be evil:
now every man being enlightened that comes into the world, one he loves the
light, and brings his deeds to the light that with the light he may see whether
they be wrought in God, and the other he hates the light, because that his
deeds be evil, and he will not bring his deeds to the light because he knows
that the light will reprove him, that hates light whose deeds are evil, whom
Christ enlightened knows that the light will reprove him: therefore the will
not come to the light because his deeds are evil; and I will give him for a
light to the Gen^iles, salvation to the ends of the earth and what is that
which the children that wlaketh according to the course of this world, the
Prince of the power of the Air that works in the children of disobedience:
what is that which they are disobedient to? a consider, mark, and read your
selves which being d^sobedient, they walked according to the course of the
world and the Prince of the power of the air which now works in the children
of disobedience; now mark what disobedience is too: and him that has an ear
let him read and hea^: and says the Apostle to the Colossians, the wrath of
God comes upon the ch ldren of disobedience Come you profess^rs let us see? is
not this something of God that is disobeyed is it not that is of God manifest in
them, which God has showed, which lets them see Gods Ju^gment is upon such
things, when they act unrighteously? is not this the measure of God? mark: and
the Spirit that is in prison and the Spirit of God, that is grieved; and ye
professors come let us read the Talents, and reckon with you, and see who it is
that has hid the Lords money in the earth, come you that have gained, enter
you into your Masters joy; go thou that has hid the Lords money in the earth,
into utter darkness; take it from him; and give it to him that has, and every
man shall have his reward according to his works, and so the Lord has given
to every man severally according to his ability here, mark: every man severally
according to his ability read if you it can hear and now is the Lord coming to,
call every man severally to acc^unt to which he has given severally, according
to his ability, and now the wicked and slothful servant which hid the Lor^s
money in the earth will be found out, and the Lords money will be taken from
him, although he has hidden it to, him the Lords commands has been grevous;
bu^ to us they are not who love G d; because we keep his c^mmandements, and God
who gave his Son for a covenant of light to lighten every man that comes into
the wo^ld and says the Apostle I say through the grace given unto me to every
man that is amongst you, not to think of himself more highly then he ought to
think, but soberly, according as God has dealt to every man a measure of faith
read and mark h^re is a measure of faith, and says the Apostle, as every man
has received the gift, even so let him minister, as a good steward of the
manifold graces of God, for the grace of God has appeared to all men, now you
good stewards, now you bad stewards which turn the grace of God into
lasciviousnes you will be reckoned withal, you shall have your reward: but
says the world, must every man minister as he has received the gift, yea but
let him speak as the Oracle of God, and let him do it of the ability which God
has given him, and says John in the Revelation, every man shall be Judged,
according to his works, read and understand I; say unto you for every idle
word that men shall sp^ak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of
Judgment, so you that name the name of Christ, depart from iniq^ity, the son of
man shall come in the glory of his father with his Angels, then shall he reward
every man according to his works, Mat. 16.21. him who is g^ne into a far
country, and has given the Talents, and to every of you severally according to
your abilities, and will render to every man according to his deeds, for every
man having a light from Christ who lights every man that comes into the
world with the light, he shall see his evil deeds, which comes from Christ,
who will render to every man according to his deeds, the revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God To. 2.6. and further I say unto you, if any man have
not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and lif Christ be in you, the body
is dead, but the spirit is life, because of righteousness, so let the light
that from Christ comes, now examine, for the Lord is appearing; you that have
according to your abilities, smite not your fellow se^vants, and think you not
that the Lord delayeth the time of his coming be, not as them which says let
us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye, and as the Ap^stle says to the
Ephesians. 3.9. and to make all men see what is the fellowsh p of the mystery
which from the begin^ng of the world has been hid in God, who created all
things by Jesus Christ. read and understand every one with the light that
comes from Christ the mystery, which will be your condemnation, else if you
believe not in it, and this is to all that stumble at the work of the spirit
of God, the manifestation of it which is given to every man to Profit with all:
and come you professors, let us read the parable who stumble at it, a sower
went forth to sow, and some seed fell on the high way ground, and some on stony
ground, and some on thorny ground; and the seed is the word, and the son of m^n
is the seeds-man: he that has an ear let him hear: and Look now all you
professors which ground you are, and what you have brought forth, and whether
the wicked seeds-man have not gotten his seed into your g^ound: he that has an
ear let him hear it: come read another parable of the laborers going into
the vineyard, and agreeing with every man for a penny. Mat. 20 every man is to
have his penny, the last that went in as well as the first, so the last shall be
first, and the first last, for many are called but few chosen: he that has an
ear let him hear: There is a Promise spoken to Cain, it he did well he should
be accepted, and Esau had a birthright and despised it, now here you may say:
we hold for free will, nay it is not in him that wills, but by grace that you
are saved, and stand still and see your salvation, and you that be children of
light, put on the armor of light, that you may come into the unity of the faith
of the knowledge of the son of God, unto a perfect man unto the measure ^f the
stature of the fullness of Christ that hence forth you be no more children
tossed to and fro Ephesians. 4. and says the Lord, I will make a new Covenant, the
covenant which the Lord will write in their hearts, and put his spirit into
their inward parts; by which they should all come to know the Lord, him by whom
the world was made, now every one of you mind this Law written in your hearts,
and this spirit put in your inward pa^ts, that you need not say know the Lord,
that you may witness the promise of God before the world begun, but says the
world and professors, if every one must come to witness the Law of God written
in their hearts, and the spirit put in their inward parts, what must we do with
our Teachers, we come to witness that we need not any man to teach us to know
the Lord, having the Law written in our hearts, and the spirit put in our
inward parts. This is the covenant of life, the everlasting covenant, which
decays not, nor changes not, and here is the way to the Father, without
which no man comes to the Father, and here is the everlasting Priesthood, the
end of the first priesthood, whose lips were to preserve knowledge, but now
says Christ, learn of me the second priesthood, and says the Apostle, that
you grow up in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, in whom are hid the treasure of
wisdom and knowledge, so you are brought of the first p iesthood, that does
change to Christ the second Priesthood that does not change, and of the first
covenant that does decay, to the everlasting covenant that does not decay,
Christ Jesus, the covenant of light, from whence every one of you have a light,
that you might believe in the covenant of light, if you do not believe in the
covenant of light, you are condemned, for light is come into the world, and men
loves darkness rather then light, because their deeds be evil, and I am come a
light into the world (says Christ) that whosoever believes in me should not
abide in darkness, but should have the light of life, and believe in the light,
that you may be children of light, and you that do not believe in the light,
whose deeds are evil, but hate it, you are that one who with the light is
condemned, therefore now you have time, prize it, seek the Lord whilst he may
be found, and call upon him whilst he is nigh, lest you say time is past, for
the rich gluttons time was, therefore whilst time is not past, consider, and
search your selves, and see if you be not them that hate the light, and so are
the builders that stumble at the corner stone, for them that hated the light,
and did not believe in the light, did so in ages past; I am the light of the
world, and does enlighten every one that come^h into the world, says Christ,
who says learn of me, this is my beloved Son, hear you him, says G^d, here is
your Teacher, bu^ you that hate the light, do not learn of Christ, and will not
have him to be your king to reign over you, him to whom all power in heaven and
earth is given, who bears his government upon his shoulders, who now is come to
rei^n, who lights every man that comes into the world, when will give to
every man a reward according to his deeds, whether they be good or evil, so
every man with the light that comes from Christ will see his deeds, him that
hates it, and him that loves it, and him that will not bring his deeds to the
light, because the light will reprove him that is his condemnation, and he
shall have a reward according to his deeds, and the Lord is come to reckon with
you, and to look for fruit, and now is the Ax laid to your root, and every tree
of you that bears not good fruit, must be hevven down, and cast into the
fire, from them who are the seed of Abraham, which the promise is to, when
he was in the u^circumcision, such as know the God of Abraham.

An establishing Note to all friends upon the Earth.
WIth the wise upon earth in their own wisdom, and the g^eatest knowers upon
earth in their own k^owledge, and the greatest understanding men in their
understanding, and the greatest learned Doct r in their languages upon earth
was Christ, among them who was born not by the will of man, was the Son of God
among them, these before mentioned, was he judged and c^lled the son of Joseph;
and they said his B eth en and his mother they knew, so looked upon the Son of
God to be natural, and so saying his father and moth^r and B^^thr^n were with
him whom they knew: Is not this the Son of Joseph? and qu^stioned from whence
had this man this wisd m? So with all these was him by whom the world was made
looked upon as natural, a natural birth by the will of man: Him that was
glorified with the Father before the world began, who enlightneth every man
that comes into the world, him by which it was made and all things created,
that all men through him might believe: Therefore he enlightneth every man, and
says, Believe in the light, that you may become children of the light, which
the wise of the earth said they believed in the Scripture declared forth from
the light, but not in the light it self. And now in this age, the wise in the
earth in their own wisdom, and the great^st understandings in their Politician,
and the greatest knowers that be in their own knowledge of the Scriptures, and
the large Doctors in their lea^ning, the greatest Students and Disputers, and
the great Writers, judges and calls the light that enlightneth every man
that c^meth into the world, an natural light; this is so called by them, and
among them. The light the Son of God which does enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world, which all these S udents before-men^ioned call a natural
light; nay some of them calls it a natural conscience, the light which the Son
of God does e^lightan every one that comes into the world withal, him by whom
it was made, that all men through him might believe; and he says, Believe in
the light, that you may become children of the light. But these witty wise ones
in their wisdom, knowledge, understanding say, they believe the Scriptures,
Prophets words, Christ's words, Apostles words; But the light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, by whom it was made, which was
glorified with the Father before the world began, is the checks of a natural
conscience, and this light is a natural light, say they, and is the light say
we which is given to all men to beli^ve in the light, which who do not believe
in the light, is condemned already, is with the light condemned, that they who
believe in the l ght shall never be condemned, nor never come into
condemnation, nor never be confounded; for he believes in that which makes
manifest that which is to be confounded. Now the Pharisees which search the
Scriptures, Doctors, Rabbis, great learned men which search the Scriptures, in
them think to have eternal life, they did believe the Scriptures, they had
Moses and the Prophets, But they did not believe in the light, being out of
Moses light, and the Prophets light, so saw not Christ the light, with which
Moses and the Prophets saw him when he came, they having the words, but out of
the light; these were them which were blind guides to the people, which lea^
people, and believed not in the light which enlightened every man that c^meth
into the w^rld; but looked at him as a carnal man, a natural man, and knew him
not the Son of God, who lights every man that comes into the woe ld, the Son
of God by whom it was made; and these wise upon earth now in their own wisdom,
and the great und^rst nding and knowers in their own knowledge which they now
profess Moses and the Prophets, Christ's and the Apostles words, declared from
the light, and they themselves being from the light, and out of it, and not
believing in it, the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, him by whom it was made, these knew not the Scriptures, that believe not
in the light, though they have them read among them every first day, as the
Jews had them read among them every Sabbath day, yet knew not the voice of the
Prophets, nor of God, nor of his Son, so now all these in this age that have
the Scriptures read among them every first day, and believes not in the light,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, sees not Christ
Jesus the same to day, yesterday, and for ever, him by whom the world was made,
who was glorified with the Father before the world began, which the children of
the light which believe in the light that enlightneth every man that comes
into the world, whose food is the bread of life that comes from above, whose
water is the water of life, which knows the living springs, these comes to know
the Scriptures, the Prophets words declared from the light, the fulfilling of
them; C^rists words declared from the light, and the fulfilling of them, and
the Apostles words declared forth from the life, and the fulfilling of them;
and these that be in the light, believe in the light, have unity in the light,
from which declared forth the Word was, and unity with the words which declared
forth from the light was, and to them are reconciled; but they that believe not
in the light which enlightneth every man that comes into the world, they be
all on heaps and strife about the Prophets words, Christ's words, and the
Apostles words, which was dec^ared forth from the light, they that b^lieve not
in the light, the greatest students upon the earth, disputers, understandings,
and knowers in their own knowledge, knows not he Scrip ures, nor are not
reconciled to them, which believe not in the light wh ch lights every man
that comes into the world; these are the blind guides in these our days, was
and is in all ages, such as believes not in the light which enlighteneth every
man that comes into the world, and they are in the disputings, and strife, and
contention, being in the contention about the words declared from the light,
the Scriptures, the words of Christ, the Prophets, and the Apostles, so being
in the dark, not believing in the light which enl^ghtneth every one that comes
inro the world; there is the stumbling, and there is the persecuter which was ever
blind, which stumbles at the light which enlightneth every man that comes into
the world, which is the way, and every man that have light from the way, and
the light is the truth which enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
that all men through him might believe: And here is the truth in the inward
parts; so all you stumbling at the l^ght, you stumble at the way, and you
stumble at the truth, and you stumble at the life; in him was light, that
lights every one that comes into the world, and the light is the life of
m^n: now is it not appearing, and does it not appear among all the wise of the
earth in their own wisdom, such as profess the Scriptures declared from the
light, and believes not in the light which enlightneth every man that comes
into the world; how they confound one another: Yea the Doctors and great
learned Rabbis, the great knowing men, the great un^ersta^ders, such as
believe not in the light, how they confound one another, and one another
meanings they do get, that are blind to the Scriptures, Is it not apparent
among you all beholders? Now such as believe in the light, shall not be
condemned. Mark, and these become children of the light, and Christ gives them
an understanding, who is the wisdom of God, and they grow up in the knowledge
of Christ Jesus, who has the Treasury of Wisdom and Knowledge, these
com^rehend the world, and their knowledge, wisdom, and un^erstanding which
believe not in the light, with which light is all condensed and confounded, in
which light the children of light believing, which was glorified with the
Father before the world began, which is not natural, but spiritual, not
created, but that by which all things was created, and these that are here
raigns over the world, and witnesses him by whom it was made, and treads all
the other which believes not in the light, which is out of the light, under
foot, as unsavory, under foot of man, these are the light of the world, these
are the salt of the earth.

Them that hold up Synagogues, Temple, changeable Priesthood, that took Tithes,
did not believe in the second Priest, the light which enlightneth every man
that comes into the world, the unchangeable Priest, after the order of
Melchisedech; this was in the days of the Pharisees, chief Priests, in the days
of Christ in the flesh then, and these withstood the light that did enlighten
every men that comes into the world, that all men through him might believe.
Now in our days and age, such as holds up the priests which take Tithes, and
has Temple, and Synagogue, and the chief place in the Assembly, as the
pharisees had, which was in the transgression out of the life of the
Scriptures, which Christ cried woe against these now in this age does not
believe in the light, which does enlighten every man that co^eth into the world
as the Pharisees and chief Priests did not: these I say that takes tithes, and
holds up the Priests with tithes that has the Synagogue and Temple and the
chiefest place in the assembly, which woe Christ cried against these, believe
not in him, in that Christ which enlighteneth every man that comes into the
world, that all men through him might believe, who are to believe in the light
according to Christ command, and are to learn of him according to Gods command,
of Christ the light which does enlighten every one that comes into the world,
every man is to hear him, every man is to learn of him, hear him says God,
this is my beloved Son hear ye him, every man who hears the light which
Christ Jesus has enlightened him withal, he hears Christ, who says, learn
of me, I am the way, the truth and the life, and no man comes to the way but
by me, who was glorified with the Father before the world began, now all the
students in the world which stand against the light, such as hold up Synagogue,
Temple and carnal worship, and observes days and times, calls the light which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, an natural light, or the
checks of an natural conscience, or a created light; the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, by whom it was made, and all
things created, nothing that was created; but was created by him* Mark, by him:
and was before it was created, which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, that all men through him might believe; so these which are holding
up Temple, Synagogues, Tithes, and Priest that takes them which are professing
the Scriptures, declared forth from the light, not believing in it, but making
a trade of the words, disputing contending and are in strife about them the
light, in the dark, about the words that came from the light, the holy
Scriptures that were given forth, to be read. Mark, to be believed in, to be
practiced, for Moses and the Prophets they was in the light, and they spoke
forth the Scriptures from the light, and they spoke them forth to be fulfilled;
and what they wrote they wrote to be fulfilled, and Christ Jesus the light came
to fulfill what was wrote of him, and they saw; Moses and the Prophets saw what
must come to fulfill their words; Christ Jesus which did come to fulfill their
words, and the Jews that were out of the light, saw not Christ when he was come
to fulfill Moses and the Prophets words, the Jews professed, and the Apostles
who witnessed Christ, and the Disciples, who was come to fulfill what was
written of him; they showed to the Jews, Pharisees, and to the great wise
Professors, great knowing men who professed Moses and the Prophets that a Mes
ia^ was to come, they being out of the light, they showed unto them that Jesus
was the Christ out of M^s^s and the Prophets, which they professed but did not
believe in the light; so they showed the fulfilling of the Prophets, and the
fulfilling of Moses words and preached to them him that was come, which did
fulfill them, which they that did believe in the light come to see the second
Priesthood, who turned were from the first Priesthood, Temple, Synagogue,
Priesthood that took Tiths. But them that did not believe in the light,
stumbled at the Apostles words, and stumbled at the light, which does enlighten
every one that comes into the world; these Builders rejected the ^orner-stone,
and counted themselves unworthy of e^ernal life, and though they professed
Moses and the Prophets words, but believed not in the light, as all our
Professors and Priests of the world in our days, which believes not in the
light that lights every man that comes into the world, judging themselves
unworthy of eternal life, yet professing Moses, Christ, and the Apostles words;
but sees not the fulfilling of Moses and the Prophets, nor Christ's words and
Apostles words, such as be out of the light, that believes not in it, these are
now haling out of the Synagogue, prisoning, and beating, and persecuting that
believe not in the light, that enlighteneth every man that comes into the
world, as the Jews did out of their Temple, which prisoned and persecuted as
those do, and haled before Magistrates, which fulfill choice words, they that
did so believed not in the light, but were out of the light, and so they know
not the Son nor the Father: take notice of this, all priests and people, who
are haling now out of the Synagogues, who are the generation that are
fulfilling Christ's words, that the righteous blood may come upon you all. But
the Lamb has gotten the victory, and the Saints sings over you all, them that
be out of the light be out of truth, which answers light and truth in every
man, which is the condemnation of all that are out of the light, and hate it,
and this is the word of the Lord God to you, and all that sees the light sees
their salvation, they that believe in the light and in that do dwell which
condemn all the world, and none comes to everlasting life, but who comes to
the light, which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, who is
the life and as every man comes to the light which he is enlightened withal,
he comes to the life of man, and he comes to the way to the Father, which no
man comes to the way to the Father, but who comes to the light, which
enlighteneth him and every one that comes into the world, by which light all
things were made, and none comes to truth but who comes to the light, which
does enlighten every one that comes into the world, him by whom the world was
made, glorified with the Father before the world began, and no man comes to
the glorious Gospel, which is the Image of God, but who comes to the light
which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world and no man receives
the power to become the Sons of God, but who receives the light which comes
from Christ, which is the power of God, who does enlighten every one that
comes into the world, him by whom it was made, nor no man comes to the truth
in the inward parts, but such as comes to the light, which does enlighten
every one that comes into the world, him by whom it was made, who does
enligh^en every man that comes into the world; who is the truth in the inward
parts, there is it to be heard, found, seen, and received, with that is Christ
the mystery the light seen, with the light which comes from him, which is the
truth in the inward parts; with this is the Kingdom of God seen, which has no
end, and here is the light of the Gospel known, which is the Image of God, with
this is the God of this World seen with the light which comes from him, which
was glorified with the Father before the world began. Take notice of this all
ye children of light, and all they that do withstand the light, which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, him by whom it was made,
glorified with the Father before the world began, they do withstand the way;
for every one coming into the world, having a light that comes from the way,
lets him see the way, and a light from the life lets him see the life, and a
light from the truth lets him see the truth, and a light from the word lets him
see the words, and lets him see the word that was in the beginning before the
world was: this light from the way to the Father, with which they know the way
to the Father into the Kingdom of God, where there is no shadow, a light from
him which was glorified with the Father before the World began, which light
shining in the heart, gives them the light of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, and this is the treasure in earthen vessels; now every man having
a light from the truth which is the Christ, which is the way to the Father the
God of all truth, here you need not go forth to ask where you shall find truth,
for it is in your inward parts, and as that teaches you, and you abide in it,
you continue in the Son, and in the Father, from whence it comes, and every man
having a light from Christ, who is the light, with which light he will see him
that comes from him, which light leads to him that he may believe in him, he
shall not come into condemnation; he need not to say, lo here is Christ, lo
there is Christ, he that believes in the light that enlighteneth every man that
comes into the world: now every man believing in the light, which enlighteneth
every man that comes into the world, with which they be lighted withal, here is
the true belief, then they believe in Christ, who is the light. Mark, in him,
for the Pharisees believed, had the letter, who did not believe in the light,
so was blind; so are all now who do not believe in the light, which lights
every man that comes into the world, therefore they that do not believe in the
light, which does enlighten every man that comes into the World, that they
might believe through him: But talks of a belief, because the Scriptures
declares, and believes not in the light, they believe not in the truth, the
devils, which be out of the light, which is the truth, can talk of the
Scriptures as well as all the World, which is out of the light, out of truth,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that all men through
him might believe, they that withstand the light that enlighteneth every man
that comes into the world withstands the way, and they that stumble at it,
stumble at the way, and they that stumble at the light that lights every man
that comes into the world, they stumble at truth, and they know not Christ,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world; and Priest and
people knows not John the messenger of Christ, sent from God to bear witness to
this true light, that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, who
suffered death by the powers of the earth for bearing his righteous testimony
against the unrighteous, and the powers of the earth, and the great Rabbis
stands against them now, and does cast them into prison, that are the
witnesses of this light, this true light, that does enlighten every one that
comes into the world, that all men through him might believe, who is the Son
of God, and against this light which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, the powers of the earth, and the rulers of the earth, and the chief
Priests gathered Councels together against, who lighted every man that comes
into the world, him by whom it was made, and so all they that are stumbling at
the light, which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which is
the Covenant of God, the Covenant of light, they are stumbling at the Covenant,
and all them; And those that keep people from the light, that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, keep people from the Covenant of God, the
Covenant of light, the Covenant of life, the Covenant of peace; and to you this
is the word of the Lord God, and every man coming into the world, being
enlightened with the Covenant of light, he loving the light, and receiving the
light, he receives the Covenant; but hating the light he goes into the evil
deeds, and this is the light does make them manifest, and this his condemnation
that hates it* the light and not believing in it, and this the lig^^ (...)
torments the evil doer, and reprooves him and m^^e^ manifest his ways and
deeds, and this is the light that makes manifest him that abode not in truth,
that speaks a lie, that is from the truth, from the light, with the light
condemned, which answers the light in every man's conscience; so this is the
word of the Lord God.

Given forth in Lanson Castle. G. F.


