A DECLARATION OF THE KING OF DENMARK, TO THE Emperor, the King and State of
POLAND, And his Highness the Elector of BRANDENBURGH: In Relation to the TREATY
Agreed and Concluded at the HAGHE in HOLLAND, The 21 of May, 1659.

Showing the Trecherousness of the Hollander in that TREATY.

LONDON, Printed by E. ^. for He^r^ Eversden, at the Greyhound in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1659.

A DECLARATION OF THE KING OF DENMARK, TO THE EMPEROVR, the King and State of
POLAND; And his Highness the Elector of BRANENBURGH: In Relation to the Treaty
Agreed and Concluded, at the Haghe in Holland, On the 21 of May, 1659.
MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCES, etc.
I Doubt not, but that you will in the highest manner Admire, when you shall
understand the Treaty, lately Concluded on by the Ministers of the most
Christian KING, and the PROTECTOR of England, and the Honorable LORDS, John
Baron of Gaunt, John Baron of Merode, and John Baron of With, etc. Deputies of
either Province: And considering that they are determined to leave Us, and to
deliver Us over as a Prey to our Blood-thirsty, and unpacified Enemies of the
Swedes; That is, that Generous Holland, who has placed Us in the very middle
of the Pikes, and would that We should Embrace that fair-seeming Treaty.

Our Kingly City has for the space of Eleven Months together been Besieged,
many of Our Islands have been Incorporated, great part of Our Country spoiled
to the Ground, many of my Subjects have been Murdered, and Tyrannously dealt
withal; Men per force taken from their Wives, Children Estranged from their
Mothers, and the most part of Our Castles, Buildings, and Houses destroyed by
Fire; And that for no other Reason, but that they cannot sufficiently be
satisfied with the Blood of Our People, no Consideration taken of their Oath
made to Almighty God, upon that Peace which was formerly Concluded on. Finally,
all this Cruelty is forgotten by Our Confederate Netherlanders, who jointly
fall from Us for fear of a War with the English; And therefore Concludes such a
Treaty, Giving Us a Law, without any Notice given to Us, or at least; to be
Heard or Understood by Our Ministers, much less without the Consent of Our
Allies, or Confederates: Likewise all this tends much to the Prejudice of their
Powerful Alliance; And the many Promises by them made for Our Assistance. Now
instead of Helping and Assisting Us, in bringing all Things to honorable and
reasonable Conditions; They have contrary to their Promises, maintaining of
their Glory, and Our Final Well-being, They have wholly forgotten that we
ought to have good Recompense and Satisfaction, for the Fireing and Plundring
of Our Country, and for the Violating of Our Subjects, and Riots by them
Committed; where to the Contrary, with this most cursed Cessation, they bind up
Our Kingly Power and Hands, and the Hands of Your most Illustrious Highness's,
who jointly Depended upon those Succors which they expected from the
Netherlandish Fleet, and are now dis-enabled to work out that Design, which
was to Transport over Our Armies, and to Chase away Our Enemies from Our Kingly
and Metropoliticall CITY: What a High Blame is this, that they should both
Swear and Promise Succors, not so much for Us alone, but for their own Ruin
and Confusion, by the Interest of the Sound, of their own Forces, and
Courageous Officers, who they have Cast into the very Throat of that Devouring
Bear: All seems to leave Us, they Consent, and force all to Cease; Giving full
Power and Authority to that Great Enemy, who to that End has United all his
Forces to make use of his Blood-Thirsty Sword against Us, and Our Subjects. It
is apparent, that God is Angry, and that he Deprives RULERS of their
Understandings, to Chastise Countries for their Offenses.

Most Illustrious PRINCES, This is a great Burden, and it would have been far
better for such Allies, or Confederates, not to have Incensed, or provoked Me
so far as to Wage War against the Swedes. But they seem first of all to hold
the Swedish Power in a Balance, and now they throw My Kingdom into his Scale,
and will likewise Surrender your Highnesses Themselves to the Power of the
Swedes; Intending to make an Agreement apart with the CROWN and STATE of
POLAND: And to the Contrary will Beneficiate the Swede with such Treaties as
shall possess Them of the Sound, and so Consequently to make Him sole LORD of
EUROPE.

May it please your Highnesses to take Notice, how Heinous a Thing this is in
the Eyes of God, and how Destructive it is. Such a Work and Cessation has been
made, and Concluded on, by the Deputies of the LORDS the States in Holland: And
yet it has been worse Acted in ENGLAND, by their Ambassador Nieuport, who
has Commanded the Hollands ADMIRAL to prolong the said Cessation for Three
Weeks; who has Obliged Himself in ENGLAND, to cause the same to be Ratified
and Approved of, by his Masters and Principalls: Insomuch, that now the
Netherlandish Power, which is so Burdensome to their Own Inhabitants, that it
is now become Noisome; And in the mean time, the Swedes lay Hold of All.

Your Highnesses may be pleased to take the Premises into your Mature
Considerations, and to continue and remain Obliged to your Oaths and
Fidelities, to Maintain and Uphold Unity, and with all Speed to Agitate
therein, according to the Designs Contained in these Charecters herewith
going: Not doubting, that although Holland leaves Us so absurdly, and that They
Oblige Themselves by the said Treaty, upon the Refusal of Our Acceptance, of
the Agreement by Them made, in Lieu of the Assistance which They have Sworn
unto Us, to force Us to it with their Fleet, but that the Almighty will Himself
Fight for Us in Defense of Our Good Cause, who will Crown your Sacred and
Anointed Heads with Triumphant Victory and Glory, and I, as David, and a
Person left Destitute, shall with my Citizens Humble Our Selves before that
Great God, and Depend upon Him alone, and then We shall in his most Holy Name
Go Out, against that Swedish GOLIA; And if it should please God, that We Fall
by the Sword, Our Wives shall set the City on Fire of all Sides, and shall
depart from thence with the remaining Ships, where Christ in his Mercy shall
Conduct Them, who will take your Serene Highness's into his most holy
Protection, etc.

Given at Our Court at Coppenhagen, the 24 June, 1659.
FINIS.

