A Free-Parliament-Letany.
To the tune of An old Soldier of the Queens.
1
MOre Ballades; -- here is a spick - and - span new Supplication;
By Order of a Committee for the Reformation
To be read in all Churches, and Chapels of this Nation,
Upon pain of Slavery, and Sequestration
From Fools, and Knaves, in our Parl'ament Free
Libera nos Domine.
2
From those that have more Religion, and less Conscience, then their fellows:
From a Representative, that is fearful, and jealous;
From a starting Jadish people, that is troubled with the yellows
And a Priest that blows the cole -- (a Turd in the Bellows)
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
3
From Shepherds, that lead their Flocks into the Briers;
And then, Fleece' um. -- From Vow-breakers, and King-tryers:
-- Of Church- and Crown- Lands from both Sellers, and Buyers:
From the Children of him, that is the Father of Liars.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
4
From the Doctrine, and Discipline of Sedgewick
now, and anon;
Preserve us, and our wives: from John a Nokes
John T, and Saint John a Styles
John
Like Master, like Man, every way but one:
The Master has a large conscience, and the Man, has none?
From Foooles, and Knaves, etc.
5
From Major-Generalls, -Army Officers; and that Phanatique crewe:
From the Parboyl'd Pimp Scot; - and from Goodface the Jew:
From old Mildmay, that in Cheapside mistook his Repulsed by a Citizens wife
Queue
And from him that w'ont Pledge -- give the Devil his due,
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
6
From longwinded speeches, and not a wise word,
From a Gospell-Minstry settled by the sword
From the Act of a Rump, that stinks whent 't is stirred;
From a Knight of the Post, and a Cobbling Lord.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
7.
From all the rich people that have made us poor;
From a Speaker that creepes to the House by a Backdore:
From that Badger Robinson, (that limps, and bites sore:)
And that dog in a doublet Arthur, -- that will do so no more.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
8
From a certain Sly Knave with a beastly name:
From a Parl'ment that is wild, and a people, that is tame:
From Skippon, Titchbourne, Ireton, - and another of the Game;
From a Dunghill Cock, and a Hen of the Same
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
9
From all those that sat in the High Court of Justice;
From Usurpers, that style themselves the Peoples Trustees:
From an old Rump, in which neither Profit nor Gust is;
And from the recov'ry of that which now in the dust is.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
10
From a Back sliding Saint, that pretends to Acquicesce;
From crossing of Proverbs (let 'um Hang that confess)
From a Sniveling cause, in a Pontifical dress:
And two Jacks both
Lawyer's, with the Devil, and his Damm in a mess.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
11
From those that trouble the waters, to mend the Fishing;
And fight the Lords' Battles, under the Devils Commission:
Such as eat up the Nation, while the Goverment's a dishing
And from a people when it should be doing, stands wishing.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
12
From an ever lasting mock - Parliament; -- and from none;
From Strafford's old friends; -- Harry, Jack, and John
From the Soliciters' Wolfe-Lawe, deliver our King's son;
And from the Resurrection of the Rump that is dead, and gone.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
13
From Foreign invasion, and Commotions at home;
From our present distraction, and from worse to come:
From the same hand again; Smectymnuus or the Bumme,
And from taking Geneva in our way to Rome.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
14
From a Hundred thousand pound Tax, to maintain Knaves and Whores:
(But it is well given, to these, that turned those out of doors)
From undoing our selves, to ^^^tring old sores;
He that set them aworke, let him pay their scores.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
15.
From Saints, and Tender-Consciences in Buff.
From Mounson in a Foam; and Haslerigg in a Huff;
From both men and women that think they never have enough.
And from a Fools Head that looks through a Chain and a Ruff.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
16.
From those that would divide the General and the City:
From Harry Martins Whore, that was neither Sound nor Pretty.
From a Faction, that has neither Brain, nor Pity;
From the Mercy of a Phanatique Committee.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
17.
Preserve us Good Heaven from entrusting those
That have much to get, and little to Loose:
That Murdered the Father, and the Son would depose.
(Sure they cannot be our Friends, that are their Countries Fooes.
From Fool, and Knaves, etc.
18.
From Bradshaws Presumption, and from Hoyle's Despaires,
From Rotten Members; blind Guides; Preaching Aldermen; and false May'rs.
From Long Knives, Long Ears, Long Parliaments, and Long Praye'rs.
In mercy to this Nation, -- Deliver us and our Heirs.
From Fools, and Knaves, etc.
Libera nos Domine.
FINIS.

