A TREATISE TOUCHING THE Peace of the Church, OR AN APOSTOLICAL RULE how to
judge aright in Differences which concern Religion.

JOHN 7. v. 24. Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous
Judgment.

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.

Crown on top of flower

LONDON, Printed for George Thomason, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Rose and Crown in Paul's Churchyard, 1646.

To the Reverend, Pious, and Learned Assembly of Divines convened at
Westminster by the Authority of the Parliament for consultation in matters of
Religion.
REVEREND SIRS,
COnsidering with my self, with a charitable and tender commiseration, the
pestiferous and pernicious Heresies, Schisms, Divisions, and Sects, wherewith
since the Apostles times the Christian (both Eastern and Western) Churches were
ever continually infested, distracted, and torn in pieces; I make no question
but you will confess, that the latter two rents, the One between the
Christian-Protestants and Roman Catholics, the Other between us and the
Evangelical-Lutherans, which in our Predecessors days sprung originally in
Germany, then were dispersed over the face of the
Universal-Occidental-Christian-World, and at this present are grown to the
highest pitch of desolation and devastation of Christendom, were fomented with
more unchristian and inhuman cruelty, bitterness, calumnies, slanders,
oppressions, persecutions, and effusion of blood, then ever you heard or read
in Ecclesiastical Histories of any other Religion in the World: And
consequently acknowledge, that such distractions and disorders of the Christian
Church proceed from no other ground then from an unseasonable, uncharitable,
rash, presumptuous, and unjust judging and condemning one another. Wherefore,
we shall do very well, exactly to search and inquire, which of these three
principal, divided, and dissenting Churches is guilty or innocent of such a
prejudicial Schism and Separation, to the end, that we may know and discern
which side to embrace and give assent unto, and which not. And that the true,
undeniable, orthodoxal Doctrine and Religion of the true Evangelical Reformed
Protestants may not be condemned and rejected by any incompetent Judge as
false, erroneous, heretical, and damnable, in regard that Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical matters are commonly as much obnoxious to ill managing, as Civil
and Temporal: It is by all means expedient and requisite for us to repair to
such a Judge, who betwixt us and others may determine and decide the
Controversy and Difference by an infallible Sentence, from which we cannot
appeal. And whereas the Papists do attribute such full and absolute
determination to the Catholic Church, or, as they declare it themselves, to
the Pope, as the Supreme Head of the Church, either himself alone, or with
assistance of a Council of Cardinals, Bishops, and Prelates, depending on him
and representing the whole Universal Church: I am persuaded we with all
Christian Protestants, cannot, nor will submit to any other Judge in matters of
Religion, but to the Holy Scripture, or to the Lord our God himself, who in his
Sacred Word has prescribed his Will and Decision to the Christian Church,
which we only, closely and positively must adhere and stick unto. For this
Volume of the Holy Scripture (I mean not any other Books, more, or less, then
those that by inspiration of the Holy Ghost were written of the Prophets and
Apostles and left to the Primitive Church, which from it were spread amongst all
Nations and in the midst of darkness and unfaithful heresies by Gods
singular Providence preserved and in their original Tongues conveyed unto us)
being the indubitable Word of God, whose Divine Power, Light, Virtue, and
Operation all true Believers feel in their hearts and consciences, and
containing (though not the decision of all Theological Questions and
Controversies) yet all Articles of Faith and Doctrine, necessary for every true
Christians Salvation; It is manifest, that the Church, or they that have the
charge over it, whether they be called Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, or Divines
and Teachers, or general Councels, have not any power and jurisdiction to
decide, determine, and wrest the Doctrines to their arbitrary judgment and
pleasure, but only a ministerial function to teach and demonstrate by Warrant
from the Word of God whether and how they are decided in it; neither to force
their doubtful and undecided Opinions upon any man sub Anathemate or
Excommunication, unless he should reject the Word of God in any fundamental
and necessary Article of Faith or plain Declaration thereof, or cry up his own
erroneous and controverted opinions, interpretations, consequences, and
inferences for the Word of God it self and necessary Articles of Faith to the
disturbance and distraction of the Christian Church.

And this is that the Papists cast continually into the Lutherans and Reformed
Protestants teeth, That notwithstanding they still refer themselves to the
perfect and infallible Rule of the Word of God; yet for all this they will be
themselves infallible Judges by obstructing and imposing their own particular
expositions and inferences on others. The Lutherans indeed, especially which
are called Lutherani rigidi the grosser sort (who are so strictly addicted
Formulae Concordiae Saxonicae, that they bind not only their Faith and
Doctrine unto it, but also all others that dissent from them in their
particular interpretations and opinions, principally in the Point of
Consubstantiation and Omnipresence of Christ's Body and its oral manducation, by
excluding them from the Communion of the Christian Church and depriving them of
Public Offices and Dignities,) as long as they do obstinately persist in their
arrogant judging and condemning, will have a very hard task to clear themselves
of this charge. The Vindication of the Protestant Reformed Churches, how that
they only depend on the Word of God and not on any man's interpretation and
opinion, much less presume to impose them on others as necessary unto
Salvation, but impart and permit to every one the due Liberty of Conscience
without transgressing the true Limits and Rules of Gods Truth and the Christian
Charity, has been of late sufficiently and punctually for the true and better
information of them that are misinformed, exhibited in high Dutch (by D. John
Bergius, Chaplain to His Highness the Prince Elector of Brandenbourg, Author
of this Treatise, One of the best Learned Divines Germany at this present
affords, a primitive Catholic Christian and downright Protestant,) in such
a plain and perspicuous way, that even the most ignorant and unlearned, who are
not able to peruse great Volumes, may palpably see and perceive the falsehood
and slanders that are laid at all Christian Protestants doors: And withal,
since the Reformed Protestant Churches cannot hope for any Ecclesiastical Peace
and Unity both in Church and Commonwealth, whilst the vehemence and
fierceness in judging and condemning of the said Papists and Lutherans is not
appeased and mitigated. He represents and declares to them an Infallible
Apostolical Direction and Rule in general, what and how far men are bound in
conscience to judge and not to judge in matters of Religion, and then by way of
application; How far they ought to judge the Roman Catholics and Lutherans in
their Doctrine and Religion, or to separate themselves from them, or to reform
them.

Which Treatise having been so happy to peruse by the communication of my
worthy Friend and Countryman Master Jaspar Godeman (whom I always in his
frequent conversation perceived a singular Well-wisher to an Ecclesiastical
Unity,) I have immediately betaken my self to the Translation thereof, much
animated and encouraged by his and diverse others good advice, accompanied with
these two pregnant Motives:

The One: That this subject is the most necessary and profitable of all
Theological Controversies and Questions, that now adays are in agitation, and
may much conduce, if not to the advancement of an Universal Peace and Unity of
all Churches (which though it was always earnestly desired of men truly
zealous and Christians, so that Learned Calvin offering his Service therein to
that worthy man Doctor Cranmer, said, It would not grieve him to sail over ten
Seas to such a purpose, yet proved a work of insuperable difficulty and
altogether impossible in men's eyes,) at least to promote the Christian
agreement and reconciliation or mitigation of the distractions of all Kingdoms,
Principalities, and Free-States that have abandoned the Superstitions and
pernicious Leaven of the Romish Church; For the effecting whereof not only the
Protestant Churches and Divines in Germany have had in former times several
Conferences at Marpurg, Wittenberg, and of late at Leipzig; but also at these
present times that Famous and Reverend Divine Master John Durey (first stirred
up by that excellent Instrument Master James Godeman, Father of the worthy
Gentleman aforementioned, One of His Majesty the King of Sweden's Privy
Counselor and President of his Court of Appellations in the Precinct of
Prussia, and then seconded with hearty wishes tnd prayers of many pious and
learned Divines in England, France, and Scotland,) has these fifteen years to
my knowledge, employed his indefatigable endeavors and singular industry in
Germany, Sweden, Denmark, and Low Countries, and not without hopeful success,
having at length prevailed so much with the Lutherans, especially in Sweden,
that they not only have given over their slanders and calumniations in the
Pulpit, but also are contented to be called Evangelical Protestants, agreeing
with us in the mean time in the name, and walking by the same Rule so far as
they have already attained till God reveal unto them what is remaining.

The Other Motive is, That also this subject would be most seasonable for these
tempestuous and turbulent times, which the Church and State of England at this
present groaneth and labors under, and which, if we will seriously inquire
into, does proceed originally from no other cause then uncharitableness and
acrimony in judging and condemning one another: And consequently (Reverend
Sirs) it will be useful and profitable for every one in particular, whereby
(being peradventure carried away with rashness and vehemence, as naturally all
men are inclined and prone unto, to judge and condemn others as unfaithful,
that err rather out of humane weakness and mere ignorance, then obstinacy and
malice in indifferent matters, and in the circumstance) much good he may here
learn and be advised how to moderate and temperate his passions and affections
with more charity and peaceablenesse and steadfastly maintain the benefit of the
substance, viz. the Universal Christian saving Faith and sincere love and
obedience of Christ, as the only fundamental and necessary Doctrine unto
Salvation, lest in rashly, presumptuously, and rigorously condemning others, he
may be inexcusable and condemn himself: And contrariwise, being either thrust
out of the way, which the Lord our God has commanded him to walk in, or falsely
and contumeliously judged, slandered, reviled, excommunicated, and persecuted
for the true Orthodoxal Doctrine, Faith, and Religion by an incompetent Judge
on Earth, he may know, without believing and obeying their words, and offending
thereby both his own and other true believing or erring consciences, how to
appeal first to the Word of God it self and unanimous consent of the Primitive
Apostolical Church, or to any legal and impartial Ecclesiastical Convocation,
Synod, or Consistory, or if he cannot be heard there, to the Supreme Judge in
Heaven himself, being the only Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy, and
in his good time will judge those Judges themselves, and pronounce a definitive
Sentence against all Heresies, Schisms, and Divisions, and establish an
Universal Harmony and Unity in the Christian Church.

Whereas now these two Motives have induced me to this slender endeavor,
without regard to any other interest or respect but that which might be
conducible to the advancement of an Ecclesiastical Peace and Unity amongst
Evangelical Protestant Churches, lest the Wel-wishers and Furtherers thereof
might not be too long debarred from the luster and use of so rare a Jewel; I
thought fit and expedient to dedicate it to your Patronage, as being suitable
and adequate to your zeal and piety (relying herein upon Sir Edwin Sandys
judgment delivered in his Book called A View of the state of Religion in the
Western parts of the World, page 173. where he writes thus: The end of the
differences between the Evangelical Protestant Churches will be, that their
enemies shall laugh, when themselves shall have cause to weep, unless the
graciousnesse of God stir up some worthy Princes of renown and reputation on
both sides to interpose their Wisdom, Industry, and Authority for the uniting
these Factions, or at least for reconciling and composing those differences in
some tolerable sort; A work of immortal fame and desert, and worthy of none but
them of whom this wicked base World is not worthy: And hoping that this weak
attempt of my labor, though some of the Vulgar sort will perhaps either
carelessly or censoriously entertain it, will be nevertheless as favorably
accepted by you, as it is affectionately and heartily tendered by

REVEREND SIRS, Your humble and devoted Servant PHILIP FREHER.
London the 23th of March 1646.
The Contents of this Book are reduced to these twelve Chapters.
I. Of judging one another in general. II. Wherein we ought not to judge one
another in matters of Religion. III. What is necessary and not necessary unto
Salvation. IV. That the Roman Catholic Church has no ground to judge or
condemn the Protestant Reformed Evangelical Churches as Heretical. V. That the
Lutherans have no ground to judge the Reformed Churches to be Heretical. VI.
Which is the chief and principal Question in this present difference of
Religion, and what are the safest means for the settlement of a Christian
Unity. VII. That even these are the safest means to restrain all Erroneous
Sects. VIII. That in the Reformed Churches, no new Doctrine as necessary to
Salvation is taught. IX. Whether and how far we ought or are bound in
conscience to judge others in matters of Religion. X. Whether or how far
Protestant Churches ought or are bound to judge the said Roman Catholics in
their Doctrine or Religion, or to separate themselves from them, or to undergo
any Reformation. XI. Whether or how far the Reformed Churches ought or are
bound to judge the Lutherans in their Doctrine and Religion, or to separate
themselves from them or to reform them. XII. Whether or how far we may judge or
condemn the persons in matters of Religion.
Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.

AN Apostolical Direction, What and how far we ought to judge, and not to
Judge, in matters of FAITH, DOCTRINE and RELIGION.
ROMANS 14. Verse 13. Let us not Judge one another any more; but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his
brothers Way.


The First Part.
CHAP. I. Of Judging in general.
THe love and charity we owe unto our Neighbor, Which are the true works of
Charity.
if we desire that God may show mercy unto us, does not only consist in those
works of Charity specified in Matthew. 25. To feed the hungry, to give drink to
the thirsty, to clothe the naked, and to comfort and relieve our neighbor
(especially such as professes himself a Christian) in all corporal and
temporal necessities; these being the most notorious works wherein Christian
Charity is externally manifested above all others, insomuch as they are
accounted evident marks and fruits of a true and lively faith and love toward
Christ, whereof also the Apostle James, Chap. 1. verse. 17, speaks: Pure and
undefiled Religion before God and the Father is this; To Visit the Fatherless
and the Widows in their afflictions: But we must also principally show our
selves charitable and compassionate toward our neighbor in his sins; and not
only in those sins he commits against us, to forgive him willingly and from
the bottom of our heart, which is the most necessary and difficult work of
Charity, without which no Sacrifice, nor Alms will be acceptable to God, and
whereof we are put in mind daily in the Lords Prayer: but also in all other
trespasses against God and men, not to judge him rashly, much less condemn
him; as our Savior does teach us, Matthew. 1.7. and Luke 6.37; where he
comprehends all the works of Charity in these four words; Judge not, condemn
not, Forgive, give.

For first, We ought not to judge him in his sins, especially in such which
proceed from humane infirmity and ignorance, but rather excuse him as much as
lies in our power. Secondly, we ought not suddenly to condemn him in such
offenses, which are committed more out of an inexcusable malice then weakness;
but rather use all our possible endeavors to convert him, and save his soul
from death and damnation. Thirdly, We ought to forgive him with all our heart
those sins he has committed against us. Fourthly, We ought also to give to
him, and supply willingly all his wants. And thus we shall fulfill all the works
of Christian Love and Charity. To which the Lord in the said Chapter does
earnestly exhort us by three strong and efficacious Motives. 1. By the example
of our heavenly Father, to whem We, being his children, must conform our
selves, especially in love and compassion: Be ye merciful as your heavenly
Father is merciful. 2. By the promise of a proportionable remuneration; If we
do not judge nor condemn, God will not judge nor condemn us; if we forgive, God
will forgive us also: If we give and willingly assist others, God will forgive
and relieve us also, and not sparingly, but liberally and abundantly: Finally,
in every thing, With the same measure that we mete withal, it shall be measured
unto us again. 3. By the representation of our faults and weaknesses, which he
sets out by Three similitudes: Of one blind person leading another which is
likewise blind: Of a Master, who will have his disciple more learned and
perfect then himself: Of a Physician or Oculist, who will pull out the mote of
another man's eye, when he himself has a beam in his own eye: Lest we may not
presume to Judge and condemn others in their ways; or to hate and forsake
others, when yet we our selves are many times blind and stand in need of a
good master and guide: nor to upbraid others with their indiscretion and
imperfections, when We our selves are in many things indiscreet and imperfect
masters: neither to find so great fault with other men's motes in their eyes:
or to undertake so boldly the pulling out, when many times by the cure of the
motes of our brother, We our selves thrust into our own eye a strong and great
beam of Hypocrisy, Spiritual pride, Presumption and Self-love, without
perceiving it at all.

What sort of Judging is prohibited and what not.
Nevertheless this sort of Judging which the Lord speaks of, is not so meant
or to be understood, as if all judging in general were prohibited and unlawful:
For he does not thereby prohibit the Jurisdiction and Judicature whereby the
Magistrates do judge and condemn Delinquents, in God's stead; and whereby the
Church, or the Ministers and Elders of the Church in Christ's stead do judge
scandalous members: nor the Judging of Conscience, whereby every Christian
ought to judge and discern aright in his own Conscience good from evil, truth
from falsehood, justice from injustice, that he may know both in doctrine and
life what to believe and not to believe, what to do and what to eschew. Such
manner of Judging is not only not prohibited, but often commanded; Joh. 7.24.
Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. 1 Cor.
5.12, 13. Do not ye judge them that are within? But them that are without, God
judges. 1 Cor. 10.15. I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say. 1 John 4.1.
Try the spirits, whether they are of God. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold
fast that which is good. But Christ's meaning was to prohibit thereby all
Presumptuous judging of other men, as far as it is repugnant to love and
charity, or to justice and truth: When we presume to be our neighbors Judges,
1. In regard of his sins, and that when we judge him either by his afflictions,
tribulations and sufferings; like as Job was judged by his friends, and David
oftentimes, especially in Psalm. 41, cries out against such judging of his
enemies or false friends: or by his words and works, when we either make the
worst construction or sense of that which was not so evil meant, spoken and
done, whereas we might have extracted and made the best of it, and excused it:
or when we exasperate too much the defects and faults proceeding out of humane
infirmity, and so make huge and vast beams of the least motes; or censure upon
false and ill grounded slanders and calumnies, that which is uncertain yet (if
not altogether forged) whether it was thus spoken, done and meant. 2. In regard
of the very thoughts of his heart, mind and intentions, against his own words
and works, merely out of a malicious suspicion to render him odious and
contemptible to others; or when we will needs judge him in matters though
certain and evil enough, yet with little or no respect either to his or our own
good: or lastly, when we are not contented to judge his sins, but even presume
to sit down in God's Tribunal pronouncing sentence against his soul, and
condemn it to hell it self.

All this presumptuous, uncharitable, unjust and unprofitable judging, is
prohibited by Christ, and extends to all sins in worldly businesses and
ordinary temporal affairs; viz. to such as are incident to words or works of
the Second Table, and much more to all sins in matters of God's service and
Religion, viz. to the words and works of the First Table.

Again, he enjoyneth these Two duties, being the chief and most requisite works
of charity, that we should not judge others, but rather excuse them; not
condemn, but rather further and hope for their amendment, because without
these, the other Two duties which consist in Forgiving and Giving, cannot be
well performed: Yea, he does in this order press the aforesaid duties, because
by such judging and condemning as he forbids, most commonly, though
unjustly, occasion is taken by many to conceive that they are not obliged to
any charity at all toward criminous persons, nor to forgive them their sins,
neither to give unto them nor help them in their wants; but rather to resist
them in every thing, and to hate and persecute them to the uttermost: Act.
26.9, 11.

In opposition to which evil apprehension, our Lord Christ alleges against
such unseasonable judging this notable and familiar place of Scripture, Hos.
6.2. I desired mercy and not sacrifice; and gives especially this lesson to
the Pharisees and Scribes, to be learned by them, who did transgress it most
of all: Matthew. 9.11. Go ye and learn what that means, I will have mercy and
not sacrifice: and Matthew. 12.7. If ye had known what this means, you would
not have condemned the guiltless.

Unseasonable and rash Judging, a grievous sin.
And although this be in it self the easiest work of Charity (for what is easier
for a man then to abstain and withhold himself from judging, the right
performance whereof is the most difficult and dangerous work in the world, and
pertains properly to God alone?) yet it is the hardest work by reason of the
perverseness of man's heart; and some find it more difficult then to forgive
their neighbors.

Moreover, Unseasonable and tenacious judging is not without reason esteemed to
be the most common, the most pernicious, and yet the most hidden and secret
Vice of all sins and corruptions.

The most common: Because we are all generally swayed by a natural proclivity
rather to judge and censure other men then our selves; And all sorts of men,
high and low, of what dignity and degree soever, are obnoxious to this
Uncharitableness. The most supreme Magistrates and Rulers of this world, Kings
and Princes, whom God has ordained to be Judges over other men, must give way
often to be very injustly judged and censured, not only by their enemies, but
even by their own servants and subjects. Preachers and Ministers of God's Word,
not only by their Adversaries, but even by their fellow-brethren and Auditors.
The most godly by the most ungodly: The wisest by the most foolish: Yea, God
himself in heaven is oftentimes judged and blamed by fools and madmen on the
earth: Psalm. 51.4. Romans 3.4.

The most pernicious: For whilst we reprove others, we forget to judge our
selves, though this be the most necessary and profitable judging: yea, wherein
we judge others, we condemn our selves, Romans 2.1. And all sorts of calamities
and miseries amongst men; all disorders, distempers, distractions, differences
and dissentions in every estate, in Commonwealths, in Christian Churches, even
in Families, if we seriously search thereinto, proceed originally from no other
ground, but from an Unseasonable, rash, uncharitable, and injust judging one
another.

The most secret: Because it happens not only in words and works, but many
times in the very thoughts, as in those to whom our Savior says, Wherefore
think you evil in your hearts? Matthew 9.4. And then it comes commonly under the
color and appearance of singular zeal toward Justice, truth, and the honor
of God; and withal under pretense of love and charity to pull out the more out
of our brother's eye: From whence it is, that it is not counted for a sin or
vice at all; but rather passes for a commendable virtue, for a good, holy,
profitable, yea sometimes for a necessary work; whilst many Imagine that they
must judge and condemn, lest otherwise they should be judged and condemned by
God.

Especially in matters of Religion.
Which Unjust judging, if it be a dangerous and pernicious Vice in any temporal
and worldly matters; certainly it must needs be more prejudicial and dangerous
in matters of Religion and Faith, as being of the greatest moment and
importance, in regard all differences, contentions, dissentions, slanders; all
vain and swelling babbling, all scholastical and profane Controversies, all
foolish and unprofitable questions and literal disputes, which we are
admonished so often by the Apostle to avoid; In like manner, all enmity,
hatred, envy and bitterness which arise from them; And lastly, all Heresies,
Schisms, Sects, Separation, and the destruction of the Universal Christian
Church, do originally proceed from nothing more then from such Uncharitable
judging and condemning.

Wherein in these later days, more then in former, not only the vulgar and
ignorant People, but even most of all those that should admonish others,
Learned Divines, have transgressed, and thereby given much occasion to this
present lamentable devastation and destruction of Christendom, and wrought so
much already with the greatest part of the Christians by such judging and
contentions arising from the same, that in stead of true Godliness and
Christian Charity, which should be the only scope and fruit of Christian
Doctrine, at this present the Christian Religion is turned almost into a mere
disceptation and debate of words, which at length may open a door to the
Contempt of all Religion and Universal Atheism, as it is already in several
places apparently manifest.

And although amongst these modern contentious Divines some are more exorbitant
then other, yet none of them shall be able so fully to excuse and vindicate
themselves, but they will be found to have sometimes transgressed the limits
and moderation of Christian Charity.

Wherefore we all have great need to repeat and ruminate again on Christ's old
Lesson; Go ye and learn what that means; I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

To the apprehension and learning of which, none can give us better direction
then the Apostle Paul, who during his ignorance was also such a zealous and
vehement judge; but afterward, when God had showed mercy unto him, did the
more faithfully dehort others from it: especially the Romans, in his most
excellent Epistle to them, through the Whole Fourteenth Chapter, the chief sum
and argument whereof is comprehended in Verse 13. Wherefore let us not judge
one another any more; but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block,
or occasion to fall, in his brothers way.

In which words, if we do examine the Coherence by the precedent and subsequent
Verses, the Apostle collecteth for us Two most necessary Rules:

1. What and why we ought not to judge one another, especially in matters of
Religion and Conscience.

2. What and how far we may and are bound in conscience to judge.

Whereof as I have heretofore given a public Exposition to the Christian
Assembly, I intend at this present, upon the request of some Well-wishers to
Truth and Unanimity, to impart to them a more ample Treatise, with an
Application to the Modern Differences; not affecting Contention, but Peace and
Unity.

As the Apostle himself does sufficiently intimate and imply that this is the
most exact Rule for Peace and Edification, when he adds, Verse. 19, Let us
follow after the things which make for Peace, and things wherewithal one may
edify ((...)) another.

Chap. 2.
The Father of all Mercy, who is also a God of Judgment and Peace, grant to
me and all that shall peruse this present Treatise, to set before our eyes his
Judgments and Mercy, that we his children in all our Judging may exercise
Mercy, Love and Peace, to the end that in the Great day of Judgment we may
not be judged by him according to the severitie of his Justice, but according
to his Grace and Mercy.

CHAP. II. Wherein we ought not to judge one another in matters of Religion.
IN the beginning of the Fourteenth Chapter to the Romans, the Apostle
admonishes them; Him that is weak in the faith, receive you, but not to
doubtful disputations. The Greek Text has (...). The Vulgar Version, Non
disceptationes cogitationum. Beza, Non ad altercationes disceptationum; that
is, not to a debate of disputes: or, as some expound it more properly with
Augustine; Not to judging of thoughts; that is to say, Do not set your selves
as judges over his thoughts, to reject him because of his weakness of faith.

Which afterward he applies chiefly to those, who, though they had received
the Gospel of Christ, and believed to obtain salvation by his grace; yet did
observe the distinction of days and meats, or made a scruple whether they might
eat such meat without sin and offense, which God himself had forbidden in the
Law: Though some will have understood thereby the meats offered to Idols;
concerning which, 1 Cor. 8, he teaches almost the very same Doctrine.

Where the Apostle exhorts those that were strong in faith, who had
sufficient knowledge that such distinctions of meats and days in the Law, were
now not any more requisite according the Gospel in Christ, but were a mere
indifferent thing; that they nevertheless should not contemn or condemn such
as were weak in faith, who had not yet the knowledge of their liberty, or were
doubtful of it; nor should judge their thoughts why they did abstain from such
meats, but receive them in love and charity.

Moreover, he gives to them both this Rule, Verse. 3. Let him that eats
(understand every thing, by reason of the liberty of the Gospel) not despise
him that eats not; and let not him that eats not (every thing, by reason
that he thinks the difference of meats according to the Law to be necessary,
or doubts thereof) judge him that eats: For God has received him (in the
Gospel.) Who art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own master he
stands or falls. Which he repeateth over again in the Tenth verse; But why
do thou judge thy brother? (that eats every thing) or why do thou set
at naught thy brother (that eats not?) We shall all stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, where every one of us shall give account of himself
to God. Whereupon these words follow: Let us not therefore judge one another
any more; viz. in such a manner whereby we should reject one another, and not
receive one another in things that are not necessary and indifferent, and
notwithstanding are accounted to be necessary by some, out of their weakness
of faith.

Out of which words and discourse of the Apostle, we frame this general Rule
and Doctrine; That in those things, A General Rule wherein we ought not to
Judge one another.
which in themselves are not necessary for salvation, though by some they are
counted to be necessary, none shall judge or condemn the other; but one ought
to tolerate and receive the other in love and charity, as brethren that are
weak in faith.

And this Rule is of great force and validity, as well in matters that we ought
to believe as practice: For both were called into question by the Primitive
Christians in the Apostles times: Some believed, that it was requisite to make
a distinction of meats, and therefore did not eat every thing: Others believed
and counted it unnecessary, and therefore did eat every thing promiscuously:
Both did also herein rely upon the Word of God: Those, upon the bare and simple
letter of the Law: These, upon the liberty of the Gospel, according to which
they did declare the true meaning of the Law, which they had received from
Christ and the Apostles. And although those did greatly err in the letter of
the Law, which was not intended for the times of the Kingdom of Christ among
the Gentiles, but had its reference only to the Old Testament: Yet the Apostle
will that none shall judge, despise or reject the other, neither in their
faith, nor works; but receive him as a weak brother in faith.

Whereunto this Observation ought to be annexed, That the Apostle does speak
only of those, who out of mere weakness and fear to transgress the Law, made
it a matter of necessity, or at least a scruple of it: to whom it would have
been sin, if they had eaten of the forbidden meat against their own (though
erroneous) consciences; according to the doctrine of the Apostle, Verse 23. He
that doubts, is damned if he eat (viz. against his own conscience) because be
eats not of faith: for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.

But those that rather out of malice and obstinacy, then out of mere weakness
and fear, did make it necessary, after such a manner that they not only for
themselves believed and did it; but also enforced it upon the believers among
the Gentiles, as necessary to their own and other men's salvation, without any
true ground from Gods Word; and consequently, besides the distinction of meats
and days, did press upon them the necessity of the whole Ceremonial Law,
Circumcision, Sacrifices, etc. and therefore condemned and reviled the Apostle
Paul and others, as enemies to the Law, who did faithfully maintain and defend
the liberty of the Gospel: Those, I say, the Apostle, by the virtue of his
Apostleship, has very earnestly judged, reproved and condemned; yea,
stigmatized and branded with an Anathema, especially in his Epistle to the
Galatians, Chap. 1. verse. 8, 9. If any man, though an Angel from heaven preach
any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received (by us Apostle) let him be
accursed; even for this reason, because they judged most presumptuously the
believers amongst the Gentiles and the Apostles themselves, and disturbed and
scandalized thereby the Christian Congregation, so that they introduced a quite
other Gospel, according to which they thought to be justified and saved by the
works of the Law, and not by the grace and mercy of Christ.

Now seeing he has thus censured those, which were so zealous for the
necessity of the Mosaical Law; how much more then deserve those to be censured
that enforced the traditions and commandments of men for doctrines necessary
unto salvation? Matthew. 15.3, 9. And yet how much more those, who under the name
of Gods Word do introduce erroneous, or even Superstitious and Idolatrous
Doctrine and Worship as necessary unto salvation? Whereof we shall speak more
in the second Part.

At this present let us principally consider and apply this first Rule, wherein
a Christian ought not to judge and condemn another, but rather receive and
tolerate him as a weak brother in the faith: Namely, in such articles of faith
and life, which either in themselves or by Gods Will and Commandment are not
necessary unto salvation.

And not only in these, that are generally agreed on not to be necessary, but
also in such which by some either out of weakness of knowledge, or out of fear
to sin, are esteemed to be necessary, though they are not.

Nevertheless with this Caution, that they reciprocally do not judge nor
condemn in such pretended necessary Points of theirs, other Christians, which
will not allow of them to be so necessary nor so true and reasonable. For
otherwise this unjust judging and condemning would be damnable in themselves,
especially if it should be done with Uncharitableness and Obstinacy.

I doubt not but the Modern Dissenting parties will condescend and assent
without any difficulty to this Doctrine: for none of them will have laid to his
charge, that he did judge and condemn his Adversary for Unnecessary matters;
but every thing must assume the name of necessary Articles of Saving Doctrine
and Worship, wherein their Yea and Nay Yea and Nay.
must necessarily be allowed. But even these are the hinges whereon all the
Differences and Disputes will hang; What properly is necessary and not
necessary unto salvation.

For although the Apostle teaches us not to judge one another in those things,
which one Party esteems necessary, though in themselves they are not: yet it
does not follow, that we ought not to judge in matters which one Party holds
not necessary, or unlawful, though they are in themselves necessary: But we
must necessarily judge, that he cannot be saved who rejects a Doctrine or
Worship as not necessary and unlawful, which yet of it self is necessary unto
salvation.

Wherefore, before I proceed to the Application, I think it very requisite to
declare briefly, and as much as will conduce to this purpose, What is necessary
and not necessary unto salvation.

CHAP. III. What is necessary or not necessary unto Salvation.
WHat is necessary or not necessary to believe and do for to be saved, may be
considered either in regard of the matter it self, which we of necessity ought
to believe and to do; or in respect of the Persons, who of necessity ought to
believe and to do them: or according to the revealed Word, Degrees and
distinctions of the necessity of Doctrines. 1. In regard of the Doctrine it
self.
as being the infallible Rule and Means whereby we know, what we ought to
believe and to do.

In the doctrine and matter of Faith and Life it self, we must exactly
distinguish what is necessary unto salvation, direct and per se, absolutely
and by it self, wherein our salvation does properly consist, and without which
none may be saved; and what is necessary but reductive, mediate, consequenter;
so far necessary, as of necessity it follows and depends from that which
is directly necessary, or does of necessity cohere with it.

For example: The Faith in Jesus Christ which works by Love, Gal. 5.6. 1 Cor.
3.11. 1 Cor. 2.2. 2 Timothy 1.13. 1 John 3.23. (as it is generally confessed by
all that call on the Name of Christ) is in it self and directly necessary; and
with it every thing wherein properly and essentially this saving faith, love
and obedience of Christ does consist; without which no man can have true lively
faith in Christ: which also properly is called The fundamental Doctrine of
faith and salvation.

But by a necessary consequence, all other Doctrines of Faith and life which
from this Fundamental doctrine, by exact and necessary Theological Conclusions
and Inferences may be derived and grounded thereon, are also in some manner
necessary.

Which are likewise of Two sorts. Some are deduced by so evident and clear a
consequence from the Fundamental doctrine and the Undoubted Word of God, that
every understanding and knowing Christian may easily conceive them, and no man
can reject them, unless he rejects also the Fundamental doctrine whereon
they manifestly depend. Some, though they are also derived from the Fundamental
doctrine of Gods Word; yet their consequence is not so evident, that every
Christian, but only Divines and men that are well versed in the Word of God,
may conceive it: Yea, some Doctrines yet are not for every Divine's capacity,
but only for those, who by a special illumination from God are endued with a
more excellent knowledge of the heavenly mysteries before others: Which
therefore are not necessary for all to know, or to do; because they may retain
the Necessary Fundamental doctrine and the saying Faith and love of Christ,
though either they do not know and conceive at all such derived points of
doctrine by reason of the infirmity and shallowness of their understanding,
or call them in question by some pretended exceptions, or reject them quite.

And from these last sort of doctrines arises almost all the Contention: When
one will judge the other for that, what for his part he deduceth and collecteth
as necessary, from the Fundamental doctrine; but the other will either hold it
for not necessary, or for erroneous and unlawful; insomuch that some either out
of a mere mistake and misapprehension, or carnal affections, do so obstinately
adhere and cleave to those pretended necessary derived points of doctrine, that
they will make Fundamental points of them: yea, some are so, exorbitant herein,
that if they do not quite deny the Fundamental points of doctrine, at least
they do obscure and pervert one or other Article of them. Which otherwise are
so clearly and perspicuously expressed in the Undoubted Word of God, by the
Prophets and Apostles, that they cannot be denied or questioned by any
Christian but him that is clouded and blinded by his affections.

2. In respect of persons.
Wherefore in the Second place we must discern what is necessary or not
necessary in respect of the Persons. For there are some Universal, or according
to the Greek, Catholic Doctrines, which are necessary for all Christians to
know, and at all times, especially in the Primitive Church of the Apostles have
been unanimously received, taught, and believed by all true Christians: as the
aforementioned Fundamental doctrine of salvation, with all that is evidently
and undoubtedly depending from it; so that no man can reject it without he
rejects also the Fundamental doctrine it self.

But some are but Theological Doctrines, which are not necessary for all
Christians, but only for some to know, to whom God has imparted before others
a fuller measure of knowledge, and more excellent gifts and charge; from whom
also he will require more then of others, according to the rule of Christ, To
whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required, Luke 12.48.

So that it is sufficient for one to know and to believe only implicitly in
the principal General Articles, that what another does know and believe
explicitly in many Special Points which are comprehended therein. For the one,
that he should believe and do that which in it self and directly is necessary
unto salvation; for the other, that which he knows to be consequently
necessary, or to be inseparably annexed thereunto: Yea, for one it is necessary
to believe many Truths, whereof he has good ground and knowledge, out of the
Word of God; which nevertheless for another, who wants such knowledge, are
either not so necessary, or not so profitable, to believe without ground; yet
are necessary, not to deny or contradict them obstinately out of carnal
affections; because he cannot but have less ground to deny them, and rather
ought to search the Truth diligently in the fear and worship of God, and to be
ready to receive and acknowledge it with thankfulness, when it is demonstrated
unto him out of the Word of God: Otherwise the Obstinate denying (which is
incompatible and inconsistent with true faith and love to Christ and his Word,
and proceeds merely from carnal affections, whereby the understanding in the
knowledge of the Truth is darkened and eclipsed) would prove damnable unto him
not only by reason of the error it self, but rather because of his Obstinacy.

Thirdly and principally, we must discern what is necessary or not necessary in
regard of the revealed Word, 3. In regard of the revealed Word of God.
being the rule and means whereby we may know what we ought to believe and to
do.

Which Word, though properly there is nor ought to be but only one, yet is
delivered to the Believers in a Twofold manner, by Preaching, and Writing: From
whence we must distinctly consider. Whether and how far the written Word of
God, and whether and how far the preached and ministerial Word, or the
traditions and doctrines of the Church and their teachers, ought to be the rule
of our Faith and life.

But since this is the Point that principally is controverted and debated
betwixt the Roman Catholics and the Evangelical Protestants; we intend at
this present to lay down the groundwork of that which is undoubtedly agreed on
by both Parties.

As first of all, That the Books of the Prophets and Apostles of the Old and
New Testament, which we on all sides acknowledge and receive for Canonical, are
the undoubted Word of God, and the perfect and infallible rule of our Faith and
life; and that consequently every thing that is taught in them so clearly and
manifestly, that every understanding Christian certainly and undoubtedly may
know and conceive it, must be necessary for all unto salvation: so that though
they do not know explicit and particularly all things; yet are ready to
believe and receive undoubtedly all things, as soon at they do apprehend them.

The Sum of the Articles we must believe unto salvation, is briefly collected
in the Apostolical Creed, into which all Christians are baptized and received
as fellow members of the Christian Church: What we must Morally do, is
exhibited in the Commandments of the First and Second Table concerning the love
and duty toward God and our neighbor: But what we must Ceremonially and
Sacramentally perform, is contained in the words of the Institution of the holy
Baptism and the blessed Communion or Supper of the Lord, being the Two
Sacraments of the New Testament, ordained by Jesus Christ himself, as it is
generally and undoubtedly agreed on: And lastly, what we ought to desire and
ask of God, is included in the Lords Prayer. In which Five Fundamental Points
of Christian Religion, viz. in tribus Symbolis doctrinalibus credendorum,
faciendorum, petendorum, what we ought to believe, to do and to ask, and in
duobus Symbolis Sacramentalibus regenerationis and nutritionis spiritualis; how
we ought to be regenerated, and as Children of God in Christ spiritually
nourished unto a new and eternal life, does consist the whole Catechism, which
we for our part think generally necessary for all Christians; yet all is to be
understood in that sense, which is most clearly taught and expressed in the
Scripture; yea also, whatsoever so evidently and necessarily does depend from
the said Fundamental Points, that every Understanding Christian (though he is
not able to conceive the Divine Mysteries by his natural reason) may yet
certainly and undoubtedly apprehend the doctrine or meaning of the Scripture,
or the necessary consequence of it. Therefore although any Controversy should
be raised and moved about these Fundamental Articles, which in the Primitive
Church had not been sufficiently declared or unanimously taught; yet they could
not be generally necessary unto salvation for all Christians, but only their
unanimous and undoubted meaning.

Moreover, besides that what directly in it self is necessary, there are yet
many other points of doctrine partly Theological partly Historical, and partly
Philosophical; yea, in general, whatsoever is clearly taught in the holy
Scripture, though its consequence and dependence from these Fundamental
Articles is not of such necessity, and therefore not directly necessary unto
Salvation; yet it is necessary for us to believe it, because it is thus
certainly and clearly revealed in the Word of God. For Example: That our Lord
Jesus Christ suffered under the Emperor Tiberius and under the Governor
Pontius Pilate, as it is expressed in the Apostles Creed: or that the mother of
the Lord was called Mary: or that our Lord rose from the dead the Third and not
the Fourth day, etc. These are such circumstances in the history of the Birth
and Death of Christ, which though directly they are not necessary for us to
believe and know unto salvation; yet they are necessary for us to believe,
because they are as clearly and expressly set down in the Word of God, as the
Articles themselves; so that no man that knows them, may deny or make a
scruple of them, unless he would also deny together the whole Word of God.

Likewise, that in the last times the great Antichrist shall come, That at
Christ's coming to judge the world, not all men shall die, but the rest be
changed; which though it is not absolutely necessary unto salvation to know,
yet it is necessary for him to believe it, who has such knowledge of it from
the Word of God.

And because the holy Scriptures do promise everlasting life and salvation to
all them which truly believe in Jesus Christ, as he is revealed and manifested
in them; we thereby further argue and conclude thus: That such doctrine of the
Scripture is not only necessary, but also wholly sufficient unto salvation; so
that no other singular doctrine besides the holy Scripture, is necessary unto
salvation. Which also the Primitive Church, both in its doctrine and universal
practice, does abundantly testify that they held the sacred Scripture to be
satisfactory unto salvation, even for the most-able and best-learned men, and
the Five aforesaid Symbols or Fundamental Articles sufficient for all Unlearned
Ignorant Christians, as we could prove it by many evident testimonies of the
Ancient Fathers; which having heretofore already been done by many others, we
thought it superfluous to enlarge our selves therein at this present.

Whether and how far the Tradition and Doctrine of the Church is necessary.
Yet next and besides the Scripture, we do not decline and reject the Word and
Doctrine of the Church, not as the principal Ground and rule of our Faith (for
that is merely and solely grounded upon this, Because the Lord said it; but not
upon this, Because the Church or their teachers said it) but as requisite means
whereby the Word of God is preached and taught unto us, and as a testimony of
that what is declared therein.

Wherein notwithstanding we must exactly distinguish betwixt that, what the
whole Universal Christian Church has with an unanimous Consent taught and
believed out of the Word of God at all times, especially in the Primitive
times, and that what perhaps but one or other Particular Church, has taught in
the later times.

Whatsoever the whole Christian Church, especially in the first hundred years
immediately after the Apostles, has unanimously taught and believed out of the
Word of God as necessary unto salvation; that same is an Infallible mark and
testimony that it is certainly and undoubtedly the true sense and meaning of
the Word of God, and consequently is necessary for all Christians to believe
and receive it: Because there is no doubt but the true Primitive Church, beside
the holy Scripture, has received also from Christ himself and his Apostles the
true sense and meaning thereof, at least in all necessary Fundamental Points of
the Christian doctrine.

Contrariwise, whatsoever the Primitive Church has not taught, that same is an
evident sign and testimony that it is not so expressly set down in the holy
Scripture, that all Christians of necessity should know and believe it unto
salvation, because many thousands of the Primitive and best Christians have
been saved without such doctrine.

But this testimony of the Primitive Church, of whatsoever it has taught or
not taught, is of such a nature that it is not to be understood by all
Christians, but only by those who are well versed and have read the Volumes of
the Ancient Fathers; which even very few of the Teachers and Ministers are able
to do. Wherefore the greater part of Christians, especially when the doctrine
and meaning of the Primitive Church is drawn into Controversy, ought to fix
themselves and adhere closely to the evident testimony of the holy Scripture,
without which they cannot have any certain ground of their faith and salvation.

For whatsoever not the Universal only, but one or some Particular Churches
have believed and taught, especially in the later times, whether it were done
in their Councils and Synods, or else by their public Confessions, or other
writings, doctrines and witnesses: that very same, though it is a testimony of
the belief and doctrine of the particular Churches; yet it cannot oblige other
Churches or generally all Christians, nor be necessary for all unto salvation,
neither ground and confirm their faith any further then the certain and
indubitable Word of God has demonstrated unto them, and they themselves have
received it as consonant and agreeable to Scripture: Since it is granted on all
sides, that the particular Churches may err in their own particular opinions,
and that the Christian Faith must not be grounded upon the word of one
particular Church, but merely and only upon the Word of God.

Nevertheless the Word and Authority of the particular Churches does bind at
least their fellow members thus far, that they ought not rashly to contradict
their doctrine and declarations, unless it be contradicted by a more evident
testimony of Gods Word, and by an Unanimous doctrine of the Primitive Church.
For otherwise this would prove a Presumptuous judging, or at least an
Unnecessary scandalous contradicting.

We hope now, Why not a certain specif^^^tion may be made of all the Points of
Doctrine, that are necessary unto salvation.
by all these things that are said it does plainly and manifestly appear, What
and how far it is necessary and not necessary unto salvation; although we do
not specify all points of Doctrine, nor precisely determinate what and how
much might be necessary and sufficient to every one in particular; which is
almost impossible to do, for these Reasons. First, because we cannot directly
know how far the capacity of every one or the most unlearned and ignorant
Christians, and how far Gods mercy may reach and extend above their
understanding, and therefore ought not rashly to condemn any man in his
ignorance, to whom peradventure God may show mercy. Secondly, because none can
obtain a true knowledge and faith in Christ, but he must somewhat strive and
labor for it, that he may increase and thrive therein. Like as we cannot
describe and set a certain measure to the height and bigness of a young child
(because yet it must needs daily grow, if it be alive and in health) till it
has attained his full and perfect age: so may we neither circumscribe and
limit any Christians knowledge within a certain measure, because he ought to
grow and augment still in the knowledge, faith and doctrine of Christ, if he be
a true Christian, till he is come to a perfect man of stature of the fullness
of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13. Thirdly, because we cannot fail sooner in any thing
then when we presume to regulate and measure all other men's capacities by the
measure of our own understanding, and do imagine that what peradventure we
think to be clear and evident in the Word of God, that very same must likewise
be as clear to all others, and therefore as certain and necessary for all;
which is also the chief and principal reason of all Unseasonable judging in
matter of faith, yea, the source and fountain of all divisions and dissentions
in the Church of God.

Wherefore it is sufficient for our purpose to know in general, which no
Christian can deny, That all and only that is necessary unto salvation, what
necessarily belongs to the saving Faith in Christ, which works by love, and
cannot subsist without true repentance and conversion from sin, and without new
obedience to Christ Commandments: Which all is so plainly and expressly taught
in the undoubted Word of God, especially in the Five aforementioned principal
Points, that every Christian may sufficiently understand them unto his
salvation, and has been unanimously professed in the Primitive Apostolic
Church.

But whatsoever is not so clearly and expressly taught in the Word of God, as a
necessary Article of Faith, Love and Obedience toward Christ, nor has been
understood and taught out of the same in the Primitive Church: That very same,
though it depends from it by a necessary consequence, and therefore may be
true doctrine and agreeable to Scripture: yet it cannot be necessary for them,
who do not understand it as yet, and retain only the Fundamental doctrine it
self, the saving faith and love toward Christ: at least so long till God
enlighteneth and brings their understanding to a fuller knowledge of the
Truth, which they in the fear of God ought daily to search into.

Whereby we do conclude further, that We ought also not to judge one another
(according to the aforesaid rule of the Apostle) in these doctrines. Especially
when the other may produce Motives and reasons to the contrary, and such, which
are taken not from natural reason, but from the Word of God; and therefore
binds not only his understanding, but also his conscience, that he cannot
receive such doctrines for fear of sinning against God and his Word, but must
at least doubt of them. For in such a case we must say, Whosoever doubts, if
he eats (if he receives them) is damned (by his own conscience.) And rather,
according to the Apostle's exhortation, in such controversies of doctrines, We
must receive him that is weak in faith, but not to doubtful disputations. Who
art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own master he stands or
falls. Let us therefore not judge one another any more; but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block or offense of conscience, in his
brothers way.

CHAP. IV. That the Roman Catholic Church has no ground to Judge and condemn
the Protestant Reformed Evangelical Churches as Heretical.
HAving laid this ground, we may easily, and as much as is necessary for every
ones conscience unto salvation, deliver our Judgment and Opinion concerning
the Modern differences and dissentions in matters of Religion, which among the
Christians that make on all sides profession of the written Word of God
contained in the Old and New Testament, are fomented and aggravated merely out
of an Unseasonable and Uncharitable judging and condemning with such vehemence
and bitterness, yea, with such great effusion of blood and lamentable
devastation of Countries, that never the like was heard of any other Religion
in the world.

At this present I will make but a short Application to the Three principal
divided and dissenting Churches, Differences betwixt the Roman Catholics,
Lutheran and Reformed Churches.
which are dispersed in the Occidental Christian World thorowout whole
Provinces and Kingdoms. As first, the said Roman Catholics, or Papists so
called, who besides the holy Scriptures, are grounded upon the traditions of
the Church, and especially upon the Council of Trent, and generally are
altogether subjected and depend on the Pope of Rome, as being their Supreme
Head and Judge in matters of Religion and Conscience; as the Churches in Italy,
Spain, and the greater part in France, Germany and Poland.

Then, the Protestant Evangelical Lutherans, as they themselves will be called;
who besides the holy Scripture, profess Confessionem Agustanam and Saxonicam
formulam Concordiae as their Symbolical and Universal Books of doctrine; not
that they ground principally their Faith and Religion upon them, but that they
hold the doctrine and opinions of them conformable to Scripture and necessary
unto Salvation; as in Germany, especially in high and low Saxony, some
Churches in Swaben, Francony, Westphaly, Hessen, etc. and without Germany, the
Churches in Denmark, Sweden and Prussia; although there is some difference
perceived betwixt them; because some have not received hitherto as yet the said
formulam Saxonicam, and some of them have collected their own peculiar Corpora
doctrinae, Confessions and Books of Doctrine.

Thirdly, those Evangelical Christian Protestants, who, because they will not
be bound and tied to any man's, whether it be Luther's, Calvin's, Zuinglius, or
any other's Doctrine or Books, and therefore not be named by any man's name;
but have purged and reformed their Doctrine and Religion from the abuses of
Popery, only according to the written Word of God, are commonly called
Reformed (by some Papists they are called Biblists or Scripturemen; of which
name they need not to be ashamed, because they are grounded on and refer
themselves wholly to the holy Bible) as the Churches in England, Scotland,
Helvetia, the United Provinces of the Low Countries, all the reformed Churches
in France, with some particular Churches in Germany, Poland, Hungary, etc.
Which though they have collected and framed also their peculiar Confessions,
yet not with the intent to bind other Christians consciences even to their
word, but only to testify their Unanimous consent and Uniformitie first and
principally in the necessary fundamental Points of salvation, out of the
manifest Word of God; then secondarily, in the confutation and rejecting of the
erroneous By-doctrines, especially those of the Popish Churches, which have no
ground in the Word of God, but are e diametro opposite to it by a necessary
consequence, And withal to decline and refute all sorts of calumnies and
slanders of their Adversaries. Wherefore also they by a special Confession of
theirs, do not reject the Confession of others, especially that of Augspourg,
though there be some difference in words remaining, much less do presume to
condemn other Eastern and Western Churches because of some different opinions
or Ceremonies, if only they do agree with them in the fundamental points of
doctrine, and for the rest, withhold themselves from condemning others.

And even for these very same reasons have I hitherto addicted my self to the
Confession of these Reformed Churches, and am resolved with Gods assistance, to
persevere in it even unto death, not only because I acknowledge in the
controverted Points, the doctrine of these Churches (I say, Their own doctrine,
which they themselves Unanimously profess) to be consonant and agreeable to
Scripture: but especially because besides the Indubitable Universal,
Fundamental Doctrines and necessary Articles of faith, which they with one
consent receive, they do not maintain or impose upon others any other doctrine
as necessary unto salvation, which in it self and by Gods command is not; but
impart and permit to every one the due liberty of Conscience, and also do
neither deny, pervert or mutilate any part or articles of the true Gospel of
Christ, nor introduce any other By-Gospel or By-articles, or judge or condemn
others for it.

Whereas other Churches, principally the Papists and partly the Lutherans, if
they do not quite deny any necessary point of true Christianity; yet do very
much transgress the true limits and rules both of Gods truth and Christian
Charity, seeing they Add many of their Doctrines and impose them upon others,
as necessary unto salvation, or judge and condemn them therein as Heretics,
which nevertheless in themselves and by Gods command are not necessary, yea,
false and not agreeable to Scripture.

I do not deny but there be some such sort of people found in our Churches,
which are too too zealous and obstinate in their own opinions, and undertake to
judge others, who will not altogether give their assent to them: Which is not
suitable to the unanimous Doctrine of our Churches, and therefore may not be
imputed to the whole Universal Church.

But that we may well know, which of these three divided and dissenting
Churches judges the other, or is judged by them aright or wrong; I will first
declare but briefly and only as much as may conduce to the information of the
Unlearned; Whether the other two, the Roman Catholics and the Lutherans, have
any sufficient and well-grounded reason to judge and condemn our Reformed
Churches as Heretical. Then shall I take an opportunity to show in the Second
Part of this Apostolical Direction, Whether and how far our Churches ought to
judge and condemn the other Two, the Papists and the Lutherans.

That the Romish Church has no sufficient ground to judge and condemn our
Reformed or Lutherane Churches, as far as they agree with us, to be heretical;
we make it good by reasoning thus: Because they cannot accuse us or make us
believe, that our Churches either deny any Article of the Ancient, Apostolic
Catholic Faith, or do introduce and condescend to any false heretical Point:
But they do condemn us merely for this, because we do not receive some articles
of their Modern Doctrine and Religion, which they cry up for Universal or
Catholical, and yet either are not necessary unto salvation, as they must
confess themselves of the greater part of them, or false, erroneous and
superstitious, as we are convinced by the Word of God in our own Consciences.

For in the first place, although they charge and accuse us of all sorts of
new, Calumnies and slanders of the Papists against the Evangelical Protestants.
Un-catholike, false, and partly heretical, damnable, blasphemous Doctrines; As
that we make God to be the Author of sin: That we do deny all free will of man,
even after his regeneration: That according to our Doctrine it is impossible,
even to the believers, to keep the commandments of our Savior: That by Faith
only we may be saved and justified, though we live never so sinfully: That all
sins shall be forgiven us, if we do but believe that they are forgiven, though
we do still continue in them: That the Justification is wrought merely by an
external imputation, without internal renovation and sanctification: That
Repentance, and confession of sins, and new obedience, and good works, are
quite unnecessary: That we reject all Fasting, all Vows, and Church Discipline,
Dignities, Orders and Traditions of the Church; yea, obedience to Magistrates:
Annihilate the Sacraments, or hold them to be but naked bare Signs: Blaspheme
and despise the Saints in heaven; and suchlike Points: Against which our
Churches have always solemnly protested, both in their Confessions and
Apologies, that such was not their faith and opinion, but that all these are
but mere slanders, detractions, and mis-constructions. Whereupon they have
declared themselves with one accord, that they would not acknowledge nor
hearken to any new doctrine, but only adhere closely to the Ancient doctrine
of the primitive Apostolic Church, as it is principally grounded upon the
sacred Scripture, being the main rule of our Faith, and as it has been
declared out of the Word of God, against all Sects and Heresies, with an
Unanimous consent of the Primitive Church, especially in the General Christian
Synods of Nicene, Ephesus, Chalcedone and Constantinople, whose Universal
confession of Faith they unanimously maintain, of which the Romish Church it
self confesses in the last Council of Trent, Council. Trid. sess. 3. to be the
buckler and shield against all Heresies, the Principle whereunto necessarily he
must agree that will profess the Christian Faith; yea, the solid and sole
foundation, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. Wherefore our
Churches cannot justly be charged with any new heretical doctrine, because,
though one of our Divines should defend any new opinion or exposition of the
Scripture, yet they do not bind themselves to it, much less enforce it upon
others as necessary unto salvation, but give way to be examined according to
the rule and square of the Word of God.

When now for all this, the Roman Catholics persist to condemn our Churches
as heretical, because we will not receive besides such Ancient true Catholic
Christian Faith, all their modern newfangled Doctrines and Traditions, which
they have since added and invented in their Council of Trent and other Popish
Councils of late times, or in the Decrees of the Popes: It behooves them first
to prove and show firm and certain grounds, that those Doctrines of theirs are
grounded upon the holy Scripture and the Primitive Church, is necessary unto
salvation.

Principal Controversies betwixt the Roman Catholics and Evangelical
Protestants.
For Example: Will they condemn us in our exterior Service, or Worship and
Ceremonies, because we have no Images of the holy and blessed Trinity, of our
Savior, of the Saints deceased, nor do adore them: That we do not pray and
call on the holy Angels and the souls of the Saints in heaven, especially the
Virgin Mary; yea, that we do not digg and take their bones or other relics
out of their graves and worship them, nor pay Vows or make Pilgrimages to them:
That we do not buy or purchase the Popes Indulgencies, celebrate no Masses for
the souls of the dead, nor make any distinction of meats on certain days, or a
general weekly Fast; neither admit of any Auricular confession to the Priest of
every particular sin: That we do not administer the holy Communion under one
but both kinds or elements of Bread and Wine both to Lay and Clergymen; nor
celebrate any Masses without Communicants, neither make use of the rest of
Ceremonies, which they, against the first Institution of Christ, have forged
for their Sacrifice of Mass, especially the adoration of the consecrated
hostia in the holy Sacrament: That we do not observe their great Feast, called
Corpus Christi-day, and the holy days of the Saints: That we perform our whole
Public Service not in the Latin Tongue, which is unknown to the Laics, but
in the known Mother Tongue, nor forbid to any Layman the reading of the holy
Bible in his Mother Tongue, but exhort rather every one in general unto it:
That we tell not our Prayers to God on Beads by fifties and hundreds; use not
the sprinkling of the holy water, nor wear about us Agnus Dei, or such like
consecrated relics: That we allow not of the Orders of Monks and Nuns, but
in stead thereof we teach that the revenues of Monasteries ought rather to be
converted to the use of miserable poor wretches that are not able to work, or
employed for the maintenance of Churches and Schools: That we give liberty for
Marriage both to Ecclesiastics and Laics, nor use the Confirmation and
Extreme unction, or the holy Orders for making Ministers in such a manner as it
usually is amongst them: That we permit no Temporal Jurisdiction or Dominion to
our Spiritual Pastors, nor will have them submit to a Supreme and Universal
Pope; neither exempt them from the jurisdiction and judicature of civil
Magistrates; and such like observations and assertions of their exterior
Worship? Will they therefore, I say, judge and condemn us as heretics? it is
fit then to prove first by certain and undeniable Arguments and Warrants, and
such which we may understand and satisfy our consciences withal, that the said
Points are necessary to the saving Faith and Obedience of Christ; Except they
would yield and confess that they do condemn us for unnecessary things.

But now the Papists themselves will hardly affirm the aforesaid Points, the
Images, the Invocation of the Saints, the Indulgences, etc. to be directly and
in themselves necessary unto salvation; They commend and extol only their
singular good use and benefit, but do not enjoin their necessity: Or in case
they would in one or other point, as in the Auricular confession, Adoration of
the consecrated Hostia, etc. intrude a necessity; yet they cannot make it
appear so upon any pretense nor ground: But we may have evident proofs from the
Word of God to the contrary, that they are not necessary, because they were not
used by the Apostles and Primitive Christians.

Likewise in Points of Controversies, and articles of Faith and Doctrine; That
we have the affiance and assurance to be justified and saved before God, not
through our own merits and satisfaction, but only through mere mercy and grace
by a true and lively faith in the only perfect Sacrifice of propitiation and
merits of our Lord Jesus Christ: That also in the whole work of our conversion
and salvation, we ascribe nothing at all to our own natural strength of
free will, but all to the mere grace and assistance of God, without which we
are able to do nothing that is good; how can they then condemn us as heretics
for it, whereas they must at length confess themselves, Bellarm. lib. 5. de
Justificat. cap. 7. Propos. 2 and 3.
this to be the safest and surest way not to confide and trust in our own
strength, works, merits, but only in Gods mere grace and mercy, and the
precious merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ? If this be the surest
way, we must certainly and necessarily conclude, that our Doctrine in this
point is not heretical, nor damnable, and their Doctrine of own merits and
strength not necessary unto salvation, but rather, that our Doctrine is the
surest and safest, whereby all honor and praise is denied to man, and
attributed to God alone, and their Doctrine dangerous and pernicious, ascribing
all honor to man, and denying it to God.

Moreover, that we cannot be induced to believe the transformation of the
bread, or Transubstantiation (as they call it) in the Supper of the Lord, or a
true Sacrifice, though without blood, of the transubstantiated Body and Blood
of Christ both for the quick and the dead, or the Purgatory. They cannot
condemn us for, unless they do convince us first, that such Doctrines are
necessary unto salvation: so that Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross, and the
Spiritual eating thereof, profits us nothing, and the Blood of Christ cannot
cleanse us from sins, except we believe also the Sacrifice of Mass and the
Purgatory; which nevertheless, I hope, they will not assert, or never be able
to prove, since they partly confess themselves, that they could not have been
assured in those and such like points, only by the words of our Lord Jesus,
unless the declaration and determination of the Church had given to them
satisfaction therein.

And this is their main Objection, Whether such Points of Doctrine, though not
necessary in themselves, are yet necessary for all Christians by reason of the
determination of the Church.
That the aforementioned and such like Controversies of their Doctrine and
Religion, though they be not directly and in themselves necessary unto
salvation, yet are necessary even for this reason, Because they have been thus
taught and ordained by the Catholic Church, which ought to be believed and
obeyed in all things.

But here we ask first the question, What they mean by the Catholic Church? If
they understand the Universal Christian Church, which since the Apostles has
been at all times and in all places dispersed (as the word Catholic does imply
it) then we confess, as we have already declared it heretofore, that,
whatsoever it teaches with one accord as necessary unto salvation, to be
undoubtedly necessary: But they themselves will not assert this of most of the
aforesaid Points; and though they should assert it of some, yet can they not
prove it neither from the Word of God, nor by the true and undoubted Writings
of the Ancient Fathers: Whereas by this very same ground, we can rather make
appear the contrary, that the most and principal points thereof must be either
false and erroneous, or at least unnecessary, because they have not been taught
thus in the Primitive Church.

Neither has the Primitive Church ever presumed and taken upon it self such a
power, as if it might or should teach or ordain some new Doctrine unto
salvation, and so impose on the Christians a heavier yoke, and prescribe them a
narrower way to salvation then it has received from Christ and the Apostles.

Whereby also consequently is made void, whatsoever they object concerning the
Unwritten Word of God, being not able to produce any certain ground or warrant,
that it was received by the Primitive Church. Although otherwise we do not
absolutely reject the Traditions of the Church, which either are grounded upon
the Scripture, or are counted only as Useful Ordinances of the Church, and not
as necessary unto salvation.

Constat omnem doctrinam, quae cum illis Ecclesiis Apostolicis matricibus and
originalibus fidei conspiret, veritati deputandam, id sine dubio tenentem, quod
Ecclesia ab Apostolis, Apostoli a Christo, Christus a Deo suscepit: reliquam
vero omnem doctrinam de mendacio praejudicandam. Tertull. de Praescr. c. 21.

Ex ipso ordine manifestatur, id esse Dominicum and verum, quod sit prius
traditum: id autem extraneum and falsum, quod posterius immissum. Id. 32.
Viderint qui Stoicum and Platonicum and Dialecticum Christianismum protulerunt:
nobis curiositate non est opus post Jesum Christum, nec inquisitione post
Evangelium, Cum credimus, nihil desideramus ultra credere. Hoc enim prius
credimus, non esse quod ultra credere debeamus. Id. de Praesc. c. 7.

Adversus universas hereses jam hine praejudicatum sit, id esse verum
quodcunque primum: id esse adulterum quodcunque posterius. Id. contr. Praxean.
c. 2.

Si solus Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid alius ante nos
faciendum putaverit, sed quid, qui ante omnes est, Christus prior fecerit.
Neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, (...) Dei veritatem. Cypr. Ep.
63.

Si ad Divinae traditionis caput and originem revertamur, cessat error humanus:
Vt si vitio interrupti aut bibuli canalis effectum est, quo minus aqua jugiter
flueret, ad fontem pergitur: Ita si in aliquo mutaverit and vacillaverit
veritas, ad originem Dominicam and Evangelicam and Apostolicam traditionem
revertamur, and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, unde and ordo and origo
surrexit. Id. Ep. 74.

Ea facienda esse, quae scripta sunt, Deus testatur. Si ergo aut in Evangelio
praecipitur, aut in Apostolorum Epistolis, aut in Actibus continetur, etc.
observetur divina haec and Sancta traditio, etc. Quae ista obstinatio est,
quaeve praesumptio, humanam traditionem divinae dispositioni anteponere, nec
animadvertere, indignari and irasci Deum, quoties Divina praecepta solvit and
praeterit humana traditio? Id. Ep. 74.

Quod Stephanus (Episcopus Romanus) dixit, Quasi Apostoli hoc posteris
tradiderint, plenissime vos respondistis, neminem tam stultum esse, qui hoc
credat, Apostolos tradidisse. Firmilianus ad Cypr. Ep. 75.

Eos qui Romae sunt, non ea in omnibus observare, quae sint ab origin tradita,
and frusta Apostolorum autoritatem praetendere, scire quis and inde potest,
quod circa celebrandos dies Paschae and circa multa alia Divinae rei Sacramenta
videat apud illos aliquas diversitates. Ibid.

Inter haec fidei naufragia, coelestis patrimonii jam pene profligata
haereditate, tutissimum nobis est primam and solam Evangelicam fidem confessam
in Baptismate intellectamque retinere, nec demutare, quod solum acceptum atque
auditum habes been credere. Hilar. ad Constantium.

Ecclesia Christi quae habitat been and in toto orb Ecclesias possidens
spiritus unitate conjuncta est and habet urbes Legis and Prophetarum, Evangelii
and Apostolorum, non est egressa de finibus suis, id est, de Scripturis
sanctis, sed coeptam retinet possessionem.

Vos autem, o Haeretici, non in Scripturis, sed in vicinia Scripturarum domum
vestram jam non risu sed planctu dignam and lacrymis construxistis. Hierony. 1
cap. Mich.

Quae absque autoritate and testimoniis Scripturarum quasi traditione
Apostolica sponte reperiunt atque confingunt percutit gladius Dei. Id. in cap.
1 Hagg.

In Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus, quod ubique,
quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. Hoc est etenim proprie vereque
Catholicum, quod ipsa vis nominis ratioque declarat. Vincent. Licin.
Commonitor. 2. cap. 3.

Annunciare aliquid Christianis Catholicis (videlicet ut partem Evangelii ad
salutem necessarii) praeter id quod acceperunt (ab Apostolis) nunquam licuit,
nunquam licet, nunquam licebit. Et anathematizare eos, qui annunciant aliquid,
praeterquam quod semel acceptum est, nunquam non oportuit, nunquam non oportet,
nunquam non oportebit. Id. cap. 14. ex Gal. 1.9.

But if they by the Catholic Church do not understand the Universal Church at
all times, but only the Modern Church, or which has been in these last
hundred years; yea, if they do not comprise the Modern Universal Churches of
all Christian Nations, not those in Greece and others in the East, but only
mean the Romish Church; and not the whole Roman Church neither, or those that
call themselves Romish in France, Spain, and other places, but only the Pope
and the Prelates of the Roman Church (for this is properly the Church,
Ecclesia representativa, to which the absolute power and decision in matters of
Religion is ascribed; not to the Laics, yea, not to the common Ecclesiastics)
Then ask we further this question, How and wherewith they will convince our
Consciences, that whatsoever this Church, which is to say The Pope with his
Prelates teaches and ordains, must therefore be necessary to salvation; and
even in those things, whereof they confess themselves, that God has not
commanded them in his Word, neither have been taught or ordained thus in the
Primitive Apostolic Church.

Whereas we may rather demonstrate, that God has plainly ordained the contrary
in his Word, that we should not adore and worship the Images, that we should
not call upon the Creatures, that we all that eat of the Bread of the Lord,
shall drink also of the Cup, etc. And yet notwithstanding Gods Ordinance, shall
we be obliged to believe and obey the Doctrine and Tradition of this Church, to
the hazard and danger of our salvation? And that only upon its bare word,
because it boasts that it cannot err, and that it applies every thing to it
self, which is spoken of the Catholic Church or of the Apostle Peter in the
Scripture? Pray, what is this else but to exalt the Church, or the Pope under
the name of the Church, above God and his Word? May we not rather say to them
with Peter, Act. 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto
you more then unto God, judge ye?

Being our Lord Jesus Christ has exempted us from the necessity of the
Mosaical Ceremonial Law, how much more then from such humane Traditions, which
under the name of Peter's Successors or of the Church, are urged as a necessary
Point of the Christian Religion, either without any warrant from Gods Word, or
against it?

By all which I hope it does sufficiently appear, that the chief controversies
betwixt the Roman Catholic and our Churches, concern not any new Doctrine
which we have introduced on our side, nether the true Primitive Catholic
doctrine which since Christ and the Apostles has been professed with one
accord of the Primitive Church (for this very same we are ready and willing to
receive in every point, yea, we have received it already, and wish nothing more
but that the Romish Church might adhere closely to it without any addition.)
But that the whole dispute and difference is merely concerning such Doctrines
and Traditions of the Modern Roman Church, whereof the Primitive Church since
the Apostles times in the first Three and Four hundred years and more, either
knew nothing at all, or has taught and practiced the contrary: or though it
has made use of some such ceremonies and observations, yet held them no ways
for necessary Points of the Christian Religion unto salvation, but only as
free exercises of devotion, which afterward nevertheless have been converted
into maifold abuses against their first intention, as we could punctually
explain it, and many of our Divines have already abundantly and often spent
their study and labor in it.

Wherefore we refer to the serious consideration of all Christian and pious
hearts, Whether men have cause and ground to judge and condemn us as Heretics.
We for our part are assured, that what has not been for the first Christians
necessary unto salvation, in so many hundred years, without which so many
thousand Martyrs, and so many millions of Christians are piously departed out
of this life; that cannot be also necessary for us in these last times, and we
may live and die as religious Christians without it. For we need not any other
Faith or Religion, besides that wherein the Apostles and the Primitive
Christians lived and died. We have with them obtained like precious faith,
(...), 2 Pet. 1.1. The old Commandment which they had from the beginning, 1 John 2.7. The great Salvation which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, Heb. 2.3. The Faith
which was once delivered unto tae saints, Jude verse. 3. And this is the true
Catholic, What is to be true Catholic.
or the Universal Christian Faith, which has been at all times, especially in
the Primitive times; and as long as we stand fast to it, we are indeed the true
Catholic Christians: Whereas those that add thereunto any new Doctrine of
Faith and Life as necessary, which in the Primitive Church was not in use,
though they bear and boast of the Catholic name, yet they are not true Ancient
Catholic Christians, but New-Catholikes, which are equivalent with
Vn-Catholikes: And that Church, which by its own Command imposes such
Doctrines and Traditions as necessary unto salvation, though Christ had not
commanded, but rather forbidden them by his Apostles, and yet will condemn and
persecute other Churches; does thereby discover it self not to be a true
Christian, but rather Antichristian Tyrannical Church: Which also has need to
stand in fear of the Apostolical curse: If any man preach any other Gospel unto
you, though an Angel from heaven, then that the Apostles have preached unto
you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9 And if any man shall add unto the Word
of God, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in it: and if any
man shall take away from the Word of this book, God shall take away his part
out of the book of Life, Rev. 22.18, 19.

But, we hope that all understanding and conscientious men, and such as love
Truth and Peace amongst the Roman Catholics, will beware of this malediction;
and taking seriously to heart this Declaration of ours, abstain hereafter from
presumptuous judging and condemning us as Heretics, much less persecute us
with Fire and Sword, and Losses of our Goods and Honors, as hitherto they have
done: which certainly does not proceed from the Spirit of Christ, but
undoubtedly from the Devil, who is that Arch-lyer and Murderer. Of which the
Apostle also does faithfully warn us, and especially the Roman Church, lest it
might imagine some special privileges before others: Those that are weak in
faith, receive you, but not to doubtful disputations; (judge not their
thoughts.) Who art thou that judge another man's servant? To his own master he
stands or falls. But if this warning will do no good to them; certainly the
other shall at length be fulfilled in them: Be not high minded, but fear: For
if God spared not the natural branches (the City and Church of Jerusalem) take
heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity
of God: On them which fell, severity, but toward thee goodness, if thou
continuest in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off: Romans 11.21,
22.

CHAP. V. That the Lutheranes have no ground to judge the Reformed Churches to
be Heretical.
WHat we have spoken now of the Romish Church concerning its judging and
condemning us, the same we may partly well say of the Lutherans, which indeed
together with us have protested against this judging and condemning of Papists
in the forenamed points of controversy; and yet no less (although in fewer
points) from whence also the Evangelical Churches and estates generally all are
called Protestants; do judge and condemn our Churches or Teachers as heretics,
under the most-odious men's names; who nevertheless rely not upon any man, but
upon the Nature, Word and Doctrine of Christ. To whom, according to the
aforesaid Apostolical Rule, we may make appear yet more plainly then to the
Papists, that they have no ground thus to judge and condemn us and the doctrine
of our Church and Worship.

The principal points of Controversies betwixt Lutheranes and Reformed
Protestants. 1. In Ceremonies.
For in the first place, what concerns some controversies about Ceremonies
both of their and our worshipping of God; as that we use not in the holy
Baptism the exorcism or conjuring of the devil to come forth out of the infants
or young children; because we do not hold them either spiritually or corporally
possessed by the devil; although they naturally are born in Original sin, and
we have no warrant to cast the devil out of them by such conjuring, and
therefore do justly abhor from taking therein Gods holy Name in vain.

That we have no such Images in our Churches, which by their own confession are
abused in Popery unto Idolatry, but rather approve and justify the taking away
of them, if it be done by Christian Magistrates in an orderly way after the
example of the Kings Hezekiah and Josiah.

That also in the holy Communion we use not the Hosties, or Wafers, but
ordinary nourishing bread, and observe the breaking of it: how can they judge
us therefore, whereas they themselves hold their Exorcism, Images, Hosties, not
even absolutely necessary, nor the breaking of the bread in it self erroneous,
but only to be adiaphora, indifferent things?

Although we for our part do not account them absolutely indifferent matters,
but in some regard necessary, partly because of Gods command, partly because of
the example of Christ, the Apostles and the Primitive Apostolical Church; At
least for our selves, who should sin, if we should against our consciences use
the Exorcism or the Images, or without any urgent cause omit the breaking of
the bread: Yet, since we judge not, nor condemn according to the
abovementioned Apostolical Rule, those that do not judge the breaking of the
bread necessary, but give way to their pretended liberty; It were fit they also
should not condemn us therein, but to impart to us so much freedom, that we may
herein follow the example of Christ (which we may do more safely, and without
any sin) as we likewise permit them to omit it, and in stead thereof to follow
the example of the Papists.

In like manner that we in our Catechism punctually retain all the Commandments
as they are set down Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5, and do not omit, 2. In the Doctrine.
as they do, the Second Commandment concerning Images; will they judge us
therefore? Should we not have the liberty to teach and to learn the
Commandments of God, as God himself has spoken them from heaven, and with his
own finger graved them in the Two Tables of stone? Whereas we tolerate the
Omission of the Commandment of Images in them that hold it not absolutely
necessary for Children and Ignorants, though we cannot approve thereof nor
excuse it, especially seeing what great Idolatry it has bred in Popery, and
that the said Commandment does extend as well to the Children and Idiots, as to
the Priests and Levites; yea, we conceive it to be most necessary for those,
being naturally bent to Images and Idolatry.

Also in the differences in Doctrine of Faith, that in the holy Communion by
eating Sacramentally the blessed bread and wine, we believe only a Spiritual
partaking or communion and presence of the Body and Blood of Christ, and not a
carnal and corporal.

Neither believe Vbiquity or Omnipresence of Christ's Body, but the Omnipresent
power, virtue and reigning of Christ true God and Man, even in those places
where his Body is not present.

Nor an Universal reconciliation and propitiation by Christ's death, whereby
indifferently all men, whether they do believe or not believe, repent or not
repent, have remission of their sins already: But whereby principally
Repentance and Faith is required from all in general, and withal forgiveness
of sins and life in Christ is faithfully offered and promised, and consequently
really and effectually conferred and given to those only who effectually
believe and repent.

Nor also an Universal Election of all men unto Salvation, but only of the
Believers; and yet so, that they are not elected by and according to their
faith or works, which God has foreseen in them before the election, much less
that they should be saved without faith, or without good works. But so, that
they are elected out of a mere special grace in Christ, even to this end, that
they through faith might be converted from the bondage of sins, to be adopted
unto children of God, and to good works, and made fit for to walk therein, and
obtain everlasting Salvation.

Will they for these or other such like points of Controversy in Doctrine for
the most part arising from thence, judge and condemn us as Heretics (as most
of them use to do?) then they must first prove, that their opinions and manner
of expressions in those points which they so fiercely insist upon, and whereon
commonly all the controversy depends, are not only agreeable to Truth, but
also absolutely necessary unto Salvation.

But we shall sooner prove those not to be warrantable by Scripture, then they
shall make them good to be necessary, seeing we cannot find any wherein the
Word of God the truth, much less the necessity thereof.

For what is then that is necessary unto salvation? We agree already both in
this against the Papists; namely, that whatsoever is necessary unto salvation,
is plainly and expressly taught in the holy Scripture; but whatsoever are only
bare words of men, and Humane Traditions and Doctrines, ought and must not be
necessary unto salvation, though otherwise they are not repugnant to truth.
Wherefore they must first prove that such opinions and manner of expressions of
theirs which they esteem to be necessary, are expressly taught in the Scripture;
and yet so, that we also may certainly and undoubtedly conceive them to be
grounded thereon, as a necessary point of saving Faith and obedience to Christ.

They will say, That they have proved it already sufficiently and abundantly,
if not by words of the Scripture it self, at least by equivalent words, and by
a necessary consequence drawn out of them; And that we therefore only will not
receive and condescend unto it, because it is contrary and repugnant to our
natural reason: As for Example; When the Lord speaks of the Bread, Take, eat,
this is my Body, they make it to be equivalent, as if he had said, Eat my Body
in and with the bread, and that he meant a natural, corporal and carnal eating.
Likewise when the Lord said, I am with you till to the end of the world, they
infer that his Body also is present with us, because Jesus Christ, or his
Godhead, is nowhere without his Body, or separated from it.

But although this may seem to them in their Reason to be a clear and plain
Exposition, or a necessary Consequence; yet we examining and comparing not
only our Reason, but also the words of Christ himself, and not the Five words
by themselves alone, but all the words of the whole Institution together, yea,
of the whole Scripture; we find the Contrary a great deal clearer and plainer,
that the words of Christ are not agreeable to their Interpretation, nor their
Consequence of any validity, much less of necessity. For indeed this is plain
and manifest, that Christ saying to his disciples, Take, eat, spoke of the
bread which he took, brake and gave to them, and that he meant there a
corporal, carnal, visible and natural eating of the bread; And it is also
manifest and evident that he spoke of that bread: This (which I have broken and
given) This bread (which ye take and eat) This is my Body which shall be given
for you: But that this is to be understood after a carnal and corporal manner,
so that his body who sat with them at Table, and reached to them the bread,
has been Invisibly in and under the bread, and eaten, though supernaturally,
with their carnal mouth, is no ways clear and manifest: But they themselves,
and the Papists also, notwithstanding they adhere and insist both upon the
literal sense; yet they cannot agree among themselves in their pretended
literal meaning; and besides, they both must confess that they are words of
peculiar Mysteries, which ought to be Mystically and Sacramentally understood.
Wherefore it is yet more clear and manifest, since Spiritual things must be
compared with Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.13, that these words also, after the na ure
and propriety of other Sacraments, must have a Spiritual meaning, as the Lord
himself says of the eating of his Body and the drinking of his Blood: The
words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life, Joh. 6 63. As
both Papists and Lutherans must acknowledge, that in the Lords Supper is
principally required a Spiritual eating. We have also many pregnant motives,
which are not only grounded upon Natural Reason, but upon the words of the
Institution it self, upon the undoubted Articles of the Christian Faith, and
upon many other manifest places of the Scripture, and therefore bind not only
our Understanding, but our Consciences, that we cannot receive by any means
their Interpretation concerning the Invisible body in the bread and the carnal
eating thereof (which may be common both to the unbelieving and ungodly
Hypocrites, and also to the believing) because it does more evidently appear to
be repugnant to these words of God, then to be extracted out of the same by
consequence.

But if we desire to have a certain, undoubted, and necessary Exposition of
these words, Christ himself and the Apostle Paul has declared it unto us: That
the breast and wine is called the Body and Blood of Christ, because it is the
New Testament and the Communion of his Body and Blood, and because we ought to
eat and drink it in remembrance of him.

If we desire also to know how we ought worthily to eat and drink the Body and
Blood of Christ; Christ himself has taught it so plainly, Joh. 6, that our
Adversaries themselves must confess, that not only the aforementioned
Spiritual eating of the Lords Supper is principally required, but also is the
only true and saving eating, without which the oral manducation is rather
noxious then profitable and wholesome.

Wherefore we hold this declaration of Christ sufficient unto Salvation; and
him that only stands to it, or gives us but liberty to stand to it, we
will in like manner not compel necessarily to receive our interpretations and
expressions, which we acknowledge to be conformable to the words and exposition
of Christ: much less will we judge or condemn any man for an Heretic, because
of the verbal alterations and disceptations in Schools; whether what Figure or
Tropus, Metonymia, or Synechdoche, or praedicatio inusitata it may be called.

Likewise it is clear and manifest, that Jesus Christ has promised to be
present with us and all Believers, as true God and Man, with his assistance and
grace, Spirit and gifts, power and operation, which no Christian can deny. But
to infer and conclude thereby, that also his body, flesh and bones must
necessarily be present with us and all creatures on earth; That is no ways
plain and evident, so that some of their own Divines do contradict it
themselves by other manifest and plain testimonies of the Scripture.

And thus much may we say of all other different Points of Doctrine betwixt us
and them; and also of the Controversy of Predestination and Election, and what
does depend on it, wherein we next to the holy Scripture not only refer our
selves to Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius and other Ancient Fathers, and withal
to the principal Scholastic Authors and Divines among Papists, Thomas, Scotus
and others that followed them, especially to the Modern Dominicans; but also to
Dr Luther himself, and many Ancient learned Lutheran Divines, Brentius,
Herbrand, Flacius, Hofmann, Spannenberg, Althamer, Heshusius and others.

CHAP. VI. Which is the chief and principal Question in this present Difference
of Religion, and what are the safest means for the settlement of a Christian
Unity.
COnsiderirg exactly every thing that hitherto has been declared, it is
apparently manifest thereby, that all differences in matter of Religion that
now adays are in agitation betwixt the said Christians, especially betwixt
those who acknowledge the holy Scripture to be the only perfect Rule of their
Faith and Religion, merely reside in this chief and cardinal question, which if
it were rightly and unanimously answered on all sides, no doubt, all such
Contention and Controversy, or all uncharitable Judging and Condemning, would
fall of it self, and a happy Unity might be settled among all Christians in
Doctrine and Religion, as much as may be necessary unto their salvation:
Namely, Whether besides the holy Scripture it self, such Interpretations and
Consequences or Inferences (which by some Teachers or Particular Churches that
follow them, are collected and deduced out of the Word of God, according to the
understanding they have, for their part in the Scripture, and held and received
for certain, undoubted, or necessary expositions and consequences) although
they are not so plain and manifest, that all other knowing and understanding
Christians besides them may conceive them, or as the Primitive Christian Church
has unanimously and undoubtedly received and taught, ought yet to be
absolutely necessary for all men unto salvation, insomuch that all those that
do not acknowledge and receive such Interpretations and Inferences as agreeable
to Scripture, may therefore be judged and condemned for Heretics.

To which we directly answer, No such matter. But supppse that such
Interpretations or Inferences were certain and true, or in themselves necessary
to be received by those that understand them; yet they are not necessary for
those that do not comprehend and conceive them as yet in their consciences;
neither can they therefore be judged as Unbelievers, but ought to be received
as weak in faith, according to the Apostles admonition: Them, that are weak in
faith, receive you, but not to doubtful disputations; not to judge their
thoughts, and to distract their consciences.

The main cause of all dissentions and differences in the Church of God.
I think rather, even this to be the main and principal source and origin of
all Divisions and Tyranny in the Church of God, that men set upon their own
Interpretations, Illations, Comments, Glosses, Formula's, Expressions, (which
peradventure they pretend themselves to infer out of the Word of God, according
to the profunditie of their understanding, or else add thereunto out of Humane
Traditions and Opinions) as high, nay, a higher estimate and price, and insist
as vehemently thereupon, as upon the Indubitable Word of God it self: As if
their words and expositions were as certain and necessary unto salvation as the
Word of God; yea, as if they were able in some points to utter and deliver more
plainly, expressly, fully, and considerately the heavenly Mysteries then the
holy Ghost has expressed them in the whole Scripture; Or as if all men did see
whatsoever they think themselves to see and to know in the depth of their
Understanding, or though they do not see it, yet were obliged to believe upon
their word: This, this is the main and chief cause of all Divisions and
Dissentions, and of all unreasonable judging and condemning in the Universal
Christian Church.

This is also the true fundamental point of Popery, The Fundamental Point of
Popery.
whereon all the Disputes and Controversies betwixt us and them depend: That
the Pope with his Prelates pretend to be an Infallible Judge of all different
and doubtful Doctrines, whose sentence and decision all men upon pain of
damnation as certainly ought to believe and obey as the Word of God it self.

Upon this One only ground all Popery is built; And principally for this Point
we are constrained to abandon it. For otherwise for our part we could well
yield to him his Primatum or Supremacy above all Bishops, yea, above Emperors
and Kings (as long as it pleases them) upon condition he would not presume to
take upon him Dominatum and ruling over men's consciences: and expound also the
Word of God, the best he can, and propound his sentence and opinion to his
children within his Bishopric, or also to others that will believe and obey
him; if he would but acknowledge withal that he, as well as others, could err
and fail in those things which are not expressly and plainly grounded upon the
Word of God; or at least, that it should not be necessary unto salvation for
us, who do not acknowledge and receive it. But when he will absolutely have his
word parallel with Gods Word, even in those points which we cannot but judge to
be evidently repugnant to the Word of God, and so in stead of Christ will be a
Lord over our souls and consciences, and of the Universal Christian Church on
earth: Certainly those can no ways be blamed, who not only give him no credit
therein at all, but by reason of that proclaim him to be the Antichrist.

Now since we may not grant this power to the Popes at Rome, although they had
entangled by their persuasion and kept in subjection during many hundred years
in the Western Church, so many Emperors and Kings, yea, all Doctors, Bishops
and Prelates; how much less may we impart it to any other Pastor and Teacher
of Gods Church, of what name soever? And he that should ascribe perhaps to
Luther or Calvin, Jerome, Austin, Abuses of men's particular opinions and
interpretations amongst the Evangelical.
etc. or to any particular Convocations, as to the Authors Formulae Concordiae
Sax. as also to whole and National Synods, that their own particular
Interpretations, Consequences, I^lations, Manner of expressions were as certain
and infallible, or as necessary unto Salvation as the word of God it self; what
is it else, but to make of Luther, of Calvin and the rest so many Popes; of
such Convocations and Assemblies so many Popish Councels; yea, to prefer in
some manner men's words and opinions before the holy Scripture, as if they in
some points had expressed themselves better, and with more perspicuity and
circumspection?

For my part, I confess that Dr Luther and Calvin have in the principal and
most Points (though not in all) well, truly and profitably expounded the
Scripture, because they have compared and declared for the most part Scripture
by Scripture.

I acknowledge also that the Doctrine of the Confession and Apology of
Augspourg, with other Confessions of the Reformed Churches, Also the Doctrine
of the Synod at Derdrecht is true and agreeable in it self to Scripture, in
those Articles that have been handled and concluded therein; though withal I
doubt not but some other Teachers of our Churches have yet expressed themselves
better and more perspicuously in some one or other point of the holy Scripture.

But that we should hold their declarations and particular opinions and
expressions as indubitable and necessary unto salvation as the Word of God it
self, and presently judge and condemn those for Heretics, who do not fully
receive them; They themselves, as much as I know, have never yet required it;
But those, who under the name of Lutherans addict themselves to the profession
of the Formulae Concordiae Saxonicae, when they not only bind and tie their
Ministers to it by a solemn Oath, but also us, who do not receive in points of
Controversies their expositions, expressions and inferences contained therein,
for thoroughly agreeable to Scripture; what is that then but to judge and condemn
us as Heretics? From whence must necessarily follow, that their expressions
and opinions ought to be as certain, and undoubted, and as necessary unto
salvation as the Word of God it self, which indeed would be a plain New Popery.

They use to accuse us, Who are those that make the natural reason to be the
foundation and rule of their Faith.
that we make our Natural Reason the foundation and rule of our Faith: Whereas
we principally insist thereupon, that we ought not to ground any Article of
Faith upon humane Reason, but merely upon the plain, manifest and undoubted
Word of God. We make use of our Reason, having been enlightened and brought unto
the knowledge of Christ, as of a requisite means whereby to learn to understand
the holy Scripture; for without Reason it cannot be understood: How far the
Reason may be used in matters of Faith.
That we also ought to infer out of the Scripture, whatsoever by a necessary
consequence depends from it, and is agreeable to it, as much as we by Gods
grace are able to comprehend it, or to refute and to reject whatsoever is
repugnant to it: And that we ought reverently to apply the holy Scripture unto
Doctrine, Consolation and Admonition; yet so that we do not oblige and bind
any man in his conscience further to those Interpretations and Inferences we in
our understanding derive out of the Scripture, then himself together with us is
able to understand them to be warrantable by it, and the Word of God does bind
thereunto.

But those who cry up their own Interpretations, Inferences and Expressions,
not only for True Doctrines, but even for Necessary Articles of Faith,
insomuch that they judge and condemn as Heretics all others that do not
acknowledge them to be agreeable to Scripture; They are those who make their
Own reason and understanding to be the foundation and rule of their Faith; and
yet not only of their own, but of other men's Faith, and of the Universal
Christian Church; They are those who make themselves new Popes and Infallible
Judges in matters of Religion and Conscience.

Which honor we cannot give to any man living on earth, but to God alone and
his undeniable Word contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament, as
also all the Protestant Churches in whole Europe have Unanimously always
against Popery referred themselves thereunto.

Nevertheless we do not reject all consequences and interpretations, How far
we may make use of Consequences and Interpretations in matters of Faith.
nor all men's expressions, though they are not verbally and literally set down
in the Scripture; as also we do not disapprove the Translation of the Scripture
into other Languages. We rather confess that many Inferences and
Interpretations may be very good, profitable, sound and necessary in
themselves, and that we may many times of necessity use them for the
confutation of several Errors.

But we cannot ascribe further to any man's Interpretations and Consequences an
Universal necessity unto salvation for all Christians, then we have declared
already; namely, when they are so clear and manifest, that they may be
understood and received for certain and undeniable of all Christians, or of
those for whom they shall be necessary: especially when they have been
acknowledged and taught undoubtedly and with one accord in the true Primitive
Church, and therefore may be called true Catholic expositions.

Now those that do not acknowledge our Expositions to be such, How far those
that dissent are to be tolerated.
we may not therefore on our part judge and condemn them as Heretics, but we
must receive and tolerate them as weak in faith, according to the Doctrine of
the Apostle. Nevertheless upon this condition, that they reciprocally do not
enforce upon us and others as necessary their own Interpretations and
Inferences to the contrary; nor we being willing to forbear and tolerate their
mistake, should they judge us presumptuously in our misconstruction of their
pretended understanding; neither should they bewray any malice and obstinacy
in their contradictions; But also, that they together with us should adhere to
the words and meaning of the holy Scripture, as far as they are clear and plain
to all, And diligently enquire further in the fear and worship of God, into the
true understanding of whatsoever they do not comprehend yet, or doubt of; And
in the mean time walk by the same rule, as far as we have already on both sides
attained, minding the same thing, and giving no offense, till God reveal unto
them and us even what is remaining, Phil. 3.15, 16.

And this doubtless is the safest and only way, What are the best and safest
means to settle and maintain a true Unity amongst all true Christians.
whereby the true unity of Spirit may be maintained amongst all pious and
religious Christians. For all those that now adays have the name of Christians
on earth, do agree therein to this very hour, that they acknowledge and receive
the Canonical Books of the Prophets and Apostles (whereof those of the Old
Testament were originally written in Hebrew, those of the New Testament in
Greek) for the Word of God, and oblige themselves with one consent to submit
their Faith and Consciences unto it. So that those that practice it not only
with words, but also with true and sincere hearts, may without any difficulty
in all things agree, that are plainly and expressly taught therein; nay, they
are already united therein by the holy Ghost; and those that agree in one
mind, have all whatsoever is necessary to believe and to do unto salvation,
and are true fellow members of the Only Apostolic Catholic Church, if
together with this Universal Christian Faith, they do but tolerate and receive
one another as weak Brethren in Faith and other things, Chap. 5.
that are not so manifest in the Scripture, wherein they may thoroughly and
generally agree.

Besides this, we know no other means on earth that either God has given and
ordained for us, or may be invented by man's wit, whereby a true Universal Unity
may be settled and maintained.

The pretended Supremacy and Infallibility of the Pope is no fit means for
Unity, but rather the principal cause of all the Divisions in the Christian
Church.
For as much as concerns the Supreme Jurisdiction and Infallibility of the
Pope, which the Jesuits cry up for the only means of the Catholic
Uniformitie; That same is rather the principal cause and impediment, whereby
the Unity amongst all Christians both in the Eastern and Western Churches, is
cut off and made impossible in men's eyes. Seeing that it is absolutely
impossible, and inexcusable withal, that all Churches and all men of the world
should subject and submit in every thing their consciences, who acknowledge no
other Lord and Master but Jesus Christ, to One man Solely, who has no charge
and warrant for the same from God. Which though they urge and press as the
most necessary point to Salvation and Unity; yet could not obtain it of some
Roman Catholics themselves, who extol the General Councels above the Pope.

Neither the general Councels are sufficient means for Unity in these last
times.
Nor are Concilia Vniversalia in these last times the true means for Unity. For
it has been a mere Impossibility in these last thousand years, since the
Ancient Roman Empires destruction and division in the East and West, and shall
be impossible till the end of the world, to indict and gather any true
Universal Council composed of all Christian Churches of the whole world. And
grant that they could be called, yet they could not establish any other Unity
then by reiteration and renovation of that which with one accord has been
taught in the Primitive Universal Christian Church, out of the evident and
undoubted Word of God. For the whole Christian Church on earth, though its
meeting at once in one place were possible, could not presume to take upon it
self such power, to astrain and oblige its posterity to any other Doctrine and
Religion further then they are bound by their Predecessors, or rather by God
himself, through our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles. If any man, though an
Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you then that ye have received,
let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8, 9.

Nor the Confessions and formulae of any particular Church.
And so shall neither the Protestants, or any other particular Churches in any
place of the world, and much less other dispersed Sects to and fro, be able to
establish a tolerable Ecclesiastical Peace and Unity, either by their vehement
disceptations and disputes, or exhortations to Peace, or by Colloquia and
conferences, or by National and Provincial Synods, or per Synodales formulas,
or any other means, as long as they insist and adhere to their own particular
Interpretations, Consequences and manner of expressions, and will of necessity
judge others thereby. Seeing chiefly it is not to be expected, nor desired, nor
approved, that all Christians of the whole world should submit and agree unto
any particular Church, or to the Interpretations of their Teachers, which are
not manifest and evident to all by warrants from the Scripture; But far more
will thereby the Divisions and Separations about the Interpretations and
Inferences, in making necessary Articles of Faith thereof by endless
altercations and disputes (as woeful experience does sufficiently testify)
increase and grow dangerous even to their final ruin and destruction: For,
Chap. 7.
if you bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another, Gal. 5. v. 15.

And how many thousand Christians, yea whole Churches are in the East, South,
and West, which know nothing, or can know any thing either of the Decrees of
the Popes, or of the Council of Trent, nor of the Confession of Augspourge, or
of other confessions of the Protestant Churches in Europe, much less of the
Formula Concordiae Saxonicae? how is it then possible, that we should undergo
to settle by such means and writs a true Unity in the Universal Church of
Christ, or to bind and oblige other Churches thereunto?

Now notwithstanding we conceive also no hope to obtain a total and
universal reconcilement of the modern unhappy differences and divisions in
matters of Religion, Even by an Universal consent and agreement upon the holy
Scripture, as far as it is plain and evident to all sides: Amongst those that
are inclined and given to contradictions and contentions, because God himself
by his just judgment sends, Divisions, Heresies and Sects, partly for
punishment, partly for trial, 1 Cor. 11. v. 19. Yet I make no doubt, In what
manner, and how far the manifest word of God is the only means of Unity.
but all Pious and religious hearts which love Truth and Peace, (whereof yet a
great number is to be found every where and even in the midst of them that
hate and abhore reconciliation) may without any difficulty be United, nay, are
already United by the Spirit of Christ, upon the evident word of God, in the
Universal saving Faith and sincere love and obedience of Christ, who also upon
this only solid and firm ground of the universal saving truth and unity, may
in safenesse, quiet and pacify their own Conscience amongst so many Divisions
and Seducing Spirits, and withal declare themselves upon good grounds against
all different dissenting parties, and yet show themselves peaceable and without
scandal.

CHAP. VII. That even these are the safest means to restrain all Erroneous
Sects.
THere may be several objections made against this our Declaration: The First
Objection against the aforementioned Doctrine.
As first, that in this manner a great gap would be opened to all Sects,
Arrians, Photinians, Socinians, Weigelians, Anabaptists, Arminians, or of what
name soever, who, though they refer themselves on all sides to the Scripture,
yet they obscure and pervert the plainest and most evident places of it, so
that at length we should retain nothing but the bare words and letters of the
word of God, nor them also without controversy and disputes.

But if we do seriously consider the matter, this will be rather the only true,
sure, easy, and most efficacious means not only to maintain Peace and Unity
amongst true believers, but also to silence and restrain all erroneous Sects;
yea to cut of all occasions, least they disturb, seduce, or tear the Church
of God any more by their perverse interpretations and opinions: namely,

First, That we know, that their own particular interpretations and inferences
must not be necessary unto Salvation, because they do either assert and affirm
some new doctrine, which is not so manifestly and expressly asserted in the word
of God, or deny some what, which is not so plainly denied therein; That both we
and other Christians can in conscience acknowledge and receive the same, or the
Primitive undoubted true-beleeving Church could have unanimously received such
a meaning and sense thereof: Which is a certain and infallible sign that it
must be either a false perverted, or at least an unnecessary interpretation or
meaning; and that we therefore may reject it as unnecessary with a good
conscience; but they may not with a safe conscience disturb the Church of God
with such unnecessary new doctrines.

Secondly, When they cry up such interpretations and opinions of theirs (though
we certainly know them not to be necessary) not only for necessary articles of
Faith or Gods Commandments, and their own words, for mere words of God: Then
we know further undoubtedly, that they are just such Prophets as God has
warned us from; Who shall presume to speak, in his name that which he has not
commanded them to speak? Deuteronomy. 18.19, 20. Who shall say, The Lord spoke thus,
when he did not speak it? Exodus 13. Especially when they are so obstinate in
their opinions, that they judge and condemn others for the same, or revile and
blaspheme the contrary doctrine, or otherwise knowingly, purposely and wilfully
draw thereby some distractions and divisions upon the Church of God: For which
reason we have good cause to shun and eschew them according to the doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles Tit. 1.10. 2 Timothy 3.6. to avoid them, Romans 16.17 to
withdraw ourselves from them, and have no company with them, 2 These. 3.6.14. 2 John 10. Who, by judgeing others, and causing therewith divisions and sects,
separate themselves from the Assembly of Christ (...), Jude 19. And also (...),
being condemned of themselves, Tit. 3.11. Who also ought to be instructed in
meekness of spirit, and convinced by sounder, better, surer, and plainer
interpretations and inferences out of the word of God, and sometimes sharply
rebuked Tit. 1.9 10.13. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. And to restrain them with all other
spiritual means that Christ has Ordained, least they may prejudicate and
hurt the Christian Church by their seductions, and spread farther their leaven,
and sow tares.

Thirdly, How much more when they by their own interpretations and conclusions
in doctrine of Faith and life, do not only affirm or deny some what, which in
the word of God is not so expressly affirmed or denied, but also do affirm
some things which are so evidently and expressly denied therein, or deny some
things, which are so expressly affirmed therein, that all learned Christians,
who will but understand them, and not out of carnal affections stick unto
them, may comprehend them without any difficulty; nay, it being evident and
palpable to every one, that those Interpretations and opinions of theirs are
but merely strained and spun out of their own fancies, and not grounded upon
the text and words of the Scripture it self, or equivalent places of it;
Especially the true Primitive undoubted Church, having with one accord taught
absolutely the contrary: Those, if they in such a manner obtrude and urge their
own forced Interpretations, or rather perversions of the Scripture, both
without and against the manifest Word of God, as necessary as the Word of God
it self, and thereby deny or pervert the true necessary Articles of Faith or
Precepts of God, and that obstinately, as has been mentioned before: They are
not only like to those Prophets who presume to speak in the Name of the Lord,
that which he has not commanded them to speak, but also like them that speak
in the name of other gods, Deuteronomy. 18.20. because they will thrust as out of the
way which the Lord our God has commanded to walk in, Deuteronomy. 13.25. From whom he
has warned us, that we should not believe nor hearken unto their words, though
they show great signs and wonders, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. Matthew. 24.24, 25.

Whereby, I hope, every one may see, that by the often-mentioned ground of the
manifest Scriptures, not only no occasion is given to the erroneous Sects, but
rather the Sectaries mouth may be stopped with much facility and safety, and
with more efficacy then by many subtle and endless Altercations and Disputes,
or by all-Excommunications and Persecutions of Heretics: although we do
disapprove also this to be used against manifest obstinate Blasphemers, as
Servetus was, who vomited such terrible and horrid Blasphemies and contumelious
words against the holy and blessed Trinity, that they are noways to be suffered
amongst Christians: Or when they under the color of Religion plot Tumults and
Insurrections against legal Magistrates, as formerly Munzerus and the
Anabaptists at Munster did, which is not justifiable, though it happens for
true Religion, much less for erroneous Doctrines sake.

But those that peaceably and closely adhere to the words of the Scripture,
without maintaining and introducing singular By-Interpretations and opinions of
theirs, as has been told; those, I say, though they do not receive ours or any
other particular Churches true Interpretations and expressions, we cannot nor
will therefore judge as Heretics, but ought to tolerate and receive as weak
brethren in faith, as it has been said many times heretofore.

Which we may illustrate with one or two Examples: As the first Chapter of
John, which the Primitive Church (whose Writings and Doctrines are descended
and conveyed to us, whereof no doubt but it has together with the Books of the
Scripture received also from the Apostles themselves the true meaning thereof,
at least in the principal necessary points, of which this si one) has
Unanimously and Undoubtedly interpreted of the Son of God, who was in the
beginning of all things, as the Substantial Word with the Father.

If the Modern Socinians interpret it of the beginning of the Gospel and the
humane nature of Christ, to the end that they may deny the Article of Christ's
Godhead; we rightly reject such Interpretation not only as not necessary, but
as false and heretical, not that it is only contrary to our Interpretation,
but that it is so manifestly repugnant to the words of Saint John, that the
Primitive Church has with one consent taught the contrary: Insomuch also that
none of the Ancient Arrians, or Photinians, to our and all Modern Socinians
knowledge, ever thus understood or expounded it; But Socinus was the first man,
as he himself must confess, that spun this Interpretation out of his own head,
wherein at first his own brethren have partly contradicted him: Yet since that
time has he together with his followers preferred it, as if it were the
undeniable Word of God it self, and a most necessary Interpretation, before the
words of Saint John and the Uniform meaning of the Primitive Church. Which may
not be done without great presumption, nor if it be obstinately urged, without
damnable Heresy, principally in such a deep, important and necessary Article
of Faith, as it is accounted not only by us, but the true Primitive Church and
the word of God it self.

On the other side, if they in such profound and incomprehensible Mystery did
adhere positively and closely, without mutilation and contention, to the words
of the Scripture, nor added thereunto their own Interpretations and Inferences
of their reasoning, beyond and against the Articles of Faith; we should then
have no cause to judge them so sharply, though they would not receive or use
all our expositions or humane expressions.

Likewise, when Socinus and his followers do wrest and pervert so many manifest
places of the Scripture, which speak of Christ's death, that he died for the
propitiation, satisfaction, and remission of our sins, to this sense, as if he
had not appeased Gods wrath against us, or which is as much, made satisfaction
to appease Gods wrath, or purchased, propitiation and forgiveness: but that he
died merely to this end, that he might by his doctrine and example convert us
from our sins to God, and to pacify our hearts toward him* And account their
own Interpretations as worthy and necessary as Gods Word it self; So that they
grievously slight and revile the Doctrine concerning the reconcilation of Gods
wrath against us, and the satisfaction for our sins, which nevertheless is so
manifestly and evidently taught by so many testimonies of the Scripture, that
the Universal Christian Church has professed it with one accord at all times,
and ever therefore held Jesus Christ for its only High Priest, Mediator, and
Savior; Insomuch that even the greatest Papists, though they supply by way of
concomitancy the merits of Christ, by the Intercession and merits of other
Saints, and their own merits and satisfaction, the daily Sacrifice of Mass,
Indulgences, Purgatory, and such like things; yet have not denied the
propitiation by Christ's merits and satisfaction; nor any other Sectary, as far
as we know, nor Pelagius himself has directly opposed it, except only
Socinus, and perhaps before him Adailerdus: Whereas Socinus himself cannot but
acknowledge that the Mediator of the Old Testament Moses has in some manner
appeased by his intercession (as Aaron and some other Highpriests by their
Sacrifices) Gods wrath against his people of Israel; and yet will deny such
power and virtue of the propitiation for our sins to the most-perfect
Obedience, Sacrifice and Intercession of our Mediator and High Priest Jesus
Christ. Who sees not then, that they intend arrogantly to prefer their own
singular Interpretations before the manifest Word of God, and the unanimous
consent of the Universal Christian Church, and thereby, as much as lies in
their power, shake and subvert the very foundation of our chief consolation in
Jesus Christ. The Second Objection against the aforesaid Doctrine.


In the Second place may be objected against the aforesaid ground of Saving
Truth and Unity, that nevertheless the Primitive Christian Church has
condemned many Sects not only for not receiving the plain words of the
Scripture, but also for refusing the Interpretations and words of the Church.
For example, The ancient Arrians in the Council of Nicen and others, Chap. 8.
for not receiving the word (...) Consubstantial, alleging that such a word
was not to be found in the Scripture.

But we Answer to this: That they were not condemned even for this bare word,
but rather because of their peculiar Arrian phrase and expressions, and
expositions concerning the created Divinity of Christ. Against whom the
Orthodoxall and true-beleeving Church, did very earnestly insist upon the word
(...), which though not in the letter, yet it is found in the Scripture more
plainly and evidently and more conformably to the unanimous understanding and
meaning which the Churches in the first three hundred years professed
concerning the eternal Godhead of Christ; not that it was directly necessary
unto Salvation, but conducible to the confutation of the ambiguous terms and
opinions of the Arrians. Otherwise there has been in those times
true-beleeving Bishops, who, though they had rejected the Arrian Heresy
concerning the created Divinity of Christ, and yet doubted of the word (...),
because it was not to be found literally in the Scripture, were therefore not
condemned, but tolerated as weak in Faith.

This very same we may say of all other ancient Sectaries, Macedonius,
Nestorius, Eutiches, Pelagius, which were at all times condemned for their
singular new fangled Interpretations, out of the word of God, according to the
unanimous meaning and doctrine of the Churches in the first three or four
hundred years.

CHAP. VIII. That in the Reformed Churches, no new Doctrine as necessary to
Salvation is taught.
IN the third place it will be objected, The Third Objection against the
aformentioned Doctrine.
That we our selves defend many doctrines as necessary unto salvation, which
yet neither in the Scripture were so plainly expressed, nor unanimously taught
in the Primitive Church. I will give but a touch in some few, but principal
Instances; That we deny the free will in man, the merits of good works, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass: Which points were with one consent asserted of all
ancient Fathers almost: That we teach the Justification, ex Sola fide, only by
Faith. That we hold the Bread and the Wine in the Supper of the Lord to be bare
signs and Seals, whereby the Body and Blood of Christ is but Signified, and
not really given: That we defend Absolutum decretum, that God freely without
any respect of Faith or Unbelief, good or evil works of men, has decreed in
his eternal Council, to elect and choose some unto Salvation, others and the
greatest part to cast away and reject as Reprobates, unto damnation: Also, That
we understand by Christ's going down into Hell, the hellish pains and torments
Christ's Soul suffered. Lastly, that we hold the Pope at Rome to be the great
Antichrist: Which Articles of Doctrine, are neither plainly expressed in the
Scripture, nor by the Ancient Doctors of the Church.

The true Doctrine of the Reformed Churches. 1. Of Free Will.
We Answer: First that we do not deny the free will in man, in that sense and
meaning, as some, and all the Ancient Fathers have taught out of the Scripture.
For we confess, 1. That the Natural man has a Free Will in many Natural and
Temporal Free indifferent matters.

2. In Celestial Spiritual things to many Outward sins, either to commit, or
to avoid them.

3. Yea also to many Outward good works.

4. That the Regenerate man has a true Free Will, or which is made Free by the
grace of God to true Spiritual works, which are acceptable to God: Yet so,
that not only the beginning, but also the continual help and assistance of
Gods grace is required unto it.

5. This only we deny, That the Natural unregenerated man has naturally,
without the preventing gracious help and operation of the holy Ghost, any
Freewill to true Spiritual inward works, which are acceptable to God, as to
Saving Faith, Charity, Hope, and consequently to the true Spiritual outward
works, which arise from those inward. Which also the holy Scripture has
unanimously taught against Pelagius: That the Natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can be
know them, 1 Corinthians, 2. verse 14. And that we are not sufficient of our
selves to think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God, 2
Corinthians 3. verse 5. For it is God, which works in us, both to will and to
do of his good pleasure, Philipp. 2. Verse 13. He that has begun a good work
in us, will also perform it, Philippians 1. Verse 6. Without him we can do
nothing, John 15. Verse 5. For we are by nature the Children of wrath, dead in
sins, Ephesians 2. Verse 5. And he that obeys sin, is the Servant of Sin,
Romans 6. Verse 16.20. 2 Peter 2. Verse 19. But if the Son makes us free,
we shall be free indeed, John 8. verse 34.36. And faithful is he that calls
you, who also will do it, 1 Thessalonians 5. verse 24.

But if there be besides any other controversy of man's Free Will, or Gods
gracious help; we hold neither theirs, nor our particular opinions to be
necessary unto Salvation, especially for all Christians, who oftentimes
understand but little or nothing at all of such subtle questions, and therefore
ought not to judge nor condemn one another.

Like as amongst the Papists themselves, the modern Dominicans and Jesuits
cannot agree about these questions, nothwithstanding the prohibition made by
the Pope not to accuse and condemn one another for errors in Faith.

2. Of merits of good works.
2. Nor do we deny the merits of good works in that sense as the ancient Fathers
use the word Meritum desert, or Mereri to deserve, viz. That we obtain thereby
temporal and eternal remuneration by grace, for Christ's sake in virtue of his
promise: Which we confess unanimously with them by warrants of the Scripture.
But we deny only Meritum de condigno, as the Papist School-authors and
Divines, principally the Jesuits do teach, that such in themselves are
condign meritorious works of eternal life, so that God is bound to give
everlasting life, not only by reason of his truth and mercy for Christ's sake,
but also of right and debt, though he had not engaged himself thereunto by any
promise: Which condign meritorious works were never taught either by the
Scripture, or by the ancient Fathers, but are rejected of many Schoole-authors
and Divines; yea by many modern Roman Catholics themselves: As the famous
Jesuit Vasques confesses, that many Catholics dissent from us (calling us
Heretics) but in words, but most agree with us, in the matter it self, and
condescend of necessity unto our opinion. And the Jesuits themselves are not as
yet agreed, wherein properly the Efficacy and worthiness of such Condign
merits of works consists. Vide Bellarm. de Justific. lib. 5. c. 17. Suarez.
in 3. Thom. Tom. 1. quest. 19. art. 3. disp. 39. Vasq. in lib. 2a. quest. 114.
disp. 214. c. 2. and 4.

3. Concerning the Sacrifice of the Mass, 3. Of the Mass.
it is sufficiently evident and manifest, that there is nothing plainly and
expressly taught and declared thereof, either in the Institution of the Lords
Supper, or in the whole volume of the Scripture.

And although some, or all the Ancient Fathers had taught it; yet it could not
be received for an Article necessary unto Salvation, because they had not
taught it out of the word of God; and, because Faith, love, and obedience of
Christ's Commandments and Institution, may very well subsist without the Mass.

But it is certain, that even the Ancient Doctors of the Church never have
taught such Sacrifice of the Mass, as now a days in Popery is professed and
held for the Sovereign Worship, and chiefest part of Religion. For although
they called the Administration of the Lords Supper Missam, and that from
thence, because the Catechumeni, those that were not yet Baptized, were usually
dismissed from it, with these words, Ite, Missa est: And although they have
attributed the name of Sacrifice to the Holy Communion it self; yet they did
it not in such a sense and meaning, that the Priest should offer again the
real and essential body of Christ in his hand and mouth; and also perform a
new Propitiatory Sacrifice both for the quick and dead, and for other
necessities, (as for sick Cattle, for good weather,) as it is taught and
expressed in the Council of Trent, Sess. 22. c. 2. v. 9. Canon. 1.3. But that
it is Sacrificium Eucharisticum, a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving; partly because
the faithful gathered and collected the Bread and Wine upon the Lords Table
for the Holy Communion and necessitiy of the poor; (from whence the Germans
retain still the name of Oblate^,) partly because the Holy Communion it self
is a Commemoration and Representation of the perfect Oblation and Sacrifice of
Christ finished upon the Cross, as the principal Roman ^chool authors and
Divines themselves do expound it, by calling it Sacrificium commemorativum and
representativum; So that we also may say as much, not of their Mass, but of
the Holy Communion, as it has been Instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Fourthly, That man sola Fide, only by Faith is accounted righteous before
God, Although we understand nothing else by the word sola, but what the Apostle
says, 4. Of Justification only by Faith.
that he is justified by mere grace through Faith, only for Christ's sake,
without the works of the Law, and as some ancient Fathers interpreted it: Yet
we desire not to impose and enforce that word as necessary upon any man, in
regard that by many it may be abused and mistaken, as if we could be justified
and saved by such a Faith which is only without any good works: If that
likewise the Papists did not enforce upon us their own expressions and
doctrines concerning the merits and satisfaction of works, which are yet less
warrantable by Scripture: But as long as they stick fast to this Tenet and
opinion of theirs, that we are justified also before God by merits of our good
works: They cannot find fault with us, if we do reply to them by way of
retortion, that the justification is done by Faith alone, and not by merits.

5. The true meaning and declaration of Christ's words in the Holy Communion.
Fifthly, The declaration and meaning of Christ's Word that he called the Bread
his Body, because it did signify and represent his Body, or because it is a
sign of his Body. Although we for our part acknowledge this exposition to be
agreeable both to the words and very end of the Institution, and to all the
Articles of Faith, and that some ancient Fathers, Tertullian, Augustine,
Theodoret, and others have expounded it thus: As the Papists and Lutherans
themselves do not deny the blessed Bread and Wine to be signs and seals of the
Body and Blood of Christ given and shed for us: Yet we desire not to enforce
and press upon any man such interpretation as necessary unto salvation, or as
the Word of God it self: Whereas many of ours ( vide inprimis Wolfang. Musculum
in 26 Matthew. page 552, 554, 555.) confess openly, that this exposition, though
it be not erroneous in it self, yet is not sufficient, unless it did show and
express withal the sort and nature of those signs: viz. not bare naked
significative and representative signs, nor bare historical symbols and tokens
of remembrance, but signa exhibitiva, exhibiting and certifying pledges and
assurances, whereby the things signified by them, namely, the Body of Christ,
which has been given for us, the Blood of Christ, that is shed for us, are
really and verily by virtue of his promise, though not for the nourishing of
our bodies, but to the cherishing and quickening of our souls, delivered and
appropriated unto us, and likewise really and verily received by us, though not
corporally and carnally by our mouth; but spiritually by faith: As the Papists
and Lutherans themselves do not deny such spiritual partaking as has been said
before, but acknowledge it to be the only saving Communion.

Wherefore we for our part teach thereby no new Doctrine as necessary unto
Salvation, but only teach that very same, they themselves must allow and
approve of: If but they reciprocally do not enforce upon us their own
particular Interpretations, as has been mentioned oftentimes already, nor
judge and condemn us therefore, but give us liberty to adhere to the Words and
Declaration of Christ and the Apostle Paul: But as long as they intend to
obtrude unto us their pretended carnal supernatural eating for a necessary
Article of Faith, we cannot but contradict it by a more solid exposition and
illation grounded upon the Word of God.

Sixthly, Concerning the Doctrine of Gods absolute purpose and decree of
election and reprobation, we acknowledge and receive it thus far, as our
adversaries commonly construe our meaning thereof, not only for no necessary
Doctrine of Faith, but also not for the proper Doctrine and Opinion of our
Churches: Being that such a term is not expressed in any general Confessions,
but only used by some Divines, which yet others do rather absolutely forbear,
because of the misapplication and abuses with all sorts of calumnies that may
arise from them.

And although we find many disceptations and different Interpretations
concerning the eternal Predestination and Reprobation, not only betwixt our
Divines, but also betwixt the Romish-School Authors amongst themselves, and no
less between the said Lutherans: Yet we cannot receive either theirs or our
particular opinions for necessary Doctrines, which are professed of all
Christians, without the manifest Word of God and unanimous consent of the
Primitive Church; not only because very few men are capable to comprehend the
depth and profunditie of those Points; but also, because it is sufficient for
us unto salvation, to know only of the Elect and Predestined as much as the
Apostle expressly teaches: Ephesians. 1. verse. 4, 5, 6. That God has chosen us in
Christ before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy and without
blame before him in love, having predestined us unto the Adoption of children
by Jesus Christ unto himself according to the good pleasure of his Will, To the
praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he made us accepted in the beloved.
Ephesians. 2. verse. 8, 9, 10. 2 Timothy 1. verse. 9. For by grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves; it is the gift of God; not of works, lest
any man should boast. For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has before ordained that we should walk in them.

Contrariwise concerning the Reprobates, it suffices us to know only, that
what Christ himself says: He that believes not, is condemned already, because
he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, John 3.
verse. 18.

So that the fault and defect can no ways be imputed to God, who himself
takes no delight in the death and destruction of a sinner, but will, that he
may repent and live; not willing that any should perish, but that all should
come to repentance, Exodus 18. verse. 23, 32. and 33. verse. 11. 2 Petr. 6. verse.
9. But the fault and defect lies absolutely and totally in themselves, who
loved darkness rather then light, and therefore receive not the love of the
Truth, that they might be saved, John 3. verse. 19.

So that we are elected not out of any consideration and respect in our selves,
but out of mere grace in Christ Jesus both unto salvation and the means
ordained thereunto; through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
Truth, whereunto he called us through the Gospel, 2 Thessal. 2. v. 13, 14. But
the Reprobates are cast away by Gods just judgment, because of their sins,
unbeleef, and impenitency, unto the just punishment and condemnation of sins;
according to the Word of the Lord: O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but
in me is thy help, Hos. 13. v. 9.

Moreover, all other Disputes and Controversies of the predestinate and
reprobates which may be moved and debated on, as, Why God to one particular
man, or to a Nation, though by nature equally corrupted in sins, has showed
more grace toward their repentance and salvation then to another? Or, Why God
has not predestined all men unto life, or converted and saved them all;
which according to his Omnipotency he was well able to do? And such like
things, which are not only curious and unnecessary, but vain, presumptuous,
unprofitable question, to which we cannot return a better answer then the
Apostle did: He has mercy on whom he will have mercy, (viz. out of mere grace)
and whom he will he hardneth, viz. out of just Judgment. But, O man, who art
thou, that reply against God? Romans 9. v. 18, 20. O how unsearchable are his
judgments and his ways past finding out! Romans 11. v. 33.

But whosoever will not be satisfied with this answer of the Apostle, he will
have as little cause to condemn thereby us and our Church, as to judge the
Apostle himself or the ancient Fathers, Augustine, Prosper, Fulgentius, and
others, who have taught this same against Pelagius: Or as the Jesuits their
Dominican-Friars: Or as the Modern Lutherans their own Doctor Luther, and some
other ancient Lutherans, who have taught this very same doctrine, and yet
partly used harsher expressions then ever was done of our side.

7. Of Christ's Destension into Hell.
Seventhly, For as much as concerns the Article of Christ's descension into
Hell; We must first know that this Point has not been formerly expressed by
all Churches in the Universal Symbol or Creed, as not only Ruffinus, about
four hundred years after Christ in Expositione Symboli does testify, that then
this Article was not in use either in the Romish or Eastern Churches; but also
is omitted by many ancient Fathers, and in the Nicene Creed it self. From
whence it is, that some Popish Divines hold this Article not generally
necessary for all men unto salvation.

Si nomine Articuli intelligamus veritatem, quam omnes fideles explicit scire
ac credere teneantur; Sic non existimo necessarium hunc computare inter
Articulos Fidei. Quia non est res admodum necessaria singulis hominibus and
quia ob hanc fortasse causam in Symbolo Nicaeno omittitur. Suarez Tom. 2. in 3.
part. Thom. disp. 43. sect. 2.

Nevertheless, Being it is grounded upon the Scripture, specially upon the
16th Psalm, and Act. 2. we call it not into question, though not only we
amongst our selves, but also the ancient Fathers, and also the Papists and
Lutherans do much differ, in their explications; where, for our part, we ought
to distinguish betwixt that which by most certain Warrants of Gods Word is
undeniable and necessary to believe, and that which is uncertain and doubtful.

The Papists commonly interpret it of Limbus Patrum, A Lake for the souls of
the believing Patriarchs and our Forefathers of the Old Testament, from whence
Christ by his going down thereunto, has loosed and fetched them forth. Now
suppose that this opinion were true and certain (though the ancient Fathers and
Doctors of the Church do not agree in it) yet it could not be necessary unto
our salvation, neither would yield to us any profit or comfort, since it does
only concern the faithful Patriarchs.

Much less is it necessary for our salvation, that Christ is really with his
soul descended into the Hell of the damned, as some even of the ancient Fathers
deemed, that he preached to the damned in Hell, and delivered some out of it;
which conjecture simply arose from the misapprehension of the words of the
Apostle Peter, 1. Pet. 3. v. 19, 20. and 4. v. 6.

These two opinions now, if not as erroneous and false, yet as uncertain and
doubtful, and as not necessary unto salvation, laid aside; At least thus much
is undeniable and undoubted, that Christ is descended into Hell virtualiter, as
Thom. Aqu. and other School-Authors and Divines interpret it, which is to say,
powerfully and effectually, where he by his death during three days and his
ensuing Resurrection has not only destroyed the place of Hell for the damned,
but the Kingdom and power of Hell for the faithful and godly, led captivity
captive, and disabled the Hellish spirits of all power over us. But whether
even this is meant by the going down to Hell expressed in the Creed, is to be
doubted of for this reason, because the place of the 16th Psalm and 2d of Acts,
whereon this Article chiefly is grounded, speaks rather of the lowest degree
of humiliation, from whence he has been exalted by his Resurrection, then of
the beginning of his exaltation.

Likewise it is without Controversy granted, that Christ has suffered for our
sins not only in his Body, but also in his Soul unspeakable torments, which in
the Scripture are called the pains and sorrows of Hell, Psalm. 18. and 116. 1 Samuel 2.6. So that many of our Divines have extracted this construction and
sense out of this Article: Yet not so, as if Christ had suffered in his Soul
the very pains of the damned, or any despair, as the Papists by
mis-construction of their words do charge them withal; but that he in his Soul
out of a tender affection toward us, suffered as great pains, distress, and
sorrows for our sins and Gods wrath against us, which he took upon him to
appease, as if they had been his own sins, or we our selves should suffer for
our sins in Hell. Which no ways can be accounted for a new, erroneous, and
damnable Doctrine, being grounded upon so evident Warrants of the Word of God;
Psalm 22. and 69. and 88. Jes. 53. Matthew. 26. v. 37, 38. and 27. v. 46. Luke
22. v. 44. Heb. 5. v. 7. And accordingly taught not only by the ancient
Fathers, but also the Popish School-Divines, Medina, Suarez, Thom. Aquin. in
part. 3. quaest. 49. art. 6.

And although no Christian can make any scruple of the distress and pains
Christ suffered in his Soul; yet a great many of our Divines move here the
Question, and not without reason, Whether this is the very meaning of the
Article expressed in the Creed, or of the aforementioned places in the 16th
Psalm and 2d of Acts, because those pains took their end upon the Cross, and
therefore are comprehended in the Articles of the Passion and Crucifixion; but
the loosing from the bonds of Death and Hell, whereof David and the Apostle
speaks, was fulfilled by his Resurrection.

Wherefore others understand by this Article The Burial, by reason, that both
the Hebrew Sheol and the Greek (...) signify in the Scripture the Grave or
Sepulcher, whereof the aforealledged places do speak, and that also the
Ancients formerly omitted the Article of Christ's Burial, when this Article was
put into the Creed.

Others interpret it generally of the estate and condition Christ's Soul was in
during three days, that, like other souls, it departed out of this World till
the third day, and according to the ordinary Phrase of the Scripture, was
gathered unto his Fathers. For the word Sheol and Hades are generally
understood of that Invisible World, whetherto the souls depart out of this
World, and is attributed both to godly and wicked, without certain
determination of place whetherto they are departed, which shall be manifested
in the Resurrection.

So that by this Article is meant nothing else, but that Christ's soul after his
death made no stay in this World, but departed, like other men's souls to the
place of the dead, and as if it were holden of the bonds of death till the
third day, yet in Gods hands; which was indeed the lowest degree of his
humiliation; whereas in the mean while the World triumphed over him as over a
dead man who went to Hell, till at length it was made manifest by his
Resurrection, that he descended not to the Hell of the damned, but to the Sheol
or Grave to the faithful Patriarchs; As the Greek (...) does not only signify
a descending or going down beneath the Earth, but a departing in general. Act.
8. v. 5. and 9. v. 32. and 11. v. 27. and 12. v. 19. and 13. v. 4. and 15. v.
1. and 18. v. 5, 22. and 21. v. 10. and 27. v. 5.

By all which expositions does manifestly appear that the two first opinions
maintained by the Papists neither are solid and certain, nor necessary; The
others, which partly they, partly we defend, as much as concerns the Doctrine
in it self, are consonant and agreeable to the Word of God and undoubtedly
received of all Christians; though the Controversy remains still; which of
them draws nearest to the true opinion of this Article in the Creed: And
withal that we do not introduce any new Doctrine in this Article as necessary
to salvation, being we give to every one liberty in his opinion, except in that
which is agreed on of all sides. Which is also the safest way and sufficient
unto salvation, if of this Article we do but generally so much know and
believe, that Christ's Soul having suffered the extremest distress and sorrow
on Earth, verily departed to the dead, who are kept in the hands of his Father
till the day of Resurrection: Although we do not even determine the place, that
it descended really to the Hell of the damned, or to a certain Limbus, beneath
the Earth, before it entered into Paradise, which the Lord promised to the thief
upon the Cross; being we yet embrace the most indubitable and certain comfort
arising from this Article, that Christ by such departure of his Soul has
delivered our souls from all the torments and pains of Hell, to the end that
they confidently might follow him out of this World, without fear of Hell, into
that Invisible World, whetherto the Lord has prepared the way by his deceasing.

8. Of the Antichrist.
Lastly, Concerning the Doctrine of the great Antichrist, of whom the Scripture
does so much prophecy; Like as it is not directly necessary unto salvation to
know that such an Antichrist is to come (although it is requisite to believe it
for them that have the knowledge of it out of the Word of God, as has been
said heretofore;) Also much less is it necessary to salvation to know and to
determine who is that great Antichrist, except unto them only to whom God has
perfectly revealed it. And notwithstanding many of our Divines, though not
generally all, are of this opinion, that the Pope of Rome, from that time he
has taken upon him to be instead of Christ the Universal and Supreme Head of
the whole Christian Church, over all Emperors and Kings and over all men's
souls (which has been specially observed since the time of Gregory the
seventh) is that great Antichrist: yet they do not teach it even as a necessary
Article of Faith, but as an Interpretation of the Prophetical Predictions,
which are very agreeable to Truth, yea partly accounted by them for certain and
undoubted, since they have the experience by the event, histories, and writings
of the Popes themselves, that whatsoever has been prophesied of the
Antichrist, is now fulfilled in these Popes. And although this opinion of
theirs must of necessity be thus far new, because the Primitive Church could
know no certainty of it before the accomplishing and revealing of the
Antichrist: Yet it is not so new neither; whereas this name has been
attributed to the Popes some hundred years before Luther's times, even by some
German Emperors and Bishops, and among others by the Emperor Lewys the fourth
Duke of Bavaria three hundred years ago; Yea, when before 1460 years Irenaeus
out of the Revelation of S. John 13. v. 18. conjectured by his name, that he
would be called Latinus, that is to say, Roman.

Nevertheless not the whole Roman Church, nor all its Members, neither all
their Doctrine and Rel gion is therefore to be accounted for Antichristian. God
forbid. But the Doctrine of Christ, which is left amongst them, ought to be
discerned from the Doctrine and traditions of the Pope, and the Temple and
People of God, over which he extends unjustly his Supreme Jurisdiction and
Dominion, from the Pope and his Dependents, as it is prophesied of in 2 Thessalonians.
2. v. 4. Revel. 18. v. 4.

But if the Pope or the Papists would reject or confute such opinion of the
Protestants as erroneous; They cannot perform it better then by the deed it
self, ordering matters in this manner:

First, That hereafter he do not anymore exalt himself over the Gods on Earth,
over Emperors and Kings, to depose and deprive them of their Crowns, and
discharge the Subjects from their Oath, obedience, and subjection.

Secondly, That he do not attribute to himself the power belonging only to
Christ, over the souls and consciences of men, or over Christian Doctrine and
Religion, by adding thereunto and diminishing from it.

Thirdly and principally, That he do not Antichristian-like excommunicate and
persecute those that do not acknowledge him as Universal and Supreme Head of
the whole Christian Church. In doing so, none of our side will proclaim him for
an Antichrist, nor his Dependents for Antichristian. Otherwise, although they
should err or exceed in holding him to be the great Antichrist, when perhaps a
greater yet is to come: Yet the Popes would have as little reason to charge
them therefore with a damnable error, as the Wolves the Sheep, for accounting
that for the ravenousest Wolf which has devoured most Sheep.

Thus we hope by these eight Points of moment, wherein we are accused of new
Doctrine, is apparently and abundantly made clear and evident, (which also we
could as easily have performed in all other Articles;) That we have introduced
no Innovation of Doctrine, but rather for the maintenance of the ancient
undoubted Doctrine, separated again whatsoever has been added to the Universal
Primitive Christian Doctrine in the latter hundred years.

To which end all the Reformed Churches have generally at all times declared
themselves by solemn Protestations, that they would hearken to no new Doctrine,
but punctually and positively adhere to the ancient Catholic Apostolic
Doctrine.

So that the principal difference betwixt us and the Papists and the Lutherans
does not properly concern the Doctrine, which we for our part maintain as
necessary unto salvation, but only the by-Doctrines and additions, which they
for their part have innovated, and besides the Universal undoubted Christian
Doctrine will enforce upon us as necessary; but we reject either as false and
erroneous, or at least as unnecessary and doubtful.

For notwithstanding some new Interpretations of some place of the Scripture,
or some new opinions in some Controversy may be found amongst our Divines, (as
they are very obvious and ordinary amongst the Papists and Lutheran-Divines)
yet by such singular Interpretation of some dark places of the Scripture, no
new Doctrine is introduced, but grounded upon more evident Warrants: Or though
one or other should maintain some new opinions, yet they are not pressed by
them or by the Universal Church for necessary Doctrines, but liberty is given
therein for each ones opinion: Yea, there are some which are not approved of at
all, but rather rejected and set by: Like as not only we, but the Papists
themselves do not approve and allow of every thing expressed in the most
ancient and principal monuments and writings of the Fathers.

But in case One or some of ours would cry up and urge their own singular
opinions as necessary to salvation, With those we should find even as much
fault as with the Papists and Lutherans:

Quidquid ille, quamvis sanctus and doctus, quamvis Episcopus, quamvis
Confessor and Martyr, praeter omnes aut etiam contra omnes senserit, id inter
proprias and occultas and privatas opiniunculas a communis publicae as
generalis sententiae authoritate secretum sit. Vincent. Licin. commonit. 2o.

Conclusion of the first Part.
BY all this, what hitherto has been declared, every understanding and
conscientious man may without partiality and passion judge and discern whether
there is any lawful ground or reason to judge and condemn us or our Church as
heretical, because of our Doctrine and Religion: Whereas we for our part
prescribe not to other men any Doctrine as necessary unto salvation, except
only what is so evidently and expressly grounded upon the Word of God, that
they themselves with us, must receive for certain and undoubted, or the
Primitive Church has received and taught unanimously, nor contrary wise do we
deny any Doctrine which is thus necessary: Though we cannot acknowledge and
receive each particular Interpretation or Inference, which either of the
different parties accounts for necessary.

Now, If we may not justly be judged or condemned for the very Doctrine of all
our Churches in general; much less may we be judged then for some different
and controverted doctrine or expressions, which peradventure have been
maintained by particular Teachers, and not generally approved by all the
Churches or by our selves, who are cried down for Heretics: For it is said: By
thy words (and not by other men's words) thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned, Matthew. 12. v. 37. Much less then for such
Doctrines, which neither we nor any of ours have ever maintained, but are laid
to our charge by dreadful slanders or mis-construction and perversion of our
words and meaning, or by groundless vain Scholastic consequences and
illations, as that we deny Gods Truth, Omnipotency, Justice, and Mercy, that we
make God to be an Hypocrite, a Tyrant, Author of sin, yea a Devil, and more
such like unchristian, inhumane, and very diabolical calumnies, which we for
our part commit to the Supreme and Sovereign Judge, and instead thereof we say
with the Apostle to all those that are yet inclinable to Christian Peace and
Unity: Let us not judge one another any more; what art thou that judge
another man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or falls. There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, who art thou that judge
another. James 4. v. 12.

And if it be, that we shall not rashly judge one another with words, how much
worse is it then; When they from a verbal judging fall at length to a cruel
and bloody persecution with fire and sword, or other violences against life,
goods, honor, and dignities? When they not only excommunicate and cut off
from the Christian Church, but if possibly could be, exclude from men's society
and extirpate from the face of the Earth those who only profess Christ and
his Word, and will not hark and countenance humane doctrines and traditions.
This is the bloodthirsty course of Cain and Caiaphas, whom God also in his due
time will judge accordingly.

THE SECOND PART.
CHAP. IX. Whether, and how far we ought, or are bound in conscience to judge
others in matters of Religion.
AGainst all this, The fourth objection against the aforesaid doctrine.
what hitherto we have declared concerning the rash and unseasonable judging
and condemning in matters of Religion; Many will object, that yet we our selves
use to judge and condemn others; And not only the old Sects rejected by the
Primitive Church, but also the modern Roman Catholics and the said Lutherans,
who never as yet have been heard, much less judged or condemned in any
universal Council, or other legal Ecclesiastical Consistory, and that
nevertheless we judge and condemn them not only with words, but rather with
deeds, in regard we separate our selves from their Churches and Congregations,
perform our Divine Service in our peculiar Assemblies apart, or reform whole
Churches in their Doctrine and Ceremonies; And that in such a manner, that we
give thereby a great scandal unto others, causing by such separations or
reformations, at least a Schism, Division, and Discord in the Christian
Church; whereof the Apostle both in the often cited place and elsewhere has
faithfully warned us: Let us not judge one another any more, but judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way.

Wherefore, having hitherto been informed by the first part of this
Apostolical rule: Wherein, and why we ought not to judge one another; Let us
now go on and learn also by the second part; whether, and how far we ought and
are bound in conscience to judge in matters of Religion? We also shall easily
thereby discern which side of the modern dissenting parts transgresses or
exceeds therein; and which part is guilty of the pernicious Schism, Division
and Separation, and of the great scandal and other distractions of the modern
Christian Church from thence arising; And withal, whether, and which part
ought, PART II.
or is bound in conscience to reform the other in Doctrine and Religion. Chap.
9.


The Apostle teaches us in the said place, that we ought principally to judge
this, That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers
way.

Where, First is to be observed, that this judging he speaks of is referred
rather to the matter, to the works and words, to the Doctrine, practice,
worship, whereby any offense may be given, then to the persons; And that
primarily to our own affairs, words and works, whereby we may put any
stumbling block and offense in the way either of our neighbor, or of our
selves; Secondarily, to the matters of our neighbor, as far as he may become
unto us, or we unto him a stumbling block or offense.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that he does not properly speak of the offense of
affections, whereby we or our neighbor is provoked to anger, afflicted,
offended, and alienated from us: but of the offense of Conscience, whereby
either our own Conscience is wounded, by going against Conscience, or the
neighbor is misse-led into errors or sins of Conscience; or he being
already engaged in errors and sins of Conscience, is by us strengthened and
confirmed therein. But we need also to take heed of the offense of affections
and the hatred arising from them as much as possibly may be, according to the
rule. Romans 12. v. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live
peaceably with all men. Yet not so neither, that we give thereby an offense to
our Conscience, and also by reason of the outward peace with men, should
destroy and lose the inward peace of Conscience.

Thirdly, it is indubitabe hereby, that the Apostle requires nothing else, but
that we for our part give or put no occasion to fall in any man's way. Which
happens, when we either commit that which is evil, and omit that which is
good, or abuse so our liberty in indiffent things, that the weak are
scandalized at our example; which is to say, offended, made worse thereby, and
misled into errors and sins. But it is no ways required from us, that we,
for the avoiding of such scandal and offense, which others without cause,
either out of weakness or malice receive at us, in doing what is good, and
omitting what is evil, should therefore omit that which is good, and commit
that which is evil. For we must not do evil, that good may come, Romans 3. v.
8. Not wound our own Conscience, that another man's erroneous Conscience may not
be offended; Yea, we need not neither forsake our liberty in indifferent
matters, because of those that are offended at them out a Pharisaicall
hypocrisy and malice, or judge and condemn us but only for their sake which
are weak in faith. But against the others we must often times of necessity
stick fast to the liberty for no other reason but this, l st they may impose on
us a necessity against that liberty which Christ has purchased unto us, Gal.
2. v. 4, 5.

Which general rule of avoiding offense of them that are weak in faith, the
Apostle does apply in the words following, upon the meats which were fordidden
in the Law, but were indifferent things in the Gospel. I know, says he, and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing (no meat) unclean (common)
of it self; but to him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is
unclean. (common) From which he makes a twofold inference.

I. He that has the knowledge and receives it for a free indifferent thing,
may use it for himself without sin: Yet so, that he give no offense toward
sin, nor grieve or distract without necessity the weak, who does not yet
acknowledge the same, but accounts it for forbidden and unclean, Romans 14. v.
15, For if thy brother be grieved with thy meat (in his Conscience) Now walk
thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died.

II. He that has not the knowledge, but esteems it to be forbidden and
unclean, or at least doubts thereof, may not use the same without sin and
offense to his Conscience, v. 20. All things indeed are pure, but it is evil
for that man who eats with offense, v. 23. and he that doubts (whether they
are indifferent or not, lawful or unlawful before God) if he eats is
damned, (condemned) viz. of his own Conscience, because he eats not of faith.
For whatsoever is not of faith (viz. so that we are sure that they are
acceptable to God, or permitted by God) is sin.

This very same Doctrine is repeated over again by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. Where
he applies it almost in like manner to meats offered to Idols, v. 5.
Concerning the eating of those things that are offered in Sacrifice unto Idols,
We know that an Idol is nothing, etc. v. 7. Howbeit, there is not in every man
that knowledge; for some with Conscience of the Idol, eat it as a thing offered
unto an Idol, and their Conscience being weak, is defiled, etc. v. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. Take heed, lest by any means this liberty of yours become a stumbling
block to them that are weak. For if any man sees thee, which have knowledge,
sit at table in the Idols Temple, Shall not the Conscience of him which is
weak, be emboldned to eat those things which are offered to Idols? And through
thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died. But when you
sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye sin
against Christ. Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no
flesh, while the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend.

By which Doctrine of the Apostle, we may here easily understand, what, and how
far we ought to judge in matters of Religion and Conscience: Judge this
rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his
brothers way.

Wherefore, I. How far we may judge of the Doctrine and Religion of the
erring.
we must not judge the persons whether they are damned before God or not, but
properly and principally the matter it self, whether it be an article of faith
or life, of doctrine or worship, and only so far and to this end, that it may
not become a stumbling block and offense of Conscience unto us and others: But
the persons we may judge so far, that we may avoid to give them the like
offense, or we our selves to be offended at them.

II. And not only in those things, which are commanded or forbidden by God to
believe or to do, and therefore are necessary; but, also which are in
themselves free indifferent things, which is to say, neither commanded nor
forbidden, and therefore not necessary to do or to omit them: which
nevertheless we must judge thus far, lest by our liberty we put a stumbling
block in the way of the weak, whereby they might deal against their Conscience,
having no knowledge of such liberty, but holding them for necessary in their
erroneous Conscience, or doubting of them.

III. Being we must be so cautious in free indifferent things, because of the
weak; how much more in things that are necessary and commanded or forbidden by
God, lest we may teach or do somewhat against our knowledge, and wilfully, what
God has rejected and prohibited in his Word as unlawful, or deny or omit what
God has ordained and commanded: Whereby we should give yet a more dangerous
offense, first to our own Conscience, who have the knowledge thereof out of the
Word of God, and then to others, whether they have the knowledge thereof or
not, not only to do against erroneus or weak, but against true-beleeving
Consciences, and withal against Gods command it self.

IV. But most of all, when such false Doctrine or Religion, which God has
forbidden, is pressed upon us, not only as sound and true, but as necessary
unto salvation; or on the contrary, when the true sound Doctrine and worship,
which God has commanded, is forbidden and condemned not only as unnecessary or
erroneous, but even as heretical. Which also, if we did confess or practice
that, and did deny or omit this against Conscience, would not only prove a
common sin and offense to our and our neighbors Conscience; but also
idolatry and a denying of God.

For since we ought not to give way, that such things which God in the Gospel
left free and indifferent unto us, (as for example the Mosaicall distinction of
meats, or the Circumcision which was enjoined to the people of Israel in the
Law,) should be, as necessary, imposed on us, lest we might seek our salvation
without Christ, Gal. 5, v. 1, 2, 3, 4. How much less then ought we to
countenance those things which God has absolutely forbidden, whereby we would
seek our salvation, not only without, but against Christ, and because of men's
Traditions and Doctrines make Gods commandment of none effect? Matthew. 15. v. 6.

Whether and how far we may separate ourselves in the doctrine and religion
of the erroneous Church.
V. From whence we conclude further, when we because of such erroneous doctrine
or Religion enforced upon us as necessary against the Word of God; as much as
in our conscience we may have knowledge of it, are cried down for Heretics,
condemned, excommunicated, shut out and cut off from the Christian Church and
the communion of the Saints; That then we have not only good reason, but also
are in conscience bound and constrained of necessity and force to separate our
selves and withdraw from that Church thus proceeding with us; And not
consequently those, who of necessity as excommunicate and rejected men must
separate themselves, but those, which do reject and force them to such a
separation, are properly guilty of the unjust, uncharitable judging of men's
Consciences, and also of the scisme and division of all the miseries and
distractions depending from the same.

VI. Yea that no man, who in his Conscience acknowledges, that this Doctrine
is the truth of God, which by such erroneous Churches or those that have charge
over them, is thus excommunicated and condemned, may with a safe Conscience
remain in their outward communion and fellowship.

First, because he cannot but play the Hypocrite and dissemble thereby against
his own true believing Conscience, and against the Word of God, so that he
would become to himself a heavy offense and stumbling block to his own
conscience.

Then, because he would also by his example be scandalous and offensive to
other true believers, who together with him did acknowledge the same and were
excommunicated for it; yea should strengthen and confirm their excommunication
and condemnation as much as did lie in his power; which certainly is a most
grievous sin not only against the confession of faith, but against the
Christian brotherly charity.

Thirdly, because he would also give an offense to the erring party, by
confirming him both in such errors and in the uncharitable excommunication and
condemnation with his own example, and assent and by making himself partaker of
their sins and persecutions.

VII. Moreover, when such Church or part of it, although it does maintain such
erroneous doctrine and religion; yet inforceth it not upon 'its fellow members,
as necessary, nor excommunicateth or rejects them for it; but in such
erroneous points of doctrine permits the true-beleevers to enjoy their
liberty of conscience; These then, though they have reason to avoid and beware
of the Communion of the erroneous doctrine and worship, as of an abominable and
pernicious leaven, and to contradict it out of the word of God in due time and
place, with Christian charity and meekness; yet in their other points of
doctrine and Religion agreeable to the word of God; ought not as yet utterly to
withdraw and separate themselves from such a Church, lest by their separation
an occasion may be given to further scisme and division; which many times is
more prejudicial and offensive, then the error it self.

Whereof we have set before our eyes not only the Prophets and other
true-beleeving Israelites who lived in the idolatrous times at Bethel, and
during the Baal-service in Israel, and yet not bowed their knees unto him: But
also the example of Christ himself and his Disciples before and after his
ascension; who did not separate themselves from the Jewish Temple and Synagogues
(as long as they could be tolerated in them) because of the leven of the
Pharisees and Saduces; yea the Lord rather exhorted them, that though they
should take heed and beware of the leven, Mat. 16. v. 6. yet should labor to
do and to observe, whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees did bid them observe in
Moses seat out of the law. Matthew. 23. v. 1, 2.

VIII. Out of all this we infer yet further: When and how far we may
undergo the Refomation.
If not only private particular persons, but whole Congregations, or the
greatest and principal part of them; especially they that have charge over
them; acknowledge and discover by the Word of God any dangerous error and
abuse, which has peradventure taken root in them, Whereby somewhat that is
erroneous and pernicious is added, or somewhat that is sound and necessary is
diminished or perverted in the Universal indubitable saving doctrine and
worship; That then they have good reason, yea, are bound in their Conscience
and function to reform such dangerous abuses and errors according to the Word
of God and the example of the Primitive undoubted Apostolical Church; yea,
withal to exhort and animate out of Gods Word other Congregations unto like
Reformation, lest they cast any further stumbling block and occasion to fall
both in their own and their posterities way, Deuteronomy. 13. Jos. 22. Judge. 6. v. 10.
1 Samuel 7. 1 Chronicles. 13. and 15. 2 Chronicles. 15. and 17. and 29. and 30. and 31. and
34. etc. 1 Cor. 5. v. 7. and 11. v. 16. Gal. 5. v. 1.10. Revel. 2. v. 5.14,
15.24. and 3. v. 2, 3.

Yet so, that they do not therefore rashly condemn other particular Churches,
which do not acknowledge such errors, but rather carefully endeavor to
conserve the bond of Christian charity and unity in the rest of the Universal
undoubted Doctrine, till they are likewise edified by their example, and
delivered from such dangerous errors.

But if other particular Churches are so much scandalized and offended at such
Reformation, that they cry down therefore the reformed Congregations for
Heretical, excommunicate, or violently persecute them; Nevertheless these
said reformed Churches, as long as they cannot legally and lawfully be
convinced of any damnable error out of the Word of God, but rather are ready
to make good before any legal Ecclesiastical Convocation or Synod, that they
have settled their Reformation according to the Word of God, upon very weighty
and urgent motives, and to adhere closely and positively to the universal
undoubted Christian Doctrine and Religion, are not only no ways bound to
shrink from and give over the Reformation of such acknowledged errors and
abuses because of the scandalizing and offense of other particular Churches;
which either arise from evil affections, or from an erroneous Conscience: But
also they are so much more obliged steadfastly to cleave and stick to it; being
the reformed errors and abuses are pressed upon them not only as lawful, but
even as necessary points of saving Doctrine and Religion, whereby they become
but a more dangerous and damnable stumbling block and offense both to them that
acknowledge the errors, and to them that do not.

And so consequently not those Churches or Congregations which are reformed
according to the Word of God, but those that excommunicate and condemn them
therefore without and against the Word of God, will be guilty of the injust
judging and of the schism or division arising from it.

IX. And all this is done without less difficulty and contention; If in such
reformed Congregations those to whose charge they are committed, whether they
be Secular or Ecclesiastical, with the Congregation, or the greater and
principal part of it, agree and consent unto such reformation according to the
Word of God. As it has been practiced in the times of the Kings, Asa,
Josaphat, Hishia, Josia, and times of our Forefathers in the most Protestant
Evangelicall Churches in Germany, England, Denmark, etc.

But the difficulty is so much greater, when those that have charge over the
Congregation, especially the temporal Magistrates as Patrons of the Churches
disagree and dissent in the Reformation from their subjects, or from the
greater part of them, (As commonly else it happens when the greater part of
the Citizens and Commons in any City or Province dissent from the other)
wherein even the wisest and most religious men may peradventure slide and
stumble, being either defective or excessive in it, when they walk not
uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, or sometimes out of zeal
toward truth, forget Christian charity and peaceablenesse, and whilst they
labor to avoid the one, cause oftentimes another offense which is far
greater. As we have an example propounded unto us in the Apostle Peter himself,
who by his dissembling with the Jewish Ceremonies, fearing them that were of
the Circumcision and weak in faith, would have carried away and given a more
dangerous offense to the believers among the Gentiles, unless he had been
rebuked and withstood by the Apostle Paul, Gal. 2. v. 11, 12, 13, 14.

But that we in such cases according to the Apostles rule, as much as is
possible, may avoid to scandalize and offend the consciences; Wherein we must
be especially cautious in reformations.
we must first of all exactly examine the error and abuse, which we intend to
reform, whether it does so certainly and infallibly appear by the Word of God,
and besides, so prejudicial and dangerous, that of necessity it requires a
public Reformation, and may not be tolerated without a grievous offense and
stumbling block to the Conscience; lest we, desiring to bring in presently a
public Reformation, and as it were, an alteration of Religion at every
pretended error and abuse, which yet is doubtful, or could be remedied with
more moderation and meekness, or might be tolerated without prejudice to the
soul, may thereby be an occasion of a greater offense then the error it self;
being the alterations and mutations are not less; yea, oftentimes a great deal
more dangerous in matters of Religion and Church Government, then in all other
temporal affairs; And then by reason of humane infirmity we cannot expect and
look for such a perfection in the Church-militant here on earth, whereby it
might be exempted from all defects, errors and abuses.

Secondly, though the error and abuse is so prejudicial and dangerous, that a
public Reformation in Doctrine and Religion should be requisite: Yet we must
by all means beware of an exterior violent compulsion, except it were against
such horrid and hideous kind of blasphemies and insurrection, as we mentioned
heretofore; where it does manifestly appear, that they do proceed rather from
an obstinate malice of the heart, then weakness and ignorance of the
understanding; Or except we had such an express warrant and instruction, with
such a Prophetical zealous spirit as Elias: For otherwise all violent
compulsion in matters of Faith and Conscience is absolutely repugnant to the
Doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ, who requires from his people a willing,
cheerful, sincere, Why all exterior violent compulsion is to be avoided.
faithful, but not a forced hypocritical, unbeleeving obedience. It is also
impossible to undergo such violent compulsion without a grievous offense and
scandal of Conscience: For whatsoever is done of force against Conscience, is
not of Faith, but against Faith, and consequently cannot be but sinful and
damnable, both to him that is compelled, and to him that compels; although
the work else is good, commendable and right in it self, which the erring party
against its Conscience is compelled unto, Romans 14. v. 23. Neither can such
compulsion of consciences procure any true, Christian, sound reformation and
edification of the Church; but rather in stead of the intended edification,
shall cause a most pernicious schism or division, yea oftentimes a total
ruin and destruction of the Church; as we have at these present times in
several places many woeful examples set before our eyes.

Thirdly, we must likewise take heed of an uncharitable condemning and
excommunicating the erring party; And although the error and abuse were
absolutely damnable in it self, yet we ought not, and cannot rashly condemn the
persons. First, because we ought always to presume out of Christian charity,
that they do err only out of weakness, as long as they may under any pretense
clear themselves from an obstinate malice. Secondly, because it is expedient
for us to labor to over-sway rather the malice by meekness, and hope that
they at length may be won and converted by Gods mercy and goodness, whereof we
will speak more at large hereafter.

Wherefore in the fourth place it is most certain, that during such dissension
of a strong party of the common people in any City or Province an Universal
Reformation may not easily be undertaken by the true-beleeving party, because
it can hardly or never take any effect without exterior force and condemning
of the erring party: And in case the erring party retains still, if not all,
yet the most principal and necessary articles of saving fundamental Doctrine,
so that they cannot directly be accounted unfaithful Heathens or damned
Heretics; but held yet for weak believers and erring Christians; then the said
Reformation ought by no means to be put on against their will, before they are
bitter informed; especially the errors being such, which have not been
rejected or condemned by the Word of God in the Primitive Church.

Nevertheless, lest the true believers out of want of an universal Reformation
may be scandalized and offended in their own Conscience; They have good reason,
yea, are bound for their part to avoid the communion of such acknowledged
dangerous errors and abuses; yet in such a manner, that they do not directly
separate themselves in the remainder of the true doctrine and worship from the
erring Congregation, as long as they may be tolerated in it, but rather for the
avoiding of the Schism or Division of the Church, be careful to maintain the
bond of Christian charity and unity, till God may open the eyes of the erring
party to acknowledge their errors.

But when the true-beleevers themselves are not tolerated by the erring party
(as it happens oftentimes) but excommunicated or condemned because of the
rejecting of their errors: Then they have not only very good reason, but in
some regard are compelled to settle separately their Assembly and Religion, and
consequently a particular Reformation, because they are not obliged quite to
omit and set the exercise of Religion aside for the erring parties sake; which
they exclude from their Congregations, if not from the hearing of Gods word,
yet from the use and communion of the holy Sacraments. Where again, not those
that are of necessity compelled to separate themselves, but these that reject,
Whether, and how far the Magistrates may undertake the reformation without
the consent of the subjects.
and excommunicate those, are guilty of this Schism.

Especially the Christian Magistrates may no ways be restrained or blamed, if
they acknowledging by the Word of God such like errors and abuses, though
their subjects will not hearken to any Reformation; yet at least do reform the
said errors for their families and fellow-beleevers, without compulsion of the
others: Like as Joshua denounced to the people of Israel, though they should
forsake the Lord to serve other gods; yet he and his house would serve him,
Jos. 24. v. 15, 16. And like as some godly Kings in Juda, and David himself,
though they could not restrain the people from sacrificing in high places; yet
they for their own persons, with those that followed them, walked upright in
the eyes of the Lord, not departing and turning aside from his House and
Ordinances, 1 Reg. 3. verse. 2. 1 Reg. 15. verse. 14. and 22. verse. 43, 2 Chronicles.
20. v. 33.

For if it does not stand with reason and equity, that the Magistrates should
compel the true-beleeving or erring subjects against their Conscience; How
much more unreasonable and unjust would it then be; that subjects, The Author
in this place speaks of the Prince Elector of Brandenbougs case with his
Lutheran subjects who endeavor to stop him and his reformed attendants from the
free exercise of Religion.
though true-beleevers, should stop and restrain the Magistrates and their
dependents from their liberty of Conscience and public exercise of Religion,
which they under their protection, and in their errors enjoy?

And all this is chiefly to be observed in such difference and dissension of
the Church which concern partly the fundamental doctrine it self. But the
condemning and separation is so much more to be taken heed of, when the
difference and dispute arises not from any one point of the fundamental
Doctrine, or from any Idolatry and Superstition in Religion, but only from the
by-points in Doctrine or Ceremonies; though the errors and abuses in them
ought to be avoided as much as is possible, lest a little leaven may at length
leaven the whole lump.

Where it may come to pass, that the erring which in their error
nevertheless conserve the bond of charity in unity, are not only tolerated as
brethren, but also accounted for better Christians then those who, though they
do not err in the controverted Doctrine, yet procure thereby a Schism and
Division by reason of their unseasonable judging and condemning, who although
they keep on both sides the grounds of Faith, yet overthrow therewith the
foundation of Christian love which is most of all requisite.

Whereof we read in the Ancient Ecclesiastical Histories about the year after
Christ 250. a very memorable example of Cyprian and his followers on one side,
and of Stephen Bishop of Rome and his dependents on the other side. Whereas,
though Cyprian, together with the Bishops in Africa, erred in his opinion, that
the Heretics being converted should be rebaptized; Yet, because he did not by
such erroneous opinion of his condemn others, who defended the contrary, but
inviolably maintained the bond of Christian unity; ( Servatur a nobis patienter
and firmiter charitas animi, collegii honor, vinculum fidei and concordia
sacerdotii. Epist. 73.) He was therefore much less to be blamed then Stephen,
who, though he did not err in the Doctrine, yet condemned Cyprian and the
others for it, was by the Bishops sharply reproved for such unchristian judging
and unnecessary separation.

Tu, Stephane, haereticis omnibus pejor ^s and lites and dissensiones quantas
parasti per Ecclesias totius mundi? Peceatum vero quam magnum tibi exaggerasti,
quando te a tot gregibus scidisti? Excidisti enim te ipsum, noli te fallere;
Siquidem ille est vere schismaticus, qui se a communione Ecclesiasticae
Vnitatis Apostatam fecerit. Dum enim putas omnes a te abstiner^ posse, solum te
ab omnibus abstinuisti.

Non pudet Stephanum propter haereticos asserendos fraternitatem scindere,
insuper and Cyprianum Pseudo-Christum and Pseudo-Apostolum and dolosum
operatorem dicere: qui omnia in se esse conscius praevenit, ut alteri ea per
m^ndacium objiceret, qua ipse ex merito audire deberet. Apud. Cypr. Epist. 75.

Otherwise this said Cyprian, notwithstanding such error has been always
accounted for a godly teacher and Martyr in the Universal Christian Church.
But when afterward the Donatists in Africa, not only followed him in such
error, but also condemned and separated themselves from other true-beleeving
Churches, They not without reason were rejected as pernicious Schismatics,
because they followed Cyprian in his error, Chap. 10.
but not in his charity and peaceablenesse, and caused thereby a most scandalous
breach and schism in the Church, as it evidently appears by the writings of
Augustine and Optatus Milevitanus against the Donatists.

By all which I hope we may sufficiently discern, whether, or how far men
ought, or are bound in Conscience to judge others in Doctrine or Religion, or
to separate themselves from them, or to reform them. Which to confirm and
illustrate with more grounds and examples in each point, I think it needless
at this present; Seeing it is for the most part agreed on in Thesi, or position
of it: But in Hypothesi, or application of it, each one favors his side best
and transferreth the fault and cause of all dissentions and divisions upon his
adversary. Wherefore for the conclusion thereof, we must apply such common and
general Doctrine to the modern differences and controversies, and especially
to the three dissenting parties before mentioned, without any partiality and
passions.

CHAP. X. Whether, or how far the Protestant Churches ought, or are bound to
judge the said Roman Catholics in their Doctrine and Religion, or to separate
themselves from them, or to undergo any Reformation.
AMongst all Schisms and Divisions in Churches, which ever since the Apostles
times arose amongst the Christians; we shall hardly find any one which has
been fomented with more vehemence and fierceness, then that which in our
Predecessors days sprung originally in Germany, and afterward was spread
over all Europe, and at this present is divulged, (witness our own eyes) to a
most lamentable desolation and destruction of Christendom, so that some long
continuance thereof, which is feared, will draw at length upon the necks of all
Western Churches like punishment and oppressions, as formerly the Eastern
suffered under the Turks, Tartars and other Barbarous Nations, unless the Lord
does shorten and prevent them by the day of his apparition. Wherefore every one
has good reason to be careful and to search out which side properly is
guilty, and the cause of such pernicious Schisms, that we may know to which to
give assent, and to which not. Whereby it is not imaginable, that one side
should be only and totally guilty, and the other absolutely innocent and
guiltless. For it may well be, that there has been faults on both sides,
either in the excess, or defect; whereby their minds were exasperated, and the
divisions grown to such a high pitch. And the differences and disceptations in
Churches, are much like the war or judicial law-businesse; where many times
the most just and equitable cause is very ill managed, and commonly prolonged
and extended to a great inconvenience, if not to the utmost ruin of both
disagreeing parties. But, since indifferences in Religion, especially when a
resolute Schism and Division is already formed in the Church, no Neutrality,
nor therefore a total separation from the Christian Church, or the settlement
of a peculiar Church is admitted; but assent is to be given either to one or
the other side in the saving Doctrine and Religion, though not all its actions
may be approved; At least thus far must be determined of the guiltiness and
innocence of the different parties, to the end that men may know which Church
is to be embraced, and which not.

Which subject fully and punctually to handle and maintain would require a
peculiar book, in regard that all modern writings, whether they concern
Divisions and Dissensions, or Ecclesiastical Unity, are in some kind directed
to this scope. But we shall here be constrained only to touch it in a short and
compendious way, as much as will conduce to our present intention, and to
declare it briefly by the aforementioned principles. And first, whether, and
how far we have reason to judge their Doctrine and Religion, to separate our
selves from them, or to reform them. Then secondly, whether therefore by any
means we ought to judge and condemn the persons or whole Churches.

I. Where then first it is to be exactly examined, How far the Protestants
are separated from the Romish Church.
how far the Protestant Churches have separated themselves from the
Roman Catholics; Seeing they have not withdrawn themselves one from another in all points of Christian Doctrine and Religion, but remain still united in many
great and weighty Articles, which have been unanimously acknowledged of both
sides out of the Word of God. For both sides profess and receive the whole
Universal Apostolical Creed, whereunto we are Baptized on all sides. Likewise
both sides retain the ten Commandments and the Prayer of the Lord: And
although they omit in their Catechismes the second Commandment concerning
Images; yet they retain it at least in their Bibles; so that we remain
undivided at least according to the letter in three most necessary Symboles or
Articles of the Universal Christian Religion, credendorum, faciendorum,
petendorum, what is necessary to believe, to do, and to ask, as was mentioned
heretofore. And notwithstanding they have added many other human Ceremonies and
Traditions, to the holy Sacraments which Christ himself has instituted; yet we
acknowledge that they have thus far kept the true Baptism, being the most
necessary Sacrament, that we nor they desire to rebaptize those that were
baptized by us and them. Moreover, they receive and acknowledge with us the
whole Sacred Scripture of the Old and New Testament, to be the indubitable Word
of God, whose Interpretation and meaning in many sound Doctrines, yea, I dare
say in the most, is unqestioned betwixt us and them. Yea likewise in the
Symbols of the Primitive Church of the first and principal Councels, which we
receive on both sides agreeable and warrantable by Scripture: and finally, in
all points of their Doctrine and Religion, which are true, Undoubted, Ancient,
Catholic, we remain as yet united with them against all other erroneous
Sectaries, as has been declared before: Wherefore we cannot, nor will judge
them Heretics, but rather we must judge and determine by those undoubted and
undeniable grounds of both sides, all other differences in Doctrine that are
left: And if we only might be tolerated by them without compulsion of
Conscience; we, nor they had then no cause to separate and withdraw our selves
one from another; And we would sufficiently find in the said articles
whatsoever is necessary unto salvation.

II. Neither do we judge and condemn them in those things, which we generally,
and on all sides acknowledge and receive as free indifferent matters, which
neither direct or indirecte in the Word of God are commanded nor forbidden to
believe or to do, but rather confess that men ought herein to conform
themselves to each Church and Laws of the Country, Customs and Ceremonies;
lest because of unnecessary things, a separation and scandal be caused
according to Augustins rule: Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores
injungitur, indifferenter est habendum and pro eorum inter quos vivitur,
societate servandum est. Epist. 118

But in such things, which We for our part account for free indifferent
matters; but they for necessary, either out of custom, or because of the
Tradition of their Church, or out of a mis-apprehension of the Word of God (as
for example in Fasts and Holy days) we ought to judge the matter thus far,
lest according to the rule of the Apostle, we may cast a stumbling block or
scandal before them by our liberty and knowledge in their pretended necessity;
but rather dispense with our exterior liberty in such indifferent things,
because of them that are weak in faith: If but they reciprocally permit us the
liberty of Conscience, that we are not constrained to receive and acknowledge
them as necessary unto salvation.

As also contrariwise in those things, which We for our part esteem necessary,
because of Gods Ordinance, but they as free indifferent things (as for example
the Communion under both kinds) We must then judge their erroneous opinion thus
far, lest we omit and neglect Gods Ordinance against our Conscience for their
sake. Yet nevertheless, as long as they do not yet acknowledge with us such
necessity and Ordinance of God; We have no reason therefore to judge their
Consciences, nor to separate our selves from them in all other points of
Doctrine and Religion, wherein we agree as yet together; If they would but let
us enjoy our liberty therein, lest we should be constrained to do against our
Consciences because of their pretended liberty.

III. Morover concerning such differences in Doctrine and Religion, where both
sides account their opinion for absolutely necessary and godly and consequently
the contrary opinion as repugnant to the word of God and his Ordinance, for
false and erroneous, or even for superstitious and damnable; of those we ought
and must judge so far, that we steadfastly adhere to Gods truth, since we have
gotten the knowledge thereof out of the word of God, and avoid to have any
communion with the contrary errors and abuses, especially Idolatry and
Superstition, lest we dangerously wound and offend our own Consciences.

Yet if they would not press such Doctrine and worship of theirs which they
for themselves hold necessary, as necessary upon us against our Consciences,
who know it to be repugnant to the word of God; but at least would tolerate us
amongst themselves as erring and weak believing Christians; If also their
Religion and worship were so constituted that we could have a fellowship
together for the other points, wherein we yet agree, without communion of any
Superstition, and without hypocrisy or denying of Gods truth and without
scandal to other weak believers; We would or should then not utterly separate
our selves from their Churches in the remnant of the true Religion because of
their errors and abuses, which they have added unto it; but carry and behave
our selves therein according to the example of the true believers in Judea, who
under the idolatrous Kings in Juda forsook not quite the Temple of the Lord,
though it was polluted with manifold idolatries; But performed their godly
exercises therein according to the Law: Yea, after the example of Christ
himself and his Disciples, who, although the House of God was made a den of
thieves, and defiled with much leaven of the Pharisees and Saduces, and although
they were aware of their leaven, yet neglected not with them to teach and to
pray in the Temple and Synogogues, as long as they could be tolerated therein,
Joh. 18. v. 20. Acts 3. v. 1. and 5. v. 42. and 13. v. 5. and 21. v. 27, 28.

But now at this present the difference and breach betwixt the Romish and
Protestant Church is in a quite other case, Why we must of necessity separate
our selves from the Romish Church.
so that the Schism and Separation is unavoidable, especially for these reasons
following:

First, because the Romish Church besides the Doctrine which on both sides is
received for Christian and Catholic, will not let the Protestants enjoy their
liberty in many such Doctrines and forms of worship, whereof they themselves
must confess, that they are not necessary in themselves unto salvation; but
enforce those upon them as absolutely necessary because of their Traditions and
Ordinances of the Church, sub anathemate, upon excommunication and pain of
damnation: And even in such things, which we for our part hold not only not
necessary, but expressly repugnant to the Word of God, and partly
Superstitious: As for example: The Communion under one kind contrary to the
commandment of Christ: Drink ye all of this: The Invocation of Saints, and
adoration of Images repugnant to the Commandment: Thou shall not make to thy
self Images, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them, etc. The
prohibition for all Priests to marry, and commandment for all Christians to
abstain from certain meats at certain times; which the Apostle calls
Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4 v. 1, 2, 3. and more such like points, which for
the most part were specified before in the 4. Chap.

Secondly, because they have introduced some such Doctrines and Religion as
necessary fundamental Doctrines, whereas they cannot show us any evident and
certain warrant from the written Word of God, that they are of God; but we may
produce to the contrary more certain and manifest grounds from the undoubted
written Word of God, being convinced in our Consciences, that they are false,
erroneous, and repugnant to Gods Word and Ordinance, or to the very
fundamental Doctrine, if not expressly, yet by a necessary consequence: and
also absolutely damnable in themselves, especially to them who should entertain
them against their Consciences: For example, That the body of Christ must daily
be formed of bread by the Mass Priest, or transubstantiated, offered again for
the quick and dead, and adored under the shape of bread: That we must deserve
eternal life through our own condign merits, make satisfaction for our sins we
our selves, and yet even be doubtful of our salvation: That all men on earth
are subject to the Pope in stead of Christ upon pain of their damnation, and
must believe and receive as the words of Christ himself, whatsoever he teaches
and ordains by virtue of his Supreme Popish power, And such like points,
which they for their part maintain not only as necessary and sound Doctrines,
but enforce them upon the whole Christian Church, as principal points of most
necessary fundamental saving Doctrine.

Thirdly, because their chief and daily Religion and worship is so qualified,
that we cannot even have a communion with that which they retain with us out of
the Word of God, unless we would thereby against our consciences make our
selves partakers of such erroneous Doctrines and Superstitious abuses
especially in the Mass.

Fourthly, and principally, because they will not tolerate us, who cannot allow
against our Consciences and the known Word of God, of their un-Catholick
by-Doctrines and Ceremonies, which they have added to the Ancient Catholic
Doctrines, nor receive us either as true-beleevers, nor as erring, weak,
believing fellow members of the Christian Church, but utterly condemn and
excommunicate us as unfaithful Heretics; yea, in many places persecute us
with banishment, fire and sword, as it is apparently manifest to the whole
world; so that they have solemnly published and authorized their un-Christian
sentence in the Council of Trent, in such a manner that it cannot be recalled,
and consequently no melioration or reconcilement and agreement on their side
can be hoped for, as long as they stand to the said Council.

By all which I conceive each impartial and unpassionate man may easily
comprehend, How far we judge the Papists.
First, that we for our part, not only ought, but are bound in conscience to
judge and determine thus far of their Doctrine and Religion, yet not with the
intent that we should attribute unto our selves or to our Churches any
jurisdiction or power over other Churches or persons and their Consciences, or
constitute our own spirit to be judge in matters of Religion, as the Papists do
charge us withal; or that every Idiot or Ignorant may and can judge of
Theological Controversies: But only that we, each of us for himself and his
own Conscience, must judge and discern Judicio discretionis, (as far as God
through his spirit has endued him with knowledge of his word) what we
apprehend to be consonant or repugnant to the Word of God, truth or falsehood,
good or evil, light or darkness; and consequently what (for to avoid our own
damnation) we believe for our selves or not believe, confess or deny, or also
set by as uncertain and doubtful, and in one word what we must do and avoid
for our salvation. Which judging and determining, no man, let him be never so
simple and unlearned, and of what Religion soeve^, can be hindered and refrained
from; because no man, even amongst the Papists themselves, can, or shall
receive or reject any Religion for himself, but he judges partly of it, and
has his reasons and grounds, why he does embrace or reject it, though in his
sentence and decision he may judge aright or wrong, build upon good or evil
grounds, upon the Word of God, or the words of men; which either will make for
his own salvation or damnation, as the Apostle says in the precedent verse:
That every one shall give an account for himself. Wherefore we shall also
always be ready to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the
hope that is in us with meekness and fear, The true cause of the modern
Ecclesiastical Schism and separation is to be imputed to the Romish
Catholics.
having a good conscience, 1 Pet. 3. v. 15.16.

Secondly, that also the cause and occasion of the Schism and Separation of
the Protestant Churches from the Romish, is not properly to be imputed to the
Protestants, but to the Roman Catholics; yet not to the whole Romish Church,
but principally to the Popes and their Prelates, who have their dominion over
the Romish Church, and those Divines, whose advice and doctrine they follow.

Yea, that We are not those, who separate and withdraw our selves from the
Catholic Church, but the Papists are they, who first by un-Catholick additions
of new Doctrins and Traditions are fallen away from the true Ancient Catholic
Apostolical Church, and withal reject and separate themselves from us by
their un-Christian condemning and persecuting us as Heretics; And not only us,
but all other Churches of the whole world, which are not subjected to the Sea
of Rome, viz. the Grecian, Russian, Armenian, Georgian, Ethiopian, etc. whereby
nevertheless the Romish Church, by pretending to be the Universal Catholic
Church on earth, and excluding all others from it, has separated it self from
all other Churches in the whole world (like as in fromer times the Donatists in
Africa) and is also become a right Schismatic Sectary Church.

Wherefore also we must of necessity separate our selves from it, both for its
un-Catholicall superstitious Doctrine and Religion, lest we make our selves
partakers of it, and also for its un-Christian Tyrannical judging, because we
may not be tolerated amongst them, but are utterly rejected by them; to the end
that we may remain united with the true Catholic Church in the Univerall
Christian Faith and brotherly charity in Christ.

Whereunto we are so often and earnestly exhorted in the Word of God: Come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, Revel. 18. v. 4. Come
out from amongst them, and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, 2 Cor. 6. v. 17. Take heed and beware of
the leaven, Mat. 16. v. 6. Keep your selves from Idols, 1 John 5. v. 21. Flee
from idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. v. 14 etc.

Thirdly, that herein also we do not proceed against this Apostolic rule, but
therefore rather separate our selves, lest we may offend and scandalize the
consciences. And first, our own Conscience, which needs must be grievously
offended, if we Romans 14. v. 23. How much more then when it is sufficiently and
evidently warranted and convinced by the Word of God? Then secondly, the
Consciences of our brethren, who acknowledge with us such errors the
Consciences of the erring themselves, who do not acknowledge the

Fourthly, Because not only particular men and teachers, but also whole
Congregations, yea, whole people and nations unanimously agree in the knowledge
and rejecting of such erroneous Popish Doctrine and Worship: That the Protestant
Churches had good reason, and have been bound in Conscience to reform
themselves.
It does follow by all this without any contradiction, that they have had good
reason, yea have been bound in Conscience and by virtue of their Function to
purge their Churches from such Popish leaven, and to reform them according to
the word of God; (though the Popes of Rome, or the Romish Church with their
Dependents will not condescend at all to such Reformation, but Anathematize,
Excommunicate, oppose and destroy it to their utmost power;) seeing it cannot
be maintained under any pretense or warrant from the word of God, that all
other Churches and Nations of the whole world, necessarily should be subjected
to the Italian or Romish Church; insomuch that they must be tied to those
palpable abuses they have introduced, nor dare alter or remove them: Whereas
yet much more in each particular Church; as well they that have the charge over
it, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, as the whole Congregation, is
obliged in its Authority and Duty and by Gods precept, to purge themselves
from all pernicious leaven in Doctrine, practice and worship, and to conform
themselves, as much as is possible to the word of God, the Doctrine and example
of the Primitive Apostolical Church. Whereunto they are also every where most
earnestly admonished as well from the Prophets, whose reproving and warning
Sermons are mearly altogether directed to this end, as from the Apostles, who
labor to anticipate and prevent thereby the future calamities and miseries,
Romans 16. v. 17, 18. 1 Cor. 1. v. 10. and 5. v. 7.13. Gal. 1. v. 7, 8, 9. and 5.
v. 1.7.9.10. Phil. 2. v. 2.15. and 3. v. 2. and 4. v. 8, 9. Colos. 2. v. 7,
8.16.18.20.22, 23. Revel. 2. v. 4, 5.14, 15, 16.20. and 3. v. 1, 2, 3. For as
every Christian is obliged to cleanse and purge his own Conscience, from all
pollution of sinful Doctrine and life, and needs not to expect any other
man's consent in that which God has commanded: Also every congregation ought,
and is bound to purge and reform it self according to the word of God, as
much as is possible from all pollution and scandal in Doctrine, Life, and
Worship, in spite of the whole world. But that Church, which resists such
Reformation with a violent power and force, discovers it self manifestly
thereby, to be herein not a true-Christian, but rather Antichristian Church.
Although the Reformation of the Protestant Churches is not blameless, yet it
may not therefore be rejected and disapproved as Heretical.


Moreover, though the Reformation may be culpable, either in the manner or in
some circumstances; yet the maine work in it self, being grounded upon the
Word and Ordinances of God cannot be found fault withal. Since we willingly
acknowledge and confess that also in the Reformation of the Protestant
Churches within and without Germany, not always the true moderation was used:
And do not imagine, that even in our Churches an absolute and perfect
Reformation without any defect and blemish is to be found.

We cannot approve it, that the Reformation in some places was begun with a
Tumult and Insurrection of the vulgar people, by demolishing and destroying of
Images, Altars and Monasteries, and such other violent proceedings: Much less,
that Arms were taken up against Legal Magistrates, with the intent to Reform
withal.

Neither can we excuse that the Laity under color of Reformation, has seized,
and transferred ad prophanos Vsus the Monasteries and Ecclesiastical revenues,
Chap. 11.
which should have been rather addicted and dedicated for the maintenance of
Churches and Schools, and for the relief of widows and fatherless and other
poor; and then, if somewhat remain for the incident and urgent necessity of
the Country and Commonwealth.

Nor can we deny but that in the Church Government, since that it is devolved
from the Bishops for the most part to Laymen, in many places great defects
occur, in the disposition and Administration of Ecclesiastical Functions.

We complain also oftentimes, that the wholesome Church Discipline of the
Church is quite gone down and decayed, and wish nothing more but that it might
flourish and revive again after the example of the Primitive Church.

Likewise we heartily desire, that in stead of the Reformation and removal of
Popish abuses in Fasts, Confessions, Vows, etc. The true Christian Fasting,
with other practices of repentance and devotion, especially the Christian
Doctrine of the Catechism might be more diligently and earnestly performed,
both for the Instruction of the Youth, and the Idiots, and Ignorants in
Bouroughs and villages.

Lastly, We willingly acknowledge, that many superfluous and unnecessary
Disputes in the Doctrine it self have bin moved by the Divines on both sides,
which rather should be referred to the Schools, and discerned from the
necessary Universal Doctrine of the Church.

But because of these and such like defects, which are also perceived in the
Reformed Churches, though in one more then in the other: We cannot blame the
principal work in it self, but must rather acknowledge it to be most
necessary and profitable, that the chiefest abuses of Popery both in Doctrine
and in Idolatrous or Superstitious Ceremonies be removed, and in stead thereof,
the true-saving Doctrine, and wholesome use of the Blessed Sacraments according
to Christ's Institution restored again, and so purged from manifold Traditions
and Rudiments of men, that the Papists themselves have no ground to pretend why
they might not with a safe Conscience have Communion with us in our Religion;
or else it must of necessity follow, that they could have had no communion with
the Primitive Catholic Church, being that all our outward religion and
Worship is absolutely conformable to the first Apostolical Simplicity, which
has been preserved afterward for a long time, as Justin Martyr, Tertullian,
and other Ancient Fathers inform us.

Die qui dicitur solis, omnium qui vel in oppidis vel ruri degunt, in eundem
locum conventus fit, et commentaria Apostolorum, aut scripta Prophetarum, quoad
tempus fert, leguntur: Deinde, lectore quiescente, praesidensoratione populum
instruit ad imitationem tam pulchrarum rerum and cohortatur. Sub haec
consurgimus communiter omnes and precationes profundimus; precibus peractis,
profertur panis and vinum and aqua. Praepositus autem quantum pro virili sua
potest, preces and gratiarum actiones fundit and populus fauste acclamat,
dicens Amen. Et distributio, communicatioque fit eorum, in quibus gratiae sunt
actae, cuique praesenti, etc. Justinus Martyr in Apolog. 2. pro Christianis.
Vid. and Tertullianum in Apologet.

CHAP. XI. Whether or how far the Reformed Churches ought or are bound to
judge the Lutherans in their Doctrine and Religion, or to separate themselves
from them, or to reform them?
WHat has been said in the precedent Chapter of the Romish Church; That we
may likewise apply to the doctrine and worship which is controverted and
disputed, though in fewer points, betwixt the Lutherans, and other reformed
Churches. Where we first willingly confess and give thanks to God, that as
we differ in fewer Articles; yea fully agree in the most of them against the
Papists and other Sectaries; we have also much less reason to judge the
Lutherans, or to separate, and withdraw our selves from them, then from the
Papists, because of such differences which are rather fomented by some
contentious Divines then by the Church it self.

Why the reformed Churches have hitherto sought a Reconcilement and Unity with
the Lutherans.
For though we cannot but judge in our Conscience some points of their doctrine
and Ceremonies to be ereoneous and false, and if not directly, yet by a
necessary consequence repugnant to the word of God, and some Articles of faith;
Nevertheless, if but they, who have not the knowledge yet of such consequence,
account their own opinions agreeable to Scripture, might not impose them or
theirs as necessary Articles of faith, but let us enjoy therein our liberty of
Conscience; If they also would leave to our freedom such Ceremonies of theirs,
as they themselves will have held as free indifferent things, and consequently
would tolerate and receive us and our teachers as true Christians, or at least
as weak brethren in faith, though we cannot assent to their own peculiar
opinions (as some peaceable Divines amongst them Paulus Eberus, David
Chytraeus, Christopherus Donaver. Nicolaus Hemmingius, and principally
Philippus Melanchton, besides many others of his Followers; yea whole
Congregations and Churches, especially in the Kingdom of Poland, and great
Duchy of Lithuania, a great while since have declared themselves.) We should
then have no reason at all, yea we were rather to be blamed and should be
Schismatics indeed; if we of our own accord should withdraw and separate our
selves from them, because of such different opinions and Ceremonies: Of whom we
yet acknowledge, and confess, that, for the rest, if they do not make their
own opinions to be necessary fundamental points, they retain with us the
true ground of Christ's saving Doctrine, and are exempted in their Religion from
a public and manifest Idolatry.

And for these reasons have our Churches and Divines at all times most
faithfully, earnestly and zealously sought to procure and settle a Christian
reconcilement and Unity, as formerly in Luthers time in the conference at
Marpurg, An. 1529, in the Concordia at Wittenberg, Anno 1536. and in later
years the Palatine, and others in their Declarations for Ecclesiastical peace,
which also were reassumed in the Conference at Leiprig, Anno 1631. As likewise
at those present times many eminent Divines beyond Sea in England, France, and
Scotland, (whose opinions and assistance therein, as that Reverend and worthy
man Mr. John Duray has solicited with a singular industry and zeal to a
peaceable Unity and Reconcilement) faithfully and sincerely wish and advise in
their public Writings such an Unanimitie and Uniformitie amongst the Churches
in Germany. Whence it sufficiently appears, that we for our part are not
inclined to judge and to condemn the Lutherans, or to continue in the division
and separation from them, which has lasted already above a hundred years.

Again, it is known and manifest on the other side that the Lutherans on
their part, will hearken and condescend not only to no absolute agreement and
reconcilement, but also to no Christian and brotherly toleration or moderation
in this unhappy Ecclesiastical difference: Because the greater part of their
Doctors and Divines, upom whom also many Laymen depend, especially the vulgar
sort (though with indiscretion) and defend their zeal, maintain their
different and controverted opinions, not only as agreeable with Scripture; but
impose them also as necessary grounds and principal Articles of Christian
faith, without which men may not be counted true Christians, nor be saved; And
so in some manner falsify therewith the groundwork it self by their own
additionall opinions, which they lay for a By-ground of salvation: And will not
let us effectually enjoy our Liberty in such ceremonies, which they themselves
call adiaphora free indifferent things, nor consequently receive us or our
teachers as Fellow Christians, unless we acknowledge and profess with them
the Omnipresence of Christ's body, the carnal eating thereof in the bread, and
other such like points of doctrine contained in their formula concordiae; much
less admit us to the Ministry, but most vehemently condemn us as the worst
Heretics, who do ovorthrow the foundation, and exclude us from the Communion
of their Churches, yea in many places exclude us from civil society, from
dignities and offices, from Senates, from privileges of the City, from
marriages, and from honorable burials.

Moreover they yet daily and most spightfully pervert, calumniate and slander
the Doctrine of our Church, and continually and most unjustly without the least
ground against our own so often reiterated Declarations, charge it with
dreadful and abominable Blasphemies, which neither Luther himself nor other
his Ancient followers, ever did, and for no other reason but that they might
pretend so much more cause for to condemn and reject us.

What is most reprovable in Lutheran Divines.
And this is, that we find in the said Lutherans most reprovable and damnable,
not simply the erroneous Doctrine in it self, but that they make it a
necessary fundamental Doctrine, and of their own particular Opinions make
Articles of Faith, and that they therefore so uncharitably, and un-Christian
like judge and condemn us.

Why the Reformed must separate themselves from the Lutherans.
Whereby also every one may evidently see, that we therefore have not only good
reason, but are of necessity constrained to separate our selves in our Religion
from those, who will by no means tolerate us, nor receive us as Christians;
least we profess and addict our selves against conscience to such Doctrines
and acknowledge them as necessary Articles of saving Faith, whereof we have not
only no certain warrant from the word of God; but are convinced in our
consciences of their repugnancy to it: Wherewith we would give a dangerous
scandal and offense first to our own Conscience, by denying the known Truth
of God, and then to other fellow Christians, as well to the true-Beleevers, who
with us have the knowledge of the Truth, that they might by our example proceed
against conscience, as to the erring, that they might be strengthened and
confirmed by our example in their errors.

And here again we are not those that separate themselves from them, but they
are those that Separate and reject us; and yet not because of the manifest Word
of God as they pretend, but because of their own Opinions, Interpretations,
Inferences, Forma^ls, and Expressions. Whereby they put a very dangerous
stumbling block and occasion to fall both in our and their own way; yea in the
way of the Universal Christian Church, and though they proceed not against the
ground of Faith; yet they are against the ground of CHRISTIAN CHARITY.
Especially, whereas also the Christian Unity or brotherly toleration, which
has been of our side offered to them at several times both by word of mouth
and in writring; not only hitherto has been utterly refused by them, but also
by many mis-interpreted to the worst, reviled, slandered, so that the most
pernicious Schism and breach of the Church is but grown thereby more dangerous
and lamentable. Which al we ought to bear yet with a Christian Patience,
committing it to the Sovereign and highest Judge; and therefore not omit to
seek and maintain the Unity of spirit in Faith and love with them that are
peaceably affected.

Some Lutheran Divines are principally guilty of the pernicious Schism and
Division betwixt Evangelicall Churches.
By which also without any further enlargement sufficiently appears, that the
native and genuine cause and fault of the long continued Schism and Division of
all the Protestant Evangelicall Churches; and consequently of all the miseries
and calamities from thence arising, principally refideth not in the Reformed,
but in the Lutherans, and especially in their Divines; yet not generally in
all, but only in those who condemn us as Heretics, and therefore hitherto
have refused and stopped without any reasonable ground, the reconciliation we
sought and offered to them.

For although they use to pretend for their excuse many damnable doctrines; yea
many terrible Blasphemies of the reformed; Chap. 2.
yet partly and most of them consist in such slanders and aspersions, which the
reformed Churches never professed, but rather many times have expressly and
unanimously rejected. So that those do but aggravate their fault before God
and man, who restrain and hinder the Ecclesiastical peace by false
testimonies, or by their own Unreasonable mis-construction of strange words and
doctrine, from which yet they might be easily diverted, if they would but give
way to a peaceable Conference. Partly they consist of such controverted points
of doctrine, as have been demonstrated in the fifth Chapter before, which
cannot afford any sufficient cause for the condemning and excommunicating of
the reformed, neither for division and separation from them. And suppose we
did err in such points of doctrine; yet this would only exempt us from all
heretical damnable errors, that we besides the universal undoubted
fundamental doctrine do not make any ways our own particular opinions to be
a By-ground, as the Lutherans, nor impose them on any man as necessary unto
salvation, except so far as he acknowledges them himself to be agreeable
to the word of God, and the saving doctrine, and that he is obliged thereunto
not by our word, but by the word of God.

Wherefore also, Whether the Lutherans may not with a safe conscience have
communion and fellowship with the religion of the reformed Congregations.
although we for our part are of necessity compelled to separate our selves
from the Lutherans, as long as they condemn and reject us, because of their
different and controverted opinions: yet they cannot pretend any reasonable
cause, why they must be separated from our Church and Religion, and should have
no communion with us in it; In regard no man on our side is constrained to
believe or to do somewhat against his conscience, if he but stands firm to
the Universal fundamental doctrine, and does not disturb the Church with his
own opinion, but labors according to the Apostles admonition, to prove all
things, and to hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. v. 21.26.

To which end also some few years ago it was decreed in a public Synod of
the reformed Churches in France at Charenton, Anno 1631.
that the Lutherans desiring to participate of the holy Communion with them,
should not be excluded from it, if they did but otherwise behave themselves
peaceably, and without scandal. For those Lutherans, who refuse not to take
the holy Communion with us, do even testify thereby, that they condemn not
our Church and Religion; And although they adhere to their opinion of the real
and corporal presence, and orall manducation of Christ's body, yet so that they
do not hold them as necessay articles of faith, but receive us also in our
opinion as fellow members, and Christians. If they were generally all thus
minded, the Ecclesiastical peace were soon concluded, and the way prepared to
a total unity and reconciliation: For in this manner we should not have any
further cause to separate our selves from their Communion and other godly
exercises, but would be ready for peace and Unity sake to tolerate the other
defects, and according to the Apostles exhortation, to walk with them as
brethren minding the same thing, by the same rule, whereto we have already
attained, Phil. 3. v. 15, 16. Till God may reveal unto us on both sides even
what is remaining, Chap. 11.
wherein we disagree. But those that will by no means condescend unto this,
shall not with all their Sophistry and arts wind themselves out from bearing
before God and man the guiltiness of the long continued most pernicious
Schism and of all the miseries that may hereafter ensue thereupon.

Causes of Reformation of the Doctrine and Ceremonies of the Lutherans.
Now what has been said of the causes of our Separation, that same declares
and shows unto us the cause of Reformation in all places, where both a
general and particular Reformation was settled.

For where the whole congregation acknowledges with one consent the error and
abuse of the Lutheran Doctrine and Ceremonies in the different and controverted
points; There no fault can be found with its unanimous and general
Reformation. Wherein it may not be hindered, though some few private men dissent
from the whole Congregation, and had rather adhere to their Lutheran Opinion,
in regard they have the liberty of their Conscience no ways restrained.

But where the Congregation in any City or Province disagreeth, so that a great
part of it does not only not acknowledge the error, but adhere so closly to
their Lutheran opinions concerning Oral manducation and omni-presence of
Christ's body, Exorcisme, Images, Hosties and such like things, that they
therefore condemn as Heretics the other party which will not allow of them:
There these, since they of necessity must Separate themselves from their
condemners, are forced also to a particular Reformation of their religion; to
the end that they for their part might discharge it toward God according to
his Word and Ordinance with a safe conscience.

Especially when the Christian Magistrate, whom the work of Reformation after
the example of Kings, Asae, Josaphat, Hiskia, Josia, chiefly depends upon,
gives assent to the true-beleeving party. Wherein neither they may be
restrained by any Temporal Constitution or Ordinance of their Predecessors,
who have no dominion over the Consciences of their Posterity, nor can tie them
to any erroneous Doctrine and Religion; which is undeniable amongst Christians
on all sides, who do not ground or build their Religion upon Temporal
Ordinances, like the Heathen and Mahumetans, but rely only upon the word of
God.

And although such Reformation most commonly cannot be settled without greatly
offending the erring party: Yet a more special care is to be taken of
scandalizing first their own Conscience, then the Conscience of other
true-beleevers, and lastly the Conscience of the erring, least they may be
confirmed in their errors, then of offending and scandalizing the affections
of the erring, whereby others are carried away with zeal to their errors,
though with indiscretion. Which zeal nevertheless, I hope, shall never
prevail so far with the Lutherans, that they against their legal Magistrates,
who have given them the liberty of their Conscience and Religion without any
impediment, should therefore tumultuously rise, when they maintain and use the
like liberty for themselves, and them that are of the same confession and
Faith; Being the Lutheran Divines and confessors have hitherto not as yet
attributed to themselves the power, and as I hope will never do it, to absolve
and discharge the Subjects from their Oath of Allegiance toward the
Magistrates, who have renounced the Obedience of the Popish See and Supremacy,
as is sufficiently evident by the examples in France and England.

Besides it would be thought in it self an unheard of injustice, if Subjects
should not suffer their Magistrates to have as much liberty of conscience and
Religion as they themselves enjoy under their protection.

Nevertheless if the Christian Magistrates might but so much obtain of the
Lutheran Divines and Congregations of their Jurisdiction, that they might not
calumniate or condemn the Doctrine of our Church; but receive us also as
fellow-brethren and Christians in our Faith and Confession, unto the Ministry
of the Word of God and use of the Holy Sacraments in their Assemblies: I
willingly then confess, that men should not rashly undertake such a particular
Reformation in Ceremonies, whereby a Division may be occasioned; but rather
tolerate such defects, because of the Ignorant and weak in Faith, who do
little apprehend and discern the Discrepancy of the Doctrine, and at the
alteration of Ceremonies presently imagine a quite new Religion, whereas they
should insist upon the found information of Doctrine, till they at length
without offense and division, either might be corrected with an unanimous
goodly consent, or each one enjoy his own liberty therein. To which purpose
it conduces also what Augustine says of such like alterations, Ep. 118. Ipsa
mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adjuvat utilitate, novitate perturbat: That
many times the alteration does not profit and edify as much as the Division
does hurt and destroy.

CHAP. XII. Whether or how far we may judge or condemn the persons in matters
of Religion.
BY all this, what hitherto has been declared of judging the matter it self in
different and controverted Doctrine and Religion, and of Separation and
Reformation, which arises from it, We may easily now understand whether and
how far we ought to judge the persons. For as far as we must discern the
matter, what is sound and true, or false and erroneous Doctrine or Worship; So
far we can and must also extend our judgment to the persons, according to the
Word of God; which of them teaches true or false Doctrine, to the end that we
may know whom and how far we ought to follow, lest they become not to us or
others a stumbling block or an occasion to fall; seeing that that judging of
the Doctrine cannot be performed without this judging of the persons who
maintain the Doctrine: yet so, that we ought not instantly to condemn the
erring persons, because of their error, though it be damnable in it self; but
rather always hope for their amendment, as much as is possible.

As First, Those that maintain ignorantly such an error, which by a necessary
consequence is repugnant to the saving fundamental Doctrine, and yet stand
steadfastly to the fundamental Doctrine it self, and build not their salvation
even upon such an error, and therefore do not condemn us and our Churches,
which maintain the very same ground. Those I say, no doubt, notwithstanding
their error, they may be saved, if they do but labor to testify also their
Faith in Christ, by the works of Christian charity and godly conversation: And
that such an error, which would be damnable unto us that have the knowledge of
it, if we should receive it against conscience; yet is not damnable to them by
the grace of God, who will judge them according to their Faith and works, and
not according to their ignorance.

Secondly, Those also which condemn us, yet if they do it not out of malice, as
those false Apostles, Gal. 1. and 3. and 4. but out of humane weakness and
mere ignorance, either because they are not truly informed of our Doctrine and
Faith, or esteem it to be repugnant to the Word of God and the Doctrine of the
Primitive Apostolical Church; Those I say, we ought not to condemn, although
they condemn us with indiscretion; but rather pray for them, and hope the best
of their salvation, as long as they hold fast the ground of Faith and the love
of Christ, which we presume, not without reason, the greatest part of them do.

Thirdly, Those likewise who ground and build their salvation upon erroneous
and false Doctrine and Religion (which in some manner all those are enforced to
do, who account them for necessary fundamental Doctrine) and indeed
sufficiently testify that they do not condemn us merely out of infirmity, but
out of an uncharitableness and malice, and also retain not the true ground of
Faith nor the love of Christ: Those we may judge by the Word of God, as all
other men who pass their life in notorious sins and vices without true
repentance, that they are in a damnable condition; which is to say, That God
could condemn them of right in their blindness and malice, and shall
undoubtedly condemn them, unless they repent: Finally, we may proceed also
with them after the rule of Christ and the Apostles: A man that is an Heretic
reject (let him be unto thee as an Heathen man and a Publicane, Matthew. 18. v.
17.) after the first and second admonition, knowing that he that is such is
subverted, and sins, being condemned of himself: Yet we ought not therefore
utterly to condemn them, but rather still pray for them, hoping God may convert
them yet before their last gasp. For although the Apostle says, 1 John 5.
verse. 16. There is a sin unto death, for which we shall not pray: Yet he says
not, that we shall not pray for the sinner, much less condemn him unto death,
we being not able exactly to know, nor ought to judge whether he has committed
the sin unto death, viz. the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, or in other sins
is given over to a hardened and an obdurate unbeleef and impenitency.

With one word, We must absolutely resign and commit the judgment of eternal
damnation to God alone, being the only Lawgiver who is able to save and to
destroy, Jam. 4. v. 12. Who art thou that judge another man's servant? to his
own Master he stands or falls: yea he shall be holden up, for God is able
to make him stand, Romans 14. v. 4.

Which we now may easily apply to our often-mentioned twofold Adversaries: God
forbid that we should condemn all Roman Catholics; much less all Lutherans in
general, or even one single and particular man.

For first, concerning the Papists, Whether and how far the Papists may be
saved in their Religion.
like as a twofold Doctrine and Religion is maintained amongst them, viz.
partly the true Primitive, Catholic, Apostolic Doctrine, wherein they with
us, and we with them do agree; partly the new Popish Doctrine and Ceremonies,
which they have added in the latter hundred years without and against Gods
Word: Also there are two sorts of people amongst them: The One, who in their
Christianity only and principally cleave to the indubitable, universal,
Apostolic Creed, which they with us are baptized unto, so that they seek only
(...) salvation in Jesus Christ the crucified, as their own Mediator and
Savior; and testify such belief of theirs in the effect by Christian charity
and godly conversation; who also consequently will not condemn us as Heretics,
who are united in spirit with them in such universal saving Faith working
through love, much less persecute us with hostility: unless it were out of
mere ignorance, because they have no true information of our Doctrine and
Faith. How should we then condemn them? Much more reason have we to account
such Catholics for true Evangelical, and not for Popish Christians, because
their salvation is grounded not upon their own merits and satisfaction, or upon
other Popish traditions, and Auxiliary concomitant means; but only upon the
mere grace of God and the precious Redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And that there has been at all times a great number of such people, and are
still at this present even in the midst of Popery; not only the experience of
them that live amongst them, but their own Books before and after Luther's
times do testify it: As Bernardi, Anselmi, Gersonis, Tauleri, Thomae de
Kempis, Erasmi, Cassandri, Feri, Cardinalis Contareni, Hosij, Pighij,
Coloniensium in Anti-didagmate and Enchiridio, and of a great many more.
Especially their ancient Manuals concerning Meditations upon death, which were
commonly used a great while before Luther's times; wherein the dying persons
from all meritorious works and satisfaction, and from all other humane means of
salvation are only directed to the precious merit and intercession of the
only Mediator and Redeemer Jesus Christ.

Formulae interrogandi infirmos inter Epistolas Anselmi. Ars been moriendi
Monachi cujusdam Cisterciensis. Hortulus Animae. Georg. Cassander in Append.
Opusc. Joh. Roffensis. Hosius in Confess. Petricov. cap. 73. Sacerdotale Roman.
Edit. Venet. Ann. 1555. fol. 116. Sacra Institutio baptizandi. Edit. Paris.
Ann. 1575. fol. 35. Ordo baptizandi cum modo visitandi. Edit. Venet. Ann. 1575.
fol. 34. In which Book the Spanish Inquisitors have ordained in their twofold
Indice Expurgatorio Annis 1584. and 1612. to deface and omit these Questions
and Answers following:

Sacerdos: Credis non propriis meritis, sed Passionis Domini nostri Jesu
Christi virtute and merito ad gloriam pervenire? Respondeat infirmus: Credo.

Sacerdos: Credit quod Dominus noster Jesus Christus pro nostra salute mortuus
sit: and quod ex propriis meritis vel alio modo nullus possit salvari nisi in
merito passionis ejus? Respondeat infirmus: Credo.

By the Omission of which words they testify against themselves; that those
amongst them, who examined the dying persons upon this belief (wherein the
principal fundamental Doctrine of salvation consists) and died upon it, have
been verily addicted to our Evangelical Faith and Doctrine of the Church, and
not to their Popish belief and doctrine.

And although such men have also adhered in their ignorance to some erroneous
opinions, according to the common course of those times, out of want of better
information: yet they cannot be condemned or accounted for non-Evangelical,
because they fixed their comfort and hope of their salvation not upon such
erroneous Doctrines, not upon merits and invocation of Saints, not upon Masses
for the souls of the deceased, (...) upon Indulgences, not upon Monastical
orders and such other like things; but only upon Gods mere grace and mercy in
Christ Jesus the crucified.

To the Objection that may be made, That they nevertheless went to Mass,
which we count Idolatry and consequently must condemn all those as mere
Idolaters: We answer; That such men went to Mass in the simplicity of their
heart, not even according to the new Masse-doctrine, which but in the Council
of Lateran Ann. 1218. and after in the Council of Trent was canonized; but
according to the pure ancient and simple belief of Christ's words in the holy
Communion, wherein even yet the moderate Papists so far must agree with us that
it is Sacrificium commemorativum, A Commemoration and Remembrance of Christ's
Sacrifice finished upon the Cross and a spiritual meat of our souls: Wherefore
there is no doubt but many religious and pious hearts have at all times
understood and eaten it after a spiritual sort, who heard little or nothing of
the Scholastical disceptations of Transubstantiation, and had not yet known the
depths of Satan, as was said of those in Thyatira, Revel. 2. v. 24. Or have
expressly rejected them and believed nothing else concerning the Holy Communion,
but what next to Augustine and other ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church,
Bertramus, or Ratramus in the times of Carolus Calvus, when the disputes of
this subject had their first beginning, has declared in his Book De Corpore
and Sanguine Christi, who at all times was accounted for a true Catholic
Teacher.

And though some had believed the real and corporal presence and oral
manducation of Christ's Body in the Mass; Yet we should have as little reason
to condemn them as the Lutherans, if they have but grounded the principal
comfort and hope of their salvation, not upon the carnal, but spiritual eating
of Christ's Body, as being the only Sacrifice and Propitiation for their sins.

Likewise, though they have much declined in the Ceremonies of the Mass from
Christ's first Institution, and have added thereunto many humane partly
superstitious, partly idolatrous Ceremonies: Yet all those cannot presently be
accounted for damnable Idolaters, who in those times and places, where the
Supper of the Lord was not otherwise to be had, nor the error made yet so
apparently evident, went to the common Mass in their simplicity, because of
the remnant of Christ's Institution therein, to the end that they might be made
partakers of Christ's Body and Blood for the quickening of their souls: Like as
they used the Holy Baptism for to cleanse and wash them from their sins,
notwithstanding the superstitious humane Ceremonies that were added thereunto:
Who also, though they kneeled down before the consecrated bread and wine, being
a Sacramental token of remembrance and exhibitive sign of Christ's Body and
Blood, like as the Lutherans also at the administration of their Communion and
the Reformed Protestants in England use to do; Yet have not fixed the Adoration
and confidence of their hearts on the bread and wine, but on Christ himself
sitting on the right hand of his Father in Heaven: And therefore are much less
to be esteemed Idolaters, then for their kneeling and bowing down before
painted (...) carved Crucifixes (which Christ never ordained for signs of
rememb^^ (...) instead of adoring Jesus Christ in Heaven: Though we must
confess that all such things have been used in Popery at least not without
prejudice and occasion unto Idolatry, and therefore are more safely omitted by
us.

And this will not serve for an excuse to those, who now adays against their
conscience go to Mass out of a mere hypocrisy and fear of men; because that
it is so vehemently pressed upon us from the Papists merely for to give assent
to their error and Idolatry, that we must adore the consecrated Hostie in the
hand of the Mass Priest, as Christ himself, and put our hope and confidence in
that Masse-Christ, whom he has formed out of bread with five words, and
offers for us again. Neither may this clear the rest of Papists from
Idolatry, who now adays with such a blind zeal impose and press this
Adoration and Sacrifice of the Bread instead of Christ: Nor those in general
who build their salvation upon their Popish Doctrine and commandments of men,
which they have added to the true, ancient, Catholic, Divine Doctrine, and
obstinately adhere thereunto; without searching and receiving the Truth:
especially, when therefore they uncharitably condemn and persecute other
Christians, which cleave only to Gods Commandment and Doctrine. Of whom we may
judge in general, that in this manner they are in a damnable condition, yet so
that we hope of every one in particular judicio charitatis, that God may
convert him yet before his end. Whereas there is no doubt but many thousands
even amongst themselves (who in the time of their life have been most
vehemently zealous against us) have at length in their last agony learned to
acknowledge, that they could find no certain comfort for their souls in all
those auxiliary means of salvation, which they so fiercely maintained, but
ought only to seek their total happiness and salvation in the mere grace and
merey of God, so that, though they lived as Papists, yet at last died
Evangelical Christians.

Whether and how far the Lutherans may be saved in their Religion.
Whatsoever now has been said of the Papists; that may we apply so much more to
the Lutherans; because they absolutely agree with us in this principal and
chief Point of saving fundamental Doctrine, and are otherwise exempted in their
Religion from all exterior Idolatry. Wherefore if they only build their
salvation upon such fundamental Doctrine of Faith in Christ Jesus, and labor
withal to testify their Faith with Christian charity and godly conversation,
so that they do not uncharitably condemn nor persecute us, but rather
diligently search in the rest of different Points into Gods Truth and Doctrine
revealed in his Word, and having attained the knowledge of it, to be ready most
willingly to profess and receive it; We cannot then condemn them for their
often-mentioned error which they merely out of humane weakness and ignorance
stick unto.

Of what sort of Lutherans are those who live in a dangerous condition of their
souls.
Nevertheless, this may by no means excuse those who 1. will have their own
erroneous, or at least controverted opinions to be most necessary fundamental
Doctrines and Articles of Faith, and consequently astrain and bind in some
manner both theirs and other Christians salvation thereunto.

2. So that Others do not only not receive us for fellow Christians, but judge
and condemn us as unfaithful Heretics, who (...) in our consciences allow of
such their pretended Articles; Whereby t^^y ^^^er and destroy the Christian
Unity and Ecclesiastical Peace, as much as lies in their power.

3. Not only condemn and cut us off from the Communion of the Christian
Church, but uncharitably persecute us, though not in lives, yet in honors and
goods, by excluding us from the Political Society.

4. Especially, When they do it not merely out of humane infirmity and
ignorance, or out of a false information of our Doctrine and Faith; but partly
out of obstinacy and malice: So that they will not suffer nor hearken to a
better Instruction of Truth, much less search into it themselves in the Word
of God: Or although they have partly been informed and heard it, yet stop their
ears and hearts before the Truth, out of sinful corrupted affections, out of
hatred and envy against men, out of contention, ambition, private interest, and
the like: Yea against their own conscience, obscure, pervert, and calumniate it
with all sort of slanders, detractations and aspersions, or intricate
Sophistries.

Of these and like persons we cannot generally out of the Word of God judge any
thing else, but that they in this manner live in a very dangerous yea damnable
state; not simply because of the error it self, but because they partly
pervert through such error the ground of Faith, in regard they make their own
particular opinions to be fundamental Doctrines, partly dissolve the bond of
Christian charity, in regard they judge and condemn other Christians by reason
of them. But he that does this not out of a mere ignorance and weakness of
understanding, but out of malice of heart; not we, but God alone is able to
know and discern him: Wherefore we ought not rashly to judge and determine of
any certain person.

5. Those also who though they have had a sufficient knowledge of the Truth in
their hearts, and yet will not openly profess it out of shame before men, or
out of other carnal respects, are almost in a more dangerous case then the
erring themselves, because they proceed therein against their own conscience,
and make themselves guilty of the Lords Sentence: Whosoever shall deny me
before men, or be ashamed of me and of my words, him I will also deny, Matthew.
10. v. 3. Mark 8. v. 38.

For not only he that denies against his conscience the whole Doctrine of
Christ, but also he that denies but one Point of it, which he has known out
of the Word of God, for men's sake, who oppose and condemn it, he has partly
denied thereby Christ, and been ashamed of his words: And whosoever shall break
one of these least Commandments, he shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5. verse. 19. For a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, Gal.
5. verse. 8.

They burden also therewith their conscience with the woe and curse which is
pronounced against all unrighteous judgment, because against their conscience
they call evil, good, and good, evil, Isai. 5. verse. 20, 23. and decline after
many to wrest Judgment, Exodus 23. verse. 2. For if men be obnoxious to that
curse, when they peradventure in temporal judicial matters judge unjustly
betwixt private persons, or following the multitude incline and assent to
unrighteous judgment: How much more he that does it in matters of Religion,
when the Doctrine of ^^^ist is disputed and controverted betwixt whole Churches!

There we ought to labor as much as is possible by fair means, to reconcile
the different parties, and not rashly to judge and condemn the erring: Yet not
so, that we wrest or pervert the Judgment, or assent to the injust party with
words or works in their error, and contrariwise withdraw and separate us from
the righteous party in the profession of the Truth, calling good evil, and
light darkness. Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,
fatherless, and widow, Deuteron. 27. verse. 19. Should he then not be guilty
also of the curse that would wilfully pervert or deny the judgment of the
Church, yea the Judgment and Truth of God?

Whereby they also, though in their own persons they might not be inclinable to
condemn and persecute any man, would yet make themselves by their assent,
partakers of the condemnation and persecution which proceeds from others, who
according to the prophecy of Christ shall hate and reproach us, separate us
from their company, and cast out our name as evil, Luke 6. verse. 22.

To let pass how they scandalize others in their conscience by such
dissembling and denying, both the true believers, from whom they separate
themselves, and the erring, whom they confirm with their example in the error,
whereas they might have induced and persuaded them by a free profession of the
known Truth at least to a further inquisition, or also to a brotherly
reconciliation.

Now although we cannot generally judge any thing else of the obstinate erring
and of such dissembling persons, but that they in this manner live in a
dangerous condition of their souls, and even for this reason we exhort them, as
tenderly as they love their own salvation, to the knowledge and profession of
Truth, or at least to the mitigation of their uncharitableness: Yet we may not
therefore instantly and rashly condemn the persons, but rather hope and pray to
God he may, if not now by our admonition, yet finally before their last gasp,
illuminate and bring the erring unto the knowledge of the Truth, or unto
Christian love and reconciliation, and move the dissembling to a sound and
wholesome Confession.

Conclusion of the second Part.
NOw by the Declaration of this Apostolic Rule, even the most unlearned
Christian may sufficiently learn both what and how far we ought not to judge,
and what and how far we ought to judge in controverted and different matters of
Religion.

The Sum and result of it is this:

1. We ought to judge and condemn none as Unbeleeving, if he does but closely
retain the Universal Undoubted Fundamental Doctrine of Faith and love of
Christ, which is necessary for all men unto Salvation.

2. Although he does not receive our own or our particular Churches and
Teachers Opinions and Interpretations, which we acknowledge as agreeable to
Scripture and necessary for us to believe, because he has no knowledge of them
as yet out of the Word of God.

3. On the contrary, although he adheres to his own, or his particular Churches
and Teachers singular Opinions, which he esteems to be consonant to Scripture
and necessary for him to believe: Yet to such Opinions, which are uncertain or
unnecessary, or erroneous also, and repugnant to the Word of God, or to the
saving fundamental Doctrine it self by a necessary consequence.

4. As long as he does not acknowledge such consequence and retains but the
fundamental Doctrine it self positively and without any mutilation, and does
also not err out of malice of heart, but only out of weakness of
understanding.

5. As long as he does not make quite fundamental Doctrines of them, nor
imposes them on others as necessary, neither judges and condemns others
therefore, or disturbeth the Church of God with prejudicial and unnecessary
disputes.

6. As long also as he does not obstinately reject better information, but
rather labors to search further the Truth in the Word of God and to testify
his Faith by Christian charity and godly conversation. So that he is not to be
accounted for an obstinate, unfaithful, schismatical heretic, but for a weak
Believer and erring Brother.

Contrariwise: 1. They that will have their own erroneous or controverted and
unnecessary opinions to be necessary fundamental Doctrines, in so much that
they repose their comfort and hope of salvation in them.

2. Which they also enforce upon others as necessary fundamental Doctrines, or
judge, condemn, exclude, and separate from the Communion of the Christian
Church others therefore, whereby they cause Schisms and Divisions in the Church
of God.

3. Especially such opinions which are not only doubtful and erroneous, but
also repugnant to the true undoubted Articles of Faith and fundamental
Doctrine, if not directly and expressly, yet by a necessary consequence.

4. They also who cruelly and uncharitably persecute others because of such
humane opinion, and thereby occasionate not only Schisms in the Church, but
distempers and distractions in Commonwealths.

5. And that not merely out of ignorance and humane infirmity, but out of a
wilful blindness and malice, so that they will not hearken nor receive any
information of the Truth, much less search into it themselves, but obstinately
oppose it out of carnal blinded affections.

Those we may and must thus far judge out of the Word of God: First, Concerning
the matter it self, That we no ways make our selves partakers of such errors
and other sins arising from thence, but had rather be condemned, rejected,
separated, and persecuted by them; lest we may become a stumbling block and
offense, first to our own, then to other true believing or erring consciences.

Secondly, As much as concerns the persons, That though we cannot judge any
thing else of such persons in general, but that they in this manner are in a
dangerous and damnable condition; yet we condemn none in particular: First,
Because we cannot directly discern in no man, whether he does err out of
humane weakness or obstinate malice.

Secondly, Because though he did err out of malice, yet we ought still to
hope, seek, and pray to God for his conversion, and commit the judgment
concerning him to the Sovereign Judge.

Would to God, That all that are called Christians, or at least Catholics and
Evangelical, did agree with us herein with one mind (seeing that all those
that will not proceed against conscience, nor parallel and equal men's words
with Gods word, neither place themselves in Gods Tribunal, must herein agree:)
Then the Christian love and peaceablenesse would reign instead of this unhappy
Schism, cruel distraction, and lamentable devastation of Christendom; And the
easiest and safest way be opened unto right Christian Unity in the Doctrine of
Truth, instead of the manifold dissensions and differences in Doctrine and
Religion.

The Apostle Paul has not only most earnestly and faithfully exhorted us all
in general, and especially the Roman Church, to which he directs his
Epistle; but also added most efficacious and pregnant motives thereunto:
Wherefore let us not judge one another any more? Why? That is evident by the
precedent words: We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ: So
then every one of us shall give account of himself to God, Romans 14. v. 10, 12.
Like as he writes to the Corinthians: Therefore judge nothing before the time,
until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the heart, and then shall
every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4. v. 5.

If we had that great day of Judgment of the Lord continually set before our
eyes, especially the Divines and Ecclesiastics, who before all others should
be the Sons of Peace, Luke 16. v. 6. yea the true Ambassadors of Peace, Isai.
33. v. 7. and 52. v. 7. Nah. 1. v. 15. whereas many are Authors of most of the
disturbances in the Christian Church by their unchristian judging and
condemning: They would not be so rash and severe in judging one another; but
every one would first think and consider with himself how we shall give once an
account of our selves before that Tribunal: And though we must judge for
conscience sake, because of our function; yet we should not more rigourously
judge others then we our selves desire to be judged by the Lord, viz. not for
our ignorances, nor for our weakness; not for every faulty word, nor according
to other men's words, or traditions of men, or humane opinions; yea not after
the severity of Gods Law, nor uncertain doubtful Interpretations of the Word of
God; But only according to the undoubted saving Gospel of Grace and Truth of
Christ, in Fatherly goodness, tenderness, grace, and mercy.

Wherefore we conclude with the words of the Apostle James 2. v. 12, 13. So
speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty. For he
shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy. And mercy
rejoices against judgment. To him the Father of Judgment and Father of Mercy
be adscribed all honor and praise for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

