To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
Dominions thereunto belonging,
The humble Petition of the Subscribers on the behalf of themselves, and other
Reduced Officers and Soldiers therein concerned.
SHOWS,
THAT in their zealous and cordial affection to the just rights and freedom of
this Nation, with expense of blood and patrimony, they have faithfully served
this Commonwealth from the beginning of the late wars until reduced by Order
of Parliament, with promise of fatisfaction forth with of such Arrears as were
due unto them, which may appear by several Orders and Ordinances of Parliament,
and many of them voluntarily since the said reducement, engaged, to the hazard
of all that was dear unto them for the Public good.

Nevertheless their constant expectations (grounded upon the many promises and
engagements of the then Supreme Authority of this Nation) have been wholly
frustrated, although they (to their great expense) constantly attended with
many humble Addresses during the space of seven years past, for the obtaining
of their just satisfaction; for want of which, diverse are brought to extreme
penury, many starved, and others in prison ready to perish.

But their long and tedious attendance producing no fruit from the Parliament,
after their dissolution, they then made their humble Addresses to his
Highness, and Honorable Council, who were pleased to refer their Petition to
the Council of the Army; who upon mature consideration and conference had with
your Petitioners, returned their sense and results thereon to his Highness,
and the said Council, by whose Order the same was transmitted (by the hands of
Captain Howard) to the late Parliament, who after daily solicitations, did
admit them (for satisfaction out of hands in Ireland) into an Act, entitled,
An Act for satisfaction of Adventurers and Soldiers, dated the twenty sixth day
of September, 1653.

That after the late Parliament dissolved themselves, they then made their
humble Addresses to his Highness, who was pleased to recommend them and their
desires unto the speedy and serious consideration of his Council sitting at
White Hall, in order to their due relief and satisfaction, and perceiving that
upon the addresses of some Officers, (under the same qualification with your
Petitioners) Lands both in England and Ireland have been obtained for their
satisfaction; and your Petitioners hitherto (by reason of the great and weighty
affairs of the Commonwealth) are unsatisfied, so that your Petitioners upon
this account are without hope of reaping any benefit, or to be enabled to
receive satisfaction by that security in the said Act, according to the purport
and meaning thereof.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that your Honors would be pleased to
take the premises into your serious consideration, to the end, that as the said
Act of the late Parliament intends a security unto them, their interest may be
preserved therein; And that some speedy course may be taken for stating the
Arrears of such Officers and Soldiers, as are not yet stated; And that such
whose Arrears are already stated by Committees, or Commissioners, or any
Anthorised by Order or Ordinance of Parliament, having faithfully served this
Commonwealth, and no ways forfeited their right to their just dues; All of them
or their Assigns may be enabled by bond or otherwise to receive satisfaction
for their Arrears so stated, and to be stated out of such Lands in Ireland, as
are yet undisposed of (viz) in the Counties of Dublin, Cork, Kildare, and
Caterlagh, or out of such Lands there belonging to Corporations forfeited, or
out of Bishops, Dean and Chapters Lands there, or out of Forests Lands in
England yet unsold, or by some such other way as to your grave Judgment shall
seem meet, that so your Petitioners may be freed from their tedious and
expensive attendance, receive the price of their blood, and be put into a
condition to be more instrumentally serviceable for this Commonwealth, which
is their desire.

And they shall pray, etc. Edward Freman. Humphrey Brewster. Nicholas Devereux.
Emanuel Neal. Walter Bosvile. Samuel Carlton. Edward Hook. Ambrose Tyndale.
Richard Stevens. John Mall. William Tovey. William Poe. Timothy Crusoe. Leonard
Morton. John Birkbeck. John Rugeley. Francis Cotton. William Pickering.
Matthias Nichols. Anthony Poe. Richard Griffith. Edward Harrington.



