A PROCLAMATION BY His Excellency the Lord General.
WHereas information is given, that diverse Soldiers of the Army have entered
into the Houses of some Merchants, Citizens, and other inhabitants, in and
about the Cities of London and Westminster, and there is an uncivil and
disorderly manner exacting Money and Victuals there, to their great injury, and
the scandal of the Army, contrary to a Proclamation in that case formerly
published; These are therefore to will and require all Soldiers of the Army
under my Command, upon pain of Death, that they do not enter into the Houses of
any Merchant, Citizen, or others, in any forcible manner, or require of any
persons any money, victuals, or other provisions, unless it be in the Houses of
Victualers, or other places where victuals are sold, and in such cases they are
to go in a civil and orderly manner, and duly to pay for what they call; And in
case any Soldier shall, notwithstanding this Proclamation, offend, or
otherwise misdemean themselves, I do then hereby require the Officers of the
next Guard, upon complaint made unto them, to apprehend and secure the
Soldiers so offending, and to bring them to Whitehall, together with the
witnesses, that the offenders may be dealt withal as to Justice shall be thought
fit.

And whereas diverse Soldiers, and some persons, who go in the name and habit
of Soldiers, and pretend themselves to be of the Army, but are not, do seize
upon persons who have been in Arms against the Parliament, and their goods,
without order, (for the preventing of these and other abuses for the future,) I
do further require all Officers and Soldiers of the Army under my Commana,
That they do not presume to enter into the houses of any persons whatsoever
(unless for provision as aforesaid) or to seize upon any persons whatsoever,
unless they go by Warrant with a Commission Officer, and he and they give in
their names of what Troop or Company, and in what Regiment they are, that so,
if any abuse be offered, upon complaint from the person or persons so injured
to the Court Marshall, all offenders shall be proceeded against according to
Justice.

Given under my Hand and Seal in Queens-street the twelfth day of February,
1648. T. FAIRFAX.
To be proclaimed by sound of Trumpet in the Cities of London and Westminster.

Hen: Whalley Advocate.



London, Printed for JOHN PLAYFORD, and are to be sold at his shop in the inner
Temple, Feb. 13. 1648.


