A VISITATION TO THE JEWS, FROM Them whom the Lord has visited from on high,
among whom he has performed his promise made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and to his seed, which Moses saw, and the Prophets gave testimony of, to which
seed the Apostles witnessed, which seed we are, which seed of Abraham Christ
came according to the flesh, which we now witness, Glory to the Lord for
evermore.

ALSO, A VISITATION to all you that have long had the Scriptures; but found out
of the life of them that gave them forth, that are stumbling about the words,
fighting and contending about them, imprisoning and persecuting them that
witness the life that gave them fotth.

The mighty day of the Lord is come, and coming, who dwells not in temples made
with hands, nor is he worshipped with men's hands, but in the spirit the
Scripture was given forth from.

Given forth by G. F.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the sign of the Black Spread Eagle near
the West End of Paul's, 1656.

A VISITATION TO THE JEWS, etc.
TO the Jews scattered, who are the seed of God, to whom the promise belongs,
who have long had the words, but mist the promise; which promise is to the
seed, from them who are of the seed, who witness the promise, to you this is
sent.

From them that are of the seed of Abraham, to all the scattered Jews
according the flesh, who have the Law of God, the form of it, but being found
out of the life of it, have not possessed that which Moses saw, who received
the Law from God, which Law you have the form of, and your fathers in ages past
had, who put Christ to death and slew him that is the end of the Law, Gods
Righteousness, Christ Jesus the end of Gods righteous Law, which Law was to
keep out of all unrighteousness.

And your Fathers that had the form of the Law slew the Prophets that showed
the coming of this just One Christ Jesus the end of his righteous Law Gods
Righteousness; they having the Prophets words, and Moses words, but out of the
Prophets and Moses life, who saw the just One that was to come and fuffer, were
those that slew the Prophets.

David saw the just one, and called him Lord; and Moses saw him which received
the Law from God, which Law was given to your fathers, which you have had the
form of, who said, Deuteronomy. 18.
Like unto me will God raise you up a Prophet from among your brethren, and him
they should bear, and every one that would not hear that Prophet should be cut
off.

Now your Fathers that had Moses, who this Prophet saw, and received the Law
from him, he said, God would raise up this Prophet, and he came among your
Fathers, that had the Law and Moses words, but not Moses life; and the Prophets
words, but not the Prophets life; but they knew him not, neither heard him,
though he was a Prophet, raised up from among the Brethren; and was made of the
seed of Abraham, according to the flesh, but declared to be the Son of God,
according to the Scriptures, by signs, wonders and miracles, Devils being made
subject to him, loosing many from their chains which were kept under bonds; and
yet your Fathers believed not that Prophet which Moses saw, and the Prophets
saw, which was to come to fulfill what was written of him; neither heard they
him, though it was Moses command they should, and Gods command: So therein was
in the transgression, though the Law the words of it they had, but found in the
transgression, out of the life of the Law and the life of the Prophets, and
came to be mingled among the Heathen which knew not God, who be in the same
transgression, though you profess the words declared from the life; wherefore
being out of the life of the Prophets, being raised up among your Fathers, who
speak of this just one, of this Prophet; your Fathers did persecute them, and
did put them to death; and at last the Son come.

And to your Fathers spoke a parable, Luke 20.13.81.
which was agreeable to the Prophets words; As a man letting forth a vineyard
to husbandmen, and he sent his servants to look for fruits, and they beat one
and cast him out, and wounded another, and killed another; and last of all he
sent his Son; and when they saw the Son, the Heir of the Vineyard, Come, said
they to the Keepers of the Vineyard, this is the Heir, let us kill him, and
cast him out, then the Vineyard will be ours. And these things your Fathers did
fulfill, they killed him, they cast him out, and delivered him up to the
Gentiles to be mocked, scourged, and crucified.

Now consider, what has become of you since, of you Husbandmen? have you not
been laid waste? and was not the word fulfilled concerning his coming and
rising up from among the Brethren? And when he was come among you, he would
have gathered you, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but your
fathers would not. And he showed them how they stoned the Prophets, and killed
them; and how Wise men should be sent among them, and Scribes and Prophets some
of them they should crucify and scourge in their Synagogues, because they
neither knew the Father, nor the Prophet that he had raised up, which Moses
spoke of.

Wherefore, Mat. 23.^^
says he to JERUSALEM, Behold, your house is left unto you desolate, Has it
not been so? Was he not a true Prophet to you herein? Are not your Houses unto
you left desolate?

Are not the Prophets words here fulfilled on your fathers, and you scattered,
which Prophet Moses spoke of, who went up to Jerusalem, and was betrayed by him
that David spoke of unto the chief priests and Scribes, who condemned him to
death, and delivered him to the Gentiles to be mocked, scourged and crucified,
but the third day he rose again; and says Christ, It cannot be that a Prophet
perish out of Jerusalem.

This the Prophet spoke to your Fathers, of whom you have the form of the law,
and the words of the Prophets, which killed the Prophets, and yet built their
Sepulchers.

Here you may see your Fathers, and as it was with them, so it is with you,
being now found in the same Transgression, until you come to the life of the
Prophets, of Moses; then with the life you see him who is the end of the
Prophets and Moses, even the EMANVEL spoken of, born of a Virgin, which is
Christ.

Now coming to the life the Prophets were in, and Moses was in, with that this
you will come to see; and with that you will come to the Conversion, and see
the everlasting Offering.

And Christ the EMANVEL, this Prophet whom Moses speaks of, and the Prophets
saw, (who said, it could not be that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem) was
delivered by the chief Priests and Scribes to be condemned to death, and
delivered to the Gentiles to be mocked, scourged and crucified: Now mind, He
was betrayed into the hands of the chief priests and scribes, and was condemned
to death, and by them delivered to the Gentiles to be scourged and crucified.

Now says Christ, when you shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, then
know that the desolation thereof is nigh: Has not Jerusalem been compassed
with armies, and has it not been laid waste? your House desolate, and
scattered as the Prophet said? Has not Jerusalem been compassed with armies,
where the Prophets were slain? and says the Prophet, They should fall by the
edge of the Sword, Luke 21.24
and be led away captive into all Nations; and Jerusalem should be trodden down
of the Gentiles, to whom your Fathers delivered him to be crucified to death,
until the time of the Gentiles was fulfilled. Now mind, Are not these words
fulfilled which the Prophet spoke whom God raised up? Is not Jerusalem trodden
down? have not you been carried Captives into other Nations.

have not the Gentiles trodden Jerusalem under foot? has it not been compassed
with Armies? have not your houses been left desolate? have not some fallen by
the Edge of the Sword? Have not they come upon you, the Gentiles, whom you
delivered this Prophet unto, to be mocked and crucified? and have not they laid
Jerusalem waste? And has not the Temple been thrown down, and not one stone
left upon another, which Solomon was commanded to build, as Christ foretold,
who was a greater then Solomon. So consider, Are not the words of this Prophet
fulfilled on you that had the words of the Prophets, but being out of the Life,
knew not the Substance; and being strangers from the Life of Moses, who had the
Life of the Law, and strangers from the Life of the Prophets; you see not Gods
purpose, nor decree, nor determinated counsel, which had showed unto his
Prophets of the coming of the Just One before he came, whom your Fathers being
in the transgression, out of the life of the Law and the Prophets, chose a
Murderer, Barabbas, and the Chief Priests persuaded the people to ask the
Murderer, and to crucify the Just. Does not this show that they was in the
state of the Murderer?

And when the Just was risen, which death nor bonds could not hold, according
to the determinable counsel of God, as David who foresaw it, Psalm. 16.10.
said, He would not leave his soul in hell, nor suffer his Holy One to see
corruption.

The chief Priests, and those that set a guard on Christ after they had
crucified him, when the news came he was risen, gave large money to the
Soldiers to say, that his disciples came by night and stole him away; and this
Report has gone among the Jews, and so blinded you with a lie, for a lie is of
the devil, and he it is that is out of the truth, and abode not in it, that
blindes the eye, and casts a mist before their eyes, that they should not
believe, and so believe the lies before the truth.

For had your Fathers known Moses and the Prophets in the life, they would have
known him, the just One, the Holy One, whom God would not suffer to see
corruption, though he was numbered among the transgressors, and among them he
made his grave, whom God highly exalted at his right hand, to whom Thrones,
Powers and Dominions must be subject to, who is the end of Gods Righteous Law,
Gods Righteousness, which the Prophet Esaias spoke of, who could not hold his
peace for Zions sake, Isa. 62.1.
and for Ierusalems sake he could not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go
forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burns. And the
Gentiles shall see thy Righteousness, and Kings thy glory; and thou shall be
called by a new Name. This Righteousness is come forth, and the Gentiles see
it, and does burn as a lamp, and the brightness and salvation thereof is
witnessed among them, and the vengeance of our God is proclaimed, the
acceptable year of the Lord is come, and comfort to all that mourn; Isa. 61.
the good tidings is preached to the meek, the broken hearted is bound up;
Liberty is proclaimed to the Captives, and the Prison doors are opened, and
them that are bound go forth, who sing of his glory; and the Gentiles see^h is
Righteousness and profess it, and the Lord is an everlasting light to his
people, and God their glory. For we can call salvation our walls and gates
praise. And the sons have come from far, this is witnessed; and behold, says
the Lord, Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings to the brightness of thy
rising, lift up thine eyes round about thee, and all that gather themselves
together, they shall come to thee from far; and says the Lord, Arise, shine,
for thy light is come, for the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; behold,
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord
shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. Isa. 60. Isa.
49.6.
This light the Prophet saw the Gentiles should come to, and Kings to the
brightness of thy rising. And says the Lord by his Prophet, It is a light
thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob; take
notice and restore the preserved of Israel, take notice again; I will give thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the ends of
the earth.

Now mind, the light to the Gentiles, and salvation to the end of the earth,
which now the Gentiles profess; the Prophet who was in the life, saw this; and
many, as its said before, do witness this light to the Gentiles, and salvation
to the ends of the earth, the Redeemer of Israel, the raiser up of the Tribes
of Jacob; and this is the Redeemer of Israel, the Holy One, to him whom man
deipiseth, to him whom Nations abhors, to a servant of Rulers, Kings shall
see and arise, ver. 7.
Princes also shall worship because of the Lord who is faithful, and the Holy
One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.

And thus says the Lord, I will lift my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my
Standard to the people, and the people witnesses the Standard, and the hand is
witnessed, which to the Gentiles is lifted up of the Lord God.

Behold my servant whom I uphold, my elect in whom my soul delights; Isa. 42.
I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles;
the Gentiles now witness this judgment brought forth to them, and this
judgment is set in the earth; he shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he
have set judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall wait for his law: Now many
of the Isles do witness this law, who have waited for it, which is Royal.

Thus says the Lord, he that created the heavens, and searched them out he
that spread forth the earth, and that which comes out of it; v^r. 5. and 6.
he that gives breath to the people upon it, and spirit to them that walk
therein; I the Lord have called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thy hand,
and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of
the Gentiles: Now this Covenant to the people, and this light to the Gentiles
that the Prophet speak of, the Gentiles witness now the light: and the people
witness this Covenant of God, and Gods promise fulfilled. And them that were
Ministes, of this Covenant, were sent to turn the Gentiles from darkness to the
light; and chose Jews and those Gentiles that did believe in the Light, did
believe the everlasting Covenant, and did receive the everlasting Covenant, and
the glory of Israel; and this brought in the Gentiles to light, which broke
down the Partition Wall between the Jew and the Gentile, and of twain made one
new man: which covenant of Light the Prophet saw before he was come; and when
he was come your fathers owned him not, neither received, though by signs, and
wonders, and miracles confirmed he his Ministry that he came from God, yet said
they blasphemously which had the Prophets words, and Moses words, but out of
the life of both, That by Beelzebub the Prince of the devils he cast them out.

And here they having the words, and not the life, when the thing was come that
the words spoke of, they that had the words knew him not, and the Gentiles,
their minds being alienated from the life of God, and strangers from the
Covenant of promise, and Commonwealth of Israel, to them the light was
promised, and that to it the Gentiles should come, which many did, and do now
enjoy and know the unsearchable Riches that are hid in God, Christ Jesus.

And the Jews and the Gentiles receiving the Light the Covenant of promise,
they come to be baptized with the spirit into the one body, and that Covenant
of Light which brings in the Gentiles, lets see the end of the first covenant,
that does decay, and lets see the everlasting covenant, Christ Jesus, wh^ came
to fulfill the Law, and not to break it; heaven and earth shall pass away, but
not one tittle of the Law shall pass away, Psalm. 19.7.
the Law is perfect, converting the soul, and brings it from under that which
was against it; and so at this covenant of God, the Light of the Gentiles, the
Jews stumble, which covenant the Prophets prophesied of, and your fathers in
those days stood against; and so here is the saying fulfilled, Ps. 69.22.
The builders rejected the corner stone; and as David said, Their Table became
a snare, a trap, and a stumbling block, and a recompense unto them: And has it
not been so? I say then, have they stumbled that they should fall? Romans 11.11.
God forbid, but rather through their fall salvation is come unto the Gentiles,
for to provoke them to jealousy, take notice of that. Now if the fall of them
be the Riches of the world, Verse. 12.
and the diminishing of them, [mark] the riches of the Gentiles, how much more
their fullness? I speak to you Gentiles.

So here, who are come into the life of Moses, and the Prophets, do witness
that which Moses and the Prophets said should come to pass, That Christ should
suffer and rise from the dead, and show light to the people and to the
Gentiles, in which Light Jews and Gentiles are one, I will make an everlasting
covenant with you says the Lord, Isa. 54.55, 56.
even the sure mercies of David, behold, I will give him for a witness to the
people, a leader and commander to the people; Behold, thou shall call a Nation
that knew thee not, and nations that knew thee not, shall run unto thee: Now
this everlasting covenant is witnessed, to which Nations run; and the people
witness the leader, which you that had the covenant which did decay stood
against, and do enjoy the covenant of peace and authority, which you do not
that have not the life, which I will not remove, says the Lord that has mercy
on thee; and every one that keeps from polluting, takes hold of this covenant;
As for me, this is my covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is in
thee, etc. So the everlasting Covenant is witnessed, which does not decay, with
which is seen that which does decay; I will make an everlasting covenant with
them, and their seed shall be known among the Gentiles; and says the Lord, My
glory shall be declared among the Gentiles, and I will take of them for Priests
and Levites says the Lord; And behold, says the Lord, the days come, that I
will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah,
not according to the covenant which I made with their Fathers in the day when I
took them by the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which covenant
they brake, though I was an husband to them says the Lord; but this shall be
the covenant which I will make with the House of Israel, After those days I
will put my law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will
be their God, and they shall be my people, and they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they
shall all know me, from the greatest to the least, says the Lord, for I will
forgive their iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more: Mind this,
you that have this first covenant which was given to your fathers when they
came out of the Land of Egypt; but says the Lord, I will make a new covenant,
not according to the covenant I made with your fathers, which was to decay, for
there you had a Law in Tables of Stone writ; but here in this covenant you
shall have the Law written in your hearts, with which you shall come to know
the Lord, and need not say, Know the Lord: And here is the Covenant which is
everlasting. Now the covenant which was made with your fathers, while that was
standing you were to be taught the Lord; but this covenant being witnessed and
received, the Law-Writer in your hearts, you shall no more every man teach his
brother, and his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know him from
the greatest to the least.

And now thousands do witness this second covenant, this everlasting covenant,
not according to that covenant given to your Fathers in Tables of Stone, but
the everlasting covenant w^i^ten in the heart, where they know the Lord: And
these witness the second cove^a^t, where the iniquities are forgiven, Ier. 31.
and the sins and transgressions the Lord will remember no more.

If these Ordinances depart from before me, says the Lord, then shall the seed
of Israel cease from being a Nation before me for ever, and I will give them
one heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them,
and of their children after them; I will make an everlasting covenant with
them, That I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my
fear into their hearts that they shall not depart from me.

So you that had the covenant given to your Fathers when they came out of the
Land of Egypt, stood against his covenant, though it was witnessed by Moses and
the Prophets, which you read; so you stand against the promise of God to you,
which now thousands of the Gentiles do witness the covenant of Light, which to
them was promised, with which they know God, and so are come into the life of
the Law, and covenant of God, which reconciles Jew and Gentiles together; which
brings to see that he is God of both, and brings them to one; so that which
does convert, brings into the life that the Prophets spoke of, and Moses spoke
of, which God to them did let see, and the promise, which thing is come to
pass, and the life of the Law and the Prophets is witnessed, and him that sits
on the Throne of David now reigns.

And again, thus says the Lord, If ye can break my covenant of the day, [take
notice] and my covenant of the night, that there should not be day and night in
their season. Mark, This Covenant which orders day and night in their season,
then may also my covement be broken with David my servant, that he should not
have a son to reign upon his Throne; and this is the covenant, and this is the
King of the Jews, which they would not have him to reign. And this is he who
bears his Government upon his Shoulders, which is without end; and this is the
Heir, and this is he that is come for judgment into the world, to make them
blind that say they see, and to make them see that sees not.

And this is the question that lies upon you to answer, If he was David's Son,
how did he call him Lord? Now as you come to the Light, you will see it, and
him that shall, and does reign on the Throne of David, with the Priests,
Levites and Ministers; as the Host of Heaven cannot be numbered, neither the
Sand of the Sea measured, so will I multiply the Seed of David my Servant,
says the Lord.

Now he that sits on the Throne of David, his Seed witnesses him Lord and King,
who is the Prince of life, that has Dominion over death, through death has
destroyed him that has the power of death, and Repentance is preached, and
remission of sins through faith in him, from whence comes the refreshing into
the soul, who is the Bishop of it; and as they cannot break the covenant that
keeps day and night in its season (for they was made by him who was the
covenant) so they cannot break this covenant with David, that he should not
have a Son to reign on his Throne; if they can break that covenant that orders
day and night, then they may break this covenant with David my Servant, Jer. 33.
that he should not have a Son to reign on his Throne. They shall set their
faces toward Zion, saying, Come let us join our selves to the Lord in a
perpetual covenant that shall not be forgotten. Now the everlasting covenant
written in the heart, by which you need not say, Know the Lord, brings from
among the Heathen, seperates from from among the strangers, and aliens from the
life of God as the Gentiles were.

Though the Lord by his Spirit in the Prophets spoke of the Promise, That he
should be a Light to the Gentiles, and that they should see his glory, which
many now do enjoy, and embrace and see him who sits on the Throne of David, him
whom Abraham, David, and Isaiah saw, and Jeremiah saw, and the Prophets gave
Testimony of, and Moses, who said, God would raise up, and the people should
hear him, and the people does hear him; yet they which had the words, being
strangers from the life of God, knew him not when he was come, and God had
raised him up, but denied the Resurrection of the Just One.

And Jesus Christ, the EMANVEL that Moses spoke of, the Prophet which God
raised up, said, Think not I am come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it;
(whom your Fathers thought was out of the life of it) Says he, It was said in
old time, Thou shall not commit Adultery; [mark] Commit it: But I say unto you,
He that looks after a woman to lust after her, has in his heart committed
adultery already. Now mark, here is the Law written in the heart; here is the
new Covenant that the Prophet speaks of, which is agreeable to Moses, and to
them all, that which fulfils the LAW, not breaks it.

And the Law says, Thou shall do no murder; but your Fathers which had
garnished the Sepulchers of the Prophets which their Fathers had killed,
desired a Murderer before the Just One, the Emanuel, the Savior, him whom
Moses, the Prophets, and Abraham did give testimony of; and they said, His
blood be upon us: and Christ said, All the righteous blood from Abel to
Zacherias, should be required of this Generation. So have you not been driven
into other nations, and your houses been desolate since, and Jerusalem trodden
under foot, where the Prophets perished that showed the coming of the Just One,
which at last the Son was cast out by you, upon whom the Gentiles has trodden.

But now is the Lord gathering to himself, and his Name is great among the
Gentiles, and the Remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many people (which
now is witnessed, and his Tent is known) as the dew from the Lord, as the
shewers on the grass, that tarries not for man, [take notice] nor waits for the
Son of man; and the Remnant of Jacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst
of many people, as al yon among the Beasts of the Forest, as a young lion among
the sheep, whom it he go through he tares down and tares in pieces, and none can
deliver: Now this is seen among many people.

And in that day says the Lord, Isa. 10.11.
there shall be a root of Iess, which shall stand for an ensign of the people,
to it the Gentiles shall seek, and his rest shall be glorious. Now the Gentiles
have found this glorious rest, which to this ensign, this root of Iess they do
seek, this day is fulfilled among them, and witnessed glory to the Lord God the
Highest for ever: And he shall set up an ensign for the Nations, and shall
assemble the out casts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah,
from the four corners of the earth.

Now this Ensign is set up for the outcasts of Israel, for Nations, and to the
gathering of the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth: Now you
owning the light, you own this ensign, (and this ensign now is witnessed) see
it, and have that set upon the Throne of David; for the Lord will utterly
destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea, Isa. 11.
and there shall be a high way for the remnant of his people, which shall be
left from Assyria, [take notice] like as it was to Israel in the day that he
came up out of Egypt.

And where this Covenant (that is everlasting) of Light is received, with it
the first is seen that does decay; And thus says the Lord, I will hold thy
hand, I will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant to the people, and a Light
to the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners out of the
prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. I am the Lord,
that is my name, and my glory I will not give to another; Behold, the former
things are come to pass, and new things I tell you of, before they spring
forth, I tell you of them: Now, when these things were sprung up among you, and
come to pass, that had the first Covenant given to you, when you came out of
Egypt;

These new things, this new Covenant, you received not, though to you it was
declared by the Prophet before they did spring forth, and this Covenant of the
people, the light to the Gentiles, opens the blind eyes, brings out the
prisoners out of the prisonhouse, and this is he that preaches unto the
spirits in prison: Now you and your fathers that have rested in the former
things, not beholding nor seeing the new things that are come to pass, and
declared to your fathers before they came to pass, shows how you have refused
the cornerstone, (which have been builders of the words without life,) the
Covenant of Light, the Prince of Peace, the Lord of glory, he that sits on
David's Throne, that comes in the volume of the book to do the will of God.

So the new things which were declared by the Prophet before they sprang forth,
you that remain in the old have rejected it, and have you not been rejected,
(mark) and provoked by a people that were not a people? Have not the Gentiles
which followed not after righteousness, obtained the righteousness, even the
righteousness of Faith in Christ Jesus, Romans 10.
the Covenant of Light, the Light of the Gentiles, among whom his name is
great, and their eyes are opened, and the prisoners come out of the
prisonhouse, and in him do the Gentiles trust. And thus says the Lord, in an
acceptable time have I heard thee, in a day of salvation have I helped thee, I
will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant to the people, to establish
the earth: I will give thee (says the Lord) a light of the Gentiles, that thou
may be my salvaion to the end of the earth. Now he that establishes the
earth, the covenant is witnessed by whom all things were made. What? is he
salvation to the end of the earth, the covenant of light? yea, who in
lighteneth every man that comes into the world, which I saiah spoke of, which
your fathers had their will on. And thus says the Lord, I will preserve thee,
and give thee for a covenant to the people, to establish the earth, to obtain
the inheritance of the desolate heritage; [mark] this covenant of the people to
establish the earth, which obtains the inheritance of the desolate heritages,
and say to the prisoners Go forth, and to them that are in darkness, Show your
selves, which is now fulfilled, and fulfilling; they shall feed in the way, and
their pasture shall be on the tops of the hills, and these witness the fresh
springs of water, and this is witnessed among them that witness his covenant,
and are converted to God, to serve the living God in righteousness, who are
come to the life of the Prophets, and possesses that which they spoke of;
therefore did David give thanks to the Lord among the Heathen, and sing praises
to his Name; great deliverance gives he to his King, to David and his seed,
Psa. 18.
(whose seed we are for evermore;) and Moses that received the Covenant from
the Lord, when your fathers came out of Egypt, said, Like unto me will the
Lord thy God raise thee up a prophet from the midst of thy Brethren, Deuteronomy. 18.
him shall ye harken unto: Now this Prophet did Stephen witness and hold forth,
when he was brought before the Council, whom they cast out and stoned. Acts 7.
Your Fathers had the Tabernacle of VVitness in the Wilderness, as he had
appointed, speaking unto Moses, that he should make it according to the fashion
which he had seen, which also the Fathers that came after brought in with
Jesus, into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drove out before the face
of our Fathers, unto the days of David, who found savor before God, and
desired to find a Tabernacle for the God of Jacob, but Solomon built him a
house, howbeit the most high dwells not in temples made with hands, as says
the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and the earth is my footstool, what house
will ye build me, says the Lord, or what is the place of my rest? Now your
fathers that held up these o^tward things, being not in the life that saw
beyond them, the end of them, the things which Steven here witnessed, whom your
fathers that had the Law and not the lise, put to death, which had persecuted
the Prophets that showed the coming of the Just One, of whom they had been the
betrayers, and murderers of that stoned Steven; these know not that new thing
that must come to pass, before declared, which the Lord by his Prophets spoke
of, but were disobedient and rebellious against the Lord, and cast his law
behind their backs, and slew his prophets which testified against them, to turn
them to the Lord, and they wrought great provocations; therefore the Lord
delivered them to their enemies, and vexed them in the time of their troubles;
and when they cried to him he heard them, according to his manifold Mercies he
gave them a Savior, who saved them from the hand of their Enemies: Now you may
see the cause why his hand was against them, being rebellious and disobedient,
casting the Law behind their backs, being out of the life of it; here is the
cause of slaying the Prophets who witnessed the life of his Law, and yet many
years did the Lord forbear them; and testify against them that had the words
by the Spirit in his Prophets: Therefore now you having the Prophets words,
have built their Sepulchers; were you in the Prophets life, you would see that
which the Prophets gave Testimony of, and Moses, him by whom the world was
made, the Glory of Israel, the light of the Gentiles, the leader of the people;
take notice, the light is to lead, yea, the light is the leader of the people.

Now you being out of the life of the Prophets and Moses, having their words,
thinking to have life in the Scriptures, searching them which do testify of
Christ, but not coming to the Prophets life, you know not the voice of the
Prophets, though they be read among you every Sabbath Day, now Christ the end
of them; so coming not to the Prophets life, you come not to Christ the life,
whom the Prophets testified of, who said unto your Fathers, Ye will not come to
me that ye might have life, who had that which testified of him; so he now is
witnessed that the Scripture testifies of, who is the light and life, which
light is the life of man, him by whom the world was made.

And your Fathers which had the Prophets words, and Moses words, being
strangers from the life, were them that said, They saw, but were them that were
blind, and saw not Christ the Just One, that the Prophets showed the coming
of, and Moses spoke of, which you had your Law from, who said, Like to him God
would raise up a Prophet, him you should hear, whom you did not hear, but put
him away from you, who were out of the life of the Prophets, and would not hear
him that was the life of them, and said, As for this man you knew not whence he
was, and would not have him to rule over you.

Therefore consider you, since your Fathers nor you never came to see this
Prophet which Moses spoke of, and the Prophets testified of, whom your Fathers
had the words, but not come to the life, which you never come to see, until you
come to the life of Moses and Abraham that saw his glory, and that will let you
see Christ the end of them, and that which the Prophets spoke of, and wrote of,
and gave testimony of, which all his Holy Apostles witnessed after his
Resurrection; him, who was the Covenant that the Prophets and Moses gave
Testimony of, which you having the words, but being found out of the life, them
persecuted.

But that now you may come to see in this mighty day of the Lord, his
gatherings together, with his Covenant of light, and his mighty power, which is
everlasting and changes not, where the prophecy is opened, and things not
declared or is known, which gathers together in one up to God, which leads
out of the changeable things up to God who is a Spirit; and the hour is now
come, wherein they worship him in spirit: And the salvation of the Jews which
is to the end of the earth, is believed in, and witnessed, and the time of the
Gentiles not believing in the Light is seen, and their Conversation, wherein
was the excess, wantonness, lust, wine, reviling, banqueting, and abominable
idolatry; with which Light from them who believe in it, are turned, and come to
the honest conversation, and the obtaining of the Savior Jesus Christ, who has
abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel.
And the Gospel is preached to the Gentiles, which is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes in the Light; and him says God I give
for a Covenant, a light to the Gentiles, and when this Covenant of God was
come, Christ Jesus the everlasting covenant, said he, Believe in the Light, I
am come a Light into the world, and he that abides in the Light, shall not
abide in darkne. And the Ambassadors of this Covenant of light, Life and Peace,
hazarded their lives among the Jews and Gentiles, among all sorts of people,
which were ^ut of the life of the Law, and they did preach to them, to the
Gentiles, and do still, for the Covenant of Light is everlasting to bring them
to it; but now many have the words declared from this Covenant of Light, but
yet are strangers to it, and them that kill the ^o^d Jesus Christ, and their
own Prophets have persecuted the Apostles, and pleased not God, but were
contrary to all men, these were of your Fathers, who had the words, but were
strangers to the life; and these did forbid speaking to the Gentiles, to whom
the Covenant was promised, they themselves being in the transgression, out of
the life of what they professed, and out of the life of the Prophets who declared
this Covenant; but now the Riches of the glory of the mystery of the Gentiles
is known, which God would make known, which had been hid from ages and
generations, which is now made manifest to his Saints, which is Christ in them
the Hope of glory, whom we preach, warning every man, that we present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus the Light the everlasting covenant of God.

Now such Gentiles that walk after the vanity of their mind, are strangers,
yet from the glory of Israel, and the Commonwealth, and the life of God, and
the covenant of Light; but God is gathering with his covenant of Light up to
himself both Jews and Gentiles in one: I say, his everlasting covenant, not
according to the old covenant which he gave to your Fathers when they were
brought up out of the land of Egypt, which did decay and wax old, for this
covenant never does decay or wax old, Glory, glory to the Lord God of life for
ever.

And so the Gentiles that are not yet come to own the light, are without the
true Hope, without God in the world; and so the promise being to the Seed, he
says not unto Seeds, as of many, but of one, which is thy Seed, which is
Christ: And this I say, Gal. 3.
That the covenant that was confirmed before ^f God in Christ, the Law which
was 43^. years after, cannot disannul that i^ should make the promise of none
effect, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus
Christ, as its written, I will give him to be a light, to whom he was preached
after his Resurrection; and this Light brings from giving offense to Jew and
Gentile that believe, but offends both that be against it. Ephesians. 2, 3, chap.


And when the Gentiles which had not the Law, did the thing contained in the
Law, which showed the works of the Law written in their hearts, that judged you
Jews that had the Law, and were transgressors of it, which caused the Gentiles
to blaspheme God, and so your circumcision became uncircumcision, and their
uncircumcision became circumcision, and judged you; so the Light, which is the
life, joins Jews and Gentiles together in one, up to one God, who is Light,
who is Lord of all, and rich to all, with which Spirit they come to be baptized
into one Body: And here that you may come to know the Salvation that is sent to
the Gentiles, the everlasting covenant which among them is witnessed, which God
of old promised; and Christ the Prophet says, Go not in the way of the
Gentiles, but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel.

Now when your Fathers had delivered him up to be crucified, he sent them to
preach to all Nations, to the Jews and to the Gentiles, and when the Jews did
not hear, (your Fathers that had the words of the Prophets and Moses, which
spoke of this Covenant) they turned to the Gentiles, and the Holy Ghost them
witnessed, Act. 9.
to whom the Apostles were sent, to whom the Promise belonged; and so Israel
which had the Law and the Prophets, being out of the life, saw not the Glory of
Israel, neither the light of the Gentiles which now is manifested, him whom the
Apostles and Prophets declared. Luke 2.


Now among the Gentiles there is an exercising of Lordship, and the great ones
exercise authority on them, but it shall not be so with you, says Christ the
light, the covenant whom God spoke of, whom Moses said God would raise up: For
they that are here in the light, are from the will of the Gentiles turned,
their Lordship to Christ the Lord, [mark] and so the Gentiles are no more
aliens but Citizens, and Coheirs, joynt-Heirs, who believe in the light, in
the Covenant.

So you that hold up that which does decay, stand against the Prince of life,
the Covenant that does not decay, which many of the Gentiles received; and you
that stood in the first, that does decay, come to be thrust out now with that
which does not decay: And now as you hearken to the light, this you will come
to see, and it is the light that does now manifest the counsels of your Hearts,
your thoughts, your vain imaginations, and Covetousness, which is idolatry, and
the lusting after those things which you should not.

Now this light does manifest that which gives to see Christ the covenant of
light, that it is which brings into the life of the Law and the Prophets to see
Christ who is the light, which light is the life of men, who is the end of the
Law. I am the light of the world, and does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, him by whom it was made. If you love the light, and bring your deeds
to the Light, it will let you see whether they be wrought in God; but if you
hate the light, it will be your condemnation: And says Solomon the King,
(which Christ that was a greater, said, A greater then Solomon was here; and
Christ the light said, Before Abraham was, I am; which because he so said, they
took up stones to cast at him) to do Justice and Judgment, is more acceptable
to the Lord then sacrifice: Mark, Prove. 21.
this Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then your sacrifice.
And says the Lord, I will take no Bullock out of thine house, nor Goat out of
thy Flock; for all the Beasts of the Forest are mine, the Beasts of a
thousand-Hills. Psalm. 50.
I know all the Fowls of the mountains, and all the wild beasts of the Field
are mine: If I be hungry, I will not tell thee, for the World is mine, (mark)
and all that therein is.

Will I eat the flesh of Bulls? or drink the blood of Goats? Offer unto God
Thanksgiving, and pay thy Vows to the Most High; and says the Lord by the
Prophet, I desire mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then
Burnt Offering.

Now you may see, many had the Burnt Offerings, and not the knowledge of God,
whereas the knowledge of God he required more then burnt-offerings, and Mercy
and not sacrifice: Mind, Mercy and not sacrifice.

And when Christ was come, the Covenant of Light, he bid your Fathers (who were
in the burnt-offerings and sacrifices, but out of the knowledge and mercy) Go
and learn what the Prophets words meant, he would have mercy and not
sacrifice, such as had the burnt-offering, and not the mercy, nor knowledge of
God, which God desired mercy before sacrifice, and the knowledge of God before
Burnt Offerings. So your Fathers that had the Sacrifice and the Burnt Offering,
were without the Mercy and the Knowledge of God, who knew not the Son the
Covenant of Light, that Moses and the Prophets spoke of, and the blind offered
the blind that which was not accepted of the Lord, who respects not your
persons, but suffered you to be trodden under foot of the Gentiles who have
been scattered.

But now is the Lord warning to turn to him, and to do works meet for
Repentance, that you might come to know the Prince of life, the end of the Law,
the end of the Prophets, the end of all outward sacrifices, and come to know
the Spiritual Sacrifice, which is acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, which goes
from the Spiritual Household, which is built on the Prophets, Christ the Corner
Stone, who is now come to reign on the Th^one of David, whose Seed witness him
David's Son, which God would show mercy to David, and to his Seed for evermore;
which mercy his Seed witness, and witness the Son who reigns on the Throne of
David, the Son of God, who are the Seed of Abraham, to whom the Promise was
when he was in the uncircumcision; and the Promise which was made to him when
he was in the uncircumcision, do we witness fulfilled; Glory, glory to the Lord
God for evermore.

And we are of the Promise, which is to all the Seed, which was not made to him
through the Law, therefore its of Faith, that it might be by Grace, that the
Promise might be sure to all the Seed; not to that only which is of the Law,
but to that also which is of the Faith of Abraham, who is the Father of us
also; and him who was made of Abraham is now witnessed, that took upon him the
Seed, according to the flesh, who is before Abraham was; a greater then
Solomon; him, who according to the flesh is the Seed of Abraham, but according
to the Spirit was declared to be the Son of God, the King of Glory.

And him David saw, and called him Lord, who said, God would not suffer his
Holy One to see corruption, nor leave his soul in hell; and says David of him,
Psalm. 68.
Thou have ascended up on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell
amongst men. Mark, He that ascended up on high, led captivity captive, and
gives gifts unto men, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them.

And he that ascended, mark, he that led captivity captive, what is it? but he
that descended first into the lower parts of the earth, and he is the same that
ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things by whom all
things was made, to reconcile all things to himself, And he gave some Prophets,
some Evangelists, some Apostles and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till all
come into the unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God, the
Covenant, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ.

And the Prophet Isaiah speaking of Christ, said he, He would proclaim liberty
to the captives, Genesis 61.
mark, to the captive; and he did proclaim liberty to the captives, and went
ministering to the Spirits in prison.

Now you who have had the words declared forth from the Prophets and Moses, but
not being guided with that spirit that gave them forth, you see not the
captive, but are captives, sees not him that brings deliverance, and heals the
broken hearted, and recovers to the blind their sight, and sets at liberty
them that are bruised; that leads captivity captive, and gives deliverance to
the captive; and this is not known till you come to the covenant of Light,

And when Ezekiel was among the Captives at the River of Keba, the Heavens were
opened, and he saw the Vision of God, (Mark, when he was among the captives)
and he was to go to them of the captivity, and speak to them; and after he was
commanded to speak to the captives, the Spirit of the Lord took him up, and
brought him to them.

So consider now, you that have had the Prophets words, but not knowing him
that is on High, that leads captivity captive, being found out of the life, are
scattered abroad; but hearken to the Light that will discover your iniquity,
whereby your captivity may be turned away; whereby you may come to the life of
the Prophets and Moses, with which you may see Christ: Lam. 2.14.
For Jeremiah did lament the falsness of the Prophets, which had not discovered
their iniquity, which might have turned away their captivity, that you might
come to know the voice of the Bridegroom, the voice of joy, the voice of
gladness, and the voice of them that say, Praise the Lord of Hosts: for his
mercy endures for ever. And of them that bring the Sacrifice of Praise into
the House of the Lord.

I will cause to return the captivity of the Land, as at first, says the Lord;
now know, this captivity led captive, and this captivity returned.

And was it not often, that Ierusal^m and the children of Israel were car^i^d
into captivity for transgressing of the righteous Law of God? and did no^ the
Enemy come upon you, which trod down the Wall of Jerusalem, which was before
Christ was manifest in the flesh, which after came and was manifest in the
flesh, according to the saying of the Prophet which showed the coming of the
Just one, who when he was come among you that had the words of Moses and the
Prophets, but being out of the life, saw not that which Moses and the Prophets
saw; and the Prophet said, Jerusalem should be laid waste, and compassed with
Armies; the Wall thrown down, and you scattered: Is not the word of this
Prophet fulfilled among you, and upon you? had you been in the life as Moses
was in, and the Prophets, and Abraham, you would have seen the glory of Israel,
him whom God raised up to sit on David's Throne, the Hope that all the Fathers
hoped for.

Now your Fathers being out of the life, though they had the words, knew not
the Substance when he was come, but on the contrary delivered him up to the
Gentiles to be crucified, which Gentiles trod your city under foot, and they
cried, crucify him, crucify him, and desired his blood might be upon their
Heads.

Now Jacob comes to be saved from his captivity, and Israel shall return to his
rest, and I will be found of you, says the Lord, and will turn away your
captivity, and will gather you from all the Nations, and from all the places
where I have driven you, and will bring you again to this place says the Lord,
whence I caused you to be carried away Captive; when you come to the life of
the Law, this you shall witness.

Now wait in the light, that you may come to witness this Promise fulfilled,
for the Lords flock has been carried away captive, but now is the Lord
redeeming, and gathering with his power them out of captivity, and leading
captivity captive.

And says the Lord, I will gather the Remnant of my Sheep out of all the
countries where I have driven them, and bring them again to their Fold, and
they shall grow and increase; and I will set one Shepherd over them; which
shall feed them; they shall dread no more, nor be afraid, neither shall they
lack any thing, says the Lord: for the day is come, says the Lord, that I
will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper,
and shall execute justice and judgment in the earth.

Now this Branch, this King, this Shepherd, this Fold do we witness, that are
his lambs, his sheep, and are come to witness the life that Moses was in, and
the Prophets were in, and David was in, from which life the Scriptures was
given forth to be believed and fulfilled, which we see with the same that gave
them forth, Isa. 14.
and the Son we see to reign; and the Lord is cutting off, according to his
promise, Babel, his Name and his Remnant, Son and Nephew, and there shall be a
Highway for the Remant of his people, which shall be left from Assyria, like
as it was unto Israel in the day when he came up out of the land of Egypt: Of
this take notice.

In that day shall the Remnant of Israel, and such as have escaped of the House
of Iaccb, stay no more on him that smote them: mark, on him that smote them,
but shall stay upon the Lord, the Holy One of Israel in truth: The Remnant
shall return, even the Remnant of Jacob, to the Mighty God; for though thy
people O Israel be as the Sand of the Sea, yet a Remnant of them shall return,
and there is a Remnant that keeps the commands of God. And did not the Lord
speak to Ezekiel; That your Fathers should be carried away captive, and the
time is come that whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord shall be saved;
for in Mount Zion and Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said, and
the Remnant whom the Lord shall call.

And the Remnant of the Philistines shall perish: Seek good, and not evil: Amos
5.
hate the evil, and love the good; and establish Judgment in the Gate. It may
be the Lord of Hosts will be merciful to the Remnant of Joseph, though the
number of Israel be as the sand of the Sea, yet a Remnant shall be saved.

Even so at this present time, there is a remnant through the election of
Grace; and now is the Remnant known that does give glory to God. And thus says
the Lord to your Fathers, who changed his Judgments into wickedness, and his
Statutes more then the wicked: I will execute Judgment in thee; I will do unto
thee that I never did before, neither will I do any more the like, I will
execute Judgment in thee, the whole Remnant of thee will I scatter in all the
winds.

And these things, and many more this Prophet does relate, which was done to
your Fathers, and what they should act and do, they, who are out of the life of
the law: But now such as be in the life of the law, Prophets, and Christ, can
say, Who is a God like unto thee? who take away iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage: and says the Lord, I will bring
again their captivity and the captivity of Sodom, and her Daughters; and the
captivity of Samaria, and her Daughters: Ezekiel. 10.53.
then will I bring again the captivity of thy Captives in the midst of them.

Now they that be in the life of the Prophets, sees this, That they that were
in the captivity, had spoiled the Oath in breaking the Covenant; Yet
notwithstanding, says the Lord, I will remember my covenant with thee in the
day of thy youth, and will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant, and
thou shall know that I am the Lord: The Lord will raise up the Tabernacle of
David that is fallen down, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise
up his ruins, says the Lord, and build it as in the days of old, that they
may possess, the Remnant of the Heathen, which are called by my name, says the
Lord.

And the dragon was wrath with the woman, and went to war with the Remnant of
her Seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ; the dragon is wrath with them that keep the commandments, and them
cannot endure, but is wrath, and makes war against them. And the Remnant of the
Seed of the woman appears now, that have the testimony of Jesus, and keeps the
commands of God, over all the world stands, and the dragon and his wrath fears
not, but by the testimony of Jesus, they overcome, which is the Spirit of
Prophecy, who are his Remnant which keeps his commandments, with whom the
dragon now is wrath, and makes war against.

And now is the Lord made manifest to them that asked not after him, and found
of them that sought him not; this Prophecy of Isaiah is fu^filled in this our
days; The Father is made manifest; God has made manifest his Covenant to them
that did not ask after him. Mark. Them that asked not after him, to them is he
made manifest.

And you which be strangers from the Light, the Covenant, having the first
Covenant, this saw not, your eyes was blinded, who was from the life of the Law
and Prophets, and this should provoke you to jealousy, The life must be
brought from the dead, before the riches of the world be known, the covenant of
light, the unchangeable, and the conversion, to the life of Moses and the
prophets, and the Son of God, who of them is the end; and this you must know
before you be converted, and come to the father of spirits, and know Moses and
the Prophets that gave forth the scriptures, for the life is that which does
convert, and lets see to what condition it was given, and gives a spirit of
understanding, by which. the Prophet spoke by, by which. spirit they saw the eye of
your fa^hers that God blinded, whose ears were dull of hearing, and hearts
gross, and are in blindness, not receiving the covenant of light within; so
over your hearts the vail i^ remaining, who yet have that eye which is blinded,
and cannot hear the holy Ghost, nor him who was born of it to be converted and
healed, who ever tesisted, and are for Judgment with the spirit ye Scripture
was given forth from; for Moses in the light saw the covenant, and Abraham saw
the promise in yt light, and we in yt light do enjoy yt promise which they saw
to be fulfilled, y^ covenant of light, and witness y^ holy spirit y^
scrriptures were given forth from, and do see them which has ye words o^ ye
scriptures, ^ut not in the spirit that gave them forth, them God the Father of
spirits scatters though they gather together, and such be Heathens that know
not the Spirit the Scriptures were given forth from, these know not God the
Father of Spirits, but are all a heaps about words, killing and destroying one
another.

From them who are Isreal's commonwealth, who are the remnant that keeps the
command of God, and are of the seed of Abraham, who witness the mighty power of
the Lord, in raising his own seed by his own power in this day, and the trumpet
is blown in Zion, and the alarm is sounded in his holy mountain, which makes
the earth to tremble, and do tremble at the word of the Lord, and are by the
dark world called quakers, at whose voice Moses exceedingly did quake, which
power and voice now is known among us, which does no^ only shake the earth,
but the heavens, which power removes that which is shaken, that that which
cannot be shaken may remain, and appear, and before this covenant you come to
know, your hearts must be rent, so to come to witness the abolishing of death
before life, and immortality be brought to light through the Gospel, which is
the power of God, which removes, shakes, and throws down all, and so the
promise comes to be fulfilled: And says the Lord by the prophet, Make the
heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, says the Lord to him that
was in the spirit, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their hearts, Pro. 6.22. Isa. 6 chap.
and be converted, and be healed, these that was from the light of the Law, the
life, for his law is light, says Solomon.

But I said, How long Lord? mark, and he answered, until the Cities be wasted
without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly
desolate, take notice. They that be in the Holy Ghost see this fulfilled upon
you, who have nor understood with your hearts, nor seen with your eyes, nor
been converted, whole cities comes to be laid waste, and houses without man,
and the land come to be desolate without the spirit, that gave forth
Scriptures: and the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great
forsaking in the midst of the Land; of this take notice. But yet in it shall be
a tenth mark, and it shall return, and be eaten as a teil tree, and as an oak,
whose substance is in it, when they cast their leaves, of that take notice; so
the holy seed shall be the substance thereof.

Mark. Romans 12.15. Isa. 6.13.
The holy seed life from the dead, he that has an ear, let him hear; and this
must be known before the riches of the world be.

Now that which gathers you to the promise, is the light and power of God, and
the light will let you see all the evil deeds you have done, all the ungodly
actions you have committed, and all your transgressions, that is the light
which shows you them, and if you love the light you will come to see your
selves, and whether your deeds be wrought in God, and if you believe in the
light, which manifests all that ever you have done, ye will become the
children of light, and receive power from Christ, from whence the light comes,
him by whom the world was made, to stand against the evil, which he has
given you a light to see; and with this light you come to know the M ssias your
Savior, to save you from your sin which he discovers, and to see the
everlasting offering.

But you that do hate this light, and go into the evil, and love the darkness
more than that which shows you your evil deeds, and evil ways, when God is
not in all your thoughts, when your heart revolts, and when you call on him
with your lips, and your hearts afar off: This is the light of Christ that
shows you this, and lets you see your covetousness, and idolatry, and if you
go on in these things beforementioned, the light will be your condemnation,
even the light says Christ, who inlightneth every man that comes into the
world.

This light of Christ tells you, you should not do unjustly one to another,
that you should not be drunk, nor oppress one another, nor wrong one another.
It Is the light that shows you this, and measures things aright, and this word
is nigh you in the heart, and in the mouth to obey and do it.

Now as you love the light, and bring your deeds to it, you will come to know
the light Moses was in, and come to know the Prophet which he said, God would
raise up, whom you should hear, and come to know the Covenant of light, which
brings in the Gentiles to serve the living God from dead Idols, which the
Prophet spoke of, which is the glory of Israel.

And as you love this light before mentioned, you will come to know the Law in
your hearts written, the new Covenant, the everlasting Covenant, which the
Prophet prophesied of, which now thousands do witness, with which light they
know God the glory of Israel, Zions King, and him are come to worship; and this
light will tell you, you must not bow to any likeness, but unto God alone, nor
commit adultery, nor serve graven images the Gods of the Heathen, nor follow
their customs which are vain, for against that Gods hand is turned, who is
one with the Light, which Light the darkness cannot comprchend, though it in
darkness shines, and Christ the light came to his own, and his own received
him not, even among your fathers that had the Oracles of God, and the darkness
could not the light comprehend, though the light in darkness shined, neither
could the darkness see him by whom the world was made, the light, who is
glor^fied with the Father, with the glory that he had with the Father before
the world was: Therefore to the light in you I speak, that with it you may be
turned from darkness, and the power of Satan to God, and receive the covenant
of light, and the power of God Christ Jesus, that you may come to life,
regeneration, and c^nversion, and the renewing of your minds, remission of
sins, and receive the refreshing into your souls.

And as you love the light that shows you the evil that ever you have done, 2
Cor. 4.6.
ye love Christ, and that light is it which gives the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Christ, which shines in the dark heart, and none comes to
the knowledge of God but by the light which shines in the heart; and this
treasure have we in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be
of God, and not of Man: But if you do this light hate, you hate Christ, and
remain stumbling, blind, and scattered, refusing the Cornerstone, whom all
the builders stumbles at, who are out of the light, and none comes from
stumbling to know the words of the Scripture declared from the life, but such
as own the light.

To the light in you I speak, if you go on in your evil deeds, and unbelief,
not believing in the light, the light is your condemnation; hateing the light,
you hate Christ, for you do not come to the knowledge of God but by the light,
He that comes to the knowledge of God knows his Son; now none comes to the Son,
but who owns and comes to the light, which from the Son does come: And this
light brings to one heart, one mind, one People, one God, one Mediator betwixt
God and Man, and this light unites and brings Jew and Gentile together, and he
that believes not in the light, does not believe in God who is light, nor know
his Son, who inlighteneth every man that comes into the world. And to you this
is the word of the Lord.

A VISITATION TO All you that have long had the Scriptures, but found out of
the life of them that gave them forth, that are stumbling about the words,
fighting and contending about them, imprisoning and persecuting them that
witness the life that gave them forth.
TO all you who are from the life of the law, and the Prophets, which is the
light, and from the spirit of understanding, which gave forth the Scripture,
and hearing hear not, and seeing see not, having hearts and understand not,
whose ears are heavy, whose eyes are shut and whose hearts are fat; who are in
the transgression, out of the Law of God, and his Covenant first and second,
against all such the Lord sent his Prophet to declare, and commanded him, Go
tell this people, Is^. 6 9.10.
hear ye indeed, but understand not, and see ye indeed, but perceive not,
make the heart of this people sat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them, who is the light,
such as was from the light, who with that ear could not hear.

Now the Prophet was here in the life of the Law, the people was here from the
life of the Law, therefore the life turned against them that were from that of
God in them, and the life of the Law, the life turning against them, being one
with that of God in them which they were gone from; so the life blinded them,
and their ears became heavy, and their hearts fat, and their eyes shut, and
they could not hear with their ears, nor understand with their hearts, nor be
converted, even such as were gone from the life, with which the spirit of God
was one in which the Prophet was.

And says the Prophet Isaiah to this people, that were gone from the life of
the Law, what the Lord would do with his vineyard, he would take away the hedge
thereof, and it should be eaten up, and break down the wall thereof, and it
should be trodden down, and I will lay it waste, and it shall not be pruned nor
dug, Isai. 5.5, 6.
I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it: For the
vineyard of the Lord of Hosts is the House of Isreel, and the men of Judah his
pleasant plant, He looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for
righteousness, but behold a cry.

These were those that were blind, where the judgment was not, but the
oppression, and were from the light, such Christ came to make blind, against
whom went the woe that drew iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were
with a cart-rope, that called good evil, and evil good, such as were from the
life of the Law, and such as these hearing hear not, and seeing see not, whose
hearts are made fat: Make them sat, whose eyes are shut lest they should see,
whose ears are heavy lest they should hear. Then said I, Lord, how long? and he
answered, until the Cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses
without man, and the land be utterly desolate; [mark, and take notice of this]
until the cities be without inhabitant, and the houses without men, and the
land be utterly desolate.

Now such as were here out of the life of the Law and the Prophets, being in
the transgression, the life went against them that were from the life, and
blinded it, and stopped that ear, and that heart cannot understand, that against
the life is turned, until the city be wasted without inhabitant, and God hide
his counsel and secrets from this eye, and from this ear; so he comes to make
them blind, that they cannot see, which be in the transgression, who does not
blind the light the eye that the Prophet saw withal.

And again, Isa. 29.9, 10, 11, 12. etc.
the Prophet said to them that were out of the life of the Law, in the
transgression, Stay your selves and wonder, for the Lord has poured out upon
you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes, the Prophets, and your
Rulers, and the Seers has he covered, the vision of all is become unto you as
the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned,
saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says, I cannot; for it is sealed: and
the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray
thee: and he says. I cannot; for I am not learned.

Wherefore thus says the Lord, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men, therefore
will I proceed, etc.

These people were from the life of the Law, whose hearts were far removed
from God, to these the books was sealed, and the Vision of all was become unto
them as a sealed book, and they could not read it, neither the learned, nor the
unlearned, for to both it was sealed; to this people that could not see nor
hear was the book sealed, whose eye was blinded though they were learned or
unlearned, such as was from the life of the Law, which was the light, the life
of the Law, the light they had not, and such the prophet saw, who was in the
light of the Holy Ghost, and their fear toward the Lord was taught by the
Precepts of men, (as it is now with them that are blind) these their eyes were
closed, upon whom was poured a spirit of deep sleep, who stagg^red like a
drunken man, but not with wine, who sought deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, and worked in the dark, among whom the Lord will do a mavelous work,
and a wonder, the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding
of the prudent shall be hid.

These were-them that turned the things upside down, who should be esteemed as
the potters clay: for shall the work say to him that made it, He made me not?
Or, shall the thing framed, say of him that framed it, He had no understanding?
Yea, he sees [take notice] that has made and framed: Mind this, you who call
upon God with your lips, but your hearts afar off, who be strangers from the
life of his Law, who turn things upside down, who must be turned upside down,
before the life of the Law, which is the light, be known, and their eyes
opened. Who are in the spirit of slumber, and the spirit of deep sleep, yet
have wisdom, and a prudent understanding: These were them that the Prophet saw
from the life of the Law, and such God made blind; for the promise was when
God gave forth the Law, Blessing, and them that were in the life saw the end of
it; a Curse was not to them that did abide in the life of the Law, the woe was
not to them that did abide in the life of the Law, but the blessing; the curse
was to them that did not abide in the life of the Law, and such came not to s^e
the end of what they professed; and these went from the life of the Law to men's
precepts, and they were such as called upon God with their lips, but their
hearts were afar off; and such owning not the life of the Law, they owned not
Christ when he came, who was the end of it, but was blind, and so the
fulfilling of Isaiah's words came to be, which were spoken forth from the life,
which when Christ came, who was the life, they that had the words of the Law,
and being out of the life, knew him not, but were them that were blinded, and
by hearing should not hear, nor understand; and seeing (...) should see, and
not perceive; these which was gone from the life of the law, the light, which
Christ was one with the life which they were gone forth from.

These could not perceive nor see, though they saw, and though they heard, they
could not understand, which were in the transgression, from the life of the
Law, and such Christ came to make blind; and these eyes must be blinded that
they cannot see nor heary for that which must hear, comes to the life of the
Law, and to the conversion; and says Christ to them that were gone from the
life of the Law, which hearing heard not, neither understood, These peoples
hearts were waxed gross, their ears were dull of hearing, their eyes was
closed, lest at any time, [mark] they were so shut up from the light, the life
of the Law, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and be converted, and I should heal them.

Now you may all come to see what peoples hearts they were that was waxed
gross, and ears dull of hearing, and could not see with their eyes, nor hear
with their ears, lest they should be converted, and Christ should heal them;
such as were out of the life of the Law, and out from that of God in them; in
the uncoverted estate, against whom Christ cried woe: For how can they hear with
their ears, or see with their eyes, that are from the life of the Law? and how
otherwise can it be, but that their hearts will wax fat and gross, and be
hardened with the deceit, who go from the Light, the life of the Law, which is
the eye which God blindes not, who is light, and teach men's commandments for
doctrines; such as hear not the life of the law, are blind, and are such as
run into the lust, whose hearts grows fat; and are such as have a wisdom, and a
prudent understanding, but as to hearing or seeing the things of God, their
eyes are made blind, and ears they have, but hear not; and hearts they have,
but understand not; and cannot understand with their hearts, nor see with their
eyes, lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and I should convert them, and they should be healed.

Now this ear and eye which is from the life of the Law, hears not, sees not,
and the heart waxes gross, and that eye must be made blind before Christ come
to heal them, and convert them: He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

And to such as were from the life of the Law and Prophets, in the
transgression, Christ spoke parables; them that were from the life of the Law,
seeing, they saw not; and hearing, they heard not, nor perceived, nor
understood; to them in parables that were from the life of the law and
Prophets, which Christ saw, these having the words, but being out of the life,
were them that were blinded, gross, and could not hear nor perceive, nor
understand the mystery of the kingdom. Unto these Christ spoke in parables.

And the Disciples said to Christ, Why speak thou unto them in parables?
and he said unto them, To you it is giv^^ ^o know the mystery, but to them it
is not, who have eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not; but blessed are your
eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear: For whosoever has, to him
shall be given, [mark] and he shall have more abundance: [mark] and whosoever
has not, from him shall be taken away, even that which he has. He that has
an ear to hear, let him hear. So they knew the mystery of the kingdom which
was in the Light; and they law not the mystery of the kingdom which were not
in the light; therefore spoke Christ to them in parables, because in seeing,
they saw not; and hearing, they heard not; neither did they understand: So in
them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaiah, which says, By hearing you shall
hear, and shall not understand: and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive: for
this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and
their eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes,
and hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

Therefore parables were spoken to these which were from the life of the Law,
which did not understand with their heart the Mystery of the Kingdom, to be
converted and Healed: For such as understood, came with their heart to the life
of the Law, the Light, to converting and healing: others stood against it, and
that eye was blinded, so saw not, and was not converted: and all dullness of
hearing was from them that were from the life of the Law, the Light; which life
of the Law gives to see before transgression was; and so these that did not
understand, with their hearts not converted, not healed, were them that were
gone from the light, the life of the Law; such could not see the second
Covenant when he was come, and to these Christ opened his mouth in parables,
and uttered forth things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the
world, to the fulfilling of the Prophets words who was in the life; and to
those that were out of the Light, the life of the law, was the Parables spoke;
but blessed, says Christ to his disciples, are your eyes, for they see, and
your ears, for they hear; Matt. 13.
now is the life manifested that was with the Father before the World was,
which all the Prophets of God did give testimony to, which while Moses is read,
the vail is over the heart, but where is the life of Moses that sees the end of
the first covenant, Christ Jesus; so they that were out of the life of the
first, were in the hardness, such as had the words of Moses, but out of the
life, whose ears were dull of hearing, and served God with their lips, out of
the life the light, but their hearts afar off, such were in the days of Isaiah
the Prophet, and in the days of Christ in the flesh, these Christ plainly told,
them he came to make blind who said they saw, but were out of the life of what
they professed, the l^ght, which is the eye, and such the God of the world
blinded the eye of their mind, and for judgment Christ came into the world,
to make them to see that saw not, and to make them blind that said they saw,
where the God of the world ruled.

And John speaks of the fulfilling of Isaiahs words, Joh. 12.
who saw the glory of the Lord, and spoke of him; he saw them that were from
the life of the Law, the light and the Prophets, that could not see with their
eyes, nor understand with their hearts, whose serving God was with the lip, but
the heart afar off; these could not hear Christ when he came, nor understand
with their hearts, nor be converted nor healed; such were for judgment, and
such Christ judged and made blind; for these could not understand with their
hearts, nor be converted nor healed, which was from the light, and had it not.

And the Apostle speaking of the hated and loved, the Election and Reprobation,
that the purpose of God, according to the Election, might stand not of works,
but of him that calls, as it was said, The Elder shall serve the Younger; Esau
have I hated, Jacob have I loved; [mark] so it is not of him that runs, Romans
9.
but of God that shows mercy; as the Scripture says of Pharaoh, For this
purpose have I raised thee up, that I may show my power in thee, and that my
Name may be declared throughout all the earth: [Of this take notice.] The Power
which overthrew Pharaoh, brings the Seed out of bondage; therefore has he
mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he hardneth. But thou will
say unto me, Who has resisted his will? why does he yet find sault? Nay but
O man, Who art thou that reply against God, who is Light? thou who art from
the Light? shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made
me thus? Has not the Potter power over the Clay of the same Lump, to make one
Vessel unto Honor, another a Vessel to dishonor? [mark] But what if God will
show his Wrath to make his Power known, endured with much long suffering, the
Vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction, the children of Disobedience. [mark]
Jacob is loved, but Esau is hated; Esau was the first, a Profane person:
Pharaoh, a Persecutor of the Seed of God, who was hardened, God had mercy on
his Seed, and made his Power known, in overthrowing the one, and delivering the
other.

And him that wills, and him that runs, obtains not the Promise of God,
but the Election obtains it; in Isaac shall thy Seed b^ called; and they which
be the children of the flesh are not the children of God; and so it is not in
him that wills or in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, the
Election obtains it.

But O man, Who art thou that reply against God? [mark] Man, not the
Election which obtains the Promise: Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the
Clay, to make one Vessel of Honor, another to dishonor? What if God will to
show his wrath, and make his power known, endured with long suffering, the
Vessels of Wrath fitted to destruction: [take notice] endured with much long
suffering, the Vessels of Wrath sitted to destruction.

What if God will make his Power known upon such, and will show his Wrath upon
the Vessels thereof, who are in the disobedience, from the Light; Has not the
Potter power over the Clay, the Vessels of Wrath where the enduring with much
long-sufferings has been; such be from the; ife of the Law of God, in the
disobedience, children of Wrath, on whom the Wrath of God abides; therefore the
thing formed that says, Why have thou made me thus? here is the willing, and
not the Election, which obtains it without the willing and running, which
overthrows the Vessels of Wrath fitted for destruction, and the willing and the
running, who has endured with long suffering: And now it is seen, The Lord
will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and the Promise is to the seed,
and Jacob is loved, and Esau is hated, and Ishmael is driven out; and the power
which overthrew Pharaoh, which has ra^sed up the Seed; and the Vessels of
Wrath, on whom he does make his power known, and shows his Wrath, which he has
endured with much long suffering, the Vessels of Wrath fitted for destruction,
and the will that is willing is seen, and the mind which is running, and
attains it not; and the man which replies against God, who is saying, Why have
thou made me thus? as if the potter had not power over the Clay: And here is
the willing and the running, but the promise of God is to the Seed, and the
Election obtains it, and has obtained; that he might make known the Riches of
his Glory on the Vessels of mercy whom he has called; so the promise is to
the Seed, not to Seeds, as of many, but as of one, which Seed is Christ. Romans
11.
And David that was in the life of the Law, seeing the second Covenant, saw
them that had the words of the Law, but were out of the life: And Paul who was
in the life of the Law, the Light that David was in, saw David's words fulfilled
in his generation, among them that were out of the life of the law, though they
had the words, and says, acording as it is written, God has given them the
spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear unto this day; they were such as were from the life of M^ses and the
Prophets, having their minds reprobated; and says David, Let their Table be
made a Snare, and a Trap, and a stumbling block; an for a Recompense, let their
eyes be darkened that they may not see, and bow down their back always: Such as
were from the life of the Law, have they stumbled that they should sall? God
forbid; but that through their sall, salvation is come to the Gertiles.

Now they that had the outward covenant, the words of the Law, and stood for
the outward, and were not guided with the inward, their Tables became a Snare
unto them, and a Trap, and a stumbling block, and they fell, and through their
sall (who was in the outward, from the light, the life of the Law) salvation
came to the Gentiles, and the R^ches of the world, the Light, which is Christ
the Salvation, which overthrows the outward, and brings in the inward, the Jews
in the spirit: For such as were in the life of the Law, the Table did not
become a Snare, a Trap, but they-saw the end with the Light, which is the eye;
but such as were from the life of the Law, had the Spirit of Slumber; so the
Election has obtained it, and the rest was blinded; [mark] the rest were
blinded, the election is not blinded; read this, who sees this, who is come to
the election, which obtains where this is witnessed, that which is blinded is
seen, and the God of the world is judged, and the eye he sets up, and that
which does blind is judged with the light, with the eye, where the conversion
and healing is, and the casting away of them is seen, that were out of the life
of the Law, and the Prophets, which had the outward Oracles, which brought in
the Gentiles, who said, they saw, but were out of the life of what they
professed. For, if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the world, what
shall the receiving of them be, but life from the dead? [mark] the receiving of
them is life from the dead, and that which does receive them makes them blind,
that life which came from the dead unites both Jew and Gentile together, when
the converting comes, the healing comes, and the elect, and the life of the
Law, and the Prophets is fulfilled, and the other eye is put out, and the gross
heart, and the dull ear, and the spirit of slumber, and all this is with the
Spirit of Truth judged, and the light which is the eyes guide, and the lip
serving of God, all this is judged, which brings the life from the dead, which
brings to serve God with the heart, and brings the heart nigh unto God, which
while they professed, the Law the light, being from the life; that Heart
perceives not, that Eye sees not, which goes from the light, and cannot see the
mystery, nor hear Christ the end of the Law.

And here is the rebellious people, and the stiff-necked, which hearing hear
not, and seeing see not, hearts have, and understand not, whom God blindes,
that his mysteries they see not, them that are from the light, Romans 1.
which are from the life of the Law, the light, which is one with the light of
God, in every man, which answers his Law, so that which may be known of God is
manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them, with that they know that
the judgments of God are upon them, when they act unrighteously. And in the
Acts the Apostles speaking to the Jews which had the words of the Law, and the
Prophets, but out of the Law, the life of Moses, and the Prophets, who knew not
Christ the end of them, in which life the Apostles was in, when he had spoken
with the Jews, and persuaded them concerning Christ out of the Law, Moses, and
the Prophets, showing unto them the fulfilling of Isaiabs words, saying, Go
unto this people, and say, hearing you shall hear, and not understand; and
seeing you shall see, and not perceive; for the heart of this people is waxed
gross, and they are dull of hearing, and their eyes are closed, lest they
should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
heart, and should be converted, and should heal them.

To them he said, Be it known unto you, the salvation of God is sent to the
Gentiles, and they will obey it.

So here the Apostle, Christ, and Isaiah saw them that had the words of Moses,
and the Prophets, but out of the life, the light, such could not hear nor see,
being from the life of God, such were blind, and such Gods Hand often turned
against, and carried them into captivity, yea, to the bringing down, and
bringing forth of his seed out of Captivity; so in bringing them down that were
in captivity, they often came to remember God, and so Gods promise stands with
the seed sure, and his election sure.

All along you may see in the days of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
such as had not the life, the light, of the Prophets and Apostles, being found
out of the life of the spirit of God, had the spirit of slumber, had hearts,
and could not perceive, eyes they had and could not see, ears they had and
could not hear, and such eyes God made blind, and ears God made deaf, and
knew not the mystery of the Kingdom, having their hearts gross, and far from
God, and served him but with the lips, and they that were from the life of the
Law were here, they that were in the life of the Law they saw such as were from
the life of the Law; here one saw, and the other did not, one saw, and the
others eye was to be made blind: And they that did carry Gods seed into
captivity, should be brought into bondage, and God would judge them, and they
had the eye which was blind; so you may all see, that which was from the life
of the Law, the life of the Prophets, the life of Christ, which is the light,
does harden, which is the deceit, and such as hear the voice of the Son of God
are not hardened, but such as hear not the voice of the Son of God, are
hardened through the deceit, among these there was wars, one destroying
another, and carrying captives.

But who are come to the life of the Law, and the end of the Law, the end of
the first covenant, the everlasting Priesthood, from the changeable to the
unchangeable, witnesses that which does not vail, change, nor harden, and make
to see captive, and lead out of captivity, while Moses is read, the vail is yet
over the heart, which does harden, but take away that which does harden, and
bring the mind out of the changeable, which their mind was in, in the
outward, to the life, the light, which was hardened and blinded, having the
spirit of slumber, to the covenant of light, the everlasting covenant, the end
of all shadows, types, and figures, to the substance, that covenant is
decayed, and so with this that is kept out which does harden, [mark] the
deceit, which is out of the truth, the life, which is in the transgression,
having a pretense of the worship, but out of the life of it; all such are
blinded, and can neither hear with their ears, nor see with their eyes, nor be
converted, nor healed, and from the life of the Law are, whose hearts are afar
off from God; so all these that have the words of Moses, and of the Prophets,
that are from the light, the life, with the life come to have all their wisdom
and knowledge overthrown, such had their eyes blinded, and had a spirit of
slumber, and Hearts gross, and these the life of the Law overthrew, from top to
bottom, and all that profession without the life of the Law, calling upon God
with the lips, but Hearts afarr off God overthrowes and judges, judges and
blindes, he that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

That which overthrowes the Jews outward, brings in the Jews inward in the
spirit to the King the light, which is one in the spirit, and baptizeth them
both Jew and Gentile into one body, and here he comes to the life of the Law,
and the Prophets, and Christ, and the promise fulfilled, where there is seeing,
and hearing, and conversion, the Heart being brought to the Lord God to
perceive; and to you this is the word of the Lord.

And this eye the Lord does not blind, God does not blind his own eye, but
that eye which is out of the life of the Law, the Prophets, and Christ, and
that eye is blinded which receives not the testimony of the Prophets, nor the
Son, and this the Prophet saw with the Holy Ghost, and Christ saw, who by the
Holy Ghost was conceived, and the Apostle saw with the Holy Ghost such as was
blinded, and is to be blinded, and the Holy Ghost was not blinded; that which
goes from the life, cannot believe the life, but is hardened, they being from
the life could not hear, nor see the life, when the life spoke unto them to be
converted, their eyes was so closed, lest I the Light should heal them, to them
woe was from the light, to them which were from it, they went from the life,
and the life was against them, so the light cast them away that held up the
outward Priests, that had the outward Covenant; their eyes they have closed,
[mark] they have closed their eyes, lest they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and unde^stand with their hearts, and should be
converted, and I should heal them; [mark] they have closed their eyes, lest
they should see Christ, (that owns not the light) that lights every man that
comes into the world, they have closed their eyes, lest they should see it,
and hear it, and come to understand with the heart, and should be converted and
Christ should heal them. They closed their eyes, lest they should see the light
(who was from it, and owned it not,) the healing which brings to be converted,
and turns the heart from being gross, and the new heart comes to be received;
these that have closed their eyes, lest they should see the light at any time,
say they see, but are blind, so being from the light the sin remains; these
call on God with their lips, but being from the light the heart is afar off;
and these are the unconverted, and understands not with the heart, and are
unhealed, and follows the world, which says, they can see, which Christ came
to make blind, and for judgment is he come into the world, that they that say
they see may be made blind, and they that see not might see; and this light
brings Jews and Gentiles to see one another, and this raises up the tribes of
Jacob, and gathers together in the unity in one, and with it does them
reconcile up to God, with the covenant of light, which is unchangeable.

And the Apostle James speaking of the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord
of glory, which is without respect of persons, Jam. 2. chapter
and showing the Law which is Royal, which is without respect of persons,
says, If ye fulfill the Royal Law according to the Scripture, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well; but if ye have respect to persons, ye
commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors: So that you that
respect persons do commit sin, and would have others to respect persons and to
commit sin, who cannot, else you cast them into prison, and go into the
transgression of the Law of God, and is against them whose souls are subject to
the Higher Power, and does not respect the Ordinances of God, as they do that
respect persons, and does commit sin, and are Transgressors, and so brings to
themselves destruction, whose souls are not subject to the Higher Power, but
the Ordinance of God is resisted by such, and the Royal Law, and it convinces
them as Transgressors; So speak, and so do, as they that would be judged by the
Law of Liberty; for whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
Point, he is guilty of all: [mark] This one Point of respecting person, which
if it be broken, it is guilty of all. As for instance; He that says, Do not
commit adultery, said also, Do not kill; if thou commit not Adultery, yet if
thou kill, thou art become a Transgressor of the whole Law, adulterated from
the life, and resists the Higher Power, to which the soul should be subject.

Qu. But deceit will say, If I must not respect persons, I must not honor my
Father and Mother.

Ans. He honors not father and mother that disobeys Gods command, and is out of
his Law, and lives not in the life of his Law, who says, Thou shall not
respect persons; and the same says, Obey your Parents in the Lord; for the law
is the light, and the light is the life, and the life preserves, which light
gives to know God and his will in the law, and Gods judgments on them that
transgresses it; and this light keeps from adultery; and where the Royal Seed
is now risen up, made under the law, brings to know, That marriage is hono
able. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear.

Obj. Says he that is out of the light, may not I respect another woman as
well as my wife, seeing I may not respect persons?

Ans. The light, which is the Law, teaches thee not to commit adultery, and,
To love thy neighbor as thy self, and thy Wife as thy own flesh, and to know
that marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled: And this Light brings
Parents to train up their Children in the fear of the Lord, with which they
come to honor them in the Lord.

And this the Law, which is the Light, that tells thee, Thou must not lust ^or
covet, which if thou do, thou have an Idol.

So that which covets goes from the Law, which is the Light, and from the
Light, which is the Law, to the Idol-maker, where is the founder of the Image,
that hardens, blindes, stops the ear, and makes the heart gross, and there
comes in the eye which God blindes, and there is the heart far from God, though
there be calling upon him with the lips.

To the Light in you all I speak, that you may come to the law written in your
hearts, with which you may come all to know the Lord, and Christ his Son, his
Righteousness, the end of Gods Law, which is righteous, the end of the
righteous, Gods righteous Law.

Let every man be subject to the Higher Power; [mark] for there is no power but
of God; the powers that be are ordained of God. [mark] Put on the whole Armor
of God, for we wrestle that we may be able to stand against the wiles of the
devil; for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities
and powers, against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wickedness in high Places; wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that
you may be able to stand in the evil day, having done all to stand; having your
loins girt about with truth, having the Breast Plate of Righteousness: So the
Armor and Breast Plate of Righteousness, brings to stand against the
Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of Darkness, against the
Spiritual wickedness in High Places, whose feet are here shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and have the Shield of Faith, whereby they
are able to quench all the Fiery-Darts of the Wicked; and have the Helmet of
Salvation, the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, and their Souls
are subject to the Higher Powers, and wrestles against the Principalities,
Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against Spiritual W
ckedness in High Places.

For there is no Power but is of God; the Powers that be ordained of God,
brings to stand against the Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of
Darkness of the World, the Spiritual wickedness in Highplaces: [mark] Here is
the Higher power, that which God has ordained, to which the soul must be
subject; and here is that which is out of the Truth, the which whole Loins are
girded with it, against it stands:

And whosoever therefore resists the powers which be ordained of God,
resists the Ordinance of God, which God has ordained; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation: Such as go from the Light, the Truth,
and the Power of God, their souls are not subject to the Higher Power, but that
comes in which wars against it, the Lusts, which war against the soul, where
the Spiritual Wickedness, and the Ruler of the Darkness, against which, who be
in the Truth Wars, for Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil.

Will thou then not be afraid of the power? Do that which is good, and thou
shall have praise of the same; [mark] then thou art kept in the truth, and the
Loins about girded with it; for he is the Minister of God to thee for good, who
has this Higher power which is of God, which is above the Principalities, and
powers, and Rulers of Darkness in the World, and Spiritual Wickedness in High
places, which is out of the light, out of the truth; such are not the Help
Governors, but he is the help government that stands against them, which is the
Higher power to which the soul must be subject; but if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid, then thou go from the light, and thy soul is not subject to
the higher power, and art where the spiritual wickedness is, and the ruler of
darkness, and the spiritual wickedness in the High places, which is to be
wrastled against, and so thou go into the evil; and this Higher power goes
against thee, for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath on him
that does evil, whose soul is not subject to the Higher power, but is gone from
the truth the light, into the power of wickedness and darkne^s, which the power
of God is above.

Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience
sake, so the light which turns from the evil, and the powers and rulers of
darkness, and spiritual wickednesses in high places and principalities, the
soul it brings to be subject to the higher power for conscience sake, and to
own the minister of God, which is for good, which is in the power, which who
resists, brings to himself damnation, who to the evil doers is a terror, for
the power of God turns against them that goes from the light, and this is the
power, that no man's person does respect.

So for the Lords sake submit your selves to every ordinance of man, 1 Pet.
2.13, 14, etc.
whether it be the King, as Superior; or to Governors, or unto them that are
sent by him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well; here the higher power is it that punishes the evil doer, and torments
the evil, goes against it, and against all the spiritual wickednesses, in high
places, [take notice of that:] To that ordinance for the Lords sake, we are to
be subject unto, for the Lords sake, for it is the will of God to have the evil
doer punished, that so with well doing you put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, as free not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness, but as
the servants of God. [Mark.]

And again, Peter who was in the light, and his soul subject to the higher
power, and owned every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, which went against
the evil, he said unto the Rulers when they commanded him to speak no more in
the name of Jesus, Whether was it better to obey God or Man? This spoke Peter,
he that stood against man's ordinance, which was contrary to the command of God;
so such as did not believe in the light, such was not to be obeyed, whose
souls were not subject to the higher powers, for the commands of God are not
contrary to his own power, for whose souls are subject to the higher power,
they own Christ the light, the power of God, the end of the Law: So all for the
Lords sake, be ye subject to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, for the
punishment of evil doers, (mark,) to be subject to that ordinance that
punishes the evil, that does not punish the good, that does not go against the
command of God, nor Christ, for it is that power the soul must be subject unto.

And Peter that was subject to the higher power, who was not subject to the
Rulers, the Highpriests, Elders, and Council, who charged them to speak no
more in the name of Christ, said to them, Whether was it better to obey God or
Man, and to their ordinance was not subject, but preached Christ the light,
whose soul was subject to the higher power.

Neither was the three children subject to the Kings command, who commanded
them to bow to the image he set up; neither was Daniel obedient to the Kings
decree, which was made that he should not pray unto his God.

Neither was Mordecai obedient to the Kings command, and to Haman could not
bow, though by his not bowing all the Jews might have been destroyed; so him
that would have Mordecai to bow, God bowed and overthrew Haman, and brought
down Nebuchadnezzar that set up the image, and gave for his commandment to all
Nations, People, and Languages, that all to it should bow; and God with his
power made him to know the most High reigned; which most High made him to bow,
and feed with the beasts of the field, seven times was to pass over til he knew
the most High to rule in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he
will; mark, to whomsoever he will he gives it, he was a higher power above
Nebuchadnezzars power, which Nebuchadnezzar was out of, which power overthrew
him, which power the three children was in. This he knew not by all his might
and authority, until seven times passed over him, and that which was to pass
over him seven times, was to be fulfilled before it was known that the most
High ruled in the Kingdoms of men; (mark) which thing he did no^ know, when he
was against that power which the three children were in, and to which their
souls were subject, though they were cast into the fire, for not bowing to the
image, nor harkning to the Kings command. But the image, and the founder of the
image was thrown down, and before he was thrown down, he knew not the most High
to rule, as they do not now, and such God with his power breaks down, and the
images to which the servants of the Lord could not bow, that were subject to
the Higher power, that delivered them; which power threw down Nebuchadnezar
that had set up the image, and made him to bow to, and to worship, and to know
that the most High reigned. And to you this is the Word of the Lord.

G.F.

THE END.

