NEW PROPOSITIONS From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AGREED Upon by the
General, Lieutenant-Generall, Colenels Lieutenant-Colenels, Majors, and
Captains, under his Excellencies Command at a late Council of War.

CONCERNING, The Brotherly Meetings of Independents, and diverse other
well-affected People of this Kingdom. With their Desires to both Houses of
Parliament concerning the same.

ALSO, Some particulars concerning the Book of Common Prayer. And the last
Propositions from the Soldiery to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax,
concerning a great Member of this Kingdom.

Published for general satisfaction.

Imprinted at London for T: Deane, Anno 1647.

THE COPY OF A LETTER FROM Wooburn Lodge in Bedfordshire, concerning the Kings
Majesty, etc.
Honored Sir,
THe particulars which I have to represent unto you at this present, are things
very remarkable and of great consequence, being of ripeness and maturity, both
for the view of your Metropolis, and the whole Kingdom also: Therefore, for
satisfaction of your selves, and the rest of your Fellow Commoners, I shall
here communicate unto you, a Copy of some further Proposals, agreed upon by the
General, and his Council of War, concerning all such persons as are
imprisoned under pretense of Conventicles, as likewise touching the book of
Common Prayer, together with several other papers here enclosed; all wdich, I
shall here give you in order, as follows.

I
WHereas diverse persons really affected to the weal and peace of this Kingdom,
are now imprisoned and grievously vexed, by force or pretense of several
Statutes (especially intended) against all those who repair not to some Church
or Chapel to hear the Book of Common Prayer, or against those who are
popish Recusants, and by their not going to Church might be discovered: and
against these who should hold any Conventicles of Meetings, to plot and
conspire some mischief to the State. Now forasmuch as the Parliament has
declared against the Book of Common Prayer, and that the said Act against the
Conventicles was not intended against people meeting only for Religious
Exercises: it is therefore desired, That all persons proceeded against upon any
Statute or Act whatsoever may be forthwith discharged from their
imprisonments, indictments, or any other molestation whatsoever, by virtue of
the forementioned Statutes, unless such persons shall be proved either popish
Recusants (and that by some other way then by their not coming to Church) or to
have in such private Meetings as aforesaid some perjurious design, conspiracy,
and practice against the State. Therefore, for a more effectual course herein,
it is desired, That the Parliament would be pleased to give Orders for the
acquitting of all persons as aforesaid, by virtue, or under pretense of the
said Statutes, otherwise then as before excepted.

Assented to by the General, and the rest of the Officers under his
Excellencies command.

A Copy of the Propositions and Desires of the Soldiery, concerning Col. Genesis
Poyntz presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.
1. That your Excellency would be pleased seriously to ponder the sadness of
our conditioq in beins destitute of a Commander in chief, of known integrity,
and that accordily your Excellency would be pleased to help us in this our
great necessitp

2. That your Excellency would be pleased to further whatsoever may couduce to
our future safety, for we conceive our selves very near to destruction, when
the Enemies of our well-being have the command over us, and would willingly
make us accessory to out owu thraldom.

3. That your Excellency would be pleased to cause this cdarge to be prosecuted
against him by a Council of War of Army more immediately under your
Excellencies command, many officers here being accsseary with him in the same
undertaking.

4. These things being performed, we humbly desire your Excellencies seriously
to consider our former engagements with you in former service, and to take such
couse for our future supply with pay as we may not lie languishing, when our
Enemies are in prosperity.

This is a perfect Copy of the four Heads or Propositions presented to his
Excellency from the Northern Party,

Another Paper from his Excellency to the Lord Mayor and Common Counsel of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
IN the carrying on of the great businesses of the Kingdom toward a general
and happy settlement, it has been a fixed principle with us to make it our
first endeavor with the Parliament, that all things which threaten an
engagement of the Kingdom in a second War, might be removed before we could
have a confident expectation of a good issue; which upon a Treaty with their
Commissioners, which course of ours, although it might have some appearance of
delay: yet by men that are zealous of the Kingdoms good (we hope) no endeavor
will be judged unnecessary, that may secure the Kingdom from the danger of any
new imbroylements.

We are now come thus far, that the most material particulars which we have in
preparation to propose, for the general settlement of the affairs of the
Kingdom, have been communicated to the Parliaments Commissioners; and we hope
they are satisfied, that they contain in them thing; tending to a general
good, and to lay an hopeful Foundation for common Right, and Freedom, to the
people of this Land for future; and for a lasting peace amongst us. But before
we can securely intend and without interruption apply our selves unto the
proceedings and dispatch of the Treaty, thereupon we have delivered into the
hands of their Commissioners, the Paper which consists of three particulars, in
the last whereof (which is the Militia of the City) you being most immediately
concerned, to the end you may see we would ask nothing which relates to you,
without giving you a just account thereof, and all possible satisfaction
therein; we have also given a Copy thereof to your Commissioners, to be here
with sent unto you. We should not desire this, ort any thing else of that
nature, were we not persuaded, thas what we desire is seasonable, and for yours
and the Kingdom good and quiet. And we should willingly have been silen- (as
to this:) but considering the just jealousies which lie at against some persons,
now authorized in the exercise of th^^ power amongst you, and those attempts
which have been made by some, who would have engaged your City, to^^ War,
had not your Lordships and the Court of Aldermen and Common Council, by your
wisdom prevented it, by getting those Votes which were passed by the Militia,
made Null; We cannot in a case of this importance but deal freely with you, in
desiring your concurrence with ours to the Parliament; that the Militia may be
changed into those hands, out of which it was taken, of whose care and fidelity
to the Public, there has been so long and large Experience as few ages have
paralelled. And if the interest we have so long fought for be still the same,
let it not seem strange that we desire both of the Parliament and City, that
those may be in places of such a Trust, who have given the best proof of their
courage and constancy in prosecution of the same.

Having thus far declared our selves with all freedom and clearness to you,
as we do not your good acceptance of your intention therein, so we desire your
forwa dnesse in a work so much tending to mu uall confidence; and to prevent
the designs of any who would be glad to put obstructions in the way to a happy
conclusion, and envy nothing more then the continuance of a right understanding
between you and us.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax and the Counsel of
War. Signed Io. Rushworth Secret'
Reading July 19. 1647.
FINIS.

