M. Speaker,
I Humbly Desire you to discharge your Public Trust to the Nation, and tender
this to the Trustees in Parliament, Sir, I am in so doing

Your Servant William Bray.

THE FOXES Craft Discovered; in destroying the PEOPLES best Friends, who stand
in their Prerogative way for Perfect Peace and Freedom.

As it will appear by their usage, not only of Captain Bray, but also of his
Troop, that raised themselves at their own cost, and have continued in many
hazards, but now must be dispersed with the reward of thr^ats or Imprisonment,
or be pressed to serve under one of the Foxes new Creatures.

Whereunto i^ anexed, September, for discovering their Apprehentions to prevent
our New Slavery.

By John Naylier Quartermaster, Richard Ell^good, and John Marshall, appointed
by the Troop for the ^ing the^e things.

April 2 Printed in the first year of the Peoples pretended Freedom,but
intended Slavery, 1649.

Certain PASSAGES BETWEEN Some Members of Parliament, and the Presenters of
the following Petition.
OF all the expectations of men, the most Justifiable expectation of Justice is
the greatest misery to men, when frustrate; but we whose Names are here
subscribed, have most wickedly, partially and unjustly been frustrate of our
Expectations, as we expected Justice to our selves, and the Nation in general,
being without reason showed us, dismissed of the Conduct of those our Officers,
which we are all of us, with many more, certain of their Integrity, but with
Resolution to address our selves to the Parliament, as the only help, under
God, that we knew of to do us Justice, we were discouraged several ways, which
made us desist from any further hoping to get any Justice done us.

First, when we had sent some of our men to London with our Desires, which was
the Seventeenth of this instant March. 1648. with resolution to have delivered
this Petition to the Parliament the 19. coming to the Parliament door, we
found our Captain committed to Windsor Castle, for appealing to the House,
against some dealings with him by one that was inferior to that Supreme
Authority, which was the amazement of our Spirits to see that just right of the
People so trampled upon, and gave us (as we thought) great cause of fear, lest
we should be served the same sauce with our Petition, we knowing the honesty
and integrity of our Captain; but yet howsoever, on the 21. of this present,
one of those which we entrusted, went into the House upon the r sing of the
House, and delivered our Petition to the Speaker, who looking upon it, and
finding Captain Brays name in the Title of the Petition, he began to make
slight of it, asking the Party that delivered it, whether it were in behalf of
Captain Bray, or not? Who answered, It was in behalf of the Troop, and
Captain Bray beside; when he heard it was in the Troops name, and saw the
subscriptions of our hands, he did vouchsafe to read some part of it, and
commended some of the former part of it to be very honest, Colonel Harrison
standing by in the House, did alone seem to be the most pitiful to us, in
relation to the hard measure that was cited in it, measured to us, but
Commissary General Ireton told our Soldier, That whereas it touched upon an
Ordinance for no deduction for Free Quarter for those raised for this summers
service, he told the Soldier again, That that Ordinance did not extend to
Forces of the County of Kent, which was very strange to us, but the Comissary
General told the Soldier, That there was care taken for us to serve in the
Army under a new Captain, but the Soldier told him again, That we would
serve under no other Captain then Captain Bray; but Alderman Permington then
replied, That it seemed we would not obey the General; the Soldier asked him,
when we ever disobeyed any of the Generals just Commands? whereupon the
Alderman seemed to catch some advantage of the Soldier, and asked him, Whether
he thought the General would command any unjust things? who made him answer,
That he should not catch him, for he did not say he did; but in fine of all, we
finding that we had beard the sense of so many eminent men in the House, we
were discouraged to trouble them any more with our Petition; for the Speaker
told our Soldier, That he looked for some such stuff in the tail of the
Petition, as he looked upon in the end of it, which you may here see; but yet
having read as much of our Petition as he thought fit, he thrust it into the
hands of our Soldier again, and so left him, but yet these our entrusted men
waighted at their door that afternoon again, but could not get our Petition
into the House to the Speaker, although the Seargeant courteously went and
asked the Speaker. Whether he should bring it in, or not.

Now we desire all honest Censciencious unbyassed men to judge, Whether we are
not unworthily dealt withal, for all our integrity to the Nation, as our
Petition, (which we have made public here will show) for we must either at
last all of us leave our employment in the Army, or at least break this Troop,
which is one of the most Unanimousest Troops in the ARMY, (as it stood under
Captain Bray; for the setting up or purify of Justice in the Nation.

To the SUPREME AUTHORITY of the Nation, the PEOPLES Representatives, assembled
in Parliament.
The humble Petition of Captain William Brays Troop, of the Regiment of
Colonel John Reynolls.
Shows,
THat whereas your petitioners, having through the sad apprehensions of the
power of a prevailing party, both amongst you, and in all the Counsels of the
Nation, Many of us laid down Arms, in the latter end of Forty Seven, and in
the beginning of Forty Eight, being about their particular Employments, but
seeing with grief of heart, the Nation, and our selves immediately brought to
Slavery by the aforesaid prevailing party, insomuch, that when we saw them
appearing in the Field in Arms, then we and others thought it high time to
begin to gird our Swords to us again, and in a way, without president, to
raise you a Regiment, consisting of Seven Troops of Horse, at our, and their
propper Costs and Charges, which is such a thing, that we cannot tell that ever
you had the like done for you before; But yet we did cheerfully,
notwithstanding the present Charge, and danger thereof, because we found an
Inclination in those of greatest power in Marshall Affairs, to employ such men
in Commission over us, which we knew had ventered very hard, even almost to
blood for the attainment of that which now this honorable House has declared;

Viz. That the People under God, are the Original of all just Power, but when
we had engaged under the before said Officers, several times God still giving
Victory, insomuch that those, ours and the Nations enemies were subdued, and
then began our old Machiavellian Adversaries to set to work again, and
abominably to Apestatize and back-slide from Principles of Righteousness,
peace, and settlement of this Nation, and to endanger it so, as to bring a
flood of misery and Injustice upon it; whereupon, we, when we were di missed
from the County of Kent, we have stood upon the account of Justice.
Righteousness and Safety to this Honorable House, and the people that
entrusted them, but now finding that the General has given our Troop away
from Captain Bray, to another Man which we know not, nor never had any
experience or ground of confidence in, and by these actings, your Petitioner,
are merely discouraged to act as Soldiers in this Regiment any longer, we
having just cause to suspect that our Captain is slighted merely for his
integrity to the Justice of this Honorable House, and the people that entrusted
them, and because he will not prostrate his Conscience to the lust and will of
men without reason.

THerefore our request to this Honorable House is, that since you have Voted
that there should be no deductons for Free Quarter for those that engaged for
the late Summers service, but it is so with us; May it please this Honorable
House, notwithstanding our good affections and security that we had full
deduction of half our pay, while we served in the County for Free Quarter,
therefore we desire this Honorable House to Order the payment of the said
Deduction from the Committee of Kent, according to the former Vote of this
Honorable House; And further, that you will be pleased to weigh the premises,
and consider us with righteous and just satisfaction toward our great expense,
danger, hazard and loss of time, which we have undergone for the peoples just
satisfaction, we having not had one penny of pay near upon six Months, to the
utterimpoverishing of us, and the sad Oppression of the Country, and besides
many horses lost amongst us, whilst we stood upon the account of Juctice, that
so we may not be made the only object of misery in this first year of freedom,
which will but open the mouths of men to asperse and dishonor you, for we are
very willing at these unrighteous discouragements to lay down our Arms, at this
casting out of our Captain; only we desire this Honorable House to consider
us likewise in some measure toward all this near upon six Months time; And we
desire also that this Honorable House will put us in a way of satisfaction for
former Arrears, before we dismiss or disperse. Also we desire you seriously to
weigh and consider an Address presented to this Honorable House the 26. of
Febr. 1648. by the hand of Lieu. Col. John Lilburne, and many others of the
Nations and our friends, that were Presenters, promoters, and approvers of the
large Petition of Septem. the 11. 1648. the aforesaid Address being the lively
portrature of our apprehensions, it being high time to insist upon Laws of
settlement, Peace and Justice, before we shall be willing to engage in any
other Nation, in the war of Ireland; the unsettlement in Justice, Apostasy,
Deceit, and neglect, here having been the cause of the Misery to the Souldery
and People there; Further we desire this Honorable House to consider of a late
Sentence passed against a Member of our Regiment, with several other men of
several other Regiments by the Counsel of War; and to consider whether the
said SENTENCE be consistent to the just Rights, which we have spent our bloods
for, or not, we conceiving all our selves sentenced in their sentence; And we
further desire this honorable House, so to regulate the Articles of War, that
they may be suitable to freeborn English men, and that likewise the same
principles and laws may govern our Officers (both Superiors and Inferiors)
which shall govern us; which way of Order we account to be most consistent to
the pe ple s dear purchased Rights. We hope this Honorable House will take
these ruff and unpollished lines in the charitablest construction, it being no
part of our Principles to speak any other language then the plainness of our
hearts.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc. Wil^iam Haslup, Lieutenant,
Christ^. Chesman, Cornet, John Naylier Quartermaster, Corporalls:
Austin VVhitney, Rob. Harbison,
Joh. Wright, Rob. Painter. Fran. Hasl^lup, Will. Bastin. John Lathe, Tho.
Grimos, John Hardey, Gilbert Games, Rich. Hill. Rich. Sanders, Rob. Harrison,
Tho. Richards, Val. Stephenson, Ed. Avery, Hen. Bugbey, Io. Bastin, Ant.
Bastin. Joseph Pepitt, Io. Marshall. Ed. Bastin, Will. Scott, Sam. Ga^er, Sam.
Howlt, Fran. Lee, Dan. King. Tho. Satchell, Tob. Robbinson, Rich. Robbins,
George Betten, George Spooner, Tho. Anderton, Ioh. Fran^on, Ioh. Allin, Rob.
Abbit. Will. B^^^^^, Christo. Booth. James Trigg, Will. Smith, Hum. Budds, Rob.
Patridge, Sam. Mowbray, Will. Howell, John Parr, Io. Lasey. Ios. Rastall,
Thomas Li^^ell. Tho. Flafer, Ioh. Washburne, Ioh. Cornelius, David Chemi^, Will.
Sidwel. Tho. Roe, Rich. Ellegood, Nicho. Westwood, Ha^^^ball Dawson, Jer.
Stephenson, Hen. Philpott, Ed. Tailor. Will. Haddock, (...) Bence, Will.
Gilbert. John Ellington, At. Boothe, Wi. Morden, Jo^. Mutlow, Rob. Ba^gey,
Joh. Price, Ralph Phillips Joh. Eluins, Ioh. B^^g^^.


To our much honored and trusty Friends, the Petitioners of the Eleventh of
Septem. This present. in London.
DEear Friends,
you are the reviving of our Spirits, to see that you have not yet made
shipwreck of your Integrity in these times of Apostasy, we acknowledge that you
have given great encouragement to us, to act something against the new Chai^^
of the Nation; and we desire likewise, that you will accept of so^^ small
encouragement from us, viz. That we have seen your late Address of Febr. the
26. 1648. and do readily and cheerfully, comply with it in every Circumstance
thereof, and have likewise so far taken notice of it to the supreme
Authority of the Nation, the People Assembled in Parliament; Therefore* Dear
Friend, We desire that you will likewise weigh and consider our Friends, that
have presented our Apprehensions in a Letter to the General, and to join with
us in our endeavors for their enlargement (if you account that which they did
just) and full and ample, reparation of their injuries suffered in the public
Cause of the people, and that further both you and we do continue faithful
one to another, i^ our old just principles; for be you assured that we are
ready to lay down our lives, (if God shall call for them in our) Capassitie
for the Nations just and full Rights, and therein rest satisfied, knowing that
you are involved in the same common Cause of the English People, with your
Faithful Friends for Justice.

FINIS.

