LIGHT VANQUISHING DARKNESS.

OR A vindication of some Truths formerly declared, from those aspersions which
have been (by reason of some misapprehensions) cast upon them; now published
for the satisfaction and benefit of others.

With a preambular Epistle to all sorts of Men. As also a Parcel of good
Counsel, if you can take it.

By Captain FRANCIS FREEMAN, a late member of the Army.

After that which men call heresy, will I worship the God of my Fathers, The
spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man. LONDON
Printed in the year 1650.

An Epistle to all sorts of Men.
TO All Christian Kings, Queens, Princes, Priests, Rulers and governors; and
to all that love the King; and to all that are in authority under Him, of what
degree, or in what condition or station soever: whether Papist, Protestant,
Presbyterian, Antinomian, Independent, Anabaptist, Seeker etc. Both high and
low, rich and poor, from the lowest form to the highest; and so to all those
that have past through all forms, and are above them, that worship God, not on
this mountain, nor at Jerusalem, but in spirit and truth. Neither can they
descend so low, as to look back, to see God in an ordinance, or in any of these
forms, or in any other form; but see him purely as he is, Jehovah Elohim; who
see him in the clouds, and in the sun, who see him in the heavens, and in the
firmament, for the heavens declare his glory etc. who see him in all things
above and below, and in every thing that has a being in the whole Creation.
These things I write unto you, concerning them that seduce you; but the
anointing which you have received of him, abides in you, and teaches you of
all things, and is truth, and is no ly etc. and as the Son of the bondwoman,
persecutes the Son of the freewoman, so every form is a persecutor. And he
that is under any of these forms, is ready to persecute him that is above them,
or below them, or contrary to him in judgment: But the son of the freewoman,
is free from persecuting any. And as there are diversities of forms; and that
every form is a persecutor, so there are diversities of degrees in every form,
some high, some low, some rich, some poor, yet all in the Spirit. The highest
degree of Papists, are almost Protestants, the highest degree of Protestants,
are almost Presbyterians, the highest degree of Presbyterians, are almost
Antinomians, the highest degree of Antinomians, are almost Independants, the
highest degree of Independants, are almost Anabaptists, and the Anabaptists,
are almost Seekers, and the Seekers are at a stand: Although they are in the
uppermost form, yet they know that there is something above all these forms,
which they have not yet found, but are in a seeking condition, yet their
strength is to stand still, till God draws them up into himself; then shall
they be of that rich family of love, they shall attain to that high pitch of
persection, as to be of Gods own family, God dwelling in the midst of them,
and they living continually in and upon him. For he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him. Now all those that are of this rich family of love; are
above all forms, types, and shadows; And are in reallitie, truth, substance:
they need not that any man teach them; they are all taught of God, they are
entered into their rest, they cease from their labors, as God did from his, and
their works follow them; there is a continual Sabbath to them; God is their
Sabbath in them. All external forms of self-duties and performances, as of
duties of fasting and humiliation, duties of prayer etc. all are turned into
praises and thanksgivings, Halelujahs. Now there is nothing but mirth in them,
there is a continual singing of birds in them, chirping sweetly, in a sweet
harmony of soul-ravishing delightful music.

Reader, I shall give thee to understand, that this ensuing Treatise, has been
almost ready for the press a long time since, and cast aside, having no
thoughts of publishing it. But seeing it is the Fathers pleasure, I should
declare my judgment to the whole world, I could not but do it; partly to
vindicate the truth, and the rather, because some members of the Army (whom I
conceive have not yet past through the third form) have a prejudice against
me, as if a child that has not learned his primar: should undertake to teach
him that has learned his Accidence or Gramer, and is perfect in them. And as
if the poorest Scholar in the lowest form, should undertake to seach the best
Scholar in the uppermost form in the School. And partly to discover the folly
and weakness of these mine accusors. I shall therefore give you a breife
marrative both of the manner, and substance of our discourse, for which they
had a prejudice against me, which is as follows.

First, I had some discourse with Capt. Lieu. Leigh, and Cornet Friend,
touching forms in the worship and service of God, and touching several
administrators or dispensations that the people were under; and my position
was, that God might be seen in the lowest form or ministration, and that I had
now no prejudice against the person of any man, that was above me, or below me,
and that I saw God in all things and in every thing that had a being in the
whole creation: working in the creature, according to the several dispensations
wherein he had placed them. Then the Cornet asked me, whether I saw God in the
Table-board or in the Candlestick? My answer was yea, I saw him in both. Then
he went about to prove (in a Syllogisticall way) that the Table-board was dead,
the Candle-stick was dead, and God was a living God. Therefore I could not see
him there in the Tableboard, but I might see him in the Work-man-ship of it;
and with all demanded of me, whether I saw him essentially in the Table-board,
my answer was I made no difference, or distinction betwixt his essence, and his
being, for they were one, and that God was every where, and in all places, and
in every thing. He was both omnipotent, omnipresent, omniscient, and his
essential will was himself, his power was himself, his wisdom was himself.
Then said the Cornet, Capt. Freeman, you say that you have no prejudice against
the person of any man, are all men alike with you? what do you think of
drunkards? my answer was, yea, they were all one to me, although in time past,
I had a prejudice against some, when I was under forms, yet now I had not; for
a drunkard, or any other man that was addicted to any other sin or vice (which
all men are subject unto) could not leave it till God called them from it. Then
we spoke something concerning the use of Ordinances; which I told them that I
was not against the use of them, nor any man that was on such a dispensation,
for he was in the same station wherein God had placed him, and so we brake of
our discourse for that time: but it seemed to me, that they were somewhat
troubled at it.

Now the next time we met together, we had some farther discourse touching
ordinances; and to my thinking (before we parted), they were very well
satisfied, for we parted upon very fair terms, and I went up into my Chamber,
where I was not long, before I had some thoughts of writing an Epistle to all
sorts of men, and so called for a Pen, Ioke and Paper, and began to write, but
before I had wrote three lines, they came to me again, and I told them what I
was about, and that I was writing an Epistle to all sorts of men, that were
under several dispensations or Ministration, and so fell into Discourse
again, spent some time in it; and all this time they were very merry and
pleasant with me, in so much that I could not conceive they had any prejudice
against me, or any design to advance their own interest, which I shall refer
to you to judge. And so we parted for that night, and went to bed, and the next
morning I wrote the former part of this Epistle, and showed it to them, but it
did appear to me, that it was not well resented by them; For, in a very short
time after, they made some complaint to Colonel Okey of some strange points
which I should hold (as they said) which occasioned some dispute amongst us, in
the presence of one Capt. Smith and others,

Now the Colonel meeting me at Bedford (with some other officers of his
Regiment) told me that he had heard of some strange opinions I should hold, but
never had any discourse with me, as to know what they were; Therefore he
desired to propound some questions unto me. My answer was, that I should be
very free to answer to any question that he should propound unto me; so that it
might be done in a way of love; which he promised it should. So he propounded
this questian first, what I thought of the use of ordinances? my answer was,
that all those that were under any of them, or in the use of any of them; that
it was their duty to be obedient unto them, till God called them to a higher
ministration. And that I liked them well, that were zealous in the performance
thereof, for I did believe they had some comfort in the use of them.

The Second question was, what I thought of the Scriptures, and whether I did
acknowledge the Scriptures to be the word of God? my answer was, that it is the
written word of God, the Prophets, and Apostle were the Penmen, and that it was
my daily practice, to make use of the Bible called the Scriptures, when
opportunity served; and I told them that every Scripture is a mystery, until
it be made known to us, or revealed in us; and so it comes to be above that
Scripture without us; for, it is said to be a hidden mystery, to them that
perish: but the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes.

Then by this time they all came about me like Bees (as the Psalmist says)
they kept me up on every side, they kept me up I say on every side etc. one
caught at me, and another caught at me, insomuch that I earnestly desired them
to forbear any further discourse; for I saw that they lay in wait for me; and
as it did appear to us afterward, that they had laid a snare to entrap me, and
katch me into their own Net, which they cunningly had laid. But I was very
cautious and wary how to speak to them, and for this reason which I gave them,
that I might speak something in answer to their questions that they might not
well bear; for; said I, that which may be a truth to me, may not be a truth to
you, and yet a truth in it self. The Word of God, which is God in his Word,
written in me, is more to me then the whole Book of the Scriptures, both of the
old and new Testament; for what is it, without it be unsealed and the Book
opened? and yet I can assure you, I prise it, at as high a rate, as any of you
all can do; but if so be you should ask a Child of seven years old, what book
it is, and lay it before him, he will say it is the Bible, or peradventure, he
will tell you it is the Scripture, why? because he has been told so: but if so
be, I know the word of God, which is, God in his word, be written in me; then I
know assuredly, that is the word of God, because it is so manifested unto me.
But how shall we know this of a truth, said Cornet Friend, how may this appear
to us? My answer was, that the witness of the spirit, did bear witness with
my spirit: and that I had certain evidences, and demonstrations of the spirit
of God working in my spirit; and that I saw a glorious change in me, since I
had past through all these forms; or ministeations, which I had formerly been
under. I told them likewise, That I had bin a Papist, Protestant, Presbyterian,
Antinomian, Independent, Anabaptist, Seeker etc. But I gave God thanks, I had
past through them all; and that Scripture was fulfilled in me, which was a
promise made by Christ, that he would put his laws in our minds, he would writ
them in our hearts, and he would be to us a God, and we should be to him a
people. Which laws are written in my heart, and have made me conformable in
obedience to his will, and this law being written in my heart; is far above any
law without me. As for example, the Scriptures contain in them diverse
precepts, as in the decalogue. Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness etc. We
see this law, we read it, and yet we break it, we cannot keep it, Why? because
we see and read no more but the bare literal expressions, and is without us.
But if God comes in in power, and commands me from within, either to do or not
to do, then I cannot break it, but I must keep it, and that from a Principle
of love from within.

Then came in Capt. Neale and one Mr. Easton, who being no sooner in the Room,
but Col. Okey (in a seeming merry way) took Captain Neale by the shoulder, and
thrust him to me; using these very expressions. That he would be on my side,
for he was of my judgment. To which Capt. Neale answered, that he thought he
should, although we were the weaker side. Then Lieut. Cheese spoke something in
reference to our former discourse. Cap. Neal asked me, whether I would answer
him, or whether he should? So I desired him to answer, (being willing to be
quit of any farther discourse) for those reasons before mentioned, in that I
found them to lie in wait for me. Then Capt. Neale ansvvered clearly to the
point, which he is very well able to give an account of. Then Leiut. Cheese
replied; (and all this while there seemed no prejudice outwardly against either
of us) and Mr. Easton answered to his reply, and undertook the discourse; but
before he had done speaking, Colonel Okey desired him to make repetition of
what he had said, which he did; then the Colonel took first a prejudice against
him; and used him very uncivilly, and unseemingly, in the presence of all that
were there; for he bad him go forth of the room for he was a dangerous fellow,
and not sit society for any honest man, and this was for nothing, but declaring
his opinion. But Mr. Easton desired to speak farther to the point, and that
there might be a right understanding betwixt them. No said the Colonel, and bad
him hold his tongue, and get him forth, for he had something to speak to some
Officers of his Regiment; and so fell very foul upon Captain Neale, with
bitter language, and then upon me and told us, he would root us out of his
Regiment, or else we should root out him, and commanded us to be gone: which
command was immediately obeyed.

Now I shall appeal to all godly conscientious men, to judge whether this
discourse was in a way of love, or not, according to his promise and
engagement; When as they did (as it were) force me to discourse, and to answer
to all their questions; yet I am sure they have no advantage against me thereby.
But to proceed, the next morning I met with Capt. Smith, who told me, that he
liked our discourse very well: but shook his head, and said, that he was very
sorry to hear, and see such miscarriages and clashings against us. Now the same
morning the Colonel sent for Mr. Close (Chaplian to his Regiment) and
discharged him, because (as he said) he was of our judgment. Mr. Close desired
to know what might be laid to his charge, to be so castoff, without a Council
of War, and that he might know his accusers: The Colonel told him, that he
had preached dangerous doctrine, and held dangerous tenets: therefore he should
no longer continue in his Regiment. Then Capt. Neale and I desired him, that we
might all three be tried at a Council at War, for we conceived all our cases
were alike, but that would not be granted: but howsoever; The Colonel then told
Mr. Close that he might ride in any Troop of the Regiment, but not as Chaplain;
to which he answered, that if he were not fit to be Chaplain to the Regiment,
he was not fit to ride in any Troop. Then I desired to know of him, what he had
against me, or what he could lay to my charge? His answer was, that I held
dangerous tenets, that I denied the Scriptures, and that I made God the author
of sin. Which I denied, and withal did ask him, where ever he heard me say so
in positive terms? He answered no, but that I did as good in effect. And thus
you may see, he would draw conclusions according to his own fancy. Therefore
give me leave to draw one conclusion according to their practice, which is
this, that if God justifies their actions (which they believe he does) then is
God the Author of sin. But no more of this, for I am very Ioath to digress;
but to proceed. The Colonel did likewise rip up the old sore at Taunton, and
told me that I said I was Christ, and that if it had not been for him, I had
been cashiered for it; which argues abundance of weakness in him, or malice
toward me, he knowing that I had clearly answered to their charge, and that
Mr. Peter's had moved the General for reparations for the wrongs done unto me.
Then Cornet Friend laid this to my charge; that I should say that I had as live
keep a Drunkard company as any other man, which I denied, neither did I indeed
speak it at all upon any other terms, then as before mentioned. You say you
have no prejudice against the person of any man (said he) then I pray tell us,
wherefore you keep up your sword? My answer was to maintain our just rights and
privileges which is our birthright, and to relieve the oppressed, and not
intentively to kill any man; and with all did demand this question of him,
wherefore he kept up his sword? His answer was, to kill the Caveliers, then
said I, you are a man of blood, you kill all the day long, and I had as live
keep a drunkard company, as keep you company: and withal I told them, that
they might see, that I was both ready and willing to do the States the best
service I could (as I had formerly done) and that I was willing, to go with my
whole Troop, for the service of Ireland, which if I had not been willing, then
I had been disbanded upon that Account without any more ado.

And thus I have given you a plenarie description (according to truth) both of
the manner, and also the matter and substance of our discourse; and if so be,
it should be denied, I can prove it by Capt. Smith and others. And now I shall
show you, how they have shot their poisoned arrows, even bitter words against
me, and have spit their poison at me, to render me as odious, as they can
possibly: and all to drive on their own designs, and set up their interests.
For here you shall find (if it may come to a trial) that the Cap. Leiut. gaped
after my command as much as ever any ungracious son did gape after his Fathers
death, that he might inherit his possessions, as may appear by his often, and
earnest solicitations to the Col. that he would give him my Troop, if he could
get Col. Rich his letter, and Col. Harrisons letter to him. Then Cornet Friend
looked for preferment too; and Quartermaster Gilmore gaped after my Cornets
place, who went for the Service of Ireland; and indeed I wrote my letter in his
behalf to my Col: That he might have it; notwithstanding (I knew) that he had
done some good officers for me. And these are my accusers, who (by their false
and scandalous accusations) have caused the Col: (he being very apt to hear
with other men ears, see with other men's eyes, and to speak the language of
other men) especially to drive on their own designs according to their hearts
desire. And as for Quartermaster Gilmore, he let fall these very expressions
to his Land-lady (where he quartred at Rowell in Northamptonshire) that there
were but few officers in the Army of his Captains judgment, and that Crumwell
was now gone into Ireland, therefore they could new model the Army at their
pleasure.

And truly for my part, this did evidently appear to me, that their intentions
were no less, but that they would root out all officers, that were contrary to
them in judgment; for I met with a Colonel of the Army in Westminster Hall,
who did (as good in effect) say so much to me; for he told me, that I
countenanced blasphemy, and if so be I had been a Captain in his Regiment, he
would have done no less then my Col. did: and that there would suddenly be a
charge drawn up against me, but I (knowing my own innocence) told him, that I
did not value a chip, any charge that could be brought in against me: and truly
for my part (I conceived) his very countenance did import much wrath and
bitterness of spirit against me, although he scarce ever knew me, or ever
exchanged three words with me before. But what he had, (it seemed) he received
it from Col. Okey; or from some scandalous papers which were spread abroad by
him, which was ground enough for his anger toward me: for here you shall see,
hand over head, without due examination; they will judge and condemn, and speak
purely one another language, and all to advance their own interests. But what
they account blasphemy, I know not; but I am sure, I have cashiered many of my
Soldiers for swearing and drunkenness, and have sharply reproved others, for
any kind of vice whatsoever, that has come within the compass of my
cognizance, and that I shall appeal to these several places where we have bin
quartered any time this fifteen months and upwards.

We were quartred eighteen weeks at Buckinghame and Brackly, three and twenty
weeks at Saint Neots and Kimbolton, five weeks at Ketering and Rowel, fourteen
weeks at Colebrooke and Vxbridge, and eight weeks more at S. Neots and
Kimbelion, before our march into Scotland. All which time, the people in these
several places have had sufficient experience of us: and are able and willing
if occasion should serve, to give a very good testimony of our civil behavior
and carriage toward them, and I dare be bold to speak it; that they are as
willing and ready to give us entertainment, as any troop in the Army, and no
disparigement to any.

And now you shall see more of my Col. dealings toward me (my Cornet and three
and twenty of my men, being gone for the service of Ireland, under Capt.
Barrington) how he took advantage thereby, notwitstanding he had given a
verbal order, not only to me, but to the rest of the Officers in his regiment,
that in case any of Capt. Barringtons men were not free to go for that service,
that we should entertain and lift them, in the room of our men that were
free. Whereupon eighteen of his men came to me, well mounted and well armed;
and I had no sooner entertained them, but the Col. sent me an express order
not to recrute; whereupon I discharged them, and they all marched up to London,
and were in a sad condition, for when they came thither, they went to the Col.
but could not prevail with him to be entertained under my command, and so were
frustrate of all employment: and continued so long (notwithstanding they had
oftentimes petitioned the Col. and diverse friends had solicited in their
behalf) till they had spent their horses and all that they could make shift
for; yet afterward, (upon my Engagement of laying down my Commission, as you
shall see by and by, he sent them down to me afoot, to be listed again, as may
appear by diverse letters under his own hand, which was a pure piece of service,
which I shall refer to the Reader to judge. But of this by the way.

Now it came to pass, that I (finding the Colonels design against me, partly
through his malice toward me, and partly setting up his own interest) knew
that offense may be taken, though not given: but woe to him by whom offenses
come, and I know that wrath is cruel, anger is outrageous, and that it is a
hard matter to stand before envy. Therefore I took my journey to London, to see
how the case stood betwixt my Col. and I, but before I spoke with him, I met
with our Major, who told me that the Colonel did prosecute his former design
against me, with all the force and strength he had, and no persuading him to
the contrary, and that he told him that he had an order from the General to
disband my whole troop, to disband me. Whereupon (having some farther
discourse with the Major and Capt. Neale, touching this matter, we all three
concluded together, to meet at the Col. house, the next morning, to know what
his resolution was concerning me; but when we came, the Col. was upon exceeding
high terms, in a railing condition against me, and ripping up the old sores
(of his own making) by those poisonous arrows shot against me: but I earnestly
desired him that I might have the benefit and privilege of a Counsel at war;
knowing that it would have bin the only way (if I might obtain it) to beget a
right understanding betwixt us, and the only way to free me from such
aspersions, which will not be removed, till truth be manifested: but if so be I
have either said or done any thing worthy of punishment, (as I told him) I
would ask no favor at any man's hands, but willingly submit to the censure of
the Court, either to stand or fall by it; and in case I were found guilty, I
should willingly suffer, according to my demerits. Then the Major, and Capt.
Neale both, did earnestly desire (in my behalf) that a counsel of war might
be had, whereupon the Col. (in a surious rage) burst forth against Capt. Neale
in bitter language, and told him that he was as bad as I, his turn was next,
and that he might trust to it, for he had a charge against him as well as
against me, and put his hand in his pocket, pretending to produce both our
charges; but did not, and truly for my part I do believe, that if he had drawn
any charge against either of us, he was ashamed to show it, knowing that his
own conscience would accuse him that he had nothing against either of us, that
would hold water at a Counsel at war, unless he could get some knights of
the post, to swear for him: and that I shall appeal to the reader to judge in
that he would not admit of a Counsel at war. And you may easily render a
reason, for it was because he had laid such ignominious and scandalous
reproaches upon us that he was never able to prove one title of it. Yet
notwithstanding, he did continually spread abroad our names in all places where
ere he came, both in City and Country, and especially my name, he made ring
throughout the whole Army, both to the General and Officers, as if I had bin
the vilest Creature under the Sun, insomuch (as I conceived and was partly
confident) that he had so far prevailed with the General to disband the whole
troop, to disband me, according to what he had affirmed to us; and truly for
my part, I took it to be truth what he had said, and whether the General were
abused in it I know not, but for my own particular, I did not care what could
be proved against me, for I had neither said nor don any thing that I was
ashamed of, but rather then my whole Troop should suffer for my sake, I would
lay down my Commission, whereupon the Colonel presently closed with me, and
told me, that if I would engage to lay down my Commission, he would speak to
the General that I might muster two or three musters, and continue my Command
so long, that I might have my accounts stated, and setle my business, for,
said he, I conceive, you will go into Ireland to your brother Col. Abbot, and I
think it will be your best course you can take. Truly for my part (said I) I
know not how the Lord will dispose of me, but you know that I was willing to go
with my whole troop for that service, when I was by you appointed to go, when
Capt. Barrington went (all though you never intended it) therefore ( I
conceive) I have the more wrong, to have my command wholly taken from me. Yet
notwithstanding, I will lay down my Commission, upon those terms, and I did
engage, and so we parted; and I protest I really intended to perform my
engagement, and so the next day I went to my troop: but for half an hour
space, or thereabouts, I was not without some small trouble in my spirits, to
think that such arbitrarinesse should be exercised amongst us, who had so
zealously, fought against it in others, but my trouble was quickly over, and
suddenly turned in to rejoycings with unspeakable joy and comfort; in that I
knew that it was the will and pleasure of God it should be so. And withal I
had such a kind of expression of mirth within me, that I took my pen and inck,
and wrote my case, (by way of indictment) as follows.

The accusation, indictment, araignment, conviction, and sentence, against,
Captain Francis Freeman without a Court. Captain Freeman, thou art accused and
indicted by the name of Captain Francis Freemen, for that thou have
felloniously denied the Scriptures, and made God the Author of sin. Thou have
said thou art Christ, and thou have countenanced blasphemy; all which is
against our Sovereign Lords the people, if we could but prove it. Therefore
what can thou say for thy self? art thou guilty; or not guilty? not guilty,
by whom will thou be tried? I Will be tried by a general Counsel at War; no;
thou can not, thou must be tried by Colonel Okey, how? must I be tried by
Col. Okey? why, he has condemned me already; what though he has? thou can
not be admitted to any other Trial, Therefore stand up and hear thy Sentence.

Thy Troop shall be disbanded for thy sake, for that thou hold dangerous?
Tenets; how? shall my Troop be disbanded for my sake? shall seventy men suffer
for one? if I have either said or done any thing worthy of punishment; then let
me suffer according to my demerits. Well, it is the Generals pleasure to disband
thy whole Troop, to disband thee: nay, rather then let my whole Troop suffer I
will lay down my commission. If thou will engage to lay down thy commission; I
will speak to the General to save thy Troop. And thus I have stated my case
truly, by way of Indictment.

Now when I came down to my Troop, I told them what was done, who were
exceedingly troubled at it, when they heard it; and did earnestly desire me to
give way to them, to petition the General in my behalf, that I might have a
Council at War: but I advised them not to do it, and for this reason which I
gave them, that they might suffer as deeply as Cap. Barringtons men did, which
the Colonel had not cared a straw, so that he might have had his will. And
withal I told them, that I had engaged to lay down my commission rather then
they should suffer, which caused no small trouble of mind to them, being very
loath to part from me; but you shall see how it came to pass upon my
engagement of laying down my commission: the Colonel sent down Capt.
Barringtons men to me, with an order to be listed, and to pay them but half
pay, and reserve the rest to buy them horses, which I did, and truly for my
part I received them into the list as a recrute for him that should succeed me.
And afterward I went to London, to have my accounts stated, and to settle my
business, but whilst I was at London, it so fell out that my Troop concluded
together, to petition the General in my behalf. And I Profess ingenuously, I
never heard of it till that very day that it was exhibited, which petition was
granted, and I was taken off from my former engagement, being it was the
Generals pleasure to grant me a fair hearing, in case my accusers did prosecute
the business, in the mean time I should continue my command, which I have done
upon that account, but since my command has bin taken from me near the borders
of Scotland; and without a Counsel at war. But I shall omit that till it
come to its proper place; and shall proceed where I left.

Now the next time the Colonel and I met together, was at Bedford, where he
challenged me upon my engagement: and told me that every bonest man would be as
good as his word: my answer was, that the case was now altered, and my
engagement made void in regard the General had granted me a fair trial, which
(I conceived) was not unknown to him, although he would not take notice of it,
whereupon he burst forth in his old wonted passion; and told me, that I was
abase fellow, a dishonest man, and he had rather have a drunkard or a
whore-master in his regiment then such a one as I was; with such like
expressions, but I seeing him in such a passion (being unwilling to multiply
words) I told him; that I should be very ready and willing at any time, to
answer for any thing, that he or any one else could lay to my charge, and would
ask no favor at their hands, and so I parted from him and left him in a
railing condition against me, and told the Company that were with him (as I
understood afterward) that I never pressed him to have a Counsel at war, till
such time, his witnesses were gone into Irelend; pretending that some of my
Soldiers, (who went for that service) were his witnesses, when as his own
conscience could witness against him, and my innocence clear me, and I dare be
bold to say, that there was not a soldier that went but loved me so well, that
he was as tender of my good as of his own: but howsoever, this was a notable
plea of his, to make people believe strange things of me, as if I had bin as
base as he reported me to be, and all to make his own matter good.

Now the next news I heard, was an order from the Major to recrute my Troop,
and to raise them up to a hundred, besides Officers, which I endeavored to
do; and in the mean time, the Col. had an order to raise two new Troops, in
the room of those two that went for the service of Ireland, and his own Troop
and the Majors to be made Troops of horse: where you shall see, that his
interestwas partly satisfied; yet notwithstanding, he did not leave his design
so naked and without hopes, but he would fulfill his own will, and (for the
accomplishment thereof, you shall see how he has given the self-denying
ordinance a total rout that it cannot be able to rally again, for he got a
Commission, for his brother to be Captain to one Troop, his Son-in-law, to be
Capt. of the other, and his brother in law to be his Lie ut. but as for his
Son-in-law, he is a mere stranger to me, but I have heard a very good report of
him, that he is a deserving man, and truly (for my part) I know nothing to the
contrary, out for the other two, I shall appeal to all that know them, whether
or no they are fit for any such employment, unless it be to receive the States
money (if they can tell how to tell it) but howsoever here you may see a Rout,
a Rout, a Rout, a total Rout. Therefore gentlemen, look about ye, have a care,
how you make any more such self-denying ordinances, for God will not be mocked.
But no more of this, I shall now proceed to the next.

The next order I received, was to send ten of my Troop, toward the raising of
these two new Troops, which was done according to my order, and the like
number or more was sent out of each Troop, insomuch that our Troops that
marched into Scotland were much weakened, and those left behind, we having
orders to march with all speed into the North. Now the first randesvouz we had
together (except the Colonels own Troop) was beyond Swarson-Bridge, over the
river Trent, where we received orders for our several Troops to quarter in
Darbishire, till farther orders, and my quarters were at a place called Morley,
three miles from Darby Town; where we continued eight days, and then according
to order, we removed to a place called Tibselfe, and quartered there till my
Colonel came to Darby, who sent for me thither to speak with me, in the mean
time, our Major took occasion to talk with him, concerning me, and told him,
that (if he could with patience hear me) he did believe that I would give him
very good satisfaction in all things (especially if a right understanding might
be had between us) and aboured much with him, to discourse with me, in a mild
way; laying aside all anger and bitterness of spirit; which was granted by
him, and he did protest (as the Major told me) that he had no malice, nor
prejudice against me, but seemed to him, to be much inclinable to a mild
discourse; so when we came together, we had a short repetition of some of the
old points (which were misapprehended before) and truly for my part, I thought
before we parted, he had bin fully satisfied, and his wrath appeased, for we
parted upon very fair terms; and the Major did much rejoice at it, who
afterward told the rest of the Officers, that he did believe, that the
business was quite over between my Colonel and I, and that we would be very
good friends for future: which caused them to rejoice likewise, and were
exceeding glad to hear of it.

But now you shall see, that malice can never ly long hid, but it must of
necessity burst forth, notwithstanding his fair outside, and his prorestations
to the Major, that he bore no malice toward me; yet he had the very gall of
bitterness in his breast (as may appear) for, about three-dayes after, we had a
randesvouz, and a Muster at Winfield manner, and we received fourteen days
pay, but till after Muster, there was no seeming prejudice against me: but
whilst I was receiving my money of the Major, in the Mannor-house, the Colonel
went to my Troop, and labored with them what possibly he could, to set them,
against me. He told them, that I was a dangerous fellow, and he would place an
honest man in my room, to command them; and flattered with them exceedingly:
but my Troop answered him plainly, that they desired no other Captain; they had
long time had experience of me, and that I had always proved an honest man to
them. Now after I had received the money; the Major and I came up into the
field (not thinking of any design against me) the Golonel called for all his
Commission-officers to come to him at the head of my troop, and there made a
speech to them; declaring against me, what a dangerous man I was, one that held
dangerous tenets and not fit to be in the Army; and that I and such others went
the occasion of these wars: therefore I should march no longer with them, he
would give me a discharge there at the head of my troop, and commanded my Lieut
to take charge of them, and commanded the Major likewise to send no more orders
to me, but to my Lieut. but when he had thus uttered his mind, I told him,
that we had fought against arbitrarinesse to good purpose, if men's wills must be
laws; but for my part I would take no discharge at his hands, I had my
Commission from the same General as he had his; nevertheless I should be
obedient to all just commands, as I always had bin, but seeing the General
had granted me a hearing at a Counsel at war, I would either stand or fall by
it: then the Colonel (in a furious rage) did protest, that if I marched any more
at the head of the troop, he would commit me to the Marshal: my answer was,
that if he did, then I was confident I should have a trial at a Counsel at
war. And so the Colonel and I parted, and he and some of his officers went to
dinner with the Muster-master, as they had provided something for him to eat,
and I marched with my troop toward my quarters, and when I found a convenient
place I drew them up, and spoke something to them, which was to this effect:
That whereas there had been a great difference a long time between my Col. and
I, as he pretended, for matter of judgment, although it does evidently appear,
that it was principally to set up his own interest, and in prosecution thereof,
he has labored to render me as odious as may be possibly, not only to you
even now, but unto all men where ere he comes, and endeavors to asperse me and
cast an odium upon me, to bring not only you, but all men else into hatred and
detestation, not only against my person, but my actions also, notwithstanding
you have had sufficient experience of my dealings toward you, and my
faithfulness toward all men, touching my military employment: and I have had
sufficient experience of your love always toward me (but more especially of
late) in that you did (unknown to me) petition the General in my behalf;
therefore if there be any amongst you (that my Colonel has wrought upon (by
his aspersing of me) that have any hard thoughts against me; I desire that you
would speak, that I may give you satis faction in all things, and for the
future, I shall desire that you would continue your obedience to my command as
formerly: but if so be my carriage has bin such toward you, as that you
desire to have another Captain in my place, I shall rest my self contented, and
march no farther; Whereupon they cried unanimously with one consent; no other
Captain, no other Captain, we have always found you faithful to us, and
therefore we desire no other Captain; we will be obedient to your commands in
all things; we will do whatsoever you will have as to do; and as we have
petitioned the General in your behalf; so we shall still own the petition. For
which I gave them many thanks, and so marched toward our quarters; but upon our
march, one of my soldiers came up to me, (as he said) to tell me a pretty
story, and used this very expression, that it was a true story. What Is that?
(said I) then he began to tell me, that be had a young Cookow at his quarters,
and a little hedge-sparrow fed him, but fed him so long till the Cookow eat off
her head. Captain, said he, you may pick out the English of this. With that all
the Troop that heard it; burst out in a laughter, importing thus much, that I
had hatched up a Cockatrice in my own bosom, and that my Cornet was the Cookow
and I the sparrow, having railed him up from a poondragoon at eighteen pence
per diem, being my fellow Towns-man formerly, to be my Cornea at five shillings
per diem, yet such was his requital with ingratitude, that he was the only man,
that first began this broil between my Colonel and I, and since he has bin
Cornet he has let fall these or the like expressions among my Soldiers, that
he should rise no higher in preferment, unless he could leap over my Leiut.
head. But what he gaped after, I shall leave it for you to judge, and so
proceed to the next.

The next Randesvouz we had, was at Whaly-bridge, where my Col. gave me another
fierce charge at the head of his Regiment. He told me that I was a base
scandalous fellow, and I had sung baudy songs upon my march, which was a grief
to all godly Christians, that heard me, and he named one of the songs, which
was this, I met with Joane of Kent etc. I shall therefore give you a true and
perfect relation both of the manner, and also the occasion of my finging, that
you may the better see upon what slight occasions he would take advantage
against me. I had a Soldier in my Troop whose name is Reger Daniel, who was
formerly a Leiut in the States service, a man whom I loved very well, insomuch
as I called him my Bucking ham, my favcurit etc. Who came to my quarters one
morning (whilst I quartered at Morley near Darby) and told me that he had
excellent music at his quarters, and invited me to come that night to hear it.
I asked him, what music it was? he told me, it was gallant music, but did not
tell me what inslruments they were, neither did I at present take any more
notice of what he had said, nor never thought of his invitation, till after
supper; but then (it coming into my mind, I being musical my self, and its
well known can sing my part) I went up to his quarters, where I found them at
supper; the people of the house bid me welcome, and as soon as they had supt,
my Buckingham (as I called him) rose from the Table, and went to a
presse-cubboard, where he took out a fife-recorder, and a Citern, and delivered
the recorder to the old man, and the Citern to the young man his Son, and they
played half a douzen lessons, verywell in consort, insomuch, that I thought
they could sing prick-song, therefore I desired to know of them, whether they
could or not? they answered no, but they had some delight to play upon those
foolish instruments (as they called them) and so played three or four lessons
more, and laid them aside. Now it came to pass, as I sat by them in a chair
taking a pipe of Tobacco: one Ralph Dennis another Soldier of mine that
quartered there, having a very good voice, sung a tune as he walked in the
room, Ralph, said I, thou have a very good voice, and so has Graves, which is
an other of my Soldiers, I care not if I have you two, to quarter near me,
that I may teach you to sing your song. Capt. said my Bucking-ham, will you not
teach me? why, thou have no good voice, said I, yea, but I have a good voice,
and I do not think, but I shall learn to sing my part as soon as either of
them. Do thou think thou can? said I, that shall be tried, and so began to
sing this old song, New oystors etc. And after I had sung it once or twice
over, I set them in their parts, and showed them their time, and struck time
for them with my hand, and found them very tractable, for after twice or thrice
singing over, they sung their parts and kept their time every well, insomuch,
as I conceived the two men of the house who played on the music before, were
much taken with it, and liked our music very well. Then I sung six or seven
songs and catches by my self, whereof one of them was this that my Col. has
laid to my charge; I met with Joan of Kent etc. And this was another. There
dwells a pretty Maid, hername is Sis etc. And these are the two songs, that go
under the notion of baudy songs; which I shall appeal to all those that know
what they are, and what the Music is. And truly for my part, I sung but meanly
for the music sake, not thinking any hurt at all. Neither had I indeed any
evil thoughts in my heart in singing any of those songs; which my conscience
can bear me witness, and it is that which must either accuse me, or excuse
me. But now I shall show you, how it came to pass, that my Colonel-should have
notice given him, of my singing these old song.

Now the woman of the house, where we had the music after I was gone, she told
my Buckingham, that I was a merry man, yea, said he, and I think he has as
much cause as any man I know, and withal spoke something concerning my
enjoyments, but she said but little more to him: but about fourteen days
after, she went to Darby-market, and having a brother that was a shopkeeper
there; she spoke something to him concerning my mirth, and that I had sung a
great many merry songs at her house. Now you shall see how her brother wrought
notably upon this news, having heard before, how my Colonel had painted me
forth to Colonel Barton, and himself with colors of his own making, and with
his own pensell too, though it were unknown to them, he presently made Colonel
Barton acquainted with what his Sister had told him concerning these old songs
which I had sung, who sent for the woman and took her examination touching this
matter; and drew a very formal charge against me, and sent it to my Colonel as
if I had committed some notorious crime, and as if he himself had been guilty
of no fault at all: I shall be glad if his own conscience can acquit him from
being guilty of much blood that of late has been spilt. And as for Colonel
Okey, I have seen him and others, fling Cushions about the house, at each
others heads, and this has been well taken, and not so much as spoken of; nay,
once I saw him set a drunken man (which is far worse then any thing he has
against me) upon a board, in the middle of a room, to see whether he could go
the length of the board, and not tread beside it; and has made sport with him
half an hour together, in his drunkenness, and yet such things as these are
must pass as well done in him, and he himself think well of it too; when as
an old song for the music sake, cannot pass from me, without a charge against
me, and it must be accounted, a notorious crime in me, although there was no
harm at all in it. But howsoever, this verifies the old proverb, that one man
may better steal a horse, then another man may look over the hedge. Besides, I
have seen him sometimes merry with his Officers: and sometimes again not an
Officer durst scarce speak to him; and this verifies an expression, that one
used of him once in my hearing. that he is either all honey, or all -- And truly
for my part I have not had a good word from him, in eight months together;
neither could I ever say, or do any thing in all this time that would please
him. Therefore I thought good to write a letter unto him, to see whether my
lines might be any way pleasing unto him; and when I came to Lancaster, I sent
my letter by our Major, who carefully delivered it, but I never received any
answer at all from my Colonel, till I came to the headquarters, at a place
called Anwick, where my Colonel was got before me, and had prevailed so far
with the General, upon his own informations against me, as to grant him an
order, to put me beside my command without a Council at war, which when I
heard of it, I made haste to the head quarters, and came in the morning before
the General was stirring, and so I went to Mr. Clerks chamber, one of the
Generals Secretaries to see whether there was any such order granted to my
Colonel against me; and Mr. Clarke told me there was, and showed me the order.
Then I desired to know of him whether the order might not be reverst upon
moving the General for a Council at war, that he might have a right
understanding of the difference betwixt us? which he told me, that he thought
it might; for it was all the reason in the world, that I should have a fair
hearing, and that it was my Lord General Fairfex his pleasure upon my
Soldiers petitioning, to grant it unto me: But whilst we were thus talking,
Colonel Okey came in for the order, and seeing me there he fell out with me
exceedingly, and all to be spattred me with his old wonted language, and told
me that I was a base fellovv, and that I had vvrote a base scurrelous and
scandalous letter unto him. Sir, said I, I have a Copy of the letter, and I
shall desire that it may be read, that other Men may judge of it, as well as
your self, and so put my hand in my pocket to produce it. no, said he, you need
not show the copy, here is the letter it self, and so delivered it to Mr.
Clarke, although it was not his intended purpose that it should be read, as
did evidently appear to us; for he had not read above three or four lines, but
the Colonel fell into a bitter passion again, and told me, that he would cut
me over the nose, and gave me very uncivil language, insomuch that Mr. Clerk
brake off reading the letter, by reason of his interrupting of him, which was
on purpose, that he should not read it, as may be gathered, vvhereupon I
desired the Colonel that he would with patience suffer it to be read, which
if he would not, I told him plainly, that the copy should, which was a tying
of himup, that he could not for shame but suffer it to be read, which being
done Mr. Clerck toldhim that there was not a word nor syllable of scandalous
langrage against him in it, and that it was as fair a letter, as ever he read,
counting how the case stood betwixt us; which put him to silence for that
charge, and so we parted.

Now when I came to the General, I desired that favor of him, that I might
have a fair hearing at a Counsel at war, that the difference between my
Colonel and I might be heard and determined by them, that I might no longer ly
under such scandalous imputations, and if so be my innocence would not clear
me; that then I might suffer according to my deservings: in the mean time,
(while I was thus speaking) in came my Colonel with diverse Colonels more with
him; whom I conceived some of them to be very right for the carrying on of the
work, as may appear by their carriage toward me: for there was scarce any
thing that I could speak, but some of them took exceptions against it: although
the General took none at all: for first my Col. charged me with my engagement
of layingdown my Commission; which the General desired to know of me, whether
it were true or no? my answer was, yea, it was true: I did engage: but my
engagement was madevoide by my Lord General Fairfax who granted me a fair
hearing at a Counsel at war, upon my soldiers petitioning in my behalf.
Then did my Col. burst forth against me in very uncivil language (according to
his accustomed practice) his tongue being inured to such language for eight
monethsspace together, you know it might come the more fluently from him. He
told the General that I was a base unworthy fellow, and not fit to be in the
Army. And having railed at me sufficiently, and endeavored to disparage me as
much as might be possible, then I humbly moved the General again and pressed
exceedingly, that I might have a Counsel at war, to see whether he could
prove what he said, or any thing thr he had or could lay to my charge, for
(said I) it is his pleasure to speak any thing a against me, to make his own
matter good, and to fulfill his own will, but if so be I would have a Counsel
at war, Then he must prove what he speaks, which expression of mine, was very
ill takenby some (though not by the General) for there was one Colonel which
did by way of acclamation, cry. Oh was there ever any officer in the Army, that
ever gave such language to their Colonel? as who should say, I had given him
the ly, or at least, questioned the truth of what he had said: when as for my
part, I thought he had bin resolved, never to speak truth any more. Nay such
was the carriage of some of them toward me, as if so be Captains were such
low-prized Officers, that they must be subject to bear every burden that their
Coloneis shall lay upon them; and to be like Isachars Ass, to crouch under
every burden; and to bear all seandalous reproaches, and submit to them with
silence: pardon these expressions, for I can assure you, I cannot help it.
Neither do I blame any of you, for doing what you did against me, but no more
of this; for this is by way of digression. I shall now proceed weere I left.

Then did my Colonel produce his charge against me, for singing the old songs
before mentioned, and railed at me exceedingly in the presence of the General
and the rest of the officers, and told me that I was a base fellow and that
Captain Blisset knew well enough what I was, and bid me ask Captain Blisset
what I was, as if I had not known my self as well as I had known him; as for
Captain Blisset I wish him well for the good he has received: I fear not any
charge that can or shall be brought in against me, being, I thank God, at peace
within my self, and with all men. Then did the General ask me, what the
occasion was of my singing those songs? I told him the occasion, and gave a
true relation thereof, and in the self same manner, as before recited; and that
I had not sung any song at all, that I need be ashamed of, although it were the
Colonels pleasure, to put them forth under the notion of baudy songs, and truly
I did but use this expression (by way of affirmation of what I had declared)
which expression was this, as I live, it is a truth Sir, (said I) but I was
presently reproved for it. Oh what an expression is there? said one of the
Colonels: as if it had bin a very vile expression, and as if God himself, had
never used any such expression to poor finners; but howsoever, such an
expression could not stand before his purity, or his own self-righteousnesse:
or I may rather say, his Pharisaicall hypocrisy and dissimulation; for I am
afraid, that some of them are apt enough to affirm lies to be truths, by worse
expressions, though smoother carried on before, men. But what good their purity,
and self-righteousnesse, will do them at the last great and terrible day, I
know not: but I believe it will stand them but in little steed, for except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees etc. But
I am very loath to digress. But to proceed.

Now the next thing which I observed was, that the Colonel told the General
that I either had him in print, or else intended to put him in print suddenly;
why, are you ashamed to be in print? or are you afraid of it? (said I) I have
not as yet; but truly for my part I think I shall be constrained to put you in
print to vindicate my self, seeing I cannot have a Counsel at war. Then said
the General (if I mistake not, neither can I afficm it to be a truth) that I
might have a counsel at war hereafter. But for the present he thought fit to
part my Colonel and I, in regard of the present expedition, and the long
continuance of the difference betwixt us, then it seems to me, that you are
minded that I shall leave my command, said I, yea, said the General, so I saw
their resolutions, and that it was but a folly for me to press him any
farther. I told him, though I were subject to many aspersions, and that I
should ly under a cloud for a time, yet nevertheless, I should submit to his
pleasure, and so took my leave of the General. But howsoever, here you may see
my Colonels kindness toward me, and that he was more kind to me then Ioah was
to Vriab: for Ioab set Vriab in the forefront of the battle: but my Colonel
instead of setting me in the forefront of the battle, he put me quite beside
my command.

And now I shall show you another piece of the Colonels kindness toward my
Lieut. After my command was taken away, my Lieut. (knowing that the Troop did
properly belong unto him) went to Barwick to the Colonel to desire him that he
might have it, and used the best arguments he could to obtain it, he told him
that he was the oldest Lieut. in the Army, and that there had bin three
Captains put in over his head, which was not unknown to him, and some other
arguments he laid down; yet all in vain, he could not prevail with him, but
bid him hold his tongue, and be contented with that command he had: if he were
not contented, he would help him to thirty pound for his commission presently,
if he would lay it down, and get him home: as if so be, Commissions were to be
bought and sold like horses in Smithefild, and you know that thirty pound will
buy a good horse there. But howsoever the Colonel bad like a good chap-man, he
offered chap-manlike I promise ye, and present pay too; but it seems the Lieut.
could not afford it at the price, therefore they could not bargain. But if so
be they had bargained it is like the Colonel would have been no loser by it. But
peradventure the Colonel was too rash, in offering money before he asked the
price, for commonly in Smith-Feeld they do use to ask the price, before they
offer any money, and truly for my part, I know not the reason why he should
offer so much money for his commission; unless it were to monopolize all to
himself and his Friends who are of the same mold and stamp with him, or at
least can comply with him. But howsoever I shall leave it to the Reader to find
out some other arguments, for the ground of these things, least I should be
mistaken, and rest my self satisfied, with confidence that the time will come
and is now at hand, that Colonel Okey, and all such usurping Tyrants that
exercise such arbitrarinesse, will be willing to give three times thirty pound
to such officers, as will stand to maintain and uphold their power, if they can
tell where to have them. Nay (for ought I know) it may be they will bid like
fair Chapmen, and give more.

But truly friends; I must tell you plainly, that it is not my wonted practice
to write in such a phrase or method as this is, for it is contrary to my
spirits so to do, but that itis sutiable to the Colonels dealing toward me.
Therefore I could not but do it, and the rather to vindicate my self, in such
a kind of dialect; for peradventure it may the better work upon his spirits;
knowing that my own conscience will not suffer me to write any untruths,
although we know that such as will prosecute their designs, by false and
scandalous accusations, are very apt to deny truths. But suppose that Colonel.
Okey should question any of these truths herein contained, so far as it
concerns himself, then I know his own conscience will accuse him, and bear
witness against him, and be ready to fly in the very face of him for it; and
this very book of mine will prove to be a devil to torment him, as bad as seven
devils. But suppose he should think to carry it off with a high hand (as he
knows how to do it pretty well) and call me knave for my labor, as once he
called Captain Mercer, and told him he was troubled with a company of knaves to
his Officers. nay, suppose he should all to be spatter me with such uncivil
language behind my back, according to his wonted practice before my face, and
say that these are not truths which I have written, and that I have done him
wrong; then I shall appeal to those six Troops of his own Regiment, which are
with him in Scotland, both Officers and Soldiers, who for the generality of
them, know them to be truths. And this will prove to be a tormenter indeed,
when there shall be so many witnesses against him; besides his own conscience
is as a thousand witnesses more.

But me thinks, I hear him rail at me exceedingly, and at my book, and lay
this poor book to my charge, for a base scurrelous and scandalous book, as he
did my letter which I sent to him at Lancaster. Then I shall appeal to the
letter it self, whereof I shall give you a true Copy, which is as follows;
and leave it to you to judge.

Sir.
I Am at present under a cloud of aspersions (though undeservedly) by reason of
some misapprehensions, or misunderstandings one of another, which occasions
some distemper and trouble of mind to some: Yet I praise my God, there is no
man can take away my comforts from me; for I behold the Lord indeed in this
appearance, and see him in all other his various workings; what though I am
defamed in my good name? it is the Fathers pleasure it should be so. What
though I ly under a cloud for a time in regard of an outward appearance before
men? Yet when the day star shall arise in your beart, and that truth may be
manifested, it will cause you to have some trouble of mind, and auxiity of
spirit, for these my sufferings. Your conscience will tell you, whether you
prosecute this design against me, for some by-sinister-ends, as to advance
selfe-interest, or out of sure zeal; truly for my parts in does not appear to
me, that your do it our of pure zeal, it savours to little of a spirit rightly
qualified, but if it be out of pure zeal, truly such zeal must be burnt up, or
at least cleansed and purified from the dross, for there is abundance of
mixture. You say that I, and such others, are the occasion of these wars.
Truly for my Part it does appear to me, that it arises from pride, and
selfeloftynesse, and not from an humble and contrite heart; for ambition
carries a great stroke, and from whence come wars? is it not from your
lusts? you lay, that every honest man will be as good as his word, and charge
me for not making good my engagement, which was to lay down my commission. And
truly for my part, I really intended it, and was against my Soldiers
petitioning the General, knowing of the suffering of Captain Barringtons men,
who lay in London, till they had spent their horses, and all that they could
make shift for, before they could have any employment. Besides you know, that
you would not affoard me a hearing at a Council in War: less then which
could not be granted to the meanest Soldier in the Army. But since the case
is altered (as I told you) for above two months afire, my Soldiers much
musing at your hard dealings toward me, that you would not grant me a trial,
(unknown to me) did petition the General to that purpose, which petition was
granted, and I took is to be a great favor, considering what informations you
head given in against me, to render me as odious, as might be possible. Now I
shall appeal to your own canscience, whether or no, you have made good all
your former engagements, notwithstanding they were of less concernment, then
this is to me; then look upon the equitablenesse of the cause, and see whether
or no, a deprivation of my liberty may not stand in competition, according to
your former engagement, with my non prformance of my promise. Besides, if I
should be put off upon these terms, without a Council at War; it may breed
some distractions amongst the Officers in the Army, which is not my desire;
knowing that there is no president for any such thing, nor was there ever such
arbitrarinesse exercised amongst them. And it will be abundance of
dissatisfaction to my friends (who are lovers of truth) in regard I shall still
ly under a cloud of aspersions, and not capable of any future employment. New
if so be there be that righteous law within you, to do as you would be done by:
Then I conceive you cannot exercise any such power. Besides we all engaged
against all arbitrary-power, and will you set it up in your self? surely this
must be destroyed in you, or else you will be destroyed in it. For what art
thou O Man that find fault with another man, and thou thy self do the
same thing? You say that I am a heathen. Truly for my part I think it better
to be amongst beath ens, then amongst such professors; such as have a form of
godliness, but deny the power thereof. You pretend abundance of zeal of
religion, and to religious men; but I see but little justice toward me. The
Lord speaks by the mouth of the Prophet Jeremiah, chapter 5. verse 1. Run ye
to and fro, into the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in
the broad places thereof, if ye can sind a mar, if there by any that executes
judgment, that seeks the truth; and he will pardon the City. And though they
say, the Lord lives, yet they swear falsely: verse 2. now if so be justice be
not to be found in such a great City, then where shall we find it but at the
fountain? You yet charge me with error, and heresy, truly for my part, I take
heresy to be a work of the flesh, and he that is without sin, and free from
the works of the flesh, let him cast the first stone; but the fruit of the
spirit, it love, joy, peace, long-suffering gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance etc. And the Apostle lays down this as a rule too; that
if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in
the spirit of meekness, and bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law
of Christ. Suppose I had bin overtaken in a fault, which my conscience can
plead my innocence and integrity, yet will you still persist and go on in
violence against me without due examination? I shall desire that you would with
patience hear me what I can say for my self, and not rashly judge and condemn
me without a cause; but I know you cannot help it, you are so overswayed with
passion, You see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand;
but I am a fraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain. I write
in the Apostles own language. Sir, I beseech you be as I am, for I am as you
are, you have not injured me at all. And thus to a void prolixity; I shall
cease to trouble you any farther at this time, and shall remain.

Your faithful servant in all duties of Command FRANCIS FREEMAN.


And now friends, you that have read this letter I shall desire that you would
once more (if you are not satisfied) look it over, with a more attentive eye,
and without any prejudicat thoughts on either side, and so go give your
judgment impartially, and if so be you find any such base, scurrelous and
scandalous language in it (according to the matter of charge laid against me,
then I shall desire you to cast a blur, not only upon it, but upon me, and
throw dirt in my face with as much disdain and disgrace, as may be possible.
And truly for my part, I presume (if I might have had a Counsel at war) you
would have found, all the rest of his charge against me, to be as frivelous as
this: but if so be I may have a Counsel at war hereafter (as I make no doubt
but I shall) when once this great business in Scotland is over: then I believe
I shall make him ashamed of what he has done against me, not that I can do any
thing by way of revenge, it is against my spirit so to do; but by way of
vindication; for I know he could not help it, he was acted by a greater power
then his own, neither can I blame him for it, for he did as he should do, but
if so be I might have the greatrest Command as might be under Colonel Okey, I
profess ingeniously, I could not take it, if I might gain 1000 pound by it: as
to have my spirits bound up, and tied fast to the wills of men, and to be in
bondage and slavery, through the beggarly rudiments of the world, by the
doctrines and tradition of men, and all by an arbitrary power exercised over
us; but if so be, I may be serviceable to this Commonwealth, in any thing I
can do, I shall be (as formerly I have bin) ready and willing to do it to the
uttermost of my power: either in England, Scotland or Ireland. But I shall
rather choose to traile a pike under the great Turk, then to have any command
under Colonel Okey. And Now I shall show you one notable cunning slight more,
that he used against me, about this time twelvemoneth: to set up his own
interest, he (having received an order to send two troops of his Regiment, for
the service of Ireland) did appoint my troop to be one: supposing, that I had
not bin free for that service, and so to disband me upon that account; for he
never intended that I should go. Now for my part I was very free for that
service, and did express my willingness to go: and my soldiers likewise did
(as it were) unanimously with one consent express their willingness to go
with me, whereupon he was crossed in his design, and then he told me, that we
should not go, and ever since he has bin plotting, and contriving all the
mischief that might be possible against me; and truly for my part, I conceived,
that we were at that time, in a capacity fittest to go for that service of any
troop in his Regiment, and for these reasons following viz. that we owed
nothing in our quarters, when other troops owed considerable sums, we were best
mounted of any troop, well clad in good apparel, and all accoutraments
belonging to soldiers; stout, gallant men, and such as I dare be bold to say,
that the Colonel never had a gallanter troop in his Regiment, since he was
Colonel; and for my own particular part (it is well known) I have faithfully
served the State, ever fince the beginning of these troubles; and so I praise
my God, there is no man can challenge me for the worth of a penny, that ever I
plundered any man, but always labored for the preservation of the Country
where ever I came. And as for my military employment, touching my charge
(before or since I came to this Regiment) no man can any way disparrage me, but
that I have behaved my self, in all services of command like a Soldier; and
my deportment, and carriage has bin such toward all men, as might become an
honest man; and that no man, I dare be bold to speak to the whole world, can
have any just cause against me.

And as it has bin heretofore the sense of the whole Army, that no man should
suffer for his opinion; so (I conceive) I have not in the least tittle made a
breach of any law, neither is there any article against me, in the whole book
of articles at war, and where there is no law, there is no transgression. But
howsoever, here you may see an obsolute discovery of my adversaries malice
toward me; and how they have made good the former part of this Epistle viz.
that every form is a persecuter. etc. and how they have set up their interests,
by clothing themselves with the fig leaves of their own righteousness, which
is the righteousness of the Law; not knowing their freedom by Christ: but are
in bondage to the elements of the world. Gal. 4.3. Ye observe days, and
months, and times, and years, verse 10. but I am afraid of you, least I have
bestowed upon you labor in vain. Brethren I beseech you, be as I am, for I am
as ye are, ye have not injured me at all.

Object. But some will say, that the Apostle Paul (which you speak of) had bin
a persecuter himself, and was he under forms?

I answer yea, he was under several forms, or ministrations but was very
zealous concerning the law, and yet he thought he did God good service in
persecuting the Church of Christ. But this was before his conversion; for
afterward, we read that he was rapt up into the third heaven, then doubtless
he was above all forms, types, and shadows, and was svvallowed up in the very
substance it self; which formerly he had seen but darkly shadowed forth to him
by the law. It is even so with these men, who are under forms, and legal
dispensations, who are my accusers: only this difference (what ever their
pretenses are) what Paul did, was out of pure zeal touching the Law; wherein it
is said, he thought be walked blameless: but these men are altogether for
their own ends; and unless they should come to be where Paul was, viz. rapt up
into the third heaven; they will go on still in their persecution. For it is
impossible to see what Paul did see, unless they could be where Paul was.

And now truly friends, as I have wrote this Epistle to all sorts of men (which
is by way of vindication) so I shall desire you to read this ensuing treatise
with out any prejudicate opinions, where you shall in like manner find some
other accusations against me, thought unjustly; which will also discover
abundance of folly, and weakness of those my accusers. And you may also find
a parcel of good council, if you can take it, communicated to all sorts of men,
both high and low, rich and poor.

And although, I know, it will be accounted a saucy part for me to give
council or advice to Rulers, and such as are in authority over us, great
potentates, and mighty men of the World; yet I could not but do it, and the
rather because I wish a happy peace to this poor bleeding Nation, and that the
sore-sick maladies thereof might be cured. And not only to this Nation, but to
all the Nations of the earth. I know it is God alone, that can heal the
Nations, and bring all earthly powers in subjection to his will. Good Council
may be offered, though not received, and if it be not received, it is because
they cannot take it. And this I know too, that the Lord sometimes stirs up
poor vveak and despised instruments, to give council and advise to Princes and
great wise men of the World, both Magisterial and Military to confound the
wisdom of the wise, yea and things that are not, to bring to naught things
that are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. And as my Epistle is
directed to all sorts of men; so is my council, and my desire is to be
instrumental, if the Lord so please, to work upon your spirits, for the healing
of the Nations, which is the principal aim and end of him, who is

Thine, and the Nations Servant Francis Freeman.

GOd (who at sundry times past, and in diverse manners) speak unto the sons of
men in parables, and dark saying, and now in these latter times, he has more
manifestly declared himself by his Son, and by the holy Ghost the comforter;
who will both lead and guide us into the way of all truth: and although the Lord
has bin pleased to unveile himself, and to make glorious discoveries of
himself unto some, in showing forth the glorious beauty and brightness of his
rays, in the light and dispensation of the Gospel, by his providence, yet
(notwithstanding) we find by experience, that there are many precious,
excellent and most glorious truths obscured, clouded, and overspread with
Antichristian darkness, by reason of an Antichristian power of darkness
reigning amongst us, who laboring to divert that current, or stream (issuing,
or flowing from that most sweet and precious fountain of truth, the Lord Jesus)
out of its proper channel, into a filthy, loathsome, durty, muddy channel of
humane inventions and traditions: crying down glorious truths, to be errors,
heresies and blasphemies, as if there were no truths declared, but such as they
apprehend to be so; when as there is an incapacity of apprehending it be carnal
wisdom: Therefore it must needs pass under that notion, especially, by such,
who are accounted Ministers of the Gospel, and are no less then deceivers, and
being deceived, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, yet
notwithstanding, they are upheld by the power of earthly Magistrates, who carry
on their work in persecuting the Saints and Servants of God, (as much as in
them lies) But how soever there is a restraining power, and that is Gods power;
which over-tops all earthly powers, when as their Mountains shall be laid
low, and without a manifestation of Gods mercy toward them, they shall be
brought to shame and confusion of faces, for this and the like cruelties, when
they shall cry out and there shall be none to help: for as the mercies of the
wicked are cruelty and oppression; so there are none that live godly in Christ
Jesus, but shall suffer persecusion, either by false accusation, imprisonment,
or both: which I my self (being one of the least and meanest of Gods servants)
have my share, not long since at the Town of Taunton in the County of
Summerset, being talsly accused, by one Cox, of no less then blasphemy,
imprisoned by the Magistrates, bound over with two surities, to answer it at
the assizes, and there indicted for blasphemy, and the indictment prosecuted
with as much violence as envy and malice it self could imagine, rendering me so
odious, as not fit to live upon the earth: as if they themselves were men of
such infallible judgment that there could be no truths held forth by me (being
a poor weak despised instrument) but what shall come within the compass of
their apprehesions; when as the Gospel is a hidden Mystery. I thank thee O
Father Lord of Heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes etc.

The Lord (who is the searcher of all hearts) can plead my innocence toward
man, and mine integrity to the truth, as it is in Jesus; who gave into me, that
word of truth, by his spirit, which is the spirit of truth in the manifestation
thereof; and sweetly carried me on, in the discovery of that truth (to the
glory of his grace be it spoken) with that spirit of boldness, and
undauntednesse of spirit, that my Adversary durst not look truth in the face,
to dispute those points with me, before the Magistrates, neither (indeed) would
they admit of any dispute, but told me, that Mr. Cox had taken his oath
possitively, that I had spoken blasphemy, and his oath was for the King; they
having an implicit faith, hand-over-head, with out due examination, took his
accusation for truth, though false and scandalous; yet would not take my own
recognizance (notwithstanding I was member of the Army at that time, but
committed me to prison, where, I praise God, my conscience can plead my
innocence and guiltlessenesse, for what I was accused, insomuch that my
imprisonment and sufferings was sweet, comfortable and joyous unto me; knowing
that such sufferings are a part of my portion, hear in this life.

Now for the clearing of my self from those aspersions cast upon me; and for
the vindication of those truths then held forth by me, for which I was accused,
and now stand Indicted, I shall (by the assistance of the Almighty) labor to
undeceive the people, that they my come to a clear understanding of those my
sufferings, that the truth may be the more manifested, Christ Jesus exalted,
and the Kingdom of Antichrist destroyed, which the Lord will do one day with
the breath of his mouth, and brightness of his coming. And for my more orderly
proceeding herein; I shall give you a true and perfect description, both of the
manner of our discourse, and also the manner of their carriage toward me, and
so leave it to the Godly-wise to judge. I shall begin with the first
particular, touching our discourse, and so proceed to the rest in order as they
ly.

Faith was the point which we insisted on; and this was my very expression:

That he that has faith, he is in Christ, and Christ in him; so that faith is
Christ, and he is Christ. But this he denied. Then I asked him, whether he had
faith? his answer was, that he did hope he had, then I told him, that he must
have some ground for it, and if he had faith, then these signs should follow
them that believe, and cited that Scripture Mark 16. they shall cast out devils
etc. And he that has faith as a grain of Musterd-seed, he shall be able to
remove mountains. Then he asked me, whether I had faith? my answer was, yea,
Then said he, you are Christ, you are able to remove Mountains; my answer was,
yea, I was able to remove Mountains. Then he farther replied, and said thus,
if you are Christ you are God, you are here, you are at London, you are every
where, my answer was, yea, though not essentially, as I am in this body of
flesh, but in respect of that spiritual oneness, with him, and in him: and
that I am here, and at London; and above London. Then we spoke something
concerning the personality of the Deity. which point was quickly ended, for the
would stay no longer to dispute out those points with me; but framed some
excuse to be gone, saying, that he had a great deal of business. Then I
earnestly desired him to stay, that I might make forth these points to him, but
he would not. Then I made them clear to my friend which was with us, who told
me, that Mr. Cox was not able to dispute these points with me: which he
conceived was the reason of his haste.

This discourse was about twelve a clock, and I heard no more news of it,
till about nine at night; at which time the Constables and other officers, came
for me to go before the Major, and Justice Nicolas; which when I came thither,
there was mine accuser: and had taken his oath (as they said) that I had spoken
blasphemy, and laid this to my charge; that I said I was Christ, I was God, and
that I denied the Trinity: My answer was, that he accused me falsely, and said,
that I do acknowledge three subsistances in one divine essence, in respect of
their several operations. Then said he, you denied the personality, my answer
was, that I am not so low, and carnal, as to bring down a Deity, to a
personality, Then Justice Nicolas cited that Scripture in John: There are three
which bare record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost. But my
answer was, that I did not read, that there were three persons did bear record
in heaven. Then he farther replied, and said, that Christ is said in Scripture,
to be the express Image of his Fathers person; to which I answered, that that
was spoken touching his divinity, and withal earnestly desired to dispute out
these points with mine accuser, that I might clear those truths held forth by
me; but they would not admit of any dispute. Then my accuser, by way of
aggravation, told me that I said that I could remove mountains. My answer was,
that he knew not what a Mountain was. Then Justice Nicolas told me, that I
despised the Ministers of the Gospel: my answer was, no, I loved the Ministers
of the Gospel: but for my part I conceived my accuser to be none, and withal,
desired to dispute out that point with him too, to see whether he could make
forth his calling, but that would not be granted neither. Then said Justice
Nicolas, Captain Freeman, It is a strange thing that there should be such
errors and heresies abroad, and such diversities of opinions amongst us, being
brethren. To which I answered, that I did not take him to be a Brother, unless
it were according to the flesh, in Adam. Then he told me that I must either
find sureties to answer it at the next assizes, or go to prison: My answer was,
that for the present, I must submit to the power of the Magistrate: and so
chose rather to go to prison, then to send for sureties. And so my Mittimus was
to be made, and the Clerk put his jear upon me; he asked me what my dipped name
was? I reproving him for it, the Justice reproved me. Then I told them that our
Savior Christ, was accounted a blasphemer: and the servant must not look to be
above his Master; and withal told them, that they sought what means they
could to betray me; and cited that Scripture Mat. 22. Where the Sadduces went
about to betray our savior Christ, touching his resurrection. but he told them
that they erred, not knowing the Scriptures, by this time my mittemus was made,
and the Officers ready to take me away; Then my accuser, insultingly, asked the
Major, whether he had any more service to command him, Mr. Major answered, and
said, that he must stay, for he must be bound to give evidence against me. Then
I cited that Scripture in Hosea 5.11. verse. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken
in judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandments. and withal
asked him, what commandments those were; but he answered not a word. And so I
went to prison, where I praise God, I received abundance of comfort; for diverse
of the Gathered Church, came to visit me, and tendered themselves to be my
sureties; so on the next day I sent a latter to the Major. A true Copy as
follows.

Sir,
I am hear a prisoner at your pleasure, by the accusation of one Cox (as I
understand) who is (as I conceive) an enemy to the truth, as may appear by his
refusal, and my non admittance, to dispute the same point whereof I am accused
by him; and for the vindication of that truth hold forth by me, I shall desire
no favor from you, nor any that have, or shall any way accuse me; and if in
case I have spoken any blasphemy, whereof I am accused, and now in durance, I
shall willingly and volluntarily, suffer punishment according to my deservings:
and if it may appear otherwise, that then I may have reparations for my wrongs
sustained. New my desire is, that you would be pleased, to take my own
recognisance to appear at the next Assizes, which I shall be ready, to stop the
mouths, ( I make no doubt) of all gainsayers. And as I have had the Generals
letter for my quick dispach of my business, that I might return speedily to my
charge so I shall desire that favor (as a member of the Army) to be tried by a
general Council at war; where we shall heard face to face, not that I
should desire any countenance or favor from that honorable Court; but that
all things should be weighed rightly, in an equal balance, Thus craving your
answer herein, and rest.

Yours, FRANCIS FREEMAN.


This letter being delivered by my man, who craved the Majors answer thereunto:
the Major returned this answer, or to this effect, not in writing, but by word
of mouth, that in regard the matter of accusation was of so high a nature, and
that it was for the king, therefore he could not take my own recognisance, but
prayed him to tell me, that any sureties should serve. So when I brought my
sureties, I told the Major that I was come to remove on mountain, and I made no
doubt but to remove the other. Then he asked me what I did mean? my answer was,
that I thought he might easily understand me. Then another standing by demanded
of me this question, whether I could remove that mountain betwixt that and
Lime? to which I answered, no, I could not. And thus it is evident, that by their
misapprehonsions, they have looked upon my litteral expressions mith a carnal
eye. And thus I have truly and plainly demonstrated the truth of this matter.

Thus having given you a brief description both of the manner of our
discourse, and also the manner of their carriage toward me. I shall now (by
the assistance of the Almighty) paraphrase upon each particular, for the
clearing of these truths, and with as much brevity and perspecuity, as I may,
and so leave it to the godly wise to judge.

But before I proceed in the handling of these particulars, it will not be
amiss for me to give you a hint or taste, of some notable passages in my journey
to the headquarters at Winsor, after my enlargement, I shall give you a true
relation thereof. The first thing observable was at the Town of Marlburough,
where I met with some friends of mine, whom I conceived, their spirits would
have closed with that truth, for which I had suffered; but having some
discourse with them touching the same point, I found them of a contrary
judgment, and after some few arguments in debating the matter in question we
parted, and (as I conceived) my friends were much dissatisfied, notwithstanding
they had no knowledge of my former sufferings, neither did I acquaint them at
all therewith. And hear you may also see, that I was not free from having
bitter aspersions cast upon me, for there was a Parliament man that overheard
our discourse, unknown to us, who on the next day with some of his assotiates,
fell foul on me, with bitter language, and not only against me, but against the
whole Army of Sectaries, as they called us, and raised up very strange reports
of me, which were both false and scandalous, yet howsoever I was not much
troubled at it, because I knew they did but do the will of him that sent them
thither, and that truth does oftentimes meet with opposition: when error and
false-hood flies apace, and is spread abroad without contradiction.

And so from thence I marched to Redding, and lodged that night at the sign of
the Crown, where I saw a vision of the night, as I lay in my bed. And although
most men do account such visions or dreams, to be but foolish fantasmes,
fantasmes of the brain etc. ye I can assure you, that I had most sweet and
glorious things presented to me in a vision, viz. after some few troubles, and
struglings of spirit, I had there presented unto me, the white stone, spoken of
in the Revelations, Which noe man knows, saving he that receives it. But
howsoever, before I could have it, I must pass through some difficulties and
dangers, for it lay in a garden, under a bed of sweet flowers, and there was a
great brinded Mastive dog tied at the garden door, to keep me from it; yet
howsoever, I must have it, notwithstanding all difficulties; and having at that
time, such a transcendant boldness, that forthwith, I went to the door, and
opened it; the dog looked somewhat fiercely upon me, but not so much as opened
his mouth against me; and so I went to the bed of flowers, and took up the
which stone, where I saw my name written, and brought it forth with me, the dog
looked upon me somewhat with an angry countenance, but not so much as touched
me, and so I came away clearly, with that rich prize I had taken. Now the Bed
of flowers, presented me with the bed of spices, spoken of in the book of
Canticles: and the white stone presented unto me, in my apprehension, my
deliverance notwithstanding all opposition; and so I awoke, where I was not
altogether ignorant of the vision which I saw, neither was I without some
teaching in it: for my spirit was wonderfully raised up, with such heavenly
contemplations, and as it were ravished, with such divine raptures, and
spiritual enjoyments, and rejoicyngs, that my soul was even lifted up as it
were, above the heavens: where I saw (as in a glass) all the glory thereof; in
that most rich, sweet, and pleasant paradise of God, which the garden here
mentioned presented me withal. And at the apprehension of these things, I was
so transcendently carried up with such confidence of my deliverance, from all
such false and scandalous accusations; that I awakt my man (lying at my beds
feet) to tell him of my dream, and withal the confidence I had, that I should
be cleared before his Excellency the Lord General, notwitstanding (as I
thought at that time, and afterward it did appear) my advensarys had sent a
bitter letter of charge against me, to render me as odious a they could
possible. In these things, I saw my spinituall liberty, and you may also see
the confidence I had of my temporal freedom, much more might be spoken,
concerning the vision; the moral of it is good; but I shall leave it to your
serious cogitations and contemplations; yet howsoever, Children mast have
bread, and if brinded dogs snatch at it, who can help it? to their peril be it,
and so I hasten on in my journey.

The Lord (who is wonderful in Counsel, rules and governs all things by his
providence, and disposes all things, after the Counsel of his own will)
carried me on carefully in my journey toward Windsor; and by his providence
(near Maidenhead-Brigde) I met with Mr. Peter's, who is an eminent man, aiman of
excellent and exquisit parts, and of a known integrity. There he told me, That
the Magistrates of Taunton, had sent a bitter letter of complaint against me;
and the General referred it to him to examine, and to take an account thereof;
touching this matter of charge, which he did accordingly; and I gave him, a
true and perfect relation, first, of the manner of our discourse, which the
charge had no relation unto. Secondly, the point which I then delivered, and
now in question. And thirdly the grounds of my agument proved; which gave
himself very good satisfaction, insomuch that he said it was a glorious truth,
but gave me this caution, that I should not use to preach such high things, to
poor Ignorant people, that were not able to bear it. To which I answered, that
it was but a discourse, with one Cox, who went under the name and notion of a
Minister of the Gospel, and placed in a personage of 100 pound per annum by the
Committee, and if such should not bear it, who should? his answer was, that
such as he was, could worst of all bear it. And so he spoke to me to go back
again with him through Maidenhead, and so to Windsor on that side the water;
which I did, any by the way, I gave him a true relation of the Magistrates
carriage toward me, insomuch (as I conceived) he was fully satisfied touching
my wrongs sustained; for he desired me to come to him immediately after
dinner, and he would put me into a way, what course to take, so when I came to
him, he advised me to draw a short petition to the General to refer it to
some others, as well as himself, to hear my answer to their charge, and the
rather to avoid such scandalous imputations, as are apt to be cast upon us, and
withal, he spoke to me to give the General the true relation in writing. So
when I presented my petition, I gave him the very same verbatim, that is here
presented to your view. And when his Excellency had read the petition, he
presently (out of his pious, and tender care he has, and always had, for the
maintenance of truth, and the lovers thereof, and no way countenancing error or
blasphemy, but altogether for the punnishment of evil doers, and for the praise
of them that do well) thought fit to refer it to Lieut. General Hammond,
Colonel Huson, and Mr. Peter's, to examine me touching each particular of this
complaint and to make report accordingly. They finding my answer so clear, in
reference to our discourse, that they judged me to be much wronged, made the
report to the General, and withal Mr. Peter's moved him for reparations. The
Generals answer was, that they did it Ignorantly, therefore would not allow me
reparations: but wrote his letter to them: a true copy thereof (as it was
transcribed by the Generals Clerk) as follows.

Gentlemen,
SInce the receipt of your letter concerning Captain Freeman, he has appeared
at the head quarters, wherein he has bin examined concerning the particulars
aledged against him in your letter, and has given in his answer thereunto, and
although (for ought that yet appears) the offense taken, was by misapprehending
of some unadvised expressions of his, yet I am so tender of the glory of God,
that I shall not in the least connive at any blasphemy or such like impietyes,
and therefore desire, that if any farther charge can be brought against him,
you will cause it to be sent up to the Iudge-Advocate of the Army, that so he
(being a member of the Army) may be prosecuted and tried for the same at the
headquarters, and in the mean time I desire that his recognizance may be
delivered up, and his sureties discharged.

Windser 11. January 1647. Your assured friend FAIRFAX.


Now my Troop being designed to quarter at Winbourne and Cranbourn, in the
County of Dorset, and being settled in their quarters, I carried down the letter
to the Magistrates of Taunton, according to the superscription to them
directed, and delivered it to Justice Nicolos in the Majors absence, (he being
at that time in London) the Justice read the letter, and (as it seemed to me)
he was somewhat troubled at it: and told me he could not withdraw the
recognizance, then I asked him, whether he would slight the Generals letter,
and whether that should be his answer? to which he replied, that he knew not
what to say; these were catching times, and dangerous for him to speak to me.
Truly (said I) for my part, I do not desire to cratch at you, nor at any man
else, although you were very apt to catch at me, by your misapprehensions: but
I desire that every man may speak his one judgment freely. Then said Justice
Nicolas, truly Captain Freeman, you delivered strange points, and indeed points
not disputable, but I am sure, they are punnishable. How? not disputable, and
yet punnishable? truly (said I) that seems as strange to me; and if they were
strange to you; I am sure they are truths to me; and withal desired him to
consider of an answer, and told him, that I would wait on him the next morning,
and so took my leave: but it seemed to me, that he had some whimsies in his
head, or cameroes in his brain, he could not stay so long, but came immediately
to my qurters, and told me, that he did honor the General and his letrer; but
he conceived, that I had made the best of it for my self, being there was not
any to prosecute against me: to which I answered, that there was their letter
of charge against me; and I had answered to each particular: and if so be they
had any more to charge me withal, that they had their liberty to prosecute the
charge against me at a Counsel at war; according to the Generals letters
where they might have a lawful hearing. Then he told me that he would not
withdraw my recognizance, for the Major was at London and the book was locked
up, and this was his answer, and so the Justice and I parted, and so I marched
from thence to Mels to speak with the Treasurer belonging to the Committee of
that County; and in the interim, my Cornet received an order, from Colonel
Scroop, to march with my whole Troop to Tounton, and there to quarter till
farther orders, and to be assistant to the Commissioners of Excise; in the mean
time, I heard not any thing of my Troops march, till I came to Shasbury, to
Colonel Scroop, who told me, that my Troop was upon their march toward
Taunton, and that they were to quarter at North-petherion that night, and so to
march in with the Commissioners the next day. I stayed that night at Shasbury,
and received farther orders, from Colonel Scroop which were as follows, that
in case the Commissioners did not engage for our quarters, that then we should
return to our former quarters. So the next morning, I marched toward Taunton,
but fell short in my journey, and in the mean time, my Cornet received billets
from the Commissioners, to quarter my Troop upon the In-holders, and
victualers; but the Commissioners durst not march in with the Troop themselves,
for fear of some farther mischief intended against them as they had formerly
tasted of some in part; and the Townsmen gave out (daily) threatening speeches,
against them (as the Commissioners said) that they would use them but coursely,
and if they came to set up the excise there, they would beat them out of the
town, or beat out their brains, or to this effect; and their intentions seemed
to be no less (as may appear by my soldiers entertainment) for as they marched
along the freet, the people threw dirt and old shoes at them, called them
excise Rogues etc. and told them, they should have no quarter there. My
Soldiers did much admire at such course entertainment (especially) from such,
who pretended themselves to be for the Parliament, yet under this
consideration, that it was in the height of their Market, and that many of them
had drunk very hard: therefore they did the more patiently suffer such
reproachful language at their hands, and so repaired to their several
quarters, according to their billets. But when they came thither, the
In-keepers gave them the like entertainment; for generally, as it were with one
consent, they told them, that they should have no quarter there, but for their
money. To which my Soldiers answered, that they had no money at present, for
they had received no pay in a long time before, yet gave them good words, and
told them, that they had orders to quarter there, and that there would be
engagements for payment of their quarters, till they had received pay from the
County, but all this would not prevail with them, for they replied, and said,
that they would take no engagement, but ready money. Then after this diverse
persons, both Townsmen and Countrymen came about them, mearly to pick
quarrels with them (as it did appear) for the Soldiers desired them to be
quiet, and told them that they would willingly be civil and quiet in their
quarters, yet notwithstanding, they continued a long time in the same way, with
such provoking language not to be endured; and about ten a clock the quarrel
burst forth, great tumults did arise at several houses, and the rude multitude
cried fall on, fall on, many up in arms, pretending some great abuse, or wrong
done by the Soldiers; and cried out no quarter, no quarter, give the Rogues no
quarter. This continued a long time, and my men stood upon their own guard in
their several quarters, the Townsmen fell on in diverse houses, at one and the
same time, some wounded on both side, and one Townsman mortally wounded; yet it
pleased God, so to dispose of things, that some of the Magistrates came amongst
them, and did appease the raging fury of the rude multitude, and persuaded them
to go home to their several habitations; yet notwitstanding they would not
presently desilt, their malice was such toward me, undeservedly, that they
would draw out a for-lorn-hope, as they eall'd it, of thirty or forty men, to
search for me in several houses, and swore that they would beat out my brains,
for my Troop was come of purpose, to revenge my former quarrel. But from
whence this came, I shall leave it to your thoughts. But this was the
Relation given by my Cornet and Soldiers, as near as I could take it, when I
came thither, which was on the next morning, but by the way, as I went to
the Town, I met with two of my Soldiers, which my Cornet had sent to Col.
Scroop to inform him of these passages; who gave me the very same relation,
and vvithall advertised me not to go into the Town, for these reasons
aforementioned, but my resolution was to trust to providence, and so made
have: and when I came thither, I went immediately, to Justice Nicolas his
house; where I found the rest of the Magistrates in consultation with him,
concerning this tumult and mutiny; and after some conference with them, I
found that there was a foul miscariage of the business, by the Commissioners,
but yet the Magistrates laid the greatest blam on my Soldiers, to excuse their
own Townsmen, as if they had been in no fau't, who were as I conceived, the
prime actors, and chief mutineers in this horrible combustion; and as it did
appear to me by diverse circumstances they had great abitters on, but howsoever
finding their temper, I desired the Magistrates to draw over the billits again,
and took them the book, called the addissional directions; that so they might
quarter my Soldiers according to those directions, which they caused the
Constables accordingly to do it; but we found a general averseness to the
Ordinance of Parliament in that case provided. Then I offered my self to
engage for their quarters, their answer was generally, throughout the whole
Town, that they would not take my engagement, nor the Magistrates neither. Then
I made Justice Nicolas acquainted with it, and showed him our condition, that
some of my men were walking up and down the streets at that time of night
without any quarters, then the justice went along with me, and put them into
their houses: and desired them to give them entertainment for that night, but
he found it to be true, for they answered us plainly, that they would not take
both our Engagements. The I told the Justice, that in case the Commissioners
came not in the next morning, to engage for our quarters, and so put their
commission in excution, that I would march forth of the Town by twelve a clock
the next day; but as we were talking together, there came some Towns men to us,
to demand justice, the Justice asked them, what they would have? one of them
made answer, that they would have the Soldier secured, that had mortally
wounded his brother, for he lay a dying; Then Justice Nicolas said, Captain
Freeman, it concerns you to do them Justice, and if you will not, then I
must. To which I answered, that it did altogether concern me to do justice upon
my Soldiers, if they did offend; and that it did no way concern him at all.
And if so be they could show me the man which they accused, then they should
see me do them justice. Then they told me, that he was at the sign of the
Castle, so when we came thither, they laid it to my Drumers charge: so I
presently secured him, and withal sent to the Governor of the Castle, to
desire him, that I might send him into the Castle, to be upon his guard for
that might, for some reasons best known to my self, which was granted by him,
so on the next morning I sent for him forth again, and committed him into my
Corporals custody in my own chamber, and so stayed till about twelve a clock,
and finding that the Commissioners, durst not come in to engage for our
quarters, I caused my Trumpet to sound to horse, and my Cornet drew the
Soldiers into the marketplace, and so marched to the place oppointed for the
randesvouz, at the Towns-end till farther orders.

Now my Troop being marched forth, I having no thoughts of any more trouble, I
went to speak with the Governor of the Castle, where I met in my way the rude
multitude flocking together, who presently seized on me; and told me that I had
sent a way the prisoner, and that they could not have justice, therefore they
would secure me, till I had sent for him again; my answer was, that I had done
them justice, for I had secured him, and that he was in my Corporals Custody,
in my chamber at my quarters. And that it did concern me carefully to see him
forthcoming, for he must be tried by a council at war. But they cried out,
no, no, he should not be tried by a Council at war; but at the Assizes; and
therefore I must leave him behind me a prisoner, and so I went back to my
quarters, with the multitude about me, where they saw him a prisoner, yet
notwithstanding, all this would not give them satisfaction, but they would have
him into the Castle again, I saw that it was but a folly for me to go about to
resist their wills, told them they should have their desire in it, and so had
him to the Castle, and there left him; and then I thought I should have bin
quit of this tumultuous crew, but they would not be so quit of me; for then
they began to pick another quarrel with me, in demanding of me by what order my
Troop marched thither? Leiut. Colonel Buffit coming by us, by accident, told
them, that I had an order sufficient; and that he had seen it, which gave them
such satisfaction, insomuch that they drew away from me by degrees, not having
any thing else to say to me. Now all this while, not so much as a Magistrate or
Towns-man of any fashion (but the Lieutenant Colonel) that ever came near me,
neither indeed would any of them be seen, any way to stop this tumult, till by
a providence it was quite over, as if they had been willing to suffer them to
act their Masters will, in making good their former vows and Protestations; for
this being no sooner past over, but presently I met with the Governor, Justice
Nicolas and the two Constables, and told them of these abuses; to which the
Justice answered and said, that they were a rude people, and he could not help
it. And so they went along with me to my quarters, to see me take horse; and
told me, they would give me a pint of wine, and when we came thither, the
Governor and I had some conference, concerning the prisoner; but he concluded
with me that he must be tried by a council of War, and said that he should not
be a prisoner in the Castle, but told me, that it concerned me to see him
forthcoming; and so sent a file of musketeers for him, and when he was
brought before us, he pleaded his innocence, and said, that if the man dyed of
his wounds, that he was not guilty of his death, for he was never in that
house at all where he was vvounded; and vvithall, desired us, that he might
go to see the dying man, and speak with him, for he was confident, that he
would not lay it to his charge, but rather clear him, if he were sensible. We
finding his willingness, to speak with the wounded man, granted his desire;
and the Justice, the two Constables, and the guard went along with him, and
when they came to him, they first set before him a Soldier of the guard, and
asked him whether that were the man that hurt him? I said he, that is the
Rogue that has killed me: no, no, said the Justice, that is one of the
Castle-Souldiers; and then set before him three Soldiers more (whereof my
Drummer was one) and then asked him whether either of them were the man? he
ansvvered no; the man that hurt him had flaxen colored hair, and a little
beard; and so my Drummer was cleared by him: for indeed he was a very youth,
and had no beard at all, nor such colloured hair, as he described, but a sad
brown color. And so they returned to my quarters, where we drunk two or three
pints of wine, and the Justice would not suffer me to pay for any; but did
protest, that notwithstanding we differed in judgment, yet for my part said he
I cannot lay any blam upon you for your carriage in this business, but I must
withdraw your re-cognisance, and there is an end of it; and seemed to be loving
and kind to me, and so we parted, and I marched with my Troop to Midlesea and
Autry, and quartered there that night. The next day I received a letter from
the Commissioners, to desire me to meet the Sheriff and them, with a Troop of
Colonel Scroops horse at Taunton the next morning, which I did accordingly, and
when the Sheriff read the Commission in the Market place, some of the chief
mutiniers stood by, what their intentions were I leave it for you to judge, but
some of them were seized on, and imprisoned; and then the Town (with much ado)
submitted to the Ordinance of Parliament, and some whom I conceived were my
greatest enemies, became humble petitioners to me, to speak for them to the
Commissioners; which I profes I did out of a real intention to do them good:
and Justice Nicolas did acknowledge it, that I had earnestly solicited for
them, and not only for them but in the behalf of the whole Town.

But now you shall see how I was requited for this service, and not only for
this, but for all other services done in the County, for the first news I
heard from the head quarters was, that Justice Nicolas, with the rest of the
Magistrals had sent up another bitter letter of complaint against me to the
General, signifying unto him that I had sent in my Troop without order, mearly
to be revenged on them for the former quarrel; and that many stirrs and tumults
did arise by that means, and abundance of mischief done in the Town etc. This
letter was presented to the General by the Major of Taunton, who came from
London to Windsor for the very same ourpose, and not only to charge me with
that base letter of falls accusation, but did also exceedingly agravate the
former business, and wonderfully insenced the General against me, insomuch,
that some Officers, which were present at that time, have told me since, that
they never saw the General in such a rage in their lives: and that he said
that he was resolved to punish wheresoever the fault lay. Now touching this
matter of false accusation: Colonel Scroop can witness my innocence, and has
already certyfied the General the truth of this matter, and that I had done
nothing that he could find without order from him.

But as envy and malice, seldom, or never lies long hid, but that it must of
necessity break forth: so they have manifestly declared, their imbittred
spirits against me, by prosecuting their former designs; for they have (since
that time) indicted me at the the Assizes: and prosecuted the indictment, with
as much force and vigor as they could possibly: not having any relation at all
to our former discourse; insomuch, that the Grand Jury found the bill, and my
enemies do exceedingly rejoice at it. Therefore, I have thought it requisite and
necessary, to give you a true and perfect Journal of these passages betwixt us,
that I may the better make way for your understanding of these things herein
contained, and if so be that any of my adversaries should have that impudency,
to deny any one particular, herein expressed: I shall be able to clear it, by
the testimony of honest men; and shall humbly refer it to the serious
consideration of the judicious reader; to judge of their dealings toward me;
and so proceed in the prosecution of each particular in order. And first, of
the first, which is touching the manner of our discourse.

The ground of my Argument lies thus.
That he that has faith, he is in Christ, and Christ in him: so that faith is
Christ manifested in him, and he is Christ, though not essentially; yet in
respect of that spiritual oneness with him, and in him, John 17. so that
there can be no separation nor division, betwixt the head and members, in
regard of that spiritual union and oneness. And as there is that spiritual
union and oneness, that cannot admit of any separation, or devision, so I
shall handle the branches thereof (issuing or flowing from them, as streams
from a fountain) both jointly and severally, in regard of that near relation
and conjunction, betwixt the head and members.

But first we are to consider, that there is a relative union, and there is a
real union; which I shall show you, under a twofold consideration, yet
comparatively (in my apprehension) they are both as one, 1. This relative union
is, as the husband and wise, Christ and his Church. And this real union is, as
the tree and branches, and if so be a branch of that tree be cut off it is no
longer a branch of that tree (being disunited) although it retains the same
quality for a while in regard of its own nature; yet it soon withers and dies,
although the body lives and grows: now this relative union with Christ and his
Church, is such a union, that they are so inseparably united and knit together,
with that spiritual bond of love and amity, that can never be broken. For our
Savior Christ says, that he is the vine, and ye are the branches, and if so b
e a member of Christ (which is a branch of that vine) be cut off, by a corporal
or temporal death, yet the spirit retains its first principles, and returns
to God that gave it; and spritually, it continues, and remains a branch of
that royal stock; For as the Apostle says, that neither life, nor death, nor
things present, nor things to come; shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus: so that here we see, that this is that
spiritual union and oneness: not that the body is the head, or the head the
body; but that all the members, (as branches) make up but one body, whereof
Christ is the head. And they are a perfect body in Christ, so that there needs
no supply of any thing to make them a perfect body, for their is nothing
wanting to make them complete; as there may be wanting in the natural body of
man, for if there be but a little finger wanting, or but one joint of that
little finger, it is an imperfect body, so that the eye cannot say to the hand,
I have no need of thee, nor the head to the feet, I have no need of you, 1 Cor.
12.21. But in this spiritual body of Christ, it is otherwise: for the flesh was
crucified at Jerusalem: and as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 2.20. I am crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. And they
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts Gal.
5.24. And as Christ is head over his Church: so God has put all things under
his feet, and gave him to be head over all things to the church, which is his
body, the fulness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Christ is
all and in all (by hit providence) to every creature: but he is all and in all,
in a more special and peculiar manner (by his providence) to his Saints, which
are his Church. So that there can be no separation nor devision, betwixt the
head and members.

And for a farther illustration and conformation of this truth in hand (I speak
chiefly to you, who are friends, and lovers of truth) I shall commend to your
serious consideration these scriptures following (to wit) Jer. 23.5, 6. Jer.
33.16. Where you shall find in the former Chap. The Lord speaking to the
Israelites, of a righteous branch, that he would raise unto David, and that a
King should reign and prosper etc. In his days Judah shall be saved, and
Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name whereby he shall be called, The
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. Now this righteous branch is meant Christ, who is the
King of Saints, and he shall prosper, in the gathering together of his Saints,
from the uttermost parts of the earth, even amongst the heathen, nay the
heathens themselves. Psalm. 2.8. and this is done out of his abundant love to
his poor creatures. And here he is called, the Lord our Righteousness, and in
the 33. Chap. of the same book of Jer. before mentioned, verse 16. there you
shall find, a kind of reciprocal love, by way of exchanges of loves, betwixt
Christ and his Church; where he honors his church with his own name, and in
the very self same sweet expression, The lord our Righteousness; so that every
particular member has an interest in this name: as you may gather by this
Scripture following, which is (as I conceive) a confirmation of this truth, see
1 Cor. 11.3. where it is said; that the head of every man is Christ: so that
every particular member, is Christ, not essentially: not that the body is the
head, or the head the body; but under this twofold consideration, 1. In regard
of that spiritual oneness with him, and in him: and 2. In regard of his name,
wherewith he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness; which is here spoken
of the church. And you may see in the 1 Cor. 6.17. That he that is jayned unto
the Lord, is one spirit.

Now if so be, I had said, that I had bin the Christ, then certainly I had
spoken blasphemy in the highest degree, and my adversaryes, might have had just
cause against me, and that scripture had bin fulfilled in me, that in the
latter times, there shall arise many false Christ's etc. but I hope (in the
handling of this point) I have made it so clear, and so plain to the weakest
capacity, that they cannot but plead my innocence and integrity, and so I
proceed to the next in order; which is touching faith, what says is, according
to my former discourse, and the ground of my arguments laid down.

Therefore to prove the point, that faith is Christ; See Gal. 3.23. Where
Christ is called faith, the words are these in the history according to the
letter. But before faith came; we were kept under the law etc. But in the
mystery, and according to the spiritual sense (in my apprehension) faith is
there meant Christ, but before Christ came, we were kept under the law, shut up
unto the fiath which should afterward be revealed. This word, but, has
reference to the former verses, therefore read from the 21. verse to the end of
the chap. and you may find this (if God says Amen to it) to be a glorious
truth; But if so be, you have but a notionall knowledge of Christ, or a bare
historical faith: as Mr. Cox by his expressions (in answer to my question.) did
import no other; saying, that he did hope he had faith, which is but
historical, by hearsay and mearly the teachings of men, and no otherwise; then
you cannot say of a truth, that Christ is in you, the hope of glory. These
things have I written unto you, concerning them that seduce you. But if you
have received the anointing, it abides in you, and the same anointing,
teaches you of all things; and is truth, and is no ly etc. 1 Job. 2.26, 27.
And if Christ be in you, the hope of glory; then you shall find that
spiritual and individual substance, or rather subsistence (in respect of
operations) manifested within you, that is infeperable, For we are his
anointing, and that spiritual unction within us, makes us to be one with him.
We are Kings, and Priests, and by virtue of his spiritual anointing, we are one
with him, by faith (which is Christ in us) we apprend all the benefits, and
spiritual enjoyments and rejoycings, made out unto us: and by his spiritual
descension so low into us; and drawing us up into himself; we are come to be
one with him, and in him, and he in us. Joh. 17. being justified by faith in
his blood. And as there is such a sweet union, and oneness between Christ and
the soul; Christ being the manifestation of his fathers love: the soul comes to
have free access by one spirit unto the Father, Ephe. 2.18. in and through the
Son; whereby the soul comes to see God, purely as he is: so that there is a
continual feast of fat things, their Table being richly decked, and covered over
with all sorts of varieties of dainties; supping and dining together. And there
is a continual presence, or habit of union between God and the soul: that the
soul is (as it were) richly clothed with God; and God with the soul, do live
mutually in themselves, for, he that dwells in love, dwells in God and God in
him, and that nothing is in God, that is not God, therefore whatsoever is in
God is God. And thus the soul comes to see God to be his all and in all, and
sees him in all things, and in every thing, and sees his own nothingnesse and
emptynesse, of himself without him.

But now I shall show you that there are many who look upon Christ after the
flesh, and not after the spirit, or a spiritual Christ within us (not
apprehending him as he is purely in himself) so they look upon the act of
faith, to be that which God accepts to justification. But truly (for my part) I
am not of that judgment; for I conceive, there is a mistake in it, looking
upon him after the flesh, and not after the spirit, or in the spirit: and so
they asseribe that honor to faith, which is due unto Christ, and dishonor him
in so doing: for although they do not exclude Christ wholly and totally; yet in
the act of justification (which is a work) it gives all unto faith, we are
justified before God in his sight, only by Christ, Romans 3.20.24. and for a
farther confirmation of this truth, see Isa. 53.11, 12. Where it is said, my
righteous servant shall justify many, which must be understood of Christ. we
are not justified before God, by faith which is in us; but by Christ, by his
blood. We are justified by his blood. Romans 5.9. by faith, which is Christ in
us, we know our selves to be justified, verse first: and although faith is one
of the chiefest graces: yet as it is an act, it is a work, and to be justified
by it, is to be justified by a work of our own, for with the heart (man)
believes Romans 10.9, 10. so that it is clear, that which justify us, must needs
be perfect; and so it can be no act of ours; for all our righteousnesses are as
filthy rags etc, Isa. 64.6. not of works, least any should boast, Ephe. 2.9.
Me thinks the consideration of this point should cause us to admire at the
wonderful riches of the free grace of God in Christ Jesus, who out of his
infinite love, being an infinite glorious Majesty, that he should descend so
low, as to take upon himself our nature (being poor finite creatures) to shed
his blood, to die for us, and to rise again for our justification. But that his
essential will is himself, his power is himself, his wisdom is himself, and
every thing that is in him, is himself, if we can but see it.

But to proceed a little farther in the prosecution of this point of faith. I
shall speak something concerning Enochs walking with God by faith, and so
conclude the point.

It is said, Genesis 5.24. That Enoch walked with God, and was not; for God took
him. By faith he was Translated, that he should not see death etc. And the text
says, that he was one that is not; this may seem to be a paradox, a strange
expression, if we but barely look upon the letter of the Scripture; yet it is a
glorious truth; for it is said, he is one that is not. Enoch walked with God,
and was not. So that he walked not after the flesh, but after the spirit; for
he was translated by faith, that he should not see death, and was not found, he
was not, for God took him. He in himself was not; for his glory and excellency
past away, all his earthly pomps vanished, he of himself was nothing, for he
saw his own emptiness and nothingnesse, and all sufficiency in Christ: what he
was, he was in Christ, Christ was his life, and his all, Christ was all and in
all unto him, Col. 3.11. So that God translated Enoch in the spirit, he was
translated into Jesus Christ; and so every true believer is one in Jesus
Christ, and nothing in himself; there is a glorious change; there is a new
birth, there is a new self, he is born of God; God is his self, Christ is his
self. So that Enoch was out of the flesh, into the spirit, out of himself and
his own righteousness, into God; and so is every saint, every true believer is
translated out of himself, into a being which is in God. He is dead unto all
self-righteousnesse, he is dead unto the law, he is dead unto the World, but he
is alive unto God: Here you see that by faith Enoch was Translated from death
to life: Therefore you may see that faith is an excellent gift, est donum Dei,
it is the gift of God, Ephe. 2.8. And so all things else that are given,
proceed from him, but this gift of faith in a more special manner, because
Christ is given in it by believing; but I shall show you that there are degrees
of faiths manifestation in believing according to the apprehension, some
degrees more weak, some more strong. Yet if thou have but faith as a grain of
mustard seed, thou shall be able to remove Mountains, which is the next
particular to be handled. But a word or two more touching the highest degree of
faith, which is faiths assurance, assurance being the proper act of faith,
proceeding from the reflect act of faith, which causes a man to know and see
that he believes; and this assurance is from the immediate testimony of the
spirit of God in the conscience of him who is already a believer; and causes
the soul to know that it believes, The spirit it self bears witness with our
spirits etc. Romans 8.16. But so much shall suffice for this point, the next in
order, is that mountain to be removed; according to the main drift and scope of
my argument.

First, a mountain in Scripture; is taken diverse ways, as you may find in Isa.
2. Mark 11. etc. But I shall show you, first Negatively, What a mountain is
not. Secondly, affirmatively, What it is. And according to the real drift and
scope of my meaning at the discourse; and it so be the Magistrates (with
patience) could have heard me make it forth, I should have cleared it, but that
they would scarce suffer me to speak for my self; but searched the statute-book
to see what punishment was fit for blasphemers, in that case provided; taking
his accusation for truth, not knowing how, or in what manner I had declared my
self, neither could they understand my meaning touching this mountain here
spoken of. Therefore I show you. 1. Negatively, that I did not mean such a
Mountain as that great hill near Taunton, called by the name of black-down,
according to the question propounded unto me. Neither did I mean that great
round Cob-hill called by the name of Glastonburytor. Nor that great mountain of
Saint Taffies, in Welchland. Nor had I any thoughts of removing that great hill
of Taunton out of his place, (who was then Major pro tempore) and committed me
to prison, when as neither of them knew a mountain from a molehill. But I
speak this but by the way, and therefore desire to be excused. 2.
Affirmatively, There are mountains within us as well as mountains without us;
there are mountains of sin, and there are mountains of opposition, there are
mountains of power, and there are mountains of pride and self-loftinesse, there
are mountains of oppression and Tyranny etc. An indeed every thing is a
mountain that exalts it self, or is exalted high in opposition to truth. As you
may see in the aforecited chapter from verse 10. and so forwards; but yet all
these mountains shall be laid low, when the lofty looks of men shall be
humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day. Which is the day of Gods power. But what flesh
shall abide his coming? When he shall come as a refiners fire, and like fullers
soap, when all corruption shall be burnt up, and be destroyed, or at least be
cleansed and purified from the dross, Mal. 3. These things are, and shall be
trans-acted in us; but the end is not yet.

And now friends, although I have not handled every particular circumstance of
this matter in hand, yet every material point of any moment is cleared.
Therefore I shall now give a word or two in general to the Nations: and chiefly
to Magistrates and Governors, and such as are placed in authority over us,
which shall be by way of good cuncel if you can take it. But if so be you do
not take it: it will be, because you cannot. Yet nevertheless I have thought
good to give you a cautional hint of some special observations, which I have
taken, touching the several greevances of the people, who ly under many
greevous pressures and burdens, and expect relief and comfort from you, which
will be by prescribing wholesome laws, according to the present constitution of
this Nation, and a due execution thereof, as it was before the Norman Conquest.
For you know, that the people have lived under a Kingly power, many hundred
years, and have been held in bondage and slavery ever since the conquest, under
those laws, which were prescribed by an Usurper. And have been still kept
under the Normand yoke: by reason of an absolute arbitrary power, domineering
over them; raised up by William the Conquetor, when he had subdued this Nation
by the sword. Then those who were his Creatures, his favorites, he created them
to be Lords of Manors and so divided and distributed the Land amongst
themselves, and the poor people, to become tenants unto them, and to pay a
small rent at first: to bring them under the yoke, and so to acknowledge them
to be their Lords and masters; and hence came in that which we call propriety,
as derived from the Norman Conquest.

Now after this, these great Lords. of Manors, by marriages, matching their
Sons and daughters together joined house to house, and land to land, and so
became greater Lords then ever, and exhausted greater rents from their poor
tenants by degrees: and all to uphold them in their pride, and so to maintain
them in their pomp and vanities, and Lordly dignities. And so the poor people
comes to be mere slaves to their Lords and Masters (their rents being
continually raised and set upon the rack, and tenterhoocks of their wicked
consciences) and are not able to maintain themselves and families, though at a
pittyful poor low rate, both in food and raiment, notwithstanding all their
labor and painstaking, both early and late. But I must tell you, that the
maintenance of propriety in this way, and by such laws, will be the
destruction of it; and me thinks, I see it already destroyed, and you know that
the stander-by sometimes sees more then the gamester.

And truly for my part I see an exceeding unequal distribution of things, some
all, and some nothing at all: and the poor daily crying out for bread, bread,
bread for the Lords sake and few, or none, laying it to heart, when many of
your great Lords, have ten, fifteen, twenty thousand pounds per annum, which is
more then two hundred thousand families have: and yet they can spend all in
rioteousnesse, and wantonness, and in superfluity of dainties, and in the
delights and pleasures of this world, and truly I do believe, I speak with the
least (though I speak it with much grief) that for every one that has but ten
thousand pounds per annum. there are two hundred thousand families and more,
that have not so much, and so proportionable of all the rest. I speak from
experience of my late travels in the North, where I have seen multitudes of
poor people go barefooted and bare-legged, and scarce a ragge of clothes, to
cover their nakedness, or having any bread, or any kind of food, to put into
their bellies, to keep them from starving. And ask the poor people, whose land
they lived in? or who was their Landlord? they would tell us, that it was
either the Earl of Northumberland, or the Lord Gray: and now lay this home to
your consciences, and acquaint you with the pitiful condition of these poor
people; and ask you, where is the feeding of the hungry, and clothing of the
naked? you will be ready to answer me, as I have bin already answered, that the
Earl of Northumberland or the Lord Gray should look to them, and make provision
for them, as if it did not concern you at all, and will be ready to post it
off, from post to pillar, and say, you have poor enough of your own, and that
you ought to take care for them. But is it not as much neglected by you, as by
them? for, is there not daily crying out in your streets, for bread, bread, for
the Lords sake, not only in this City, but in the country also, by many
thousands of poor people, who are ready to perish with famine, and few or none
take pity on them, as to releeve them, but are ready to beat them from your
doors (notwithstanding) they are flesh of your flesh, blood of your blood, and
bone of your bone? And all this proceeds from the hardness of your hearts, and
from pride and self-loftines, from whence comes oppression and cruelty; and are
there not grievious burdens, and taxes, lying heavy upon the people; which
causes a dearth upon all things notwithstanding there is great plenty of all
in the Land, and who suffers but the poor? who are your fellow creatures, whose
cries are already ascended up into heaven before the Almighty: who is able to
subdue all powers, and to bring down all the proud and lofty ones to submit to
his footstool, and to ly prostrate at his feet: and may you not justly tremble
at that terrible doom and sentence of our Savior to such, as you show your
selves to be, Mat. 25.41.42.43. Depart from me, ye cursed etc. For I was
bungry, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was a
stranger; and ye took me not in, naked: and ye clothed me not, sick and in
prison, and ye visited me not; And may not the Apostle James 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. thunder a rattling peal of terror in your ears, Go to now ye rich men, weep
and howl etc. see Micah 2.2. Micah 3.1, 2, 3. and Amos 6. from the 1. to the
7. read these Scriptures considerately, and weigh them well, and then I shall
give ye my Counsel and advise, for a remedy (speaking after the manor of men)
which shall be first to you Rulers and Governors, who are placed in authority
over us, who sit at the helm, and ought to steer all things aright, according
to equity and justice.

That seeing all those laws which came in by the Norman-conquest, and have
continued ever since, successively by Kings, and consequently by Tyrants, till
the late Kings head was taken off; which laws (for the substance) are still in
use, as if that he were yet alive, only the form altered. But my Counsel is
that they may be wholly taken away, and wholesome laws prescribed in the room,
that the people may no longer ly under that yoke, which is an intolerable
burden. For many families have bin utterly undone, by long and wearisome
journies, and by their vast expense of money in their long and tedious suits,
and by the corruption of the lawyers, which (corruption) will never be taken
away: unless the laws be wholly taken away, both root and branch. And if so
be you should go about to mend these laws, and have them translated into the
English tongue; and divide the Nation into several provinces: to avoid
tediousness of traveling; yet the same laws being put in execution (though
they are translated as aforesaid) the corruption will still rmeain, and the
people will still ly under the yoke.

Therefore my Counsel is, that you will wholly take away all the laws in one
day, and give us such wholesome laws the next, that may stand most consistent
with the republique, which will be most suitable to what they were before the
Norman Conquest.

Let there be a Court of Judicature erected in each hundred of every County,
where causes may be equally determined by twelve sworn men, annually chosen by
the freemen of the said hundred, and not left to depend upon the prerogative
lawyers for justice, the obstructors of the peoples freedoms. And you know
there can be no men able to judge so well of causes and controversies between
party and party; as such as are neighbors to the parties where the offense or
trespass was committed, and so those twelve men to be their Judges to hear and
determine, as in time past before the Conquest the Jury were the Judges, and
ended all controversies, that were amongst the people. This being one parcel of
good Counsel if ye can take it.

Now the next Counsel I shall give you, is, that this unjust and intolerable
burden of Tithes may be wholly taken away, that those who go under the notion
of Ministers, may live on Gospel maintenance, and not by law. Seeing it is a
more blessed thing to give, then to receive; that no man be compelled to
maintain such a generation of men, who look to their own way, every one for his
own advantage, and for his own purpose. Who bite with their teeth, and cry
peace, and he that puteth not into their mouth, they even prepare war against
him, as we have had sad experience of them, being the greatest incendiaries
against us and the public good of this Nation ever since the beginning of
these troubles. For the first war was the Bishops war, and you know that
the Clergy had a great hand in the second war; laboring to set the people
against both Parliament and Army, crying out against them almost in every
pulpit. But when they saw, that there was a rising in Wales, in Kent, and that
the Scots had invaded the Nation, and were setting up the Kings interest again,
and knew full well, that they should be no gainers thereby, then as they had
faced about to the left before, so they could face about again to the right, as
they were, like good soldiers. And you know that this war is the Kirks
war, and the Clergy have the greatest share therein, crying out against
errors, heresies and blasphemies, as if they themselves, and none but them,
were able to judge what heresy and blasphemy is, and as if they were of such
infallible judgment, that whatsoever they shall say is heresy or blasphemy
it must of necessity be so. And thus much more I shall tell you, that
whenever the Lord shall be pleased to give our Army victory over our enemies
in Scotland, both Kirk and State (which I know they must be overcome) for that
interest can never be set up again, neither in England, Scotland nor Ireland)
but I say that whenever that war is over, you shall have the Clergy be
ready to foment another war presently, unless you take them off of their
great power, which will he done by taking away Tithes, and not compelling, any
to maintain them, but those that will have them to be their Ministers let them
maintain them; and let such as are under Gospel-dispensations, be freed from
the slavery and bondage of legal administrations. And this is good Counsel if
you can take it.

But here I shall meet with an objection by the way. You will ask me
(especially you that have impropriations) what will become of you and your
families if Tithes go down; you or your predecessors laid out all the stock you
had, to purchase an impropriation, and you have not a subsistence without it.
And if it be taken away, you are utterly undone, and your posterity: shall you
that have purchased loose your bargain, and your money too; and those that
never purchased shall they have it for nothing?

I answer no, every man shall purchase the tenth of his own possessions, of the
State: and shall pay to the utmost value of it, according to so many years
purchase, viz. every delinquent fourteen years purchase, every Neuter ten
years purchase, and every faithful honest man to the State, and can approve
himself to be so; let him have it at five years purchase. And by this means you
may but in all the impropriations, according to their purchase, and so give
full satisfaction accordingly, which will be no wrong at all to any man, and
there will be remaining on overplus, which will amount to a vast sum of
money, for the States use. And you know that the public good of a Nation,
ought to be preferred before any particular interest. But me thinks I hear some
impropriators say to themselves, I have a good bargain, and my means comes in
with very little labor and cost, and must I leave this good bargain? yea, I
tell thee thou must leave it, and if thou have thy money it cost, thou have no
wrong at all, and if so be thou did purchase me to be thy slave in the time
of ignorance, as to have the tenth of my labors, and not only of mine but of
all my family besides, the tenth of my stock, and the tenth of all my
increase, yet this I know that the bargain has been made void ever since the
late Kings head was taken off; although we have been kept in this slavery and
bondage many hundred years by an arbitrary power of Kings successively, yet now
the people are come to be a knowing people, and expect liberty and freedom
from such bonds. Therefore my Council and advise, shall be once more to you
Rulers and Governors, to whom the Nation have entrusted, and have committed
all to your care to do them justice, that you will speedily put these things
into practice, and see it effectually performed, not having your spirits
inslaved with any self-interest, nor to fear the rattling thunders of the
Clergy crying out against you, nor the malice of any Lawyer, or Impropriator,
nay fear not to do justice, though all the Devils in hell were against you, for
God will own you, and he has raised up a gallant Army to back you in all your
just undertakings, against the violence of men. This is good Council if you can
take it, but if so be you slight and neglect it, God will find out a
deliverance for his people, as once he did for the people of Israel, who were
held in sore servitude and slavery eight years under Cushan-Rishathaim, King of
Mesopotamia, Judge. 3. Yet the Lord found out a diliverer, even among
themselves: Othniel slew the King of Mesopotamia, and so set the people at
liberty. And here you may see a parallel to this in our late King, who could not
be contented to govern his Kingdoms according to law and justice, but must
usurp a power to himself over both people and laws contrary to his oath, and
so became a Tyrant, exercising dominion over the people according to his
arbitrary will, taking upon himself Gods own peculiar, and sitting in his
Throne, exercising his Kingly power by monopolies and patents, contrary to his
laws; and imposing great burdens and taxes upon the people, as by Ship Money,
Coat and Conduct-money etc. Insomuch that the burdens were grievous,
insupportable; and the people held in bondage and slavery, and labored to keep
them so: strengthening himself by his wicked council, and raised up a wicked
Army to destroy his good council. Yet the Lord found a way of deliverance for
his people from that slavery and bondage wherein they were held; hence I draw
this conclusion.

That he that has a limited power ought not to exercise dominion. But Gods
power is only arbitrary, he governs according to his own will, therefore not to
be limited, but man's power is derived from Gods power, and has its limits and
bounds set: now if so be man comes to break these bounds, and comes to exercise
dominion, then he derogats from that power which was given, and attributes to
himself that power which was not given, and so coms to be a rebel and a traitor
against God and man: which was palpably seen in the late King, and that
scripture is fulfilled in Isa. 1.23. Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions
of thieves. every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not
the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto them. And was
not the late King a companion of thieves and robbers, plunderers in the best
sense? And what complaints did he hear at any time, that were brought before
him? Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty God of Israel: Ah!
I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies verse 24. and
I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dress, and take away
all thy tin. verse 25. and I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and
Councellers as at the beginning etc. verse 26. And now me thinks I see
Monarchy to be clearly extirpated, and rooted out of these three Nations,
never to have a being any more, as to reign; and all earthly powers shaken
throughout the whole world, and a perfect restoration at hand. For before
Kings, there were Judges and Councillors, yet I never read of priority amongst
them. And if we look upon the computation of time, from the Creation unto Noah
you shall find it to be 1656. years. And from Noah to Christ coming in the
flesh was 3000. and od years. And from Christ coming in the flesh to this
present day, is 1650. So that I gather that the restoration is at hand. But of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my Father
only. But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be, and if you compare this Scripture Mat. 24. with that of Genesis 5. then you
may give me your thoughts concerning my opinion. Not that I dare limit God in
his time, but for ought I know this may be the very year of Jubilee. Therefore
my Counsel and advise is to all Christians, who make profession of
Christianity, and are placed in authority over us, that you exercise no such
Kingly, or Tyrannical power over us, which if ye do, it must be destroyed in
you, or else you will be destroyed in it. For the Lord will find out a way of
deliverance to his people from all oppression and cruelty.

And now friends, my Counsel shall be to the Nation in General, that you will
submit, and yield subjection to this present Government, and that for
conscience sake. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is
no power but of God etc. Now I know that many of you heretofore scrupled at the
Covenant, and many of you at the Engagement, some out of tenderness of
conseience, and some out of stubbornness and obstinacy, which is a kind of
rebellion, and causes contention and strife amongst us. And here I saw, that
the Clergy (especially in the western parts) had the chiefest hand against the
engagement, and some of them pretended out of pure zeal, in regard they had
formerly taken the Covenant, as if the Engagement had clashed against the
Covenant. But truly friends I am satisfied in my own spirit, without any
scrupling at all. I have taken the covenant, I have taken the engagement, which
engagement is to maintain this present Government, as it is now established
without a King or house of Lords, and we ought to be obedient thereunto, for we
see, that God pulls down, and he raises up: he pulls down one power, and
sets up another. God has set up this power over us, and it shall stand as
long as he pleases, and when he will have it destroyed, it shall be destroyed
notwithstanding all the engagements in the world, he will dash it in pieces
as he did the late Kings power.

Object. But the Prophet Hosea says, Blessed be the Lord thy God that has set
thee to do justice and judgment. Then ought we to be obedient to this present
government, although they should command us unjust commands.

My answer was yea, we ought to yield obedience unto them, let their
commands be what they will, in case there be no power to resist those
unlawful commands, but if so be God will raise a power to resist unlawful
commands, then it is lavvful to do it: For whether is it better to obey God or
man judge ye. And I shall instance in the case of that late King, where he
commanded the people unlawful and unjust commands. The Lord raised up a
Parliament and Army to resist those unlawful commands, and so destroyed both
him and his power. But if so be, those that are placed in authority overs us,
do not do justice and judgment. It is because they cannot, why, because they
derogate from that power which is given; and atribute to themselves that power,
which is not given (as I said before) yet notwithstanding, we ought to yield
obedience unto them, and wait Gods leisure, for the hearts of Kings are in his
hands, and he can turn them at his pleasure, therefore wait upon God, his time
is the best time, and in his due time he will accomplish his own work, and
satisfy all interests. But in the 2. Psalm its said, That the Kings of the
earth stand up, and the Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord and
against his Anointed. And truly friends, we have seen abundance of great
Counsels, many plots and contrivance, but most of them tending to advance
selfe-interest, have we not seen abundance of pride and self-loftinesse?
especially, amongst such as are in high places both majesterial and Military,
abundance of self-seeking not only to make themselves great, but their friends
also. This man has a friend and he must have a great Office for him, that man
has a friend, and he must help him to some great preferment too etc. and all
to make themselves rich upon the peoples ruins by oppression and cruelty.

And now friends, I cannot forgit to speak some thing more of the overflowing
pride of this Nation, not only amongst the gentry, but amongst all sorts of
people, as well the Clergy as others, For the Bishops wore great laune
sleeves, and our Clergy weres as much upon their legs as they did upon their
arms, with their Boots ruffled down, with their tops upon the very Insteps,
and poor creatures I pity them, that they do not see their downfall to be so
near at hand. You know that the Scots were the first that pulled down their
Bishops and set themselves up in their room, and then sent a pattern of their
directory to our Clergy that they might practice by their example; our Clergy
being pretty act Scolers, they quickly learnt this lesson, only altering the
form of the directory, but not the substance, and so pulled down the Bishops
here, and stepped up into their room, and presently in all have must have a
classical government set up, for all men to be compelled to worship so many
Idols. Now I heard last night that the Kirk in Scotland lies very sick of four
sore deadly wounds, the head, the hands, the heart, and the feet, and wait for
a good hour, to depart out of this transitory life: and me thinks it were not
amiss for some good body to set the passing bell going for our Clergy, for
they are going the way of all flesh too; for they are greeviously wounded in
their hands too. Zech. 13.6. And if you ask them, what these wounds are, they
shall answer those with which, they were wounded in the house of their friends:
Now the time is near at hand that all Prophecies must be fulfilled, as that in
Jer. 5.31. Jer. 23.1, 2. that in Ezekiel, but I have forgot the place, but the
words are these, Who look to their own way, every one for his own advantage,
and for his own purpose: this is fulfilled, and so is this of Micah 3. who byte
with their teeth, and cry peace etc. and that in Zech. 13. will be fulfilled
e're long, they shall be ashamed of their visions etc. And the Apostle speaks
much to this purpose in diverse places, as that in the These. he speaks of such
as comes with all decievablenesse of unrighteousness. And that in the Gal.
such as make a fair show in the flesh. And in another place, he speaks of such
as are decieving and being decieved. And in another place, such as are holy in
conversation, like unto the false Apostles, which Scriptures points out notably
to this purpose. And truly friends I must tell you, that all your holiness,
all your purity, all yoor zeal, all your honesty, nay all your, righteousness
too: all must be burnt up, for it is said accept your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. And truly for my part I cannot see, that any of your
righteousness does exceed theirs: for if we look upon the purest of you, we
shall see abundance of pride and ambition, abundance of self-righteousnesse,
self-purity, self-holinesse, self-zel, etc. mixed with abundance of
coveteousnesse, and averice, abundance of hatred and malice, especially
toward such as are contrary to you in judgment.

Object. But are all the Clergy a like with you? do you make no difference of
ministers? are there not abundance of Godly, faithful, religious Preachers,
faithfully dispencing the word of God and with abundance of zeal?

I answer yea they are all alike with me, although some are more religious,
more zealous, more holy then other, and although the Scripture faith, that the
righteous, is more excellent then his neighbor, yet I make no difference of
the persons of men, for if God be no respector of persons, I know not why I
should: but for my part, I love them all very well, but not one better then
another; and although some of them are accounted more glorious lights then
others, yet they shall fall as the stars of heaven fell unto the earth Rev. 6.
even as a figtree, casts her untimely figs etc. That is not those figs which
naturally are brought forth alone by virtue of its pure sap Jesus Christ, but I
conceive, by untimely figs is meant, all the righteousness of man which he with
out or before Christ's time of his rising up in the branches, has brought forth
of himself, which is untimely, and therefore must fall to the ground and become
dung (as Paul said of all his) for there is no righteousness at that day can
stand to endure, or pass through that refiners fire, but alone the
righteousness and purity of himself, nor no garmant made by man, though it
appear never so glorious now, that will endure the scouring with that fullers
soap, but will presently be discovered to be but earthly and so consumed and
brought to nothing: friends in a word, at that day (which truly for my part I
believe is near at hand) there is no glory or excellency of man but will be
extinguished and put out (such will be the glory of the coming of the Son of
man) even as the moon and stars fly at the appearing of the Sun.

And whereas I had some thoughts to speak largely concerning the pride of Women
in their fantastical apparel, and their foolish orn aments and dressings in
their atyre, their chains, and their bracelets, and their Mufflers, their
Changable suits of apparel, and the Mantles and the wimples, and the crisping
pins etc. but because of their weakness, I shall trouble my self no more at
this time with a company of foolish women; but I shall refer them to that
Scripture, Isa. 3.24. Where they may read what will become of them. But I know
I shall be apt to ly under the sensure of many, why I should undertake to meddle
with such things as to give Counsel etc.

What though there is abundance of injustice, what though there is abundance
of pride and self-loftines, what though there is abundance of selfishnesse, and
setting up self-interest, what though you make Idols of Silver, Idols of Gold,
and worship the works of your own hands, what though you make your selves
strong with engagements, what though you strengthen your selves with a bond of
Iron and brass, Dan. 4. but yet I must tell ye, all this will stand you but in
little stead, when once the day of the Lord shall come upon you. Then there
shall be nothing but pure justice, and no pride nor self-loftinesse at all. For
the lofty looks of men shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be
bowed down, and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day-for the day of the
Lord of bests shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty, and upon every
one that is lifted up and he shall he brought low.

In that day a man shall cast his Idols of silver, and his Idols of gold, which
they made each one for himself, to worship, to the moles, and to the bats:

To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the tops of the ragged rocks, for
fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his Majesty; when he arises to shake
terrible the earth.

Cease ye from man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to be
accounted of?

FINIS.

