A MESSAGE From His Excellency SIR THOMAS FAIREFAX and the Council of War
TO THE Parliament and Common Council of LONDON.

AND The Copy of a Petition of Citizens, Officers and Soldiers, Seamen,
Watermen, and others, gathering hands to be presented to the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commons of London, at a Common Hall.

With their Engagement and Covenant.

And a Declaration by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
proclaiming those that shall promote or sign the same, to be Traitors.

Die Sabbathi. 24 July 1647.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled. That the said
Declaration, be published forthwith (by order of the Lord Major, Sheriff, and
Committee of the Militia) by beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet in the Cities of
London, Westminster, and within the Line of Communication

H. Elsyng Cler. Par. Dom. Com.



Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, the Right Worsh. the Aldermen and Com.
of the City of London, in the Common or Guild Hall of the City of London,
Assembled.
The humble Petition of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers, of
the Trained Bands, and Auxiliaries, the young men and Apprentises of the City
of London, and Westminster, Sea-commanders, Seamen, and Watermen, together
with diverse other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, within the Line of
Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bills of Mortality.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners taking into serious consideration, how Religion, his
Majesty's honor and safety, the privileges of Parliament, and Liberties of
the Subject, are at present greatly endangered, and likely to be destroyed; And
also fadly weighing with our selves what means might likely prove the most
effectual to procure a firm and lasting peace, without further effusion of
Christian, English blood) have therefore entered into a solemn Engagement,
which is hereunto annexed, and do humbly and earnestly desire, that this whole
City may join together by all lawful possible means, as one man in hearty
indevors, for his Majesty's (...) ^^^^ing up to his two Houses of Parliament,
(...) sa^ety, and freedom, and that without the near approach of the Army,
there to confirm such things, as he has granted in his Message of the 12 of
May last, in answer to the Propositions of both Kingdoms: And that by a
personal Treaty with his two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioner^ of
the kingdom of Scotland, such things as yet are in difference, may be speedily
settled, and a firm and lasting peace established: all which we desire may be
presented to both Houses of Parliament from this Honorable Assembly.

And we shall pray, etc.
A Solemn Engagement of the Citizens, Commanders, Officers and Soldiers, of
the Trained Bands and Auxiliaries, the young men, and Apprentises of the Cities
of London, and Westminster, Sea commanders, Seamen, and Watermen, together
with diverse other Commanders, Officers and Soldiers within the Line of
Communication, and Parishes mentioned in the weekly Bills of Mortality.
WHereas we have entered into a Solemn League and Covenant, for Reformation,
and defense of Religion, the Honor and happiness of the King, and the peace
and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, All which
we do evidently perceive, not only to be endangered, but ready to be
destroyed.

We do therefore in pursuance of our the said Covenants, both of Allegiance,
Oath of every Freeman of the Cities of London, and Westminster, and
Protestations, Solemnly Engage our selves, and vow unto Almighty God, that we
will to the utmost of our power, cordially endeavor that his Majesty may
speedily come to his two Houses of Parliament, with honor safety and freedom,
(and that without the nearer approach of the Army) there to confirm such
things, as he has granted in his Message of the 12 of May last, in Answer to
the propositions of both Kingdoms, and that by a personal Treaty, with his
two Houses of Parliament, and the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland,
such things as are yet in difference may be speedily settled, and a firm and
lasting peace established. For effecting hereof we do protest and re-oblege
our selves as in the presence of God, the searcher of all hearts, with our
lives and fortures, to endeavor what in us lies, to preserve and defend, his
Majesty's Royal person, and authority, the Privileges of Parliament, and
Liberties of the Subject, in their full and constant freedom: The Cities of
London and Westminster lines of Communication and Parishes mentioned in the
weekly Bills of mortally, and all others that shall adhere with us to the said
Covenant, Oath of allegians, Oath of every freeman of London, and Westminster
and Protestation. Nor shall we by any means admit, suffer, or endure any kind
of neutrality in this Common Cause of God. The King and Kingdom, as we do
expect the blessing of Allmighty God, whose help we crave, and wholly devolve
our selves upon, in this our undertaking.

A Copy of a Paper delivered to the Commissioners of Parliament, from the
General and Council of War.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
WE received this enclosed paper the last night from the hands of a very well
affected Citizen: It was delivered him by an Officer of the City Militia, who
being invited to meet some Citizens at Skinners Hall, upon Wednesday last, with
diverse others, to sign the same; and offering to dispute the matter of it to
them how dangerous and illegal it was; was silenced, and told that it was not
to be disputed, but to be signed and joined in, there being diverse Citizens and
others at the same place for that purpose, which when he understood he took
this printed Copy away with him.

By the contents of which, when you read it, you will easily perceive what it
tends to, and how desperate and dangerous it is, to the hazard of the whole
Kingdom, and to frustrat all those endeavors of the Parliament, the Army, and
Kingdom, for an happy settlement. And likewise to precipitate all into a new
and bloody war. We cannot therefore but acquaint you, that we look at this,
as a business set on foot by the malice of some desperate minded men, this
being their last engine for the putting all into confusion, when they could not
accomplish their wicked ends by other means.

To this have all secret listings tended, and we wish that needless and
superfluous listing of Auxiliaries, and connivance at the continuance of the
Reformados about the Cities of London and Westminster, have not had the same
aim. And by this we hope it will appear, that our jealousies and fears of
some such desperate design to be hatched in and about the City, considering
the sense of men there, have not been groundless, nor our desires to draw
near the City of London with the Army, to disappoint and break all such
plots, and to free the Parliament from violence of them, have not been without
just cause; and we desire all indifferent men to judge, whether our withdrawing
from the City in obedience to the Parliaments commands, was for theirs and the
Kingdoms security, or not. We wonder that diverse men did calumniate at our
marching so near the City, and put so bad representations upon it, as that it
tended to force the Parliament, or to plunder the City, seeing our doing so,
was to break the black design which now begins to show it self in its
colors: whereas indeed our consciences witness with us that our Armies were
clear and honest, tending to restore the Parliament unto its just liberty,
which was much abated in the eyes of all the kingdom, and no doubt by the
authors and contrivers of this new covenant and engagement, some whereof have
been so far from assisting to put the Reformados, and other dangerous persons
out of the lines, that now they are called in to join in this conspiracy.

We entreat you to give the Parliament a full representation, of these things,
which that you may do we have sent you the Papers, together with such
informations as may give them an opportunity to discover the bottom of this
business. We were marching from London (when we received this information) in
obedience to the Parliament, to give the City content, and to stop the mouths
of slanderers. But if such designs so destructive to the Parliament, and the
work in hand be suffered to go on, or that the Parliament be interrupted in
the freedom of their debates, and proceedings, as we hear within these few
days they were, by those that are invited to partake of this confederacy.

We beg it of the Parliament, as they tender their own safety the peace of
the Kingdom, and preventing of a second War, as they would not have the
Kingdom, lose the fruit and benifit of all the blood and treasure that has
been spent in this Cause, that they would not suffer their freedom and
Liberty to be endangered by such designs as these, they having an Army, which
by the blessing of God in spite of all that theirs, and the Kingdoms enemies
can do, will stand and fall with them, and be firm, faithful, and obedient
to them in all things, and as ready to relieve Ireland when the peace and
Rights of the Kingdom are settled.

We write not this to desire the Parliament to invite us to march up to them,
we care not how great a distance we are from London, if it be the
Parliaments pleasure, and consists with their security, and the breaking off
those combinations which are hatched in the bowels of that City.

We are hastening out Proposals which are for the general settlement, and
which we are consident will satisfy all that love truth and peace.

But we see plainly, we need more to intend security, then have cause to expect
to bring things to a happy issue by treaty, while such designs are on foot We
pray you therefore that the Parliament would speedily and thoroughly enquire
into, and break these designs, wherein as in all things else we shall be ready
to serve them, as they shall judge it needful; and when they shall command us.

Ailesbury July 23. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Tho.
Fairfax, and the Counell of War, Signed Jo. Rushworth, Secr.

Die Sabbathi 24 Julii, 1647.
THe Lords and Commons having seen a printed Paper entitled, A Petition to
the right Honorable the Lord Major, the right worshipful the Aldermen and
Commons of the City of London in the Common or Guild hall of the City of London
assembled, under the name of diverse Citizens, Commanders, Officers, and
Soldiers of the Trained Bands, Auxiliaries, and others, young men and
Apprentices, Sea-Commanders, Seamen, and Watermen, together with a dangerous
engagement of the same persons by Oath and Vow concerning the Kings present
coming to the Parliament upon terms far different from those which both
Houses after mature deliberation, have declared to be necessary for the good
and safety of this Kingdom, casting reflections upon the proceedings both of
the Parliament and Army, and tending to the imbroiling the Kingdom in a new
War: And the said Lords and Commons taking notice of great endeavors used by
diverse ill-affected persons to procure Subscriptions thereunto, whereby
well-meaning people may be mis-lead, do therefore declare, That whosoever
after publication or notice hereof shall proceed in, or promote or set his name
to, or give consent that his name be set unto, or any way join in the said
Engagement shall be deemed and adjudged guilty of high Treason, and shall
forfit life and estate as in cases of high Treason, accustomed.

H. Elsying Cler. Par. Dom. Com.


