A BLOODY PLOT, Practiced by some Papists in Darbyshire.

And lately discovered by one Jacob Francklin, Sexton of the Parish Church of
Bingley within thirteen miles of DARBIE.

With the Examination of one John Symonds an Instrument in this Conspiracy.

Together with his Confession taken before the Justices of the Peace of the
same County,

Also the Names of those whom he confessed to be Confederates in this said PLOT.

And what Ammunition and all kind of Provision was found and taken in two of
these Confederates Houses, Ian. 18. 1641.

A true Relation.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

A True Relation of a most horrible and bloody plot at Bingly in Dvrbyshire,
some 13. miles from Darbie, which Plot was discovered by one Jacob Francklin
Sexston of the same Parish.
Mischief the child of Heresy cannot want instruments to prosecute and bring
it to perfection, and the Devil who is the Author of all unlawful attempts,
is always ready at hand to further and set forward any dissentions, and
damnable enterpises. He will not suffer the poor disposition of Rome to
sleep and be at quiet for want of new supplies and assistants to further her
unlawful practice. This Kingdom has had too frequent experience of their
mischievous intentions and plots, which had not the all-seeing eye of Heaven
prevented, we had long ago been brought to utter ruin and destruction. Yet
notwithstanding the manifold Discoveries, and the continual shame, that has
continually been the issue of their undertakings, they will not desist, but
still proceed in their inhumane and most Tyranicall devices, they have of late
practiced most strangely against the Peace of this Realm but by the mercy of
GOD have bin prevented, yet none was of such Horrible condition as this which I
shall now relate unto you. In Derby-shire some Thirteen Miles from Derby
Town, lies a Town called by the name of Bingly, a small Country Town but of
good Bigness, inhabited by good sort of men of great Rank and Quality, among
the rest their lived one Mr. Thomas Needham, a man of large possessions, but by
profession a Romish Catholic, this Needham had gotten unto him many of the
same profession, and by the asistance of one John Simonds, whom they had hired
for their porpose, had convay'd by night by a private Door into the Church
into a great Vault underneath the Ground 34. Barrells of Gunpowber, with store
of small pieces of old Iron, some Stones, and Faggots, whereby they had
determined at the time of Divine Service, to subvert and blow up the aforesaid
Church in the time of Divine Service, when the Church was filled with a full
number of the Parishioners, but thanks be to God; their design was prevented
and the Parishioners destined for Ruin, as yet safe and alive, The Discovery
was after this manner, it happened that one Jacob Franklin being the Sexton of
the aforesaid Parish of Bingly had occasion to go to the Church late in the
Evening to Tole the passing Bell for a Neighbor who then lay desperately sick
as he was entered into the Church he heard a great noise underneath the Ground,
which put this Sexton into a great affright and amazement, so that leaving to
perform the Duty, he came about, he betook himself home, and told his wife
what noise he had heard in the Church under ground, who willed him to call
some of his neighbors, and take them along with him, and to go and perform
what did belong unto him to do. He did according to his wives directions and
council, and as he entered into the Church accompanied with some of his
Neighbors they all heard the same noise, not knowing from whence it should
proceed, and at length as he was passing by to the place where he should tole
the Bell, through the cranny or crack of a stone, he received the Reflection
of a light to shine forth of the Vault, whereupon they drew near the mouth of
the said Vault, and discovered by their approach more light, which made them
retreat back to see the event of this noise and light, about half an hour
after they lying in obscurity perceived a man with a dark Lantern to come
forth of the Vault, and perceiving him to be alone, unaccompanied with any body
else, they drew near unto him, and demanded the reason of his being there at
that unseasonable time, and the cause of his going down into the Vault, but
he would not declare any thing unto them, but said that they had no power to
question him, upon which peremptory answer they dragged him by violence unto the
Constable, who kept him in safe Costody that night, and the next day had him
before a Justice of peace to be examined, which Symonds upon examination
confessed that he was an hired servant unto Mr. Needum, and that he did not
doubt but that his Master would justify what he had done, he further confessed
that he was to receive twenty Marks for his service, and that he had been now
6. months in this employment, to lay in the Powder and the rest of the things
in the Vault, and that their design was in the time of Divine Service, to have
blown up the Church and killed all the Parishioners that should have been at
that time assembled, and that if he had not been at this present taken, by the
next Sunday they should have understood the end and intention of his
proceedings. He confessed further, that this his Master was not alone in this
Plot, but that he had more adherents in the business, some of which, he at
that time made mention of, as of one Mr. Richard Danzy Esquire, Mr. Thomas
Overlie, and Mr. Anthony Gray, Gentlemen all of the said County. After this his
examination taken, his mittimus was made, and he sent unto Darby Goal, where
he now remains, and immediately this strict charge was given by the Justice of
the Peace, that search should be made in the Vault, which was done accordingly,
where they found the Gunpowder according to his confession, and all things
else, after which they did proceed to apprehend some of those whom this Symonds
had confessed to be in this Plot, but they were all fled, but in the house of
Mr. Needhum they found great store of ammunition for war, as Muskets, Pikes,
Halberts, Armor, Powder and Bullets great store, the provision that was taken
from thence might very well furnish near upon an hundred men for service,
there was also taken forth of Mr. Grayes house some other Provision for war,
as store of Petronels, Gunpowder and shot, and in his stable sixteen horses
well fitted for service, all which provision was seized on, and was carried
away, and delivered into the hands and custody of Mr. Richard Fotherly, Justice
of Peace of the said County.

FINIS.

