NEW PROPOSITIONS From His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, SENT TO The Kings
most Excellent Majesty: With His Reasons, why He did not conduct His Majesty to
White Hall. when His Excellency marched through the City. As also, the time
wren His Majesty shall come, and upon what terms and conditions. And the
substance of the Armies new Proposals, to be signed by King and Parliament.

depiction of King Charles I and General Fairfax C^ROLUS R^X. GENERAL FAIRFAX.


Printed at Oxford by Leonard Brown, and Reprinted at London for Robert
Williams, Anno Dom. 1647. Aug.:26:

Certain new Proposals from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, concerning the
Kings most Excellent Majesty.
HIs Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax having a tender and deep sense of several
difficulties and dangers which were like to ensue, and of the evil and
treacherous dealings of the public Enemies to the Peace of this Syon, against
the Parliament, Army, and Kingdoms peace and welfare; having a long time
sought and endeavored to break those silver Cords of Amity, which has been
so unanimously knit together, betwixt the hearts of our renowned General, and
the whole Kingdom; and finding that all their wicked stratagems, and Hell-bred
Devices could not take effect, they began to bethink themselves of a new
Project (which indeed was a most horrid and desperate one) and that was their
great activenesse in sending and dispiersing of their several Agents
throughout many Counties within this Kingdom; to the end, that they might use
their utmost endeavors to seduce the People, and to make his Excellency and
the Army odious unto them, by defaming their just and honorable Endeavors,
with most false and scandalous aspersions, and all under this Mask and
Pretense, that the General and Army sought their own private ends, more then
the good and welfare of this languishing Kingdom, with many more such like
untruths and false aspersions, and that there was a design in hand for bringing
his Majesty to London, and restoring of the Kingdom to their just rights and
liberties.

All which delusions could not prevail to withdraw the hearts of the People
from his Excellency, but were resolved to live and dye with him in the Armies
just Cause and Engagement, etc.

His Excellency, and the Council of the Army, having seriously considered the
wicked practices and evil designs of these men, and the great ruin that
might befall this Kingdom, if not timely prevented, thought requisite (for
satisfaction of the whole Kingdom) to Declare as follows, and to represent
these ensuing Proposals to the view of the whole world, viz. I. THat when (by
the blessing of God) all things were composed and the Kingdom reduced to a
peaceable condition, there were cross workings by a prevalent party,
roobstruct and pervert justice, and oppress the peaceable and well affected
people of the Kingdom and by holding forth pretenses of Uniformity, oppressed
the people, and to further their designs raised jealousies, and to further
their designs got a power into their hands of a public influence, whereby
they had the advantage to raise a new war and make disturbances in the Common
wealth, and the impeached Members continued about London very active therein
and the new Militia joined with them in ^^sting of Reformadoes, and others, by
which means the Speakers and many fa^thfull Members of b^th Houses were forced
away, after which some Members remaining chose new Speakers, that they might
act according to their own ends and that the proceedings and votes of the major
part of them during the absence of the Speaker, intended to the carrying on of
a treasonable Engagement.

After which, all of them concentring (as in other things, so especially) in
this, viz. To have the King brought up to London without delay, or any nearer
approach of the Army. To which his Excellency propounds, as follows: I. That
had the King come up to Londen (as they have so often desired and attempted) it
is apparent they intended and would have made use of it, rather to lay the
stronger foundations of a new war, then any way to settle thereby a safe and
well-grounded Peace. II. And since they could not rationally expect so casie an
obtaining of the Kings Person to London, upon any pretense whatsoever, yet it
is evident, that they could intend nothing thereby, but a more plaudible
pretense and foundation of quarrel against this Army, whereby to engage or
incline to their assistancethe Kings Party, and such others who might be
caught with the apprehension thereof, as a speedy way to Peace (the thing so
generally longed for) and by such assistance gained, the better to ruin this
Army, and those faithful Members of Parliament who retired to it. III.
Thirdly, For our parts we shall rejoice as much as any, to see the King
brought back, to his Parliament, and that not so much in place, as in
affection and agreement, on such sound terms and grounds as may render both him
and the Kingdom, safe, quiet, and happy, and shall be as ready as any to bring
his Majesty to London, when his being there may be likely to produce (not
greater Disturbances or Distractions, but a Peace indeed, and that such as may
not be shaped and molded only to the private advantages of a particular party
or faction, but bottomed chiefly on grounds of common and public safety. IV.
That if (without regard to these considerations) we would have brought his
Majesty with us to London in our late advance thither (which our Enemies could
not hinder or prejudice us in) we had no cause to doubt, but (as to men) we
might have had all the advantages, which our Adversaries promised to themselves
thereby, added to the strength and intrest of the Army, and have inverted the
disadvantages upon them that they intended against us thereby, so as his
Majesty's coming to London might have been much to their prejudice and our
advantage, if we had regarded only our own particulars. V. That we have not
minded nor bin acting our own works and interests, but the kingdoms, and
every honest man's in it.


For all which, it is propounded and desired, that the chief Actors of the
late Design may forthwith be brought to trial; and it is further declared,
as follows, viz.

That if any of those Members, who during the absence of the speakers and the
rest of the Members of both Houses (forced away by the tumultuous violence
aforesaid) did sit and Vote in the pretended Houses then continuing at
Westminster shall hereafter intrude themselves to sit in Parliament (before
they shall have given satisfaction to the respective Houses, wherefore they are
concerning the grounds of their said sitting at Westminster, during the absence
of the said speakers, and shall have acquitted themselves by sufficient
evidence, that they did not procure or give their consent unto any of those
pretended Votes, Orders, or Ordinances tending to the raising, and levying of a
War (as is before declared) or for the King^ coming forthwith to London) we
cannot any longer suffer the same, but shall do that Right to the speakers,
and Members of both Houses who were driven away to us, and to our selves with
them, (all whom the said other Members have endeavored in an hostile manner,
most unjustly to destroy,) and also to the Kingdom, which the endeavored to
imbroyle in a new War,) as to take some speedy, and effectual course whereby
to restrain them, from being their own, and ours, and the Kingdoms Judges in
those things wherein they have made themselves parties, by this means to make
way that both they, and others that are guilty, and parties to the aforesaid
treasonable, and dectructive practices, and proceedings against the Freedom of
Parliament, and peace of the Kingdom may be brought to condign punishment
(and and that at a Judgment of a Free Parliament, consisting (duly, and pro
perly) of such Members of both Houses respectively, who stand clear from such
apparent, and treasonable breach of their trust, as is before expressed.

At the head quarters at Kingston upon Thames, Aug. 18. 1647. By the
appointment of his Excellency, and the General Council of his Army. Signed,
John Rushworth, Secr.
The Army are perfecting of a model by way of Propositions to be confirmed by
King and Parliament for settling a firm Peace, they are the substance of their
former Propositions.



FINIS.

