His Majesty's DECLARATION Concerning The Proclamation of the Army, proclaimed
by sound of Trumpet, throughout the Cities of London, and Westminster; and His
Resolution touching their bringing of Him to Trial.

With a Letter from Denmark; a Message to His Majesty; and His new and latter
Game, to be disputed with the Army.

Dated from Windsor, on Wednesday Jan: 10. 1648.

Also the Scots new Declaration, in behalf of their Native Sovereign; and their
Desires and Proposals to the Commons of England.

Together with a Declaration from the honest party in the West of England,
touching the King, and their raising of 12000 Horse and Foot, for preservation
of Liberty and Freedom.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal English blazon or coat of
arms

Printed for John Gilbert, near Temple Bar, 1648.

A DECLARATION From the Kingdom of SCOTLAND Concerning The apparent danger of
his Majesty's Royal person, and the present proceedings of the Parliament and
Army in order to the deposing of Charles King of great Britain, their native
and lawful Sovereign.
Right Honorable,
THE Parliament of Scotland, are conveened at Edinburgh, and begin to debate
and consult much upon the transaction of affairs in the kingdom of England,
diverse pressing hard for unity and concord between the two Nations; others,
That their Native Sovereign may be inthroned, and his just Rights and
privileges confirmed and established; and to that end, forthwith sent post to
their Commissioners resident at London, purporting the sense and desires of
that kingdom, requiring them to negotiate with the two Houses of Parliament,
and his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, in behalf of their dread Sovereign,
to the end, that no prosecution so trial, may be put in execution against his
royal person, without the advice and concurrence of the Nation thereto, and
that nothing be done or acted, contrary to the Solemn League and Covenant
between the two Kingdoms. Our intelligence from thence further says, That
diverse of the Scottish peers have transmitted a Message to the Kings Majesty,
intimating, Their loyalty and affection to his Royal person, and their
Resolution to leave no means unassayed, for the advancing his Honor and
Greatness. But notwithstanding their great forwardness, to make the Royal
party glorious, yet there are many dissenting Brethren amongst them, who are
resolved to confide with the parliament of England and the Army. The
revolutions and transactions of affairs in this kingdom, now give a caution to
all the well affected in our Neighbor Nation, to carry a strong hand, and an
Eagles eye, over the proceedings of the Adverse party. We hear of a new storm
arising in Lancashire, and of great underhand listing there; but the
well-affected are putting themselves in a posture to receive them and have in
readiness 4000 Horse and Foot to attend their motion. We hear that the honest
party in the West of England have also put themselves into a posture of
defense, and have raised and listed 12000 Horse and Foot, to engage with the
parliament and army (upon any occasion) for common Justice, Freedom, and
Safety, and for promoting the Remonstrance of the Army, to the end, that
impartial Justice may be executed upon the capital Enemy of this Nation, viz.
Charles Stuart, for the high crimes and misdemeanors committed by him against
his subjects of England, in levying war, massacring, and spilling the blood of
near upon 400000 souls, within the Bowels of these his Realms and Dominions.

Hallifax 6 Jan: 1648:
A Declaration of the proceedings of the high Court of Justice, against the
said Charles Stuart.
Monday the 8 of this instant, the Lord Genesis Fairfax, and the rest of the
Commissioners appointed for the trial of Charles Stewart king of England, met
in the painted Chamber at Westminster, about 3 of the clock in the afternoon,
and after some debate touching the trial of his Majesty, they came to this
Resolution, viz. That on Wednesday morning a Herald should be appointed to
make proclamation, and proclaim throughout City and Country, That the Commons
of England assembled in Parliament, and the Commissioners for trial of the
King, Do (in the name of themselves, and the freeborn people of this Nation)
declare, That all persons whatsoever, who have any matter of Fact, against
Charles Stuart, King of England, are desired, and invited, to bring in their
Charges, on Wednesday the 10 of this instant January, to the said
Commissioners sitting in Westminster Hall, for trial of the King, to the end,
that Justice may be executed, and peace and Righteousness established.

Having thus named the time and place, his Majesty is expected to be sent for
from Windsor, this present Thursday, and to be guarded to St. James'es, by two
Regiments of Aorse, there to remain during the pleasure of the High Court of
Justice.

The presbyterians Declaration touching the King.
AFter mature deliberation upon the proceedings of the Lord General Fairfax,
and the General council of Officers, in relation to the establishing of a firm
and lasting peace within this bleeding, torn, and tottering kingdom, and the
erecting of a pure and sound Government according to the Law of Nature, and the
fundamental laws of this Realm, and after several conferences and disputations
in order thereunto, diverse of the Presbyterian party frequented to Westminster,
and other places, where they had several disputations and conferences with the
Officers, and other members of the Army; and after some debate upon the
Foundation, of the grounds and principles of the Agreement of the People, the
Presbyterians declared a great dislike thereof, remonstrating, That it was not
founded upon a firm Rock; to which objections, several answers were made, for
clearing such scruples and cautions, as seemed difficult to many; And as for
the person of the King, they further declared, that notwithstanding the present
Ordnance of Attainder against his Maj. yet they conceived it requisite and
lawful, that the prayers of the Ministry be still continued in every
Congregation throughout his Maj. Realms and Dominions; desiring, that he may
have a legal trial, and that He may not be degraded of his Titles and
Honors: Concerning which, be pleased to peruse this ensuing Letter from
Holland, touching the degrading of his Majesty.

Sir; We are here in a kind of amazement, to hear that your King should be
designed for the grave before his time: Believe it, there is nothing more
characterizes men wise in the opinion of the wisest mere man, then that they
see a far off, not the plague of the body only, though that, but judgments
sometimes for evildoing, sometimes for acting indiscreetly in matters that may be
done. That which may lawfully be done, it may be absurd to do at some time:
The taking away life, which is that prized above all, by him that all account
wise, is not just (say some) at any time, unless there be a law that makes the
thing done death, and death to him that does it: The supreme power of England
that forbids any to judge of treason in a constructive way, but themselves have
retaind in themselves a power to judge such and such practices and endeavors to
amount to treason or death. In particular, supose there were law, or it were in
the power of the Lords and Commons to take awoy the life of the present King,
yet if England, Scotland, and Ireland shall be made more miserable thereby in
reason, and the waas renewed, to the probable ruin of the Nations, and chiefly
to those who pretend most to piety and justice therein, it were better not.
That it is dangerous this may be said: If you cut off, you must set up,
vacuities of that nature suddenly introduce confusion: If you set up, it must
either be a new King, or a new Government; if a new King, then the next of
kin, and if him, then let his compliance be what it will, his Fathers death
cannot be forgot: no, the danger of his mothers influence, who will remain in
banishment, be easily got over, refuse he to come in, as it is most like, he
has the aforementioned written upon his breast, hesides his hereditary claim, his
marriage, which no man that has a purse, but will endowry with a daughter,
raise an army of 20000 to restore a son in law, and make his daughter Queen of
3 kingdoms, which by reason of situation, and inherent accommodations may
(well managed) be the ballancing power of Christendom. If any other, or a new
Government, the objections are the same, and all the line and that successively
are made enemies to boot; besides has the Parl. or army yet got so much love?
are they so deep in the hearts of the people, that they can assure them selves
the newtrals, or those who have gone far with them will quiesce? But the
answer is ready, we have an Army that can not be overcome, neither by what can
rise here, or come from abroad. So had Alexander, but Alexander was poisoned,
and what then became of his Army? ruin approached. etc.

Copenhague Jan: 4. 1648. Sir, Yesterday in the evening, here arrived a
messenger from London, who secretly conveyed a Letter to his Maj. hands,
purporting, That the Commissioners for his trial, had (by an Act of the
Commons assembled in Parliament) made proclamation throughout the City of
London, for the speedy bringing of him to trial, and executing of Justice and
Judgment upon his person, proclaiming him by the name of Charles Stuart, etc.
And after serious meditation upon the said lines, It is given out, by some
Gentlemen resident with his Majesty, That (after reading the same) He
declared, That if his Charge and Trial were legal, and according to the known
Laws of the Realm, He feared not what man could do against Him; but if they
acted contrary, He was resolved not to make any answer thereunto, not doubting
but He should have a time of redemption, and that with honor and freedom.
Thus confident is He of restoration; For, not long since. He publicly
declared, That He had a new and latter Game to dispute with the Army, which
might prove more fatal then all the former.



FINIS.

