A REPRESENTATION From his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, And the general
Council of the ARMY.

EXPRESSING The Desires of the ARMY in relation to themselves as Soldiers; in
which they desire satisfaction before Disbanding.

Tendered to the Right Honorable the Commissioners of Parliament residing with
the ARMY, Sept. 21. to be by them represented to the PARLIAMENT.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX and the general
council of the Army.

JOHN RVSHWORTH Secret.



7ber 24 LONDON: Printed for John Partridge, in Blackfriars at the Gate going
into Carter-lane 1647.

Crown surmounting French fleur-de-lis flanked by a Tudor rose and Scottish
thistle on either side, each surmounted by a crown
Right Honorable:
IN our Representation or Declaration sent from St. Albans; We did express in
general terms, what we desired for the settling and securing of the Rights,
Liberties, Peace and Safety of the Kingdom; and since then, as the
Distractions and interruptions we have met withal would admit; We have
proceeded to prepare, and have lately delivered to your Lordships in particular
Proposals. In pursuance of these General desires, and in order to the same
Ends, having in these set forth what our Desires are, in the things which
concern us as Members of the Commonwealth, and in common with all others, we
shall now desire your Lordships to reminde the Parliament of our humble Desires
in these things which concern us as soldiers; and of our dissatisfactions in
relation thereunto: which remained upon us, when some Regiments of the Army,
are voted to be disbanded.

For which purpose, we have now prepared, and do herewith tender to your
Lordships our particular desires, in pursuance of our former papers, published
before our coming to St. Albanes; in order to the satisfaction and security of
the Army, and other the Parliaments forces, in point of Arreares, and other
things that concern us as soldiers.

Which we desire may be humbly represented to the Parliament, to be taken into
a speedy consideration; as may be the matter of the first Article, concerning
the present stating of Accounts, and giving Debentures for Arreares, to be
speedily put in execution, or set in a way of dispatch; and the rest of them to
be agreed upon, and provided for, and included in any settling of a Peace, which
we shall heartily pray for.

Putney 21. of September 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX. and the general Council of the Army.Signed John Rushworth.

For the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons, Commissioners of Parliament,
residing with the Army.
Putney, September 21. 1647.
FIrst, That a Committee or Commissioners be appointed by the Parliament to
come down, and abide at the Headquarters of the Army, with full power and
authority to Audite and State the Accounts thereof, and to give Debentures, as
well for the pay respited upon the Public Faith, as otherwise for their
service under the command of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or any other
respective Command wherein they or any of them have formerly served the
Parliament; that so what shall appear justly due upon the said Debentures, may
be made an unquestionable Debt unto them: And for the more effectual
accomplishment thereof, we desire, that the respective Treasurers and
Commissaries of Musters of the several Armies may be commanded to attend the
said Committee or Commissioners; That thereby the Arreares of any person of
this Army incurred in other Armies or Garrisons, who by his or their continual
attendance upon the Service, have not had their Accounts audited and stated,
may now be fully accounted for, without further trouble. And for as much as the
Accounts of many who are now Members of this Army, and have formerly served the
Parliament under other Commands, through the neglect or want of Musters, loss
of Papers, death of Officers, taking of Garrisons, etc. and will be very
difficult to be cleared, to what they will be for the service under the command
of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, where Musters have been certain and
Accounts better kept, and such contingencies as aforesaid have not happened. We
humbly offer that the said Committee or Commissioners may have such full
Instructions that where Certificates from superior Officers cannot possibly be
obtained, or other sufficient testimony had, the Oath of such persons may be
taken, and valid as to the stating of their Accounts. And in regard there
remains a dissatisfaction upon the Army, grounded upon the Instructions made
for the Auditing of our Accounts, and published at the Randezvouz of the Army,
at Triploe-Heath in order to our satisfaction, wherein care is taken for the
abatement for free Quarter, when Moneys have been received, and Quarters not
accordingly satisfied; but no notice taken of payment of Quarters at any time
beyond our proportions of pay received, or any regard had of the several
hardships, wants and extremities we have been put upon in times of eminent
Services, viz. difficult Marches, continual Motions, and tedious Leaguers,
etc. whereby the greatness of our Body, or closeness of Posture in
quartering, there has been such scarcity in Provision, that both Officers and
Soldiers have been put to extreme expenses in procuring necessaries to live
upon; and all this at such time when no Moneys have been sent us, and hereupon
proceed made to the several large deductions thereafter specified, which we
neither then, nor yet can see good grounds for. We humbly offer, That the two
Houles will be pleased to reassume the Consideration of the said Instructions,
and think upon some expedient whereby our Deductions for free Quarter may be
moderated, as to the Instructions aforesaid; and that no person who has
constantly paid Quarters may be put upon any Deduction, or any Officer be
accountable for any thing, save that which particularly concerns himself.

And fursher, we desire there may be effectual course and provision made for
the stating the Accounts, and securing the Arrears of those the Soldiers of
the Kingdom, who have faithfully served the Kingdom and concurred with this
Army in their late Engagement.

That whereas diverse of the Horsemen of this Army, upon the loss of their
Horses in the Parliaments Service, have at their own charge furnished
themselves with others for the said Service, and happily have again lost
certain of the said Horses so bought, whereby the State has been served, and
the Soldiers much damnified, We humbly desire the two Houses will be pleased
to take it into their consideration, that some convenient satisfaction may be
thought upon for such as by sufficient testimonial shall make it appear they
have been damnified as aforesaid.

Secondly, That provision may be forthwith made, and a visible security given
to satisfy the Arrears of the Army, in such way and manner as may be least
burthensom to the Commonwealth; in order to which we offer, That Bishops
lands, Deanes and Chapters lands, and Forrest-lands, may be speedily set to
Sale, or otherwise made over for the use aforesaid, or any other way the
Parliament in their wisdoms shall think meet appearing satisfaction for the
security of the said Army.

Thirdly, That there may be an Ordinance for securing all and every person in
this Army, who have willingly served the Parliament, from being imprested out
of this Kingdom to any foreign Service, and that no Horseman shall be forced
to serve on Foot in any future Case; and for the more real effecting hereof,
we desire, every such person as aforesaid as shall have a Certificate under the
Generals, or his respective Field-Officers or Captains hand, that he has
served in this Army, which he may carry about him or keep by him, or producing
such a Ticket he may be discharged, and that if any Officer shall detain any
such person after the sight of such testimonial, there may be a certain
penalty inflicted upon him.

Fourthly, That the Ordinances concerning Apprentices Freedom that have served
the Parliament, may be made an Act before or at the settling of a Peace.

Fifthly, That the Ordinance concerning provision for maimed Soldiers and the
Widows and Orphans of men slain in the Parliaments Service, may likewise be
made an Act.

Sixthly, That to the Ordinance lately passed for Indemnity, there may be an
additionall provision for saving harmless and indempnified the Army and all
the Members of it, as also all that have acted in concurrence with it, and for
securing of them from all trouble, question, or prejudice for or concerning any
thing done, in, upon, or in pursuance of the Petition of the Army, agreed upon
at Walden in March last, or upon the Papers since then presented and published
from the Army, or any the things therein contained, or for or concerning any
thing spoken or done in relation to or in vindication of the Army from the
injuries or extremities put upon it about the said Petition, or since; Which
additionall provisions we desire may (together with the said Ordinances for
Indemnity) be past into Acts at the settling of a Peace, so as we nor others,
may not (for what we have done or insisted on in necessary defense or
vindication of our selves, as Soldiers, from ruin or insufferable injuries
and oppressions, or in behalf of the Commonwealth, for the settling and
securing of the Rights, Liberties, and Peace and Safety thereof,) remain
subject to the malice or pressures of ours and the Kingdoms Enemies (whom we
have opposed) upon any future advantage.

Putney, Sept. 21. 1647. By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, and the General Counsel of the Army. JO. RUSHWORTH, Secret.

FINIS.

