THE GALE OF OPPORTUNITY.

OR, A SERMON Preached (at Lidbury-North) at the Funeral of the Worshipful
HVMPHREY WALCOT, of Walcot, Esquire; JUNE 8th. 1650.

And now Published, by Thomas Froysell, Minister of the GOSPEL at Clunne in
Shrop-shire.

As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men, especially to
them that are of the Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10.

Exhort one another daily, while it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13.

Filij hominum usquequo gravi cord? ut quid diligitis vanitatem et quaeritis
Mendacium? Tempus hocanimabus non corporibus enim assignatum, dies salutis
utique non voluptatis. Omnia tempus habent: Animabus nunc operam dare necesse
est; nam in carne qui seminat, solum exinde metet corruptionem. St. Bernard in
declamat.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by H. B. at the Sign of the
Castle in Corne-hill.

1652.

To the truly virtuous and his much Honored, Mistress Anne Walcot of Walcot.
IT was your Husbands desire (when alive) that I should preach His Funeral,
and it is yours, that I should Print it; Else (for ought I know) it had never
seen the light: For I count not any of my Grapes worth the Press: Therefore
since it is your pleasure to see this Sermon in a Printed dress, I pray accept
of it.

When your dear Husband was alive, Ye were Two precious Diamonds set in the
Ring of Marriage; God has taken him away to shine in another World, and has
left you to shine a while in this world; It is but a while, and therefore
spread forth all your beams, before you set in the West of Death, and be seen
here no more.

If we would shine with God in Heaven, we must shine for God on Earth: Let this
Sermon of opportunities make you improve your opportunities: Shall the men of
this world hugg their opportunities for the world, and shall not we Husband our
opportunities for Heaven?

Society with Jesus Christ even on this side Heaven, is a kind of Heaven; and
those Crystal streams of Joys which we might suck from God here, outid all
the pleasures and braveries of this world; which made Bonaventure (when the
Devil tempting him, told him, he was a Reprobate, and Si Non datur frui Deo et
virtute post hanc vitam, fruamur eo in praesenti.
therefore persuaded him to drink in the present pleasures of this life, for
(says he) Thou art excluded from the future joys with God in Heaven) Answer,
No, not so, Satan, If I must not enjoy God after this life, yet let me enjoy
him as much as I can in this life: Oh that drooping Souls would thus quench
Satan's suggestions! This were enough to rebound all his temptations back again
upon him. Fruition of God a far off in this life (though we should never enjoy
him in the next) is much better, then all the pleasures of the world below him:
Ah! What then will our fruition of him in Heaven be? Joy in him here, and you
shall enjoy him hereafter: Live to him here, and you shall live with him
hereafter: And to this and God gives you all your opportunities, to this high
and happy end, that you may attain him. That himself, and all that he is
worth may be yours: And let me tell you, 1 That a Sermon of opportunities is
almost as necessary to be preached, as to preach Christ himself: because the
opportunity to receive Christ is (in its kind) as necessary as Christ to be
received: as Christ is called Salvation; so our opportunity is called the Day
of Salvation: Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of
Salvation. We loose Salvation it self, if we loose the day of Salvation; we
loose Christ himself, if we let pass the day of Christ, If thou had known,
in this thy day, the things which belong unto 2 Cor. 2. 6. Luke 19. 42.
thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. A man that is to have a sum
of money tendered him upon such a day, must be sure to watch and wait the day,
if he would receive the money: He that has a suite at Law, must observe the
Terme-time; if he loose the Term he will loose his suite: as Luther said, that
Much of Religion consists in Adverbs: so say I, That much weight of our
Salvation lies in circumstances, in the circumstance of time and opportunity:
As the whole weight of our Salvation is laid upon Christ, so the whole weight
of our getting Salvation is laid upon our time, our opportunity: 2 Let Faith
give you a presentiality of things to come, of Death to come, of your Account
to come: Faith gives them a present Existence: set the Period of your Time near
unto you, behold it is at hand, when you shall live no longer, pray no longer,
have the help of Ordinances no longer; We know not how few sands are left in
our Glass of opportunity, and when they are once spent, God will not turn the
Glass again for us: It Is this that affects the heart: 'Twas this that awaked
Niniveh to repentance: Yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed: How did
this Alarm stir their Hearts! what (say they) but forty days? Are our days
shut up into so narrow a room? What are Forty days? How soon will they see an
end? This frighted them into a fit of Repentance: It is time for us (say they)
to fast and pray, and rise out of sin, if our Sun be so near setting: I am
persuaded if God had sent Jonah with this message, Yet forty years and Niniveh
shall be destroyed, it had made no work at all upon them: it might have amazed
them, but not started them up to such a present repentance: It is the near
approach of our end that drives the work home in us: Tell a Scorner in his
ruff and jollity, that he must dye one day; He receives it carelessly, and
makes nothing of it: but tell him, yet forty days, and you must be called to
judgment, Nay Sir, but two or three days hence, and dye you must; This goes
to the quick, at this news the proud Ruffler is sodainiy dismounted, and his
courage degraded, he looses his blood in his cheeks, and shivers at the heart,
like the leaves of the forest that are shaken with the wind: Ah then, see
death upon us: Look upon our end as standing by us; as near as are the shadow
and the substance, so near are Life and Death; our life is but the shadow,
death brings substance with it, substantial woes, or substantial joys in the
bosom of it.

Cato Had oftentimes spoken in the Senate, that the City Carthage must be
destroyed, being too near a neighbor to the City of Rome: For a long time
together he formed no Oration in the Senate, but he usherd in that still as the
conclusion: yet he could not carry it, because Scipio Nasica being made up of a
contrary opinion, always pleaded on the other side, that it was for the good
of the Roman Commonwealth that Carthage should stand: At last, Cato on a day
brought a green Fig into the Senate among them, and told them, that this Fig
was growing in Carthage but three days ago: and thereby warned them that a
Navy might within three days arrive from Carthage, and lay fiege to their
City: When they heard this, The neernesse of the danger, made such impression
on their thoughts, that whereas before they could never be won upon to assent,
now they voted not to give over till they leveld Carthage to the ground: And
shall not eternity affect us? the neernesse of it write deep Characters of
fear and care upon our hearts? Within three days, and death may lay siege to
our City, to our Soul: beware of evil at hand, of death at hand, of Judgment
at hand. Thou Fool (says Christ) This night thy Soul shall be required of
thee: ah then let us Act betimes, let not the night take us in a night, let not
the night of Death take us in a night of sin and security, then we shall have a
double night at once upon us.

3 Opportunities are very precious: Every one according to the objects they lay
out for, value their opportunities: there is no Prince or great person in the
world, has more Clients and attendants, then opportunity has: All sorts Court
her, and wait with humblest service on her: The Husbandman waits opportunity to
plow, and sow, and reap: The Tradesman attends opportunity to make his bargains
at lowest rate, and sell off his wares at highest price: The Ambitious man
stands at the door of opportunity to raise himself: All (but fools) according
to their occasions run out to meet, and bow the knee to opportunity, and
shall not the dearest opportunities be precious to us? shall we not take the
best opportunity by the hand? Opportunity to gain the most precious things is
the most precious opportunity; opportunity to get the best treasures is the
best opportunity: Godliness is great gain. Heaven is the highest advancement,
The Soul is the Crown and Masterpiece of man, surely then the opportunity to
get and save these should be counted precious opportunity: All things here
(that are of the world) are but nothings, but Idols and shadows of the best
things ( and an Idol is nothing.) Time is 1 Cor. 8. 4. Tempus (...).
but the Idol of Eternity, and things Temporal, but the Idol of things
Eternal: Our estate and our days here are but an Idol: There Is no divinity nor
immortality in them: but God is an absolute and eternal Being, the spring of
all Divine satisfactions, They that live in him, live at an high rate, and live
for ever: How can he complain to want light, that lives in the midst of the
Sun? How can he complain of Thirst, out of whose belly flow rivers of living
water? Surely then opportunity to enjoy God, is the most precious opportunity.
John 7. 38.


Your Importunity has setcht out this Sermon of Opportunity from me: and I
have given you here more then I preached, the time being too narrow to deliver
all at once, and therefore I was feign to omit many things in the Pulpit, which
I had in my papers: The Spirit of the Lord Preach it all over again to our
hearts: I commend you to the Lord,

Who am Yours most deeply obliged to Honor and Serve you, Tho. Froysell.
Clunne October. 8. 1651.
To his highly HONORED, Mr. John Walcott, of WALCOT. Esquire.
SIR, In publishing this Sermon (Preached at your Fathers Funeral) I could not
but publish your Name to it, or it to your Name, you being so near to him, for
Every Child is the Father multiplied: He loved you dearly, for his (and your
own) sake, I cannot but love and honor you highly.

This Sermon was Preached for him, but it was Preached to you; and therefore
God looks that it should work upon you: For at that time you had two Preachers
at once Preaching to you, the Preacher in the Coffin, and the Preacher in the
Pulpit: He preached to you that you must dye, This Sermon preached to you how
you must live: His Death preached to you, that time will be gone; This Sermon
Preaches to you, how you should improve your time: As Death is the way to
eternal life, so an holy life is the way to an happy death: Your Good Father
dyed old, and you may dye young: as God writes some men's life in words at
length, so sometimes God is pleased to write in shorthand, and cut a long life
into a small Monosyllable: and therefore turn and wind your present stock of
time to the best, and grow rich in grace upon it. Remember

1 You cannot begin too soon to serve Jesus Christ: One may begin too late, but
he can never begin too soon to serve Christ: Where should the Flower of your
Age grow but in the Garden of his service? Bp. Hall.
It is the Policy of the Devil to discourage Early holiness: He that goes out
betimes in the morning, is more like to dispatch his Journey, than he that
lingers till the day be spent.

2 You can never do too much for Jesus Christ: Religion know sno Religio non
potest habere excessum secundum quantitatem absolu. am, potest tamen habere
excessum secundum quantitatem proportionis, prout scilicet in cultu divino fit
aliquid quod fieri non debet. Aqui. 22ae. q. 92. a 1. ad. 3.
excess: you cannot savor too much of holiness: as there be some persons
that cannot bear the smell of Musk and sweet perfumes, it fills their brains
and makes them sick, so Hypocrites, (and they are Hypocrites that) cannot abide
the smell of holy preciseness, and the sent of strictness: Paul bids us be
servent in spirit [(...), that is, seething hot] serving the Lord: Quinon
zelat, non amat, He that has not zeal for Christ, has not love to Christ:
True zeal is a Seal of our Election: Strictness and exactness is the beauty
and luster of Religion: I say, you cannot do too much for Jesus Christ, be
has done so much for us: And what does Christ require of you, but he did the
same for you? Is he not upon equal terms with you? Nay before hand with you?
If he calls you to bear the Cross for him, did he not bear a greater Cross for
you? Grace puts no limits to Holiness: Sus non potest far rosas and
amaracum. Franz. and Plin. Romans 12. 11. Iracundi sunt qui amant. Lucian. in
dial. Merc. and Maij Finis appetitio non habet limits defini. o;. Aristot.
Finis praescribit media, sed ipsi fini non praescribitur. Eccl. 7. 29. Genesis 1.
26.
He that makes God his End, thinks he can never have enough of God, or be too
holy for God: And though his actions of Holiness, and his forwardness in them
overrun his Credit, or overthrow his Estate, yet he cares not, repents not;
for it is not his End to preserve himself, but to serve Jesus Christ upon him
self.

3 Holiness is no upstart: Vunder which notion the world looks upon it: as if
preciseness in Religion were a new fashion taken up, and put on by some but of
late: No; Holiness was the first Suite that ever was put upon the back of man's
nature: It Is elder then Sin: It Is the first borne: God made man Righteous: It Is
more natural to man to be righteous; Sin is against nature: It Is a defect of
nature: It came (as I may say) of the wrong side of the Hedge, a mere Bastard:
God is not the Parent of it, it has nothing of God in it, 'twas the Devil that
begat it upon man's nature, and therefore it is of a later Edition then grace,
Grace was, when sin was not: Let us make man (says God) in our Image, after
our likeness: You see Grace is of a most ancient house, of the highest
antiquity, and therefore if any thing will, it will ennoble you.

4 And that you may be beated into zeal for Jesus Christ, Live in the
Scripture fire: as the Salamander (they say) lives in the fire, so do you live
in the Scripture, as your Element: It will scorch you into en holy love to
Jesus Christ: No book becomes your hand like the Bible: It made David wiser
then his Teachers: It Is this Book that makes Preachers, and this Book is the
best Preacher: This Book will preach to you in your Chamber: By this Book all
Preachers and Hearers must be judged at the last day: This Book will expound
to you that hidden Book that is within you, your Conscience-: The Book of
Conscience is a secret and intricate piece, very few are well read in it, most
deceived by it; but this Book of Scripture I say, this Book will discover it,
and show you all the Errata in it; it will search your very heart, and tell all
its secrets to you, nay this Book will tell out Gods heart to you, and his
mind concerning you, Ego odi libros meos, and saepe opto eos interire, quod
metuo ne morentur lectores, and abducant a lectione ipsius Scripturae, quae
sola omnis sapientiae fons est, etc.
Luther hated his own Books, and (says he) I often wish they were all lost,
fearing least they should hold Readers in delay, and take them off from reading
Scripture.

Jerome gives a strange narrative of himself, how he was dragged to the
Tribunal, because he had read Cicero more greedily then he did the Scripture;
Being asked of my condition, (says he) I answered, I was a Christian: Thou
lie (says the Judge) Ciceronianus es, non Christianus: Thou art a
Ciceronian, not a Christian; for where thy Treasure is, there is thy heart also.
Presently (says he) I was put to silence, and had not a word to say: and among
the stripes (for he had commanded me to be beaten) I was scorched more with the
fire of Conscience considering with my self that Verse, In the Grave who will
give thee thanks? Then I began to cr^, Have Psalm. 6.
mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me: This voice sounded loud amidst the
scourgings: At last, they that stood by, casting themselves down at the
Presidents knees, prayed him, that he would pardon my youth, and give place of
Repentance to my Error: Then he requiring punishment, if at any time I read
heathen Books, I, who in such a case would have promised greater matters, began
to swear deeply, saying, Lord, If at any time I should read those secular
Books I have denied thee: And so upon this Oath he was dismissed: And he adds
moreover, Neither was this a sleep or a vain dream, with which we are often
deluded, Witness that Tribunal before which I lay; witness that severe
judgment which I trembled at, that I pray God I never fall again into such
examination by torment: I confess I had my shoulders black and blew, and felt
the blows after my sleep, and have since read Gods word with such endeavor,
as I never read before any humane writings: Thus far Saint Jerome: Now let this
passage awake you, and all of us: Let us lay aside the sublimest curiosities of
man's wit, all Volumnes for Scripture, And all employment for Heaven.

Wing your haste, you have the flourishing plumes of Age upon you, How far
might you fly and soar up quite to an heaven of experience, and communion with
Jesus Christ, if you would loose no time: I say, if you would loose no time: I
hope you will not, I pray you may not: For you may see in this Sermon, That
opportunity is an unvaluable Treasure, and yet a transient Treasure; it
carries lasting things along with it, and yet it self lasts not, stays not
with us: You may see in this Sermon, what great things you may loose, if you
loose your opprotunity; you may loose your self if you loose your opportunity.

God has set you upon the higher ground, above many in the world, Act highly
for him: Lay up a Rich stock of Grace within you, that you may have an heart to
act for him in public: I wish you prosperity here, felicity hereafter: Accept
t his Dedication from him, who does, and shall ever rest,

Your real Servant in CHRIST JESUS. THO. FROYSEL.
CLUN. October. 8. 1651.
JOHN XII. VIII. For the Poor always ye have with you, but me ye have not
always.
Mee-thinks I see a sad concourse of people before me this day; and truly who
can be here and not be sad? A great man and a good man is fallen this day: He
lived amiable, and dyed desirable; I am persuaded, you could all find in your
hearts to wish him into life again, but that you are loath to displease God;
We must submit and kiss the hand of providence in the death of our dearest
Friends and Saints: We are now to perform our last office to him, we have
brought him from his house to his house, I mean his grave, which must house
him up till the great day of the Resurrection. Eccles. 12. 5


You see what Death does, it plucks up the tree by the roots. the Cedar as well
as the Shrub: To day we are green, within a little while we are not seen: Stay
but a few days, and such a day as this will be thy day: And therefore that we
may make a serious and spiritual use of this occasion, turn your eye and cast
your thoughts upon the words of my Text.

For the poor ye have always with you, but me ye have not always. These
words are the words of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and they are an
Apology or Defense which he makes for a poor Saint, who having done a good
work (an act of love to Jesus Christ) was censured for it.

1 The work which was done, you shall see in the third ver. Then took Mary a
pound of ointment, of Spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus,
And wiped his feet with her hair, and the House was filled with the odor of
the ointment: Observe,

Jesus Christ:

2 Love will spare no cost: the Saints will spend the Spikenard of their
credit, and the oil of their life upon Jesus Christ: where we dearly love
Christ, nothing is too dear for him.

2 You shall find this work of love ecclipsed, and censured in th 4th. ver.
Then says one of his Disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simons Son which should betray
him, Why was not this sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?



And this he said (says the 6. verse) not that he cared for the poor, but
because he was a Thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein.



3 Now follows Christ's Apology and Defense of her, v. 7. Then said Jesus, Let
her alo ne

Jesus Christ will take his Saints part and plead their cause ^hil nocet
ca^uniator, si te (...) tua opera pro^t Deus. Ferus.
against the wicked.

The Lord Christ pleads and justifies her action by two arguments.

1 The one Argument, from the end of the action, The honor of Jesus Christ,
ver. 7. [ Against the day of my burying has she kept this] That is, ye do
willingly allow sweet balmes and rich perfumes for the dead: Now I am within a
little of death; Behold this woman has herein reached beyond your conceit, she
has done this (as her last office) toward my burial: I hope you will afford
me those solemnities of honor which are given to others at their burial; now,
against the day of my Burial has she kept this.

2 The other Argument of defense he takes from the opportunity of it; she has
now an opportunity to show me kindness, ^aesens pro fu^o, ut infra. ^h. 16.
10. ^at. 28. 20.
which within a little while will be taken from her [ For the poor always you
have with you, but me ye have not alwayes] and therefore let her show me
kindness while she may: Ye have not me always with you: that is, ye shall
not have me always with you: Indeed, I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world, in respect of my divine presence, but me ye have not always with
you, in respect of my humane presence. Six days hence I dye, and go to
Heaven, I go quite away from you, and you shall neither seem, nor have me
again among you to perform any such offices of respect to me, and therefore
as for this action, she does well to take the opportunity, which will be taken
from her. Observe, and it is the point I shall discourse of at this time;

There is an opportunity for good, which if we neglect, we may never have the
like again.

And therefore Mark renders it thus, for you have the poor Mark 14. 7.
with you always, and whenever you will you may do them good, [i. e. at any
time] but me (says Christ) ye have not always. That is, you shall never want
the opportunity of showing kindness to the poor, for ye shall never want poor
among you; the poor that want, you shall not want among you, they shall always
dwell among you, some poor or other as objects of your Charity: but you cannot
always perform service to me in my body, for you shall not have me always in
this visible form and presence with you. And therefore be not angry with this
woman, in that whilst I am present in body, she has done this service to my
body; The hour is coming you shall wish to do the like, but cannot; The
opportunity will be Luke 17. 22.
gone, when I am gone, ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of
man, and ye shall not see it: And therefore I say, Docemur hoc verbo, ut non
cessemus been operari, quandocunque et quamdiu occasionem habemus, non enim
semper id poterimus. Ferus in Loc.


There is an opportunity of good, which if we neglect we may never have the
like again.

Time and opportunity differ: Time is the duration or succession of hours;
days, or years, opportunity is a concurrence of all other helps with time to
crown your desires, and give birth to your designs: opportunity is a meeting
of time and means together to effect the end, when time and the means are
married and lodged together they beget opportunity. What opportunity is,
Occasionem pars Temporis, habens in sed alicuius rei idoneam fuciendi aut non
faciendi opportunit^tem. Cicero lib. 1. de invent.


As the Mariner that intends a voyage, Riggs his Ship, lies ready in the
Haven, and waits the wind, his time is all the time he stays there: His
opportunity is when time, and tide, and wind, and all other accommodations
meet together to send him away.

If you would speak with a man upon such a day, your time is any hour in the
day, but your opportunity to speak with him is, when he is at home, and can be
at leisure, and will afford (...), Tempus, spatium temporis in genere: (...)
vero opportunitas Rei gerendae, quam Terentius articulum vocat Pasor. in (...),
Isai. 55. 6.
you his company: When all these claspe together, that is your opportunity: So
suppose thy business be-to speak with God, and seek him for grace or comfort,
thy time to speak with God is all thy life time, but thy opportunity to speak
with God is, when he is at home, and can be found; when he gives thee a heart
to speak to him, and has a heart to speak with thee, and therefore says the
Prophet, Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is
near: when all these are twisted together, that is the thread of thine
opportunity.

Time without opportunity is like a body without the Soul, a dead thing and
mere inanimate carcass, and as the body is left without the Soul, so is time
many times left without her opportunity.

So that time may stay, when opportunity is lost: time may be present when
opportunity Is past: the tree of time may (...).
stand when the leaves of opportunity are dropped of: The stump of time may stick
fast in the root, when the branches of opportunity are cut down: the head of
time may stand, when the golden hairs of opportunity are fallen off: when
opportunity is gone, the head of time is bald.

And therefore I say, that there is an opportunity for good, which if we
neglect, we may never have the like again.

And this I will show you in two things.

1 There is an opportunity of receiving good, which if we neglect, we may never
have the like again.

2 There is an opportunity of doing good, which if we neglect, we may never
have the like again;

There is an opportunity to get, and an opportunity to act; an opportunity to
lay up, and an opportunity to lay out spiritual treasures, which if we neglect
we may never have the like again.

1 I say there is an opportunity of receiving good, which if we neglect, may be
we shall never have the like again.

1. Sometimes there is an opportunity to beget faith in us, which if we neglect
we may never have the like again; as you Esai. 7. 10, 11, 12.
may see in Esai. And the Lord spoke again unto Ahaz, saying, Ask thee a sign
of the Lord thy God, ask it either in the depth beneath, or in the height
above: But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the Lord. Ask a
Sign, where thou will, where thou think it may be the greatest miracle, and
give thee the greatest satisfaction, either in the depth, or in the height, on
earth, or in heaven.

Ah what an opportunity had Ahaz here offered to inspire him with faith! A
miracle where he would, and what he would; for the Prophet Ratio signi autem
(quod certe magnum enim) Regi Achas relinquitur libera, quan velit esse and
habere, sive in supremis, sive in infernis. Sam. Bohl. in Isai.
prescribes not what sign Ahaz should ask, lest happily the truth of the miracle
might be suspected; but leaves it to the Kings own option and free choice,
whether he will have it toward the depth or height, in earth or heaven, if
earth were too low for a miracle, to heigh then his faith, he should have one
as high as heaven.

Ah sweet opportunity! ah strong opportunity to work such a faith in Ahaz, as
to trust God for ever! here was an opportunity for him to try God, to put the
word of God to an experience; and ah! what scope had he? Ask a Sign in earth
or Heaven, where thou will, and what thou will, I will not grudge^t, any thing
to mount thy faith beyond the Region of fear and doubting; to make thee and my
people Israel believe in me, thy faith shall want for nothing to support it;
God gave him leave to be his own Carver.

As when a great friend comes to your house, you entertain him in this
Language, Sir, command all that's here, ask what you will have, it is yours: So did
God be speak Ahaz, all that is in heaven or earth is, for this minute, at thy
service, the choicest miracle that heaven or earth can yield to banquet thy
faith, command it, it is thine: what a rich table of opportunity did God spread
for him? What variety of dishes [a sign from Heaven or earth] did the Lord set
before him, to entertain and feast his faith? Thus does God condescend to
sinners; when they will not come up to him, he comes down to them: This was
kindness enough to strike the fire of Faith out of the hardest flint: Ah what an
opportunity was here lost! and once lost, 'twas lost for ever: we read not that
the like was ever offered Ahaz any more, but he grew worse: when men despise
Gods opportunities, they grow worse and worse.

So again, you have another sad instance in the second of Kings; where Elisha
prophesied in a time of scarcity, Thus says 2 Kin. 7. 1. 2.
the Lord, tomorrow about this time shall a measure of fine flower be sold for
a Shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel in the gate of Samaria; then
a Lord on whose hand the King leaned, answered the man of God, and said,
Behold, If the Lord would make windows in heaven, might this thing be? and he
said, Behold Thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat thereof: And
see this verified. And the King gave the Lord, on whose hand he leaned, the
charge of the Verse. 17.
gate, and the people trod upon him in the gate, and he dyed as the man of God
had said. He sees the plenty for conviction of his unbelief, but he dies and
tastes it not, as a punishment of his unbelief.

2. Sometimes an opportunity of repentance, and so of receiving pardon, is
given to a man, which if he neglect, he may never have the like again: Such an
opportunity Judas had: Judas had conceived a plot in the womb of his intention
to betray Jesus Christ, and formed it up into a conspiracy with the Pharisees
to deliver him to them, yet Jesus Christ gives him an opportunity once more to
repent and recall himself before it be too late; Verily I say unto you, one of
you shall betray me, He that dippeth Mat. 26. 21. 23, 24.
his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray me. The Son of man goes,
as it is written, but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it
had been good for that man if he had not been borne.

Ah Judas! What a thunderclap is here sent from heaven to awake thee? what a
warning-piece goes off to scare thy soul out of sin? 'Twas a providence thou
should sit at table once more with Christ, to hear something fall from his
lips that might melt thy heart; Ah, what an opportunity had thou now put
into thine hand, to repent, and retract thy purpose? for the Lord Jesus does
discover his sin, and does dissuade him from his sin.

1 He does discover the Sin,

But not the person, yet.

I say, He does discover the sin [ one of you shall betray me] the Lord Jesus
discovers the sin that he might recover the sinner, He showed him his sin, that
he might not sin, he showed him his sin before hand, that he might not sin
underhand: he did strike the sin that he might open a vein of confession in
Judas, and make him bleed kindly: Ah what an opportunity was here for Judas to
confess and be forgiven?

2 But he does not discover the person yet: he does not name him that he might
not shame him: he opens the sin but not the person, that he might thaw him and
not harden him: that he might win him, but not irritate and provoke him:
Jesus is yet tender of his credit, how much more of his Soul: what an heavenly
dew of opportunity drops it self upon Judas to moysten his heart?

In like manner, what an opportunity have thou (O Sinner) to repent when God
shall reprove thy secret Adulteries, and unjust dealings, and hypocrisy in a
Sermon, and not discover yet?

2 He does dissuade him from his sin by two arguments.

By Love, and Terror;

1 By Love, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall betray
me: which words were not spoken to discover Judas by this sign, but to
aggravate his sin; as if he should say, my fellow-commoner, one of my familiar
friends, that eats of the same dish with me, shall betray me.

And here Christ endeavors to melt the heart of Judas, and cause him to
forbear, by an argument fetched from all the kindness and intimacy that had
been so long between them: what, my friend? my familiar? who does not only sit
at the same Table with me, but eat of the same dish with me, will he betray me?
will that hand that has been with me in the same dish, dip and dye it self
into a Crimson color in my blood? he disswades him by love, by the law of love
and friendship.

2 He disswades him by Terror: The Son of man goes as it is written Mat. 26. 24.
of him, but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been
good for that man if he had not been born: where observe,

1 The Lord Jesus Christ be wayles not himself, but Judas, even whilst he
threatens Judas, he pities Judas: woe unto that man by wom the Son of man is
betrayed.

2 He does not yet unmaske and disclose Judas: he carries the person yet in the
clouds, he does not as yet say in individuo, Woe to thee O Judas; but speaks
still in the general, Woe to that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed: the
individual discovery of Judas comes in afterward, and here Jesus Christ does
with this threatening way-lay Judas, to make him retreat, Paena predicitur, ut
quem pudor non vicerat, corrigant denunciata supplicia. Hieronim in cap. 26.
Mat.
seeking his salvation, It had been good for that man if he had not been borne:
as if he had said, if nothing else yet will, if nothing that has been said yet
can recall the Traitor from his purpose of sinning, yet let this one thing
bespeak him, and turn his heart quite about, his own safety, his own
fearful condition which will follow upon his sin, let that put a stop to his
progress: Woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed, it had been
good for that man if he had not been borne.

Here the door of opportunity stood open to Judas, and Jesus Christ stood in
the door to invite Judas, but he had not an heart to go in, and the
opportunity was presently shut against him, and he never had the like again:
he goes away, and becomes his own Executioner; Judas betrays Christ, and after
betrays himself, when Christ called him, he would not repent kindly, and now
he meets with an unkind repentance that Swallows him up in the gulf of
despair.

3 A man may have an opportunity given him to save his life, and so by
consequent to save his soul, which if he neglects he may never have the like
again. I will give you two Genesis 19. 12, 13, 14.
sad instances, the one is Lots children in Sodom; Then the men said unto Lot,
whom have thou yet here, either Son in Law, or thy sons or thy daughters, or
what soever thou have in the City, bring it out of this place for we will
destroy this place, because the cry of them is great before the Lord, and the
Lord has sent us to destroy it.

Lots friends, a father to his children. And Lot went out and spoke unto his
sons in law which married his daughters, and said, Up, get ye out of this
place, for the Lord will destroy this City: Behold, here is their opportunity!
an opportunity to save their lives from fire and brimstone, and for ought I
know, their souls from the fire of hell; O golden opportunity! for a man's life
is his Treasure, an opportunity to save ones life is the life of all
opportunities, and therefore poor Lot goes to them, Grace does not extinguish
nature: he flies upon wings of love to them, and tells them, he warnes them
like a Prophet, and bespeaks them like a Father: but what say they? he seemed
as one that mocked to his sons in Law; and so he leaves them, for his time was
short, and now their opportunity is gone, and they are gone too: Farewell now,
you are all dead men and women: God first raines down the golden drops of
opportunity upon them to save their lives, which they neglect, and presently he
raines down showers of fire and brimstone on them, and takes away their lives.
1. Kings 22. 4, 5, 7, 8, 17. and 28.


Another instance is Ahab in the first of the Kings, Will thou go with me to
battle to Ramoth Gilead? and Jehoshaphat said to the King of I Israel, I am as
thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses, and Jehoshaphat
said unto the King of Israel, enquire I pray thee at the word of the Lord to
day, And Jehoshaphat said, is there not here a Prophet of the Lord besides,
that we might enquire of him? And the King of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat,
There is yet one man Michaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we may enquire of the
Lord, but I hate him, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil:
And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the King say so. And he said, I saw all Israel
scattered upon the hills as sheep that have not a Sheapheard, and the Lord said
these have no Master, let them return every to his house in peace: And
Michaiah said, if thou return at all in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me.

Here was his opportunity to save his life: but go he will, his opportunity
expires, and his life too, for he never returns alive again, for a certain
man drew a Bow at a venture, and Verse 34.
smote the King of Israel between the joints of the harness, wherefore he said
unto the driver of his Chariot, Turn thine hand and carry me out of the Host,
for I am wounded.

[ certain man drew a bow at a venture] the man shot the Arrow, but God aimed
it: the man shot at a venture, but God leveld it at Ahab: the man shot at he
knew not who, but Ahab in the whole Army was Gods marks-man; Carry me away
says Ahab out of the Host for I am wounded: Oh Ahab; What think thou now of
Gods opportunities! What say thou now of Micaihas words? I am wounded; says
Ahab, I believe thee, and the loss of thine opportunity wounds thee more;
there is death wounds in thy Soul, as well as in thy body.

4 When an hypocrite will not obey Gods express command, he may lose his
heart, and his restraining grace for ever after; when a man loves a sin better
then Gods command, God leaves him to his sin: When a man gives up himself to a
lust, God finds a time to give him up also, and sets him a going faster: he
opens the sluices, and pulls down the banks, that the man's lust may run in a
full stream, and have nothing to check it.

Sinner! God will one time or other try thee secretly, with a casting command,
a command that shall have the casting voice, and there is thine opportunity to
make or mar thy self for ever.

The Glass of Balaams story will show you the face of this truth in it, when
King Balak sent for Balaam to curse the people Israel, God denies him leave to
go, he sets his command before Number. 22. 12.
before him, Thou shall not go with them, thou shall not curse the people, for
they are blessed: Here Is Balaams opportunity: the command is set before him to
try him to try him, and Balaam stands now upon the turning point, But what is
the issue? When the Messengers came again, Balaam sollicits God again for
leave to go, Balack promises him transcendent and high rewards, and they seal
a deep impression upon the soft wax of his covetous heart, he is upon the wing
to be gone, and what then? God Verse 20.
now in judgment gives him leave to go; God came unto Balaam at night, and
said unto him, It the men come to call thee, rise up and go with them.

But how can these stand together? in the 12 verse God said unto Balaam, Thou
shall not go with them; But in the 20. Verse, If the men come to call thee,
rise up and go with them; Why did God bid him what before he did forbid him?
At the first time, when he told him, Thou shall not go with them, God showed
him the will of his approbation, but when at the second time God said to him,
Rise up, and go with them, 'twas a command with indignation.

Some things God permits with indignation, not for that he gives leave to the
act, but that he gives a man over to his fin in the act: This sufferance
implies not favor, but judgment; God never liked Balaams Journey, he
displeasedly gives way to it.

And now Balaam thine opportunity is lost, and thou a lost man: God will now
give thee up to thine own heart; Balaam after this grows worse and worse; his
heart is given up and hardened, it is steept in sottishness, for an Angel stops
him with a drawn sword in the way, yet he has a mind to go, his Ass does by
miracle speak, and yet he has a mind to go, ah Balaam! where is thine
understanding? I see now thou art a gone man, for thine Ass is wiser then his
Rider, the Ass becomes rational, Balaam becomes brutish, when men repel Gods
opportunities they become more brutish then the beasts.

5 A man may by one short act of sin bring a long curse upon himself and his
posterity: As Ham when he saw his Father Noah drunk, and uncovered in his
Tent, Ah what an opportunity lost he now? had he veiled his fathers nakedness,
and thrown a cloud over it, he had received a blessing: but he goes and
proclaims it to his brethren, and they do what he should have done; they
covered their Faterhs nakedness, and would not turn their eyes to see it. And
Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son had done unto him, and
he said, Cursed is Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren.
Canaan Genesis 9. 24, 25.
was Hams son, Noah ( Nec enim tantum hominis verbum est, sed Dei, imo plus and
polius est prophetia quam ultionis aviditas. Ferus in loc.
as Gods mouth) prophecieth a curse upon the son, for the fathers sin; although
some think Non dubito filium ejusdem cum patre ingenij fuisse, and ipsum
quoque, ut patrem risisse Noe, Mercer.
that Canaan first saw Noah naked, and deriding him alone, called his father to
bear him company in that contempt; Here Ham is cursed in his son Canaan, and a
curse entailed not only to Canaan, but to his posterity. Noah prophecies a
long series, and chain of curses upon Canaan and his children: he makes the
curse hereditary to the name and nation of the Canaanites, (...) A servant of
servants shall he be unto his brethren; that is, the vilest servant: for the
Hebrews express the superlative degree by such a duplication, as [vanity of
vanities] that is, most vain, a [song of songs] a most excellent song: So
here, A servant of servants, that is, the vilest servant: Ah heavy and
prodigious curse! for the Kernel and quintessence of this curse was spiritual,
whereby Canaan and his posterity are sealed up for slaves to sin, and
excommunicate from the Church of God: what a brave opportunity did Ham loose
here to get a large and long blessing on himself and his posterity? and this
opportunity he lost for ever: for the decree is gone forth, [a servants of
servant shall thou be.]

Soul thy not obeying God in such a nick of time may loose thee, thou know
not what: the doing or not doing of one 1 Samuel 10. 8.
act may undo thee for ever: See another instance in Saul [And thou shall go
down before me to Gilgal, and behold I will come down unto thee to offer
burnt offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifi ces of peace offerings, seven days
thou shall tarry till I come to thee, and show thee what thou shall doe] And he
tarried seven days according to the set time that Samuel had appointed, but
Samuel came not to Gilgal, and the people were scattered from him, and Saul
said, bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace offerings, and he offered
the burnt offering; and it came to pass that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold Samuel came, and Saul went out to meet him,
that he might salute him: Samuel had bid Saul stay seven days in Gilgal till
he came: six days he stays, and part of the seventh, he had but a little
part of a day to expect longer: his impatience will not give him leave, for he
offers Sacrifice before Samuel cames, and he had no sooner offered sacrifice
but Samuel come: As soon as he had made an end of offering Verse 10.
the burnt offering, behold Samuel came, and tells him, thou have done
foolishly, for now, mark the word [now] now would the Lord 13.
have established thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever: This one opportunity
improved would have sealed thee the Kingdom; one act of obedience now, would
have given thee a lasting mercy: this minute of time would have got thee a
Crown: scarce is Saul warm in his Kingdom when he has even lost it: how near
may we be to a mercy and miss it? Could thou not wait a little longer Saul?
Thou wast within an inch of a Kingdom, within a hairs breadth of an
established fruition: Saul waited till the season, and then brake off: He got
nothing by all his six days waiting, because he watched not this season: and the
reason is, because though obedience at all times please God, yet there is a
punctual and peculiar season of obedience, wherein he blesses: all the other
acts of obedience are but preparatory, there is a special nick and season of
obedience which crowns with blessing: perseverance is the only grace that
crowns a Christian: Methuselah lived nine hundred ninety and nine years, if he
had fallen away from grace at the nine hundred ninety and nine years end, all
the good that he had done or got before had been quite forgotten: To obtain a
blessing, its not enough to obey God, but we must obey him in that point and
nick of time wherein he will give the blessing; as to meet with a friend in a
place; its not eneugh to walk there often, you may walk there a week together
and not meet him, but you must walk there in that nick of time wherein he
appoints you the meeting.

6 There is sometimes an opportunity given to receive some gift of the spirit,
which if we neglect we shall never have the like again: as you may see in
Elisha, when Elisah was to leave the world, and to ride in state to heaven in
his Coach or bright Chariot, says he to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee
before I 2 Kings 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
be taken away from thee, and Elisha said, I pray thee let a double portion of
thy spirit be upon me, says Elijah thou have asked an bard thing;
nevertheless, if you see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so unto
thee; but if not, it shall not be so: And it came to pass as they still went
on, and talked, that behold there appeared a Chariot of fire, and horses of
fire, and parted them both a sunder, and Elijah went up by a whirlewinde into
heaven, and Elisha saw it, etc.

Here was a ticklish opportunity, a slippery opportunity: had Elisha missed it,
he had never had the like again: So may thou have some gales and rushings in
of the spirit, to put thee on to duty, some breathings of the spirit to blow up
thy cold heart into holy heats and desires; some coruscations and beams of the
spirit to enlighten thee, some joggings and provokings to heavenly
-mindedness, some strengthnings of the spirit against a lust proffered thee,
which if you put off it may be thou will never have the like again.

7 So when a man does by providence enjoy the society and company of a godly
man, that is, of a choice spirit; here he has an opportunity to taste fruit
from him, which if he neglect, he may never have the like again.

A man may by providence be cast upon the company and fruition of such a
precious and fruitful Christian, such an experienced Christian, that he shall
hardly meet with such a one again in all his days: Ah! now how should thou
improve his graces whilst thou have him? How should thou suck experiences
from him? How soon he may be removed from thee, or thou from him, thou know
not: providence that lends thee him and his graces for a while, may carry him
from thee to another place; and then thou loosest thou know not what: Ah!
how will the loss of such an opportunity afterward damp the spirit!

Thus Faelix, whilst Paul was in prison, enjoyed a rich opportunity: he had a
rich Jewel in the Casket of opportunity: Ah what an improvement might Faelix
have made of Paul all that time? he had been happy Faelix then: Sometimes he
sent for Act. 24. 24.
Paul and heard him reason of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come;
but he might have had more of Paul's company if he would: he knew not what a
price he had in his hand whilst he had Paul in his custody: but he lost his
opportunity, for within two years he was removed, and never enjoyed such an
opportunity again: And thus I have done with. the first part.

2 There are opportunities of doing good, which if we neglect me may never have
the like again.

1 When you are traveling, and fall in upon the way with a man you never saw
before, and a thousand to one never shall see again; here is an opportunity for
thee to do his soul good, to drop heaven into his soul; which season thou
may hever have again to season him with a word of grace: Thus Philip falling
in with the Eunuch whilst he was riding on his way homeward from Jerusalem,
closed with him and preached Act. 8. 35. 37.
Christ unto him, and was an instrument to save the soul of him whom he never
saw before, nor ever after saw again.

2 When thou art in an office for a time, it may be but one year, thou art
clothed with authority and opportunity to do good, which thou may never
have again. Time will strip thee of thy robes of Authority, thou may lay
down thy life before thou layst down thy office; if not, yet annual offices
expire, and fall off of themselves, and when thine authority is gone, thy
opportunity is gone: as a man that has a sword or a staff in his hand, if his
staff be wrencht out of his hand, he has lost his opportunity to soil his
enemy; so it is when the staff of authority is passed out of thy hand unto
another, thy time is gone.

Faelix whilst he was in office, was married unto a gallant opportunity to
release Paul out of Prison, but he did not husband the opportunity, and he was
divorced from it for ever, Act. 24. 27.
for says the Text, after two years Portius Festus came into Faelix room, and
Faelix willing to show the Jews a pleasure left Paul bound.

3 So when a man is dying, upon his deathbed, there you have an opportunity to
do his soul good, which you shall never have again: Thus Christ dropped in
grace and good counsel into the thief upon Cross, the Cross, was his
death-bead, which had it been omitted, the thiefs soul had been lost within a
few hours for ever, and the opportunity gone too.

4 So when a friend is in affliction, then thou have an opportunity to strike
whilst the iron is hot, to humble him while he is humbled: to speak a word in
season to him while his heart is seasoning and melting: as the Jews and those
eastern people do plough and sow their ground when the former rain has
softened it, Ah! Sow then (for now is the opportunity) I say, sow the seed of
instruction upon a sinners heart, while the former or latter rain of
affliction falls upon him, it is a softning time, a melting time; while the
rain drops, the earth is soft: He that made a scorn of godliness before,
will then be of another mind, and hear counsel then if ever he will hear it.

5 So when a godly man is by providence cast into a family, he has an
opportunity to distill showers and drop divine influences, whilst (like a star)
he is fixed there, which if he omits, he may never have the like again: thus
Paul being in the Jaylors family preached the Gospel to him, and to his
household, and he believed in God (says the Text) with all his Act. 16. 34.
household.

6 So when a Minister has interests in the hearts of a people, let him improve
it, and look to it, for he knows not how soon the tide may turn, and he never
have the like opportunity 2 Timothy 4. 23.
again.

7 Rich men, You that are in prosperity and have your sails filled with gales
of wealth, you have opportunities to honor God, which others have not, and
which if you neglect you may suddenly never have the like again.

1 You have wherewith to maintain and encourage the Gospel, to give to the
Saints; and truly it is the highest advance of riches, to make riches an
instrument to advance religion: Oh then honor God with thy substance, lay out
for God and his Gospel, least the Lord, thou know not how soon, send a
North Wind to blow upon thee, and freez up thy wealth, and then thou may
never have the like tide of opportunity again.

2 Besides, you have greater opportunities for hearing the word, and praying in
your secret closets, then poor men have, who live upon the sweat of their
brows: you may be praying when the poor must be laboring for their living, you
may be meditating, whilst, they must be getting their bread.

If then you, rich ones, see poor men that are necessitated to work hard for a
mean living, more lively, more frequent and abundant in duties then your
selves are, know now you walk not by rule, where much is given, much is
required; and to whom God has given much, of them he asks the more; who are
happier, they that are in the Kitchen, or they that attend upon the Prince?

Ah, you rich and great persons! this is a high favor and transcendent honor,
that God has freed you from inferior drudgery, to employ you in more noble
services in the Court, while others must serve their occasions; you that have
fullness of the world, you have fullness of time to enjoy the Kings presence,
and wait upon Christ's person in holy duties, and therefore know that you should
be more with God then others: Holiness is your trade, and your closets are
your shops, and every day is a Sabbath day to you: Take your opportunities;
that may be enough for one which is too little for another; where God gives
much opportunities, they must do much for God.

8 A man may have an opportunity to suffer for Christ, which if he nglect he
may never have the like again: To suffer for Christ is honorable, God will not
put this honor upon every one, he puts this honor upon his vessels of honor:
he gives grace to a man, and casts him into a vessel of silver or gold, and
then throws him into the fire to melt, and suffer for his name: The metal of
that Christian must be silver or gold that can suffer for Christ: a vessel of
wood, throw him into the fire, his hoops will fly off, he will break asunder,
and never hold out.

The three children that were cast into the fiery furnace, what glorious mould
and metal were they made of? Had they not taken the opportunity to suffer for
God, they might never have met with such a one again.

1. For what a spreading same and glory of God did their sufferings scatter
over all the world? God is acknowledge and adored by Nebuchadnezzar, a Decree
is made that every People, Nation, and Language which speak amiss against the
God of Shadrach, Mesback and Abednego, shall be cut Dan. 3. 28, 29.
in pieces: Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, blessed be the God of Shadrack
Meshach and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his servents that
trusted in him, and have changed the Kings word, and yielded their bodies, that
they might not serve nor worship any God, except their own God. Therefore I
make a Decree that every People, Nation or Language, which speak any thing
amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be cut in
pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other
God that can deliver after this sort: Here Gods glory shines out of their
sufferings, even enemies acknowledge none like Isreal's God.

Here they found a most glorious opportunity to honor God, which if they had
lost, they might never have had the like again; had they lost this opportunity
God had lost his glory.

2 To honor themselves: for

1 They were no sooner in the fire, but they met with Jesus Dan. 3. 24. 25.
Christ there; Then Nebuchadnezzar the King was astonished, and rose up in haste,
and spoke and said unto his Counselors, Did not we cast three men bound into
the midst of the fire? they answered and said unto the King, True O King: He
answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose walking in the midst of the fire,
and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God: They
were but three that were cast into the fire, but Nebuchadnezzar saw four
there: And the form of the Fourth was like the Son of God: Whether it were
Jesus Christ the natural Son of God, or an Angel, who are called the Sons of
God, here was Verse 28. Job 1. 6.
a great honor; the Angels of the Lord are present with the Saints in their
sufferings, and Jesus Christ is present with the Saints in their sufferings:
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the
Rivers they shall not overflow Isai. 43. 2.
thee, when thou walk through the fire thou shall not be burnt, neither
shall the flame kindle on thee: Angels company and Christ's company is a
wondrous honor: We count it a great honor to have Princes to be our
companions; the Saints in their sufferings have Princes for their companions,
Jesus Christ and his Angels: and thy suffering time is opportunity to enjoy the
company of these Princes and great ones.

2 It was an honor to them, that God should work such Verse 27.
a noble miracle for them, as to stop the mouth of the fire, that it could not
burn them; And the Princes, Governors and Captains, and the Kings Counselors
being gathered together, saw these men upon whose bodies the fire had no power,
nor was an hair of their heads singed, neither were their coats changed, nor
the smell of fire had passed on them: Ah wonderful! So did God honor his
servants: the fire still retained its property of burning, and yet could not
burn them: the power and Impossible est propria perfecta vel ad momentum
temporis suis subjectis seperari. Keckerman log. lib. 1. Nam si urendi vis ab
igne esset sublata, miraculum plane nullum a Deo fai. Editum; quid enim
miraculi sit eam rem non urere, quae non possit urere? Non ergo in tollenda ab
igne urendi facultate miraculum consistebat, sed in eo quod cum vim urendi
maxima^ ignis iste Babilonicus obtineret, vis ills fuit divinitu^; impedita, ne
se exereret, ut quidem statim post exeruit absumens eos qui in fornacem eandem
inijciebantur. Kecker. ibid.
property of burning was not taken from the fire, for then it had been no
miracle: what miracle is it for that thing not to burn which cannot burn? The
miracle therefore did not consist in taking away the natural power of burning
from the fire, but in this that when the fire had the gratest heat and power of
burning, yet it could not burn them: The fire had its full power and property
to burn, but could not exercise it: what an honor was it to walk safe in the
midst of the fire? How did God magnify them, that they should be in the fire
and yet be safe from the fire? the fire does not kill them but kiss them: the
fire does not consume them, but court them; and denies it self, to give them
courteous entertainment: they walk in the fire as in a pleasant air: what
honors are these put upon poor creatures! they were bound hand and foot, when
they were cast into the fire, and yet Nebuchadnezzar sees them walk: the fire
had heat to burn their bonds, but not power to touch their bodies: Had they
mist this opportunity of suffering they had missed of this honor.

3 Their suffering was the Churches honor and advantage: it won great respect
and honor to the Jewish Church and Religion: Neluchadnezzar makes a Decree
that no people shall speak any thing amiss of the God of Shadrach, Meshach
and Abednego: Now their God comes into request with the King himself, and
their deliverance flying abroad upon the wing of fame, makes their God famous,
and their Religion famous, and their people the Jews famous: How many taunts
and derisions cast daily at the Jews for their worship, were suppressed by the
severity of this Law? Without doubt this D^cree was of special use for the
comfort of the Jews, they had a sweet, calm, and Halcion time of peace and
serenity upon it; Ah! What honor and advantage brought they to the Church by
taking this opportunity of suffering?

4 And did not their suffering and their deliverance (think ye) strengthen the
weak faith of their distressed brethren the poor Jews? Did it not inspire them
with courage, and root them deeper in the love of their Religion? How many
Heathens and Chaldeans might this great miracle of deliverance work home to
the true God? Surely Nebuchadnezzars Decree made the learning of God famous
among the Gentiles, a special help to conversion; as we may see in the three
Magi or wise Matthew. 2.
men.

Ah my beloved! your sufferings may be the conversion of others: How willing
would we be to preach a Sermon if we knew it would be the conversion of some
Soul? Let me tell you that thy suffering for Christ may be the best Sermon that
ever thou preachest all thy life long, and win more upon souls, then all the
Sermons thou did preach in all thy life: as we say, that to live well is the
best preaching, I say also, to suffer well is the best preaching; To suffer for
godliness is the most powerful preaching of godliness. He that can suffer
best for Jesus Christ is the best preacher of Jesus Christ: the best sufferer
is the best Preacher.

Ah you Saints! this way you may all be Preachers: let your lives preach, and
let your sufferings preach Jesus Christ: loose not your opportunities of
suffering.

5 I am sure also they will increase your future glory: 2 Cor. 4. 17.
every suffering will be a grain put into the scale of your heavenly glory, to
make it more weighty: For our light affliction which is but for a moment,
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory: Oh! be for
ever contented to have fellowship with Jesus Christ in all his sufferings; It
is said that the Saints have grace for grace with Jesus Christ, be content also
to have suffering for suffering with Jesus Christ, you shall also have glory
for glory with him: if you have suffering for suffering, you shall also have
glory for glory with him: Ah then! Loose not your opportunities of suffering
for Jesus Christ: if you loose your opportunity of suffering, you loose a part,
a beam of your glory, your glory in heaven will be so much the darker.

9 You that are young men, that are the twigs and branches of youth, you have
blossoms of opportunities growing on you, which if you neglect you shall never
have the like again: There are opportunities that are married to youth, which
if you sever can never be united again: you have strength to serve Christ,
which old age has not: you have yet no cares of the world in your heads to
keep out heavenly contemplations: you are yet scarce in the world, and therefore
have not much of the world in you: Oh drink in heaven, before you drink in
the cares of the world into your thoughts: Fill your thoughts first with God
before you fill them with the world; fill your Sails with the gales of Christ,
before they are filled with the aerie vanities of the creature: you have a great
deal of your time before you, when old men have their time behind them, gone
and past, and but a little of it left before them.

10 So there is an opportunity sometimes to save a whole Church, which if we
neglect, we may never have the like again: Such an opportunity came before
Hester, which if she had not looked it in the face, and embraced it, all the
Jews had been cut off at one blow by Hamans policy: He had got the Kings
Decree that the thing should be done, If it please the King let it be written
that they may be destroyed, and the King took his Ring Hester 3. 9, 10, 11.
from off his hand, and gave it unto Haman, and said unto Haman, the silver is
given unto thee, the people also to do with them as it seems good to thee:
The signet-Ring did represent the Kings authority and name; and therefore when
one gave his Ring to another he gave his power over to him to do what he would
in his name; as Pharaoh took his Ring off from his hand, and put it upon
Joseph's hand, that Joseph might in the Kings name sign Decrees as Viceroy of
Egypt; and Alexander the Great when he was sick and lay speechless, and saw no
hopes of life, took his Ring from his finger, and gave it to Perdiccas to
signify (as is thought) that 'twas his mind that Perdiccas should succeed him:
So Haman had got the Kings Ring to sign the fatal Decree, And letters were
sent by post into all the Kings Verse 13.
Provinces to destroy, to kill and to cause to perish all Jews both young and
old, little children and women in one day: Here the poor Church was at a dead
lift: Hamans teeming hopes were at the birth, nay (as it were) betwixt the
womb and the world; and now here is an opportunity (now or never) to step in and
save the Church: Save Lord, now or never, Hester takes the opportunity, Who
knows says Mordecay to her, whether thou art Hester 4. 14.
come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Such a time, which carries
nothing but death in the womb of it: Such a time, wherein the Jews, as if all
their necks had stood upon one shoulder, were destined to the blow: at this
time Hester strangled the design, and saved the Church by taking the
opportunity, which had she neglected, a thousand to one she her self had never
escaped to have had the like again.

11 Sometimes there is an opportunity given to reform and purge a Land, which
if we neglect may never be given again in our days, as you may see in Judges,
the first and second Chapter; in the first Chapter there you shall find that
Judge. 1. 21. 27. 29. 30.
the Children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that inhabited
Jerusalem, but the Jebusiies did dwell with the children of Benjamin in
Jerusalem: Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her
towns, and neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer:
and neither did Zebulun drive out the Inhabitants of Kitron, nor the
Inhabitants of Nahalol, but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became
Tributaries, and what then? see Judges 2. 1, 2, 3. An Angel of the Lord came up
from Gilgall to Bochim, and said, I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have
brought you into the Land which I swear unto your Fathers, and I said, I will
never break my Covenant with you, and you shall make no league with the
Inhabitants of this Land, you shall throw down their Alters, but you have not
obeyed my voice [you have not apprehended the season and opportunity, what
then? it is lost in your days, and in your sons days, for many generations] For
now I will not drive them out from before you: I have said it; it is now past
cure, but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a
snare unto you, And when the Angel of the Lord spoke these words unto all the
children of Israel, the people lift up their voice, and wept, and they called
the name of that place Bochin, that is Weepers: they wept so much, because they
had let slip their opportunity, but all their floods of tears could not bring
back the opportunity again, nor turn the tide: I pray God this be not Englands
case; time was when we had the opportunity to destroy the Canaanites, Heresy,
Error, Profaneness out of land: but now the bird of opportunity is fled out
of our hand: She has taken wing, is fled away and gone: and I fear me we
shall not see her again in our days: the Scepter of Jesus Christ is the primum
mobile of all good government, set him up, and his government right, and he
will set Stat^s right: till this great wheel be set right, all the lesser are
like enough to go wrong: Ah England! I am afraid of Ezekiel. 24. 13.
that Text concerning thee, Because I would have purged thee, and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee.

Let us now make application; And first then,



1 you loose your souls, we Ministers loose all our labor, and Christ loses
all his blood that he has shed for your souls, and what account can you give
to God for so much cost? Most of you do not value your souls worth the saving:
Many a man does prize his Ox or his Ass more then some men prize their souls.

2 The Devils have lost their opportunities, will you not take warning by the
Devils? if you will not take your opportunities you will shortly be as
irrecoverable as the Devils.

3 Opportunities iost cannot be bought again for gold: As Ahab could not buy
Naboths Vineyard of him, Naboth would take no money for it; so opportunities
lost cannot be bought back again for money; if thou would bid never so high
for them, thou can not have them upon any price; thou can not pray thine
opportunities back again, thou can not weep thine opportunities back again,
as you may see by Esau, he lost his opportunity, and When afterward he would
have inherited Heb. 12. 17.
the blessing, he could find no place of repentance, though he sought it with
tears: Jacob was no sooner gone away with the blessing, but Esau comes in with
hope of the blessing, the blessing was gone but one minute, and yet cannot be
recovered.

4 Every opportunity thou loosest thou growest worse and worse: thou art bad to
day, if thou loosest this opportunity, Genesis 4. 6, 7.
thou shall be worse to morrow: as Cain, God conversed with him (as it were) to
day, Why art thou wroth? why is thy countenance fallen, if thou do well, shall
thou not be accepted? and if thou do not well sin lies at the door: but he
was not bettered by this opportunity, and presently he grew worse upon it,
Verse 8.
for the next thing he did was, he talked with his brother Abel, and slew him.

5 Salvation, which these opportunities carry in their womb, is a transcendent
birth, a blessing of the first magnitude: who would not be saved? all things
else are but shadows and trifles, to this reality called Salvation.

Those are the sons of wisdom that contend for substance, for God, for
heaven: God is not a thing indifferent, and, Jesus Christ is no circumstance:
Honors, ease, worldly profits Istae divitiae nec verae sunt nec vestrae.
and pleasures, all these, these I say, are in their nature things indifferent,
and being compared and put in the scale with Christ, are less then things
indifferent, even toys, dreams, loss, dung, mere nothings, at best but
fading things, that pass away as a picture drawn upon the Ice, which soon
vanishes: They are mere accidents, nay separable accidents, that may be taken
from the subject without its hurt, a man may spare them and yet be happy; but
God is the Essence of the Soul, the eternal Entity of our happiness. This is
life eternal to know thee Ioh. 17. 3.
the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

6 It may be (O Sinner) that art now in thy sins, it may be this very day, even
this particular Sermon, may be thy day, that if thou repent not at this very
Sermon thou loosest eternal life for ever.

Thus Jesus Christ ended the day of grace on the Scribes and Pharisees even in
the very Sermon time whilst Christ was preaching to them, they were delivered
up to hardness of heart.

7 In a word, to pass by Jesus Christ carries with it the most surpassing
wrath: to disrespect the offer of mercy Heb. 2. 3.
ushers in the greatest misery. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation. That is, you shall not escape so, you shall not pass with an
ordinary doom upon you.

Sinners! opportunity attends you, Christ is yours if you'I have him: the Lord
Jesus is at your service, if you will embrace him: God sends up and down the
world to offer Salvation, hence that phrase [ my salvation is gone forth] Mercy
wayts on you, and kneels to you, and does obeisance to your souls; when you are
running from it, mercy runs after you to catch you and embrace you: Ah how long
has freegrace stood at your doors, waiting your leisure when you would let her
in? yet she calls and knocks again, you may yet be saved, but if you will go
on still, and disrespect mercy, it brings the greatest misery; The greatest
severity goes along with the Gospel: greatest severity goes along with the
greatest mercy.

The Gospel is the greatest mercy that ever saluted the world, and there is the
greatest severity with the Gospel that ever came with any mercy into the world:
Men shall be deeper in hell because heaven was offered them, and they would
not: All they suffer here is but typical of the wrath to come: here they but
sip of the top of Gods cup, there they must drink the dreggs, though it be
eternity, to the bottom; a Sodomite in Hell shall fare better then the refuser
of Jesus Christ, See the 10. Mat. 14, 15. verses, and Whosoever shall not
receive you, nor hear your words, when you depart out of that house or City,
shake off the dust of your feet; Verily I say unto you it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorah in the day of Judgment, then for
that City. Is not here the greatest severity with the greatest mercy? So again
in Mat. 11. 21, 22. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the
mighty works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sydon, they
would have repented long ago in Sackcloth and ashes; but I say unto you, it
shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sydon at the day of Judgment then for
you. Is not here the greatest severity going along with the greatest mercy?

God can better bear any thing then the contempt of his free grace in the
offers of mercy.

More yet; When the Gospel began to be preached, faith the Text, Now is the Axe
laid to the root of the Tree; Jesus Christ Matthew. 3. 10.
comes with his Basket and his Axe, his Basket togather fruit, his Axe to cut
down the tree if it will not bear fruit; and is not here the greatest severity
with the greatest mercy? If there were a sword on Moses thigh, there is an Axe
in Christ's hand. Now is the Axe laid to the root of the tree [Now] that is,
your opportunity is Now, if you pass by this [now] you are gone; for ought I
can tell, you are chopped off presently. Neglect not the present [Now] least ye
be cut off for ever.

8 Consider sin is your dishonor! it does Mundiliaenim necessaria est ad hoc,
quod men's Deo applicetur, quia men's Humana inquinatur ex hoc quod inferioribus
rebus conjungitur; sicut quaelibet Res ex immix-tione pejoris sordescit ut
argen. turn ex immixtione plumbi. Aquia. sum. 22ae. q. 81. ar 8 cup.
degrade you. The vesture of man's nature is base and beggarly since it was
patched with sin: It is a debasing of the gold to marry it with any metal of a
courser birth, so it is a dishonor to man to match his golden nature (so God at
first made it holy and righteous) I say, to match thy golden nature to
base-borne dross, to low-borne sin, which derives its pedigree from hell.

None but Jesus Christ is a fit match for the soul of man, take the
opportunity then, and make choice of Jesus Christ, Espouse thy soul to him, and
keep the marriage knot inviolate with him, Romans 7. 4.

9 Come in quickly, take the opportunity to come in presently to Jesus Christ,
least your sins (before you are aware) ripen too fast, and you be cut down you
know not how soon Sins De uno peccato enim in aliud, ex una turpitudine and
stuhitia in aliam ruerant. Ita Aetas parentumpejor avis tulit, Hos nequiore,
mox daturos progeniem vitiosiorem. Neque tantum a peccato ad peccatum, sed ab
errore and stuhitia ad (...) ad insaniam et corruptionem mentis, ac rationis
Eversionem proceditur. Cocceius, ad 2 Timothy 3.
multiply; one sin will shortly multiply into many; they are like circles in a
pond, one circle begets another, so does one sin beget another, a lesser begets
a greater, as in a case of stairs, one staire is a step to another, so every
sin is a staire to help up to higher and worse sins.

It is wonderful to behold the great flames bred out of small sparks of sin,
how one sin hatched a greater; sin is like a whirlpool, which first sucks in
one part, and then another, and never desists until it draws in and plungeth
the wholebody.

10. man may perform duties of Religion after his day of grace is set upon
him: you think that as long as a man performs duties, and does many good
things; his day of grace is not past: My beloved, observe me. A man may come to
Church, perform religious duties, do many good things, have many meltings
upon his heart, after his day of grace is past and gone: as Saul went on in
duties of Religion as well after Samuel had pronounced the Lords doom upon him
as before. How many times was he offering sacrifice to the Lord, after the
Prophet had told him that he was a man rejected? How many good speeches came
from him? what meltings some time fell in upon his soul? as if there were
hopes of him, and yet a lost man, his opportunities of Jesus Christ.

There are mysteries Mysteria tremenda.
in Gods opportunities. My beloved, there are these three characters of
mystery and excellency engraven upon Gods opportunities; It may be some may
think of and add more, but I at present observe three characters of mystery
and excellency upon Gods opportunities. First, they are easy, Secondly, they
are sudden and unexspected, Thirdly, sometimes they come beside our

1 First, Gods opportunities are easy, they bring great matters to birth with
easy travel: they bring hard things to pass easily: Oh that this were
observed. In Gods opportunity it is an easy thing to believe, to repent, to
subdue a sin, and to overcome a temptation: as it is an easy matter for the
Ship to go when she has the wind to fill her sayls. Every thing is done
easily in Gods opportunity, whether it be to save a soul, or to destroy a
soul: because God in his opportunity makes all things concur and brings
circumstances together to strike up the action suddenly you shall see it.

1 First, In the ruin of a man, in the destruction of a man: when it is Gods
opportunity to destroy a man, what easy way will he make for it? As Saul, when
Gods time came that he must perish, he slew himself, there was no difficulty
in the 1 Samuel 31. 4.
work, he fell himself upon his sword, as the stone does to its center: How
easily was Jericho taken? when the Priests blew the Trumpets, and the people
shouted, the walls fell down flat of themselves: How easily was Pharaoh and his
Army destroyed in the red Sea? The Sea was divided, and a way made for him,
that he might not stand upon it, but run voluntary into the womb of death; Oh
the efficacy of Gods opportunities! How easily did Goliath fall, what stirs
and blusterings did he act a little before upon the stage of pride and
boasting, making a challenge to all Israel? but when Gods opportunity comes
how easily is he slain? And therefore the Scripture speaks this with an
Emphasis. So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone,
and smote the Philistine, and slew him, but there was no sword in the hand of
David.

2 So Gods opportunities work good for men easily, they bring great matters of
good to pass with no difficulty: when it is Gods opportunity that David shall
take possession of his Kingdom, it falls into his mouth (as it were) not only
Saul, but all his sons, (that might stand as so many screens between David and
the Crown) are taken out of the way. The house of Judah, they of themselves,
come and anoint David King over them. Then Abner Saul's General of his whole
Army, displeased with Ishbosheth revolts to David, and all the Tribes come to
Hebron to anoint David King over Israel: Do you see? this great work is done
to his hand.

So in Gods opportunities it is an easy thing to believe and repent, Act. 16.
14. Luke 19. 6. 1 Kin. 19. 20.

Ah my beloved! the ease of beleiving and repenting attends a peculiar
opportunity of Gods own vouchsafing in which he does more readily work then
at other times.

How shall I know when it is easy for me to believe and repent?

1 When the light of the spirit does flash into the eye of thy soul, then thy
work is easy, as when the light of the day does dart its rays in at the
windows of thy Chamber it is easy for thee to read a small print. Thus when a
light from Heaven did shine upon Paul, and shine into Paul, how easy did his
work come off? Lord what will thou have me to do?

2 When thy heart is made combustible and ready to take fire: as when the
tinder is dry it is easy to light a candle, the least spark that falls on it
takes fire, and when the fire is combustible, it is an easy matter to kindle a
fire, it burns presently: So when thy heart is softened it easily takes the
impression of the seal upon it, and when thy thoughts are stirred up and made
combustible, it is an easy matter to kindle them into a fire of repentance, as
in the Acts, when they were pricked in Act. 2.
the heart, they said, Men and brethren what shall we do? repent (says
Peter) and they took presently.

3 When thine affections and desires are upon the wheel, then any work is
easy, as when a load is upon the wheel it is drawn easily, whereas if you
should go about to lug it along upon the ground it comes on heavily; and
therefore the Lord pursuing Pharaoh, took off his Chariot wheels, and they
drove on heavily: So when God puts thine affections upon the wheel, and sets
them a going, then it is easy for thee to do great matters, and therefore
observe thine opportunity.

2 Gods opportunities are sudden and unexpected: they come upon us without
preparation; God does not send us word before hand, when he will visit us and
come to us, as sometimes we send to a friend that we will dine with him, or
speak with him at such an hour; but Gods opportunities come suddenly upon us
in the twinkling of an eye, before we be aware, when we know nothing of it, and
the spirit rusheth in upon a man, and gives him no notice before hand, Thus
Christ came and called Matthew [follow me] on a sudden, whilst he was sitting
at the receipt of Custom, And he arose and followed him.

Some poor souls have sent up many a prayer to heaven for assurance, and it
has not come, and they poor creatures have thought that God has not regarded
them all the while, and then, on a sudden, assurance has come when they looked
not for it: Ah dear father, how many mercies from thee have come to us
uninvited! thy preventing grace and mercy does always visit us uninvited: we
send not for it, it comes freely to us.

3 Gods opportunities come besides our intention, they come sometimes when we
aim not at them: We stumble upon heaven, when we are seeking something else;
as a man that dug in his garden only to set roots and plants, and found a
pot of gold there; and as Saul went to Samuel to enquire for his Fathers Asses,
and found a Kingdom. This was besides his intention, he sought one thing and
found another, his poor Asses were in his intention, but a Crown was the
object he met with in execution. Oh the mysteries of opportunity! It Is so many
times in the matters of heaven, I am found says God of them that sought me
not. Many a soul finds Heaven besides his intention: How strangely do some
meet with a Commission? they meet with heaven and grace by accident (as it
were) they go to a place only to seek health or food, something for the body,
and there they light upon (besides their intention) salvation for their souls,
as the lame man seeing Peter and John asked an alms, there was all his
intention, and met with a cure both of body and soul: and the woman of Samaria
came to the Well for water, and there found a Christ. It was an accident to her
to meet Christ there: Gods opportunity comes upon her besides her intention: Ah
gracious God! that she should come for water that very hour when Christ was
there, not before nor after, but that very hour when Christ is there: she
came for water which was but puddle, and found a Spring of life; So the
Mariners that took Jonah into their Ship, they received him only Jonah 1. 3.
for the fare, he paid them, that was all their intention, their fare and pay
for carriage was all their aim, but they met with a better fare, conversion to
the true God, verse 16. Then the m^n (h^y were Heathens) feared the Lord
exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice to the Lord [that is, to the true God, not
to Neptune but to the Lord] and made vows, So Moses went to mount Horeb only
to keep his Fathers sheep, but there he met with God in the burning bush. Thus
you see Gods opportunities are clothed with stately robes of mystery upon
them, behold them therefore with holy fear and reverence.



Esau said unto Jacob, Have thou but one blessing oh my Father? But God Genesis
27. 38.
has many blessings, he has many mercies, and therefore many opportunities
for lost souls, he does not give off for many denyals; after many refusalls
God comes on again, and woes afresh: he has a treasury of opportunities, a
quiver full of opportunities, and if one arrow of mercy be spent, if more
arrows of opportunity be lost, and thrown away upon thee, he has more yet to
shoot at thee, and more yet; Oh that God would now draw out an arrow of
conversion, and hit thy soul with it! What though God has bent his bow, and
shot many an arrow, many a Sermon at thee, and missed? Yet he will shoot
again, he can shoot and hit, he is rich in mercies, and therefore rich in
opportunities: thine opportunity yet is not gone, as you may see in Revel. 2.
4. 5. Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy
first love. Observe, thou that have decayed in the heat of thy first love, God
has somewhat against thee, he has a quarrel with thee, and therefore awake
with all speed, for God has somewhat against thee, but yet thine opportunity
is not gone: for says God in the next words; Remember therefore whence thou
art fallen, and repent, and do thy first works, there is yet opportunity that
shines on thee, the Sun is not yet set, though it be going down: and if thou will remember whence thou art fallen, and repent, and make haste to rise, God
will rather make the Sun to stand still (as he did in Joshuahs time) The Sun of
opportunity shall rather stand still in the orb of time, then that thou shall
loose thy soul, therefore look about thee.



Laodicea, Rev. 3. 15. I know thy works [I know what they are and utterly
dislike them] thou art neither hot nor cold, Thou art neither an open enemy,
nor yet truly zealous of my Gospel, verse 16. Therefore because thou art
lukewarm I will spew thee out of my mouth: as tepid and lukewarm water does
provoke the stomach to spew it out again: So will I (says God) spew thee and
thy profession out, it is so loathsome to me. Observe (thou lukewarm
Christian) thou art in a sad and dangerous condition, God cannot bear with thy
profession long, as the stomach cannot hold lukewarm water long within it, yet
thine opportunities are not yet gone, for says Christ, Behold I stand at the
door, and knock, if any man hear Verse 20.
my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and sup with him and he
with me; though thou art lukewarm and deservest with thy profession to be
spewed out of my mouth, yet I stand at the door and knock: Christ was going. (O
observe thou lukewarm Christian, and therefore says he) I stand at the door
and knock, but (says he) l'le pause a while before I go, l'le stay a little
and then go, I am unwilling to leave thee yet, though thou shut me out I will
not yet be gone, though the door be locked against me, yet I Will knock a while;
for this phrase shows that Christ was stayed from entering in presently the
doors being shut against him; yet he would stand there waiting, though you be
all asleep within, yet I will see whether I can knock you up: The opportunity
waited still upon them.



Jonah in the Whales belly, he had sinned, highly against the Lord, like a
Runagate who fled from his Masters service, and when he was upon the Sea, a
tempest pursues him, which would not give him over; a Lot to discover the
malefactor is cast, and it falls upon Jonas; The Mariners they cast him over
Shipboard: here was a fearful case, to be cast over Shipp-board with a
guilty conscience: how did he fall into the Sea, that had a Sea of terror in
him? Well; he is cast in, and a Whale swallows him, in whose belly he is lodged
for three days and three nights, after such a manner as was never heard of
before: how perplexed was his state think you? a man drowned and not drowned;
devoured, but not digested; alive, but yet as dead; ah what a dying soul had he
in the living Fish! expecting every minute the fearful dissolution of his
Soul from his body; for he was under horror of conscience, now lying on him for
his sin, and dreadful conflict of Spirit, as if God had forsaken him, and
given sentence on him, for you shall read, some such were his expressions, Thou
have cast me into the deep, that is, the Jonah 2. 3, 4.
Sea; then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, my Soul fainted within me. Here
Jonah thought his opportunity was gone, but the Whale brings him safe to the
shore, the Whales belly was a place of safety, a sanctuary to him, had not the
Whale received him, he might have been drowned, for he could not swim to the
shore. Ah thou poor dejected soul! know that God can be angry, and yet love
thee; he can throw thee into the belly of despair, and make thee live in it,
as the child does in the womb, The Mothers belly is the Babes Sanctuary, the
child lies safe in the womb, so shall thou lie safe in the belly of despair,
God will make the belly or womb of despair to travel in birth till thou art
delivered, and therefore do as Jonah did, believe in the midst of despair,
pray unto the Lord, cry unto him out of the whales belly, Out of the belly of
hell (says Jonah 2. 2.
Jonah) I cried and thou heardest my voice; Ah, blessed word! God will hear
thee when thou art at the worst; if thou could pray in hell, and repent in
hell, were thou in hell, if thou could believe there, God would hear thee
there; a sweet word to a despairing soul: Jonah in the Whales belly said, Yet
I will look again toward thy holy Temple; God will give thee leave to look up
to him though thou art in the bottom of destruction: I am cast out of thy
sight (said Jonah) yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple? A soul is
never so forsaken of God but he may look up to his God; though thou art cast
out of his sight, yet he will give thee leave to look upon him: ah thou for
saken soul! a look from thee will pierce his bosom, a mournful look from the
child wounds the breast of the angry father; though the child dares not send
out a word, yet a mournful and longing look conquers his Fathers heart: Art
thou forsaken of God? yet thine opportunity is not gone, dart a look upon him,
if thou can not pray to him, yet look upon him: God looks to see whether
thou will look upon him: he waits to be gracious, Isa. 30. 18.
thou waitest to be comforted, he waits to comfort thee.

5 Man's extremity is Gods opportunity: when thou art most ready to perish, then
is God most ready to save: God ordinarily does not save in danger, but in
extremity of danger; when it is at the worst with thee, then it is Gods
opportunity to help thee, as the woman that had the bloody issue, her extremity
was Christ's opportunity; She had a wasting disease upon her, and time added to
it; twelve long years had she withered and languished under it; besides the
tediousness, her disease must needs get head by continuance, yet more to mend
the matter, poverty (which is another disease) was super-added to her sickness
(she had spent all that she had upon Physicians) her extremity now swells great,
she has two evils at once upon her, two unsuffererable evils, though she were
sick, yet her wealth (as long as she had it) would have maintained and
succored her in her sickness, but now want does pinch her no less then her
distemper, and helps to make her perfectly miserable: she is now perfectly
miserable, weak and sick, and nothing to refresh her in her weakness: had she
spent all and gained her health it had been well enough, but alas, she has
beggered her self, undone her state, and her body; never the better, her money
was wasted not her disease. Now her extremity is at the height, what then? her
extremity is Christ's opportunity; when her case is most desparate she is
healed. 1 Kings 17. ^.
If I can but touch the hemme of his garment I shall be whole. So the widow of
Sarepta; Elijah sent to her by God to be sustained by her: when he comes he
sustaines her, she is sustained by him: for when he comes and asks her food,
bring me I pray thee a morsel of bread in thine hand, she tells him, as the
Lord thy God lives, I have not a Cake, but an handful of meal in a barrel,
and a little oil in a Cruise, and behold I am gathering two sticks, that I may
go in and dress it for me and my Son, that we may eat it and dye. She was now
upon the borders of extremity: It was high time for the Lord to send the
Prophet to her, for (poor Soul) she was now making her last meal; after one
mean morsel she was yielding her self over to death; she was now going to
eat her last, that she might dye: and what then? truly her extremity was Gods
opportunity, Fear not said Elijah to her, go and do as thou have said; make
me a little Cake first, and bring it to me, and after make for thee and thy
son; for thus says the Lord God of Israel, the Barrel of meal shall not waste,
neither shall the Cruise of oil fail until the day that the Lord sends
rain upon the earth. What a shower of comfort was here? she was going to eat
her last and dye, and God sends the Prophet to her to provide for her the whole
famine: How opportunely does God provide succor to our distresses! It is his
glory to help at a pinch, to begin where we have given over, that his mercy
may be so much the more welcome by how much it is the less looked for.

6 Though I have lost time, yet (say) Lord thou have not lost time, thou were
before all time, and can set time yet before me: My loss of time does not
put thee to a loss.





2 What he loses of his glory by the one way, he gains another way, in
pardoning of thee; he counts it his glory to pardon thee: as the Holy Ghost,
says, It is a man's glory to pass over a transgression. In pardoning the sins
thou have lived in for a time, he will gain glory to himself beyond all time;
Thou have sinned against him some years, and so he has lost his glory Pro. 19.
11.
by thee for some years, but if he pardon thee thou will glorify him (will thou
not?) for ever.

3 What ever glory thou have lost him, he has it all made up in Jesus Christ:
come in now then and serve him cheerfully in Christ, do more for him in a
little time, then thou have done against him in a long time.





2 Gods delays should make thee set on him with greater strength, and his
putting thee off should make thee put on afresh with stronger violence; as the
cold weather makes the fire burn hotter, so Gods slacknesse should make thee
more hot and earnest in prayer; and (by an holy Antiperistasis) be kindled from
his coldness: Thus it is with the men of the world, when Balak sent messengers
unto Balaam to come unto him, and curse the people Israel; Balaam denied him,
and sent him word back, that God would not give him leave to come: what then?
says the Text, Balak sent again certain Princes more, and more honorable
then they, so little is Balak discouraged Numb. 22. 15.
with one refusal, that he sent so much the stronger message, More Princes and
more honorable; ah that we could be so importunate for our good, and with our
God! a denial does but whet the desires of vehement Suitors: Why are ye faint
in spiritual things, when ye are not denied but delayed? does God put the
off? send up more prayers, and more honorable again to him.

3 And therefore when after much seeking thou meetest not with peace and
assurance, do not say thine opportunity is past, but rather say, thine
opportunity is not yet come, or thine Heb. 10. 37.
opportunity is yet to come, For yet a little time, and he that shall come will
come, and will not tarry.

How shall I know mine opportunity is yet to come? How shall I know mine
opportunity is yet to come? Hab. 2. 1.


1 When thou live in expectation when thou stand upon thy watch tower to
see what he will say unto thee.

2 When thou waitest in the use of means, when thou will not leave the use of
means: when thou stickest by the poole of Bethesda as the lame man did, that
had a disease eight and thirty years, there he came to be healed, but he was
still prevented, because when he was going down into the water, another
always stepped down before him; yet there he stayed, he knew there was the
place and means of healing, and from thence he would not go; if he would lie
any where he would lie there: and was his opportunity lost, though he had
waited long, and been put by often? (this is the very doubt) No surely: Christ
visits him at last, there he waited in the use of means, and rather then fail
he shall be healed without means.

3 When the Fig Tree blossoms, then thine opportunity is yet to come, nay it is
at hand: when any blossoms of goodness any buds and beginnings of a work
appear, any breathings of soul in thee after Christ, then thine opportunity is
at hand; as Christ said, Learn a Parable of the Fig Tree, when his Matthew. 24.
32.
branch is yet tender and puts forth leaves, know that Summer is nigh; and
therefore cherish every blossom of grace, though never so tender in thee. Let
not a May-frost nip them: Be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the King
of glory shall come in: When your doors, your souls begin to lift up themselves
ever so little after Christ, the King of glory is coming in.

Jesus Christ, and believe in him and repent, and come out of sin: alas you bid
us do what we cannot do, we cannot believe, nor repent, nor come out of sin:
or come to Jesus Christ of our selves.

Jesus Christ: when you seriously and feelingly say that you cannot believe of
your selves, This is the first seed of faith, I say to believe that you cannot
believe of your selves is the first seed of faith: you must first believe your
own weakness, that you may have power from Christ to believe in Christ: Is
there ever a poor soul then in this Congregation, that cries out, I cannot come
out of sin of my self? this is the first work and step unto Jesus Christ, to
receive strength from him to come out of sin: do thou say thou can not come
out of sin of thy self? Now thou art the farther from thy self, and the nearer
to Jesus Christ: They whom Christ helps, he makes them first see themselves
helpless; Jesus Christ gives strength to them, whom he makes to see their own
nothingnesse: they that say they cannot believe, Jesus Christ is in the way to
make them believe: They that say Lord I cannot overcome my sin, Jesus Christ
becomes 2 Cor. 12. 9.
their Conqueror for them; thy nothingnesse shall set out his power, for my
strength (says he) is made perfect in weakness.

2 And again, whereas thou say, I bid thee do what thou can not do,
thou can not repent, nor come out of sin of thy self, I answer and tell
thee, God offers his hand with thee to the work, he does not only offer thee
work to do, but he offers his hand with thee to the work: while he bids thee
believe, his hand shall be with thee to make thee believe: This is the
excellency and kindness of the Covenant of grace, when the Gospel bids thee
leave sin, it puts in thee a new nature, that is contrary to sin, to hate it
more then hell; If a man (to whom thou owe so much) bid thee pay him a
thousand pounds, and give thee the thousand pounds in thy hand to pay him, now
it is easy. Jesus Christ in the Gospel does not only say to thee, pay me what
thou owe me. I am thy Savior, believe in me, I come down from heaven to
dye for thee, come out of sin to serve me; I bought thee with a price, pay me
down thy self, thy service which thou owe me. I say Jesus Christ does not
only thus bid thee (poor sinner) believe in him, and come out of sin, but he
is ready to give thee his grace and strength to make payment. A new heart will
I give thee, and a new spirit will I put into thee: and therefore do not say
absolutely, I cannot believe, or I cannot come out of sin, for Jesus Christ is
ready to give thee thy thousand pounds thou owe him, that thou may pay him
out of his own stock; that thou may believe out of his treasury, that thou
may come out of sin by his grace and mercy; The Lord Jesus offers his hand
with thee to the work: as Bernard tells us of Pope Eugenius, that meeting with a
poor but honest Bishop, he secretly gave him certain Jewels wherewith he might
present him: So Jesus Christ will give thee the Jewels of faith and repentance
wherewith thou may present him: If God did not furnish us, we should have
nothing wherewith to honor him: The Father that gave thee Christ will give thee
faith to receive Jesus Christ, and Jesus Christ that gave thee himself, will
give thee his spirit to draw thee to himself. Ver. 4.


How shall we know our opportunities?

I will lay down but two things before you.

1 Consult with the Lord: as it is said of the children of Israel, that when
the Gibeonites deceived them with a wile, and they spared their lives, whom
they should have destroyed, the Text says, They asked not counsel at the
mouth of the Lord; Joshua 9. 14.
they had an opportunity here put into their hands to destroy the Gibeonites,
but they missed it, because they did not consult with the Lord: do but compare
the seventh ve^se with the fourteenth, and you shall see how right a man may
g^esse of a thing sometimes, and yet want a clear light and discovery of it*
because he does not advise with the Lord; in the seventh verse, Said the men of
Israel to the Hivites, peradventure you dwell amongst us, and how shall we make
league with you? here the Israelites did guess aright, it was past (a
peradventure) for they did live among them; and therefore could not make a
league with them: How right did they hi^? how true was their conjecture? Now
the lock of opportunity was before them, they might have laid hold upon it, but
they were in the dark, and walked in a cloud, not knowing who the Gibeonites
were, because they asked not counsel at the mouth of the Lord, (that is) by
the high Priest putting on the breast plate of judgment wherein was the Urim
and Thummim) so the reason why we know not our opportunities is because we
consult not with the Lord: as he is the maker of time, so he is the revealer of
time unto us: Nay, Gods will to work at such a time, is that which makes an
opportunity, as suppose a man in a curious Apple Tree or Plumb-tree; your
opportunity to gether, and carry away fruit is, when it is his will to shake
the tree, before or after is no opportunity: you may walk, and watch about the
tree, when he will shake down the fruit, but when he has done shaking, your
opportunity is done. So the Lord, who is the husbandman of his Church, he has
among all his other Joh. 15. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 9.
trees, planted the tree of time, and he himself sits upon the top of the tree
(as the God of time, the disposer of time) and when it is his will to shake the
tree, then is your opportunity: So that if you would know your opportunities
you must consult with the Lord, Lord, when will thou shake thy tree? when will thou drop down the fruit, that I may gather into my lap?

2 If you would not loose any opportunity, apprehend every one; as Abraham by
entertaining strangers, entertained Angels unawares: As a man that keeps an
Inn, by entertaining all travelers that come, oftentimes entertaines a
Nobleman, or a Prince; So if thou entertain all opportunities that come, thou
shall at last entertain the noble opportunity, the Angel opportunity, the
Prince of opportunities, the Soul-saving opportunity; a thousand to one thou
shall entertain Christ at last; as the Inn at Bethlem that entertained all
passengers, entertained Christ himself there.

Sinners, I told you before, that God will at one hour or other come with a
casting command; one command that shall have the casting voice; that if you
obey not then, mercy will shut up shop, and trade with you no more, but give
you up for ever; and therefore I say now if you would not loose any
opportunity, take every opportunity.

And now give my discourse leave to cast some beams of reflection upon that
worthy Gentleman whom God has taken from us: It Is our duty to speak something
of him: Though we bury his body, yet it is not fit we should bury his worth in a
grave of silence and oblivion, and truly (my beloved) I do not think ye can
bury the sweet remembrance of him; He will live a long time after his death,
though he be dead, yet he cannot dye, his name cannot expire so soon: Oh! that
what good was in him might live after him to gives us example: He was an
exemplary pattern; when he is laid in this grave he will live above the grave,
the sweet smelling spices of his lovely life and conversation will imbalme him,
and keep him unperisht in your thoughts many years. I need not blazon his coat
of arms (you may see them upon the sable hearse) the worth of his descent or
luster of his family, Et genus and proavos and quae not fecimus ipsi; you did
all honor him and know him, Mr. Walcot of Walcot: besides that he was honored
with the office of Justice of Peace in his Country, and truly I think the
office in some measure received honor from him, for he adorned it with his
virtues: he moved in that sphere for many years together, in which place both
he and that worthy Gentleman, And once a Member of the Parliament.
now with the Lord, M. Rich, More of Linley Esquire. (whom for honors sake I cannot
but revive and mention) In which place I say (you all know) how they two
uniting their beams together, refreshed your country with the warmth of their
influence; executing Justice, relieving the poor, placing Orphans, punishing
offenders, suppressing the profanation of Sabbaths, countenancing the godly,
supporting the course of godliness and religion, honoring and backing the
faithful Ministers of God. I well remember those times, I speak but what ye
all know.

He was also (having interest in so many Churches) as great an instrument (I
think) as any in the Country, to propagate the Gospel, and preaching of the
word.

That excellent man of God Mr. Pierson of Brompton Bryan had a large room in
this Gentleman's heart, and kindled that pious flame in him: and when M. Pierson
dyed, this flame dyed not in this Gentleman's breast, till the oil of his life
wasted; surely 'twas a true work, it lasted in him.

It was his care to get as godly Ministers, and able as he could; and how dear
were his Ministers to him? I dare say, next to his wife and children, First, he
was a father to them: they were to oversee the flock, and truly he would
over-see them that they should want nothing according to his ability. When they
came to visit him, his common quxre was, Is it comfortable with you? do you
want? tell me if you do, let me know it? I would not have you discouraged, nor
go on drooping in Gods work. I speak but truth themselves are witnesses.

He was a mirror and example of temperance to all the Gentry in the country.

I know no greater infirmity did lie upon him then timerousnes, he had not that
height of masculine spirit which dwelt in some men:

But my beloved, he that is without sin among you let him cast the first stone.
He was as meek as a Lamb: a child might reprove him; an inferior might boldly
tell him where (he thought) he went awry. I never found any like him in this,
he would ever love a man for it.

As for Covetousnes, I dare say he was not much acquainted with it; for 1 when
he had an opportunity to exercise covetousness in the disposure of the
Vicarage of Clun, he gave it me as freely as the Sun shines upon me in the day
time; he was no mercenary Patron. 2 Covetousnes and mercy never dwell together;
a covetous man cannot be a merciful man; but he was a man made up of pity and
mercy to the poor; I speak but what you all know; the bellies of the hungry,
and the backs of the naked did every year proclaim his bounty and charity. 3
Besides a covetous liver is no free giver in secret: a covetous man, when he
gives, will cause his gifts to run in a visible channel to be seen of men; but
(to my knowledge) he was a secret and hidden reliever of godly widows and
others that were in want; he refresht their bowels with his hid treasures: he
would send to know their indigencies and their straits; they need not sent to
him, he would send to them. 4 Yet more, a covetous man is not a cheerful man
under losses: but he was sweet and smiling under all his losses. It Is well
known, these times srown'd upon him, and made him a great looser, yet he had a
most composed and contented heart under them, with a great deal of acquiescence
in God. 5 Besides, no man knew the dimensions of his estate better then
himself, so that knowing what I now do know, I admire at his constant
liberality.

He was of a meek spirit, wonderful free from the tang of revenge; I know no
man had such a rare art of forgiving injuries as he had: if any had spoke ill
of him, or done ill to him, he would be silent, and pass it by with this, They
are but men, they show themselves to be men.

He was a pattern of patience under affliction; Surely there was much worth in
this Gentleman, your faces speak such sadness for his loss and departure;
Methinks I read a sad love -- and loving sadness written upon your faces for
him.

It may be some may think, that in setting out his graces and his works, that I
place some merit in these things: No, I do not, and therefore let me tell you,
that when he was like to dye before, (for now God took him suddenly) he uttered
this speech, when he saw his dear wife and servants weeping before him; Why do
ye weep thus? cannot a man dye without all this ado? and says he, I do
rely wholly upon the righteousness of Jesus Christ; and recovering that time;
he did renounce all his own works that ever he had done, desiring to be
accepted in Christ.

And thus I have done speaking of him, and so speaking longer to you; only I
would entreat you to pray for his family: He has been an instrument of good
unto the country, and now he is gone, pray for his Family, pray good on his
Family; that much good may still come out of that Family.

And what shall we say of our selves? what shall I say to you? I say again, as
I did before, Loose not your opportunities: shall we suffer the time to condemn
us, that was given to save us? we must either be saved in it, or condemned in
it: ah then! let us time our business aright for heaven: you that have no
grace, get it: I say, get it; you that have any grace, use it for God, and
increase it: use your grace to Gods glory: act more grace, and get more Romans 1.
17
grace. It is a sad sign when men do not go on in grace; the righteousness
of God (says Paul) is revealed from faith to faith; That is, they which have
faith, shall have more faith: therefore this is a fearful sign that we have
no faith nor grace, if God does not increase our faith and grace in us.

Again, If men will sleep and do no good, God comes and takes away their
gifts: Take his Talent from him (says Christ) from the unprofitable servant,
in Act. 26. 18. You have God opening eyes, in Isa. 6. 10. you have God shutting
eyes, in Joh. 15. 1. you have God dressing trees, in Mat. 3. 10. you have God
hewing down trees, and in Mat. Mat. 25. 28.
21. there you have him cursing the tree, Never fruit grow on thee hereafter:
If thou neglect prayer God will take away the gift of prayer; if you will not
exercise repentance, God will take away repentance it self from thee; thy
graces shall drop away one after another, and ane virtue dye after another,
until the Soul dye too. Thus does God smite the unprofitable servant, that
crumbles away his time here, his opportunities here, and acts not for God: Take
Verse 29.
away from him, even that which he has; and then as the figtree began to
wither, so do his gifts begin to flag and pair in him; as if a worm were
still gnawing at them, his knowledge loses its relish, like a dying man's
palate; his judgment in him rusts like a sword that is not used: His Faith
withers as if it were blasted, and the Image of death is upon all his
profession; he thinks (like Sampson) to pray as he did, and speak as he did; he
shakes himself to duty as at other times, but his strength is gone from him. Woe
to the Soul of such a one; Soul-losses, and Soul-Judgements are the worst.

In one word, Sinners, wing your have, delay not, but home to God: your
opportunities are flying, fly you as fast home to God: let me argue the case
with you as Abraham did with God, peradventure (faith he) there be 50 righteous
in Sodom, peradventue 20, peradventure but 10, and will thou not spare it for
these? as Abraham reckoned up the righteous that might have bin in Sodom, so
give me leave to number your days; it may be thou have 20 years yet to live and
will thou not serve God 20 years for a Crown of glory? 20 years service is too
little for so great a Crown of glory: when thou come to dye, thou would be
saved for ever, and will thou not serve out 20 years to be saved an eternity?
It may be thou have but 10 years yet to live, and will thou not serve God 10
years, who have served a lust twice 10? It may be thou have but 7 years yet to
live, an apprentise serves out 7 years for a trade, and will thou not serve 7
years for an heaven? Jacob served twice 7 for Rachel, and will thou not serve
one 7 for Christ? It may be there are but five cards in all left in the deck,
but 5 years yet to live, nay, it may be but 5 months, nay, it may be but five
weeks, nay it may be but five days, nay, it may be but five hours, as soon as
you are come home from burying the dead, you (it may be) may return your selves
to be buried, ah then! is it not time for you to make have? you that have no
grace, yet a little while, and you may loose heaven, (and is it not time then
for you to make have?) and you that have grace, yet a little while and you may
arrive at heaven (and is it not time also for you to make have?) up then and be
doing: you Saints, I say, up and be doing, it may be your work is almost at an
end; be not weary, pluck up your spirits; he which is tired can crawl a little
way; a little farther put on, a little farther yet, one step more for a Kingdom.

Lastly, I would charge every one of you that have heard me this day, not to
gather from any thing I have said, that his opportunity is past: for me up no
such conclusion: I do not, I dare not say to the vilest sinner, that his
opportunity is past: Though thine opportunity be passing away, yet I do not
say it is past away: this Sermon is not to shut any Sinner out of Heaven, but
to hasten him toward heaven: because you have lost so many opportunities, I
would hasten you to come in to Christ, whilst there are any yet left: because
opportunties may be lost, I would quicken you to come in, before all are gone:
Sinner, yet take Christ, and God will yet receive thee; repent now, and God
will save thee now. Say not, thy opportunity is gone, for God calls thee, linger
and delay no longer; because opportunity will be gone.

Deo soli Gloria.

