A Full RELATION OF The particulars and manner of the late great VICTORY
obtained AGAINST JAMES Marquess of Montrosse, In SCOTLAND.

With a perfect List of the names of the Lords, Gentlemen, and chief Officers
which were taken and slain in the fight.

printer's device -- depiction of a thistle surmounted by a crown

First printed at Edinburgh by Order from the Committee of Estates, and now
reprinted at London by E. G. in the Old Bailey. May 14. 1650.

SIR,
THe News from Scotland works strange effects in all people suitable to their
principles. The old Cavaliers stand amazed to see the Scots stroke the King
with one hand, and smite him with the other; and begin now to believe that if
the entertainment of the Van be so rugged, the arrival of the Rear will not be
safe.

From Edinburgh we have intelligence, That it is credibly reported that their
King is come to Caithnes, and yet the day before it was reported the Treaty was
broken off. The great victory over Montrosse, and the manner of it, you will
see by the enclosed, which is printed in Scotland by order from the Committee
of Estates: and withal you may observe how much the Kirk and State owns L. Col
Straughans proceedings by what they have done for him. They have given him 1000
li. English, and a Gold chain: and Hacket 1000 marks English, and Kiffin 50 li
and to the party that engaged in the service three months pay. The Kings
Standard in the fight was taken, wherein his head was drawn out to the life,
cut off from the body, bleeding. Sir, I have no more at present, but remain,

Your very humble servant, J. H.
Berwick, May 8. 1650.
A true Relation of the late great and happy Victory obtained by the blessing
of God, upon the 27 of April 1650. against that Excommunicate and bloody
Traitors, James Graham and his Accomplices, who had invaded this Kingdom.
IT is a mercy never to be forgotten, that when the Lord might justly quarrel
with a sinful Nation for their transgression, he powers out his wrath on their
enemies; and as the malice and rage of our adversaries is renewed against us,
so are the Lords mercies much more manifested from year to year. It is much
about this time the last year when our Commissioners were treating with his
Majesty, that the enemy having gathered together, were broken in pieces by a
handful of our forces: and now this year, after long preparations made in
foreign Countries, the excommunicated Traitor James Graham, having landed
some friend in Orkney, did about the tenth of April, in the midst of the Treaty
with the King, coming to Caithnes in a hostile manner, to kill, plunder, and
destroy after his wonted manner. But the Lord out of his gracious and
wonderful kindness, has prevented his designs. Lieu Genesis David Lesley
having appointed a Rendezvous of our Forces at Brechen the 25 of April, did
make all possible haste against the Enemy, marching 30 miles every day, and to
put a stop to the enemies advance, he sent Lieu col. Straughan before him to
command the Troops that were lying about Rosse and Innernesse.

Upon Saturday April 27. the Enemy was quartered at Strachekell, in Rosse Lieu.
col. Straughan with his own Troop, Col Montgomeries, Col. Kers, Lieu col.
Hackets, and the Irish Troop were quartered about Kincairne, their number that
were present being only about 230. The Officers being conveined, and having
considered the great scarcity of provisions for Horse, and that it was very
probable, the Enemies strength being of Foot, they would take the hills; upon
the advance of more of our horse they concluded to fight that wicked crew with
the Forces they had: But the Lords day approaching, and the enemy being ten
miles distant, they were in doubt whether to march toward them presently, or
to delay till Monday, and so decline the hazard of engaging on the Lords day:
but this doubt was soon removed, for notice was presently brought that the
enemy was marched from Strachekell to Corbisdell, six miles nearer to them:
whereupon they forthwith drew up into three parties, the first consisting of
near 100 horse, to be led one by Lt. col. Straughan: the second some more then
80, to be led on by Lt. col. Hacket; the third, about 40, to be led by Cap.
Hutchinson, and 36 Musqueters of Lawyers Regiment (which were occasionally upon
the place) to be led on by Quartermaster Shaw. After prayer, by Master Gilbert
Hall, whom the Commissioners of the General Assembly had appointed to attend
these Troops, they marched about three of the clock in the after noon,
toward the enemy, who were drawn up in a plain, near a hill of Scroggie Wood,
To which upon the advance of our horse, they quickly retired, yet Lieut. Coll.
Straughan, persued them into the wood: And at the first charge made them all to
run: The Lord did strike such a terror, into their hearts, as their most
resolute Commanders had not the courage to lift up a hand to defend themselves,
and our forces without opposition, did execution upon them for five or six
miles, even till Sun set: there were killed ten of their best Commanders, most
of their Officers taken, and 386 common soldiers, the number of the whole (as
the prisoners informed was not above 1200, of all which there escaped not 100.
but were either taken prisoners, killed or drowned in a River that was near the
place: The chief Standard called the Kings, and four others are taken, What is
become of that Traitor James Graham is not certain, but that horse which he rid
upon, when the forces engaged, is taken: also his Coat with the Star, and his
Sword-Belt was found in the field; the harm which our forces have got from the
enemy is very little, blessed be the Lord, who covered their head in the day of
battle: Lieut. Coll. Straughan received a shot upon his belly, but lighting
upon the double of his Belt and Buffecoat, it did not pierce: one of our
troopers, too forward by hastening after a boat, which carried two or three of
the enemy over the River, was drowned, and two are wounded, which is all the
loss; advertisements was sent that same night to all parts about, to apprehend
all that escaped, but the account is not returned; the Gentlemen of the Shire
of Rosse, were drawn together on the Hills, to engage against the enemy, if
they had come that way, and were very ready to provide our Troops with supplies
of all things necessary; for which they deserved to be remembered.

The enemy left some small part of his forces in Caithnes, to keep some houses,
and to raise forces in that Country, and sent some few to other places to bring
them assistance; against whom the Lieut. Genesis has sent such forces, as we
trust shall speedily give a good account of them: It remains that we be truly
thankful unto the Lord our God, for so seasonable and so complete a victory
over so wicked and cruel an enemy; and that we look upon it as a pledge of
greater mercies, which the Lord has to bestow upon us, if he shall in his
wisdom think fit, to put us to harder trials, in the defense of his Cause and
Covenant. It is omitted in the Relation, that Capt. William Rosse, and Capt.
John Rosse came up to the execution with 80. foot, chosen out of the Country
forces, and did good service.

A List of the Officers taken.
Lord Frandrought. Gen, Major Hurrie. Colonel Gray. Lieut. Coll. Stuart.
Lieut. Coll. Hay, Brother to the Lord of Nachtow. Major Fleake. Capt.
Mortimer. Ronte-Mast. Walloris. Peter Sense, Capt. of Dragoons. Capt. Warden.
Capt. Anchinleck. Capt. Spotswood. Capt. Charters. Capt. Lawson. Capt. Lieut.
Gustabus. Lieut. Verkim. Lieut. Andrew Glen. Lieut. Robert Tonch. Lieut.
Ernestus Burham. Lawrence van Luitenberg. Lieut. David Dromond. Lieut. William
Rosse. Lieut. Dromond. Lieut. James. Dimi. Lieut. Alexander Stuart. Cor. Ralph
Marley. Englishman. Cor. Hendrick Erlach. Cor. Daniel Beaich. Ensign Rob.
Graham. Ensi. Adrian Ringwerch. Ensign Hans Boaz. Two quarter Masters. Six
Sergeants. Fifteen Corporals. Two Trumpeters. 3. Drums. 386. Soldiers. Mr.
Riddie. Mr. Meldrum. Ministers.


A List of the Officers killed.
Lord of Poury Ogilvy. Lord of Petfothels, Standard bearer younger. John
Dougles Brother to the Earl of Morlow. Major Lille. Major Bicher. Capt.
Stirling. Capt. Powel. Capt. Erskin. Capt. Swan. Cap. Garrie, and Lt. H^lme
either killed or taken.


Edinburgh, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
1650.


