Every man's Right: or, ENGLANDS PERSPECTIVE-GLASSE.

Wherein may be seen, every man's Case, Face, Birthright, and just Liberty.

Whereunto is added; The Copy of a Letter written by a Prisoner in the Fleet,
unto a worthy Member of the House of Commons: Expressing the necessity of
Justice, and the illegality of Imprisonment of men for Debt.

Composed (primarily) for the Meridian of London and Westminster, and may
prove very profitable, to inlighten the eyes of all the Commons of England, in
this year of our long-expected Reformation, and Suppressions of Injustice,
Tyranny, and Oppression, Anno 1646.

Prove. 21.3.7.10.15. The soul of the wicked desires evil, his neighbor
finds no favor in his eyes. It is joy to the just to do judgment, But
destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity. To do justice, and judgment,
is more acceptable then sacrifice.

Prove. 24.23, 24. It is not good to have respect of persons in judgment (for)
he that says to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse,
and Nations shall abhorr^him.

Prove. 31.8, 9. Therefore open thy mouth wide, in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction; Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the
cause of the poor and needy.

Eccles. 4.1. So I considered all the oppressions that are done, and behold the
Tears of such as be oppressed, and they have no comforter, and on the side of
their oppressors there is power, but the oppressed have no comforter.

Job. 24.25. And if it be not so now, who will (or can) make me a Liar, and
make my speech nothing worth.

Fear not the face of the mighty, neither be dismayed at the looks of the
haughty, for their end shall be suddenly.

Printed, Anno 1646.

The Copy of a letter written unto the worthy Member of the Honorable house
of Commons, Mr. HENRY MARTIN, Apr. the 18. Anno 1646.
HONORED SIR,
THe many gifts and graces displaying themselves in you, and by them setting
forth your zeal to Gods glory, and your Native Countries welfare, together with
the hopes of comfort we apprehend in the restoration unto the place you
possessed, when the Ordinance of Parliament passed for release of prisoners for
debt, and others as unjustly restrained; incourages me to address my self unto
you, not only in mine own particular, but also, for and in the behalf of all,
suffering imprisonment for Debt, in those times in which the whole Kingdom is
become Banckrupt; and enforced by a strong hand to work his peace for the
restoration of her Liberty, Laws, and Religion in its purity, according to the
true and only rule, The Word of God. Yet we poor creatures, whom the Lord by
his just afflicting hand, has bereft of all their estates, through several
crosses and losses by Sea and Land, are still afflicted, imprisoned, and
oppressed by those, who doubtless in their hearts, conceit themselves wiser
then their Creator, and by that their fantastic wisdom, endeavor, by most
cruel oppression and tyranny, over their brethren (like to the Alcumist) to
extract something out of nothing; viz. Satisfaction of debts out of their
Brethren, who have nothing, being bereft long before by the just hand of
heaven. Only here is the difference; The Lord after his just judgment
inflicted on us, did in mercy suffer us still to enjoy the liberty of our
persons, and thereby the future use of our endeavors for subsistence, and the
common air to breath in; But these most cruel, Mich. 7.^, 3, 1, 5, 6.
merciless, unjust, persecuting Nimrods, have not only (by that abominable
Statute of Bancrupt) bereft us of all the remainder of our Estates, to the very
covering of our nakedness; but also have most cruelly shut us up in their
several prison houses for 8. 10. 20. years 30. years together, There their
blood thirsty Souls (like so many Cainballs) feeding upon our bodies and
lives, thinking to extract satisfaction for their debts out of the very ruins
of our poor souls and lives, depriving us (in these their soul-destroying
houses) of the very air, by the Lord allotted in common to every Creature to
breath in, where our conditions is far worse then the fellons case, who
commonly within 2. or 3. months after their Commitment to prison, are by the
Law, either aquitted of their Imprisonment, or by deprivation of life released
out of their miserable sufferings; whereas our misery of Imprisonment for Debt,
is contnued many years, and seldom ends, but by a violent (untimely, or
natural) deprivation of our lives in extreme misery.

Shall we the Inhabitants of England, who profess the true Knowledge, Honor,
Love, and fear of God, and the Rule of true Christian Charity prove more cruel
to our Brethren and fellow Members of the same Common Wealth, then Turks and
Pagans, who knows not God in a saving way, or the unjust judge in the Gospel
who cared neither for God nor man, yet because of the poor widows uncessant
importunity, he did her justice, by granting her just request, (God forbid)
far be it, from this so knowing a nation, to mock God thus, in slighting, and
neglecting him their Just and dreadful God in these his three chiefest
attributes, of Mercy, Judgment, and Justice, in stopping their ears from the
hearing lamentable cries, of the oppressed, and becoming dumb to speak in the
behalf of the afflicted, oppressed, and long imprisoned, or to judge their
righteous cause in a free current without respect of persons, and yet (with
grief of heart be if spoken) our several uncessant humble requests, have now
continued more then Five years, crying, knocking, and calling at the doors of
the honorable Assembly of Parliament; for Justice, and Release, from this our
unjustly inslaved Thraldom: But hither to have we reaped no fruits of our
humble and just desires; For their faces have been hid, and their ears stopped
against the cries of our afflictions, so that (as yet) none of our oppressions
and wrongful sufferings are redressed (as in duty both to God and Man, they
ought long since to have bin) and then doubtless our enemies had bin long ere
this time at peace with us, and the Land should have enjoyed rest; For when the
ways of men please the Lord, then (and not till then) shall their very enemies
be at peace with them; For what do I require of thee O man says the Lord; but
to execute Justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God, to relieve
the Widow, the Fatherless, and the stranger, and to let the oppressed, and
long imprisoned go free: for in these things I delight says the Lord: But my
soul abhoreth the ways, of wickedness, Injustice, Tyranny, and Oppression.

The long neglect of Justice (I think) has brought down these heavy
Judgments from the just hand of heaven upon this Kingdom in special, where
God and his Statutes are so clearly known, but whether they be as truly
practiced or not, I refer to your Judgment, and to the due consideration of
all such as truly love and fear God.

For now ye purpose to keep under the People of God for Bond men and Bond
women unto you; But are there not with, you even with you, sins against the
Lord your God? And because we have not from the first sought the Lord, after a
due order, and in the true practice and faithful execution of Justice,
Judgment, and mercy: Therefore has the Lord God made this breach upon us, as
at this day to the Kingdoms woe.

The neglect of Justice, Judgment, and mercy (and the practice of the contrary
by the Israelites) informed the Lord to become an enemy unto them, to swallow
them up by his judgments of Plague, Pestilence, Famine, and the Sword, and also
to destroy all their strong holds and places of habytation in the Land, and to
increase unto them, Mourning, Lamentation, and Woe, and can we, who are guilty
of the same transgressions (if not more) being but wild branches of that Olive
tree, presume to receive more favors from the hand of that most just God, then
those his peculiar chosen people the Israelites* Certainly no, For what measure
ye mete unto the poor, afflicted, and oppressed, shall be measured to you
again. Oh that there were some just Jehoshaphat, to give some speedy and strict
charge, for the due execution of justice, between man and man, in a free
current without respect of persons, and without the taking of Fees, Gifts,
(alias Bribes) and otherwise styled New Years gifts. The 2 d. of Chron. 19.5,
6, 7, 9.10. verses. Or that there were in that honorable Assembly, some
undaunted zealous Nehemiah, to stand up for the birthright and just liberty of
his brethren (according to the true intent of his being called to that place of
trust) and to enforce justice to take its free current without respect of
persons (or the wages of Balaam) in despite of all wicked, abominable,
opposers of the same: Nehem. 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. verses. And I wish
also from my heart, that the 58, and 59. Chapters of Isaiah, the 58. Psalm,
the 6. of Jeremiah, and the 22. of Ezekiel, were truly looked into, piously
considered, and well weighed by all the Inhabitants of the Land, from the
highest even to the lowest of them, and that they might open their mouths in
the cause of the oppressed, and such as are appointed (by cruelty and tyranny)
for destruction, that they might open their mouths and judge righteousness,
and plead the cause of the poor and needy.

I will say no more for this present, but only from my poor oppressed and
afflicted soul, most earnestly and uncessantly wish and pray for the prosperity
of Sion, and the peace and flourishing state of this Kingdom. Beseeching you
also in the bowels of compassion to think upon your afflicted, oppressed, and
long-imprisoned Brethren, to cast your eyes upon these enclosed papers;
Entitled, An Appeal to Heaven; and the other called, A Declaration and appeal
to all the freeborn People of England; and then (as the Lord shall direct you)
to prove a Moses for our delivery out of this Egyptian bondage of unjust
imprisonment, which is the most earnest and humble suit of him who is and will
be

Your assured friend in the Lord, to serve you in what he may to his power,
JAMES FRES^.
From my chamber of close imprisonment in the Fleet, since the 11 of Febr.
1645. ( contrary to the Subjects liberty, and the Parliaments own vote, in the
ease of Sir Rich. Wiseman and others, complaining of their close imprisonment
in the year 1641.) this (...) of April, 1646.
Woe unto that Kingdom and people, where the wicked walk on every side
(without control) and the vilest men are exalted to places of eminency and
trust, Isai. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
that they may oppress and do violence with both hands, yea, that they may the
more effectually exercise their cruel tyranny of injustice and oppression
(without let or hindrance) upon the poor, the needy, the afflicted, oppressed,
and long imprisoned, in especial upon such as honor, love, and fear God, and
most earnestly wish the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom, some such as
these have been brought to most untimely ends by Jailer, and their substitutes,
others quite lamed by their Iron fetters, others of them have surfered
unjustly, most cruel and heavy afflictions in several prison houses and denns
of cruelty, from some (eminently supports) Jaylors, and their cruel
substitutes, yet hitherto none of these oppressed Christians have been righted;
but rather discouraged from seeking any redress, their several Articles
exibited against Jaylors, extremely slighted, and themselves still exposed to
the inhumane rage and unlimited cruelty of these Jaylors, and their hellish
substitutes, to be by them (if not murdered) yet beaten, abused, reviled
daily, and starved to death, and decreppit by Irons, for instance the prisons
of the Kings Bench, the Fleet, and Newgate.

Behold they tread upon the poor, they afflict the needy, they murder the
innocent, and crush the prisoners under their feet, before the face of the most
high, not regarding the Lord of Hosts, nor his Power, nor his Justice, nor his
Judgments, although he has divided them, in setting the Prince against the
people, the Father against the Son, and one friend against another, and has
set the sword as a destroyer of them all, yet they still provoke the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Justice unto wrath and indignation against themselves, by
neglecting the due execution of Justice, Judgments and mercy, in a free
current (without respect of persons, and the wages of Balaam) entitled, Fees,
Nowyeers-gifts, and Bribes: It seems (...) Riddle, not only to me, but also
to many thousands in the Kingdom, that the greatest Contest between King and
Parliament, being for the Liberty of the subject (and has been the cause of so
much efusian of Christion blood for almost 5. years together) the Peers of the
Realm constantly enjoying the same, and yet the commonalty hitherto most
unjustly debarred of the same, and still inslaved (as formerly) unto the
arbitrary will and power of a few mercinarie Lawyers whose profession and gain
inslaves them to the will and disposition of the very worst and skum of men and
women, and ingages them (as hirelings) to maintain their cause at any bar of
justice (so called) for the price of iniquity; I mean for their fee of ten or
twenty shillings, be the cause never so bace and unjust, so by them mayntained.
It is therefore to be considered, whether it be agreeable to justice, and the
freedom and prosperity of this Nation, that the prosperity and flourishing
state of a few Lawyers, Atturneys, Jaylours, and their adherents should be
preserved before, the just liberty, peace, and well being of this whole Nation
and their posterities, and whether it savor of Christianity or any Charity, to
inslave your brethren to their works, and unjust wills, and to coope them up
(as a bird in a cage) in your prison houses, and not to provide for their
subsistence there, or for their determinate time of delivery from thence; but
expose them to the oppression of their adversaries, and the several mercies
cruelties of Jaylors and their cruel substitutes for many years, or whether
the inrichment of a few Lawyers, Atturneys, Solicitors, Clerks and Jaylors, be
to be preferred before the flourishing Peace and tranquillity of this whole
Nation, and also whether it be according to Gods Law (whose people we profess
our selves to be) that justice should not be executed nor administered unto the
poor of the Land in particular, nor to all in general, without the price and
reward of iniquity, I mean without paying to Judges, Lawyers, Atturneys,
Clerks, Jaylours, their deputies and servants, their several great (unjust)
exacting Fees, Fees I say, and Newyeers gifts (besides Bribes) for expedition,
and setting down of a sause for hearing, or else it may be staved off by many
juggling tricks and devices of our Lawyers from being heard, since the 44th.
year of Queen Elizabeth's Rain until this present, especially in the Court of
Chancery, where the succeeding Orders (like so many vipers) still eat up and
devour all the preceding Orders, or that Court, and one cause of 40. l. value,
produces at the least 700. several orders before it be determined, and the
expense of that Suite (on the Plaintifs part only) amount unto 2500. l. at the
least, these and such like causes (and the several commitments upon the same)
makes Lawyers and Jaylours laugh, and both plaintiff and defendant to come
heavily home by weeping cross, to the utter ruin of them and their posterity,
and at the last inforces them to sell their Lands to their Lawyers, and
Atturneys. We read that Samuel judged Jsrael many years, yet we read not,
that he nor any of his Servants and subordinate Officers exacted or rceived any
fees and rewards of the people for the administration of Justice, or that the
people were barred from pleading their causes (but only by Lawyers, Advocates,
and Atturneys) or that ever there were such a generation of men, or Instruments
of contention known, or appointed by Gods Law, to the overthrowing of many a
poor and righteous man's cause, by their several tricks and unjust devices
tending merely for their own ends, and self-advantage of private gain,
although to the apparent inslaving of the Nation, and ruin of the People.

Who, but some Lawyers, are (for these 5. years past) conceived to be the only
obstructors of Magna Charta, in point of the Subjects Liberty, and inslaving
their persons in their several prison-houses, notwithstanding the peoples
several Remonstrances, Petitions, Declarations, and appeals unto the
honorable houses of Parliament, and Commonalty of the Land, and instead of
relief, their miseries have been augmented to them, by the cruelty of Jaylors
(who are countenanced) and the poor Prisoners complaints, rejected and
themselves discouraged from exhibiting any further complaints against them, for
Justice and Relief? who but Lawyers make merchandise of Justice, and confine
the practice of the same, unto the Latin Tongue, and Pedlars French, like unto
the Mass Priests, who in like manner confine the Service of God to the Latin
Tongue that they may make merchandise of the word of God, and by keeping the
people in Ignorance, enforce them (like slaves) to walk by their light, as the
Lawyers and Atturneys do by this Nation; For their Tongues devise mischief,
working deceitfully, because they love evil more then good, contention more
then Peace, and lying, and swearing, more then to speak the truth, because
contention, strife, and debate, is the only thing that brings the price of
gain, Riches, Honor, and Preferment unto their Mill of contention and
profession.

The Lord in mercy look upon the deplorable, afflicted, oppressed, and
distressed Estate of this distracted Kingdom, and now at the last (after five
years expectation) be pleased to open the eyes, and incline the hearts of the
honorable Assembly in Parliament, unto the speedy and free execution and
administration of Justice, Judgment, and Mercy, in a clear current without
respect of persons, or the wages of Balam, that so the wrath of God may be
appeased, his present Judgments diverted, and the poor, affllicted,
oppressed, and long imprisoned, relieved and released, and also enabled to
reap the fruits of justice against their oppressors. Psalm. 123.4 Psalm. 140.3.
Psalm. 142.6.
And the high and honorable Court of Parliament also, thereby clearly
acquitted of and from the several blemishes fastened on them (not only in this
Kingdom but also in other Countries) for the neglect of the due administration
of Justice (according to expectation upon their first Summons and convening)
and the restoration of the Commonalty unto their just and ancient Birthright
of Liberty, according to Magna Charta, and the late Petition of Right, ratified
and confirmed by his now Majesty, more then 4. years since.

I do also therefore in all humility, most humbly, and earnestly, implore the
high and Honorable Assembly, Piously to consider, That the miseries happening
to one man, at one time, may redound to another man the next, and that the same
divine hand of power which at the first, did cast us down into the dust of
reproach, misery, and oppression, is also able at his pleasure, to bring the
mightiest, the richest, yea, the proudest down to the like dust of misery, and
bands of oppression; Beseeching them also to consider, that if any their carses
were the same with us, whether, they then would be willing and contented thus
to suffer, and to be oppressed by the indirect practice of the Law, and
Tyranny of Jaylors, and their hellish Instruments; To be by them close
imprisoned, put in Irons, starved, yea murdered in Goal (I trow not) yea, I
am confident that they would account it a great measure of cruelty inflicted on
them, or their posterity; and have not many thousands of ancient families in
this Kingdom, (by imprisonment) been brought to utter ruin and destruction,
and have not I known diverse personages, nobly desended of very ancient
Families in this Kingdom, that have perished miserably in Goal, and their
misery not pitied by any, nor their death no more regarded by the Jaylour, nor
any his Substitutes, then the barking of a Dog. These things piously
considered (according to the Rule of Christian Charity) it is then to be
wished, that the facred Rule of our Savior Christ might speedily be put in
practice amongst the Inhabitants of this Land; from the highest to the lowest
of them. To do as we desire others should do to us, and not like Caniballs, out
of mere malice and revenge, (and the great gain by contention) to devour one
another in prison houses, that so the God of Justice, Love, Mercy, and Peace,
may receive us again to mercy, and return unto us, with healing in his wings.
Note this well.
For behold, wickedness and oppression shall not deliver those that are given
to it, And there is a time wherein one man rules over another, to his own
hurt, And because sentence against evil doers is not speedily executed;
therefore the hearts of the Sons of Belial is fully set in them to do evell
with both hands: For they lie in wait for blood, they haunt their Brethren
with the net of cruelty and oppression. The best of them is as a Briar, or as a
Thorny hedge unto his poor afflicted Brother; And if it be not so now, who
will make me a liar, and make this my speech nothing worth, J^be 24 25. For
thus says the Lord, who art thou, that thou should be afraid of men that
shall die, and the Sons of men which shall be made as Grass, and forgettest
the Lord thy maker, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he were ready
to destroy; Fear not the reproach of men, be not dismayed at their looks,
neither be afraid of their revilings; for the Moth and the Worm shall eat them,
horrer, coufusion, and eternal destruction shall take hold of them, And where
(then) is the fury of the oppressor? I am he that comfort thee; for I am a
just, and a righteous God, who bring Princes to nothing, and make all the
Judges of the Earth as vanity; Therefore fear not man, whose breath is in his
Nosthrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of; Behold I the Lord execute
Righteousness and Judgment, for all that be oppressed; Therefore be not
afraid of their faces, nor of their haughty and proud looks, for I am with thee.

Imprisonment may be compared to Hell
Where punishment, among them shall excel,
And Hels music is, to curse and swear
And ban, their wicked friends, so do they there;
As they in Hell, shall daily howl and cry,
For to obtain some ease, or liberty,
So men in prison daily make complaint,
How they with grief and hunger pine and faint,
And are tormented by the Jaylors still
With iron fetters, abused at their will:
Yet these unto Delinquents, Traitors, Papists, Knaves,
Yield liberty, give moneys, only make us slaves,
That loyal are, no Enemies to the state;
This is our lot, this is our cruel fate,
And fruits we reap for our fidelity,
From these vile imphs of all disloyalty,
Who most of them being none other then,
Fiends of hell, walking in shapes of men,
Acting Belzebubs pleasure, on us all
That are their captives, lying in Bonds and thrall:
Yet we these five years past, no right can have
Though we the same full often with tears did crave,
Of King and Parliament to grant, but that
Which they themselves full often, have sworn flat,
For to maintain, the liberties and right
Of freeborn Subjects, and thereto have plight
Their faith, their covenant, and their Protestation,
Yet for all this, we still reap molestation,
Anguish and sorrow, afflicts our hearts and will,
Cruelty of Jaylors, does torment us still:
If Laws, if oaths, if vows, if Protestation,
If covenant with God, produce such reformation,
Then Judges, Lawyers, Atturneys, Jaylors, all
This Kingdoms glory, unto your lot must fall.
Then Bribes and Fees all Hellish gain,
Shall flourish to the peoples pain,
And sorrow grief and misery,
Shall still possess the Commonalty,
For justice, judgment, and mercy,
Are grounded on true piety,
But want of justice in this land,
Has brought on all, Gods heavy hand.
Be careful then, suppress the Imphes, make sure
Your Rights and Liberties, may still endure
To future ages, posterity then may
Have cause, to bless your memories for aye:
For God, is God of Unity, of Love, and Peace alone,
But these men for deceit and strife,
the like of them there is none.
Probatum est.
For whatsoever is not of God is from the Devil. But injustice, contention
(and the instruments of the same) Oppression, Bribery, imprisonment of men
unjustly, starving, and murdering of men in Goal, are not from God; Therefore
from the Devil: And whosoever does them, does the will of his father the
Devil; for he is a murderer from the beginning, and the grand Enemy to
Justice, Love, Mercy, and Peace. Therefore if we be of God, we must then do the
works of God, and manifest the fruits of the same. And these are the works of
God; To execute justice and judgment, to show mercy, to relieve the Widow,
the fatherless, and the stranger, and to let the oppressed go free. Let us
therefore now at the last (by suppressing of Contention, Injustice, Tyranny,
and Oppression, and the wicked instruments of the same; And by a speedy
administration of justice, judgment, and mercy) try the Lord our God, and see
if the Lord will not forthwith power down his mercies on us, withdraw his
present judgments (of Devision, Sword, and Plague) from us, and heal the Land;
and so become a father of mercies, a God of comfort and consolation, unto us,
and our posterity after us.

It is to be wished, that the Laws of England favored of as much justice and
mercy, and were but as truly executed without respect of persons, as the Laws
of some Foreign Nations are, and that there were some honest men appointed,
for the Visitation of Prisons every first Monday in the Month, for to restrain
the cruelty of Jaylours, and to know the causes of men's Imprisonment; To whom
the prisoner declaring himself by Petition, declares the real value of his
estate (and as in the presence of God, affirms the contents of his Petition to
be the whole truth) unto which the Commissioners then subscribe. Let the
Creditors see this Petition, and by the next Visitation day, either disprove
the contents thereof, or else the Petitioner to be set free, upon the
assignement of the two third parts of the said declared Estate unto them. In
the mean time, the Creditors, or party imprisoning the Debtor, are to take care
for his subsistence in Goal, and to discharge all just Prison fees.

And if the Creditor happen to disprove the said Debtors Petition before the
said Commissioners, and prove that he has concealed some part of his estate;
then (for a punishment to such a deceiver) his whole estate is, by the said
Commissioners assigned to the Creditors, and both he, his wife, and children,
deprived of their third part of the same; and the said fraudulent Debtor is
then also adjudged to stand in the Pillory (and a hole punched or bored through
his ear.) But upon the Debtors discovery of his whole estate (be it more or
less) really and truly, then the Commissioners do forthwith assign two third
parts of the said estate to the Creditors, and the other part thereof unto the
said Debtor, for and toward the future subsistence of himself and his wife,
and education of his children: And further, that if any Debtor, do of purpose
take up goods and moneys, with an intent to defraud (and take a prisoner as his
surety) by assigning over in trust the said estate to some of his friends (this
being proved) then the said Commissioners have power to assign all the said
estate unto the Creditors, prohibiting (by proclamation) all persons from
paying or delivering unto the said cheating Debtor any moneys, goods, or Lands,
or to any other persons for his use, but only unto the Creditors; And the said
Cheator or fraudulent Debtor, is then also adjudged to stand three hours in the
Pillory, and to have then both his Nosthrils slit up (by the common Hangman) or
some base Hounds-Cut:) Such a course as this, truly and justly put in execution
here in England, would soon increase the number of honest men, and produce (if
not enforce) honest and plainer dealing, from, and amongst all men, and it
would also destroy the great number of Deceivers, Oppressors, Extortioners, and
Gentlemen-cheaters, as well as common-Cheaters, and all Knights of the Post,
common Bail-men, and all such cunny-catching deceitful companions. The opening
of this gap (I doubt not) will draw upon me, the rage and malice (if not the
curse) of all Knights and Gentlemen Jaylours and their Substitutes, as also the
revengefull fury of some evill-minded Lawyers, Atturneys, Clerks, Soliciters,
Sergeants, and Bumbayliffes: From whose Milles (by this means) the great
gainful waters of contention, fraud, injustice, and oppression, will be
dreyned dry, theit deceitful craft fall to the ground, and their Goddess
Diana quite drowned in the Sea of Englands Peace and Tranquillity.

Truth from Injustice, may hap to reap some Blame,
Yet truth shall stand, Injustice shall reap the shame.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader,
I Pray thee to accept of this small Treatise for the present, and if this
unjust bondage of Imprisonment, be any longer continued, upon the Commonalty of
this Land, then expect a more larger Relation, and Declaration of the many
several oppressions, indirect practices, and abuses of the several Courts,
and Committees, as also of the several murders and cruelties, by Jaylors
committed on prisoners, when, where, on whom, and by whom; so far forth as
God shall enable me, and give me life and health. In the mean time I remain,
thine and the Kingdoms friend and well-wisher, and a professed Enemy to all
instruments of Injustice, Tyranny, and Oppression.

For the Lord upholdeth my soul, he, even the God of Justice, Judgment, and
Mercy, is on my side, and takes my part against all those that seek to destroy
my soul; Therefore will I not fear what man can do unto me.

FAREWELL, This year of Hope, 1646.

