A FULL RELATION OF His Majesty's proceedings at Newcastle; Declaring his
gallant Resolution to come to London, and to unite himself to his great
Council, the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT. ALSO, The time of His Majesty's
coming to London; And several remarkable Passages, concerning the disposal of
His Royal Person.

DECEMBER, 17. 1646.
Published for general satisf^ction, and presented to all His Majesty's
Subjects within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

two angels holding the royal crest of Charles I

LONDON, Printed for William Johnson, 1646.

IOYFVLL NEWS FROM NEWCASTLE Being a full Relation of the proceedings of the
Kings Majesty, concerning his coming to LONDON.
THe darksome Cloud which has for many years appeared and hung over the heads
of the Inhabitants of England does now begin to show its self with a most clear
and perfect resemblance, and in stead of countenancing a dismal show, does
demonstrate i^s self in her full luster, giving us some glimpse of the apparent
light, which begins to shine upon us, and the most happy and welcome
appearance of that bright and glorious Cloud, which attends its motion, for the
crowning of the Well-willers of the Peace of Zion, with unity and prosperity,
as will manifestly appear, by these bright stars and shining Comets, which I
shall here faithfully represent unto you, as follows:

The gallant proceedings, and most happy concurrence of the Comissioners of the
kingdom of Scotland, with the Parliament of England, does cause the hearts of
all true subjects to rejoice, instancing unto us, the blessed unity which the
Inhabitants of England and Scotland are now each other to embrace; for all
things being concluded of, betwixt the Parliament of England, and the
Parliament of Scotland, and their Armies to depart this Kingdom in a quiet and
peaceable manner (of which I shall have occasion to speak more at large in the
conclusion) the chiefest object that we now look upon, is, the safe arrival
and happy return of the Kings most excellent Majesty, to his great Council the
honorable Houses of Parliament, that so His Royal heart may be united and
knit fast to them, whose faithful endeavors, and unwearied pains, have
always tended to the preservation of the person of his Royal Majesty and his
posterity, the advancing of his Crown and Dignity, the maintenance and
preservation of the truth and purity of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and the safety and liberty of all his Majesty's Subjects.

And for the accomplishing of this, we are given to understand, that his
Majesty has an earnest desire to come to London, and to unite himself with his
great Council, that so the streams of blood, which has for many years gushed
forth within the bowels of this bleeding Kingdom, may be stopped and prevented,
and this distressed and languishing Kingdom settled in peace and prosperity.

Some supposes that his Majesty will take his Journey from the North about a
month hence, and others fancy his Majesty to be here about New years day.

But we daily expect his Majesty, and it is supposed he will be here suddenly.

What a terror will this be to the raging and potent enemy in Ireland, to see
the happy uniting, and firm knitting of the Head and Members, which has for
many years been separated and divided. Nay, what a sting will it be to other
Foreign enemies, to behold so gallant a uniting; whose former pride, were in
boasting of ^nglands calamities, and laughing in their sleeves, to see our
unnatural Divisions.

But now for the general satisfaction of all people, I shall think it meet to
insert some remarkable Observations concerning the disposal of his Majesty's
person, viz.

First, that the honor, safety, and freedom of the Commonwealth, may be
settled, and then the honor and safety of his Majesty's Person, so far as the
latter may stand with the former, and no otherwise.

Secondly, that when his Majesty were pleased to cast himself upon his Subjects
of Scotland, the honorable houses of Parliament were pleased to wot their
d^sposall of him, to prevent that harm which might befall his Majesty,
residing in the Scottish Army in England.

But afterward this personal being of the King with the Scots begets a
National dispute of his disposal between the Kingdoms.

The Scots claiming a right of coacting with the Parliament therein; yet
declaring their opinions, that his going into Scotland is not the safest.

It was also intimated, that seeing they approve best of his being in England;
who shall take care for the good of the Kingdom, and the safety of the Kings
person therein, but the Parliament of England, in whom the power is for treating
and concluding for the good and safety of the Kingdom, though the King be
with their Army in England, and propound otherwise.

Thirdly, the Parliament out of their great desire to have the King to come and
remain with them, sent to his Majesty Propositions from both Kingdoms, and
agreed fot their pay and marching home.

Which, for satisfaction of the whole Kingdom, I will here faithfully impart
the manner of their departure, as follows:

That the 200000 l. to be told at York 100000 l. to be paid at North-A^erton,
within fi^e ca^es after it is told. That when the money comes to Topcliffe the
Scots shall give hostages, that they sha^ quit all their quarters possessions
and garrisons on the South ^^de Tyne. Newcastle and Tinmouth, with all the arms
etc. within ten days: Upon performance the hostages to be redelivered.

Upon the delivery of the Garrisons on the South side of Tyne, and of
Newcastle, Tinmouth, etc. the Kingdom of Scotland shall have Hostages upon
rede^ivery of theirs, for assurance that the other 100000. l. shall be paid on
the Northside Newcastle within a mile of the works, within 8 days after the
quitting Newcastle, Tinmouth, etc. and all the Forces to be drawn on the North
side Tyne.

For the payment of the other 200000. l. the Scots Commissioners desired, that
it might be paid out of the sale of Delinquents estates, or some other
particular security.

The house considered of this business, and ordered to adhere to their former
Vote, which was to give them the public Faith of the Kingdom for the same.

And upon further debate thereupon, the house ordered that the sum of 900. l.
should be allowed to the tellers of this first 200000. l.

They likewise ordered, that the sum of 1600. l. should be allowed for and
toward the defraying of the charges of the carriages, and conveying of this
200000. down to York. The Committee of both Kingdoms were likewise ordered to
treat with the Commissioners of Scotland how their Forces should or may march
for the best advantage of those parts, and that they may pay their quarters as
they march into their own Kingdom.

And in case any miscarriage should be in the carriage of the said moneys to
York, that the loss should be born by the whole Kingdom.

FINIS.

