A LETTER Of a great Victory obtained by Sir Miles Livesey, near Kingstone, on
Friday July 7. 1648. The Duke of Buckingham Routed, where was slain, the Lord
Francis Villers, the Duke of Bucking-hams Brother, Col. Tho. Howard, The Earl
of Berkshires Son, 20 Officers and Soldiers, The Earl of Holland hurt, 200
wounded, 200 Horse taken, 100 taken prisoners, etc.
Right Honorable,
THE Lord Duke of Buckingham, the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Holland, the
Lord Francis, the Lord Andover, with the rest of the Lords, and chief of the
Gentlemen at Kingstone, and hereabouts, had a consultation about removing the
Horse quarters, and it was concluded to go to Rigate, and accordingly they
went this day intending to possess themselves of it.

Sir Miles Livesey who had before taken Horsem, with twenty prisoners, and
defeated the Cavaliers in Sussex) being come up, possessed himself of Rigate
before them, which caused the Lords to retreat back toward Kingstone.

Major Gibbons coming to join with Sir Miles Livesey against the Duke of
Buckinghams party (who were about 700 horse) they pursued after them and
discovered them near Nonsuch.

The Duke of Buckingham with some of the Horse was then (it being almost night)
got into Kingston, And a man of Collonell Hammonds, that was sent to view, was
coming back taken by six of their Scouts, and his Horse worth 20l. taken from
him, (Colonel Hammond) Lieut. Col. of the Ordnance himself being near to join
with Sir Miles Livsey but could not find him, and other parties were coming
with better strength.

Upon the approach of Sir Miles Livesey there was an Alarm in Kingstone,
whereupon the guards were doubled, and all to horse, whereby Colonel Hammonds
man made an escape into a Corne-field.

Sir Miles Livesey, Propounded in the head of his Soldiers, whither they would
stay until more assistance came to them, or fall on that night

They all cried (as one man) Fall on, fall on, which accordingly they did, And
fought with them between Nonsuch and Kingston, and both the Kentish-men and the
rest fell on with such valor that the Lords stood not out the first Charge,
But fled toward Kingston, Sir Miles Livsey pursuing them, doing execution many
being killed and taken.

When Sir Miles Livesey, came to the Turnepike at Kingstone towns-end, he had
some opposition by some foot placed there, but after some dispute gained it.

The Cavaliers plundered Sir Gilbert Gerrards, and diverse other horses, and
fled toward Harrow.

Sir Miles Livesey, with his Forces is marching over Kingstone bridge against
them, it is said they are some 400 horse that are gone thither, which is all
that is left of them of whom it is hoped there will suddenly be given a very
good account,

Sir I am Your Honors humble servant, Hen. Frierson.
Nonsuch the 7 of July 1648
A LIST of the particulars of this great victory obtained by Sir Miles Livesey
against the Duke of Buckingham and the rest of the Lords near Kingston on
Friday night the 7 of July 1648.
Slain of the Duke of Buckinghams part.
The Lord Francis Villers. The Duke of Buckinghams brother Col. Thomas Howard.
The Earl of Berkshires son. 20. Officers and Soldiers.
The Earl of Holland hurt. 200. wounded. 200. Horse taken. 100. taken
prisoners. Taken also,
9. Boats full of Pistols and Saddles 300. Arms, besides good store of
pillage. 3. Of Sir Miles Liveses men slain. 20. wounded. The Duke of
Buckingham. The Duke of Richmond. The Earl of Holland. The Lord Andover.
And the rest fled toward Harrow, and are pursued by Sir Miles Livesey. Some
others being expected to join with him.
LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson in Smithfield near to the Queens-Head
Tavern.


