A second WHY NOT.
Or Eight Queries, made to the Parliament, From the People of England, being
the Supreme Power thereof in 1649.
WHether this Nation shall be a free People, according to Magna Charta, (now
regained with such a vast expense of Treasure, and effusion of blood) and
according to our trust reposed in you, and your solemn deep Engagements, Vows,
and Promises, made to us, to make us a free People? And WHY NOT yet performed
by you, according to your Promise made to us, since the Kings death? And if a
Free State. WHY NOT our Persons acquitted of imprisonment, and we a
Free-People.

II. Whether you intend to pass the National Act for Liberty or not, and to
take off all Capias for Arrests, That so we the people of England may be
secured from trouble in our personal Liberties and thereby enabled freely to
follow our Callings and Endeavors for Livelihood? And WHY NOT, seeing it is
our just Birthright?

III. Whether this Nation shall still be enslaved in their Estates, personal
Liberties, and Lives, to the present corrupt, delatory, chargeable practices of
the Law, and to the cruel, impious (unparalleled) mercenary Instruments of the
same (by whom thousands of this Nation have been ruined and destroyed) even by
Lawyers and Goalers? And WHY SO, seeing they are cruel, abominable and wicked?

IIII. Whether you intend to prefer the impious flourishing State of an
inconsiderable number of corrupt Judges, Isa. 56. 11,
and mercenary Lawyers, and cruel murdering Goalers (Enemies to Englands
Liberties) before the just Liberties, Peace, and Welfare of this great Nation?
And WHY SO? Seeing he that treads in their Paths, shall never have Peace nor
Rest, Ier. 5. 1, 2. And by whom; God, Truth, Justice, Mercy, Life, Estate,
Rights and Liberties, are sold for money daily.

V. Whether Justice shall be freely administered to all (both rich and poor) the
oppressed relieved, with full satisfaction and reparation for their wrongs
sustained, and the imprisoned set free, SO, as their persons may not be still
subject to imprisonment every two or three days, Isa. 59. 1, 2 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
^, 9, 10, 11.
or as often as their malicious cruel adversaries shall think meet so to do?
And WHEN, after eight years Expectation? contrary to Isa. 33. 15, 16. Psalm. 82.
1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

VI. Whether the Creditors, according to Magna Charta, shall be enabled to reap
Due and Real Satisfaction for their just Debts, out of the real and personal
Estates of all able Debtors, in the two third parts thereof (Intailed Lands
also not exempted) without any tedious juggling, chargeable delatory tricks in
the Law? And WHY NOT, rather then Lawyers and Goalers to rob both them, and the
Debtors? The one of his Debt, and the other of his Liberty, and to the
hinderance of Seamen in Navigation.

VII. Whether all persons by you entrusted with many Millions of the National
Treasure, (and by them perverted) shall be called to a just and strict account
for the same, whereby the Soldiery may be duly satisfied, and this whole
Nation eased and acquitted from the unsupportable Burdens of all the several
great Taxes, and daily Plunders, wherein the Soldiery is made to appear the
Actors, (conceived to be done by the Speaker and Lawyers) merely to render the
Soldiers the more odious and detestable to this whole Nation (a subtle
contrivance, to imbrue the Nation again into a Sea of Blood through the daily
increase of all the peoples heart-burnings against you, and the Soldiers? And
WHY NOT, that so Knaves may be known?

VIII. Whether you intend to abolish Tithes, restore the Rights of the Poor,
call a new Representative, provided, That all mercenary Lawyers be exempted
from coming up to Westminster for Justice; but every man to have Justice
administered at his own door, as in the days of King Edward, and King Alfred,
who hanged up 45 County Judges in one year, for taking Bribes, and passing
false Judgment; and Edward the fourth who hanged 15 Goalers in one year for
exacting moneys from Prisoners; and the Law practiced in our English tongue, in
some brief expedicious way, without any delatory ( heats, Fees, or Bribes, (as
now used) according to the command of God, the present practice of all other
Nations in the World where more Justice is to be had for eight pence, then here
in our Land for 800. l. And WHY NOT unjust things abolished?

Finally, our desires are. That because there is a far greater number of able
honest Conscientious understanding men in every of our Cities, Counties,
Hundreds. Towns and Villages that are able to judge and determine all
Controversies between a man and his Neighbor better then any of those
Instruments of Contention, The Lawyers. (Englands Cankerworms) whose Nature and
Profession is to fish in troubled Waters, and to make the Wound of Contention
deeper and far larger, rather then to cure it, That therefore they may no ways
be thought fit to decide any Controversy in Judgment, nor to sit in our
National Assemblies, but to be expunged and expelled the House of Parliament,
even as the Bishops, Lords, and Judges were before them? And WHY NOT the power
of such Serpents destroyed, and quite confounded, confounded, Yea accursed of
God and abhorred of men let all them be, That appear in their defense, or
stand up for their support, WHY NOT?

Amen. By James Frese Merchant.

Printed by I. G. for I. B. and I. F. and are to besold by G. Lindsey at
London-stone. 1649.


