A PROCLAMATION to prevent Abuses by the Soldiers:
By his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, Knight, Commander in Chief of the
Forces raised by the PARLIAMENT.
WHereas diverse Complaints have been made of several abuses and
misdemeanors, committed by several Soldiers of the Army both Horse and Foot,
viz. That they unwarrantably impresse and violently take Horses for their own
uses, from several persons, pretending the same to be for the use of the
State; And also force persons where they quarter, to pay them unreasonable
sums of money, in lieu of quarter, (notwithstanding they are provided for at
their several quarters) and to give them moneys at their removing for their
future expenses, having no manner of color for the same, tending not only to
the great prejudice and wrong to the persons injured, but also to the scandal
and dishonor of the Army, and contrary to the Laws and Ordinances of War in
that case made and provided.

For prevention whereof, and of all other the like disorders and abuses
whatsoever, I do hereby strictly charge and require all Soldiers of the Army,
both Horse and Foot, (after Proclamation hereof duly made) to forbear, either
by themselves or others, to impresse, or by force take, any Horses or Mares,
from any person or persons whomsoever, to their own, or any others use, upon
any pretense whatsoever, unless it be by sufficient warrant under the hand of
the Captain or other Officer lawfully authorized thereunto: And that they do
likewise forthwith forbear to demand, take, or compel any person, where they
quarter, to give them any money, upon any pretense whatsoever, either whilst
they remain at their several quarters, or at their removals, upon such
penalty and several punishment as may be inflicted upon every such as shall be
found offenders therein, by a Council of War. And I do hereby require all
Officers of the Army, in their several places, to use all possible care and
diligence, to prevent the Soldiers under their respective Commands, from
committing the aforesaid or any other the like misdemeanors. And upon
discovery of such as shall be found offenders therein, to bring them to a
Council of War in the Regiment to which they belong respectively, according
to a Commission to that purpose granted, to the end they may be brought to
condign punishment for the same. And if any Office shall wilfully neglect his
duty herein, such Officer shall be responsible for the misdemeanors of his
respective Soldiers.

Given under my hand and seal at Wickham the 1. of July, 1647. THO: FAIRFAX.
To the Marshall General, to be published at the Head of every Regiment of
Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, by Sound of Trumpet and Beat of Drum.



A Commission granted by his Excellency to the Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel, or
Major, of every Regiment in the Army, for the punishment of offenses by a
Council of War in each Regiment, in pursuance of this Proclamation.
WHereas diverse misdemeanors and offenses are daily committed by some Soldiers
of the Army in their several quarters, and other places, which cannot
conveniently be brought to a Council of War at the Head-quarter: I do hereby
give you full power and authority (by the Commission Officers of your Regiment)
to call a Council of War from time to time, and as often as need shall
require, for the trial of such persons of your Regiment (according to the
Laws and Ordinances of War established) as shall be found guilty of
misdemeanour: And to inflict such punishment upon them (according to the said
Laws and Ordinances) as they shall be adjudged unto for the same by the said
Council. Provided that this Commission shall not extend to the trial of any
Officers in Commission, nor to the inflicting any punishment to the taking away
of life or member, without first acquainting me therewith.

Given under my hand and seal the first day of July, 1647. THO: FAIRFAX.
To Col: (...) Lieutenant Col: (...) or Major of his Regiment.



LONDON Printed for Humphrey Harward. 1647.


