THE French Mountebank, OR AN OPERATOR Fit for these present Times.

Being a man of great travel and experience throughout most Countries in
Christendom, and to the great comfort and happiness of this Kingdom lately
come to Town, and is ready to show himself a man of Skill, in all particulars
hereafter mentioned, to the distressed Rich for their Money, and to the Poor
for Gods sake.

printer's or publisher's device

1642 March.21 LONDON, Printed for R. Austin, and A. Coe. 1643.

THE French Mountebank, OR An Operator fit for these Times.
COnducted by the hand of Providence, me arrived at Dover on the first of
March, where me stayed two, tree, four, and five days, exercising my faculty
in a charitable way among tee poor Seamans, tee residue of tee time before I
came to this renowned City, me spent for tee most part in Canterbury, where by
reason of tee great confluence of People, me was forced to erect a Stage,
whereon to preserve my own self from stifling, and the better to present my
own self and my Rarities to the sight and view of the multitude. Yet for for
all this me could take very little money. Me appeared every day with my Dwarf,
my Hermaphrodite, and my Monkey, and entertained them all a mode de France,
with Songs, Anticks, and Masks, yet all would not not do, me could see but
little money.

My self and my Hermaphrodite,
My Dwarf, and Monkey, all that night
Were very full of sorrow:
We did despair
To take the air
In public on the morrow.
Yet once more we came forth again,
And had our labor for our pain;
Though me pulled out rare knacks,
All with one voice
Made a great noise,
And cried we were but Quacks.
Then down me laid my Velvet cloak,
And quickly pulled out of my poke
Papers from several lands;
Where they did see
Wonders of me,
Confirmed by thousand hands.
The silly people now believe,
And crafty me do laugh in sleeve,
To see them so soon taken:
They money bring
To buy each thing,
Besides Goose, Eggs, and Bacon.
When me had vented all my Commodities, it was not safe for me to stay long
there, yet me be sure if tey do them no good, tey will do them no harm: And
now me be newly come unto this famous City of London, and the City of London
cannot but confess themselves very much beholden to me, that after so many
years travail, and experience in several Countries, both Christian, and
Pagan, me be pleased now in these latter, and most knowing days of mine, to
leave wandering, and reside here with them.

The reason why me do show mine self in print first is, because me be tickled
in the conceit by some, that this is the best way to make my self known unto
you, and the setting up of Bills upon Posts, is the tricks of tee Mountebanke,
which me do abhor.

Imprimis, me do mean to tell you what rare exploits me have done abroad.

Me first in Paris up was bred,
A mender of the Maidenhead,
Where by mine Art I did restore,
The sound, and eke the Pocky Whore:
And so salve up Virginity,
That none could any fault epsy.
This called me out of France to Spain,
To stop up a new opened Vein,
Me found the Lady sore, and Stradling,
Yet made her go quick, without wadling;
With promises to make me great,
She would have kept me for this Feat:
But me cried Madam pardon me,
For me be bound for Tartarie,
In haste, to visit the great Cham,
And rectify his crooked Hamme,
Besides to show a piece of Art,
Upon his Doxies lower part,
Me made their Tools so well and right,
They got three Heirs all in a night.
The next of my admired works,
Was done among the cruel Turks,
Where to the Fame of me, and France,
Me mended up a sad mischance,
The broken neck me firm did set,
Of their then Emperor Mahomet,
And once me raised from death to life,
With Cordials, the Grand-Seigniors wife.
Thence me came into Germany,
Where were as cunning Knaves as I,
Such tricks me saw, that me did fear,
Mine for that place too shallow were.
From thence to England me soon come,
And here intend to make my home.
And now Dukes, Earls, Lords, Bishops, Knights, Deanes, Prebends, Gentlemen of
Englant, etc. and all others, High and Low, Rich and Poor, me do address mine
self to you in all humility. For as much as me do understand that since this
present Perliament, there has been many strange and unheard of diseases,
seizing upon certain sorts of People, that were in perfect health before, and
as yet remaining incureable, me being accustomed to cure such diseases, do
undertake these Maladies following, and for my better proceeding in the cure
when they come to my hands, me join to every Mallady some short directions for
their observation. Though a Parliament (as me do know) be salus Populi, the
best means conduceing to the health of this Nation, yet as in ill conditioned
stomachs, oftentimes the best Cordials degenerate into an ill nature, and so
become as offensive to the Body, as the ill humors themselves; even so this
Parliament, (which God preserve) though as well a tempered Cordial for this
languishing Kingdom as ever was, yet to some ill humoured Members it has
proved Feavourish, and set them all on Fire, as Jesuits, Papists, and
Cavaliers: and to others as bad as poison, as to Church*Statists, and
Monopolists, those Catterpillers of the Commonwealth, etc. So then me being by
my proffession to cure all diseases, must not be blamed, if me do name all
indifferently, and me do see no reason why me should be blamed for nameing such
of these diseases, which me do intend, and promise to cure, therefore Sans
dissimulation, or Fear, me do proceed.

Imprimis, once more; if you know
Of any Citizen does owe
More then he can pay,
Though broken-backt, me him assure
Me have a medicine will him cure,
Let him break word or day.
Is any Bishop with a pain
Much troubled in his head or brain,
And would be made lighter,
Me do suppose that the worst harm
Comes from his being kept too warm,
Let him throw off his miter.
Has any been a great whore-master,
And in his age now wants a plaster
That will do the deed?
Has any Madam caught the pox
By daily tribute to her box?
She need not purge or bleed:
She shall regain her credit well
If she observe what me do tell,
And then take what me give her:
No matter who dare to attaint her,
For there are ways in age to Saint her,
Though never so lewd a liver.
Is any troubled with sore eyes,
For losing of Pluralities?
Me have a good water:
To cool them, and a most rare pill
To purge the humors that are ill,
And feed the greedy matter.
These and many more the Professor hereof will faithfully perform, he being
but newly come to town you cannot expect much from him, till longer observation
has better acquainted him with the diseases now raging, and ranging in this
Land.

If any desire to make use of him in any of these particulars aforenamed, or to
make known any other Malladie wherewith they are afflicted, let them repair to
the Physitiaus College.

Vive Le Roy.

