A Full and Particular RELATION Of that Strange, Horrible, and (in England)
Unheard Of Murder, Which was Committed on the Body of the late Famous Dr.
CLENCH, In an Hackney-Coach, near Leaden-Hall-Market; on Monday-Night, the 4
th. of this Instant Jan. 1692.
LAST Night, being Monday the Fourth Instant, about a quarter past Nine, Dr.
Clench went from John's Coffee-House in Fullers-Rents, to his late
Dwelling House in Brown-low Street; where he had not been long, before a
Messenger came to desire him to come to Two Gentlemen, who were at the Devil
Tavern near Temple Bar, in order to Visit a Person of considerable Account, who
was dangerously ill; upon which he immediately went with the said Messenger,
not ordering his Coach or Coachman to Attend him, but being come to the
Gentlemen, at the aforesaid Tavern, they persuade him to take Coach with them,
in order to go to this Patient near White Chapel; upon which they paid their
Reckoning, and called a Coach to the Tavern Door; but in their way, between
Temple Bar, and Leaden-Hall-Street, these two Persons (after the Turks manner)
most Barbarously Murdered the Doctor, by Strangling him; now coming near
Leaden-Hall-Market, they called out to the Coachman to stop, and gave him
Three-Shillings, Six pence, and bid him step into the Market, and Buy the best
Capon he could light on; the Coachman innocently takes the Money, and goes into
the Market according to Direction; but he was no sooner gone, but the Two
Ruffins made their Escape, and the said Coachman returning soon after, with the
Poulterer, bringing with them several Fowls for the Gentlemen to take their
choice, but they were no sooner come to the Coach side, but they found the door
of it open, the two Gentlemen gone, and (to their great surprise) the Doctor
alone lying dead in the Coach; upon which soon after, the Doctors body being
brought to his own House, in Brown-low-street in Holbourn, Constables and
Watchmen were sent out into several Parts, in search of the Murderers; but as
yet no Account can be learnt of them; what induced these Barbarous Homecides to
commit this Fact is not yet known; though its thought it may be an inveterate
Malice, and Revenge, not unlike That of Esquire Thynn. The Doctor was a very
Worthy, Honest, and Charitable Gentleman; and is very much lamented by all that
knew him.

NOW, for the Hainousness of this Sin of Murder, I suppose none can be
ignorant, that it is of the deepest Die, a most Loud crying Sin. This we may
see in the first Act of this kind that ever was Committed, Abels blood cries
from the earth, Genesis 4. 10. Yea, the Guilt of this Sin is such, that it leaves
even a stain upon the Land where it is committed, such as is not to be washed
out, but by the Blood of the Murderer, as appears, Deuteronomy. 19. 12, 13. The Land
cannot be Purged of Blood, but by the blood of him that shed it; and therefore,
though in other cases, the flying to the Altar secured a Man, yet in this of
Willful Murder, no such Refuge was allowed; but such a one was to be taken
thence, and delivered up to Justice, Exodus 21. 14. Thou shall take him from the
Altar, that he may die. And it is farther observable, that the only two
Receipts which the Scripture mentions, as given to Noah after the Flood, were
both in Relation to this sin; that of not eating blood, Genesis 9. 4. being a
Ceremony to beget in Men a greater horror of this sin of Murder, and so
intended for the preventing of it. The other was for the punishment of it. Genesis
9. 6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by men shall his blood be shed; and the
reason of this stricktness is added in the next words; For in the image of God
made he man: where you see this sin is not only an Injury to our Brother, but
even the highest despite and comtempt toward God himself; for it is the
defacing of His Image, which He has stamped upon Man, etc.

Licensed according to Order.

Printed for Alex. Milbourn in Green-Arbour Court in the Little Old-Bayly. 1682.


