A full and exact RELATION OF THE Horrid murder committed upon the body of Col.
Rainsborough, The persons that did it, and the cause thereof.

Also the killing of Capt. Layton, and diverse others: And a fight near
Pontefract; with the relieving of Scarborough, and a Pinnace taken there.

Likewise the List of the names of some Members of both Houses of Parliament,
and chief Officers of the Army, against whom there is a Design to take away
their lives.

Certified by Letters to both Houses of Parliament.

VIZ. His Excellency the Lord General. The Lord Say and Seal. The Lord
Wharton. Lievt. Genesis Cromwell. Mr. Challenor. Mr. Pury. Mr. Corbet.
Major-Generall Skippon. Sergeant Wild. Colonel Hammond. Colonel Rich.
Colonel Pride. Colonel Hewson, etc.


nou: 3d London: Printed for R. A. 1648.

A full Relation of the killing of Colonel Rainsborough, Capt. Layton, and
others: with a discovery of a further Design to take away the lives of eighty
other eminent Persons; and a List thereof.
SIR,
ACcording to your desire by the last Post, I shall weekly communicate unto you
such Intelligence as is stirring in these parts; which at present may be truly
represented thus. Sir Henry Cholmley, (with some Country Forces) for several
weeks past has lain against Pontefract, to block up the enemy in the Castle,
but wanting strength to keep them in so little room, the Pontefract-men did
daily make several inroads upon the Country, took away their Cattle and other
goods, brought them without let to the Castle, and then exchanged them for such
other necessaries as they wanted, even with some of Sir Henry Cholmleyes own
men; and the Pontefract-men being strong in Horse, and very desperate, have
made a practice to fall upon our Guards, and into our Quarters; and have done
much execution amongst us: On Tuesday last they beat up our Quarters at a
village six miles from Pontefract, killed Captain Layton, and two others,
wounded many, and carried away 6. prisoners: they have also taken Mr. Clayton,
Steward to the Lord General, and carried him wounded into the Castle; and many
others, which I shall not here particularize: yet when those in the Castle, and
the others which keep the next Guard, are making their markets, they drink one
to the other, saying, Here is to thee brother Roundhead: and the other replies,
I thank thee brother Cavaleer. Sir Arthur Ingram, who was lately taken by the
Pontefract Forces, and imprisoned by them in the Castle, is gotten off; paying
1500. l. redemption: All this, and much more mischief having been done, to the
intolerable sufferings and damage of the Country; it is now time to seek better
to prevent it, and therefore we are strengthening the Forces so as to complete
a Siege: Colonel Rainsborough for this purpose came into these parts by
directions from his Excellency, but by reason of some difference between him
and Sir Henry Cholmle^, he took up his Quarters at Doncaster, intending to stay
there until the matter were decided: in the mean while the Devil appearing
strong in his instruments, they consult together by a private and base way of
revenge, to effect that by treachery which they could not otherways
accomplish; and as executioners of this bloody design, came three men in the
habit of Gentlemen, from Pontefract Castle to Colonel Rainesboroughs own
Quarters early in the morning, and pretended they had a Letter for him from
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, whereupon they were no sooner gotten in, but they
in a sordid manner stabbed him, dragged him to the chamber door, cut his
throat, turned him down stairs, and escaped while those of the house were
either in bed, or so much amazed at this horrid murder, that they knew not what
they did: And we hear that the malice of that party stays not at this, nor
will be satisfied only with this new manner of murdering one that was faithful
to the Parliament, and a Member thereof, but have a further design to take
away the lives of at least fourscore other eminent men, which have been active
in the Parliaments service, for the good of their Country, which I pray God to
discover and prevent, and unite the hearts of his People together, that the
wicked One by sowing his seed of dissension may not gain advantage against his
chosen: And so I rest,

Doncaster, October. 30. 1648. Your affectionate friend, J. Barnard.

Another Letter concerning the horrid murder committed upon the body of
Colonel Rainesborough, with the last News from Scarborough.
Honored Sir,
I must now be a Harbinger to bring sad news to you and the rest of our
friends at Wapping, which I am sure cannot but with me condole the loss of our
old acquaintance Colonel Rainsborough, who after a long preservation from the
force of the Cannon and open hostility of the common Enemy, was at the last
most unfortunately murdered in his Chamber, it being done in a base and
unworthy manner; Some say it was to be farther avenged for the death of Sir
Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, and thereby think to mitigate the fact;
but I will assure you they will find it otherwise: for the whole Soldiery with
us lay this business much to heart, and although the loss of such an
instrument as he, cannot be small: yet are we confident that we have this gain,
that the hearts of all the well-affected party in the Kingdom will be the more
firm in conjunction with each other; I hear his wife is now in London, I pray
God give her strength to take it patiently, which is one general use we are to
make of such trialls and afflictions. And as for those that are such implacable
enemies to peace, and secretly thirst after the blood of such as would live
quietly in the Land, we hope care will be taken to preserve us from their
malice, and to bring those to condign punishment which do justly deserve it,
that they may be a terror to others from running into the like mischiefs: The
enemy in Pontefract Castle have about sixscore horse well armed, which
oftentimes sally forth, and do great mischief, and have (as some report)
fitted themselves with all things for a twelve months siege: the weak Leaguer
by the new Militia of the Country has so wasted the parts adjacent, that what
with freequarter and large assessements, with the spoil made by the Enemy, the
Inhabitants are very much impoverished; Here has been levied for many weeks
together the value of 30000. l. per mensem, but we have better hopes of those
which are now coming to do the work, the Lieutenant Generals forces being
drawn near: and truly it is high time, for some further course to be taken not
only against this Castle, but also against Scarborough, for the Enemy there
have made diverse late sallies forth, and have taken a Pinnace which was come
into the Harbor with some Provisions, whereby some relief has been gotten by
the Enemy; but another course is t^king with them also. Thus with my best
respect to your self, and all our friends, I remain

Whetherby, 31. October. 1648. Your obliged friend, S. T.

A List of the names of the chief of the Members of both Houses of Parliament,
and Officers of the Army, against whom the design is discovered to take away
their lives.
His Excellency the Lord General. The Lord Say, and Seal. The Lord Wharton.
Lievtenant-Gen. Cromwell. Mr. Challenor. Mr. Pury. Mr. Corbet. Major-Gen.
Skippon. Sergeant Wild. Colonel Hammond. Colonel Rich. Colonel Pride.
Colonel Hewson. Colonel Okey. Major General Lambert. Major Salway,
and diverse other Members of the House, and Officers of the Army, whose names
cannot be here inserted.

Moved in Parliament, that a Regiment of Horse and another of Foot come up, and
be a Guard for the security of both Houses.

FINIS.

