THE Friars Last Farewell, OR, Saint Francis must Pack for France.

SHOWING, How the Mass-monging Fathers were by Order of Parliament, brought
from Somerset House in the Strand, by many Officers, Watchmen, and others:

And by them put into safe custody, till the next fair wind shall blow for
Paris.

On Saturday the 26. of February. An. Dom. 1642.

Being a doleful Dialogue between Pere Robert, and Pere Cyprian, two Lamenting
Fathers.

God send them good Shipping,

LONDON, Printed by John Hammond. 1642.

The Friars last Farewell, OR, St. Francis is packing for France.
In a doleful, Dialogue between Pere Robert, and Pere Cyprian, two Distressed
Fathers.
Rob. HOw now Friar Cyprian, how liked you your lodg^ng to night?


Cyp. By Saint Francis, as men that cannot help it: Well I perceive they will
make a riddance of us all by degrees; they will leave neither head nor tail: Now
they have done with the Miter, they have a fling at us; a man may clearly see,
that here will be no longer pla^e for us. We must even entreat them to give
us our Trinkets and away.


Rob. Away say thou; Yea by my Cowle, and glad we may escape so, by the hope
I have in our B^essed Lady, when they first came in upon us, in that
unacquainted fashion, and no way pleasing to Franc^scans, bring^ng Constables,
Officers and Watchmen with them, as though they had to do with Thieves, not
with Fathers; with such sad looks, and brow-bent words, I doubted what would
become of me, fearing least they would have took my sanctified Coard from off
my middle, and have hanged me in it.


Cyp. What then thou should have gone to heaven in thy Order: had they done
so, or as bad, or thou had had thy end by a Rope, so thy mends in thy hand:
For this Parliament goes through-stitch with it; they have removed other blocks
than we, they bear all down before them* upon my conscience I speak it, If
either his Holiness, yea, or very Saint Francis himself had been there among
us, they would scarce have took them along for company.


Cyp. I believe it as surely as I do Purgatory, or salvation by observing
Saint Francis his injunctions; we are all out of esteem here, both head and
tail: we have seen our best days, I fear me in England, which now gives us
up; and is grown weary of us, as is all the world besides, though I trust
France will bid us welcome, as reason it has, for sure I am, that I for my
part, by the Worship ^owe unto Saint Francis, have not been unmindfull of our
Covent there; and have conveied over as much English gold, as any other here
imployd for that purpose, and can give an honest account of my Talent, as you
know Friar.


Rob. I t^ust the same Friar.


Cyp. But are you of an opinion that we may bid our last Ad^eu to
Somers^^-hous^, and never plant Julips there again, shrift Lad^e^ ^n the
Chapel, take the pains to go home to their husbands, nor young Gentlewomen,
look over the wall into the Thames, and throw them our blessing, that may
safely carry them over be it that they live on the other side, and wind
against Tide, make the water boisterous.


Cyp. Lets think no more of that then of forsaking our holy order Friar
Robert: alas, the chiefest of our friends are on the other side the Poole;
hardly could we keep house, when they were all at home, we were put to it then:
our resort has lessened, and consequently our offerings, ever sin^e the
sitting of this great Assembly at Westminster, we have had such watchfu^l
eyes upon us; that it was impossible but that our doings must needs slack,
though I never thought, that we should ever be brought to that p^sse, that
Somerset House should have been to hot to hold us.


Rob Friar Cyprian, I liked not that great fall of part of the wall on the
backside of our Mansion, Christmas last was two year, I liked it not (...)
s^y, for it ever since ran in my m^nde, and I could by no me^nes rid my self
of that conceit, that i^ did pre^end some ruin, r^nt or separation of the
fraternit^e, and rather then the land would longer be troubled with us, if the
gates were too little, they would give us an exit, by breaking down a maine
part of the wall.


Cyp. I presaged as much Brother by the coming of the Scots into England: S.
Francis you know never affected that Nation; as who are the professed enemies
of idleness and ignorance, both which are the most considerable ingredients in
the composition of our regularitie.


Rob. My nose dropped just three drops of blood: the very first day of the
sitting of this Parliament: and passing from S. James to Somerset House, a Hare
crossed me thrice.


Cypr. The banishing of all the Catholics from London, and within 15. miles of
the Parliament: was no sign of our long stay.


Rob. Nor the fall of the Hierarchiein Temporalls, any good token of our growth
in any Spiritualls.


Cyp. When Con. and Russetta were dismissed, men I think that would have found
and wrought as strong means to have kept their footing, as could be procured,
when these once ^ooked b^ew, and must be content to take water: I durst never
after think of laying my bones amongst the Sanctified Julips.


Rob. But who would have thought that they would have stoopt so low as us poor
men, clad in medley Linsey Wolsey, with Tunnell on our heads, and though not
strung, yet girt in hemp, having perhaps our wooden Knicknacks, our Crosses
and bunch of Beads, with such pretty things rediculous about us, but nothing
that they can discern suspicious.


Cypr. Ho friar Rob. Ho, ho: They took us not for Saints for all that; he that
has an ill name is half hanged: they have heard too much of our prankes
elsewhere, and in particular, what exployts some of our livery have lately
acted in France, and by name how Father Joseph has lately behaved himself
there, whose Woolvish attempts has brought them clean out of conceit with our
Sheep clothing: they are contrived into so bad a belief of us, that they
stick not to say, that our wills are as good, and conditions as bad, if we had
an occasion as seasonable. Nay, a Gentleman told me, within these few days,
walking in the Garden, that he saw the Horns through my Cowle, and that he
was sure, could he but have the patience to hear Mass, he should hear the
Fiend grumble, if not rear.


Rob. I confess Friar Cyprian, it is a difficult thing to charm men out of an
opinion once took up; so that is become a Proverb, The Devil and the Friar
will be honest together.


Cyp. Was it not pretty what one of the attendants motioned unto one of the
Gentlemen of the House, that came with the unwelcome Habeas Corpus for out
non-residencie, and unto the two Const^b^es that came with him?


Rob. Pretty, say thou brother? Pretty indeed: he deserves to be cursed with
Bell, Book and Candle who ever he was; and questionless our holy Patron and
Saint, never besteaded us more, then by his intercession to the Virgin Mother,
to put back his Leviticall advice from taking effect and execution from the
Gentlemen and the Constable: for surely, had we not been permitted to have laid
down our habits, and to have come forth something in fashion, like other men,
we should have been the Owls of wonderment unto all the birds between
Somerset House and Westminster.


Cyp. The merry whoreson would have had us come out just as the Parliament men
and Constable took us, (O sweet St. Francis author of our salvat on) we
should have had more hollowing, hooping and shooting at our heels, then ever
was made after Bears, Cutpurses, or Clarken-well whoores.


Rob. Nay worse, another wished as we^l to us as he, would have had us tied
a-row in our Copes, like Gally-slaves; and then we should have carried all the
Strand a breadth, and what Coach or Carosse belonging to what Nobleman soever,
had chanced to have come by, he must have had the patience till one of our
poor Fathers had been unlinked, or else borne Cope, Fathers, and all before
him.


Cyp. What ever those conceited Knaves were, I believe there will be never a
Friar in the world the more for them.


Rob. If none bore more respect unto Friars then they, for my part I would
rather turn Devil then Friar: and as I am, the first thing I would do, should
be to cast my frock into the nettles, and lay hold on Spade or Mattocke,
whereto I must confess, I have a right able body, had I as much mind to
labor as ability.


Cyp. A third merry companion was bold to tell me, that my holy Cowle was made
like a Vintners tunnell.


Rob. That fellow wished better to the Vintner then any of us, I warrant him.


Cyp. A fourth tole me, that I had stuff enough about my middle to have tied
up all the prisoners that were to be executed this Sessions, and put my self
in the number.


Rob. Mr. Constable requested my habit, or some part of it, to make a strainer
for his wives grains.


Cyp. Had the Constables wise been there, and known the abilities of thy
pendents, thou might have received more favor of her then of her husband.


Rob. That's not unlikely: for had we not ever been more beloved of women then
their husbands, we had never been of that standing in the world we are;
notwithstanding these hard times, I know, thanks to good. St. Francis, those
devout Catholic women, and some no small ones neither, who will keep it not
only from their husbands, but even from their own selves and children, to
give it unto us, and think themselves happy that they have it to the same end.


Cyp. Whatsoever their husbands count us, seeing it c^nnot be remedied why let
it pass: but could we get a repreeve to stay in England but one seven years,
to see the towardnes of the brats, I am assured that we should find the
children more affectionate to us for their fathers sakes: for I am confident,
ever since we came to be inwardly acqua^nted with their mothers, we have done
our best to breed them.


Rob. It is an especial gift given to us by Sa^nt Francis, that whithersoever
we come, we p^opagate to the Order.


Cyp. But must we for France without deni^ll?


Rob. But what if our entertainment be not so good there as we expect? what
then? For not to flatter our selves, even Catholics themselves are fallen
three farthings in a penny of their esteem of us, howsoever some of us have
handled the business.


Cyp. What if our entertainment shall not be to our minds? we must bring our
minds to our entertainment; but if we shall find Charity and Devotion quite
past re^overy, and that in no sort we are likely to live upon it like
ourselves; my counsel is, to alter our copy. What? if I am bound to serve St.
Francis, St. Francis is bound to keep me. No penny no Pater noster. Hark, one
knockes, or opens door: pray God we are not sent for to be doomed.


Rob. I fear me it is even so: for ever after apprehension follows sentence.


FINIS.

