HIS EXCELLENCY SIR THOMAS FAIRFAXES Protestation, in the name of himself, and
the rest of the Army.

THE DECLARATION Of the Commaltee of Soldiers, Their Answer to the Scots
Declaration, And the Resolutions of the army Concerning the City of LONDON.

printer's or publisher's device

London Printed by B. A. 1647

NEVVES FROM THE ARMY
SIR,
YOurs dated June 11, came safe to my hands for which I give you many thanks,
and for what has since my lhst bin collected by me, is briefly thus, That we
have left the King vt his house at Newmarket, where Col. Whalley commands the
Guard still.

We are now come hither to St. Albones the Genesis Excellency, Leivtenant Genesis
Hammond, Col. Hammond, Comissary Genesis Ierton, Col. Rainsborough, Col. Sir
Hardreds Waller, Col. Rich, Col. Lilburne, Col. Pride, Col. Howson, and the
rest, Also F. Mar. Genesis Skippon, Live. Genesis Crumwell and the rest of the
Commissioners are come with us, we have a very gallant army, and do not
decrease, besides many that have left us would feign be admitted again but come
not.

We had some of the Scots Declarations brought hither which have much
incoraged the soldiers, especially that last passage, wherein they assined the
Parliament at the conference of both houses, that if there were need, (it
being upon some speeches against the army) that they would join above man.

But I find that the soldiers take things very well from the City, in that
they will join with those who would promote war against them. And it has (as
I here) been disputed amongst the soldiers very much, what course to take for
the poor of the City of London, in case the Armies lying near raise the prises
of provisions, the result of which was that if they have but some moneys sent
them to pay the Armies quarters, they will retreat further from the City, and
it is the open way (so far as I perceive) that upon a motion from the City, the
Parliament will not deny it them.

we hear that it is much questioned in the City of London what the Army will do
upon them in relation to their Estates whether they shall be free from plunder,
and also whether they will admit a free trade, if the Country to which the
Soldiers have resolved, that the City of London going on in this loving way,
and not opposing them, they will do them no prejudice.

The soldiers are resolved that not one penyworth of goods or money, shall be
prejudiced by them, not only that in their shops or houses, but what soever
shall be carried in to the Country, or be sent up from the Country, between
them and those they deal withal, not any jote thereof shall be prejudiced, and
if any moneys be sent them to enable them to pay quarters they will remove
further off from London.

We hear of some Aldermen, and Common Council men coming to the Army from
the City, they are much expected again, they a^^ come to us, you shall here
further from

Your humble servant R. CORBET
St. Albones, June the 13. 1647.
His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax his Protestation, in the name of himself,
and the rest of the Commanders in chief.
1. WE have said before, and profess it now, we desire no alteration of the
Civil Government.

2. We desire not to interrupt the settling of Presbyterial Government.

3. Nor do we seek to open a way to licentious liberty, under pretense of
obtaining ease for tender Consciences.

T. FAIRFAX.

The Desires of the Army.
I. Their desire is, to preserve and not to spoil, and to that end, are
determined both Officers and Soldiers, horse and foot, not in the least, to be
accounted the wicked of men, and destroyers, but preservers of that remnant and
talent which God has bestowed upon those, who serve him in truth and sincerity.

II. That although they are now near approaching toward your vast and populous
City, yet it is no ways prejudicial to the State, but for the preservation
and security of those privileges, for which diverse poor soldiers have lost
their lives for the maintenance of the same.

III. That if there be an answer returned somewhat suitable to their desires,
and their reasonable requests granted, they shall proceed no further, but
retreat to any convenient place, which shall be thought fit and convenient.

IV. That, their desire is, that they may receive a fair and suitable Answer
to their Requests, (professing that their intentions are real, and not in the
least, prejudicial, either to State or Commonwealth, but for the advantage of
the public good.) And that the Citizens of London with whom they have so often
hazarded (...) lives withal against the Common Enemy of the Kingdom, may not
in any ways stand in opposition against them, but really and unanimously knit
their hearts in one link, against all opposers and disturbers of the public
Weal of England, in which troublesome disasters, both the Citizens of London
and the renowned Prentices (of the said City) in the Army, have waded through
many difficulties.

V. And lastly, (...) is the earnest desire of the whole Army, that all things
may be composed in love, and that all possible means may be used, for a safe
and well-grounded peace, that so his Majesty's Honor and Prerogative may be
maintained, the Privileges and Being of Parliament preserved, and the peace
and welfare of the Kingdom defended, against all Opposers, and Disturbers
whatsoever.

These Desires and Demands were subscribed by diverse of the chief Officers in
the Army.

FINIS.

