A Full RELATON OF THE Taking of Bath by Sir THOMAS FAIRFAXES Forces on
Wednesday the 30th. of July, 1645. With the manner of the same, and the
Ar^icles by which it was Surrendered.

And how Colonel Rich Has Taken:

100. Garrison soldiers. 100. Welchmen. 6. Piece of Ordnance. 200. Muskets.
100. Pikes. 10. Barrels of Gunpowder. 10. Barrells of Ammunition 1. Staderd
Colors. 5. Colors more, and good store of Bullet, match, Ammunition, Bag and
Baggage.
Also Six Piece of Ordnance taken by Sir Thomas Fairfax, that the Enemy had
hid, 4000. weight of Match also taken, and 44. Barrells of Powder.

Printed, and published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Barnard Alsop, and Jane Coe. 1645.

A FULL RELATION OF THE TAKING OF BATH, And other proceedings of Sir Thomas
Fairfax since he marched out of Bridgwater.
SIR,
AS I gave you an account of the taking of Bridgwater, so God multiplying his
mercies upon us, we having taken in Bath also; I shall briefly give you an
account thereof: only I cannot omit something yet behind of Bridgwater, for we
have found six pieces of Ordnance which the enemy had hid, and there is left
besides what was destroyed by the fire, 44. barrels of gunpowder, and 4000
weight of match.

On Satterday last, Sir Thomas Fairfax marched out of Bridgwater, Lieutenant
General Crumwell has been ill, but God be thanked mends, that night we
marched to Marstock about nine miles on the way to Sherburn, where we quartered
that night and Sunday night.

On the Lords day we heard that Rupert had been himself in person (the day
before) at Bath with Sir Tho. Bridges, to encourage him to keep it against us,
promising him relief in case he should be besieged.

On Monday the 28. of July, 1645. the General marched to Sherborne, about
fourteen miles from Martock: Major General Massy was left further west: And
the same day, viz. Monday, about 60 horse, (most Welsh) came from Prince Rupert
to strengthen Bath; and other Officers with them to govern the Town, because
that P. Rupert had found, when he was there two days before, that Sr. Thomas
Bridges was quite out of heart to keep it: for the very name of Sir Thomas
Fairfax strikes a terror to the enemy. But when they were come into Bath, the
Town cried out as one man, all against the Welsh: No Welsh, no Welsh: Neither
did Sir Thomas Bridges take it well, that he should be displaced, and another
put in; which caused a great division in the Town, that the Officers and Horse
would not stay to dispute it: yet nevertheless some Welsh stayed in the Town,
which did much displease both the Governor, the Officers, the Townsmen; yea
and the Garrison soldiers also.

On Tuesday the General sent 2. Regiments of horse and two Troops of Dragoons,
under the Command of Colenell Rich, to view and give account of the condition
of the Garrison of Bath, then held by Sir T. Bridges for the King. The Army
removed to Wells.

Col. Pickering is with a party before Sherborn, a nest of most mischevous
vermin, under whom the country has much suffered, and by whom before we came
thither some of our own messengers have been taken, and our letters
intercepted, and the country do wholly complain against them for very great
plunderers, and barbarous neighbors.

We made on toward Bath, having no foot at all with us, only the aforesaid
two Regiments of horse, and 2. Companies of Dragoons and about an hour before
sunset, the South side was close beset, the Dragoones lay about Holliwell, and
we kept them on the South, and on the west parts of the town; But the north
part of the town lay open, for we came not to block them up, nor had we forces
to do it then present there: The Enemy might have gone away on the North part
of the town, in despite of all that we could do to hinder them, but God did
so infatuate them, that they had not power, as in our former victories, so
particularly in this taking of Bath, the hand of God was much seen for us.

About Sun set we gained Holliwell; and placed our Dragoones within half
Pistol shot of the Gate on the Bridge at Bath, where there was some
skirmishing, and the Dragoones behaved themselves very gallantly, In the Night
the Enemy within took several Alarmes; and were in great fear of, us I
conceive they knew not our strength, only before had some intelligence of the
advance of our Army.

On this present Wednesday morning the Enemy heard of a party from Malsbury,
on the North side of them, but they were not Considerable, but they were
struck with such a fear that Sir Tho. Bridges sent a Messenger very early
forth of Bath to us, to desire a parley, which we wondered at, so we presently
held a parley with them, and by Sun rising had the Garrison of Bath delivered up
to us, upon very good Conditions, 1. All, Both officers and soldiers to have
quarter for their lives. 2. That Sir Thomas Bridges and all the Officers be
permitted to march away to Bristoll, without let or molestation. 3. That Sir
Thomas Bridges, and all other Field officers, and Captains have liberty to
march away with horse, and Arms. 4. That all Officers under the degree of
Captains, march away without Arms (only staves in their hands) to Bristoll. 5.
That Sir Thomas Bridges, with all the Officers asoresaid do immediately march
out of the Garrison, and surrender it to Colonel Rich for the service of tho
Parliament. 6. That all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition be surrendered also.
7. The common soldiers to be left all prisoners.


All which was done; and we were possessed of the Garrison by beak of the day;
And truly you may think it a strange thing for horse to take a Town, and no
foot within 15 miles of it, but you may see how God infatuates men, and
possesses them with a fear, that deprives them of wisdom and courage.

Farly Castle (Sir Edward Hungerfords house) is also besieged, and the whole
Army is every where full of action; and generally go on exceeding cheerfully:
notwithstanding much hard duties, and constant service.

Bristoll is in the same condition, you would hardly believe the fears they
are in there, Rupert went out thence yesterday, and the town and soldiers in a
great perplexity; the King has been long expected there, but we hear he
stays still at Cardiffe Castle? whether Rupert be returned back again to
Bristoll, we do yet hear; but the plague does certainly abate in that City.

Goring is still in in his old quarters about Okehampton and confidently
expects Greenvils and Hoptons recrutes, and the pressed men to be 7000 horse and
foot,

The Cornish it is believed will do him little good out of their own County,
and the forced Clubmen as little as they.

Some Welsh landed on Monday last at Posets point, that came from Wales; but
I hope care will be taken for the guarding of the Seas, especially that River,
which may so be kept, that no boat can pass (without difficulty:) neither in
nor out.

We shall suddenly have our recrutes, and what else we stay for; and then we
shall on in our design. In the mean time you see how industrious our General
is to loose no time, whilst he is necessitated to stay; and I hope God will go
on to bless Colonel Pickering against Sherburn, as he has us; in the taking
of this Garrison of Bath: which make a good account of our service in this
vacasie.

Yet in all this we look up to God, who is the Lord of Hoasts; by whose power
we have done those things wherein he has so blessed us; and therefore to him
be given the praise of all his power, and goodness.

Bath the 30 of July, 1645.
A List of what was taken in the Garrison of BATH by Colonel Rich, on
Wednesday July 30. 1645.
200. prisoners which were left in the Town, according to the Articles; which
prisoners were as follows. 100. Garrison Soldiers. 100. Welsh that came in
but three hours before. 200. Muskets also taken, and 100. Pikes. 6. Piece of
Ordnance. 10 Barrells of Gunpowder. 10. Barrells of other Ammunition. A great
quantity of Match and Buller. Sir Thomas Bridges his Standard Color in the
Royal Fort. 5. Colors besides. Good store of Provisions. Likewise some
Pistols swords, and all Sir Thomas Bridges Bag and Baggage. Besides the Arms
and Provisions of the towns men's. Also diverse halberdg Roundheads, and other
weapons. This Garrison is of great consequence, and will much streighten
Bristoll.
FINIS.

