A FVLL ANSWER TO A SCANDALOUS PAMPHLET, Entitled, A Character of a LONDON
DIURNALL.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Francis Coals and Lawrence Blaikeloke, and are to
be sold at their shops, in the Old-Bayly, and at Temple-Barre. 1645.

A full ANSWER to a Scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, A Character of a
LONDON-DIURNALL.
SUrely, when he drew this Character, he never thought of the Greek Alphabet,
for the very remembrance of these two Characters, and might have then given him
a sufficient admonition, to beware of such virulent extravagancie: But I wonder
at his ambition, since having merited the Laurel in this famous Universitie,
he could not be content, but would still aspire to become a Graduate in the
triple Academie, and to put on Doctor Stories Cap, with a Wreath of a more
ignominious and fatal consequence, then that which he first aimed at: But
since he has pleased himself, and his Party, by acting the old Comedy e
Plaustro, to the scandal of our Honorable Senate, it is requisite also, that
by acting the old Tragedy in the Cart, be should satisfy justice. But though
his tongue has extremely transgressed the limits of Truth, Modesty, and
Loyalty, yet I hope that the hearts of his Judges will demonstrate mercy.

He labors about the pedigree of a Diurnall, as that Conventus Asinorum, or
College of Heralds, were wont to sweat about derivation of the descent of some
vainglorious Novice, from Godfrey of Bulleyn, or Ieffrey of Aniou; but not
improperly, though unwittingly, he calls it the Parliaments Book of Maccabees,
for the Maccabees (we know) were the Heroic Vindicators of the Jewish Laws
and Liberties, from tyrannical violence and cruelty. I confess, I find in
Diurnals no such politic maxims, as be in Tacitus his Annals, nor do I
account them so authentic as Livies Decades; yet experience shows, that they
usually render so much truth, as will make the most clamorous Malignant as
silent as a Seriphian frog, and appear with a face as ill as his heart; yea,
make him look like vanquished Marsyas, bring him into such an Epilepsie of
melancholy, that none can help him but his white Witch Aulicus, who applying a
fictitious charm, cures him as well as dancing does those which are stung with
a Tarantula. He tells us of the miracle of Zealand, but I wonder more at this
of Cleveland; who has here a more numerous birth of monstrous and desperate
conceits in one sheet, then the Countess of Meurs had conceptions between
two: but such prodigious births, may prove as fatal to the one as to the other.

He says, that the house of Commons sit as Judges of the twelve Tribes of
Israel: but he is much mistaken in his account, for they judge only two
Tribes, viz. Superstitious Levi, and the Malignant Tribe of Dan. These two
Tribes were the principal sticklers in the erection and adoration of the Calfe
in Horeb: ought they not therefore to be judged? He calls the Parliament the
Kingdoms Anatomy, in stead of the Kingdoms Epitome; and this is one of Will
Toolyes mistakes.

He brands our Assembly of Divines with the reproachful term of Empericks,
and twits them for thumbing of Diurnalls: I should rather have thought they
might have been taunted for thumping of Pulpits then thumbing of Diurnalls:
But I dare assert, that for the mystical Urim and Thummim, wherewith every
Minister ought to be qualified, these whom he terms Empericks, and spiritual
Dragooneers, do as far surpass their pontifical Canoneers, and Cathedral
Recluses, as Swans do Geese.

He says, that the State staleth blood; and here, he is in the right: for both
Church and State have endured many terrible fits of the Stone, and Strangury,
ever since their party obstructed those passages, by which the evacuation of
excrementitious abuses should be made.

He compares the Diurnallists, and Aulicus, to the Devil, and the Exorcist, or
to a black and a white Witch; but more properly, they may be represented in
Ocnus and his Ass: for the Diurnallists twists ropes of discourses, and that
Oxford Ass devoures them, and they proving very hard in concoction; he refunds
them to his Malignants, which lick them up with as much greediness, as the
smaller Poets do Homers Vomit. But if he will needs make Aulicus a Witch, he
shall be a Witch of Lapland, for he envelopes Malignant air in paper, as they
do winds in clouts.

This Natural would bind political affairs to a physical condition, and
therefore out of the abundance of ignorance, and loyalty, he impleades the
Parliament of bastardie; not considering that Regal power, in relation to the
public good, is ever consistent with the authority of the Parliament,
howsoever his Majesty be in person absent, or in will averse: therefore
whatsoever ordinances, tending to the preservation or benefit of the
Commonwealth, shall be concluded on in his absence, they are to be accounted
legitimate, according to that infallible rule, Salus populi suprema lex esto.
Thus are our Ordinances no subventanious, or abortive births, but real,
mature, and Herculean Infants, destined and brought forth, to strangle those
Serpents, sent out by Malignant Juno, to destroy our Religion, and Liberties.

He compares our Militia to Mars, who was borne without a father: but their
Oxford Militia may more aptly be compared to the pernicious Cockatrice, who is
hatched without a mother: As for our Parliament Votes, they are the same in
effect with the Romanae Senatus consultum, which had the validity of a law a
long time, even under their most tyrannical Emperors. Nor can he really prove
what he impudently would infer, by his trivial comparison of the Sexton and
his Clock.

How exactly this Pedantique Heteroclite has learned the Popish trick of
disavowing of those mischiefs, which are evidently and truly theirs, the
births of their damnable Plots have justly merited such Midwives as were
cruelly obtruded upon the Hebrew women: But since they have proved as
ridiculous as the labors of the mountains, or the nativitie of a cushion, we
must therefore (next to God) thank our vigilant Patriots at Westminster, whom
unworthily, and wickedly, he asperseth with the opprobious appellation of
Players and scenical Actors: wherefore, I may justly here retort upon him the
Psalmists reproof; Thy tongue imagines wickedness, and with lies thou
cuttest like a sharp rasor: thou have loved all words that may do hurt, oh
thou false tongue, etc. This Sophister will acknowledge no Plots, because they
were never fully effected: but had they succeeded according to their desires,
then no doubt they should have bin justified with as much audacitie, as they
are now disavowed with impudence. I skip his Skippers and his Tailors, and bid
him look upon the Plot of drawing up the Northern Armies, and upon that which
tended to the apprehension or assassinate of the six Members, on that of
Waller, Tompkins, and Chaloner: these were no Chimaera's, no personated Devils.
But I wonder not so much at the shameless confidence of many, since some, who
were Actors, have appeared so wretchedly obdurate, that the Ladder or Scaffold
could not put them in mind of a true remorse, or penitent confession.

If all Array-men were with Canterbury, and the Lions, the Kingdom might be at
quiet; the dormant Articles need no cramping: they will awake soon enough, to
wait upon Justice, and (I fear) before Canterbury be ready for his Voyage.

Names are but accidents; yet our Sword and Scepter have been most frequently
glorious, in the Name of Henry: but I am afraid, the wicked counsels of some
will make the Name of Charles sadly ominous. His supposition of Isaac, and the
Corne-cutter, is a ridiculous and profane excrescence of the Cornucopia of his
wit, therefore this fellow seems rather to deserve a Crowne-cutter, then he to
need a Corne-cutter; or he may better merit to be furnished with a Scale,
though not according to his Votes, yet befitting his deserts.

Don Quixote deserves the patronage of these errant Cavaliers, who though they
have not Valor enough to fight with Wind-mills, yet they have wit enough to
plunder them. This fellow ought to retract his incongruities, for our Senators
are Men of the long Robe, and therefore incapable of that appellation which
belonged to that fantastique son of Mars. As for Foxes, it is most certain,
that there be none more noxious to our State then Spanish Foxes, and a Brace of
these we have run to ground at Oxford, where we hope (ere long) they shall
be unkennell'd by our Terriers.

He thus having sufficiently played upon our conscript Patriots, proceeds in a
second part, to the same Tune, (through the invincible boldness of his
obstreperous Goose-quill) to calumniate our Military Officers; and he begins
with the Earl of Stamford, saying, that the people took him for one that
danced a Morris, etc. but he was mistaken in the peoples opinions, for they
were more sadly sensible of another, who more properly may be said to have
danced the Morris in the West, though he danced Lachrymae before Lyme.

The propriety of Banks his Horse seems to be in their great Attorney, and
the Caparison of a Sergeants Gown suits the condition of that ingenious Jade
better then a great Saddle. The loyalty of their Cornish Cavaliers merits
Monuments of Ginger-bread, and the virtue of their Welsh Worthies Statues of
tosted Cheese. Our masculine devoires admit no female Committees; though their
Affairs depend too much upon the capacity of that Sex. He contemptuously
measures his Lordship by Saint Paul's stature, and imagines that Valor dwells
only in Carrack of Flesh. He says, that this Lord (by the help of a
Diurnall) routed his enemies, at fifty miles distance: I know not what Panick
fear those Western Choughes might apprehend from his Lordships Name; for this
has heretofore been very formidable to the Adversaries of our State,
therefore I suspend my unbeleefe. But I have heard, that Prince Rupert (by the
help of Aulieus) routed our Northern Army, for which Victory they made
Bonefires at Oxford; and yet I am certain, that this story was more remote
from truth, then his Lordship was from Hopton, when he was routed: but these
are only the slips of Fame, and not to be insisted on by the superlative wit
of an Universitie. His Lordships prowess needs no Paracelsian Sword, neither
is the Valor of his Adversaries only to be abated by a Magical Antidote; but
the Weapon-Salve would have been a precious commodity among them after Modbury
field, where we made much work for their Chirurgians; and there Sir Ralph
Hopton was taught to relinquish the virtue of his hands, and to be beholding to
the activitie of his heels for his preservation.

But (says he) the Squibbe is run to the end of the rope: this is a
miscellaneous sentence, for though the Squibbe be ridiculous, yet the end of
the rope is as fatal as the scissours of his Lady Atropos. He enveighes
against Sir William Waller, and his companion in Arms, and by a scurrilous
comparison seeks to imbase their approved worth, but his slandrous language is
a most forcible argument of their Valor and fidelity. The Mountebanke and
Zany, are a pair of couples fit for his Court Spaniels, and nothing pertinent
to heroic fraternities.

Nor can the Translators of the Psalms escape his extravagant madness, but
they must have a lash for their pious endeavors.

He would make Sir Ralph Hopton (in this respect) co^parable to some of their
Clergy; these have Pluralities of Livings, and he must have a Plurality of
Lives: Indeed, when it was reported he was beaten, the world (who til then had
such a strong opinion of his Valor) presently gave him for dead, for few could
be persuaded that this flower of Chivalrie would ever have condiscended to make
his Spurs of honor accessorie to an ignominious flight; yet since that, he
has more then once given them occasions to alter their opinions, But though
the natural life can be lost but once, yet there is a moral life which
consists in honor and reputation, and this merits more esteem then that which
is annexed to flesh and blood; but the same may be lost more then once: and in
this regard, their Champion of the West was slain both by the Earl of
Stamford and Sir William Waller:

This Fellows terms are such, that he seems rather to have been brought up
among the scumme of rascalitie, then in a Nurserie of manners and Arts, but a
time may come when he may be called to answer for all his barbarous
incivilities, and that rude paronomasie, and other abuses most intemperately
vomited against the name and person of his Excellency.

He mentions Round-VVay-Downe, where the Valor of Sir William Waller was more
conspicuous, then his disaster notorious; for after he had given Hopton
several encounters and defeates, and forced him to take Sanctuary in the
Devizes, after he had slain Greenvile their Cornish Achilles, with many of his
Myrmidons: I say, after he had reduced Hopton to such a desperate condition,
that he must have been surprised within the space of 24 hours, he was
unexpectedly charged by a fresh Brigade, and so was constrained to leave his
prey, retreating without any singular loss.

This Fellows malice has transported him into such an ecstasy, that he not
only labors to scandalize good men and their laudable actions, but to abuse
holy Scripture, yea even the most sacred part of the Scripture, the Gospel it
self: and therein that mystic word of gratulation which was applied to our
most glorious Savior in his tryumphant Entrata into Jerusalem, this holy
benediction he distorteth to his ludibrious purpose in a blasphemous manner.
Names are but circumstantiall adjuncts, and nothing pertaining to the essence
of sanctity; yet certainly, a Christian may more decently bear a name borrowed
from the Hebrews, then the heathen, and our most frequent names come from them,
as John, Thomas, etc. yea Dionysius of Alexandria, an ancient Father of the
Primitive Church, says plainly; That as we ought to strive to imitate the
actions of the Apostles, so we ought to give their names unto our infants, that
the same may put them in mind to follow the examples of those pious men whom
they so nearely resemble in their names: but how absurdly this pedantique Drole
would infer, that his Majesty may lawfully make use of the Irish Rebels,
because the List of General Cromwells Regiment consists of Hebrew names, for
he vainly pretends, that the imposion of an exotic name may translate a person
to the condition of an Alien. I am not acquainted with General Cromwells
person, therefore I could never observe the posture of his neck: but this I
know, that the most noble and glorious Commander which the world ever had
carried his neck awry. It is true that, or his complexion, or his Valor, so
dazzled their young Eagle, that he durst not look him in the face at
Long-Marston, but it was his bloody Sword, not his bloody Beak, which made
them run almost toward every point of the Compass.

Images in Churches are obnoxious to Superstitious abuses, and therefore may be
justly taken away or demolished; but from violation of Monuments, or
disturbance of the repose of the dead, I confidently believe, his hands are as
clear as his accusers tongue is guilty of a slanderous aspersion; but were he
faulty of what is laid to his charge, yet I doubt not, but he might procure a
Certificate under Prince Ruperts hand, that he dares fight against creatures of
a more lively constitution, then Images or Statues. He speaks of a running
banquet, and surely he means that which General Cromwell invited his
Highness and the Marquess of New Castle to, at Long-Marston, when Generals
and Lieutenant Generals ran like Lance-spessado's, or Irish Footmen; some
fled Westward, as if they meant to take Sanctuary in the Devils -- of peake;
and some Eastward, never turning head till they had measured the breadth of the
Germane Ocean. As for his whistling to the Cambridge Committee, I believe it is
an expression of more sense and honesty, then the tongue of this back-biter can
deliver, or his heart imagine, and he that reads him backward or forward, shall
find him valiant and faithful, if he construes him rightly. Rifling of
Colleges, and demolishing of Churches, are false imputations of that
bleare-ey'd malice which cannot distinguish abuses from things: Sacrilege is
not entailed upon him, but Religion, Virtue, and the Spirit of Reformation runs
in his blood: For as his noble Ancestor overthrew those Houses of Superstition,
Sloth, and Sensuality, so he labors to purge Cathedrals of those abuses which
threaten ruin to true Religion: But this Fellow, out of his iniquity, or
weakness of judgment, takes Reformation for Robbery, and it may concern him
in time to crave the benefit of the Clergy, which will hardly be granted,
because he has made such bad use of his learning; but there can be no greater
benefit, both to the Clergy and Laity, then a true Reformation.

His personal Reproaches speak him rather to be one of the Assembly at
Billinsgate, then a member of our Universitie. Whether it were the Holiness of
Manchester, or the Vigilancie of Cromwell, that defeated their unsanctified
Crew so often, we need not examine, since we know they have been almost as
fatal to those Punick Cavaliers, as those two Roman Thunderbolts of War were
to the Adversaries of their Commonwealth; and it has appeared, that Michael
and the Lord of Hosts have been their Assistants. The Earl of Manchesters
Victories amply prove the unanimitie of his Soldiers, and their Divisions are
but the Devices of this fellows malignant condition: it makes much for the
credit of his party, to call those who have so frequently beaten them, a
company of winking Cowards. He rayles against the breakers of Monuments, yet
spits Venom on the ashes of the dead: He argues, as if Virtues and Vices were
hereditarie things, and like an absolute Pelagian, he goes about to derive
Religious Sanctity from a natural cause, so corrupt is his Divinity. Neither
his Lordship nor the Scottish Mysts are so noxious to the eyes of this
Kingdom, as their French and Spanish Mysts, for these have almost put out the
eyes of both King and Kingdom. As for the knowing loyalty he speaks of, it
is but a mere pedantick Heresy in policy, cried up by their Pontifical
Rabbis, against Conscience, because it is a support of their Lordly Dignities;
and most of the lightheaded Levites follow the example of their Reverend
Bel-weathers. His Lordship has no way appeared an enemy to Learning, but to
Ignorance and Superstition, personated with Religion and Learning, and his
Treasons are nothing else but the fictitious Idaea's of this fellows malignant
imagination, who in this slanderous aspersion has approved himself to be an
arch-traytor to Truth.

The Account of his Lordships Victories is written in the blood of his
Adversaries, and this Balaam has not prophesied in vain; so often has our
Christian Knight defeated those swearing Nimrods, and Pagan Cavaliers. As for
Losses (thanks be to God) they out-vye us ten for one; but the innocent blood
spilt by their Irish Auxiliaries still cries for Vengeance, and shall
doubtless be heard: Those savage Villains, that merit interdiction of fire
and water, are reputed good Catholic subjects, while others, of singular
integrity and loyalty toward God, their King and Country, are called
barbarous Rebels: Videat Deus, and judicet.

In his wonted scurrilitie, he taxes Sir William Brereton and Sir John Gell,
Gentlemen of approved worth and valor, whose fortunate and Heroic actions
justly give the Lie to his opprobrious appellation. The first of these, has
been a terrible slaughter-man to their Irish Canibals, and showed himself a
tall trencher-man at diverse bloody breakfasts which he gave to those uncivil
guests. As for his resemblance of the Beast, it is only a fallacy of this
detractors vitiated fancy.

He is so seasoned with malignancie, that goodness in others, to him seems
miraculous: it is an Aenigma to his dunghill spirit, that noble Fairfax should
stand up in Vindication of Religion, from Atheism and Superstition, and the
Commonwealth from a Tyrannical and Arbitrarie Power. He might have spared his
distinction of a personal and a political capacity, for his Lordship is no
creature of a double shape, no Centaure, but the very Hercules, or Theseus,
that combats those Cloud-bred Monsters. He somewhat strangely compares his
Lordship to an Egyptian Chicken; but we must add too, that he is of a
generous kind, for their fiercest Lions tremble at his voice.

Me thinks he should forbear to call General Brown Wood-monger, because
this very term might make them call to mind, how often he has cudgel'd their
Militia, even from the Generalissimo to the Corporal.

All good men can attest, that there was need of a Reformation both in Church
and State, which before this time might have been happily perfected by the
Parliament, if they had not been maliciously interrupted by those Babylonian
Sanballats.

The name of Tinker may be most properly applied to their Cornish Mettall-men,
those subterraneous spirits of darkness, whom they have raised from the
Western Stannaries; or to those Irish Rogues, whom those Oxford Foxes,
Cottington and Digby, have sent for over to hammer in pieces both Church and
State, so they may accomplish their wicked ends and purposes.

He has very charitably translated the name of Rebels, from his Consorts the
bloody Irish, to his innocent Protestant Brethren: but the justness of our
Cause is warrantable both by the Fundamental Laws of our Kingdom and Divine
Ordinances; therefore we confidently retort upon him and his Faction the name
of Rebels with more bitter reproach; then he can or ever could fix the same
upon us, that endeavor to be found really loyal to God, our King, and
Kingdom. Our Victories have not been Magical, but truly Martial: At
Edgehill it was evident, that the epithete of Invincible was as vainly
applied to their formidable Cavaliers, as to the Spanish Armado in 88. At
Newbury we did cut out our passage by dint of Sword, and march over their
bellyes. Near York we totally routed their numerous Miscellanie, and laid
thousands upon the ground: Therefore I know not what his Triumvirate of
Bladders can more genuinely imply, then those three Puffes of Nobility which
were pricked at Newbury.

As for our Fancies, they are firm and sound; but He, and his party, are
impostumated Members of this Commonwealth, and incurable (I fear) without
incision, or abscission.

FINIS.

