A FULL RELATION OF The SCOTS besiedging Newcastle, and their taking the Glass
houses, and other Forts.

With a List of the chief Malignants in the Town.

Also, the Victorious Lord Fairfax his taking of Whitby,where he surprised;
500. Officers and Soldiers. 1000. Sailers and Inhabitants. 40. Ships in the
Channel. Good store of Powder. 500. Arms. ^0. Commissioners of Array. All
their train of Artillery. 100. Piece of Ordnance.


The Town and Forts of Newcastle.
depiction of the town of Newcastle upon Tyne

London, Printed by Bernard Alsop, according to Order. 1644.

THE VICTORIOVS LORD FAIRFAX HIS Surprising of Whitby in York shire, with the
men, Arms, Ammunition, Ships and Ordnance; with diverse other particulers
thereof.
MY Lord Fairfax having taken Burlington Bay, the farthest Haven Town in the
East Riding of Yorkshire, and placed a Garrison for the Parliament in it; he
marched from thence into the North Riding, and having passed over at
Pottersbrimton, and so to Yerley, and quartering in those parts, the Country
of the said East Riding of Yorkshire, came in to him in an abundance; being
very ready to take the Covenant, and to assist the Parliament against the
Papists and Prelates the Enemies thereof.

So that the Lord Fairfax marched toward Whitby, a Haven Town in the farthest
part of Yorkshire, with a very considerable Army; intending that if the Enemy
would not deliver up the Town, to storm it; for Whitby was a very strong
Garrison of the Earl of Newcastles.

But the Enemy considering in what condition they were, surrendered up the Town
to the Lord Fairfax, wherein were above five hundred Captains, Lieutenants,
Commanders, Officers, and common Soldiers; besides (at the least) twenty of the
Commission of Array, and almost a thousand Sailers and inhabitants of the Town;
all which have delivered up the Town, and joined themselves with the Lord
Fairfax; besides forty ships which were then in the Channel.

Also the Lord Fairfax seized on all their Works, Ships, Powder, Ammunition,
five hundred Arms, many Barrels of Powder, match, and other Ammunition, and
train of Artillery; and it is supposed, at the least a hundred Piece of
Ordnance in the Ships and upon the Works; all which the Lord Fairfax has
seized on for the use of the Parliament.

A Relation of the taking of the Works at Newcastle by the Scots; with diverse
other Passages concerning the Siedge, and an onset by them made upon the Town.
THe Earl of Newcastle (it seems) foresaw the danger he was in; and how
probable it was that he might by all likelihood lose, since not only the Lord
Fairfax increased his strength; but our Brethren of Scotland also were so near
him: and therefore the Earl of Newcastle, General King, and diverse others of
the chiefest Commanders went into Newcastle, it is supposed, to try if they can
escape away by Sea; but our Brethren of Scotland are very glad to hear that
they are there, for they have laid close Siedge to it; and making an onset upon
them, beat upon their Works, and with the loss of only 14. men, slew many of
the enemies, recovered the Glasse-houses, and one of their Forts, not the least
considerable, and were got on both sides the Town; so that it is not any ways
possible, that they can hold out long.

Our Brethren of Scotland are quartered about Morpeth, Ogle-Castle, Seton,
Prude; and as many as well can, lie before Newcastle.

The Scots sent forth a party, which with some Boats made as a Bridge over the
River at Newcastle.

One Brigade of Horse and Foot, and Dragoons, with some Ordnance, are marching
toward Durham, and a party of them are to stay on the South side of Newcastle,
in the Bishopric, to secure the Coal Pits on that side, and to keep the
Enemy from firing them.

In the taking of the Shelds there is no great difficulty, and Tinmouth Castle
will be forced to yield up, when Newcastle is taken. The Earl of Warwicks
Ships lie before Tinmouth, to keep in the malignant Ships.

So that now we may see a plain demonstration of Gods blessing, since the
taking of the Covenant; there is no more now between the Lord Fairfax and our
Brethren of Scotland, save only the Bishopric of Durham; for Whitby, which
the Lord Fairfax has taken, is adjacent to the hithermost part of the
Bishopric, and Newcastle at the further part adjacent to the Country of
Northumberland: so that between them it is not forty miles. The City of Durham
it self being just in the mid way: which when they hear that Newcastle is
taken, can have little hopes to build upon to stand out against the two Armies.

By this time there is no doubt but Newcastle is in the hands of the Scots, it
being a fortnight since the Messenger that brought this Message left them in
this condition.

The Earl of Newcastle seeing that now he can do no more mischief in that
Country, has fired and burnt down (as it is supposed) nigh an hundred houses,
and all the goods of so many poor families in the Suburbs of Newcastle;
notwithstanding the cries of many poor widows and fatherless children, that
begged of him with tears, to refrain from the doing thereof.

A List of the Names of the chief Malignants in Newcastle.
Earl Newcastle. Lord Widdrington. Vic. Carre. L. Gray. Sir Thomas Glenham.
Major Morlay. John Emerson. Henry Rowcastle. Charles Clarke. Ralph Cock.
Robert Sherstoe. Nicholaus Cool. Thomas Lyddell. Lionel Madison. Alexander
Davison. Mark Milbanke. Francis Bows. Francis Anderson. Henry Maddison.
Leonard Carre.
FINIS.

