A FVLL RELATION CONCERNING The wonderful and wholesome FOUNTAIN.

At first Discovered in Germany, two miles from the City of Halberstadt, by a
certain Youth upon the fifth of March 1646. as he was coming from School.

And now dispersed into fifteen several Springs.

With a specification of those persons, which (as certain Letters do inform)
through Gods assistance and blessing, were in a very short time Cured by use of
these Waters.

A List of the Diseases, how long the Diseased had them, with the place of
their birth and abode.

And the form of the Prayer, which daily after the Sermon, and set hours of
Devotion is usually said.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Joshua Kirton, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the White Horse in Paul's Churchyard. 1646.

A true Description of the wonderful and wholesome Wells at Hornehausen in
Germany in the Bishopric of Halberstadt.
Collected out of several Letters from Hornehausen, Stettin, Hanburg, Bremen
and other adjacent parts.
Of the 12. of July and 18. of August. 1646.
THe village wherein these wonderful and wholesome Wells are, is called
Hornhausen half a mile distant from Ashersleben and two miles from the City of
Halberstadt, standing in a bottom or valley, between two little Hills, one
toward the East, and the other toward the West, consisting at this present
not of above fifty Boores or tenants, whereas in former times there were at
least a hundred and fifty of them.

The Ministers name is Friderick Seligman; who was borne at Brunswigg. There
are now six Wells in the said Village, whereof but three are used. The first as
being the head spring on the fifth day of March. 1646. and was discovered by a
youth coming from school who accidentally fell into it with one of his legs.
He that first of all drank of it was one, that had been troubled with an Ague
for a long time, and in a very short time after he had drunk of it, he
recovered. The second spring on Midsummerday the 24. of June. And the third and
fourth few days after. The fifth and sixth on the even of our Ladies
Visitation, but especially the sixth, during the time of public devotion. The
first is as large, as a round table the second and third half as large but
they yield all three such a quantity and abundance of water, that it is a
wonderful sight to all that have bin there. There is a distance of forty paces
or thereabouts between each of these Wells. Concerning their virtues, effects
and operations, it is certain, that they are most miraculous, and answerable
to the reports that have bin noised both within the Empire, and dispersed
beyond Seas, It is most true, that one Girl of Mansfeld, which was dumb and
deaf from her youth did recover, so that she was beard of many, when she said
after with good sense and understanding this passage of the Scripture, The
Blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us from all our sins. Likewise a certain
Man, who was blind, and used to beg before the Gates at Leipzig, has been
seen of some within few days, testiying that he could see with one of his
eyes all things, and full as well as any Man that is sharpesighted. In sum,
such wonderful Cures happen every day, As the weekly thanksgivings after the
Sermon, do give a sufficient testimony of them.

Not long ago, as we are certainly informed, there has been public
thanksgiving for the recovery of a hundred and twenty seven persons at once,
whereof there were thirty seven that had the Falling sickness. And a woman
with a crooked back, which she had twenty years. And last month there was
another public thankes-giving said for fourscore persons, which were all
cured of very strange Diseases and Infirmities.

Besides, the three principal Wells are not of one taste, notwithstanding they
are of one color; The first is counted for the sweetest, and for this reason,
it cannot be transported far over land; The other is very salt, having six
or eight Springs, with a sandy ground, not above a yard distant from a brook;
The third is of a middle taste between the first and second. The water of the
second is especially good, and excellent for any outward hurts and sores. There
are many that have been restored to their former sight (as the public
thanksgivings for them does testify) which had lost their sights quite by the
small pox; And we received but just now Letters from the Schoolmaster there
that inform us that already six hundred sick bodies, of several diseases,
were recovered by drinking of the said Wells for the space of eight or nine
days. Certainly those that have been there present relate, that Gods
wonderful works, might, power, mercy and goodness is evidently to be seen
there, in these infirm and diseased Creatures, which by the drinking of this
precious Water, were made whole, especially that were afflicted with these
sicknesses following. As with the Gout, Fevers, Agues, Deafness, French pox,
Crook-backs, Worms, Blindness, Dumbness, Cholicke, Swollen legs, lamenesse
in shoulders, hands and feet* Scurffed and scabby heads, all sorts of old
festered hurts, Biles and sores, Pluresie, sore eyes, Dropsy, dis-joynted
limbs, and strained Sinews and veins, ill stomach, Palpitation or beating
of the heart, Apoplexi, Palsy, bitings of Dogs, broken arms or legs, Shooting
in the head and ears, Short and dim sight, Toothache, Convulsions, Bruises and
falls, Fistulaes and running sores, Melancholic thoughts, Leprosy, defects in
the Liver and Lights; Coughs, Headache, bloody Flux or issue, Ruptures, Wennes,
Carnosities, Impostumes in the Kidneys, Cancers, Guidinesse, with many other
Diseases and infirmities, which would be too long to specify.

Moreover, there are at this present above five thousand persons come there, of
all sorts, rank and condition from all parts of Germany, as Nuenberg,
Auspurg, Munchen, Hanburg, Bremen, Stetin, etc. with a world of Coaches and
Wagons; so that Travelers sometimes find difficulty to be furnished with
Horses. His Highness the Prince Elector of Brandenburg, with his Mother and
Aunt, Her Majesty the Queen of Sweden, are gone thither; And we are informed
that General Torstenson, (who by reason of his indisposition in his body, was
constrained to resign his Command to Wrangel) went thither in a Litter, and
came away on horseback fully recovered.

Besides, we are of late informed, that by Gods infinite power and mercy those
three principal Wells are multiplied and dispersed into fifteen all at a
distance of forty paces one from another. They write also, that the Physicians
have distilled the same Water, and found pure gold thereby. It is to be feared,
that if men should not be satisfied with the grace and mercy of God, that God
shall withdraw his blessing, and turn it into a judgment. And for the
obtaining of Gods blessing, at set hours in the morning, at eight of the
clock, and in the evening at 3, prayers are duly and constantly performed in
the presence of so many thousand persons who altogether fall down upon their
knees, praying with the Minister after this manner following.

The Prayer which is usually said at the Fountain of Hornhausen.
ALmighty God, merciful Father, we thy weak, diseased, infirm and miserable
children do appear here with sad, afflicted, and distressed countenances
before thy most holy throne of Grace, bowing the knees of our hearts,
acknowledging and lamenting our manifold enormous sins and transgressions,
wherewith we have sinned against thee, O most righteous God, provoked thy
wrath, which is like the burning and consuming fire, and drawn upon our
selves, all sorts of judgments and plagues; so that thou have not only
visited us with the Sword Persecution, Dearth and other punishments, but also
have chastened* handled and afflicted our bodies with several Diseases, Sores
and Infirmities, and thereby have fulfilled, wherewith thou have threatened us
in thy Word long ago; that whosoever sins against his Creator, shall fall
into the hands of the Physician. Now, Lord, me must confess, that we have
not only justly deserved all these, but yet far greater and heavier
judgments; yea withal that thou also in the midst of thy wrath and
indignation do show mercy, for if thou would have dealt with us after our
deserts, thou might have totally consumed and destroyed us in our sins,
without giving us any respight for our repentance; whereas thou have bin
pleased not only to prolong our days, that we might repent of our sinful and
wicked course of life, but also as a loving Father, to chastise and humble us
with thy Fatherly rod of diseases and infirmities, like as a temporal Father
does chastise his sons, that thereby we might be induced and seaed up to
repentance: For our great calamity and misery does compel us to draw nigh
unto thee; Wherefore we come and call upon thee, O Lord, in our distresses, and
in our offlictions we lift up our voice, and power out our supplications
before thee: Pardon us, O Lord, pardon us our sins; Have mercy upon us, and
blot out all our transgressions; and forgive our secret sins for the love of
thy Dear Son Jesus Christ. And because our weaknesses and infirmities are
not hidden before thy eyes; yea, thy beloved Son, our Lord and Savior has
assumed upon himself, and borne our weaknesses and infirmities, to the end
that he might show mercy and help to those that were afflicted; We beseech
Thee therefore, O merciful Father, have mercy and compassion on our misery.
Take to heart our manifold afflictions, infirmities and diseases. O Lord Jesus
Christ, true God; that know our distress and misery; ease us of our heavy
burden, which thou have borne thy self And whereas thou as being the true
Physician of souls, removest and curest not only the sickness of souls,
fo^giveest sins, and cleansest and washest our filth and pollution in the
wholesome Fountain of the blood and grace of Jesus Christ, but also thou only
can heal the infirmities of our bodies, to which effect thou have infused
thy wonderful virtues, and heavenly oparations into the Elements, Minerals,
Herbs, Flowers, and other Plants, wherewith thou removest all sorts of
sicknesses, as thou have healed by the means of a lump of figgs, the venomous
and mortal boil of King Hezekiah; We therefore beseech Thee, O heavenly
Father, to magnify thy mercy also in us; by granting us thy grace, that
according to thy Fatherly and good pleasure, since thou know alone what is
for our best, this wholesome Fountain, which thou have opened and discovered
unto us poor and unworthy sinners, out of thy mere grace, may power unto us a
powerful and gracious help and remedy for the recovery of our health. Lord,
thou art He, that have life and death, health and sickness in thy hands, that
killest, and make alive again, and bring men alone to the grave and
destruction, and say remain the children of men; Wherefore it is nothing to
thee to help us here thy unworthy creatures. And as thou prolongd'st the life
of King Hezekiah, even when he was at deaths door. As thou restoredst the
sight to him that was borne blind with clay made of spittle, and sendest him to
wash himself in the Poole of Siloam; As thou healedst Peter's Mother in law
lying sick of a Fever by touching only her hand: As thou helpedst the Woman
that was troubled with the bloody issue, by touching the Seame of thy garment:
Yea, as thou have miraculously restored health and strength to many others: So
it may please thee, to sanctify and bless by thy infinite bounty and
mercifulness the use of this Water unto us, that if it be thy holy will our
Infirmities and diseases may thereby be healed and removed. As the water of
Jordan served for the healing of Naamans Leprosy, and conduced to the recovery
of his health; So be pleased, O good Lord to grant the same wholesome virtue and
power to this Water. Many such, blind, lame, and other infirm bodies were
gathered together at the Poole of Bethesda, which waited on till the water was
moved by the Angel, that then they might descend into it and be healed. O
Lord, look likewise in thy mercy upon this infirm and weak multitude of
people, waiting for thy help and blessing. O that it may please thee, to move
also this water through thy Divine power, that it may likewise have the same
virtue and operation with us, to the restoring of our health. Thou command
us, Lord in thy Word, that if any man be sick or infirm, he shall call upon
thee, and then thou will hear him, according to his faith, and give thy
blessing to the means and remedies he shall apply. Now, behold, O Lord, we
are here prostrate in thy fight, with our faithful prayers and supplications,
not relying upon our righteousness, and holiness but trusting to thy great
mercy, that thou will hear us, according to thy promise: Yea Lord, thou do
testify thy self, that he that aske^h, shall receive; he that seeks shall
find; and to him that knocks shall be opened: Wherefore we beseech thee, for
our health, grant us the same by thy grace: We seek thee, as our Physician,
be gracious and propitious unto us; We knock with our unanimous prayer, and
fervent supplications, at the door of thy heavenly throne, till they penetrate
through the clouds. O Lord, open thy door of grace, and hear us from Heaven,
whether we lift up our eyes and hands. Let our faces not be confounded, for if
thou should reject us, who would receive us? if thou should abandon and
forsake us, who would help us? Yet, if thou have decreed in thy eternal and
unchangeable decree and will, that these infirmities and weaknesses shall lie
longer upon us; Thy will be done, O Lord, and give us patience, that we may
not murmur against it, nor envy others, that are healed, but submit our selves
with all obedience to thy good pleasure, and having our confidence and trust
put in thy mercy and grace, may say with Job; O Lord, although thou should
kill us, yet we will put our trust in thee; We are sure thou will not lay a
heavyer burden upon our shoulders, then we shall be able to bear, but that
thou will assist and relieve us in the midst of our calamities with thy holy
and blessed Spirit, which may comfort us in our afflictions, refresh us in
adversities, remove our pains and torments, and deliver us out of all
distress and misery. Moreover, O most merciful Father, since thou have been
pleased to show thy self thus glorious and wonderful through thy infinite
goodness and grace in this place toward us unworthy and miserable sinners, by
giving and discovering unto us such a precious and powerful remedy for the
recovery of our health, whereby already great wonders have been wrought, so
that we are not able to express our thankfulness unto thee in all
eternity. We beseech thee therefore from the bottom of our hearts, that thou
would not withdraw from us these heavenly gifts and blessings, if we should
not thankefully acknowledge them, from which in mercy thou will be pleased to
preserve us, but vouchsafe that this Fountain of grace may flow and gush out
more and more, without drying up or diminishing. O Lord grant this Fountain
may yield water in abundance, with a constant and durable virtue, that thereby
our miserable and weak bodies may receive comfort and help, and thy name be
exalted and magnified throughout all Nations. We beseech thee, O Almighty God
and Father, to hear this our prayer, through Jesus Christ thy Dear Son, to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor and glory, for ever
and ever, Amen.

A list of those persons, which as we are certainly informed, have through Gods
blessing bin cured by the use of the said Waters.
1. ONe that was cured of a fever, namely he that drank first of all of this
water, as above said. 2. A Girl of Mansfeld, which was dumb and deaf as
above said. 3. A Woman that had a crookebacke for the space of twenty years as
above said. 4. A Beggar of Leipzig, that was blind, as above said. 5. One that
was extremely troubled with the cholick, and had a swollen leg. 6. A Woman
borne at Egeln, which had a dangerous hurt in her leg, for the space of six
years. 7. A Woman borne at Egeln, which had a painful swelling in her left
side caused by a dangerous fall. 8. One borne at Egeln, that from his Infancy
had a lamenesse both in one of his thighs and legs. 9. A Girl borne at Egeln,
which had a swellen leg. 10. and 11. Two Girls which had scurffed heads. 12.
Another Girl of Egeln, of seventeene years of age had a crook back with an
old sore in it. 13. A Girl of three years of age, which endured great pains
in her Arms thighs and legs. 14. A Boy which from his infancy was struken
with the palsy. 15. A Woman borne at Egeln, which had an old hurt in one of
her legs for a twelve month. 16. Another Woman of Egeln, which felt great
pain^s and stitching in her side. 17. A Woman borne in Silesia, who sprained
her foot, whereof the sinnews of her anckle were hurt and displaced. 18. A
Woman borne at Towin, that had a sore eye for the space of seven years, and
hurt her hipp, 19. A Woman of K^tchstett that had a sore eye for twenty years,
and her face broken out five years. 20. An Old Man, of Gr^ningen that endured
great pains in his body, and had a swolln leg. 21. A Woman, that had great
stitches in her crosse-bone. 22. A Woman of Taitin, that was troubled with a
scurffed head: 23. A Man of Eglen, which had great pains in one of his eye,
and the cholicke. 24. A Woman of Eulenstet, which had the Dropse for a whole
year. 25. A Man of Quedlinburg, that was troubled for half a year, with
great stitches in his side. 26. A Woman of Hadersleben, which had a lamnesse in
both her legs, sent for the water, and was cured. 27. A Man of Bernstorff,
which had old sores in both his legs. 28. A Child of Hammersleben, which had a
rupture. 29. A Boy of Egeln, which had a scurffed head. 30. A Woman that had a
sore in her mouth. 31. A Woman of Stolberg, that had a sore eye for the space
of ten years. 32. A Servant of Laugen Weddig, which had the Convulsion fits.
33. A Woman of Allerdriff, that was troubled with the Stone. 34. A Woman of
Salz^, which had a crasie body for a long time. 35. Another Woman of Salz^,
which had an ague above a year with a swollen leg. 36. A Woman of Seehausen,
which had a defect in her hearing. 37. A Woman of Egeln, which was lamb in one
of her hipps for many years. 38. A Man of Egeln, which had a scurffed head.
39. A Woman of Huber, which had great pains and stitches ^n her cross bone
and right leg. 40. A Woman of Quedlingburg, that had an inward hurt. 41. A Man
of Ashersleben, which suffered great torments in his body and legs. 42. A Youth
of Barby, that had endured for thirty years great pains in his crosse-bone,
and had a scurffed head. 42. Another youth of the said place, which got a hurt
in one of his legs thirteen years a go, whereby his veins and sinnewes were
sprained. 43. A Boy of Cudlingburg which had a defect in his hearing. 44. A Man
of the said place, that had an old sore from his youth, in his thigh. 45. A
Woman of Stastfurth, which got a hurt a quarter of a year a go, in his arm
and foot, was broken out, and tormented with great pains in his crosse-bone,
so that he could not move nor stir. 46. Another Woman of the said place, which
had a weak stomach, digesting and keeping nothing of that she took. 47. A
Woman that had a great stopage and crudity in her stomach, and could not
digest any victuals. 48. A Man of Ashersleben, which was stricken by an
Apoplexy six years ago, whereby he became lamb in both his hipps, and was
scarce able to to speak. 49. Another Man of the said place, which had a
terrible pain in his head. 50. A Womam of Brunwoode, which had great pains in
all her limbs, and especially in the crosse-bone. 51. A Servant of Shoubech,
that was mightily troubled with the Cholick. 52. A Man that three quarters of a
year go was bitten of a Dog and laid in the Physicians hands for half a
year. 53. A Man of Ashersleben, that had an old sore on his foot. 54. Another
of the said place that had a broken Arm. 55. A servant of great Barnmersleben,
which had a defect in his hearing, and a sore leg. 56. A woman of Dersdorff,
that had a great infirmity in her body and back. 57. Another woman of the same
place, that had great pains and stitches in her hands. 58. A man of
Cuedlingbourg, that had a long time a dead lamenesse, that he could hardly go.
59. A woman of Snasburge, who had great pains in her back. 60. Another woman
of the said place, which had a great shooting in her head, and rhume in her
eyes. 61. A Boy of Westerhausen, that had the horrible disease in his gutts
called Miserere mei. 62. A woman of Gerenrode, that had for two years great
pains and stitches in her Cross bones, left hip and leg. 63. A woman of
Hallensleben, that had great pain in her thighs and legs. 64. Another woman of
the said place, that had a cold dead lamenesse. 65. A woman of Halberstadt,
that was troubled with obstructions and crudities in her stomach. 66. A Boy of
12 years of age, which was starck blind for four years. 67. A Woman of
Bas^lfeldt, that had four years an extreme great pain in her leg. 68. An
ancient Man of Cuedlinsbourg, which was dim-sighted from his Infancy. 69. A
Maid, which had great pains in her body. 79. A Woman of Bottingen, that had
great Stitches and shooting in her head. 71. The same woman's Daughter, that had
an old Sore in her hand. 72. A Woman of Halberstadt, that had a defect in her
hearing, great shooting in her head, and the toothache for a twelve month. 73.
A Man of Wegleben, that had two years ago broken one of his legs, and quite
crushed his bone. 74. A poor Man of Ashersleben, that was tormented with the
Disease called by the Physicians Noli me tangere. 75. A Woman of Dissford, that
had for a twelve month a swollen Lamenesse in both hands, with grrat stitches
in her left side. 76. The same Woman's Son, that had from his infancy a
stinking bloody running Sore in his ear. 77. A Woman of Cueddlinsbourg, that
had a Sore on her neck. 78. A Schoole-boy of the said place, that had a Sore in
his eye. 79. A Maid of the said place, that had a great Sore and pain in her
knee. 80. A Woman of St^s^ford, that had been lame 18 years in one of her
legs, and great pains and stitches in her cross bone. 81. A man of
Hadersleden, that had great pains and stitches in both his legs, that he was
hardly able to go. 82. Another Man of Cuedslingbourg, that had great pain and
shooting in his head for 9 years. 83. Another Woman of the said place, that
had a pain in her back, and Cross bone, and was also lame in her arms and
legs. 84. Another Woman of the same place, that got in her childbirth, a thick
swollen neck. 85. A Man of the said place, had a stiffnesse in his knees for
three years. 86. A Woman of the said place, that had an old Sore round a bout
one of her legs for 19 years. 87. A Man of Shekein, that in his sickness two
years ago got pain in his eyes, so that he could see with one a little, and
with the other nothing at all. 88. A Woman of Cueddlingbourg, that had a thick
swollen Neck, with a great pain and lamenesse in her arms. 89. A little Girl
of the said place, that had a great rhume in both her eyes. 90 A Boy of the
said place, had a great Sore in one of his eyes. 91. A Woman of Stassford, that
had a lame hand, and defect in her hearing. 92. A Man of Bermersleben, that was
extremely pained with the Cholick. 93. A Young man of Beesfeld, that was
troubled with Melancholy thoughts. 94. A Man of Stasford, that had an old hurt
on his leg for two years. 95. A Boy of the said place, that was troubled with
the Stone, and had a sore throat. 96. A Man of Ko^he^n, that had great pains
by the stoppage and crudity in his stomach. 97. A Woman of Stasford, that had a
defect in her hearing. 98. A Man of Ashursleben, that had an old sore on one of
his legs for 5 years. 99. A Girl of 4 years old, borne at Salze, that had the
Leprosy spread over his whole body. 100. A Man of Koken, that was vehemently
troubled with the Cholick for 9 years. 101. A Girl of Sla^stet, that had 5
years a dangerous Sore on her leg. 102. A Man of the same place, that had
strained his foot, and could not go well for two years. 103. A Man of Barby,
that had an old hurt on his leg, pains in his body, and stiching in his left
side. 104. Another Man of Barby, that had a defect in his Lights and Liver,
with a very heavy Cough. 105. A Man of Elrode, that was tormented with the
Cholick, for three years, and with the stitching in his left side. 106. A man
of Gerurode, that had a great pain for twenty years in his Crosse-bone, and a
cold lamenesse in his legs. 107. A Woman of Barby, that had great shooting in
her head for seven years. 108. A Man of the said place, had a difficulty in
hearing for seven years. 109. A Maid of the same place, that got a rheum in
her eyes three years ago, so that with one of them she could see almost
nothing at all. 110. Another Maid of the fame place, that had a lamenesse in
one of her thighs, which she strained four years ago. 111. Another Maid
which had a stiff leg for two years. 112. A Maid of Eisleben, that had a
very short breath with a Cough. 113. A woman of Halberstadt, that had her mouth
and arm broken out. 114. Another woman of the same place, that had a very
crasie body. 115. Another Woman of the same place, that had an inward bruise in
her body, and the running Gout in her arms. 116. A Boy of five years of age
of the same place that was Speechless. 117. A Woman of Mansfeld, that had sore
Eyes for 6 years, and great pains and stitches in her Crosse-bone, and in one
of her legs. 118. A Girl of Barby, that could not see with one of her eyes
for a twelve month. 119. A woman of Quippelzerbst, which had great pains and
stitches in her legs, so that she went upon Cruches, which she left here
behind. 120. A Man of Swanbeck, that had for six years a lame and crooked
leg, so that he could scarce go with the help of a staff. 121. A Boy of
Wegeleben, which had a swelling and stitching in both his legs. 122. A Man of
Rose, which had for eight years the disease in his guts. 123. A Girl of
Disford, that was stricken with an Appoplexie, whereof she fell lame in one of
her Arms. 124. A Man of Cothen, that had a short knee, felt great pains and
stitches therein, and could not stretch his leg. 125. A Woman of Slawstet,
which had a great pain in all her limbs, with a heavy Cough. 126. A Woman of
Ashersleben, which had a great pain in her thighs. 127. Another Woman of
Ashersleben, that was much oppressed with Melancholy. 128. A Woman of
Hemers^^ben, that was lame both on hands and feet for twenty eight years, so
that she could not stir out of her bed for a twelve month. 129. A Woman of
Groningen, that had great stoppages and oppressions in the breast, so that she
knew not what to do for pains she endured. 130. A Child of B^^by, which had
crooked heels, so that he went inwards, which were made straight again. 131.
A Man of Harsleb^n, that had an old hurt in his legs, that be could hardly
go. 132. A Man of Bassen, which had disjointed his leg three years ago, and
is almost recovered. 133. A Man of Mansfeld, which has bin very ill handled by
the Soldiers, so that he fell dease and lost one of his eyes, and with the
other seeing for a time a little, became afterward stark blind. But now he
has recovered his sight. 134. A Woman of Haselfeld, that had a lame thigh for
three and twenty years, with great pains and stitching in it. 135. A Woman of
Dinderstein; which had a great stitching at the heart for two years. 136. A
Woman of Stresburg, which was stricken with a dead palsy both on her hand and
feet for seven years, so that she could stir no where. 137. A Woman of
Badesast, which had great pains and torments in one of her legs. 138. A Man of
Cothen, that had pains and stitching in his arms and legs. 139. A Man of
Fursta, which had a wenne or Carnosity on his neck. 140. A Woman of Roben,
which had great pains and torments in her head. 141. A Girl of the same
place, which for five years did but lall does now speak very distinct. 142. A
Woman that had a bloody issue. 143. A Woman of Ilsenburg, that had very old
festred sores in her left Arm and left leg enduring huge pains. 144. A little
Boy of Halberstad, that had a rheum in one of his eyes; that he could scarce
see with it. 145. A Woman of Quedlingburg, which was stricken with the dead
palsy on both hands and on the right foot. 146. A Man of Grunrode, which had a
huge pain in his crossebone, so that sometimes he could not stir out of his
bed. 147. A Woman of Ballinstet, which had defect in her eye, and a lame hand.
148. A Girl of Halberstad, which had a dangerous rhume fallen into her eyes.
149. A Woman of the said place, that had great pains in her body, arms and
legs, which she got in her Childbirth labor. 150. A Man of Kalbe, that had
the Convulsion fits. 151. A Boy which had an Ague for three quarters of a
year. 152. A Girl of Stolberg, that had rhumes fallen into her hands. 153. A
Boy of the same place, which was lame on both legs. 154. A Boy of
Qued^lingburg, that had a scurffed head, 155. A Woman of the said place, that
had a scuiffed head. 156. A Woman of the said place, which had great pains in
her arms and b^^k. 157. A Boy of Kalbe, which had a defect in hearing, and a
rupture. 158. A Girl of Hoc^stett, that was dumb and deaf. 159. A Woman of
Halberstadt which had the Cholick for four years. 160. A Man of Ashersleben,
which was short through his throat. 161. A Girl of the said place, which had
rhumes in her head and legs. 162. A Woman of Griffenhagen, which had a great
infirmities in her body. 163. A Girl of Stolberg* which had a thume in her
hand. 164. A Woman of J^wich that was sore oppressed, with heaviness of heart,
so that she was almost distracted in mind. 195. A Girl of Stolberg, which had
a thick swollen neck. 196. A Soldier of Haders^^ben, which had a defect in his
hearing. 167. A Man of the said place, that was troubled with oppressions in
his breast, and had an old hurt in his leg. 168. A Woman of the same place,
which had a pain for two years in her arms and legs, and was troubled with
rhumes in her eyes, that she could not see almost. 169. A Boy of F^^s^, (...)
^ had a great weakness and pains through all his limbs. 170. A Child of North
G^rmers L^ben, that fell lame of a green sickness. 171. A Woman of Cothen,
which was mightily tormented with the stone for eight years, whereof she got
an Impostume in her kidneys, and having used a Physician, in vain for four
years, recovered here in eight days, confessing that this water had driven of
from her a great deal of sandy and other sharp congealed matter. 172. A Woman
of Heinroda, which had sor a year and a half great pains and stitching in
her left knee, and great torment in her crosse-bone and back, 173. A Woman of
Roden, which had the Convulsion fits for nine years. 174. A Woman of Wernstet,
which had a lame leg and was mightily troubled with winds and stitches, and
somewhat distracted in her head. 175. A Man of Keltern, which had great pains
and obstructions in his breast, and was much tormented with wind. 176. A Man of
Arnsl^ben, that was pained for eight years with stitches and winds in his
legs. 177. Another of the same place, that was also troubled with the same
disease in his arms and legs. 178. A Man of Clothen, which had great pains,
winds and stitches in h^s back, so that he was forced to go with cruches,
which he left there behind him. 179. A Woman that was lame both in her arms
and legs. 180. A Man of D^sdorf, that was troubled with stitching in his sides,
and with oppressions and faintness of heart, so that he could not take any
victuals. 181. A Woman of Mekern, which had a stiffness in her leg for twenty
years. 182. A Woman of G^st^r, which had sore eyes for four years. 183. A
Girl which had a scu^ffed head. 194. A Woman of As^ersleben, which had a
lamnesse in both legs, taking no rest day nor night, for the great pains and
torments in them. 185. A Woman of the said place, which had the crosse-bone in
her back bruised. 186. Another Woman of the said place, which had a swelling in
her body, and was troubled with the stone in the kidneys. 187. A Woman of
Quedlingburg, which was tormented with the running gout in all her limbs for
two years. 188. A Woman of Zerbest, which was troubled with rheumes in her
head. 189. A Girl of Zerbest, which of her falling sickness, got a giddiness
in her head. 190. A Boy of Wooluersleben, which had rheumes in his eyes, and
was pained with the stone. 191. A Man of Cothen, which had great pains in one
of his hipps 192. A Maid of Zerbst, which was dim-sighted. 193. Mr. Valentia
Sharff, Captain of the Town of Northausen, who had the Gout both on hands and
feet, so that he could neither stand nor go, is likewise recovered. 194. A
Boy of Egals, which got a short leg of the plague he had nine years ago, so
that he was forced to wear a high shoe, is almost recovered. 195. A Man of
Cothen, which fell lame four years ago on hands and feet, so that he went
upon cruches, which he left there behind him. 196. A Man of Heiligen, that had
a running Sore in one of his legs for four years continually. 197. A Maid,
that had a great Rupture, and is somewhat recovered. 198. A Girl, that had a
swollen thick neck. 199. A Man, that had a Fistula or running Sore in one of
his cheeks. 200. A Man, that had the running Gout both on hands and feet. 201.
A woman, that had a dangerous Rheum spread over all her face. 202. A Man of
Egals, which had an old hurt for five years on his shin-bone, 203. A woman of
Swanbecke, had the running Gout, through all her limbs, and was deaf with the
right ear. 204. A woman of Cothen, that was extremely pained with headache,
running Gout in her legs, and oppressions of heart. 205. A Boy of Wanegarde,
that had a scurffed head of four years. 206. A Girl of the said place, that
had the said Disease. 207. A Woman of Alrode, that was troubled with shaking
and trembling. 208. A Woman of Konewda, that had the running Gout in her legs.
209. A Woman of Falkenstein, that had great pains in the Crosse-bone. 210. A
Girl of the said place, that was troubled with a running Sore in her leg. 211.
A Man of Egals, which had a defect in his Liver and Lights for a year and a
half. 112. A Woman of Halberstadt, that was troubled with faintness of heart,
shortness of breath, and a very heavy Cough. 213. A Girl of the said place
that had a sore eye. 214. A Boy of the said place, that had old hurts on his
legs, so that they became crooked, and was scarce able to go. 215. A Man of
Cuedlinbourg, which was lame both on hands and feet for twenty years, and went
upon Cruches for many years, which he left behind him there.
FINIS.

