A Frivolous PAPER, In FORM of a PETITION: Framed and composed by a
DISAFFECTED PARTY in this City of London, intended by them to be presented to
the honorable House of COMMONS.

WITH Certain Considerations propounded by way of Advertisement and Caution
unto those who through unadvisednesse, are apt to subscribe the same.

By a wel-willer to PEACE and TRUTH.

ENLARGED With new Additions, by way of Advertisement to all such who
unadvisedly had subscribed; and three special Rules for their present Caution,
and future Admonition.

LONDON, Printed for STEPHEN BOWTELL, and are to be sold at his Shop in Popes
bead Alley. 1642.

A COPY OF THE Frivolous PAPER, Beforementioned.
THat the present sense of our Mysteries and Apprehensions of inevitable Ruin
both of Church and Commonwealth makes us to become humble Suitors to this
Honorable Assembly (the likeliest means under God for our relief) to
consider our distressed state and to provide a speedy remedy for our present
and future evils.

Earnestly desiring you to weigh the Care and Judgment of our Predecessors,
who by a known Law settled and preserved our Protestant Religion, our Liberties
and Properties, with the right understanding between King and Subjects, which
produced Plenty and Peace in our Streets. And to reflect with serious thoughts
upon our present Distempers, violating Religion by Papists, and Sectaries,
engaging our Nation in a Civil, bloody, and destructive War, in, invading
our Laws, and Liberties, indangering all our Lives, and utter disabling us to
relieve our distressed Brethren in Ireland.

We beseech you likewise to consider the effect of a continued War, as the
Destruction of Christians, the unnatural effusion of blood, Father against
Son, Brothers by Brothers, Friends by Friends slain; then a Famine and
sickness the followers of a Civil War, making way for a general confusion
and Invasion by a foreign Nation, while our Treasure is exhausted, our Trade
lost, and the Kingdom dispeopled.

These things weighed and enlarged by your Wisdoms, we doubt not will be as
strong motives in you to labor as in us to desire a speedy Peace and happy
Accommodation.

Wherefore we humbly crave that not lending an ear to any Fomenters of the
present War under what pretense soever; nor remembering ought that may
increase Jealousies or continual Divisions, between his Majesty and his
Houses of Parliament; you will speedily tender his Majesty (according to his
Royal Intimations) such Propositions for Accommodation as he may with Honor
and safety to the whole Kingdom accept.

For effecting whereof we shall be ready to assist you with the best and
utmost of our abilities; and whilst you endeavor Peace, we shall send up our
Prayers to Heaven for the blessing of Peace upon you, and all that desire it.

CERTAIN CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE PREFIXED PETITION.
AS God and his Church never wanted enemies, so the Devil and Antichrist never
wanted friends for the promotion of profaneness and Idolatry in all places, it
is hard to say, whether are more the enemies of truth and peace with God, or
friends of error and peace with the Devil: men whom the Apostle calls
sensual, fleshly, and Divellish, lovers of pleasures more then Lovers of God,
who can see no further then this life, fearing more the terrors of man then of
the Almighty, choose rather peace with man, and wrath with God, then the wrath
of man and peace with God; the truth of all which does appear by a Petition
now in agitation; concerning which I have gathered some plain and undeniable
observations, presenting them by way of caution unto others, from these
particulars, viz. 1. The chief composers of this Petition. 2. The Malignant
nature of this Petition. 3. The most probable Consequences, Reasons and Aims
of this Petition.


First consider whether the chief sticklers and fomenters thereof are not
notoriously known to be Pattentees, Proctors, Delinquents, Malignants, who
either have not at all, or any of them in any considerable measure according to
their Estates assisted the common cause of the Kingdom against the common
enemy hereof: whose pretenses though they are for Religion, and Law, and the
aid of poor bleeding Ireland, yet they are men Popish, Atheistical, and
profane in point of Religion, some whereof (and they not of the lowest sort)
have most prop^anely and blasphemously in the presence of those (who being
desired, denied to subscribe to a Petition for peace without truth) cursed
truth, saying, a pox on truth, give us peace truth will follow, and let us have
peace and the Devil take truth, etc. and as for the Law consider, whether many
of them have not gotten their Estates by Pattents, a lawless occupation; and
as for bleeding Ireland let their Receipts show what they have don for its
recovery, which will amount to the same nothing as the sum which they have
disbursed for distracted England, they are mutinous and tumultuous professing
in the presence of many, that if this Petition died, they will die with it, and
if one suffer all will suffer, with such like mutinous expressions. -- These
are the parties.

Secondly, consider the nature of this Petition, and see if ye find it not
intolerably saucy and peremptory against the Parliament in many particulars.

First in taxing closely but clearly this present Parliament with
inconsideration of the known Laws of the Land, as if either they were ignorant
thereof, or impotent thereby, as not able to repeal or alter the same, being
made by themselves in their predecessors having power to null the same at their
pleasure.

Secondly, consider whether they do not covertly, but unavoidably tax this
present Parliament, either with indiscretion in that they presume to be wiser
then their predecessors, and therefore desire them to weigh the care and
judgment of our predecessors, who by a known Law settled and preserved our
Protestant Religion and Property, etc. or else closely implying, that this
present Parliament accuses former Parliaments of folly and unadvisednesse, in
that they have confirmed those things that must now be reversed; either whereof
is most unsufferable arrogance and National injury.

Thirdly, consider whether they do not tax this present Parliament with their
tendering unto his Majesty such Propositions hitherto, which he may not with
his honor, and safety of the Kingdom accept, and therefore they desire that
they would speedily tender unto his Majesty (according to his regal
intimations) such Propositions for Accommodation, as He may with honor, and
safety to the whole Kingdom accept: Whereas it is most evidently known, that
many Propositions have bin tendered, and not one either to the dishonor of the
King, whose greatest honor would be to govern his Kingdom by the advice of
his great Council, and faithful Parliament, and not by the Malignant
Counsels of Papists, and Traitors, and out-lawed Delinquents: neither has
there bin one Proposition tendered which does not most uberously carry along
with it the safety and future prosperity of this Kingdom.

Fourthly consider whether the Malignity of this Petition does not appear in
many phrases and expressions scattered up and down therein, as if it were the
birth of the same womb which has lately bin very fruitful in many printed and
scandalous Pamphlets, in casting reproaches, and most unworthy scandalls, upon
both Houses of Parliament, such as The known Law of the Land; ascribing the
violation of our Religion to Papists and Sectaries: Under which latter word,
has ever bin implied, every man that in any thing has differed from the
Bishops Innovations, and superstitious Ceremonies, in the government of the
Church: Thus the malignity of this Petition appears in the nature of it.

Thirdly, consider the undoubtedly aimed at Consequences and Tendences thereof,
which must be such as these,

First, the raising of mutinies, divisions and discontents in the City (the
unity whereof is the ruin of the common enemy) that the report hereof in the
Countries, whose eyes are upon the City, may discourage the well affected
there, and so the common cause may meet with reluctance throughout the whole
Kingdom.

Secondly, that the enemy now very weak and like to fall of themselves for
want of Ammunition and means (the vital blood of an Army) may yet strengthen
and encourage themselves, and make shift by plundering, robbing, and spoiling
the Country, to spin out a little time, knowing that our division here, if
continued, will effectually advantage them in their bloody designs: and thus
these hypocritical Petitioners as Ehud to Eglon, cry Peace, Peace, to the
Kingdom, while they secretly and maliciously endeavor to thrust a Sword of
destruction into the bowels thereof.

Thirdly, a third aimed at effect must be this, the stiring up of other their
Brethren malignant wretches in other parts of the Kingdom, ad exemplum to do
the like that so they may bring the whole Kingdom divided against i^ self to
inevitable ruin, whereas by the mercy of the Almighty the present care and
endeavor of our Parliament, by our Forces abroad, and associations of the
several Counties against the common enemy, may put a very speedy and timely
end unto these present troubles, with all advantages both to Church, and State,
and desired assistance of our poor Brethren in Ireland.

Fourthly, they now well perceive that they shall no longer be tolerated either
in their detected malignity, or unworthy newtrality, but Nolentes Volertes
shall be compelled by just assesments and censures in their estates to help the
present state of the Kingdom, and therefore will now adventure such courses as
may bring all to confusion, rather then be helpefull, endeavoring like Judas
for a little moneys sake, under color of a kiss of of peace, to betray the
Kingdom into the hands of violent and bloody men, and although like reverend
Plush-cloakes, and intelligent Statesmen they cry out against the Parliament,
saying, did they not plead the Subjects property, lo where is property if
they shall take what they please from us? yet they may know, that though we may
plead property in respect of the Kings taxing without Law, yet we can plead
no property from the Parliament in a time of imminent danger, into whose
disposal we have committed our estates and all that we have, which we never
did to the King; and surely were our Parliament as selvish as these Petitioners
are, we should all have known long before this time, what the power of a
Parliament had bin, by our ruin and slavery, being not in the tenth measure so
provoked by such ingratitude, and unnatural provocations, as they have bin.

Fifthly, consider what a rock we may run upon, thus unthankfully to provoke the
Parliament, may they not compremise differences to their own personal safe^y,
and preferment, and our irrecoverable slavery? have they not us at such
advantage, that they may undo us every hour? can we allege any thing
against them wherein they have bin unfaithful in that trust we committed to
their charge? is it not in the prosecution of our peace, wherein they meet with
such frowns and oppositions from above? have they not hazarded their estates
and livelyhoods for us? did not many of them oppose with their blood in their
personal adventures, the malignity of that unnatural and bloody Army that
came against their mother Nation? did we not choose them because we thought they
would be faithful? and shall we distaste them for their faithfulness; has
not the peace and welfare of the Kingdom bin precious in their eyes? let
malice it self produce any instance to the contrary: what had become of us
before this time had not their care and diligence in securing the Seas
prevented those preparations made beyond the Seas by known Traitors to the
Kingdom? has God by them discovered so many plot? prevented so many apparent
dangers? freed us from so many preslures, and taxations? procured so much
freedom for us? and do we thus requite them? had they not every day a fresh
ointment from above with the Spirit of meekness and love unto the Kingdom,
they would make our hearts ache for such daring provocations as this Petition
imports.

It is not to be doubted but many have put their hands hereunto, not discerning
any such malignity either in the nature or consequences thereof, whose
integrity and discretion can no way better be vindicated but by their
Recantation, which if I might be their Monito^) should be as publicly
divulged as is their unadvisednesse, against these; the imputation employed in
what has been said is not intended; but because honest men have been more
then once taken by this slight, I shall desire to propound two or three Rules
of advise for their caution and prevention astainst another time.

First take special notice of the prime and chief Actors and Promoters in
matters of this nature. It is hard to draw evil men to good actions,
especially for Church and State; therefore will I suspect that wherein they are
more forwarder then honester men.

Secondly, observe these men and their number; who seconds any thing of this
kind once begun, evil men (though one age has been delivered of two such
births) may happily both centrive and bring forth a Design intending both the
purity of Religion and Peace of the Kingdom together, but seldom seconded by
many such as themselves; and never deserted by a more conscientious party; if I
cannot see who the Leaders are, I will take the more notice of the followers,
and accordingly will I come up in the Rear, or decline them.

Thirdly, let not the goodness, or badnesse, quality, or number of men in any
matter wherein your subscription is required, quit your own personal
examination thereof, if any thing be propounded chiefly by suspicious men,
lege, per lege, and relege; read it, and that thoroughly and over again; for
though such men are most apt to call men more uprigh^ then themselves,
hypocrytes and dissemblers; yet you shall find a great dexterity in this
^ivi^^ish Art of dissembling in such men's expressures: plausible intimations of
aiming at Religion, and the good of the Kingdom, are commonly the green
leaves, under which they hatch their Cockatrice Fggs, as is their pretense in
this Petition, though the chief Actors were never known to have the least dram
of true love either to Religion or Kingdom.

In fine, let us follow hard after Peace but harder after Truth, the best peace
will follow truth, though truth will not follow every peace; let us pray for
peace, but of Jerusalem, not of Babylon; if our peace be enmity to truth, truth
will quickly devour our peace: let us admit of a p^ace upon any terms of
personal disadvantage, so we engage not the God of peace against us; what ever
we abate of that which is called ours, yet let us not leave a hoof behind of
all that is called Gods; better it is to purchase Truth for our posterity by
our blood, then to betray them by a sinful peace. God has hither to bin with
us, while we have bin with him, if we forsake him he will forsake us: though
the Sons of Anak be great and tall, yet shall God drive them out before us as
he has don: If we honor God by believing he will honor us by succeeding our
endeavors; it is true God bids us follow Peace, but never without Holiness.

FINIS.

