A fresh WHIP For all scandalous LIARS.

OR, A true description of the two eminent Pamphliteers, or Squibtellers of
this KINGDOM.

With a plain and true Relation of their Tricks and Devices wherewith they
use to cousen and cheat the COMMONWEALTH.

7ber 9th London printed. 1647.

A Fresh Whip for all scandalous LIARS. OR, A true description of the two
eminent Pamphliteers, or Squibtellers of this KINGDOM.
I Must begin with the Diurnall-Writer first, as indeed order it self does
enjoyne me, by the constant course of the days in the week; and whose large
volumne is issued our every Monday morning. I may not unfitly term him to be
the chief Dirt-raker, or Scafinger of the City; for what ever any other books
lets fall, he will be sure, by his troting horse, and ambling Booke-selers have
it conveyed to his wharfe of rubbish, and then he will as a many petty fogging
scrivoners do (I may not exempt himself out of the profession) put out here
and there to alter the sense of the Relation; and then he shelters it under the
title of a new and perfect Diurnall. This merchant when he has laden his
Sheet (or Dung-Cart) with his stale informations, and mis-informations; then ye
shall have him strut up and down with his gingling spurs, as if he had a pair
of Aarons Bells at his heels, or that he had done the state mighty good
service. He was once a Stationer, till he crept into the little hole at
Westminster Hall, where indeed he began his trade of inditing or framing; and
so rose at last to the style of the Diurnall-Writer. I must confess at his
first beginning to write, he was very industrious, and would labor for the
best intelligence, as his large volumnes do testify, but when he found the
sweetness of it, and how easily he could come by his intelligence, he fell to
his sports and pastimes, for you should hardly ever find him at home all the
week, till Saturday-morning, and then you should be sure to find him abed,
panting and puffing as if he had over-rid himself, with riding too and again
from the Army, when God-wot he has not been out of the Lines of
Communication; (but a little too much within the Lines of M. M.) And so by this
means making the poor workmen stand still for their labor, and that which he
should do on Saturday, he must do on Sunday. This merchant has his two
Printers to attend his work, whereof one has a man, that rather then it
should be thought that he were not diligent enough for his Master, he will
content himself with a piece of Thursdayes news for his Prayers, Fridayes
Intelligence for the first Sermon, and Saturdayes for the afternoon Lecture,
and if it do not hold them overlong, he will sit down and sing a Psalm, or
take a pipe of Tobacco, and think he has done God good service. It Is a shame
such a Conventicle (I can term it no otherwise) which tends to the dishonor
of God, should be suffered.

Now I must do as many false Prognosticators mistake, or skip 3. days in the
change of the Moon: I must come to Friday, styled the Perfect Occurrence
Writer. He whose face is made of Brass, his body of Iron, and his teeth are as
long as tenpenny-nayles. I think he is a youth not unknown to most in the City
since the great preferment he had to stand in the Pillory. He is a great
merchant in this way of writing, and very excellent for framing a Title for an
old, or new lie. This is he that when our men lay of one side of Shotover-Hill
against Oxford, he got the favor to discharge a piece of Ordnance against the
City, when he had done, for London he came, with a greater report and execution
then ever the piece did, that he had shot down one of the chiefest Colleges in
the University, and that he could perceive the very Battlements to fall: and
after this great victory of his, because he would be taken notice of, he
causes his Printer to set down the very place where he lives, as for example,
London printed for Thomas Walker living at a great brick house and balcony, as
you turn up to St. James's; when indeed the three cornerd house without a
roof, turning up to Padingion were more fitter. He was an Ironmonger in St.
Martins by his trade, where having but little trading for his Tinkerly ware,
fell to this trade of mis-informing; and so by his venomous pen framing, and
with his chasing dishes of Hell, he has bestrowd the whole City, nay the
whole Kingdom with unsavory languages, and burning coals of contention. This
merchant I must needs confess does take a great deal more pains then the
other in compacting his relations together, and it does chiefly lie in running
up and down, he may well be called the Bellman of the City, for he is up all
hours in the night, running to and again, from the Post House; and when he is
questioned with who goes there; my name is Walker, J am about the States
service, pray do not stop me: when he has been at a Printing house, laying his
sour Leven of raylings and scandalizings against honest, and reverend men; or
else compacting his damnable lies together. Witness how many times has he
taken and killed Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice, and Sr. Ralph Hopton: he
has an excellent faculty to put a new title to an old book, and he will be sure
to put more in the Title page then is in all the book besides; how many
victories, and sometimes small losses has he framed, and especially out of
Ireland, and many times strange sights in the air, appearing like Champions
ready to encounter. I wonder he never met with the Devil, but indeed he was
ever a favourer of Lies, and I believe has granted him a large Patten for his
profession. Nay rather then he will be out of action, he will rob Hammon of
his Patten of one side, and draw out a list of half a side with Malignants
names, or Horses, and frame an Order as from the House whereby they may sell;
For his Fridayes Occurrences he does take a great deal of pains to keep up
the sale of them, he does as many times Grocers use to do by their moldy,
musty ware, take and shake them together with a new gloss of Honey, and they
will pass as if they came newly over. So when he has compacted all his
Rubbish or Ribaldry together, he will set them off with an Order or Ordinance
of Parliament. I could enlarge my self a great deal more, but J would keep
within the compass of my sheet. And conclude with this, that I do think that
his, and many other scurrillous Pamphlets, have done more mischief in the
kingdom then ever all my Lord of Essex's, or Sir Thomas Fairefaxes whole
train of Artillery ever did.

FINIS.

