depiction of three scenes from the narrative: the frightening of the
schoolmaster with fire and fireworks; the public whipping of two courtesans;
and the cheating of the Pope with a fake St Peter's beard Though young he his
old schoolmaster out wi^
And the fine Misses with a whiping fitts
The Pope He Cheats and proves in all t^ Rest
Rogue who will Rogue french Rogury thriues (...)


THE French Rogue: OR, THE LIFE OF Monsieur RAGOVE De Versailles. CONTAINING
His Parentage, Monstrous Birth, Early Rogueries, Pleasant and Witty Pranks, not
only in France, but in diverse other Countries. With the Strange and Wonderful
Plots, Projects, Policies and Stratagems, by which he Contrived, Managed, and
Brought about his Villainies, and escaped many Dangers; and more particularly
the Prank he played with the French KING, etc. All very Comical and Delightful.

Done from the Original by J. S.

London, Printed for N. Boddington, at the Golden Ball in Duck-lane, 1694.

TO THE READER.
IN this small Book you will find such delightful Entertainment as none of this
kind has yet afforded; it is dressed, the better to please, in the Modish
Fashion of France, some years since so greatly in request, that few Ladies or
Sparks found themselves easy, and undone without a Tailor that had crossed the
Water to take a Survey of that Fantastical Court, and bring over Models of the
Newest Bravery in vogue. To be brief, If you are desirous to divert your self
with what may contribute to Mirth, and banish Melancholy Thoughts, or dive
into the depth of Ingenious Roguery, here you may have your Wishes answered at
a small Expense, in so curious and pleasing a Style of Prose, interwoven with
Poetry, that the like we dare affirm, never came to your Hands. Take it then,
as it is, and when you have seriously perused it (but not till then) Judge, and
speak as you find, and no doubt you will conclude that you never met with a
better Help to remove a Fit of the Spleen. And so passing through this little
Porch into a fair and large House, I leave you to take its Dimensions at
Leisure.

And remain, Your very Humble Servant, J. S.

On the Ingenious AUTHOR OF THE French Rogue, etc.
Reader,
IN this no Common Rogue you find,
It is a French One, (pray that Notion, mind)
One who more Cunning than the rest has been,
Out-witting all that ever yet were seen:
French Tricks, you know, are for Invention rare,
Once coveted like Fashions, or their Ware.
No Modes, but French, would please some Years ago,
So that their Vice became a Fashion too.
If a French Venus in hot Kindness fired,
Our Gallants, they even the Disease admired,
And hugged her in their Arms, as she had been
The only Cause to make them Gentlemen.
All Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Rhine
Cannot please some Palates, o't must be French Wine;
Or if it be not so, give it the Name,
It passes current as it were the same.
No Fans, nor Toys, but Theirs, Miss will receive;
And for a French Dog, what will not Madam give?
Stored with a Breed of Puppies of this Strain,
Will a Half-broken Merchant raise again.
Then for their Paintings, nothing can come nigh
Their curious Touches that can please the Eye;
A Lady's Chamber will catch cold without 'em:
As for French Watches, they are still about 'em.
French Plays and Novels too, are liked the best,
And French Translating late much in request:
Put but an Author of that Countrey's Name
IN the Title Page, it gives even Nonsense fame.
And now since these, and more, are so in vogue,
We pray, among the rest, accept their Rogue.
On the impartial Commendation Of your Humble Servant J. S.

THE French Rogue: Or, The LIFE of Monsieur RAGOVE.
CHAP. I.
An Exact and Pleasant Relation of his Parentage; early and monstrous Birth,
being born with Hair and Teeth, five Months after his Mother was married: And
of the Suspicion of his Legitimacy. The Discourse of the Gossips. A Story of a
Barley Child. And what else materially happened on this Introductory Occasion.

AS for my Birth, it may be termed Preternatural, above the common Course of
Nature, or rather, somewhat Monstrous, as in the Sequel I shall demonstrate;
and great Disputes arose about my Legitimation.

As for my Parentage, the Father that owned me, was one Monsieur Ragoue de
Versailles, who had a little Country Seat near to that aspiring Palace, whose
Stateliness has created so much Wonder and Commendation. He had spent his
younger years in Amors and Intrigues with the Fair Sex, though very
unfortunate in his Adventures of Knight-Errantry, as having squandered away his
Patrimony in relieving distressed Damsels: so that being doubly destitute of
Money and Friends, he betook him to his last shift; which was, to leave the
soft Tents of Venus, and enter into those of Mars. But the Armies being at that
time in Quarters, he had leisure to repair to his own Mansion; which having
been roughly used by the surly Winds, who had cuffed off a great part of its
Covering, was like that wherein Pope Urbin, a Fisherman's Son, was born, and of
which, in his Pontifical Pride, he used scoffingly to make mention of saying,
He came of an Illustrious House; for by reason of the scarcity of Money to
repair it, the Sun darted in his glorious Rays at a great many more places than
the Windows.

As for his Diet, which otherwise must have been near as slender as that of a
Chamelion's, he frequently resorted to the House of Villezaroy, at Versailles,
which adjoined to the Royal Palace, who liberally dispensed his Bounty to all
that appeared any thing like Gentlemen, by keeping a Table on purpose to
entertain them.

Here, as the lucky Stars would have it, he became acquainted, and was
desperately smitten with the irresistible Glances of my fair Mother's sparkling
Eyes. She being an intreaguing Baggage, soon perceived by his steady and eager
gazing on her, and the Sighs that sometimes would unpremeditatedly 'scape the
Prison of his Bosom: yet as she had served many others, she seemed ignorant of
his Passion, and careless of the officious Services he rendered her, as he
found Occasion to tender 'em in the most obliging manner, when he thought he
might best nick the Critical Minute of gaining her Affections.

Now, some inquisitive Coxcomb or other may be desirous to know her Extract and
Quality: Wherefore, not to leave this Particular undiscuss'd, I shall (as far
as I learned from her self, which, I believe, was all she knew) clear the
Point, and give him Satisfaction

Though she had been well educated, her Birth was but mean, holding her Rank
among the Taylor's Daughters of Orleance, the Place where she sucked in her
first Air; and was at twelve years old left to shift for her self, her Parents
then stepping into the other World, and leaving her as much of this World, as
by her Industry and Ingenuity she could procure of it, for a Portion, or
Subsistence. She was, indeed, of a very pregnant or sagacious Wit and
Understanding, quick of Apprehension, and had a Memory very tenacious; so that
having trudged on foot-back to Versailles, in a pretty janty Garb, she soon got
into Service, at first, to tend a Lady's Child; and then to be Lawndry-Maid to
Fair Lucinda, a Marquis's Daughter: and so perfectly, in little time, learned
the Art of Wheedling and Flattery; which she carried on so smoothly, that many
were insensibly drawn into a good liking of her facetious way of Discourse and
Carriage; and so infascinated at length they were, that they found themselves
uneasy without her Company (...) Conversation, and therefore much coveted it.

She was not slow in perceiving the Ascendant she had over them upon this
account, and resolved to turn it to her Advantage. She had frequent B^bes from
their amorous Admirers, to introduce them, deliver Letters, or plead their
Lovesick Causes or Plaints to the Charming Fair Ones: which she did in so
opportune and moving a time and manner, that Success usually attended her
Endeavors. She often, on the other hand, managed the Ladies Intreagues, and
was conscious of their stolen Pleasures. She was (it being a thing very rarely
found in the Sex) excellent at sealing up a Secret from the Eyes and Ears of
babbling Fame; imprisoning what they entrusted her with, as securely in her
Bosom, as a Silkworm housed in a strong Box; and made it part of her business
to secure their Honors and Reputations, to provide them Country Retirements,
and faithful Nurses, when Nature compelled them to disburthen the Products of
their stolen Pleasures; excusing their Absence, if Enquiry was made, by
informing the Inquisitive, That my young Lady was gone to pass some Days with
her Country Relations, at their Rural Mansions; a^ sometimes she was sick, and
could no^ admit of Visitants; carrying it so demurely and serious in all her
Expressions, that no ground was left to surmize: She told 'em an Aesop's Fable
for a Veracity. But being young and spritely, full of youthful Blood, gay and
witty, she thought her Beauty suffered injury, not to be enjoyed as well as
others; and thereupon set her Sprindgs, and threw out her Baits and Allurements
for Woodcocks and Gudgeons, where she perceived any Game, or tendency to Sport
or Profit: and many she took, to her great Advantage; among the rest, a
Marquis's Son; who (not to be tedious with you) finding, as I suppose, and as
she never without Blushes denied, that he had given her so much Lambswooll,
that her Belly began to swell; upon notice, my Father was fallen in Love with
her, for his own Reputation (being then married to a beautiful Lady) made up
the Match, and gave them a considerable Farm to begin the World, as I may say,
a new with. My Father, who had been a long time under the gripes of Necessity,
was overjoyed, that at last, as he thought, some propitious Star had smiled on
him, or that he had now found his good Angel, and mightily hugged himself in
the little revival of his Fortune; she having over and above brought him 400
Crowns gotten in Service, and the forementioned intreaguing Businesses.

They lived very happily together, always Billing and Cooing like two Turtles,
till at the end of five Months, being in bed with her, all on a sudden she was
taken with a violent Pain, the true cause of which she could no longer
dissemble, but taking him about the Neck, almost stiflng him with Kisses, and
bedewing his Cheeks with Tears, entreated him to rise and call a Midwife. At
this he started, and muttered his Resentments and Discontent between his Teeth;
but finding that it was but too true, and that there was now no other remedy,
out he jumps, and as secretly as he could, brought in the good Women at a
Backdoor, as knowing what was done was past preventing; and to blow his Horns,
would but disturb the Neighbors, at such an unseasonable hour. My Mother was
active and lively; and in a short space, by the help of the Generation-Drawer,
I crept thorough the narrow Passage of Nativity, into the World, having,
contrary to the usual Birth of other Children, indifferent long Hair on my
Head; and when one of the Women went to clap me to her Breast, not suspecting
any danger, the rest of the Gossips thought she had been falling in Labor too,
and expected more Hot-Suppings; for she roared out in a piteous manner, and
would have thrown me from her Arms, but that, like a Wolf, I hung too fast by
the Teeth at her Nipple, and made a crimson trickling descend her panting Hill
of warm Snow; which presaged what bloody work I would make before I have done
with the World. With much ado, and the help of the Midwife's Bodkin, they
made me quit my hold; and all of them wondered to see my Phangs so long and
sharp, every one spending a Verdict on me, as their Fancies and Opinions led
'em, as to what these unusual Prodromo's might fore-run, or signify, in the
whole Series of my Life.

By this time, the VVeather being Cold, my Father advertised of his Spouse's
safe Delivery, adventured into the Chamber, wrapped in his Cloak, walking up and
down in querpo, declaring, by his furious Motion, and sullen Looks, he was much
troubled at what had happened; which he feared would reflect upon him, and
redound to his Disgrace and Affront. My Mother called often to him with
abundance of honey Words, as, My Dear, My Bird, My Chuck, etc. why are you so
strange to me at this time; I prithee, Love, draw nearer, and kiss me. But all
would not do, he answered her never a word, but still kept his Motion, with a
wrinkled Forehead, and bended Brows. The good Women seeing this, and not
being ignorant of the Cause of his Disturbance, when in another case it would
have been a Comfort and Delight to him, thinking to put him out of his Dumps,
carried me, by this time, finely dressed, and smiling, said, Pray, Monsieur,
turn about, and look upon your hopeful Offspring; your very Picture, I protest
and vow: Oh, sweet Babe! Look here! Look here! its Fathers none Nose, Month,
Chin, and every thing so like you! -- A Pox! (replied he, muttering in a surly
Tone) I know not but it may be like the Father; but then (fetching a deep Sigh,
continued he) it cannot be like me: -- Why so? Why so? (says Mother Midnight,
who bore up briskly to him, and wanting her Fore-Teeth, sputter'd in his Face,
through her earnestness of speaking.) -- What! (said he) a Five Month's Child,
so large and lusty, and mine! Tell me no more on it (biting his Nails) it can
never, never. be, (and then stamped and fretted?) -- Not be! Not be! (replied
she hastily, still pursuing him as he walked about,) Upon my corporal Honesty,
I protest it may be, and has been a hundred times, to my knowledge; therefore,
pray Sir, have but patience to hear me, and I Will soon convince you. Ay! As how?
As how? (said he, beginning to lessen his Anger, and listen to her.) -- Why
(said she) Don't you see, Wheat is sowed in September, and yet it is but ripe
in August? And, Don't every one that knows any thing of Country Affairs, see,
that Barley sowed in the beginning of March, is ripe as soon, or sooner; why,
here is Five Month's difference in the Grain, and this pretty Babe here, want^
but Four: Dod a blesh it and shaveit, this is a Barley Child, take my Word
for it; and as for the next, you need not doubt but it will be a Wheat Child;
and therefore, pray Sir, set your Heart at rest, and be contented, and thankful
for what God has sent you.

This a little cleared up the angry; Cloud that hung on his Brow, threatening a
Storm; and though he was not so ignorant, as altogether to credit the old
Gypsey, yet finding he must acquiesce, and the sooner the better, he gave my
Mother a reconciling Buss, or two, who crowded two Louid'ors into his Hand:
with which going to the next Tavern, he washed away Sorrow from his Heart in
good Company.

How he was admired for his large Size and Comeliness, in his Infancy: How a
Great Lady seeing him in the Streets, took a Fancy to him, had him under her
Tuition, by the Consent of his Parents; put him to School: And of many things
that befell him there, in the Juvenile Progress of his Learning, and little
Rogueries.

BEing tumbled into the World in the manner before recited, without (as I ever
heard on) any Blazing-Stars, or Prodigy fore-running or attending my Birth, I
was brought up by Hand: for a Suckler dreaded my sharp Phangs, as much as a
Shipwrecked Sailor, floating on the Waves toward some friendly Shore, does
the meeting of a Shark; or the Egyptians, near Nilus, an Allegator. As I was of
an extraordinary Bigness, when I thrust my Head out of Nature's dark
Working-Room, being lustily crammed by my tender and indulgent Mother, I grew
a-pace, and came to my Legs and Speech to Admiration, before Children that had
been born a great many Months before me did, or were expected to do; so that
many Persons made it their business to pretend sham-Errants to our House, on no
other purpose than to see me: and the Lasses took a singular pleasure in
doudling, kissing me, and feeling my Cock; which, in Infancy, promised what it
has since performed to the Satisfaction of the Fair Sex.

I no sooner was so fledged, that I could run about without a Rowler or
Leading-strings; but a great Lady passing by our Gate in her Coach, eying me
narrowly, was mightily taken with my Physiognomy, and pretty manner of Tatling
to my diminutive Play-Fellows; who calling me to her, and almost smothering me
with Kisses, demanded whose pretty Boy I was? Nor could she forbear smiling,
when instead of an Answer to her Demand, seeing her delicate white Breasts,
meander'd with Azure Veins, rendering them very charming and tempting to my
Eyes, I fell not only to nuzling, but stroaking and playing with them: At last,
she got out of me, who my Father and Mother were; and understood, by my
pointing to the House, the place of their Abode. It seems, this beautiful
Creature was, by her own ambitious Inclination to Honor, and the Persuasion of
her Parents, married to an old fumbling Count; with whom she had lived five
Years without any Child, or hopes of having one by him; and therefore, to
upbraid his Impotency, or stir him up, if possible, to a more active Vigor, or
frequenter Repetition of the Lesson she loved, she was desirous to have me to
set as a Pattern before his Eyes, and thereupon ordered her gaudy glittering
four Wheeled Movement to drive nearer to our Door.

My Father and Mother happening to be at home, wondered what great Visitant
this might be; but more, when they saw her hugging their hopeful Issue in her
Arms: They accosted her with what Complements, on a sudden, bolted into their
Heads; and she returned them suitable Civilities: but when she came to start
the Question, of parting with me, and what Great Things she would do for me, my
Mother, whose Darling I was (though by this time she had another Son) seemed
very averse to it: But my Father, who seldom looked on me with pleasing Eyes,
it still running in his Mind, that I was none of his Begetting, was more
attentive to her Discourse; and prevailed with my Mother, that within ten days
I should be sent to her Ladyship; she, by reason of her great Quality, not
being unknown to either of them: And so having given me a fervent Kiss, or two,
and clapping a small Necklace of Pearl, as an Earnest of her Kindness, about my
Neck, she took her leave, highly satisfied in this Adventure.

She was no sooner gone, but my Mother, dropping some Tears, repented her
Consent; and labored, by many Arguments and Persuasions, to have revoked and
nulled it: But my Father, more willing to be rid of me, persuaded her to
acquiesce in a Separation that promised so much, not only to mine, but, as he
strongly urged, the Advancement of our Family; and accordingly I was sent,
under the safe Conduct of Margery our Maid; and fancied I became, as it were,
the adopted Son of Pharaoh's Daughter.

The old Lord, I perceived at my first arrival, was a little doubtful whether
his young Lady had told him the truth; or that being sensible of his
Inabilities, it might be her own Offspring by some dusty Lover, upon his
absence on an Embassy, at the time he fancied I might be made and brought into
the World. But upon a sober Enquiry, and the coming of my Mother to visit me,
this blew over, and he found himself obliged, in Honor, to crave Madam's
Pardon for his unjust Suspicion; and I was splendidly clothed, entertained,
and attended; and by my pretty Discourse, and little Apish Tricks, diverted my
Lady in her Fits of Melancholy, more than her Buffoon, or Monkey: and for my
better Accomplishment, being arrived at my Tenth Year, without many other
remarkable Transactions of my Life, that no Qualifications might be wanting in
me worthy of acquiring, and for the Improvement of Education, I was put under
the Tuition of a famous Pedagogue, or Schoolmaster, who spared no Correction
for the benefit or furtherance of Instruction.

I learned to read and write French pretty tolerable the first Year; and by
conversing with an Italian Youth, I pretty well understood that Language: but
the next Year, being put to the dull Grammatical Methods and Rules of
Scholastical Education, it grew tiresom to me, my magnanimous Spirit being by
Nature exalted above it; yet having with great difficulty, in another
Perambulation of the Sun through the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac, crowded my
self into the company of Adverbs, Prepositions, and Interjections, etc. with
which I did so kick, cuff and scuffle, that notwithstanding my Master gave all
possible Assistance to his Disciple, yet he found the Opponents too crabbed to
be overcome: which unhappy Contests frequently ended in most cruel
Flagellations, that made me but the more stubborn and regardless, though he
plough'd and furrowed my tender Buttocks, till they carried the Marks and
Characters of all Languages on them. Shame, and desire of Revenge, stopped my
Complaints, or my good-natured Lady would not have suffered me to have
undergone such Severities: which Revenge, as sweet to me as Eggs and Muscadine,
I accomplished before I intended to take my Farewell, as will appear in the
next Chapter.

CHAP. III.
Of his Master's Severity toward him, by reason of his neglecting his
Learning, and following his Sports, to the outwitting and defrauding his
Companions: And how, by diverse comical Tricks and Intrigues, he pursued his
Revenge, caused his Mistress to run away with one of the Scholars, and all the
Money and Plate; which breaks his Master's Heart, and so he returned to his
Lady.

TO divert the Trouble my Master's Severity put me into, I bent my study upon
all manner of boyish Recreations, and became very expert therein, beyond the
rest of my Companions, as Tipcat, Cricket, Span-Farthing, Skittle-Pins,
Cudgels, Wrestling, and the like; by which, over and above the Allowance I had
from my Lady, whom rarely I went to visit, but she crowded a Crown into my Hand
at parting, I gained considerably in Money and Experience; and finding my old
Pedegogue covetous, I fell into a dextrous way to buy off my Faults with
Presents of curious Fruits, and choice Wines, which I pretended my Mother, or
my Lady, had sent me, and sometimes, he being none of the richest or best
Husbands, with Money I suggested to have found in the streets; which so charmed
him, that much of my usual Punishment was abated, though my Learning made no
better progress; yet I heinously resenting how scurvily he had used me, the
desire of Revenge still run in my Mind and I was resolved, in some measure or
other, to cry quits with him at parting.

I cast in my mind various ways how to bring it about: sometimes one Project
liked me, and then another jostled it out of the way; some seemed easy to be
accomplished, others presented themselves in frightful Idea's, full of Hazard
and Danger, and very difficult to be brought about, and me to come off with
safety; insomuch, that although I was very quick at Invention, especially of
Mischief, which my School-fellows had frequently experienced, to their smart
and loss: yet here, I confess, I was at a plunge; but not long after, a ^ucky,
or unlucky Hit (call it which you please) came into my Noddle, though somewhat,
as yet, undigested, and not well shapen: I had observed the oldest of our
Scholars, who had arrived at nineteen years of age, and was substituted by my
Master, sometimes, as a kind of an Usher to supply his Place, when he had a
mind to be among his toping Companions, and by his Complaints, had many times
caused me a smarting, to have a leering Inclination toward my Mistress, who
being spritely and gay, in her youthful Blood, and before, his Chambermaid,
had married the Dotard for a more certain and regular Subsistence, and larger
Command, and that she had not declined the Civilities the young Amorist omitted
no Occasion to tender her. I concluded, upon these Observations there must be
something more than ordinary in the winding up of the bottom, and therefore
became a more intent and di^igent Spy upon their Actions, critically marking
their Glances, Smiles and Winks, and scrutenizing the nicest Symbols of Love,
till I verily believed my Master was very near, if not already entered the
Kingdom of Cuckoldom; then I began to contrive Ginns and Snares to catch him in
the uneasy and dangerous Trap of Jealousy; and by degrees, led him into
greater Mishaps and Perturbations, if possible.

One Evening, my Mistress feigned her self indisposed, and would needs go to
bed sooner than ordinary; which made me more sedulous in putting my self on the
watch for a further Discovery: and thereupon, sneaking up before her, as soft
as if I had trod upon Eggs, I was soon concealed behind the Arras. She was
scarcely entered, and in a Posture charming enough to receive her Lover, but I
heard one trip up Stairs, and give a gentle rap or two at the Door. Upon this,
she jumpt out of Bed, and gave admittance to the Party I had all along
suspected to be more welcome to her Arms than my Master. Having almost stifled
him with Kisses, and whispered many endearing Expressions into his Ear; for it
seems, being one of Cupid's Novices, he was somewhat bashful in encountering
these Enjoyments, he quickly unstript, and his lovely Venus as soon infolded
him in her Arms; and so they began a Citizen's galloping pace at his first
setting out; but after frequent Repetitions, tired and satiated with sweet
Enjoyments, after some pretty Murmurings, and Love-toying, so long a silence
ensued, that I concluded them a-sleep; and so intending to steal away
undiscovered, and send up my Master, I crept from 'em as silent as a Ghost: but
as I was going out, 'spying a Glew-Pot over a glimmering Fire in the Chimney,
left there by the forgetfulness of the Joiner, who had been cementing the
disjointed Frame of a great Looking glass that stood in the Room, another Whim
came into my Head; for perceiving their Optics fast closed, I with a gentle
Hand stroak'd them over with the glutinous Materials; and leaving them in that
Condition, I locked the Door on the outside, and crept down Stairs as softly
as I ascended. I thought indeed to have found old Ramhead in his Study, where
sometimes he was wont to sit up late; but peeping through the Keyhole, and
perceiving no Light, nor hearing that snoaring he usually made if he fell
a-sleep, and surfer'd his Candle to burn out, I concluded he was not there; but
coming into the Kitchen, I heard the Cook-Maid say, I must go lay the Key for
my Master; for he is a sucking at the Tavern among the old Gang, and I believe
he will not come home till his usual hour of Twelve. This gave larger scope to
my Invention; and pretending to go to Bed, as the rest did, I, however, crept
down to prepare for his Reception, when he should enter. In the first place, I
drew up a Trap-Door in an Entry he was to pass, made for the convenience of
emptying or cleansing the Sink and Bog-house, which run under it, and then
planted my self behind the Outward-Door, with a frightful sort of Vizard tied
over my Face, with a Cap on, to which a pair of Horns were fixed, that we had
sometimes used in our private Masquerading; and lest my Clothes should be know,
I had stripped over my Shoulders an old cast Black Crape Petticoat; and having a
small Rocket in my Breeches, the remainder of the last public Fire-work
Entertainment, with my Pocket-Tinderbox I struck, fire, and tinded my Match.

Being thus accouter'd, he came somewhat sooner than I expected; and by his
grunting, and fumbling for the Key under the Door, I perceived he was somewhat
sucky, or addle-Pated: at length he opened it, yet advanced but a few steps
e're he blunder'd over me, who had laid my self as a Stumbling Block in his
way, and miserably broke his Face against the Pavement; but before he had time
to make any noise, I had got up and fired my Rocket; by the light of which
unexpected fuze, lifting up his battered Forehead, and seeing my dreadful Form,
concluded me to be no other than the first-begotten of Beelzebub, come to punish
him for his sins of the Bottle; upon which, bolting up at a leap, Fear adding
Wings to his Feet, he fled amain, crying out, The Devil! The Devil! Help! Help!
He has me! He has me! whilst I pursued with a Fire-drake at his Tail, crying
with a hollow and hoarse Voice, through a Kecks, Thou art mine, Thou art mine;
and with me you shall go to the Shades Below.

I had scarce ended these Words, but the Trap took him, and down he plunged
into the Filth, over Head and Ears; when throwing the unspent part of my
Rocket, which till then I held in my Hand, after him, I shut down the Door upon
him, and was got to my Chamber just as it gave the Bounce; which being just
above the Place, I could hear him bellow out hideously, I Am in Hell! I Am in
Hell! Oh, Mercy! Mercy! Mercy! Which doleful Noise alarmed the nearest of the
Servants, and they roused others; and, to be brief, being directed where he was
by the the Noise he continually made, they lifted up the Pit-fall, and drew him
out, like another Joseph, in a miserable stinking Condition, almost senseless,
through Fear and Stench, wondering how, possibly, he could come there, the Door
being shut so close down: but as soon as they had given him some Spirits to
revive him, he frightfully looking about with abrupt Stammerings and
Hesitation, assured them, That a monstrous stump-footed Devil, in a horrid
shape, vomiting flames of Fire, had seized him, just as he entered the Door,
and was carrying him that way, as he believed, ^o his Infernal Region; but,
upon saying an Ave-Maria, the Demon quitted his hold, and vanished in a Clap
of Thunder, that had sindg'd his Whiskers.

His Fear being a little dissipated, the pickle he was in, made not only
himself, but all that were about him, uneasy, till they had put him into a
Bucking-Tub under the Pump, and scrubb'd him into somewhat a more sweet and
cleanly Condition. Whilst this was doing, and I not perceiving my Mistress and
her Lover all this while to stir, resolved, now I had begun, to go
thorough-stitch with my Roguery; and therefore, taking an End of Candle that
stood by me, I light it by the help of my Tinder-box, put it in a
Dark-Lanthorn, and creeping undiscovered near their Apartment, set an old
tattered Map of the World, pasted on Canvass, and hanging in the Staircase, on
fire: and being sure, that before it could do any harm, it would be discovered
by the blazing Light, and so concluding I had made Fireworks enough, I crept
to Bed again; which I had no sooner done, but my Ears were saluted with the
noise of Fire! Fire! and and could hear my Old Master roar out in his
Bucking-Tub, He Is come again! He Is come again! and will have me! I see his
Sawcer-Eyes glaring thorough the Casement! and as a Charm against the supposed
Fury, mumbl'd over diverse Passages in the Rosary, and rattl'd his Beads.

The Noise of Fire alarmed the Watch, and they came thundering at the
Outer-Door; and had the sooner admittance, because those of the Servants who,
perhaps, did not suppose it to be the Devil, nor his Dam, fancied there might
be Thieves in the House. The Night-Governour no sooner advanced with his Guard
of Bilbo-Blades, but my Master took a little Courage, as supposing now, having
Authority on his side, they were strong enough to scuffle with Lucifer himself,
should he make any further Attempt or Disturbance: but perceiving his dear Wife
had not appeared during all this Noise, Hurry and Confusion, he fell into
dreadful Apprehensions, that Demigorgon, in his retreat, might have caught her
napping, and taken her for him, or that, at least, some other mischief might
have befaln her, and so flouncing out of his Tub (like Lazarillo de Tormes, in
his escape, when he was taken and showed for a monstrous Seafish) he prayed
the Man of Authority, and his Janizary-Tribe, to go with him to the Chamber of
his Sweeting; yet Fear so shook him, that he strained Courtesy to make them
the Front, that he might have the honor to be in the Front, if they should
have occasion to face-about.

Their Leaden-heel'd trampling up Stairs, and a bounce or two at the Door, made
the two Lovers start out of their sweet and pleasant Dreams; and just as the
Door was opened, (for the Key was still on the outside) they leaped out of Bed
in their Shifts; and not being able to see, their Eyes being so fast glew'd,
but hearing a great number of Voices, verily supposed them Thieves and
Murderers, who had killed the rest of the Family, and were come to dispatch
them last; wherefore, running skreaming about the Room, as supposing themselves
in the dark, though several Lights were brought in, in seeking for shelter, they
tumbled headlong over the Stools and Chairs, which I had set out of rank for
some such purpose; so that my Mistress's delicate white Buttock turned up, and
she produced her Ace of Trumps for Highest, by rolling over; whilst her young
Amorist, being hindermost, and taking his turn at tumbling, pitched directly
over a Chair, with his Head between her Haunches.

Those that saw them at these Vagaries, and they not harkening to what they
said, took them to be a couple of distracted Persons; till my Master coming in,
and putting on his Spectacles, perceived how the Game had gone, and like a
good-natured Husband, though it fretted his Gall, to be privately injured, and
publicly disgraced, hasted to cover his dear Wife's naked Beauty, which lay
too temptingly exposed to vulgar Eyes, by carrying her into Bed, and throwing
the Clothes over her. Hearing her Husband's Voice, she was a little comforted,
as knowing now this was not the last hour she had to live, nor the last time
she should serve him so, but with hopes of better luck than to be so basely
betrayed into a Disgrace, by over-drowsiness; yet she alleged, she knew not
how his Scholar (who was all this while upon his Knees begging Mercy and
Forgiveness) came into her Chamber, or how their Eyes came to be shut up,
unless it was by Witchcraft: Which the old indulgent Coxcomb comparing with
what had befaln himself, either that he believed it, or that he feigned he did
so, to hide the Shame, and hinder these Passages, as much as he could, from
being made public, concluded, at that time it was so; and dismissing the Watch
with Money and Thanks, entreating them not to scatter any Words abroad of what
they had heard and seen. But they were no Privy-Counsellors; for in a short
time, all the neighboring Places rung of these Adventures

Warm Milk was immediately brought to unseal the Eyes of these blinded Lovers;
which, with much rubbing, struggling and pain, opened their Optics (like our
First Parents, in Paradise, when fallen, to blush the more at what they had
offended in.) My Master surpressing his Anger, said no more of it that Night,
but ordered the young Gamester to his Bed, and went himself to another, as not
being yet sweetened and air'd sufficiently to come between my Mistress's Arms,
though she Complementally desired it; but with what Sincerity you may imagine.

Early in the Morning he came to his Spouse, having broke his Rest by a
thousand Fancies and Imaginations running all night in his Head, and labored
to get out of her the Truth of the Matter, in Generals or Particulars: But she
being a cunning Baggage, and having a great ascendant over his Credulity,
persisted, it was done by Witchcraft; and she knew no more how it otherwise
came about, than the Man in the Moon. Resolving not to give it over so, he goes
to the Youngster, and beginning to examine him, bid him freely confess, as he
hoped for Pardon; for his Mistress had declared, That when he crept to Bed to
her, she was deceived, and knew not but it was him, her Husband. The Noddy
thinking this to be true, and fearing a Rape, at least, would be laid to his
Charge, fell on his Knees, and declared, his Mistress tempted him to these
Enjoyments, by urging the Impotency of her Husband, and that this was not the
first by an hundred times. At this my Old Master being enraged, as supposing
him to be the Contriver of the Mischiefs that had befaln himself, drags him
into the School, calls in his Man; and having tied our young Cuckoldmaker, Hand
and Foot, cross a Table, immediately locked up his Wife, to prevent a Rescue;
and he fell to cooling his Courage, at such a thrashing rate, on his Buttocks,
that after the tiring himself, and the expense of two Brooms, he left such
bloody Remembrances, as neither Bridewell, or the Cart's-tail, ever produced.

My Mistress hearing the miserable Outcry her distressed Gallant made, at last
ventured out at the Window, by the Sheets tied together, and came and unbound
him, being ready to swoon away at so piteous a Sight: And (to be brief) soon
after they so plotted, that he going away in discontent, she robbed my Master
of all his Money, Plate, and richest Things, and followed her abler Gamester to
Places of freer Enjoyment: Insomuch, that Grief soon after cast my Pedagogue
into a Fever, and that cast him into the Grave, and gave me the Revenge and
Liberty, with as fine a Come-off as ever I could have wished, and much better
than I could reasonably have expected, though I could have been contented my
Old Master had had more Wit than to have dwindl'd into the other World upon so
slight Occasion: yet I have ever made it my Observations, That such as
tyrannize over prostrate Creatures have neither Hearts nor Courage to face or
sustain Crosses or Afflictions, when they press hard upon themselves.

He that will triumph over a Wretch distressed,
Sinks lowest, when by Misery oppressed:
The Noble and the Brave, who scorn to tread
On Worms, when Fortune srowns, hold up their Head,
And dare the threatening Storm, as free from Wrongs,
That crowd on guilty Minds in fearful throngs.
But here, I must confess, was no such guilt;
My Buttocks smarted, without much Blood spilt;
Yet I too rash Revenge sheathed to the Hilt:
Ruined a Family at one bold stroke,
For one's damned Whim, who durst my Rage provoke?
So have I heard, A Comet, from his Hair
Shakes Death and Ruin. Then let all beware,
Lest in my Shape a Basilisk appear,
Whose darting Eyes sends out a poisonous flame,
That kills, though unperceived from whence it came;
A Shaft of Fate through trembling Air there flies,
That Life, through never so guarded, can surprise.
Thus springing Secret Mines, I overthrew
That Strength that open Force could never do.
CHAP. IV.
How he returns to his Lady. His kind Reception. And contemplating on her
excellent Beauty. How he goes Abroad a Visiting with her, being constituted her
Page; and in her Visit to a great Lady, puts a very comical Trick upon a
drousie Friar, the Lady's Confessor, etc. to the Mirth and Wonder of the Family.

WE poor Scholars, upon my Master's Exit into I know not what World, though
not at the usual Tides or Festivals Breaking-up, had a long Jubilee, and
returned to our sundry Habitations. As for my part, my charitable Lady received
me with as much Kindness as she did when my lucky Stars threw me first in her
way: which, in Gratitude, constrained me to a double-Diligence in obliging her,
as far as my tender Years capacitated me. She decked me now with finer Plumes
than ever, constituting me her Page to wait on her at Home and Abroad. And my
Lord was no less pleased with my little Waggeries, spending some Hours, in
Winter-Nights, to hear me run on in Discourse of Childish Recreations; and if I
bolted out any thing that made my Lady fall into a Fit of Laughter, he seemed
overjoyed; for he Loved her entirely, even to Doting; and when, at any time,
she was discomposed, he suited his Humor to sympathize with her in Melancholy:
for, indeed, she was a very Curious Creature, Cast in one of Nature's choicest
Moulds; so that when she was Formed, no doubt, our General Dame cried, A Lucky
Hit; and reserved her as a Pattern of Beauty.

Young as I was, I could seldom, when in her Presence, keep my Eyes fixed upon
any other Object. I had heard much Talk of Venus; and I concluded, if there was
a Rarity in Creation, of that Sex, this must be she. Thus, in my Childish
Imaginations, I formed Idea's to my self; and that so strongly, that finding
her, one day, sleeping upon a Couch, I took the boldness to rumple her ruby
Lips with Kisses. At which she waked, and smiled; yet blamed my Presumption,
and told me, I must not presume to offer any more such unbecoming Rudeness,
lest I forfeited the Esteem and Favors she had bestowed upon me.

Abashed with this Reprimand, which, however had something of Mildness and
Serenity in it, I retired at an aweful distance, and bending one Knee to the
Ground, humbly implored her Pardon for my unadvised Rashness. Well, said she, I
give it you, and take it as only proceeding from the Effects of youthful Folly,
but beware how you transgress any more in this nature. I promised her I would
not, but ever observe my Distance and Respect to her Ladyship She could not
forbear smiling at the Simplicity of my Excuse; and so with some Cringes and
Scrapes I quitted her Retiring-Room, and left her to her Repose.

The next Morning, she gave Order I should wait on her Abroad. At which I was
not a little overjoyed, as conceiting, like those in the Frozen North, upon
the Suns retiring, all was gloomy and dark when she withdrew herself from my
sight; yet was so ignorant, that I protest I knew not then to what my Desires
tended, being, as I may say, in Embrio, a formless and disordered Chaos, or
Confusion, till maturer Years had polished my green Understanding.

The Coach being ready about Ten in the Morning Abroad we went, and my Lady
paid Visits to diverse Persons of Honor, without any long stay; till at last,
coming to a great Countess's House, very pleasant and delightful in its curious
Situation and Gardens, resembling the Primitive Paradise; she resolved not only
to dine there, but spend a part of the Heat of the Day under the Umbrage of
those cool and spreading Shades: of which I was not a little glad, for my Belly
grumbl'd for an Antidote against Emptiness. Our Entertainment was very
sumptuous, and various Discourses passed of State Affairs, and sometimes of
Amorous Intreagues. I, though I Waited, and a Stranger, not being minded, by
way of Scruple, by reason of my Nonnage; yet as little as I seemed to regard
it, I could perceive my Lady smile, with her dazzling Eyes, on a florid brisk
young Caveliero, and many interchangeable Glances passed between them; and
having heard him named, I concluded, by what had been reported of my Mother
upon my so sudden coming into the World, for whose sake it was that she kindly
entertained me; for this Gallant, upon a more strict Enquiry, in which I was
not wanting among the Servants, proved to be the very Man that Fame had
whispered abroad for my True Father: The Conceit of which did not a little
swell my Pride; for I was naturally Ambitious, and, methoughts, had a Mind that
soared at things above my reach. Once or twice I thought to take an opportunity
to lay Claim to him before we parted from that House; but then Fear and Shame
checked my Resolves, and something within me commanded me to wave it, lest
being mistaken, I repented my saucy Presumption: so that leaving, him and my
Lady, as I was commanded, for the more privacy of Discourse in the Walks, after
Dinner, I went to take a View of the Apartments, rambling up and down by my
self, admiring now the curious Pictures on the Staircases, and in the
Galleries; then the curious Fret-work, and gilded Cielings; by and by, the
curious Painted Glass in the Windows; till passing many stately Rooms, I at
last came into the Dormitory, or Sleeping-Apartment for the Servants; and what
should my Eyes fix on, as the first Object, but a huge Two-handed Fat Friar, of
the Order (as I perceived by his Habit) of St. Francis, lying on a Couch on the
Ground, fast asleep, and snoaring like a Rattle-Snake; and whatever pleasant
Dream, of the Confession of some pretty wanton Wench, had come into his Head, I
know not, but his Label of Mortality, he decumbing on his Back, had broke
Prison; and, May Pole like, disdained its Stateliness should be hid. I was upon
this, once or twice, about to call the Maids to take Measure of it; but being
in a strange Place, I knew not whether it might be taken for a Jest, or an
Affront; and therefore thought it better to leave him in such a Rampant
Posture, than to expose his Vigor to the Longing Appetites of buxom Lasses:
But to further my mischievous Design, and compel Father Shaveling to sing
Ave-Maria backward, to the Tune of, The Millers Gelding the Devil, in a little
House hard by, I heard a Calf blating, as bemoaning the Absence of his Dam:
whereupon lifting up the Latch, I loosed him from his Stall and brought him to
the Priest, to make his Confession of being an Hungry; and guided him so near,
that he soon espied what I directed him to: which he taking for his Mammy's
Teat, greedily seized it, and fell to tugging, frisking his Tail, and soft
blating, till he had lugg'd Sir Domine off the Couch. In the mean while, having
softly tied his Legs and Hands, to prevent his disengaging himself, I writ upon
a Board overagainst him, with a Phosphoros, Woe be to you Whoremongers! which
immediately, as it is nature is, fell into a Blue Flame, burning in large
Characters, plain and legible, which the Darkness of the Place rendered more
dreadful. Upon which, I vanished, to listen, at a distance, undiscovered, what
might be the Event.

This Babe of a Cow, as I suppose, finding no Milk come, sucked and nibbl'd so
hard, that he waked the drousie Priest; who seeing himself thus surpised, and
the dreadful Handwriting on the Wall, betwixt Pain and Fear, made him roar
out, like Perillus in Phalarus's Brazen Bull. Which alarming the Maids in the
Pantry, they came running to see what the Matter was: But seeing their ghostly
Father so entangl'd, and seized on by a Cloven-sooted Creature, and the
harmless Flame still burning (its nature being so to continue about a Quarter
of an Hour) they run out skreaming; whilst he, in a lamentable Tone, cried
after them, to bring his Pot of Holy Water, to douse the supposed Demon, and
send him packing to the Red Sea.

The Noise these Wenches made, brought several young Ladies, and the rest of
the Servants: who understanding the Cause of the Out cry and Disturbance,
peeped in at the Door, but durst adventure no further; till with much
struggling, the good Father got loose, and came running out among them,
Crossing himself, the Calf still following at his Breech, pushing him forward,
and nuzling in search of the mistaken Teat; which now deprived of its Vigor,
hung dangling out; which caused the Females to scamper and squeek: but one of
the Menservants, more bold than the rest, perceiving the Priest's Error, laid
hold on the Fourfooted Animal: which undeceiving the Assembly, turned their
Panick Fear into loud Laughter.

The Priest, upon this, bit his Thumbs, raged, stamped and fretted, drawing his
Knife, to take bloody Revenge upon his Affronter; but was hindered, and the
Matter excused, as happening by Accident, through the Innocence and Mistake of
the Beast; but how the strange flaming Handwriting came, they were at a loss
to define, some of them concluding this happened as a Judgment to discover the
Secret Sins of the Confessor. However, it made a great Noise in the Family, so
that the Priest, through Shame and Anger, shut him up in his Chamber, and
appeared no more that day in public, though he was often sent for to Prayers.

My Lady, upon our going Home, perceiving me laughing heartily at what had
passed, and knowing how I was inclined to Archness and Waggery, charged me to
tell her if I had any hand in the Matter. When not being able to conceal any
thing from her, I told her plainly how I had managed the Intreague, with all
the Circumstances that attended the Adventure. At which she could not forbear
smiling and blushing: and when we come to our Mansion, it served for Table-Talk
at Supper; and so tickled my Old Lord's Fancy, that with straining too much in
an excessive Fit of Laughter, he bepist himself, and was forced to hasten into
the Laundry for a dry Clout; which proved a new Subject for Merriment.

Thus my small Rogueries crept up by degrees,
Till grown to Monsters frightfuller than these;
No Conjuring Monk such Magic Mischief wrought,
As I, by Roguish Wit, on the World's Stage have brought.
CHAP. V.
How undertaking to Travel with a young Lord, he viewed several stately Towns
and Cities; gives a Description of the Alps, in his Passage; and the Strange,
though very Comical and Pleasant Entertainment they met with in their first
Night's Lodging in Italy: And other Matters.

NExt Opportunity I had to wait on my Lady in private, she demanded whether I
was willing to go with the young Gentleman that walked with her in the Garden,
to travel? urging how much it would be to my Advantage, for the seasoning and
accomplishing my Youth with all those Qualifications that might hereafter
render me acceptable to my Superiors. At this, I fixed my Eyes on the Ground,
and appeared melancholy; not but that I had a great Desire to Ramble, but
thought it intolerable to be divorced, by a tedious Exile, to foregoe the
Pleasure I took in gazing on her Charming and Angelical Features. But she urged
it so far, that at last I consented, if my Mother's Approbation might be had.
Which she undertook to procure; and with some difficulty she yielded; and the
rather, because her Husband, my reputed Father, had sworn to be the death of
me, if ever I came in his way, for saying, among my quondam School-fellows,
when they upbraidingly started a Suspicion of my Legitimacy, That I had rather
be accounted the Base Son of that Noble Lord they twitted me with, than the
True Offspring of that pitiful Pimping Cuckold, Monsieur Ragoue: Which
unadvised Words, foolishly let drop, were so loudly babbl'd abroad, that by one
means or other it came to his Ear. My Mother and I thereupon, parted with
Tears; and the next Day, the young Lord de Villeroy, Son to the Marquis of that
Name (for such I found him to be) came to our House with a very splendid
Equipage, to take his leave of my Old Lord, but especially of my Young Lady,
who was his Kinswoman at some distance: and understanding, as he desired, I was
to accompany him, he seemed mightily pleased; and more, when asking me diverse
Questions, he found me endowed with singular Natural Parts, and a prompt Wit.
My loving Lady caused her Steward to furnish me with all things necessary, and
a Cock-horse I mounted. Far we had not rid, but feeling in the Pockets of my
Horse-man's Coat, I found a Box, and in it Forty Luid'ors, or Seventeen and
sixpenny Pieces of Gold. I presently knew the fair Hand from whence they came,
and blessed my lucky Stars, and her more bright in my Eyes than any
Constellation, whose Bounty had rained this shower of Gold upon me.

We traveled through diverse fair and pleasant Countries, took a View of many
stately Cities and Buroughs: and I observed, in all the Places where we Lodged
and Inn'd, my Lord had a more peculiar Regard of me, than of any other of his
Retinue; which, he told me, was for my Lady's sake, who had tenderly
recommended me to his Care. Passing the huge rugged Alpine Mountain, by that
narrow Passage that leads out of France, I perceived, though the Weather was
extreme Hot at the Bottom, we were on the Top, as in a Winter-season, the Air
being Thin and Sharp; the Snow, though in the Middle of Summer, lay thick, and
undissolv'd in diverse Valleys, or Hollows of the Rock; and in heavy lowering
Weather, a Sea of Watery Clouds floated beneath us; the Sun shining, and all
being serene and calm over our Heads. In four Days we passed those mighty
Mountains, and entered Italy; it being his purpose to visit that once Famous
Country in times past, renowned for its pleasant Situation and Fertility
throughout the World, but now, through the Pride and Contention of the
Nobility (...) Laziness of the Commonalty, and (...) ^ope's of Rome's
Usurpation and Tyranny over a great part of the most flourishing Provinces, it
is much decayed, and its Grandeur dwindl'd into scarcely any thing that may be
compared to its former State and Tranquillity, many Castles and Villages lying
waste and ruinated, without Inhabitants or Owners; so that the Roads, by reason
of the Banditti, and other sorts of Outlaws, Robbers, and Rapparees, are very
dangerous to travel without a strong Guard, especially by Strangers who are
unacquainted with such Turnings as may enable them to avoid their usual
Lurking-places; as I found by woeful Experience, which sufficiently punished me
for my former VVaggeries, but hardened and prompted me in greater Mischiefs.

We passed to the Confines of Naples* without meeting with any considerabl^
Adventures worth relating, unless ^ome uneasy Quarters* for one time, missing
of a Guide, and mistaking our Road* we fell short of any convenient Tow^ or
Village capable to receive us; so tha^ the Sun being down, my Lord ordered one
of his Servants to call (...) a few straggling Houses, to see if they could
afford us any Entertainment: The chie(...) of 'em appeared to be a kind of an
Inn* and to that they made their first Address* The Master, upon our calling,
came(...) out in an old tattered Shepherd's Coat* and being dimm-sighted, clapped
his Spectacles on his Nose, the better to discer^ what we were; and seeing our
Equ^page above the ordinary Rank, wi^ many obliging Scrapes and Cringes, told
us his House was at our Service, and we should be very well entertained. It
growing dark, my Lord accepted of his Proffer, and so we dismounted: but when
he perceived the Hangings consisted only of Cobwebs, and the other Furniture
not much unanswerable to them, he would have been gone, had he not been assured
there was no better Convenience within Three Leagues; and the Night was not
only dark, and much over-cl^ded, but that by the Rain, that then began to fall
in greater Showers, were promised greater Inconveniences, besides the threatened
Danger of the Way; and I being very much tired, was glad of an Opportunity to
rest me; but more overjoyed, when I saw the Pot over the Fire, verily
concluding before, that that had been Fasting-Night, and we must have gone
Supperless to Bed, not expecting any Provisions in such a Place, at such a time
of Night.

Our Landlord having VVelcom'd my Lord, and his Retinue, with such Complements
as he had, ordered the Cloth immediately to be laid in the Parlour, and a great
Bustle there was in the House to put Things in pimlico; when all on a sudden my
Landlady cried out, she had not Chairs or Stools enough, and so sent her
Daughter to the Neighbors a borrowing; but they being as slenderly provided,
she could procure only a Form on which they used to kill Hogs; and that it
might come least in sight, was planted at the Lower-end of the Table, whither
the Light of our one Candle shined but very faintly.

For the Convenience of our Horses, I should have told you before, the Hogs
were made Close-Prisoners, being crowded together into a little Hole that used
to serve for a Dog-Kennel. These things appeared a little odd, as very unusual
to us; but where there is no better to be had, it is Prudence to rest
contented. And now Supper being taken up, and set on the Table, we were invited
in; and what should we find, but every one a Wooden Bowl or Dish, with a Spoon
in it of the same Metal, full of Ola Podrida, a kind of Pottage made of several
sorts of Herbs, and a little Minced Meat to savor it, that our Landlord
himself, without the help of an Herbal, could never have found 'em out, at
least, by their Names. My Lord, who was not used to such Diet, and had ordered
us strictly to conceal his Quality, lest, as is usual, there should be any
Treachery in the People of the House, who suspecting, by that means, he had
great Riches about him, might give Notice to some Gangs abroad, ordered us all
to sit down, rather to please my Host and Hostess, than any Stomach he had to
this First and Last Course; for, upon Enquiry, we found there was no Second:
nor had they now had such Sumptuous Diet (as they termed it,) but that their
Daughter's Sweetheart had made a Promise to come with diverse Friends, and in
the Morning to Marry her; but had just then sent Word, and could not perform
his Promise.

We, however, having keen Appetites, eat a little; partly to still the grouling
of our empty Guts, and partly in Complacency. As for Drink, there was not any
but Adam's Ale, VVhey, and about two Gallons of Milk, in all the Hamlet: with
the first and the latter mixed together we made our Beverage; our Host, his
Spouse, and Daughter, fed lustily, and carous'd Fair-Water as savourly as if it
had been the best Hock, or Langoon Such is the Advantage of Use to Mankind,
that being accustomed to a Diet, it suffices Nature, and become; pleasant. The
Wooden Utensils, and the other Table-Materials, being removed, the Damsel, who
was well-Complexion'd, well-Featur'd, and of a Middle Stature, taking the Sign
from her Old Dad, sung very sweetly, and had in it much Skill and Judgment:
With which, I perceived, my Lord was better pleased, than with his Commons: I
could perceive them talk with the Language of her Eyes, and took an Opportunity
to whisper something into her Ear: At which she seemed rather rejoiced, than
displeased; and I have since been informed, That People, in those Parts,
keeping such Houses on the Road, are glad if they can Oblige a Noble Guest, to
make him Liberal; even their Wives, if tollerably Handsome and Young, or
otherwise, their Daughters, will creep to Bed to them, with the least Hint, it
will not displease them; and I am not mistaken, if, I say, my Lord, to make the
Night pass the pleasanter in so hard a Lodging, did not Tap the Vessel her
expected Bridegroom was to have Broached the next Morning; for I heard bare
Feet come patting up Stairs when he was a Bed But lest I prove too tedious,
Bedtime being come, a greater Bustle was made; for the House afforded but
Three, and those very scurvy ones, and we were Ten, besides the Family. My
Lord, we knew, expected to have one to himself, and another kind of a
Bedfellow (as I before hinted) than any of us. The Host, his Wife and
Daughter, for our better Accommodation, generously offered, the VVeather being
warm, to take up their Night's Quarters on a heap of Rushes; and after a while,
another Bed was procured abroad for three of our Companions; and so we hasted
to our several Cabbins: That to which I, and two of my Companions, were
destined, was the most exalted, being one degree advanced above the Garret, or
a Cavity between the Ridges and the Rasters, the general Randezvous of Rats and
VVeesels; to ascend to which, we went up a Ladder but of a very few Steps; then
popt thorough a Trap door, like a Play house Devil from under the Stage, it
being a curious Inner-Room, and no Partition but the Pan-tiles between us and
Heaven; and it had been better for me, that I had been a Rope-Dancer, as it
fell out in the Morning. That Night, indeed, our Hostess leading us, we kept
our Feet regular on the Rafters, till we came where our Bed lay upon a heap of
Brushwood, in lieu of a Bedstead; and then leaving us a bit of Candle as long
as her Nose, with great care and caution we should not be wasteful, but
extinguish it as soon as we were pig'd in, she dropped us a Courtsie, and bolted
down again as if a Ghost had vanished into the nether Shades; and now we had
leisure to take a further View: When, upon Examination, we found the Ticking
of our Bed to be an old VVool-sack, stuffed with Rags, and the Combings of
Hemp, Thistle-Down, Hogs-Hair, and suchlike sort of Materials; our Rug being
made of Lists, Shreds, and patched in diverse places, consisted of as many
various Colors as a Herald's Coat, and challenged any VVoollen-Drapers Shop,
for variety, to match them: Blankets we had none; but our Sheets were pretty
cleanly; yet being made of Cloth a Groat a yard, were as soft as Hogs-Skins:
Our Bolster, indeed, was stuffed with VVing and Tail-Feathers, that in
Moulting-time, I suppose, had been picked up on the Heaths and Commons.

Seeing this coarse Entertainment, we deliberated a while, whether we had best
unstrip, or not; but the Weather being exceeding Hot, we, at last, threw off
our Clothes, and in we jumpt. We had not lain long, but whole Battalions of
Fleas, and flying Squadrons of Gnats, as hungry as Cannibals, invaded us, to
feed on the Plenty which Providence had sent them. All our Hands were instantly
at work; but we could not defend our Buttocks from the one, nor our Faces from
the other of these Blood-thirsty Enemies: they bit, and we clawed; I grumbl'd,
and my Companions swore. Nor were Rats, Mice and Weesels wanting; for ever and
anon they run cross us, squeaking and fighting; so that if we had leaped out of
Bed to avoid the smaller Blood-suckers, we must unavoidably have taken a Dance
in the Rats Morris, and hazarded more dangerous Bitings. About Two in the
Morning, when we began to slumber a little, the feasted Vermin giving us some
respite for the Blood they exhausted, we were all on a sudden strangely alarmed
by an harmonious Consort of Music in the Ceiling of our Bedchamber, (for
there, it seems, the neighboring Cats kept their Nocturnal Revels,) which
continued in diverse Strains for about two Hours, and then they filled off from
their Copulation Recreation, to their Mouse-catching Occupation.

Thus we lay surrounded with all these Plagues, and under a necessity of
enduring them till the long wished for Dawning came to relieve us from the hot
Service we were engaged in; for our little Enemies, by this time, having
digested their first Banquet, came crouding again for a second; so that before
we could lift up our Hand to disengage our Faces of the Gnats, or Muschata's,
we had fifty Fleas apiece nibbling at our Arses.

At last, the welcome Light shined thorough the Crannies of the shattered
Walls; which we beheld with as much Joy, as one sifted from the long durance of
Shackles in a dark Dungeon; or a stale Maid, who has drawn in a lusty young
Fellow to go to Church with her in earnest. Glad of this Deliverance, out we
jumpt, as mottely as one of our Country Spaniels; or a young Lady newly come
Abroad to Air her self, after the Smallpox. But now another Mischief befell
me, for reeling too far before I could recover, missing the Joyces, treading on
the Laths, down I dropped on my Lord's Head, who lay in the Room underneath, and
could perceive a Thing in White vanish out of his Chamber, as I was falling;
for the Crack, and Dropping of the Ceiling, had given so much Notice, that I
found none in bed with him, yet never disputed but he was better pleased with
his Night's Lodging than we had been.

At first he started, and seemed somewhat surpised; but seeing it was I, and
that I was piteously scratched with the snags of the Laths, upon my Excuse,
after having chid me for taking no better heed, he ordered me immediately to
dress my self, and call up those Servants that lay in the Lower-Room, and
summon them in the neighboring House. I punctually obeyed his Orders, as being
the hastier to get to some good Town where we might refresh our selves. He
wondered to see us so speckl'd; but looking in his Pocket-Glass, he found he
had not altogether escaped the Hopping Legion.

We stayed not for Breakfast, but liberally rewarding our Host with Two Pieces
of Eight, our Hostess with one, and the pretty Daughter with another, an Estate
in their Pockets, we mounted, and took the Road we before intended.

Thus I first Hardship felt, but not the last;
New Woes succeed, to plague me for Tricks past:
Fate, at next stroke, strikes me from Fortune's Wheel;
But never alone will I her Fury feel:
Since she will me a desperate Gamester make,
I Will play at all, but that I Will win some Stake:
To spite her, I her Favorites will out-wit,
And push them in, who dragged me to the Pit.
CHAP. VI.
How, in their Way to Naples, they were Set-upon by diverse Thieves, or
Banditti, who came out of a Wood upon them; and the brave Resistance they made.
How his Horse being killed, he fled into the Wood, and was there rifled and
made Prisoner by them; his Lord, and all his Companions, that were not killed,
besides himself, charging through, and escaping.

WE had not rid above a League, but being on a rising-Ground, we had a Prospect
of a Country that appeared to be more fair than any we had yet seen since our
passing the Alps: And seeing a considerable Town, called -- about Two Leagues,
or thereabouts, farther, we concluded we should meet with better Refreshment
than we had the foregoing Night, or the present Morning* And thus flattering
our selves with a good Dinner, we rode on, till descending the Hill, we came
into a Hollow-Way, the one side being enclosed with a craggy shattered Hill,
and the other with a large Wood, rising considerably higher than the Road; we
were not far entered into it, but we heard a Pistol go off behind us, and
immediately another before us; when not well knowing what to make on it, we all
provided against the worst: Which, indeed, was bad enough; for we had no sooner
turned a blind of Trees, but we espied five or six Horsemen, not a Bow-shot
off, spreading cross the Way; and others coming out of the Wood, at some
distance beyond them. This gave Suspicion, that they would not prove Friends;
but my Lord being a Man of great Courage, and his eight Followers of a Daring
little inferior to his, he resolved to press on, and venture the Brunt, if it
came to the Extremity, rather than shun a Danger where, perhaps, there might be
none, by cowardly Flight. Coming nearer, and seeing they gave not way, but
stood to stop the Passage, he rid up with his Sword drawn, hanging by a Chain
on his Wrist, and his Pistol cockt, and bore it on the Pummel of his Saddle,
with the Muzzle mounted, having ordered his Men to halt, demanded what they
were, and why they stopped up the Way?

They answered him somewhat roughly, We are the Banditti, Servants to Mompazon,
Chief Lord of the Road; and if you and your Companions have any regard for your
Lives, it is your wisest way, to deliver all the Treasure you have about you,
as a Tribute to our Master, for trespassing on his Ground. My Lord smiled at
this, thinking, or, at least, dissembled he thought so, that they were only in
Jest; and told them, He believed they were Gentlemen only upon a Frollick, and
if they would accompany him to the next Town, they should be entertained with
the Best the Place would afford. To this they replied surlily, They must
convince him by stronger Arguments, if he persisted not to deliver his
Treasure; and so having made ready, bore up to seize his Horses Bridle. Upon
which, perceiving they were in Earnest, he fired, and shot the foremost
thorough the Head, so that down he dropped in an eternal slumber; the next he
missed, but killed his Horse under him: Then we hasted to his Assistance, and
fired so thick (I being as active at that Sport as the rest, though I kept
sideling on) that we were, in a manner, circled in Clouds of Smoke; and made
such havoc of our Enemy, though twice our number, that they gave ground; and
we pressing hotly on, were trained into an Ambush; for immediately a greater
number appeared at our Backs, who firing their Carbines at a distance, killed
my Horse; whereupon being dismounted, I crept into the Wood: My Lord, I
perceived, seeing himself in this strait, with much Resolution and Bravery
Charged thorough those that first encountered him; in which Action I see two of
his Retinue drop, but with the rest ( Parthians like, firing behind them as
they fled) got safe to the next Town, where the Pursuit ended, it being, as I
afterward heard, a strong Place, where a Spanish Troop of Guards lay; who,
notwithstanding my Lord's Entreaty, more particularly for the recovery of me,
whom he supposed they had taken Prisoner, and considerable Proffers, would not
venture after them; saying, They knew they always went in strong Parties, and
not being certain of their Number, might be cut off by their Ambuscades in the
Woods, or Hollows of the Rocks. My Lord (as I heard at my return to France) was
greatly grieved, to be thus unluckily deprived of me; but perceiving I entered
the Wood, and supposing how barbarous soever they were, they would not kill me
in cool blood, he comforted himself, that one day or other he might recover me,
for Money, or by Accident: But I never had the happiness to see him more.

The Pursuit over, some of them came back to the Place of Skirmish, to carry
off their Companions; when two or three scouting into the Bushes and Shrubs, to
see if we had thrown any any of our Treasure there, though I lay as snug in a
Thicket as could be, till I thought all might be blown over, one of them,
ne'ercheless, 'spied my Heels; for I like a foolish Bastard, supposing all was
hid, because my Head was) found I was seized by a strong Hand, and dragged out.
Being thus took napping, I thought it the best way to fall on my Knees, and beg
Mercy. At first, they threatened me with many bloody Oaths, and direful
Imprecations, setting their Swords to my Breast, swearing they would kill me,
unless I would discover how many more of our Company was absconded? or what
Treasure we had hid there, before they came up with us? But when I pulled out
all the Gold and Silver, except eight Pistoles quilted in my Shirt-Collar, they
begun to unwrinkle their Brows; and searching, but finding no more, they gave
car to my Protestations, That there was no more of our Company in the Wood, but
my self, nor any Treasure besides what I had given them; and so ordering me, on
pein of Death, not to make a word of any Money to their Companions, they
mounted me behind one of them, and convoyed me to the Main Gang; where the
substitute Captain, empowered with the Command of the Party, by his Chieftain,
in this Day's Adventure, seeing me finely clothed, and of a very fair
Complexion, and that my Answers to his Demands were above the Ordinary Rank, of
my Years, he concluded me to be of Quality; and therefore expecting a large
Ransom, sent me Prisoner, under the Conduct of Two of his Gang; though I
protested I was but a poor Servant, and falling on my Knees, with Tears in my
Eyes, begged he would give me liberty, that I, if possible, might follow and
find out my Master:

But Fate denied me, till I found a way
For my Escape, far greater Pranks to play.
CHAP. VII.
How he was carried Prisoner to the monstrous Cave where these Thieves had
their Residence, cut out of a Rock in a Woody Mountain. The Description he
gives of it, and what he observed there. Of the unmerciful Usage he at first
suffered among them. Their Oath, or Articles of Combination; and manner of
living.

MY unwelcom Italian Conductors immediately posted away with me I knew not
whither, passing thorough Woods, winding Lanes, and diverse bye Passages, till
we came to a Woody Mountain a great way from the Place where they took me up:
But I, as narrowly as I could, observed every Turning, and all the Remarkable
Things in our Journey, hoping, one time or other, they would turn to my
advantage, in furthering my Escape, if I was not fallen into the Hands of
Cannibals, who would roast me like a barthol'mew-Pig, and devour me as a Dainty
they had not lately lighted on. Well (to be brief) coming to this Mountain,
Perriwig'd with overgrown Trees, after we had ascended about Half a Furlong,
with little or no great difficulty, except the various Windings, upon the
removal of some Bushes, as I thought, appearing then very green and pleasant,
as if they naturally grew: And turning of a Key, the Entrance of a Cave
appeared, so wide, that in we went, Horse and Men: The Door, on which they
were, duly artificially fastened, to renew the decayed ones, and prevent
Discovery, turning upon Hinges fixed in the Rock, clapped after us; but so
softly, that it could not be heard twenty Paces. Into this Place came Light
many ways, thorough Bushes and Shrubs that grew over it, though very much like
that we call a Twy-light, in a gray Morning: yet I could see, when we
dismounted, several Stables very regular; and in them, a great many very
curious Horses, well stored with Provender. They having ranked their Steads
among the rest, one of them led me beyond these subterranean Stables, where a
more comfortable Light appeared: when ascending a few Steps, cut out by Art in
the Rock, as I suppose the Cave had been, we came into a kind of stately House;
which made me conclude, by what I saw there, if the History I had read of
Knight-Errantry, were not Aesop's Fables, I was got into an Enchanted Castle;
for there I beheld a great deal of Arms and Armor (this being much lighter
than the Stables,) as also rich Apparel hanging upon Pins in the Wall; and
diverse Enchanted Knights, as I took them to be, sleeping upon Rush-Mats and
Couches.

I had a great Desire to be asking Questions; but being in the Hands of an
Enemy, I knew not how they might be taken, and therefore remained silent, till
I should understand their Humors better. Passing this kind of a Hall, I came
into their Kitchen, (for so I took it to be, seeing the She Cook's hard
sweating at the Fire, preparing Provision, both Boiled and Roast, against the
coming Home of her Masters.)

Hopes of some Victuals, a little comforted me; for now I had been a great
while without any thing to the purpose, being, as some say (if it may not be
taken for a Bull) Full of Emptiness: but I grew melancholy, when I was
deliver^d into the Hands of this strapping Female, with Command, That she
should lock me up in a close Room, till the Captain's Orders were further
known* My Entreaty signified no more than a Penniless Wretch's to a Sergeant;
for in I was pushed, and the Key turned upon me. I found the Place wherein I
was enclosed to be very dark and lonesom, and fancied with my self, that like
Ulysses, I was now got into the Polephems Cave; and so strongly, through Fear
and Surprise, my Imagination worked, that Fear made me doubt, whether their
Spits and Cauldrons were not loaded and stuffed with Humane Flesh; for though my
Eyes, in part, gave Evidence to the contrary, yet I found some difficulty to
credit 'em: and what more heightened my Suspicion, I heard, as I conjectured,
piteous Sighs and Groans in a distant Apartment, as of a miserable Person in
great Distress; which cast me into such a Fit of a Trembling, that my Knees
knocked together like the rattling Branches of a naked Tree, when beaten against
each other by fierce March Winds. And in this plight I continued, groaping up
and down for some Hours, when I heard without, a very great Trampling, and many
Sounds of Humane Voices; and soon after, a Key turned in the Door, and I was
ordered by my Female Jailer to advance, for the Great Captain. Mompazon, was
arrived, and desired to see him.

Upon this, I recollected, as well as Fear would give me leave, my dejected
Spirits; and coming into the Hall, I found him sitting at the Table, in State:
His Grim Countenance, Swarthy Complexion, and huge Long Whiskers, represented
him so terrible to me, that I concluded him no other than a second Cerberus,
the fabled Porter to Pluto, King of the Infernal Regions: His Voice, when he
asked me diverse Questions, who I was? who were my Companions? and whence we
came? sounded like a Speaking-Trumpet, or the Roaring of a Lion: His Sword,
that lay on the Table before him, was at least Four Inches Broad, and Four Foot
Long. To what he asked me, I answered him as well as my abrupt Stammerings,
occasioned by Fear, would give me leave. But not satisfied, but that I was of
Quality, he ordered me to the Pully, to extort from me what he thought I
concealed; then had I a Cord fastened about my Thumbs, and great Weights
fastened at my Heels; and in this manner being drawn up, I hung so long, that I
thought my Legs and Arms would have parted from my Body: then, in that Posture,
was I ordered, by reason of my tender Age, to have my Buttocks exercised with
six Strings of knotted Whip-Cord at the End of a Stick, which, I was afterward
informed, others used to have on their Backs with Wire, and afterward rubbed
over with Gunpowder. But as merciful as they were to me, by omitting the two
latter, I conceited, all my Old Schoolmaster had given me, was but a
Flea-biting to this; and thought that his departed Ghost, in Revenge, had
instilled this barbarous Cruelty into their Minds, to revenge, in some measure,
the Injuries I had done him; or that the Priest's Curses had reached me: But my
piteous Cries and Entreaties, at length, made the Barbarians relent: And being
taken down, unable to stand, lest I should die of my Usage, I was put to Bed,
where my Breech stuck to my Shirt and the Sheets like Birdlime; and only that
Evening I had a little warm Broth given me, and a Glass of Wine, of which their
Cave was well stored, taken from Merchants, as Free-Plunder upon the Road.

As I lay in Bed, I heard the grim Captain say, Come, Punish him no more, lest
he die, and we lose our expected Ransom; but speaking to their Female
Attendant, commanded her to give me the liberty of the Kitchen and Hall, but no
farther, and see what she could wheedle out of me by fair Means, and good
Usage. Having feasted and drunk plentifully, they laid them down to sleep; till
just before Day, upon the tinkling of a little Bell, they got up, and went to
their old Trade, with all their Strength, as having Notice the Evening before,
by one of their Scouts, That a Rich Convoy was to come from Naples, in order to
pass for Rome. Leaving only their Female Housekeeper, two Grooms, and a Porter
of the Gate at home, she came to my Bedside, and seeming greatly to pity the
Severity I had undergone, brought with her a Flask of Florence Wine; which was
more welcome than her Presence: having drank a Glass, or two, and revived me a
little, she helped me to rise, and set a Gold Chicken before me, for my
Breakfast, bidding me be of Good-chear; for though she believed I would be kept
Prisoner there all my Lifetime, for ought she knew, if Money was not sent for
my Ransom, yet she assured me, my Punishment, as to any thing to be corporally
inflicted on me, was past. At this I appeared wonderfully dejected, and
entreated her to become an humble Intercessor for me, that I might be
dismissed, seeing I being of poor Parentage, and only a Servant in that Company
where they found me, could never expect any Ransom; my Father, for something I
had spoke that displeased him, having utterly renounced me, and would rather,
if he knew it, rejoice in my Misery, than in my Release. She told me, she durst
not move any thing that way in my Behalf, and therefore bid me be content with
my Condition, and leave the rest to Time; and so leaving me pensive and sad,
went about her Household Affairs. In the mean while, having satiated my craving
Stomach with the best Morsel Italy had afforded me since my coming into it,
which I wished I never had seen, Curiosity led me to take a stricter View of
the Place, and meditate on my Escape.

Having cast my on diverse Things, at last I fixed them on the Orders of this
wicked Crew, hung up on a Pillar, Sworn to, and Subscribed with their Names;
which denoted no less than One hundred and Twenty in the Combination, and for
Curiosity-sake, I wrote them down: Viz.

I. I A. B. Swear by the Head and Soul of our Captain, to be Odient to all his
Commands. II. To be Faithful to my Companions in all their Designs and
Attempts. III. To be always present at such Meetings as the Captain shall
appoint, here, or in any other Place, except his leave to the contrary. IV. To
be ready at all hour, by Day and by Night, upon Call or Notice. V. Never to
desert my Companions in any Danger, or otherwise, to the last Breath. VI. Never
to fly from an equal number of Opposers, but rather die, courageously fighting
on the Place. VII. To Help one another, whether Taken, Imprisoned, in Sickness,
or any other Distress. VIII. Never to leave, if possible I can bring it off,
any of my Companions Bodies, wounded or dead, behind me, to fall into the
Enemy's Hands. IX. To Confess nothing, if Taken; or ever to Discover the Abodes
and Residence of my Accomplices, though put to Racks, Tortures, or Death it
self. And this Oath when I Break in the least Tittle, may Power and Damnation
be here and hereafter my Plague and Punishment.
Thus Vice does often a Combination find,
Stricter than the now in fashion, Virtue, binds:
My Projects though to 'scape this Crew, must deep
Be laid; my Wits must not be now asleep:
This kind of Living, nothing suits my Vein;
I must be freed, and Rambling once again.
CHAP. VIII.
How he meditates his Escape and Revenge: Finds there a Beautiful Captive: And
hears the Woman that Dressed the Thieves Victuals, and look'd-after their Den,
relate the Comical History of her Life, and Manner of coming thither. How he
wonderfully escaped; and causing the Destruction of this Nest of Thieves,
released the sorrowful Lady.

THrough Fear of Danger, and Desire once more to see my Native Country, my
Mind run extremely on Projects, how I might Out-wit these Blood-sucking, Crafty
Vermin, and bring a Mischief on their Heads, as such Spoilers deserve, whose
Hands are against all Persons; and the Hands of all Men, for the General
Safety, ought to be against them. These, at this time, were my Thoughts;
though, indeed, I have since, in some measure, Outdone the most Expert of
them. Having cast many things in my Mind, I was frequently at a loss; but at
last, resolved to see what I could do with our bouncing Female: And instead of
her Wheedling me, I concluded to summon all my Ingenuity to Out-doe her. But
how, handsomely, to break the Ice (as the Countryman calls it) and start what
might be most Taking, was the main Matter: Sometimes I fancied to tell her what
great Matters I would procure her, if she would further my Escape, and go along
with me into my Country: But that was dashed again, when I considered, her
main Discourse tended to that, by the Captain's Order; and that it would, if
she should be false to me, improve my Punishment, or prolong my Imprisonment.
Whilst I was thus musing about what I should do, she having made an end of her
Work, came to me, leading a very Fair, but Dejected fellow-Prisoner in her
Hand, on whose Beauty Sorrow had implanted Paleness, and her Cheeks seemed
furrowed with the often trickling of Tears. After a Sigh or two, she sat down
by me: And our Two-handed Housekeeper, to divert the Melancholy she perceived
had seized us, proposed to give us a brief Narration of her Pranks, and how she
came to this Place, Trust, and Office. Which seeing us attentive to listen to,
she began in this manner:

IT matters not (said she) to tell you where I was born, it being too great a
Difficulty for me to do, seeing my Parents were Wandering Strolers, and carried
me at their Backs thorough so many Countries, before I came to Understanding,
that themselves could never give me any direct Account of it; only thus far,
That the Chamber where my Mother Pigg'd me, was a Gravel-Pit; her Bed, a few
Rushes on the Ground; Curtains, Pebble-Stones; and Tester, the Skies: And at
Twelve Years of Age I had the wide World to shift in; my Parents taking their
leave of me, after some little swinging on Cross-Timber, for Breaking-open and
Robbing a House, and Murdering most of the Family.

The Terror of this Disaster, and my Aversion to the kind of Living wherein
they had hitherto dragged me up, made me consider how, by some genteeler way, I
might advance my Youth, and that little Beauty that Nature had furnished me
withal. Seeing others Fine, I emulated their Bravery, being homely Clad my
self, and much affected Gaudy Apparel, yet was a great Hater of Labor and
Pains-taking; and hearing what a Brave Place Naples was, and the Gallantry of
those People that lived there, I resolved to trudge thither, in hopes of
mending my Condition, and bettering my Fortunes: And so setting out, without
any further Deliberation, and almost at every other step struck Fire on the
Flint-paved Causeways; an Emblem of what Fireworks I should make before my
Return.

Coming into this stately City, the most spacious in all Italy, except Rome and
Venice, I wandered up and down, begging from Door to Door, for several Days;
till an Old Woman who kept an Ordinary, seeing me a likely Girl, and she then
wanting a Scullion Drudge, entertained me as her Servant. But this kind of Work
not suiting my Humor, I stayed no longer then I could make a Booty; and then
packing up my Awls, gave her the Go-by. I found, by our Trade, she had Money,
though, for fear of losing it, she always complained of Poverty; but where it
was nested, and how to find and take these White and Yellow Birds, I was at a
loss; till one day, musing on the Matter, I resolved to fire the
Callico-Hangings in her Chamber, as done by Accident of a Candle placed too
near them, when I light her to Bed. This I effected; and she thereupon, the
first thing she did, leaving me laboring to extinguish the Flame, which I
easily subdued, was running into a little dark Closet, and lifting up a Board,
so artificially placed, as if it had been as firmly nailed down as the rest,
took out something, on which, no doubt, her Heart was most Intent; and that, I
concluded must be her Treasure.

I had soon put out the Fire; and running to her, said, Pray, Seniora (or
Mistress) don't be frighted; the Danger is over. But instead of Thanking me,
though I looked, with Smoke and Soot, like a Brimstone-Devil, recollecting her
Amazement and Affright, Anger took place; so that falling on me with great
fury, she cufft and kicked me well-favour'dly for my Carelessness (as she termed
it.) I bore it patiently, however, as knowing now I had not long to stay with
her; for the next day, when the House was full of People, and all in a Hurry, I
stole her Bunch of Keys out of the Bar, sneaked up Stairs, unhoarded the long
imprisoned Cash, and so rubb'd-off, without any ceremonious Complement at
parting: For the loss of which (as I was afterward informed) she fell
Distracted, and took up her Quarters in the College of the Bethlemites.

Having got what I longed for, and taken on content, I trudged on all that Day,
and all the Night following, thorough all the Cross-Ways I could find, for fear
of a Pursuit: but when the next Morning-Sun gilded the Mountain-tops with its
cheerful Beams, I found my self weary and faint, through long Travel, and want
of Food; when striking about a Furlong into a large Wood, I took the boldness
(after having a little satisfied my craving Stomach with Kernels, Medlers, and
other wild Fruit growing there, and a Promise of better Fare) to open my Pouch,
and found Coin, the Richest of both sorts, amounting in all to Forty Ducats; a
greater Sum, perhaps, than many of my Ancestors had seen of their own, in the
whole progress of their Lives. This exceedingly lightened my Heart, till Father
and Mother's Catastrophie bolting into my Thoughts, caused in me some Allay;
and put it into my Head, that I was not yet arrived at a place of Safety: so
tucking up my Treasure in an old ragged Petticoat, I again took the Road,
begging and taking up my Nights Quarters in Woods and Barns, for fear my
Changing of Money in those Parts, should breed Suspicion, and cause my being
stayed; till I came into the Suburbs of the City of Florence, and there I
concluded I was pretty safe. This City gives Name to the Province or Dukedom of
Florence, and is a very fair one, feated near the River Arne and Chian,
beautified with many stately Edifices; the Duke being accounted the Richest and
Chiefest Merchant in Italy, usually called the Great Duke of Tuscany. Here I
bought me a convenient neat Garment; and going into the Fields, stripped me of my
coarse Apparel, almost degenerated into Rags, and buried them in a Lime-Pit,
that they should never rise up to accuse me, by any Description that might be
given concerning them. This done, and being a little smugg'd up, I came back
again, and bought other Necessaries I wanted; and about the Sun's declining, I
took me a Lodging, pretending many sham-Occasions of my coming thither, as,
That I had a Brother returned thither, on board the Galleys that had been
cruising in the Mediterranean, etc. But at last, finding my Landlady an honest,
free, open-hearted Old Woman, but withal very poor, after having taken a View
of that spacious and pleasant City, taking its Name from the curious Gardens of
Flowers that almost every where incompass it, I told her, I was so mainly taken
with its Situation, and Healthful Air, that I would, if I could meet with a
convenient Service, settle there; and if she would use her Endeavor to that
purpose, I would, out of the little Money I had, give her a Gratuity; and
better it, when more able. She promised me, her Diligence should not be wanting
to serve me: When, to encourage her, I sent for a good Supper, and a Can of
Wine; and so we spent the Evening in Telling of Old Stories. In the Morning,
she went upon the Hunt; and returning about noon, told me, she had been
successful; for that a rich Merchant's Maid died the Day before, and they were
destitute of another. After Dinner, I went to this Place; and though but young
in Years, was very well Approved of; my Face, and the little Replies I made
happening to be very Taking with my Master and Mistress; but more (as I
perceived by his Smiles and Leering) with a Young Spark that stood at their
Elbow; with whom I afterward was better acquainted, though he had better never
have seen me, as in the Sequel will appear. To be brief then, I was Hired, and
admitted one of the Domestics.

CHAP. IX.
She continues her Story; How being in the Service of a Rich Merchant of
Florence, the Cash-keeper fell in Love with her, promised her Marriage, and
made her Rich Presents. How she discovered her Master's Intreagues with his
Part'ner's Wife. And how her Sweetheart, mistaking her Bed, stumbl'd into that
of her Mistress; and of the Adventure that befell him there, and how she
resented so great an Affront put upon her.

BEing initiated one of the Family, I was, no doubt, in a happy Station, if I
could have seen when I was well. At first I lived very comfortably, making it
my business to please and wind my self into the good Opinion of All, soon
perfectly understanding the Ways of the House, and in a Year's-time became Head
Maid, or rather Housekeeper: At what time, another Merchant, somewhat in
Years, who had married a Beautiful Young Lady, became Part'ner with my Master;
and and brought his Family, which was but small, to our Habitation: By which
means my Vails and Wages much increased; and with them, likewise my Pride. So
that affecting Gaity, I laid out lavishly, till at last I appeared so Lovely
in the Cashier's Eyes, viz. the Young Spark beforementioned, that he took all
convenient Opportunities to do me Favors. I dissembled my taking Notice of
them, till at length, by my amorous Leers, Winks, Smiles, and other Gestures, I
had drawn him in over Head and Ears in Love with me; thinking no Treats nor
Presents within his Power, that I could reasonably demand, too much for me. So
having nooz'd the Woodcock with the Snares of my Glances, I resolved to make
the best Market of him. He sued earnestly for a Night's Endearment in my
Charming and Ravishing Arms and Embraces (as he was pleased to style 'em.) But
though I gave him no absolute Denial, I found Excuses and Delays, when I
perceived him most pressing toward, and languishing for Enjoyment, till I had
made him pay as costly for it, as if he had Intreagu'd with a Duchess

I soon brought him to this, when he perceived other Arguments were in vain:
Rings, and Jewels, and what he thought most tempting, he procured me: And for
those precious Presents, thought himself over-recompens'd with a few Smiles,
and my kind Acceptance. At this Distance I held him a considerable Time, till
hearing a Rich Uncle of his died, and left him a good Estate, and then I
thought it my time to close with him, and hamper the Woodcock in a Matrimonial
Sprindge. I took my time to propose it to him, when the warm Touches of my
Naked Breasts, and warmer Kisses, had heightened and inspired beyond an ordinary
Transport; strengthening my Allegations with Modesty and Blushes, making him
believe I was Worthily descended, though Misfortune had thrown my Family from
the Precipice of a great Estate, into the low Valley of Meanness and Poverty.
To this Proposal I found him but Gold in his Replies; which made me fling out
of his Arms in a great Pet, and vow never to entertain any good Thoughts of him
more, seeing his Passion tended only to base and sinister Ends. He not being
able to part with me, pulled me back again; and on his Knees begging my Pardon,
protested to yield to whatever I desired, and submit himself, in a blind
Obedience, to what I should direct, without any Scruple or Reluctance. I then
proposed the Day of Marriage; but he seemed so-impatient of Enjoying me, that
upon his swearing to keep the Day prefixed punctually, for the joining our
Hands, I promised a Surrender of the Treasure he languish'd for, that very
Night, and set the Hour for more privacy, when he should steal into my Arms,
when in Bed. At which, giving me an hundred endearing Kisses, he seemed so
ravished and transported, he know not how to express sufficient Thanks for my
obliging Condescension.

At the time of this Assignation, my Master's Part'ner, Signior Elnorea, was
gone a Journey, and had left his Beautiful Young Wife to the Care of Almanda,
my Master, whose Fidelity he no ways mistrusted: But, on the contrary, his Fair
Charge had so overcome and captivated him, that he sought all manner of ways to
enjoy her. She repulsed the first Assaults with many Reasons, why she ought not
to consent; but at the second, or more furious than the former, coming to a
Capitulation, she promised, between a kind of willing and unwillingness, to
surrender up, that Night, the Fort of her Chastity, if he could handsomely give
his Wife the slip, and convey himself into her Chamber, without any Suspicion
tending to a Discovery; for she was, it seems, more careful of her Honor, than
her Virtue. This double Appointment made, the Hours seemed tedious; and we
fancied the Sun had wandered out of its wonted Road, and gone the farthest way
about to the Western Ocean. At last Night came, and Supper being on the Table,
I and my Spark gave our Attendance; but scarce could I contain, with holding my
Sides, and biting my Tongue, from bursting into Laughter, when I see him stand
like the Picture of the Man in the Moon, either gazing on me, or wandering he
knew not whither, his Wits, no doubt, being in the Eclyptick, and his
Imagination bent on the sweet Contemplation of those charming Delights and
Pleasures he suddenly expected to find in my sweet and delicious Embraces; so
that he was no further serviceable in his Attendance, than to make the Company
Pastime: for if his Master called for Beer, he brought him a Clean Plate; or
his Mistress for a Glass of Wine, he presented it to me; or, to mend the
Mistake, to Madam Elnorea: which caused a great deal of pleasant Discourse,
what should be the Cause of this so sudden Disorder?

This, I observed, was not the Disorder of my Spark alone; for my Master, by
the strength of Imagination, and partly by those Flames the incomparable Beauty
and obliging Promises his Part'ner's Wife had kindled in him, made him ready to
dissolve, as Snow against the Heat of the Sun: Fancy moved him to think he was
already incircl'd in her soft Arms; and clung as close in the amorous Folds of
Love, as the Ivy to the begirted Oak: sometimes he imagined he heard the Twang
of her harmonious Lace-Tags against her Stays, making her self Unready, to be
the more ready for the soft Combat; and grew so impatient of Delay, that
counterfeiting Drousiness, and early Business in the Morning, all things were
taken away, and he hasted to Bed with his Wife the sooner, to lull her asleep,
and steal away into Madam Elnorea's Arms. He effected (as I afterward
understood) the first, by feigning to fall into a profound sleep, as soon as he
was a Bed, thereby preventing the Love-toying wont to pass between them, that
he might the sooner receive them with more Satisfaction from another. This
Neglect of her Youth and Beauty, made my Mistress shed some Tears, for the
slight Regard had to her; but knowing how humoursome and peevish he was, if
suddenly 'waked, she considered, it would be more seasonable to expect his
Kindness at another time; and so hushing her Cares, settled her self to sleep
likewise.

The cunning Husband was diligent in waiting for that Opportunity; and very
carefully stealing out, went as softly to the Chamber of Assignation; to which
there was no other way, but by the Apartment where I lay; and being wakeful, in
Expectation of my Spark, a Mousetread could not 'scape my hearing his tripping
up gingerly one Pair of Stairs above me, fancying it was my Husband-elect, who,
blinded with Love, or the Darkness of the Night, had mistaken his Way, and so
expected his return, when he had groaped himself into a better Information; but
his stay, and the long silence that ensued, made me grow both jealous of a
greater Beauty than my own, whom I supposed had tempted him from me, and of
being now delayed, when I had fully framed my Mind to a Complacency: But alas,
my Love was mistaken in another Place; for about Half an Hour after this
disloyal Husband had left the warm Bed of his hitherto constant Bedfellow, to
go a Catterwawling. Mine, who was aged about Twenty, and a brisk, lusty,
handsome Fellow, got out of his Bed, having slept against his will; and not
knowing how much of the Night had stolen from him, in his slumbering, rubbing
his Eyes, between sleeping and waking, groaped the way in the dark to find my
Chamber; but instead thereof, entered into that of his Mistress; and
encountering with a Bed, doubted not but he was right: whereupon, lifting up
the Clothes softly, he laid himself down by her Side; and was not long there,
e're he began to bustle: which soon waked his Mistress; who supposing it her
Husband, embraced him with ardent Affection, crying, in a soft loving Tone, Oh,
how Cold you are, my Dear? Come, let me warm thee in my Embraces! And hugging
him very close, with many Kisses, and amorous Twinings, she told him she was
glad what had perplexed her in her sleep, was but a Dream, for that she fancied
she had felt for him before, all over the Bed, and and he was no way to be
found; intending to tell him how she had dreamed, That at that very juncture,
her Man and her Maid, meaning me, were naught together, and just in Love's
lawless Conjunction; but glad I am (continued she* that it is but a Dream, and
that waking* I have thee in my Arms.

These Actions and Expressions not only convinced my Spark he was in an Error,
but so startled and surpised him, that he knew not what to think or do; at
first he was almost dead with fear, but by degrees recollecting his scattered
Spirits, he bethought himself of a Stratagem to protect him from Discovery: All
the Passages he had observed between his Master and Partner's Wife came fresh
into his Memory, and from all the Circumstances concluded they were in this
critical Minute consummating their Loves, and that if he refrained from
speaking, he doubted not but she falling a-sleep again, he might steal away,
and hasten to my more desired Embraces: But, alas! in this he found himself
deceived; for the Fancies in her Dream, and her natural Inclination, had so
warmed her Blood, that abandoning for that time the Modesty of her Sex, she
grew so impatient of Delays, that he found himself incapable of resisting the
Emotions she had raised within him, but suffered himself to be taught by her
those Love-Lessons designed him by another School-Mistress. She found him so
active and vigorous in his Caresses and Embraces, above what are ususually the
Attendants of a Marriage Bed, that, together with his continued silence, gave
her a suspicion that she was mistaken in her Bedfellow; whilst he, on the other
hand, lay sweating and trembling in a peck of Troubles how to make his Retreat
handsomely before his Master's Return: For if he surpised him, he could expect
nothing but a bloody Revenge for what he had acted to his Dishonor and
Disgrace, through mistake.

After a Thousand Cogitations and Revolvings in his Mind, weighing each
Particular in the Balance of his green Understanding, he considered it might
be of dangerous Consequence to ask Pardon of the injured Lady for what had
passed between them; and again, to steal away when she was asleep, without
discovering, would undoubtedly betray the whole Matter by her petulency* or
some little toying and wanton Discourse that might arise upon the Husband's
coming; and who knows but she might too amply acknowledge his Gratitude for his
late supposed Work of Supererogation, which might give him a just ground to
believe some other had supplied his Place in his absence, and consequently his
Man, for no other could be suspected in the Family.

Apprehensions of Danger from the Discovery of a Secret of this great
Importance, put him into such a Confusion, that it was not to be judged which
exceeded, the Pleasure he had enjoyed, or the Trouble and Fear he underwent to
purchase it. Whilst his Thoughts were engaged in this Perplexity, a lucky one
came into his Noddle, which, in all probability, might remedy all, and so after
an endearing Kiss or two, thus broke silence:

'Prithee, my Dear, what did ^ou mean by that Dream thou told'st ^en I first
came to Bed; the Matter I value not, but it is the manner of ^e Relation that
troubles me, beca^ in it thou namest me as thy Servant, which is more like the
Language of my Mistress than of my dear Love. I promised to be thy Husband, and
will not fail, at the time appointed, to bind the Contract with my Hand, which
my Heart has already sealed; and now I have named my Mistress, she, no doubt,
poor innocent Lady, lies fast a-sleep, whilst her perfidious Husband is in the
height of Enjoyment with his absent Partner's Wife. And here he ended with
renewed Kisses; but she started, trembled, and turned away, not able, at
present to make any Reply. Never was Alcmene of old so amazed and surprised,
when Jupiter had enjoyed her in the Shape of Amphitrio her Husband. The Curtain
of the Night indeed hid the Confusion of her Blushes and Disorder, which else
had appeared greater than can be reasonably expressed: But seeing there was no
Remedy to retrieve so strange an Accident, which had at this time unwittingly
broke her Marriage Vow, she comforted her self, in that the F^lt, if any, was
not designed by her, ^t all the Guilt ought to lie on her faithless Husband,
who had deserted her Bed for the lawless Pleasures of an other's.

She was somewhat loath, however, to part with the Company of her Bedfellow,
but Reason persuaded her to it for the avoiding Danger. Wherefore taking a
Diamond Ring, she clapped it into the Hand of my Spark, saying, in a very low
Voice, If you are discreet, hug your good Fortune in silence; otherwise you
shall find a Reward to this Surprise and your babbling Folly. Hereupon, without
reply, he sneaked away to his own Bed, whilst I lay in vain expecting his
coming to mine, mistrusting some such thing, but not knowing where it happened,
till he gave me soon after the full Relation, as it is here set down; which
Disappointment put me upon Revenge, which fell sure, though slow in Execution:
For as the Poet says,

Woman, when crossed in her desired End
Of Love, or call it Lust, becomes a Fiend,
Till her Revenge destroys her dearest Friend.
CHAP. X.
She relates how her Master was surpised in Bed with his Partner's Wife, upon
his unexpected coming home; and what Stratagems were used by the Wife to
deceive the Husband. How she 'frighted her Master in his Return, by siezing him
instead of her Lover; with the Discourse that happened between them. How she,
by discovering these Intriegues, ruined not only the Cashier, but the whole
Family, yet greatly enriched her self; afterward Marrying. By what means she
fell into the Hands of the Thieves.

SHe would have ended her Story here at this time, reserving the remainder for
a more fitter opportunity; but by my Importunity she thus proceeded:

My Master (said she) having gained a speedy Admittance, we may well imagine
employed his time to the end for which that Assignation was made: It is
needless, if I had been then their Bolster, to give an Account of every amorous
Folly that the Two Lovers were guilty of, which consisted, no doubt, more of
Action than Expression; and no wonder, since Kisses barrocade their Speech, we
may imagine, that their Lips being tired, they encountered in another manner,
somewhat more pleasing. But in the height of these ravishing Enjoyments, and
stolen Pleasures, the amorous Lady's Husband unexpectedly came home, and having
a Key to the Backdoor went directly to his Chamber, having struck a Light, and
carried up with him a Candle. His unexpected knocking at the Door startled our
Two Lovers, then more strictly intangl'd in each others Arms, etc. than Mars
was by Vulcan's crafty Net, when intwin'd in amorous Folds with the Cyprian
Goddess. But she being otherwise employed than to come out of a warm Bed, and
endanger the catching of Cold, was as mute as a Fish, neither could she in
reason make answer to the Disturber of her Joys, till the Business she was
about was consummated: But he, impatient of delay, repeating his Strokes on the
harmless Door, she found her self constrained to demand who was there, though
in Words imperfect as one waked out of a profound Sleep; and too sadly knowing
the Voice upon reply, she capitulated with him till she might abscond her
Lover, for whom there was no other Refuge but crawling under the Bed: When
being secured there, she jumped out, and in great have ran to the Door,
speaking as she was wont, Oh my Soul! Oh my dearest Heart! The most welcome Man
to me alive. When in her self she thought, What envious Devil has brought thee
hither at this juncture to disturb my early Joys?

The Husband thus entered, clasped her in his Arms, when the Temptation of her,
in a manner, naked Beauties, made him uneasy till he could enjoy them in a
closer manner; and immediately throwing her into Bed, fell to making himself
unready, that he might be the more ready, as he thought, to pleasure her. But
she who had already the Satisfaction of a more vigorous and active Inamoretto,
knew how to defend her self against the weak Assaults of an Impotent Husband,
as likewise to give her Gallant the better opportunity to escape, said, Hold,
hold, (pushing him back with her Hand) my dear Heart prithee lets drink a Glass
of Wine for Joy of thy return, I have Half a Dozen Bottles which were lately
sent me as a Present, the best you ever tasted; let me entreat you to step down
into the Cellar, and fetch up one of them. With all my Heart, (replied he)
being overjoyed he might do any piece of Service to oblige her: And re-putting
on those Garments he had already divested himself of, he began to search for
his Shoes which he had carelessly dropped so, that one of them was tumbled under
the Bed; for which he no sooner began to grope, but out she leaped; and whilst
her absconded Lover lay in a quivering Condition for fear of a Discovery, and
pretending to be angry for his so long standing in the Cold barefooted,
snatched the Candle out of his Hand, saying, Is it possible, Husband, you
should be thus long looking for your Shoe, and not find it: Come, you shall
stand no longer on the cold Boards, I Will rather suffer than you. And thereupon
searched for it where she knew it was not, to avert the Light; and when he
commanded her to go to Bed, unless she meant to be accessory to her own Death,
in exposing her tender Body to the nipping Season, running against the
Bed-stead, as unawares, she let the Candle drop, which by its fall was
extinguished; and whilst her dear Husband was groping for it, she gave her
Gallant the hint, by softly pulling him by the Foot, that this was his only
time to escape. Whereupon, poudered with Dirt and Feathers, out he crept, and
sneaked down Stairs like a Dog that had lost his Tail: But not so silently, but
I, who lay perdue, supposing him to be my false Spark, bolted out upon him; and
siezing the Lappet of his Shirt, he would have cried out, as taking me for some
Ghost sent to punish him for his Evils, had not fear of Discovery overruled his
other Apprehensions; and indeed I soon made him understand I was not as yet a
damned Spirit, by saying in a soft, though angry Tone,

Oh Sir, have I caught you! Are these the Products of your Oaths and Promises!
Can the Current of your so often avowed Love so soon run in another Channel?
Base perjured Man! so quickly to relinquish her, over whose Affections your
Subtilty has gained so entire a Conquest.

He thought at first, his Wife had siez'd him, and began to excuse himself, and
beg Pardon in the most humble and beseeching manner; but I continuing to
reproach him with Infidelity for his Maiden Obligation, and giving me so
unexpected a Disappointment in the height of my Expectations. He upon this,
knowing my Voice, and finding what I drove at, dispersed his Fears, and made me
believe he had an inkling of our Intriegue, and had left his Bed at so
unseasonable a time, when muttering some Threats between his Teeth, he flung
from me, whilst I remained in much surprise and confusion, as greatly
astonished and confounded at this double Misfortune, but re-collecting soon my
fading Spirits, I went to Bed, though I slept but little for Ruminating on what
had past in these unlucky Adventures.

My Master, it seems, went not directly to his Wife's Bed, but to my Spark's
Chamber, where rapping and calling Twice or Thrice at the Door, he put him into
dreadful Apprehensions that all was discovered; so that had not the iron Bars
prevented, he had ventured his Neck, by leaping out of his Window, to escape
the heavy Revenge he expected to fall on him. However, at last venturing to
open the Door, with a Resolution to make an humble Confession and beg Pardon on
his Knees, his Resolves were changed, when by the light of the Moon he
perceived his Master pale, and shivering like a Midnight-Ghost, all besmeared
with Dust and stuck round with Feathers, only desiring he would give him
immediately one of his clean Shirts; and hinting to him that he had been upon
the Discovery of his Haunts that Night, he left him far more composed and
satisfied than before, and so passed to his Wife's Chamber, who was again
fallen asleep and dreaming of the pleasant Pastime that had befallen her by so
strange an Adventure; yet waking, dissembled at this time the knowledge of his
Absence.

My Disappointment, and the Affront, I conceived with Indignation to be so
deluded, made me yet restless, and in the Morning I upbraided my faithless
Amorist with many Reproaches. He blushed, but hid nothing from me, only begged
my Pardon, since it was by Mistake, and consequently, as it fell out, not to be
avoided; but for the future he would be more wary and constant: -- But finding,
though I allowed him that Freedom he expected very frequently, I watched him so
narrowly, that the further Intriegues he had in secret nocturnal and diurnal
Correspondences held with my Mistress, escaped not my Knowledge; and the Day
appointed coming, he shuffling and making further Delays and Demurrs about our
Marriage, I was resolved at one bold Blow to strike home; and accordingly,
having made my Spark flustered one Night, and over-dozed him with Love-Posset,
leaving him as fast as a Church, I stepped into his Chamber with the Keys I had
taken out of his Pocket, rifled his Trunks, and found the Diamond-Ring, and
other known Marks of my Mistress's Favor, which she had bestowed on him for
secret Service, and returned unmissed. Next Morning being up early, and
appearing Melancholy, and much disturbed, my Master observed it, and pressed me
to tell him the Reason. I seemed averse to comply with his Request, which made
him the earnester in his Enquiry. After a while, fetching a deep Sigh or two,
with some seeming reluctance, I drew the Ring and other Tokens, that were no
Strangers to him, out of my Pocket, and letting fall some Tears, told him, How
my Mistress had not only wronged him but me, in too prodigally dispensing her
Favors to his Man, who had before promised me Marriage: But since his stolen
Enjoyments with my Mistress, he, contrary to his Vows and Promises, had
declined it, if not absolutely renounced me. My Master seemed at first
difficult to believe this, never having observed any thing but a modest,
humble, and virtuous Carriage in his Wife.

Seeing him pause, and unresolved, I concluded it now time to go thorough with
it, and said, Sir, If you will not believe these Visible Marks of the Injury
done you, do but feign an Excuse to be Abroad this Morning, and I will deliver
the Adulterers into your Hands, as securely taken, as Mars and Venus were in
Vulcan 's Wyre-Net, invisibly spread to entrap those lustful Deities. To this
he gave very attentive ear, burning all the while with Anger and Fury, his
Eyes, as it were, sparkling Fire; yet a little composing his Mind, he thanked
me for the Care I had for his Reputation, and promised to be ruled by my
Directions, in discovering the Dishonor put upon him: and so going up, and
taking a dissembled loving leave of his Wife, feigned Business Abroad till
Three in the Afternoon, and should not be at Home till Dinner. She took no
great Notice of what he said, but gave him a Kiss, and so they parted. My
Master being gone out, as my false Spark supposed, he sneaked up Stairs, and
crept into my Mistress's Chamber; where, by his stay, I plainly perceived he
was not unwelcome.

Having them thus in a Trap, I ran to the Place where I knew I should find him,
to inform him how it was. With the News, Anger and Revenge added Speed to his
Feet; and forcing open the Door, found them in the same Posture he had been
with his Part'ner's Wife a little before. Impatient of Delay, he dragged his
Man out by the Heels, letting his Head and Buttocks come thump against the
Ground, beating and kicking him at a most miserable rate, whilst he lay
crying-out sometimes Mercy! and sometimes Murder! His Wife, in the mean time,
fearing the Death of her Minion, leaped out of Bed, and taking hold on her
Husband, entreated him to forbear; And since (continued she) you have been as
guilty as we, in doing the like with Madam Elnorea; for which Dishonor to my
Bed, I was res^lved to take this Revenge, though, at first, unwittingly; it
will be Discretion in you to be secret, lest you not only publish, unadvisedly,
your Shame, but ruin your Fortune. Upon this Discovery, he supposed his Wife
had been a Witch, standing confounded and amazed in himself, to consider how
otherwise such a Secret should come to her Knowledge; and (to be brief) whilst
he a little suspended his Fury, my Spark crawled from under his unmerciful
Clutches, on all Four; and getting to the Stair-head, made, for haste, but one
leap to the bottom, and tumbled Head over Heels down the other, and ran out of
Doors, with a Resolution of never returning; and indeed, I heard afterward, in
the Terror and Fright he was in, going on board a Ship just setting sail out of
the Port, he was, within Three Leagues of Land, Castaway upon a Rock; and so,
at last, all his fiery Love to my Mistress and me, more or less, was quenched
in the Ocean.

Upon his Departure, having the Keys I had taken out of his Pockets, I rifled
the Cash, took out Five hundred Florins, besides other Things of Value that had
been laid for considerable Sums, and in the Evening hid them in a Wood that
stood about Four Furlongs from the City, and so returned undiscovered; when I
found, my Master, after her humble Submission, had taken my Mistress, as well
as he could digest the Affront, into Favor again. But this Revenge satisfied
me not for the loss of my Spark; for whose last Disaster, I could not, on
second Thoughts, refrain shedding some Tears; and therefore resolved, the
Mischief I had begun, should go further. Nor left I off, till in the same
manner my Master had taken his Man with my Mistress, himself was caught by
Signior Elnorea in his Wife's Arms; although the injured Husband did not
roughly use him at that time, only ranting at a distracted rate, as being too
weak to grapple with him, he grew discontented, and took a worser Revenge, by
Confessing a Judgment; which turned out my Master and Mistress to shift again
in the wide World. The Creditors, upon Notice of what had happened, drawing off
the Overplus Effects so hastily, that my Master found it in vain to stand the
Brunt; and so slipping what he could conveniently, stood away with his whole
Family to the West Indies: and what became of them there, I am ignorant of; yet
heard, That his injured Part'ner, soon after, seeing what he had done, to the
loss of his Reputation and Credit in the World, ran distracted, and died in a
Raving Fit, exclaiming against his Wife's Disloyalty, as the Cause of all his
Misfortune, and the only Cross-wind that had Shipwrecked his Felicity.

Being thus, as I may say, Disbanded by the Families Going-off in such Disorder
and Distraction; yet having Treasure enough to support me till I could find out
other Quarters, I took me very sumptuous Lodgings; where I became acquainted
with one Flavius Dumaine, a Brisk Young Man; whom I so much doated on, that I
consented to a Marriage with him, though he was no more than a Blade of
Fortune. He, in a little time, spent all my ill-gotten Wealth; and running much
in Debt, we were obliged to bid adieu to Florence; and in our Travels, fell
into the Hands of these Thieves; against whom fighting valiantly in my Defense,
rather than his own, he was unfortunately slain, and I made a Prisoner. They,
at first, used me very roughly, as is their manner to all they take Captive, of
which they have now diverse in several adjacent Dungeons, in hopes of Ransoms
for the Men; or training them up, by a compulsive Consent, in their Gang: And
as for the Women, by Threats and fair Means, they strive to bring 'em to a
Compliance to their Lusts; which I, by the Service I do them, have hitherto
avoided; as also this Fair Lady, to whose Chastity our Captain lays strong
Siege, by reason she protests to kill her self, if he violates it.; so that in
hopes to bring her to a better Temper of Mind, he has not hitherto used any
Force, as knowing a Constrained Enjoyment, in Sullenness and Tears, can yield
him but an Imperfect Pleasure. At this, the Fair Stranger held down her Head,
and wept. And so our Discourse, at this time, breaking off, by the coming in of
a petty Captain, with a considerable Booty taken from Merchants, and other
Travelers, we retired to the Inner-Places: the Lady, through Fear and
Bashfulness; our Housekeeper, about her Domestick-Affairs, the better to keep
up a fair Correspondence with her new Master; and I, to avoid any Suspicion of
my Intention of Escape.

So different Ends did move a different Thought,
Which my deep Projects to one Center brought,
And Trapt the Villains who us first had Caught.
CHAP. XI.
He hears the Complaint of the Beautiful Captive in the Thieves Den; with her
Love-story, and how she came thither: Which so moved him to Compassion and
Admiration, that he resolves to attempt, by one means or other, to make his
Escape, that he might work her Deliverance.

PErceiving this Fair Stranger sigh, and often let fall Tears, I took the first
Opportunity to entreat the Favor of a Relation, who she was, and how she
unfortunately came into this miserable Place? At first, Grief stopped the Passage
of her Language, that she could make me no Reply: but I more earnestly pressing
it, and promising, if Heaven favored my Designs, to be instrumenta^ in her
Delivery from so horrible a Dungeon, and the Danger she was in among such
wicked and unmerciful Associates, or rather Tyrants, hourly threatening he^ with
the loss of her Chastity, if not o^ Life; upon this she looked on me with Eyes
expressing her inward Languishment and Sorrow; then taking me by the Hand, and
often whispering me to sit down by her, on a Bench of Earth, covered with dry
Turff, letting fall some Tears, she said, Ah, Stranger! may I trust thee with
the Secrets of my Grief? Is there any Fidelity to be found in such a Place of
Horror, where I see my self surrounded with nothing but my mortal Enemies?
Could I believe thou would lock up my Woes in silence, and any way befriend
me, I would most willingly do it. These Expressions concluding with a Sigh, I
perceived she took me to be one of the Gang. But I presently undeceived her, by
declaring how I fell into their Hands, and how earnestly I desired to be rid of
their Company. This made her a little clearup, and the Clouds of Sorrow that
eclipsed her Beauty, began to pass away, and leave the Heaven of her lovely
Face in a kind of Serenity; when making me swear to Secrecy, she thus began:

I am called (said she) Lucindar, a Native of Pavia, though now my Father, a
rich Merchant, lives at Naples, on the Point of the Port; his Name Paulus
Urbinus, of no mean Family in this Country, when I was Fourteen Years of Age,
going to be a Spectator of some Justs, and other Pastimes ordained in Honor
and for the Entertainment of our Viceroy on his Wedding Day, being married to
the Beautiful Alfrida Mendoza, Daughter to the Great Duke of Tuscany, I cast my
Eyes, among the rest, on one of the Youths that maintained those Justs, whose
Courage and Bravery surpassed all the rest, overthrowing all that came before
him, Horse and Man tumbling and rouling on the Ground together confusedly
wherever he directed his Lance, so that the Shouts and Applause of the Field
were all on his Side, till at last none durst any more encounter him. Upon
which, he retired out of the Lists, to the side of the Stage, where my self,
and a great many Ladies of Quality, were seated, as Spectators; and taking off
his Silver Helmet, flowing with a Plume of White Feathers, he, in a courteous
manner, bowed himself to the Bow of his Saddle. I no sooner beheld his lovely
Face, and he, as I perceived, had accidentally singl'd me out, and fixed his
Eyes on mine, but we gazed one at another, without either of us being able, for
a good while, to observe any other Objects: I must confess, with Blushes, that
I was so smitten at that first Sight, that I am ashamed of my Weakness, and beg
Pardon of my Sex, that I could resist the powerful Arrows of the God of Love no
longer: I struggled, indeed, against my Passion, and called in my Reason to my
Assistance, but all would not do. He was likewise as restless and uneasy as my
self; and giving his Armor to his Page, appeared yet more Gallant and Charming
in his Coat, embroidered over with Golden Lillies, and Silver Stars; he left
not sight of me, till (...) To be brief, we met often, and his Merits
commanding my Love, I delayed not to give him all the Assurance of my Love and
Affection he required; which never extended the Bounds of Modesty. I found him
to be a Younger Brother to a Noble Family in Corduba in Spain, and gave him
leave to make known to my Father the Pretensions he made to me: but he being of
a covetous Temper, and designing to match me to one Richer, and well settled in
the City of Naples, received his Proposals so coldly, that utterly despairing
to gain his Consent, I resolved for once to be disobedient, which Fear has
brought this Punishment upon me, promising to meet him one Evening in the
Grove, and wholly resign my self to his Care, and the Conduct of his Love. As I
was passing a Road about Two Fields from it, I was surprised by Four Horsemen
with Vizors on, one of them alighting, set me up by Force before another of
them, and stopping my Mouth to stop the Cries I began to make, brought me to
this accursed Place, but by what Ways I know not; for through the Fright I fell
in a swoon, out of which I recovered not, till safe housed. What the brave
Lysander's Thoughts are for my Absence, and unwillingly disappointing him, or
how great the Grief of my Parents for my Absence, I know not; but sure I am
their Tears and Sorrows mingled in one Channel, cannot exceed mine, who am, to
add more Affliction, persecuted here by a Love I abhor.

She ended here, and a Shower of precious Drops, like young Diamonds in their
Infant Dew, fell from her fair Eyes; which made mine overflow for Company. I,
as melancholy as I was my self, comforted her in the best manner I could,
promising presently to put in practice at the hazard of my Life, something that
might contribute to hers, as well as my own Deliverance.

Pitying such Innocence and Beauty, I
The utmost of my Skill resolved to try,
Eith^r to set her Free, or in attempting, dye.
CHAP. XII.
How, after having considered many ways to escape, he mounted the Smoak-Loft,
or Chimney, cut in the Rock; where hiding himself to escape in the night, by
the sudden laying on of Fire, he was almost scorched to Death; and what means
he used to prevent it; the Thieves Opinions thereupon. How he got free, and
escaped a Party of Thieves, by falling into a Quarry, and finding Lysander the
Fair Stranger's Love, after he had heard his Lamentation, he discovered the
joyful News to him, etc.

NIght now approaching, our wicked Masters began to flock home in small
Parties, few of them empty-handed, and many Discourses passed between them of
the Business of that day, and what they designed the next; but I little minded
the Particulars, by reason I had more weighty Matters, viz. to consider my
Escape. I had observed the Door to be narrowly watched and guarded by two Grim
Fellows, in the nature of Porters; I thought sometimes to bride them; for I had
still some Gold in the Collar of my Shirt: but thinking if they should take my
Money, they might however deliver me up to the Tormentors; for I took them to
be People of no Faith nor Conscience, and then I should not only be narrowly
watched, but my Condition much worse. At last I cast my Eye upon the little
Smoak-Loft, which was a Place cut through the Rock, among a great many thick
Trees, and it then strongly came into my mind, that that was the way allotted by
Providence for me to escape out of the Clutches of these Wicked Ones; and so
bent I was upon a Trial, that I was impatient till I had put it in practice. I
made my Eyes very diligent Sentinels to observe when every Bodies back was
turned on me, and sneaking into the corner, soon by the help of one of the
Crutches, or forked Sticks, by whose help the Spits were turned, ascended, as
by a Ladder, till I was out of sight: I found then a hollow Cavity made by the
mouldering away of the Rock, through the Heat of the Fire, and in this I stood
up like an Image in a Cell or Shrine, to consider how I might in the surest
manner take my next ascending Steps, for fear of falling or prevent Discovery,
by tumbling down the loose Stones, I tried diverse that were within reach to
find their fastness, the Earth being mouldered away between many of them, so
that they hung by Geometry, like the Ruins of an old Town long since
demolished by War: whilst I was doing this, the day having been somewhat rainy,
a great Bundle of Wood was thrown on under me, to dry my New Masters, which
first sent up a terrible Smoke, which in a manner turned me into Bacon: but
that, though very troublesome, was not so intolerable as the Heat that
seconded it, when the Fuel began to blaze. In this miserable taking I knew not
well what to do, fearing, as the Flame ascended, I should now be sacrificed to
Molock; sometimes I thought to descend, and put off my being there with a
Pretense I only did it in a Frollick; but knowing among such Villains I should
gain little Credit as to being believed, whatever specious Pretenses I
suggested to palliate my intended Escape, and therefore upon second thoughts, I
resolved to stand it, though I suffered Martyrdom.

I bethought my self in such a Conflagration, an Engine was necessary, and
therefore pulled the little Spout I had, out of my Breeches, and as I saw
opportunity, played it as long as the Water in the Cistern would supply it,
which somewhat lowered the proud Curls of the aspiring Flame: I know not
whether they perceived it or no, but imagined they did, 'For (says one of them)
it rains very terribly abroad, and our Companions will be wringing wret when
they arrive:' yet construing it to the best, I concluded in wet Weather part of
the Showers were wont to descend there: but now my Cistern being dry, the Flame
got head again, and put me into new Perplexities; I then begun to beat, and
blow down the Smoke with my Hands and Breath, insomuch that it clouded their
Cave, and made them remove further; when to my great satisfaction I heard one
say, 'Take off the Fire, the Wind is turned to the South, I perceive by the
smoking of the Chimney, or we shall be smothered.

The unconsumed Fuel and Brandsends, were hereupon immediately taken off and
raked away, so that my firey Trial by this means was over; and now all Sooty
and Smoak-dryed, having taken a little Breath, I attempted my climbing
business, and soon got to the top, so that I could peep into the open Air: But
here another Difficulty startled me; for though I could get my Head out, my
Shoulders would not follow: I however pushed hard forward with all my Strength;
but finding I was like the Fellow in the little end of the Horn, I knew not
what to think of it: I trembled for fear, and wept for anger, and was almost at
my Wits end to be so near a happy Deliverance, and yet not procure it, but
return into worse Misery then ever; therefore, Sampson-like, redoubling my
Strength, by a happy Providence the Stones that obstructed me, tumbled away,
and out I leaped with more Joy than Drake when he first discovered the Spanish
Plate-Fleet.

Being now at Liberty, though in a a Place of horrid Shade and Gloomyness, (the
Escape from one Danger, as is usual, made the other less terrible) I crept
through the quilts of Bushes and Briars, without accusing them for their sharp
Incivilities of scratching and renting my Flesh and Garments, till I supposed I
was got about Two Furlongs; and there I ventured, quite tired and out of
breath, to rest me a while, when immediately my ears were saluted with the
barking of Foxes and the howling of Wolves, so that I fancied now I was in the
case of Aesop's Heart, who flying his cruel Hunters, fell into the Mouth of the
mercyless Lion, by unadvised entering his Cave for shelter. I resolved however,
since I had thus far proceeded, to make the best of my way; and so pushing
forward, within Two Hours after, I came into a narrow way that descended on the
other side of the Mountain, which I descended with so much precipitation, that
not minding my Steps, I tumbled into a deep Pit, and with the Fall much bruised
my self: But I know not whether I may call this a Misfortune or a Providence;
for whilst I lay groaning and struggling to get on my Legs, I heard a great
number of Horsemen pass by me, which by their discourse of Booty and Plunder, I
concluded to be some of our Out-Party returning to their Den. This,
notwithstanding the Pain I felt, made me lie as still as a Mouse in a Cheese,
till I heard all quiet; then I took the boldness, by the assistance of rugged
Stones sticking out of the sides of the Pit, to get on upper Ground once more,
blessing my Stars that I had, by this unexpected Accident, escaped falling into
their Hands; and so trudging on, as Day began to break, I entered upon very fair
and pleasant Fields, and had the prospect of some little Villages at a
distance, which put more Life and Spirit into me. Toward the nearest of these
I made as fast as my tired Legs would carry me, in hopes of some Refreshment;
but by the way ascending a little Hill, I perceived on my Right Hand, under a
little Tuft of Trees, a Cave, and in the Door of it a very comely Person
sitting very Melancholy; his Thoughts were so employed, that his Eyes were not
at leisure to mind my Approach till I was pretty near him. I at first knew not
what to think of it; fear made me suggest this might be another of the
Banditti's Dens, which made me edge out of the way, as much as I could, for a
large River that run on my Left Hand; at last I heard him sigh aloud and cry
out:

O unfortunate Lysander! thus to be forsaken by my visible Divinity, the
fairest, and as I concluded, the most virtuous and constant Creature that ever
Nature made! Who could have suspected breach of Promise from a Mouth that I
always before believed spoke Oracles, and that nothing but Verity could proceed
from those Ruby Lips! But what should be the Occasion of this new Change or
Dislike I know not. The most beautiful Lucindar is fled from her Lysander, who
adored her next to that Deity who governs the World, and all humane Affairs;
and what is more intolerable and tormenting to my distracted Mind, perhaps she
is fled into the Arms of some sordid Wretch who knows not how to prize and
esteem so rare and valuable a Jewel. But why, (continued he, fetching another
deep Sigh) since she flies from me with such Neglect and Disdain, and bears
with her my Heart as a Trophy of her Spoil, should I not, after such a Loss and
Disgrace disdain to live? Death after such a Loss is the only welcome Mistress
that can ease the disturbed Passions of Mind. Welcome then (said he, starting
up in a furious Action and drawing his Sword) art thou to me. And here he had
died, had I not stepped in and entreated him to live; for that I had so welcome a
Reprieve for him, that after he knew from whom I came, he would not desire to
dye.

My sudden Intrusion made him frown, and cast an angry Scarlet over his Face,
which gave him so terrible an Aspect. though otherwise very comely, that I
could scarce look on him with steadfast Eyes. He seeing me stand mute and in
amaze, broke silence, Who ever thou art, (said he) young Stripling, thou
deservest the death thou would preserve me from, for presiming to add more
Tortures in desiring me to retain a loathed Life, than a Thousand Deaths can
give me. -- Seeing him recollected, and resolved to perish by his own hand, I
found it now no time to dally; but said, Sir, I beg your Pardon for my
Intrusion; but praised be Heaven, I hope its seasonableness was directed by a
Hand of Providence. Did not you (continued I) name Lucindar -- I did (said he,
with up-lifted Hands and Eyes) I named the Fair but False Lucindar; and
thereupon some Tears, inspite of all his Courage, trickled down his manly
Cheeks: She lives (said I) lives for Lysander if you be he. At this starting to
me, he claspt me in his Arms so hard; as if in a Convulsive Fit, crying out, O
my good Angel, speak those blessed Words again; let those blessed Sounds o'er-joy
my Ears and Heart; does Lucindar live, and live for me? She does (said I:) and
thereupon told him all she had told me in the Cave; but in the telling, I
perceived him so transported, that he was ready to sink under the Excess of
Joy, which quite overbore all the Hazards and Dangers of recovering her; his
Eyes, by Intermissions, sparkling Fire of Rage, and Tongue Threats of Revenge
against he Injurers: then he clapped a Ruby Ring on my Finger, gave me Gold, drew
his Horse out of the Cave where he had stood undiscovered, made me mount behind
him, and with a Whirl-wind's speed, posted to Naples, by well known ways, to
engage his Friends and all the Power he could make, for the speedy rescuing his
adored Mistress from those rude Villains Hands; and the more eager he was in
it, when I rold him what Danger she was in of being forced to the lawless Lust
of the cruel Captain of those Thieves; taking in this, the same Measures I
intended, resolving, for the Injury they had done me, in separating me from my
Master, and the scurvy Usage they showed me afterward, to bring those upon
them, that should drive out this pernicious Nest of Hornets with Sword and Fire:

That those who plagued the World might justly feel,
For bloody Injuries, Revenging Steel.
CHAP. XIII.
How he conducts Lysander at the Head of a Company of Armed Men, to the
dreadful Cave in the Rock. Of the dreadful Battle fought between them; in
which the Banditti were utterly destroyed; with an Account of the valorous
Exploits of Lysander; his Rescuing the fair Lucindar, and being Married to her
at Naples.

BEing come to the City of Naples about Noon, the Noble Lysander immediately
went to the Viceroy's Palace, who governs there for the King of Spain, and
making himself known to him, told him the Condition of his Distress, imploring
immediately to be assisted with a convenient Number of Armed Men, as might
utterly root out those Enemies to the Government, and all the civilized Part of
Humane Society. To this he hearkened with much Patience and Concern for the
public Good. Then I was called, and taken into strict Examination, the better
to discern whether my Report was true or feigned: I told them all the
Circumstances attending my first falling into the Hands of those Thieves, and
Usage to the Time of my Escape, and luckily for the injured Lysander, declaring
each particular with such Vehemence and innocent Expressions, that I gained
Belief. The next thing demanded of me was, whether I could discover the Place
of their Abode: this indeed put me somewhat to a stand, yet I recollecting my
self, told them I believed I could, or give a very near guess at it, which with
little search might be rectified. Hereupon Two Hundred Men well appointed with
Swords and Fire Arms, were ordered to be in a readiness, and the impatient
Lysander joined to them as many of his Friends as the little time would give
him opportunity to do. We took our March as secretly as might be, without the
Beat of Drum or any Martial Instruments of Music; so that by break of Day, I
had guided them to the Foot of the Mountain, and it so luckily happened, that
their Captain, and the greatest part of them were then together, it being an
appointed Day for dividing the Booties they had taken: However, some of their
Out-Scouts discovered us, and gave the Alarm. Upon which, these daring Fellows
by blowing a Horn, gave the Signal to Arms, and came out and faced our Troops;
long it was not, ever a terrible firing on both sides ensued, and many Men
mingled with Horses, lay weltring in their blood. Lysander enraged or inspired
with Love and Fury, broke through the thickest of them, charging through, or
beating down all that came before him, in such a dreadful manner, that they
began to give ground, though they fought like Lions, as knowing this to be
their last Effort: their Captain stormed and bann'd the Skies at a dismal rate;
yet finding himself over-matched, in the midst of War and Fury, he forgot not
his Love toward the Fair Lucindar, and ordered some that nearly attended him
to fetch her out of the Cave, that if possible he might escape with that
precious Prize at least: But immortal Powers, how infinitely did Rage transport
Lysander, when he saw his adored Mistress in the hands of those Men, who
endeavored to carry her away in spite of her Cries and Resistance, and
delivering her into the Arms of their Captain, who was retired a little out of
the Files of War, well Armed and Mounted, to receive and bear her off.
Certainly all the Words in the World are not sufficient to represent his Fury;
he was so animated by that sight, that all their Forces were not able to resist
him; he flew most impetuously on them, and turning toward him that with
outstretched. Hands was ready to receive her, he brought down his Sword so
forcibly on his Arms, that they fell both together from his Body to the Ground:
His Companions seeing him receive that Stroke, and fearing such another,
quitted her; but scarce had they disburthened themselves of that glorious
Weight, and he thereby freed from the fear of wounding her by a random Stroke,
but with a reverse Blow he took off another's Head, and made it roll, Cask and
all, on the bloody Ground, and after this Execution, breaking in among the rest
that stood wavering and consulting of Flight, like a Tempest he overthrew them
in Heaps; so that from retreating, they betook themselves to open Flight, and
being hotly pursued, they entered into a Marsh, full of dried Reeds, by known
ways, about a quarter of a mile from the Mountain; which being encompassed and
fired on every side, most of them were burnt or drowned, in attempting to swim
over a River that bordered on it, and fed it with Water by several Sluices. The
Fight being over, and the Pursuit ended, we returned to the Spoils, which upon
search of their Cave, we found to be very great, consisting of Gold and Silver
Vessels, Silks, and diverse Merchandice; for this was the general Storehouse to
which they brought such things as they got by Plunder; and in more curious
searching, we found the Female Housekeeper, who for fear, hid her self in a
Well, dangling as near the Water as she durst venture in a Bucket; we drew
(...) up, and I prevented her further Fears by interceeding for her: whereupon
she lead us to some not yet discovered Apartments, where we found more
Treasure, and delivered diverse miserable Captives of either Sex, almost starved
and famished to death, and being as^ured by her, there was nothing more in ^he
Place than what we had seen, we marched off with the Trophies and Spoils of
Victory and Revenge.

It is impossible for me to express the ^oy and Satisfaction the Two Lovers
con^eived at their so unexpected Meeting; their Embraces spoke the Transports
of their Souls in a Dialect above the Power of Rhetoric, or Oratory, to
explain. ^n fine, having ridded the Country so ^uccessfully of this Plague that
had so ^ong infested it, we returned to the City through the thronging Crowds
of the ^houting People; and the Father of the Fair Lucinda understanding the
Misfortune of his Daughter, and the Merit of her Renowned Deliverer, upon the
Vice^oy's Recommendation, consented to the Marriage, which was celebrated with
great Joy and Triumph, and I was ca^essed and highly rewarded for my seasonable
Discovery.

Here good Success attends me; but the next
Shows me out-trick'd, defeated, robbed and vexed;
And, more than ever, leaves Ragoue perplexed.
CHAP. XIV.
How traveling toward Rome, and observing various Matters in his way. He is
imposed on in his Inn by a company of Bravo's, and their Trulls. How in the
Night, thinking all safe, he hears a Cry of Thieves and Murder in his Room: Is
whipped, Robbed, and has other roguish Tricks put upon him, etc.

I Lived some time happily in the City of Naples, and loath was Lysander to
part with me: but being of a Rambling Genius, and now I was abroad, desirous to
Travel, and see more of the World, I beggd Leave to depart in seeking new
Adventures, and in hopes of better Luck than had before befell me: Lysander at
my Departure bestowed a Purse of Gold on me, and the fair Lucindar, a very rich
Jewel; and with much Regret they dismissed me.

Leaving this City, and having heard how famous Rome was for its Antiquity, and
its present Grandeur, I resolved to Travel thither. But hearing that the Ways
that lead to it, by reason of the great resort of People, and Booties to be met
withal, were pestered with Thieves and Pillagers, I was resolved to trudge it
partly on Foot, and partly by the Waggon-Coaches, which they call their
Sieges-Volants, as I found opportunity to meet with in Inns, or on the Road,
when most wearied: And so providing me a Suit of ordinary Clothes, the less to
be suspected, I set out on Monday in the Morning, having taken Notes of
Directions for my nearest Cut; and in my Passage observed the Houses of many
noble Families stand tottering, decayed, and un-inhabited, by reason their
Owners Extravagancy had reduced them to that Poverty they were not able to
maintain them. When Evening came on, I went to a pretty handsome Village, and
enquired for a Lodging, finding by the resort in an Inn there, that I should
not miss of some considerable Entertainment. So that being admitted a Tennant
at Will, I walked about till Suppertime.

In the mean while, the Innkeeper enquired my Name, saying it was the custom
of the Place that he might give the better Account of his Guest, though
afterward, to my cost, I found it was to another purpose: For no sooner was I
sat down, and had called for a Can of Florence Wine, and the Servants not
presently answering, Two Bravo's and a Trull came and placed themselves at the
same Table, and bringing Wine with them, drank to me. They had seen me before,
it seems, pull out some Money, as cautious as I was to conceal it, and so
concluded the Reckoning safe enough. I continued however still to call the
Servant; but with a great many Complements they assured me they were all my
Servants: As we (continued they) shall testify by our Endeavors to oblige
you. And thereupon cried, Ho! Master of the House, make this Gentleman welcome:
Set open your Pantry-door and Cupboards, and we'll see you well paid. Then one
of them fixing his Eyes more intent on me, leaped over the Table to Embrace me,
saying, O Monsieur Ragoue! who would have thought to have seen you here! Its
Ten Years since I had the Honor to pay my Respects to you. He spoke this in
French, as knowing by my Tone I was of that Nation: And whilst, whether I could
call him to mind or not, (for it came not into my Memory that I had ever seen
him in my Life) he passionately cried out, O Wretch that I am, I now see I am
much altered since you have forgot me. He being here nonplust how to go on, up
comes the other, and with as great seeming Admiration, said to his Companion,
Is this that Gentleman's Son, whose worthy Deeds in Feats of Arms you have so
often extolled to the Skies? Surely we are very happy we have met thus
accidentally with him: He Is grown pretty tall, God bless him.

This kind of Discourse had almost confounded me; for by it, one would have
gone near to have thought, they had been born in the same House and bred up
with me; yet I very seriously assured them, I could not remember I had ever
seen any of them in my Life. No! (said they, as struck with Admiration) that is
very strange as we should be altered so much in so little a time. Then I began
to ask them some Questions which I was certain they could not positively
answer: So that their Trull fearing they would be gravelled, dashed them aside
with saying, I see the Gentleman has forgot you; therefore lay this Discourse
aside till another time, since Supper is just entering on the Table. She had no
sooner said so, but up they started, and began to place the Chairs, straining
Complements with me to sit at the upper end, which all my Rhetoric and
Refusals could not avoid.

By this time the Table being covered with Dishes of a kind of strange Variety,
though but very little Meat in them. They fell on with Stomachs like Famine it
self; and when they (for though I was hungry I could eat little for gazing on
such Gormondizers) had almost de^ured all, in came Three more of the same
Tribe, with each of them a lean shrivel'd Serving-Man, as I thought them, at
their Tails. These taking Acquaintance with the Bravo's and their Mort, they
invited them to sit down and thundered for more Provision, which was as quickly
brought up; and so they fell on afresh, and my Host forgot not to score it: For
when the Fury of the Business was over, we found we had, as my Host was pleased
to score it, Five Chequins of Gold, amounting to Twenty French Crowns to pay.
At this they stared on each other, and held a profound silence, whilst I was
fumbling in my Pocket, in Expectation of the Birth of Mountains; but when they
saw I only brought forth a Mouse, viz. as much as came to my share, one of them
started up, and protested I should be excused for my Father's Sake. But I not
willing to be beholding, as indeed they never intended I should, to such
Companions, least for this Civility they should have further ends on me,
pressed them to accept my Dividend, saying, If they thought convenient, I would
pay more at last. Their Trull taking the Wink, said, Come, come, what need all
this ado! Let the Gentleman, if he so pleases, present us with this small
Treat, and do you give him a larger at his taking his Farewell in the morning. I
liked not this Proposal; so that at last we agreed, I and the two first
Bravo's, to throw Dice to end the Controversy, which of us should pay the
whole shot; you may be sure it fell to my share; for they so managed their
Business, that putting the Change upon me, the Dice they threw with, run all
Fives and Sixes, and mine Fives and Fours; which I perceiving, and going to
detect it, their Mort snatched them up, and by the Art of Hocus Pocus changed
them into Regular ones; so that I had the Voice of the whole Board against me,
insomuch that I was condemned to pay the Reckoning, though the Dissembling
Villains vowed and protested they had rather it had fallen to either of their
Lots to have the honor of treating me, with large Promises, what great Things
they would do the next Morning to make me amends. I dissembled my Discontent as
well as I could; and they perceiving I would not engage in Gaming, but
counterfeiting Drowsiness, and desirous to be a Bed, the Company broke up, and
I was showed to my Lodging. I had, as I thought, a Chamber to my self, but was
fatally mistaken; for what I took for a Wall was only a Curtain that parted it.

Before I went to Bed, I took care to barrocade the Door with old Trunks,
Stools, and Chairs, but never minded what a weak Back I had to my Appartment:
And so going to Bed as soon as my Two Inches of Candle were burnt out, I fell
asleep; but was soon awaked with a capering up and down the Room, and an
Outcry of Murder and Thieves. Upon this, I leaped out of the Bed, and run to
the Door to see whether it was fast or not; and finding nothing removed, I
wondered how the noise should be in my Room, unless the Place was Enchanted: But
as I was about to remove the Barrocades to run and raise the House, I found my
self incircl'd with a Horse-whip, which at every Lash I thought had cut me in
two, and made me roar out as loud as the other had done. And indeed I had
greater Cause; for I since concluded theirs was only in Jest, and mine
downright Earnest; for they were worse than Bridewell strokes, still circling
my Waist and Shoulders. I flew to my Bed thinking to get under the Clothes for
a Refuge, but found they were taken away; so that I had no other shelter than
to creep under it. In the mean while, some body had dung'd just in the middle
of my Couch, and laid the Clothes on again: And by this time the Innkeeper,
the better to color the business, came thundering at the Door, demanding what
the cause was of Clamor at such an unseasonable time of Night. Whereupon I
heard one or Two leap out at the Window into a Back-Yard, and the noise of the
Whip ceased: And by this time my Host had jumbled open the Door, or unlocked it
with another Key, and was entered with a light, bringing his Ostler and Tapster
at his Heels; and running hastily forward, being a huge Two-Handed Fellow, he
beat me over and over. I thought now they were come to show me the Italian
Trick which I had heard of in my own Country, viz. To circumcise my Jugulars
with a Rasor, or pink my Jacket with a Poniard; which put me into a greater
Fear than before: after having rolled about with me a little while, and
pretending to know by my voice who it was, he kindly raised me up, and begged
my Pardon; saying, He took me for one of the Thieves. But I afterward
understood the Cause of this pretended Error was to give these Hell Hounds
opportunity to see whether the others had made clear Work with my Pockets, or
to take the Gleanings. I took this Apology however, in good part, as knowing
not how to help it: he then took me by the hand, and lead me under the Curtain
Partition, where I unexpectedly found Two Beds, in one of them was one of the
Bravo's and his Mort, whom he called his Wife; and in the the other the other who
had supped with me: they lamentably complained of the Stripes they had
received. The Devil take the Rogues (said they) they have flayed our Skins. I
had like (said the first that opened his Mouth) to have catched one of them; he
narrowly slipped through my hands, but I reached his Buttocks with the point of my
Poniard as he was leaping out at the Window, and gave him a Mark for his
Roguery. Upon this, the Host and his Men promising to sit up and watch the
remainder of the Night, weary and much out of order, I got me again to Bed, and
presently fell asleep, without perceiving the Bedfellow I had gotten. My sleep
was not however so sound, but I often turned from one side to another, insomuch
that when I awaked I found my self anointed all over with Pilgrims Salve.

As soon as day appeared, they all came to my Bedside to utter their mutual,
though dissembled Complaints; I kept close, and answered them but little,
desiring to lie longer, for I had but little sleep that night: they knew as
well as I the cause of my Delay, and therefore out of Courtesy, as they said,
began to move the Bed-Cloaths to cover me better; which so scented the Chamber
that they were forced to hold their Noses, and retire at some distance. The
Host, who knew what was done, immediately came and desired me to rise, for that
some Gentlemen who had traveled all night, were come in weary, and desired to
lie down to refresh themselves a while. I knew not well what Excuse to make,
but feigned to swoon away; whereupon they raised me up, and bent my Fingers so
hard, under pretense of recovering them, that they pulled two of them out of
Joint: at last I perceived all was discovered, and it could be no longer hid,
out I jumpt, and stunk 'em to an awful Distance. My Host perceiving how finely
the Sheets were gilded, though I made many Excuses, began to grumble like a Dog
between two Doors, swearing he would have satisfaction for the Abuse of his
Linen: but the Two Bravo's interceeding on my behalf, that such a Misfortune,
in such Frights, might happen to the best of Gentlemen, he seemed to be
pacified, and ordered me a Tub of Water to sweeten my self in, after I had for
some time lain battling in my Dung; which being placed under the Pump, they
pumpt so fast on me, that I was almost stifled. This put me in mind how I had
served my Old Master, who was here in some measure revenged. But oh! the
miserablest Part was yet behind; when I came to look for my Clothes, they were
vanished, together with all my Moneys, etc. at this, I cried out with a
lamentable Voice, I was undone, I had lost Four hundred Crowns in Gold, besides
Rings and Jewels of as great a value. At this they began to stare as if they
scarcely gave credit to what I said: but I continuing to affirm it, they swore
in a seeming great Rage they would find out the Rogues though they went to a
Conjurer; and so left me in a naked Condition, to the mercy of my Host, I never
seeing them more; though I believe they needed not have consulted the Devil to
know who had robbed me, no more than they might have doubted going to him
themselves, when they dyed.

But by these Tricks perhaps I may gain Wit,
TO enable me, Rogues in their kind to fit;
He never can Bite well, that was never Bit.
Ragoue go on then, in thy swift Career,
And make thy Roguery imminent appear,
That all may wonder, when thy Pranks they hear.
Being thus gulled and cheated of all I had, but those Pistoles I sowed up in
the Collar of my Shirt, I begged to have an old Frock to cover me, which I
could not obtain, till they see I had ripped out some Treasure: at which sight my
Host grinn'd, and applauded my Policy, in making some Reserve in time of
Danger; though I doubt not but at the same time he wished his Comrogues had
stripped me to the Skin, that I might have no place suspected to hide a Silver
spangle in: For it is past all peradventure, but he came in for the largest
Snack, and lived mostly by the practice of such Vermin; but being in a strange
Place, unskilled in the Laws of the Country, and not knowing how to remedy my
self, I was obliged to be silent, and in haste to be gone cut of so wicked a
House; wherefore sending for a Tailor, he fitted me with some second-hand
Clothes, at a moderate Rate; so having returned the Frock, and disposed of a
Crown for a double-dyed Hat, not worth Twelve pence, with some small Expenses
to the House, I departed with a heavy Heart: when having got some Miles
distant, down I sat me by a Wood-side, to bemoan my Misfortunes; but finding
no boot to stay there, up I got, and trudged on my intended Design:

For being made Fortune's Tennis-Ball, I thought
My Way lay best, where most was to be got
CHAP. XV.
How going to a Gentleman's House, he undertook to lie in a Room where a
dreadful Ghost was fancied to appear; and how personating it himself, he
frighted a whole Table of Gamesters away, and swept up the Stakes they left
behind for haste, with which he replenished his Empty Pockets.

REsolved, if I could help it, to lie no more in a Roguish Inn, when Day was
near spent, I made up to a very fine ancient Building; where at some Distance
my Ears were saluted with Music, and merry Songs; which made me hope for good
Entertainmente (it being in those Countries a sign of good Housekeeping) I
therefore set a good Face on it, and went to the door, demanding if the Master
of the House was within: he thereupon came, as being within hearing, and asked,
What I would have? I told him being a Stranger in those Parts, and having been
ill used upon taking up Quarters in Public Houses, I would entreat him to
spare me a Lodging that Night. He answered me mighty civilly, but said, He
feared he could not; for it being the Anniversary of his Wedding Day, he had
diverse Friends there, and knew not but most of 'em might stay all night. I
continued to press my Suit, and told him some of my Misfortunes Seeing me a
likely Young Man, he told me he had one Room he knew no body would lie in,
which he could well spare; but if I accepted that, I might perhaps fall into
greater Misfortune than I had yet done, for that it was nightly haunted with a
Spirit, ever since his Grandfather's Barber, for Love of a Coy Chambermaid,
had cut his Throat in it, and that the Spirit appeared at usual times with
Razor in one hand, a Basin and Light in the other; crying in hoarse Tone, Will
you be shaved? and some that we have ventured, unknown to them, to lie there,
have been for refusing to suffer him to shave them, thrown violently out of
their Beds, and bruised at a strange rate.

I heard very attentively this Relation, but having always a strong Fancy that
these Reports of Apparitions were only Delusions and the Fancies of Whimsical
Brains, or Men in Drink; I with much obliging Language told him, That if he
pleased, I would accept of his Proffer, notwithstanding the dreadful Report he
had made, and knew not, but by an Art I had learned, I might lay this poor
disturbed Ghost to rest; that he should be confined to the Lower Shades, and
wander about the World no more. At this he appeared altogether yielding,
inviting me in, and caused me, after we had discoursed a little whence I came,
and whither I was going, to enter the Parlour, and make merry with the rest of
the Company; and at Supper-time told them for what I came thither, and what I
had undertaken. They all wondered that I durst venture upon it; some dissuaded
me from it, as a thing too full of Presumption, and Danger: some again laughed
in their Sleeves to think what sport they should have in the Relation of this
Adventure next morning; but they had little Cause, as it fell out, though they
did so. Supper ended, they adjourned into a large old fashioned Hall, and fell
to Cards and Dice.

Seeing them set in, and the Stakes thrown down briskly, a merry Crotchet came
in my Head, and retiring, desired one of the Servants, for that I was weary
with long Travel, to show me up to my appointed Lodging: the Fellow, though a
Lusty Lubber, gave me a Candle, but durst venture no further than the
Stairfoot, and there wishing me a Goodnight, stood listening a little, and
then departed: I shut the Door, and expected the frightfull Gobling, but he
gave me none of his Company: wherefore least he should be missing in the
Family, I resolved to personate him. Thus concluding, I rubbed my Face over
with the White of the Wall, to make me represent a Ghost the more exactly; then
with one of my Garters tying a Sheet with a Knot to place just upon my Head
like a Shroud, I stripped me to my Shirt and Drawers, and laid my Clothes
decently on the Bed, the sooner to whip in after this Exploit: a Razor I had in
my Pocket, and to make it look more terrible, I cut my Finger, and bloodied it
over; but being at a Loss for a Basin, I at last concluded the Pewter
Chamber Pot, by the glimmering of Candles, and in a Fright, might be taken for
it, as well. In this Posture I waited, till I heard by their noise and rattling
of Money, the Wine was got into their Crowns; then softly descending in the
same Posture as the other had been described to appear, I found them so busy
at their Game, that I was in a manner at their backs, when one of the Servants
that attended, looking up, and spying me, started ten Paces back, crying out,
Oh! the Ghost! the Ghost! and so run out, stumbling headlong over the
Threshold; I immediately extending my Piss-pot, and bloody Razor, seconded him
with crying out in a hoarse and dreadful Tone, Will you be shaved? upon this,
they all started up without any regard to their Money that lay on the Table,
and tumbled over each other for have, as if they had bid the Devil take the
hindmost; and happy was he that could tread over another to get before him. I
still pursued them in the same dreadful Tone, till I had quite cleared the
Hall and adjacent Rooms of every Soul of them; some got into the Cellars,
others into the Stables and Outhouses, sculking and hiding themselves; Fear
charming many of them in those Places as in enchanted Castles, till Daylight
appeared, and banished the Bugbears of nightly Fancy.

I upon this, returned to the Deserted Spoil, and pretty well lined my Pockets,
taking this as a Providence to make up in some part, my Loss at the Inn, and so
returned to Bed as softly as could be, and putting out my Candle, I soon
perceived how this Error came: there was an old doated Post in the Room, that
looked whitish, or shining, in the Dark, and the Wind blowing then a Penthouse
of thin Boards just over the Window, swaying too and fro, made such a kind of a
noise, as seemed to imitate Shave; and no doubt the Drunkenness, or Fear, of
such as lay there, had improved the dreadful Consequences of it, by leaping out
of Bed, and hitting themselves against the Bed-Posts, or tumbling on the Floar.
The next morning they were not so much vexed that the supposed Goblin had
carried away their Money, as for an ill Report, if I should be murdered; for
they concluded no less, seeing the Razor all bloody: but when they ventured to
call to me at the Stairfoot, and I assured them I was not yet dead, (though in
a faint Voice, for I had cut off some of my Hair, and one side of my Beard to
make it more passable) they rejoiced, and desired me to leave my Purgatory. I
soon descended, and upon their Requests, gave them a very dreadful Relation,
how at first refusing to let him Shave me, he attempted to Cut my Throat; but I
so guarded it with my Hands, that he only cut my Finger, and having done what
they saw, passed away from me, as I thought, down stairs; and returned soon
after in the same Posture, rattling something in or about his Hands, like
Chains. A Pox (says one of them) a plaguey Toad of a Ghost; that was our Money
he stole off the Table then: I have often heard these Goblins discovered hidden
Treasure for the Advantage of others, but never that they coveted it before. It
may be (said the Master of the House, half smiling) some of your Fathers owed
him for Trimming in his Lifetime, and now he came to you for their
Quarteridge. Upon this, they all burst out a laughing: but I somewhat better
pleased them, especially those of the Family, when I told them I heard him
mutter as he passed out at the Casement, that his Time of wandering abroad in
the World was now expired, and this was the last time he should appear;
insomuch that I was invited to stay the next night, to see if he would be as
good as his Word: but fearing when they had better recollected their scattered
Senses, they might see into the Trick I put upon them, they could oblige me to
no more than to take a Breakfast with them: and so being a little liberal to
the Servants, I parted; laughing in my Sleeve to think what such a Frenzy, as a
suggested Fear, though never so groundless, can throw Men's Minds and Wit into.

CHAP. XVI.
How coming to Rome, he fell into the Company of stroling Players, Fiddlers, and
Dancing-Masters; and of a pleasant Adventure that befell; with the downfall of
their Custard Supper. Also another Comical Adventure in the Playhouse, and how
he left them.

AFter a tedious Travel, without meeting with any Adventure worthy of Note, I
came to the Suburbs of the Seven Hill'd City, and thought it best there, for
cheapness and convenience, to take up my Quarters without entering the Gates;
least coming so late a Stranger thither, I might be taken for a Spy, there
being an Army of Frenchmen then at Mantua, and no good Understanding between
the Pope and the Crown of France.

Long I had not enquired of the Women that sold Herbs and Fruit, who had their
little Stalls under the City Wall, but they directed me to a pretty compact
House, though of no largeness, where I found diverse merry Pot-Companions
heating their Noses with good Liquor, till they looked like the lighted Ends of
Charcole: amongst these honest Topers I sat me down. (For indeed the low Rooms
were but few; the greatest part of this Company, I perceived consisted of
Stroling Players, Fiddlers and Dancing-Masters; as by their Catches, throwing
out Fragments of Old Plays, capering and scraping, my Judgment soon informed
me; and as I conjectured, so I found it.) Being very needy, as most of those
kind of Cattle are; they were very sweet upon me, especially when they knew I
was a New-comer: But Experience taught me to be as shye of them as an Alderman
is of a Courtier's Treat, when he suspects it is only a Bait laid to hook him
in for a Sum of Money without a Mortgage. However, we drank about ptetty
briskly, till one of them tipped me the Wink to step aside with him; and what
should it tend to, but to tell me he was just stepping up to Supper, and if I
would go with him, I should be welcome. I knew not well what to think on it;
but Hunger prompting me, we stole as it were from the rest. We were no sooner
got into the Chamber, and our Victuals not presently coming up, but to divert
me the while, he proceeded to act in Gestures and Expressions, some Fragments
of a Tragedy, made upon a Scythian King, who flying through a Forest with his
Queen, was himself, after a stout resistance, seized on, and got under the Feet
of a Bear. It seems he had acted this Part, and just as the Wench was coming up
with a Dish of Custards which he had ordered for his Supper, the Poetic
Rapture took him in the Noddle, and fancying himself in the Bear's Clutches, he
thus, in a passionate and very earnest Tone, besought his Queen to save her
self by flight.

O fly! my Queen, from this devouring Bear;
Let it suffice, he me alone does tear:
O save thy self, the bloody Bear's Jaws fly;
Why should thou, whilst thou may escape him, dye?
O have, be gone; or thy Death too, is nigh.
The Maid being by this time at the stair-head, in a great fright concluded,
that some Bear broke loose, was got into the Chamber a worrying him, and that
it was to her he spoke so eagerly to save her self; least the Beast having made
but half a Supper of him, she should come in for the Second Course to make up
his Meal; and thereupon made but one leap down Stairs; yet tumbling Head over
Heels at the bottom, beat all the Custards in pieces; and lying with her Coats
over her Head, her bare Buttocks and Heels up the stairs, she fancyed the Bear
would now soon have her by the Breech; which made her roar out lamentably for
Help.

Being taken up, all imbrued in, and almost blinded with Custard, and demanded
of how this Disaster came to pass, Oh! (said she) for the Love of God don't
stand asking of Questions, but Arm, Arm, and run up quickly to the poor
Gentleman's rescue, whom a monstrous Bear, come from I know not whence, is now
tearing in pieces, and eating. Upon this, though somewhat startled, they
caught up what Weapons came first to hand, and up stairs they run, rushing in
upon us in a very furious manner, that I knew not what to think should be
meaning of it, till they all cried out in a breath, Where Is this Bear? Where Is
this Bear, that the Maid says was worrying a Man? The Player as he could be
heard, assured them it was only a Mistake of the Maid's, who had heard him
perhaps repeating such a Passage of a Play, and by her fear suggested it a
Reality. This occasioned much Laughter in the House; but we had the least
Cause; for by it we had the bad Luck to lose our Custards, and forced to take
up with a few hard boiled Eggs.

It growing late, I was conducted to my Lodging, and made all fast about me;
remembering how I had before been served, and indeed slept the quietliest that
night, of any I had done since my setting out.

Being up indifferent early in the morning, I took a turn into the spacious
City, and spent the time till Dinner, in viewing its Order and Situation, and
perceived that of Ancient Rome, little but Ruins remained; the City now in
quest consisting of New Foundations, for the greatest part: For the Pope making
the amplest Figure there, they all covet to crowd and build near his Palace;
yet there is several of the Ancient Monuments remaining; as of Pompey's
Theater; Trajan's Statue on Horseback; some Remains of the Capitol, where the
strong Castle of St. Angelo is founded, and many other things I remarked, too
tedious here to be inserted; till wearied in so large a space, and my Stomach
told me it was time to provide for it, home I went, where I found my last
night's Companion Cooking a good Dish of Fish; I desired to put in with him,
and he quickly granted my Request.

Dinner ended, he asked me if I would not go and see their Play that Afternoon.
I told him with all my Heart. But I had better have kept away, for I narrowly
escaped a Mawling. It seems this Play had been Acted before, and very much
disliked; whereupon they had promised this day to present another: but my New
Acquaintance, who was the Composer of it, thinking to keep up his Honor by
retrieving the Disgrace, upon some Alterations, resolved once more to try its
Fortune.

The Curtain being drawn, and the Audience in great Expectation; I, as a
Friend, had liberty to be on the Stage; when the First Scene beginning with a
War, after a Flourish of Trumpets, my Friend advanced, completely Armed, Back,
Breast, and Head, as a General, with a Truncheon in his Head: And well it
happened he was so well fortified; for the People no sooner perceived they were
defeated of their Expectation, but with loud Clamours, not giving him leave to
speak, they sent a Hail-Storm of Cudgels; Brick-bats, Stones, Stools, Benches,
and whatever they could get, or tear up, at the poor General, with such Fury,
that had he not made, as well as my self, who received part of the Blows, a
hasty Retreat, upon the imprudent Advance made too near the Enemies Quarters;
it is ten to one whether he had been brought off alive or not: and nothing could
appease this Popular Fury, which had tore down the House like a Whirlwind, had
it lasted Half an hour longer; but a Restitution of their Money, and a Promise
to so many of them as would enter their Names, to be admitted Gratis to a Play,
the next Evening: and so going home, I paid off my Lodging, and took leave of
my Company, that I might be the better at leisure to stumble on some fortunate
Adventure.

CHAP. XVII.
How he fell into the Company of two beautiful young Courtesans, who took him
for a Mercer. How in hopes of getting Silks of him, he was highly Entertained
at their Lodging; and in a pleasant Arbor enjoyed the Fairest of them. What
after happened on this adventrous Occasion.

I Had heard much of the great Number of Courtesans, kept here to supply the
Lusts of those that could supply them with Money; when having traveled a great
part of the morning in viewing the Churches, Palaces of Princes, and Colleges,
grown weary, I sat me down on a Bench before a Mercer's Shop, when immediately
up came two of them, (as I perceived by their covering their Faces with Hoods
so transparent that they could see and not be seen,) and taking me to belong to
the Shop, demanded whether we had any Silks of the Newest Fashion, I told them
No; but a Caravan was expected in a day or two; and if they pleased to tell me
where I might wait on them, I would bring Patterns of such as was very choice.
This stumbled them a little; but after they had compared Notes together, they
said they knew not the Name of the street, as being New-comers where they
lived; but if I would go with them, they could show me. I knew this was a
Wheedle, yet resolved to venture; for now I writ my self Man, and thereupon
stepping into the Shop to the 'Prentice, as if I had given him charge of the
Business; on the contrary I only asked him for a shamm Name, which he assured
me he knew not, and so came out again to 'Squire my Ladies to their Lodging.

Being at the Door, I would have taken my Leave; but they cried, Nay Sir, but
you shall walk in, and take a Glass of Wine, since you have taken this trouble
upon you: for they now took me for no less than the Master, seeing me as I came
along bowing to some Noblemen and Magistrates we met, as well as wealthy
Citizens, and they in Civility re-saluted me; they showed me into a very
curious Chamber, hung with Tapestry or Wainscot, gilded in the Sashes, and hung
with variety of Pictures: at length we sat down at a Table, and drank
plentifully as to my part, but they only seemingly, as to any purpose: then
came in a Basket of Sweetmeats and Fruits, which being lightly tasted, one of
them called for her Lute, which she had no sooner tuned, but in came skipping a
little Spaniel and a Monkey, dressed in Dancers Habit, and about it they went
so nimbly and exact in their steps and turnings, that I had seen but few
Dancing-Masters who could out-doe them.

By this time the Maid came in, and as I suppose purposely, whispering the
other; she withdrew, and left me with the other, who after some other
Discourse, began to talk very Amorously; and understanding I was a Bachelor,
refrained not to proffer her self as my School-Mistress, to teach me, as she
said, a soft Love-Lesson: I was very willing to learn, but feared I should pay
too dear for it: I knew she expected as much Silk as would make her a Gown at
least, and how to come by it I knew not. At last, by her Persuasions, I
consented to be her faithful Servant, and ruled by her every way. When being a
little hotheaded, that I might not seem to be less than I had proposed my
self, I in a Bravado drew out most of the Money I had got at the Ghost Scuffle:
this new Allurement sweetened her Conceit; and so to pass away the time, we
walked together down a Back-stairs into a very fair Garden, furnished and
curiously set out with the most delicate Trees and Flowers that Italy afforded,
and there in one of Venus's Bowers, a curious Umbrage consecrated to Love, I
enjoyed the delicate Beauties of my Charming Nymph; which I repeated with such
Vigor, that she seemed mightily pleased with my performance: but as I thought
before, the Burden of the Song was hopes of Gain.

After this, she gave me her delicate White Hand, and lead me into a Banqueting
House, where we were saluted with melodious Music, and having been entertained
with all manner of Delights on Free-cost, I took my Leave, promising to send my
Rich Presents. Upon this, away I trudged to the Mercer's, and told him a great
Lady (whose Name I had learned, and who had a House near the Apartment of these
Courtesans) had sent me to desire him to let his Man carry her some of the
Richest Silks his Shop afforded: To which he consented, as knowing her, and to
the Youth gave them in Charge, which was but newly come to him, and therefore
the easier to be imposed on. I lead him through as many By-streets as I could,
to lose his way, and at last fixing my Eyes on a House that had a Through-fare,
in I went, desiring him at the Door to deliver his Cargo, that I might show it
my Lady; but instead of doing that, I made an Excuse to the People, after I
asked for a strange Name, and they had told me no such Person lodged there,
that I found my self mistaken, and desiring to go through the House into the
back-street, I left my young Merchant in the Lurch, to return to his Master,
after long time having expected my Return, with a lamentable Story of Sharpers.
Having thus gotten what I aimed at, away I went to my Mistresses, who received
me very kindly, and there I revelled some Days; but upon a through Search made
throughout the City in all suspected Houses, our Quarters were beat up about
Midnight: I happened upon the Alarm, to peep out, and spy the Officers, and
fearing the Consequence, put on my Clothes, went down, and stood up close
behind the Door, after I had opened it; so that when they rushed in, out I
slipped: but upon search the Silks being found in the House, the two Charming
Venus's, notwithstanding all the Excuses they made, were hurried to Prison, and
soon after as I heard, had Scarlet Laces fixed on their tender white backs by
the Lictor or Public Whipper of the City, and forced over and above to pay a
very dear Rate for their supposed Elemosinary Finery.

CHAP. XVIII.
How he robbed the Offering-Box under the Virgin Mary's Image; and being
discovered, by what Trick he escaped: his Roguery declared a Miracle by the
Cardinal, who before was about to condemn him to the Flames, and he carried in
Procession. How he put a Trick upon a Priest for his Silver Crucifix and left
Rome.

THe fear of Discovery upon this Prank, made me skulk about in the most private
Corners; till finding a Ship in the Tiber, of my own Country, and bound
thither, I so ingratiated my self with the Master, that he suffered me to
embark for a Passage; yet it was some time ever he sailed. In the mean while, I
ventured in search of Adventures; and perceiving the Door of Lateran Church
open, in I went and found the People at High Mass, every one as they entered
casting Money into a Box that stood under the Image of the Virgin Mary, which
made me itch to be fingering it: when taking my Opportunity, with an old
crooked Nail I soon picked the Lock, and crammed as much of the Treasure as I
could into my Pockets: but doing it over-hastily, and dropping some Pieces,
they made such a gingling on the Marble Pavement, that as Ill Luck would have
it, I was discovered, seized, and dragged before Cardinal Cibo; who examining
Witnesses as to the Fact, and finding it plain, exclaimed against me by the
Titles of Rogue, Rascal, Sacrilegious Villain, and Heretic, and was just about
condemning me to the Flames: when falling on my Knees, with up-lifted Hands and
Tears in my Eyes, I begged his Eminency to hear me; which after much storming
he granted, and silence being made, in a piteous Tone I told him, That being a
vile, wicked Wretch, and brought up a Hugonot, coming to this City in great
Distress and Poverty, I had made my Prayers before the Image of the Blessed
Virgin to relieve me in my hard Necessity; and in consideration of that, I
would turn Roman Catholic, and ever be her Votary; when all on a sudden, the
Box under her Image flew open, and she pointed with her Finger to the Treasure,
making a dumb show with nodding her Head for me to supply my self out of it,
which I had thankfully done, with a resolve to keep my Vow.

This being heard with much Patience and Attention, I perceived the furious
Cardinal to lessen his Anger by degrees; when all on a sudden lifting up his
Hands and Eyes, he cried out A Miracle! A Miracle! which all the rest gabled
out aloud, and concluded that none might more properly dispose of that Treasure
than the Virgin to whom it was offered: whereupon I was carried back to the
Church in Solemn Procession, and round it on Men's Shoulders in Triumph, whilst
Ave Maria was sung by the Priests, and I placed before the High Altar; being
afterward dismissed with great Applause. Since which, I have considered most of
the Miracles of that Church have their rise from such Fallacies.

This Success and Escape emboldened me to a greater: For one day going into St.
Peter's Church, I perceived the Priest put a Silver Crucifix, of great value,
into a Sepulcher, as their, Ceremony is, upon the Resurrection; and whilst they
were going round in their Devotion, I, by the Art of Hocus Pocus, conveyed it
into my Breeches, and shuffl'd among the Crowd: So that when he came back to
it, crying, Non est hic, sed surrexit, "He is not here, but is risen," he found
it so indeed; for, after much fumbling, he perceived his graven G^d was gone:
And I made as much have to get away for fear of a Search. So getting on Board
the Ship, ready to Sail, I bid a lasting Farewell to Rome.

My Store recruited by these lucky Hits,
To France I steered, to re-imploy my Wits.
CHAP. XIX.
How being Embarked, a counterfeit Hermit told him a Story, of a pleasant Trick
he put upon the Pope with St. Peter's Beard: And coming back to France, he hung
Two Bastards in a Basket, about the Neck of the French King's Statue; for which
a poor Friar was hanged by mistake, etc.

ON Board our Ship, I found, among others, a kind of counterfeit Hermit, or
Pilgrim, w^ had taken that Garb, the better to shroud his Rogueries, as he told
me many others did; and among other Stories, he told me of the Trick he had put
upon Pope Innocent XI. viz. That coming to Rome, and pretending he came from
visiting the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and all the other Places usually
visited there by Pilgrims, he desired to be admitted to the Pope's presence, as
he said, for his Benediction or Blessing, but more truly, in hopes of getting
Money out of him, which he usually gave Pilgrims at their return from that Holy
Place; but was told by the Cardinal, That he could not be admitted, unless he
brought some Relics. He told him, He had some at his Hermitage. And so taking
leave, after rambling about the City, heard an old fat Hostess had been lately
hanged for poisoning one of her Guest, and that she was delivered to the
Surgeons to be Anatomized. This put a strange Whim in his Head; which was to
get the skinny circle of her merkin Hair; and all which, one of the Surgeons
Men, for half a Duckat helped him to. This he dried and combed out, and so
returned to the Cardinal, telling him he had brought St. Peter's Beard, which
he bought, at a great Price, of the Fathers of the Sepulcher. The Cardinal
admired at this, and looking earnestly on it, clapped it on his Muzzle, saying,
If it was true, it were a Jewel worth a Kingdom; and immediately introduced him
to His Holiness, who was in as much Wonder, strictly examining the Truth of it,
saying, They had his Scull already, but never heard his Beard was preserved.
But he gave them such plausible Reasons, as to the Truth of it, that he gained
Credit: And the Pope putting it upon his Mouth, as the Cardinal had done, and
in a manner worshipping it, demanded why there was so much Hair on the one
side, and so little on the other. O, said our counterfeit Pilgrim, Your
Holiness well knows St. Peter was a Jew by Brith, and used to play much on the
Jews-Harp; so that by often rubbing and twanging with his Finger, he rubbed off
the Hair on the right side of his Face.

This gaining Credit, it was set up in the Repository of Rarities, in a Crystal
Shrine, to be adored by superstitious Votaries, and a Hundred Ducats were
ordered our Pilgrim; who, fearing the Cheat should come to light, had now left
the City. Many other Stories we had by the way, which lasted us to Marseilles;
where landing, I was overjoyed to be once more in my own Country after so many
Perils and Dangers, but in my Travels found it every where very much wasted and
impoverished, a great number of People being reduced to the last Extremity of
Life, by hard Taxes, Oppressions, and other Grievances. However, on I trudged
through many desolate Places, the deserted Seats of the Hugonots, or
Protestants, who by violent Persecution, were driven out, or fled almost out of
the Country. Coming to my Father's House, I found he was killed in the Wars
about half a Year before in Flanders, whose Death my Mother, poor Soul, had
taken so grievously, that she died, as some say, of Grief, and as others, of a
certain Fire that burnt too hot inwardly. But what troubled me most, my dear
Lady having turned her fumbling Lord into the other World, had foolishly left
the Pleasures of Life, and buried her self alive in a Nunnery, upon notice the
Lord I traveled with, was murdered in an Inn at Pavia.

Being now a free Denison of all the World, I resolved to continue living by my
Wit; and our Family by these sad Disasters having broke up House-keping, I
haunted the Court, and easily found those that could Pimp best had the greatest
Preferments bestowed on them. I insinuated my self, by that means, into the
Favor of the Court Ladies, as knowing how my Mother had prospered in that
Trade. I sometimes helped them to Gallants, or in the Dusk of the Evening, laid
their By-blows at such Noblemens Doors as I conceived they most properly
belonged to; and resolving on a Frollick one Evening, looking on every side for
fear of Discovery, Two thumping Boys that were brought me, neatly placed in a
Basket, by a Waiting Woman to a youg Lady, with whom I had seen the great Lewis
very familiar, I tied it a about the Neck of his famous Statue, (set up in
Honor of that Monarch, by Monsieur de Louis) with this Distich:

Nature, Law, Reason, all have plainly show^,
That every Father ought to keep his own.
This being found upon the going about of the Guards, great Enquiry was made,
by the King's Order, after him that had presumed so great an Affront, and a
Friar of the Carmelite Order, having preached a little before against the Vices
of the Court, and glanced much in his Discourse upon this Monarch, he was
suspected to be the Author or Contriver of it, and so was put to the Rack; who
in his Tortures confessed what he had never done, and was fairly hanged for my
Roguery.

And thus through many Dangers I have run,
Played roguish Pranks, though yet I have not done:
Much more's behind, to which I still aspire,
Whilst for a true French Rogue Men me admire,
As Phaeton once, who set the World on fire.
FINIS.

