A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Strange Discovery of the Supposed Murder, OF
Mr. Thomas Tedder
In Black Swan-Alley in Pauls-Church-Yard, who has not been heard of this 5
Years.

With the manner of the Discovery,

By Letters to several Persons of Note, to search a Vault in the House of Mr.
Allen, where he formerly Lodged, where was found the Bones, and part of the
Scull of the supposed Murdered Person.

With Mr. Allvens Examination, Mayhr on Saturday last, and of his being Bound
over to Answer it at the next Sessions.

UPon account of some Letters arrived here, whereof one to the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor, one to -- Andger Esquire Counselor at Law, and the rest to several
other Persons of Note, giving an Account of a suspicious Murder, thought to be
committed by one Mr. Allen, who keeps a great Toy-Shop near Deans-Court in
Paul's Churchyard, upon a certain Gentleman, who lodged at his House, a
Justice of Peace in Ireland, who has not been heard of these since these five
or six Years past; about which time, he was known to be at the said Allen's
House in Black-swan-Alley, in Paul's- Churchyard, and the said Letters
particularly insisting, that the said Allen's House of Office should be emptied
and searched; and the said Esquire Andger going to the Lord Mayor, to acquaint him
with the purport of the Letter, his Lordship finding it to agree with that sent
to him, gave orders on last Friday for emptying the said Vault, and ordered the
other Gentlemen concerned to take care to see all that came out carefully
examined: Which being done accordingly, we are told that the said Night-men
found a piece of a Scull with Hair upon it, and several other Bones, which were
carefully kept and carried; together with Mr. Allen and the Night-men, before
his Lordship; where the Night-men declared, That besides the Soil which they
took out, they brought also a good quantity of Lime, which gave some suspicion
that the said Lime had been thrown in to consume the Flesh of the party
supposed to be Murdered.

Mr. Allen owned, as I am told, that he put in the said Lime, but alleged,
that it was to save the charge of emptyng the Vault, because he did not think
of living long there, and to prevent annoying his Neighbors by the Stench.
Some Surgeons were summoned to give their Verdict upon the Bones this Night,
which all agreed that it was the Scull and Bones of some Person, thought to be
murdered. However, upon the whole, the said Allen is bound over to answer the
same the next Sessions, and has given Six Hundred Pound Bail to answer it
accordingly.

Licensed according to Order. London, Printed for B. H. in Grace Church Street,
1699.


