A PROCLAMATION By his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX: Concerning The
proceedings of some Ministers of the CHURCH of ENGLAND.

THE Copy of a Petition to the KINGS MAJESTY WITH A Representation of the
Desires of diverse Clergymen.

AND His Excellencies Resolution concerning the insolences exercised by some,
to abuse his Excellency and his Council of WAR.

Aug: 14* CAMBRIDGE, Printed for Nathaniel Smith, Anno Dom. 1647.

A PROCLAMATION By his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX: Concerning the
proceedings of some Ministers of the Church of England WITH His Excellencies
Resolution concerning the insolences exercised by some to abuse his Excellency
and his Council of War.
WHEREAS it appears upon sufficient proof, that many violent Tumults and
outrages, are committed by several persons, against diverse Ministers, placed
by Order, or Ordinance of Parliament, in sequestered Livings, and for such their
violent carriage to, and detaining from the said Ministers, their profits;
there is pretended by the said parties, power and authority from the General
and the Army: And for the more plausible justifying of their undue pretenses
herein, have caused to be Printed and Published, a Pamphlet entitled TWO
PETITIONS of the sequestered Clergy of England and Wales. One to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty; the other to Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, with a (pretended)
Declaration of the General and His Council of War thereupon; of all which
actions as aforesaid; We cannot but testify a very ill resentment, and do
hereby declare a dislike of such proceedings, disclaiming not only the actions
themselves to have had any encouragement from us, but also any ends or
intentions to that purpose. And to the clearing of our selves herein, We
shall henceforth endeavor the bringing to condign punishment, such who have or
shall exercise the like insolences upon any pretense whatsoever.

Given under my Hand and Seal, the 11 of August, 1647. T. FAIRFAX.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of many thousands of Your Majesty's Loyal Subjects, the
poor sequestered Clergy of England and Wales.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Petitioners have a long time been destitute of all
livelihood, by means of sequestration of their Estates and other losses, and
are at present driven to extreme necessities how to provide for themselves and
their Families, and the season now approaching for the receiving the benefits
of the Harvest, before which time, if some charitable course be not taken, they
are like to starve or beg another year.

May it therefore please your most Sacred Majesty to take our sad condition
into Your Gracious consideration and care, that some course may be taken for
our speedy relief, as may preserve us a live, and enable us to do more
service in Gods Church to Your Majesty and the Kingdom.

And as in duty bound, we shall ever pray for Your Majesty's happy
establishment, and long and prosperous Reign.

To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.
The humble Petition of many thousands of the poor sequestered Clergy of
England and Wales.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas the eyes of all the oppressed people of the Kingdom are fixed
upon Your Excellency and the Army as the great Instruments (under God) to
restore them to their legal Rights and Liberties, which they do justy ground
upon Your several Declarations published to the World.

And whereas your Petitioners (a considerable number of the free borne men of
this Kingdom) have been for diverse years outed of their livelihood and
freeholds, contrary to Magna Charta and other fundamental Law of the Land, by
the arbitrary power of Committees; whose proceedings usually have been by no
Rule of any known Law but by their own wills: of whose orders no Record is
kept, nor scarce any notes or memorials, whereby it may appear when by whom,
or for what your Petitioners were removed, the Committees for scandalous and
for plundered Ministers (by whom the greatest part are turned out) being
grounded not so much as upon any Ordinance of both Houses; the most of your
Petitioners outed for refusing the Covenant, or adhering to the King and the
Religion established according to their Judgments and Consciences; and, of
those, diverse were never called to answer, scared one had any Articles proved
against him by oath, or other legal process, and some put out upon private
information given to the Chaire-man Master White: by which unheard of
proceedings not to be parallelled in any age Your Petitoners, who have lived
heretofore in good esteem, according to their Calling, Degrees,, Birth and
Education, are reduced to extreme misery and want, with their Wives and
Children, that they must either starve or beg, if some speedy course be not
taken for their releife. And whereas those who are put into our places, labor
by all means to stir up the people to involve this Kingdom in a new war, and
are generally men ignorant and unable to instruct the People, and many of them
scandalous in their practices, if impartially examined, and diverse of them hold
three or four of the best Benefices, whilst diverse other Churches are void and
without any constant Preacher: And Your Petitioners are ready to submit
themselves for their Rights to trial by the known Laws of the of the Land,
and if any appear guilty of any legal scandal (which we know to have been
unjustly charged upon many, and is a great part of their present sufferings) we
shall leave them to undergo the severest punishment and censure, which by any
known Law can be inflicted.

And forasmuch as the maine profits of our Benefices consist in the Harvest
which is now at hand; which many of the present possessors, if they could
receive, would presently be gone, whereby the burden of the Cure will lie upon
Your Petitioners, having nothing to live upon all the next year.

Your Petitioners therefore Humbly pray, that Your Excellency would be pleased
to make stay of the profits of this Harvest, in such way as Your Excellency
shall think fit, that such as are charged with any legal scandal, may come to a
just trial, and both they (if they be found innocent) and the rest may enjoy
their Rights, and have the benefit of Subjects, according to the known Law of
the Land, and your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

FINIS.

