A FULL RELATION OF The whole Proceedings of the late Rising and Commotion in
WALES, Under Pretense for The King and Sir Tho: Fairfax.

Represented in several LETTERS to the Parliament, and His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax.

With the ANSWERS and REPLIES.

ALSO The Names of the chief Actors.

LONDON: Printed for Francis Leech, July 2. 1647.

A LETTER FROM Major General Laughorn, TO The Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
THe first rumor of His Majesty's departure with the Army, has put the
Delinquents in Glamorganshire into their old Frenzy; the enclosed Papers will
express their present Posture, and shorten my Relation: The Leaders of them are
of the principal Delinquents engaged in the former Revolt of that County, and
whom the Parliaments clemency for offenses past has occasioned to this
ungrateful relapse: Diverse of the well-affected Gentry of that County disfavor
their courses, and cast about for their own security; some of them are come
hither to me, and I am drawing up my Forces thitherward, to suppress the
Insolency; and find my Soldiers, I thank God, very cheerful and inoffensive
where they come, not capitulating for any Conditions: I shall (God willing)
never desert my first Principles for the Parliament of ENGLAND; The issue of
this Insurrection probably will occasion speedy and frequent seconds of this
Address, by him who is,

Sir, The States and your loyal Servant, Rowland Laughorn.
Carmarthen, 17 Junii, 1647,
To the Honorable, Major General LaVGHORN.
SIR,
IT has pleased God to make Sir Thomas Fairfax his Army a miraculous means of
the KINGS Restitution (in appearances) These Counties, very apprehensive of
their long desired Liberty and present Sufferings, have already declared for
the King and Sir Thomas Fairfax: Now that there might be nothing untimely done
to your prejudice, We thought it fit to communicate so much of our business as
can be no way prejudicial to yours; We should be very glad to hear how you look
upon our proceedings, and unfeignedly rest,

June 4. 1647. Your humble Servants, Tho: Not. Edward Thomas. Rich: Basset. Jo:
Stradling. Tho: Thomas.


To the Honorable, Major General LAUGHORN.
SIR,
THere has happened a business in Cowbridge, which may (except you be pleased to
interpret it in a fair sense) be liable to a misconstruction; The truth is, the
Committee, as is known, had an intent to seize on the persons of diverse
Gentlemen, some whereof for their security betook themselves to Cowbridge, and
there made bold with the Magazine, without any the least meaning of opposition
or disrespect to you, to whom by many civilities they are much obliged: And
being certain of His Majesty's conjunction with Sir Thomas Fairfax his Forces,
they conceived they had been wanting to themselves, in not providing so well
for their safety as they could. And they more then hope you will be so far from
being any way displeased with it, as to receive assistance from you in their
just and necessary Defense; whereby you shall eternally oblige the whole
Country, and more particularly

Cowbridge, 14. June, 1647. Your most humble Servants, Jo: Stradling. Tho:
Stradling. Jo: Vanne. Will: Basset. Rich: Gwyn. William Merrick. Edward Seis.
George Gibbon. William Flemming. Theodore Basset. Richard Basset. Henry
Stradling. William Basset. Robert Thomas. Thomas Basset. David Buckley. Jo:
Walter. Miles Watkins. Jo: Powel. Rich: Wilcoke. John Stradling. John Jones.
Rice Merrick. Robert Corroche.


To His Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Forces.
May it please your Excellency,
THese last days there appeared a sudden and violent Distraction in
Glamorganshire; I shall use all my power and diligence to alay it, and expect
your Excellencies Orders for my proceedings, and the rather, in that the
turbulent party, as I am informed, pretend your Excellencies Authority for what
they do. The enclosed copies of some Expresses I received out of these parts,
and of one of the Delinquents Warrants, will supply what I here omit: The chief
actors are ancient Malignants of a deep stain, and can pretend no Grievance but
the just and conscientious proceedings of the Committee, according to the
Ordinances of Parliament: Other Gentlemen well-affected and of good quality in
the country, are not engaged among them, but stand upon their Guard. This is
all I can at present in that affair present to your Excellency, with my humble
service, and readiness to obey what commands you will please to impose on

Carmarthen, 17 June, 1647. Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Rowland
Laughorn.

To Major General Laughorn.
Noble Sir,
WE have in a former Letter made bold to intimate unto you the necessity of
our present Posture, which we in the Name of the whole Country must still
affirm to be no ways tending to the diminution of your respects with us, but
meant only for the vindication of our Estates and Liberties from the unjust
and Arbitrary disposition of Committees here; on the mediation of whose
Friends, we have notwithstanding thus far complied with their desires: Yet upon
assurance given, The Inhabitants of this County may enjoy their Liberties and
Estates, and all Taxations (other then such that are for the Army) be for-born,
until, by Gods blessing, the present unsettledness of Supreme Affairs be
composed, we shall not farther proceed on these terms whereon we now insist:
This, for ought we can yet discover to the contrary, may in a very few days
determine our instant Differences: However we shall not fail to advertise you
of what farther courses the prosecution may engage us to, and ever remain,

St. Lythins Down, 15 Junii, 1647. Your humble Servants, Richard Basset. Henry
Stradling. Thomas Stradling. Charles Kemis. John Stradling. Thomas Not. Henry
Basset.


To the High Constables of the Hundred of Miskine, and to every of them.
WE require you forthwith to direct your Warrants to the Petty-Constables of
the several Parishes within your Hundred, That they summon all able men from
Sixteen to Sixty, to appear before us at Cowbridge, to morrow, by Nine of the
clock in the morning, with all Horses fit for Service, or Dragoons, and all
such Arms as are Defensive or Offensive, as they have or can come by, for the
use of the Kings Majesty and Sir Thomas Fairfax General, for the preservation
of the Peace and Safety of this County: Hereof fail not, as you owe your
Allegiance to His Majesty.

Dated 13 Iunii, 1647. Edw: Thomas. Richard Basset. Tho: Not. Greenvile Weeks.


To the Honorable, Major General LAUGHORN.
SIR,
I Am very glad, that by your watchfulness and diligence you have so timely
prevented the inconvenience of the rising of these Men in Wales (according as
your Letters mention;) I believe too many are apt to make advantages of the
present discomposure of Affairs to work their own ends, though it be to the
disturbance of the whole Kingdom. Its very true, I have made some
Representations to the Parliament, and I hope their Wisdom and Justice will so
answer our Expectations, as that we shall speedily see an happy composure of
all Differences, and a settlement of all Rights, both to the King, the
Parliament, and the People, to the comfort and satisfaction of all men that
wish well to Peace and Righteousness: I desire you still to continue your care
in those parts to prevent any evil of this kind, and to let all men know, That
I cannot in the least allow of such proceedings, but shall send to your
assistance to suppress them, if need so require, and that you do give me
seasonable notice thereof: I rest,

Barkhamstead, June 25. 1647 Your very loving Friend, Tho: Fairfax.

To His Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Forces.
May it please your Excellency,
MY Letter of the 17. instant informed your Excellency of a violent Distraction
in Glamorganshire, which I have been diligent to alay without the effusion of
innocent blood: The Country hearing of my approach, deserted the chief Actors,
whom to the number of Fifty, all well mounted, are fled the Country; the Names
of them are subscribed to the Letters I sent your Excellency, only some few
added: They had convened Fifteen hundred or Two thousand, pretending Authority
for so doing; but the Country are made sensible how they were seduced, and I
shall neglect no diligence to settle quietness, and remove the disturbers of
it. This Account in duty I conceived my self bound to give your Excellency, and
remain,

Cardiff, 21 Junii, 1647. Your Excellencies most humble Servant, Rowland
Laughorn.

His Excellencies answer to the former Letter dated at Vxbridge, June 29. 1647.
SIR,
YOurs from Cardiff of June 21. I received this day; I hope my last unto you
from Barkhamstead, will give you satisfaction concerning the proceedings here,
and how far we are from countenancing any that shall raise Forces against the
Parliament, or those employed by them.

Your care and diligence in preserving those parts in peace, will be an
acceptable service to the Kingdom.

Things here are like to come to a speedy composure, both Houses having agreed
to send Commissioners to Treat and Debate of business in order to the present
settlement of the peace of the Kingdom, which is a thing much desired by all,
and I hope in a short time will be effected, to the quiet and content of the
Kingdom.

For those Forces of Horse and Foot which you brought lately into
Glamorganshire upon the late occasion; I desire you to remove them back into
those counties where they were formerly quartered. I remain

Your assured Friend, Tho: Fairfax.
Vxbridge, June 29. 1647.
FINIS.

