A Full and True Account of a most Barbarous Murder and Robbery
Committed on the Body of Mrs. Johannah Williams, By one William de Fray, a
Frenchman, at a Gravel-Pit near Barnet, in Hartfordshire. Likewise of his
being apprehended and taken, and committed to Hartford-Goal. He Robbed her of a
Gold-Watch, together with Three Guinneas, and one Five Shilling piece in Money,
first having cut her Throat from Ear to Ear, then scarrified her Face, by
reason she should not be known. And of his making his Escape toward Dunstable.

FOR as God has said, the Murder shall not go unpunished, but that he shall
be brought forth either in this World, or that which is to come; so it pleased
God to order it, that a Gentleman was walking forth with his Bloodhounds, that
sented the Carcass of this poor Murdered Gentlewoman, whereupon they went
forthwith to it, the Gentleman following them, heard them Howl and run too and
fro about the Pit, insomuch that he looked down, thereupon he espied a dead
Body, which beholding he stood a small time astonished, but phesently coming to
himself, he run forthwith and made a Hue and Cry, withal satisfying the People
in the Town of Barnet, that there was a great Murder Committed in the
Gravel-Pits aforesaid, and he believed it was but just done, the People hearing
him tell this most sad and deplorable Story, run some one way and some another,
and some to the Pit, whereupon viewing the Corpse, and Cloths of the deceased
Murdered Gentlewoman, found her to be one of the Neighboring Gentry, who was
as I am informed was Walking a little distance from her House, somewhat Early
in the Morning, for a little of the fresh Air, and being pretty well Attired
its supposed the Villian had some mistrust of her having Money, and thereupon
fell upon with his Blood-thursty Hands, not being satisfied till he had
Committed this most Vile and Detestable Tragedy.

And although many Tragical Actions of this nature, have been often Committed
of late, by several Barbarous and Bloody minded Villians, yet this does appear
to be as Black as any, we have yet heard off, for could any one think, that a
Fellow could have the Impudence to be so Notorious Wicked, as to offer any
Violence so near the House as that was, nay, not only so but at broad Day
light, when all People were Walking on the Road, one would have thought the
late Murder of the Worthy Esquire Bowles's Lady were enough for an Example of all
Persons whatsoever, and to molifie the Sturdiest and Strongest Heart in the
World.

Now the Hue and Cry being out run, this Barbarous and Bloody minded Villain,
it forthwith struck such a Terror to his Spirits, as God had ordered it, that
he had not the Power to go any further, but forthwith went into an Inn at
Dunstable, where he sat down and called for a Mugg of Beer, and some Bread and
Cheese, which was presently brought him, the Tapster looking earnestly upon
him, see him look somewhat dejected, and withal a few drops of Blood upon his
Ruffels, thereupon he went to his Master and told him there was a Hue and Cry
past the Road about the Murder of one Mrs. Joannah Williams, who was found
dead this Morning in a Gravel-Pit near Barnet, and he believed if this Fellow
were fully Examined, they would find it to be him thereupon his Master ordered
a Constable forthwith to be called; in the mean time the Master of the Inn
approached the Company of this most Barbarianlike Villian, saying, Sir your
Servant and the like, and by way of discourse asked him from whence he came, in
a very respectful manner, in so much he could not have the least cause of
suspicion, and so he told him from London, likewise he asked him whether he was
going, he said to Chester, in order to take Shipping for Dublin, so the
Frenchman asked him if he should reach to Stonystratford, and how many Miles
it was to it, the Master of the Inn told him no, it would be to far, and he had
better stay all Night.

But in the midst of their Discourse, in come the Constable, who made no more
to do, but examined him, at which the poor Monsieur who was so bloodily bent,
was mightily astonished; but the Constable forthwith had him before a Justice,
who examined him from whence he came? and whither he was going? Likewise, how
he came by that Blood on his Ruffels? But he could not give any good account of
himself, therefore the Justice ordered a Mitimus to be made, and committed him
to Hertford-Goal; and in his going, confessed the Business to the Constable,
who has got a more particular Account, which will appear against him at his
Trial; It is too long and tedious to repeat the particulars, therefore shall
omit, by reason the Trial will make it more plain to those, who are desirous to
hear it.

Nothwithstanding the many repeated Examples that have been of late, it will no
ways be a warning to leave off their vile and hideous Practices, and they not
having the Fear of God before their Eyes, and giving their Minds full and
wholly over to Covetousness, and it works so much in the Minds of those who are
so hardened in Sin, that they value not the Laws of God and Man, but are grown
so lazy, that they care not what wickedness they commit, to accomplish the
Desires of their wicked Appetites, which this bloody-minded Villain, as I think
to a very high degree shown in this most Bloody Tragedy.

But here this Barbarous Villain, after his Commitment was made, he was
forthwith delivered into the Custody of the Jailer, to whom he declared, he was
brought up a Gentleman, but the Losses his Friends had sustained in France, by
being forced to leave their Native Soil, to fly to Charitable England for a
Refuge, having lost all their Substance, he had nothing to subsist withal, and
being in no manner of business, could not tell how to live. Therefore he being
weak, not daring to trust God's Providence.

Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for T. Lightbody near the Borough of Southwark 1699.


