THE FROGS OF EGYPT, OR The CATERPILLARS of the COMMONWEALTH truly
Dissected and laid open;

With the Subjects Thankfulness unto GOD for their deliverance from that
Nest of VERMIN.

Printed in the year 1641.

THE FROGS OF EGYPT, OR THE CATTERPILLERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH.
MOnopolers by their nefarious Projects, and impious exactions, have
contaminated the Land with such a contagious exulceration of wicked
impositions, that I may with a coequall sympathy, assimulate them to the Frogs
of Egypt. First, In regard that those Frogs were the second Plague that was
brought upon the Egyptians: So these Monopolers (in respect that Bishops had
the priority) were the second Plague, which with disastrous aspersions, did
infect our Nation. Secondly, As those Frogs came unto Pharaoes Bedchamber, and
upon his Bed: So these Diabolical Parasites, did creeep into our Kings bosom,
with their Phariticall Calumny. Thirdly, Those Frogs did come upon all the
people in Egypt, throughout their Territories: And who is there in all our
Kingdom, that have not been infected bv the contagion of their venenosive
aspersions: they were a Nest of Waspes, which did Tyrannically sting the Kings
loyal Subjects with their exacting impositions: They were a swarm of Vermin,
which did pollute sincere purity, and like the Frogs of Egypt, did over-creep
the Land. They warmed themselves at other men's fires, and though the peoples
fingers ends were a cold, by regard of their impious Project, yet they would
always remember to say with Mantuan, Optimum est aliena frui pecunia. They
sip't of honest men's cups, and did distend their purses in their Bacchanalian
riot, for they drowned themselves in Bacchus Fountain, while other men paid
the reckoning. They did always share with the Butler in his Box, yea they grew
so fat and plump with damned Projects, that it was easier for Hercules to beat
the Triple-headed Cerberous out of Hells Stygian Portals, then for us of late,
to speak against these cursed Projectors, who abused the Triple Crown. But
(we thank the all-directing providence of the mighty and Almighty God) we have
found the like success with Hercules, and by the inflexible Justice of the
Parliament, we shall with him, drag these Hell Hounds upon the earth, who did
eradicate the well planted branch of Plenty. They were heretofore so
Epidemically strict, that they would not bate us a pin in their exactions; they
have worn a Vizard a long time: But a Vizard said I? Their pride was a
sufficient Vizard, for it was no marvel that no man else could know them,
when they knew not themselves. But when the Parliament shall once unface these,
they will prove as bad as any cards in the pack. They were Janus-like, and had
two Cloakes to hide their knavery; and like the Pythagorean Monster, they did
threaten to devour the whole Commons at a mouth-full. In Egypt the thirsty
Dog could never lap of the River Nilus, but the Crocodile would assault him
immediately. Neither in our Land could any honest man, whom dry necessity by
compulsive coercion required to allay his sitiating thirst, sip at the
odoriferous Spring of Bacchus, but incontinently he was assailed by these
cursed Crocodiles, the rubbish of Babylon, Honesties Hangman, fomenters of
Impiety, Iniquities prodigious Monsters, Plenties execrable Foes, Envies
individual Companions, detestable Enemies to loyal Subjects; and in a word,
that I may fully paint them out, The Devils Journey-men. The Romans were never
in more danger of the Sabines, than we have been of these pernicious members:
the Sicilians never feared the Basilisk more, nor the Cretans the Minotaure,
neither the Athenians that pestiferous Serpent Epidaurus, than we have justly
feared these wicked Dragons of impiety. They are like the Grecian Horse, in the
midst of Troy, under pretense of safety, but at length consumed the whole city:
So these firebrands of iniquity would have extirpated the flourishing plenty
of the Land, but (thanks be to God and the righteous Parliament) they are now
extinguished. For as a rotten member Ense recidendum est, ne pars
sinceratrahatur, ought to be cut off, least it infect, and contaminate the
whole body; so ought these wicked members of the Commonwealth to be executed
with the Sword of Justice, who have already too far polluted the body of the
Realm. It Is a plausible assimulation which Hippocrates observes, that in the
body natural, as it must be truly purged, before it can be truly sound: so
likewise in the body politic, unless these improbous malefactors be purged
out, it can never be truly sound. Their very name Monopolers does stigmatize
them under the brand of knavery, which is derived from Moroc which signifies in
English, Only: so that Monopolers, are the Only Polers of the people, which
have abused them by their Projects: But now (alas poor men!) they are
intruss'd and like to be whipped. Their very Projects themselves are set
against them: Their Coals which they did aggerate are ready to consume them:
The Butter, which before greased their pockets, now melts in their mouths: The
Soap scorns to be projected any longer, and will invert its first Letter S.
into R. and become a Rope to them rather. The Salt is ready to powder them to
Tiburne: The Cards scorn that they should play the Knave any longer: The
Pinnes could pin their Heads to the Gall-house, The Wine threatens to lay them
dead -- drunk: but hang them they are so crafty, that although they fall down
in a Wine-Seller, yet they know how to rise up agine in a Tobacco-Shop, but I
hope before they rise there, they will first rise up at the Gall-house: where
I'le-leave them -- By these, and the like enormities have our Land beeue too
far overspread, it has lately flourished too luxuriously in impiety, which
did accumulate such insupportable burdens to the weather-beaten Commons of
this Realm, that they were almost everted. But thanks be to the all-disposig
omnipotence of immortal God, who have always preserved this Kingdom from
innumerable evils, and have kept it as the apple of his eye. I say thanks be
to his Supremacy, who among other evils have preserved us likewise from the
Tyranny of these insulting Projectors. But we now solely depend upon the
Parliaments exemplary piety and great Justice, of whom we beg with all
humility, and with affectionate fervency to the truth, do supplicate that they
would with expedition extinguish these cursed firebrands of the Land, who like
Samsons Foxes have consumed the Lands and Possions of the Commons. Wherefore
let every true hearted Subject enumerate his express thankfulness to Almigty
God for the preservation of this Kingdom, and the multitude of his favors
irrigated thereon with all alacrity.

A Thanksfullnesse to GOD for his Mercy towrds this KINGDOM:
WE bless and magnify (great God!) thy Name
Who justly do exenterate with shame
All Enemies to Thee, and us who do
Preserve this Kingdom with thy favors most.
By Thee our base Monopolers do fall
False Prelates, and false Papists in their Gall.
By Thee Projectors vanish, and by Thee
The Church has been preserved from Popery.
By Thee our Canonists requoile, and turn
Their Innovations to a doleful Urne.
By Thee all Pontificians dote deplore
Their fortune more diastruous and more.
Thus in our Hemisphere, while the bright Sun
Desplayes his radiant splendour, and do run
Through the twelve Signs in the Zodiac, and then
Smileth upon the face of mortal men:
Thus while the Queen of night do beautify
Her self, and gilds the Star-bespangled Sky:
While liquid rivers do return again
Wandering abroad into the greedy maine,
Yea, while our pious hearts remain to be,
We yield a thankful sacrifice to Thee.
And as we thank Thee for thy Favors past,
So we do supplicate a blessings last.
First, that Thou would extenerate all those
That are Monopolers, or other Foes.
And Then (oh!) then conduct the Church aright
For our Salvation and thy Heavenly Right.
That we may serve Thee, serving Thee we may
Rejoice, rejoicing triumph, in that day:
Triumphing, then exult, exulting raise
Glory to Thee, and serve Thee all our Days.
FJNJS.

