A FVLL AND TRVE RELATION OF THE LATE GREAT VICTORY, Obtained by the
Protestants against the Rebels in Jreland; In which is declared the manner of
the Fight, with the number of those that are slain; and the Names of such men
of rank and quality, that are either slain or taken prisoners.

All which was sent from Dublin in a Letter, dated the 5. of this instant
month of April, and received the 11. of the same, 1643.

London, Printed for Hen: Overton, and Edward Blackmore, April the 12. 1643.

Dublin the 5^h. of April. 1643: LOVING BROTHER,
I Wrote you at large by the last Post, of the happy success and safe return
of our Army; but because the times are dangerous both by Sea and Land, and our
Letters like to miscarry on both, and because I would not have Gods mercies and
power shown for our defense, and confusion of our adversaries, to be cast into
oblivion, I shall give you a brief rehearsal thereof at this time, as near
as I can remember, and what I might then happily omit, I shall give you now to
undestand. In my former Letters, I wrote of all the passages that were in their
going forth from the first of March to the eighth, so far as Ballenepark in the
County of Wexford, 15. miles from the Town of Wexford, as we received
Intelligence on the return of the Earl of Roscommon. From Ballenepark they
set forward the 9. toward Rosse, and the horse came to Rosse going before the
foot, the 10. of March, at which time if the whole Army had been there, they
had taken the Town, but the enemy being abroad in the field, hindered that part
of our foot that was to accompany our horse in their journey, and forct them
to retreat toward the Body of our Army; the horse having left them and gone
before, so that our horse also made back again; In the mean time, they shat
their gates, and got store of men into the Town, before the main body of our
Army could get thither, they came before the Town the eleventh, and lay there
to the seventeenth, and being disappointed of their Grenades, and their
Garrison coming by Sea, was forct to leave it; for by that time the enemy were
strong, both within and without, so that our Army expected that Preston would
have given them Battle on St. Patricks day; the 17. of March being Friday, and
accordingly made ready to fight with him, which was accomplished on Saturday
the 18th. at Knockduffe, alias, called the hill of Balleregagh, with much
courage on the Rebels side, in so much, that the right wing of our horse was
routed, and the day given to be lost, in which some of our Commanders were very
much to blame, and Sir Thomas Lucas being given to be lost, being twice cut
over the head, it went by that means very ill there, and gave such advantage
and courage to the Rebels to go on, that some of their horse brake through
our Army, and came to the Carriages, but could not return the same way, and
Lieutenant General Cullin came up to the very Ordnance, thinking to have
surprised them; but his horse was shot under him, and himself (not being well
seconded) taken prisoner. In which time the Marquess of Ormond showed both his
valor and inveterate hatred against his kinsmen and Countrymen for their
Rebellion, he put himself so forward, that he was accounted to have been
either slain or taken prisoner; In this time the left wing of our horse, (not
knowing the danger of the right) did admirable good service, and the foot the
like; mean while our Ordnance played, but at first did little hurt to the
Rebels, but having new Masters, (by means of two Vessels that they sanke to
prevent the Rogues taking of them in coming toward Rosse with necessaries for
our Army) they did in the end great execution; these men being Ship-men were
nimble, and better skild then those Gunners we had before, which put such
terror into the Rogues, that the maine body of foot fled, and the left wing
of the horse had them in pursuit, but there were so much good Clothes lay up
and down by the way, that the wind of our Ordnance had scattered in the
field, and such want of them among our men, that spoyld the pursuit: their
horses could hardly be gotten to go by: the right wing of horse not able yet
to set themselves again in order, was nothing expected to be done by them, Sir
Thomas Lucas head being down, (but since on the mending hand, and great hopes
of his recovery) whereby there were not above 200. slain as yet come to our
intelligence for certain, not there in the place; but of those about fourscore
Commanders, men both of wealth, note, and valor, besides the prisoners taken,
but doubtless there were many hundreds that were carried away dead, and that
carried away their deadly wounds with them, much good may it do them. The
names of those that were found dead, viewed and known by our Army in the
field, were Colonel Thomas Butler, son to Sir Richard Butler, Lieutenant
Colonel Brown of Mulcankin, Beverly Britain of Lions Castle. Captain Henry
Bagnall. Captain Thomas Scarlock, one that did us much mischief in those
parts. Sir Morgan Cavenagh, shot twice but escaped, since reported to be dead.
Captain Brian. Captain Donogh O Brian. Captain Theobald Butler. Captain Edward
Butler. Captain Masterson. Captain Synnot. Captain Newgent. Captain Gerald fitz
Gerald. Captain Thomas Plunket, Major General of the Horse.

Most of these were the Lord Marquess of Ormonds kinsmen, and men of great
quality: my Lord took a good course with them, for fear of counterfeiting
themselves dead, he caused them to be put into the ground. I hear of diverse
slain, as Robert Harthale, etc. and some others, but I know not if they be the
men by name that I have set down above, as the brother to my Lord of Dunboyne,
who is a Buttler, and the second son to my Lord Mountgarret, whose name is
Buttler. Those that are taken prisoners are, Lieut. General Cullin, who was a
gentleman with Cardinal Loshellew in France. Sarjeant Major Buttler, I think
his name is Pearce Buttler. Walter Buttler, Captain Bryan, Captain Grant
Christopher Newsent, Edward Maisterson and his brother.

There are 14. or 16. prisoners all Commanders that day in the field, whereof
some are gone to Dublin, the Earl of Castlehaven made a very narrow escape,
his horse was shot under him; and if the brave clothes lying in the Field had
not dazzled our horsemens eyes, he had not escaped taking or killing; But that
Butler who kept my Lord Ormond out of his Castle near Tully, and would not
yield it up was slain there, and with our horses running over him was trodden
into the dirt. It is admirable to think and hear, that their Army consisting
of about 7. or 8000. foot, and 6. or 700. horse, not an unnecessary (not an
unarmed) man, all chosen men (and horse) of the Kingdom except the North parts
of it; our right wing of horse being as it were lost should be overthrown by so
weak an Army of ours, being wearied with travel, wanting bread, and rest as
much or more, our horses worn out for want of hay and oats, and with much
travel, and little rest, consisting of 2500. foot, and about 600 horse, but
what shall I more write, the Lord will help us if England will not: and if there
be any affection to us here, or the cause in hand, I hope there will be no
longer delay. In this great conflict it is to be admired, that we lost not 20.
men, and not a man of any office slain, but Provost Martial General Borras,
man more eminent in place then souldiership, and merely for want of care of
himself, enduring in the cold without his wounds dressed. Indeed he was a good
Gentleman, and very valiant but no Soldier. Those that we had hurt, were Sir
Tho. Lucas, but upon recovery, Sarjeant Major Morris, (a notable piece of
flesh) but not mortally wounded: I hope it will prove but a badge of Honor.

Sir Richard Grynfield in the face, but no danger. We had news that Lieutenant
Colonel Tillier and diverse others were hurt, but (thanks be to God) it was not
so: Colonel Cromwell and Captain Slaughter were unhorst, Colonel Cromwels
horse slain, and Captain Slaughters horse fallen through weakness, neither of
the Gentlemen hurt. The Rebels had intended a deadly plot, but the counsel of
Achitophel amongst them (thanks be to God) took no effect: it was the advice of
Lieut. General Callim (now in the Castle of Dublin) not to give our Army
barrel at all, but our horses finding little food, and our men no bread, they
should only follow our Army in their March home, and still as they grew
wearier and fainter, to fall sometimes on the Rear, on sometimes on the
Carriages, and so at last on our Ordnance in the night, and so u^terly to cut
off our Army, and to take Dublin, which might have been effected, but that God
would defeat his counsel. Whereupon the Commanders knowing their own Forces to
be great, and the weakness of ours would, and being greedy of their prey, they
thought to get in Dublin, would admit of no delay; they could not have patience
to stay any longer: now having Saint Patricks blessings too, they made
themselves sure (of what) not of their destruction, but ours, so and are yet
confident, for surely he that is purblind may behold afar off their devises,
and confidence of strong aid to us from England: But England has heretofore
suffered so much of the Romish bondage from the Crown to the foot, that I hope,
which I almost fear; it is an ill sign when the Hemlock shall grow, and grow
amongst the Corn, and none to pluck it out, will it not make the husbandman to
have little fruit in time of harvest: I am sure they grow, and we diminish
every day; but we will be tried by God, who has his cause in hand. So prosper
them O Lord.

Our Army returned safe (blessed be God) the 27. March, weary and hungry, not
having any bread amongst the poor footmen in five days: the horsemen got
somewhat abroad riding hard for it, the poor footmen could not do so; and now
we bless God for their return, we commiserate their misery, but cannot help
them: we can hardly help our selves. I wish I could but present most of their
faces, and in the habit they are in, unto you in England, I hope that would
make peace; no more but think what I writ not of them. I writ a letter of the
21. March, and the party that I was to send it by left it behind: it is worth
the taking notice of, if I have not writ of it before. On Tuesday the 16. of
March at Even, Colonel Crafford went forth into the County of Wicklowe, with
about 600. foot, and about 60. horse, returned on Sunday night the 19. dicto,
he brought home 800. oxen and cows, and about 1500. sheep, goats and lambs,
and left a thousand sheep that he could not drive through the water. The Rebels
pursued him to Bray, and took the Castle and Church before him for their
Sanctuary, but God was not their Sanctuary; Colonel Crafford himself leading
up the forlorn hope, beat them all out, and made them run; and came safe home
with the loss of two men, but that plenty of cattle is not now known,
through what are eaten and stolen from us. I rest,

Your very loving Brother.

FINIS.

