SEVERAL PROPOSALLS From his EXCELLENCY Sr Tho. Fairfax: and the general
Council of the ARMY.

Showing their humble desires in those things which concerns them as SOVLDIERS.

Together with a Letter, tendered to the Lords and Commons Commissioners of
Parliament, Residing with the Army.

To be by them humbly Represented to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sr THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the general
Council of the ARMY.

Signed JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secretary.
Putney the 22. of September. 1647.


LONDON* Printed by James and Joseph Moxon. for John Pounset, at the sign of
the Hand and Bible, at the lower end of Budg-row, near Dowgate. 1647.

FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE the LORDS and COMMONS Commissioners of Parliament,
residing with the Army.
Right Honorable,
IN our Representation or Declaration, sent from St Albans, we did express in
general Terms what things we desired for the settling of the Rights, Liberties
Peace, and safety of the Kingdom: and since (as the distractions and
interruptions we have met withal would admit) we have proceeded to prepare
and have lately delivered to your Lordships our particular Proposalls in
pursuance of those general desires: and in order to the same ends, having in
those set forth, what our desires are, in the things which concerns us; as
members of the Common wealth, and in Common with all others. We shall now
desire your Lordships to re-minde the Parliament of our humble desires in those
things which concerns us as Soldiers, and of our dis-satisfactions in relation
thereunto; which remained upon us, when some Regiments of the Army were voted
to be disbanded; for which purpose we have now prepared (and do herewith
tender to your Lordships) our particular desires, in pursuance of our former
papers, published before our coming to St Albans, in Order to the satisfaction
and security of the Army, and other the Parl^aments Forces, in point of
Arrears, and other things that concern us merely as Soldiers, which we desire,
may be humbly represented to the Parliament, to be taken into as speedy
Consideration as may be. The matter of the first Article, concerning the
present stating of accounts, and giving debenters for Arrears, to be speedily
put in execution, or set in a way of dispatch, and the rest of them to be
agreed upon, provided for, and included in any settling of a Peace, which we
shall heartily pray for.

Putney September. 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sr Thomas
Fairfax, and the general Council of the Army. JOHN RUSHWORTH, Sceretary.

SEVERAL PROPOSALLS From His EXCELLENCY Sr Tho. Fairfax; and the general
Council of the ARMY.
Showing their humble Desires, in those things which concern them as Soldiers.
1. THat a Committee or Commissioners be appointed by the Parliament, to come
down and abide at the Heed Quarters of the Army, with f^ll power and authority
to audite and state he Accounts thereof; and to give Debenters as well for the
pay respited upon the Public faith, as otherwise, for their service under the
command of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, or any other respective Command,
wherein they, or any of them, have served the Parliament; that so what shall
appear to be justly due upon the aforesaid Debenters, may be made an
unquestionable debt unto them. And for the more effectual accomplishment
hereof, we desire, that the Respective Treasurers and Commissaries of musters
of the several Armies, may be commanded to attend the said Committee or
Commissioners, that thereby the Arrears of any person of this Army, incurred in
other Armies or Garrisons, who by his or their continual attendance upon the
service, have not had their accounts audited and stated, may now be fully
accounted for, without further trouble.

And forasmuch as the Accounts of many who are Members of this Army, and have
formerly served the Parliament under other Commands, (though the neglect or
want of musters, loss of Papers, death of Officers, taking of Garrisons, etc.)
will be very difficult to be cleared, to what they will be for the service
under the Command of His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, where Musters have
been certain, and Accounts better kept, and such contingencies as aforesaid
have not h^pned; we humbly offer, that the said Committee or Commissioners, may
have such full instructions, that where Certificates from superior Officers
cannot possibly be obtained, or other sufficient Testimonies had, the oath of
such persons may be taken, and vallid as to the stating of their Accounts

And in regard there remains a dis-satisfaction upon the Army, grounded upon
the Instructions made for the auditing of our Accounts, and published to us at
the Rendesvouze of the Army at Triplow-heath, in order to our satisfaction,
wherein care is taken for the abatement for Freequarter, when moneys have been
received, and quarters not accordingly satisfied, but no notice taken of
payment of quarters at any time, beyond our proportions of pay received, nor
any regard had of the several hard^hips, wants, and extremities we have been
put upon, in times of eminent service, viz. difficult marches, continual
motions, and tediou^ L^ghers, etc. Where, by the greatness of our Body, or
closeness in posture in quartering, there has been such scarcity in
provisions, that both Officers and Soldiers have been put to extreme expenses
in procuring necessaries to live upon, and all this at such time when no moneys
have been sent us; and thereupon a proceed-made to the several large deduction
thereafter specified, which we neither then nor yet can see good grounds for:
therefore we humbly ^ffer, that the two Houses would be pleased to reassume
the consideration of the said Instructions, and think upon some expedient,
whereby our deduction for Free Quarter may be moderated, as to the Instructions
aforesaid: and that no person who has constantly paid quarters, may be put
upon any deduction, nor any Officer be accountable for any thing save that
which particularly concerns himself.

And further we desire there may be effectual course taken, and provision made
for the stating of the Accounts, and securing the Arrears of other the
Soldiery of the Kingdom, who have faithfully served the Parliament, and
concurred with this Army in their late engagement.

And whereas diverse of the Horsemen of this Army upon the loss of their Horses
in the Parliaments service, have at their own charges furnished themselves
with others, fit for the said service, and happily have again lost certain of
the said Horses so bought, whereby the State have been served, and the
Soldiery much damnified: We humbly desire the two Houses will be pleased to
take it into their consideration, thar some convenient satisfaction may be
thought upon for such, as by sufficient Testimonial shall make it appear they
have been damnifyed as aforesaid.

2. Secondly, That Provision may be forthwith made, and a visible security
given, to satisfy the Arrears of the Army, in such way and manner, as may be
least burdensome to the Commonwealth; in order to which we offer, that
Bishops lands, Dean and Chapters lands, and Forest Lands may be speedily put
to sail, or otherwise made over for the use aforesaid, or any other way the
Parliament in their wisdom shall think meet, appearing satisfactory for the
security of the said Arrears.

3. Thirdly, That there may be an Ordinance for securing all and every person
in this Army, who have willingly served the Parliament, from being impressed
out of this Kingdom, to any foreign service: and that no Horseman shall be
forced to serve on foot in any future case: And for the more real effecting
hereof, we desire, that every such person aforesaid, as shall have a
certificate under the Generals or his respective Field Officer or Captains
hand, that he has served in this Army (which he may carry about him, or keep
by him, by producing such a Ticket he may be upon sight thereof discharged:
and that if any Officer shall detain any such person after the sight of such
testimonial, there may be a certain penalty inflicted upon him.

4. Fourthly, That the Ordinance concerning Apprentices freedom, that have
served the Parliament, may be made an act before or at the settling of a Peace.

5. Fifthly, That the Ordinance concerning Provision for maimed Soldiers, and
the Widows, and Orphants of men slain in the Parliaments service, may
likewise be made an Act.

6. Sixthly, That to the Ordinance lately past for Indemnity, there may be an
Additionall Provision, for saving harmless and Indemnified the Army and all
the Members of it. As also all that have acted in concurrence with it, and for
securing of them from all Troubles, Question, or Prejudice for or concerning
any thing done, in, upon or in pursuance of the Petition of the Army, agreed
upon at Walden, in March last; or any the papers since then presented and
published from the Army, or any the things therein contained, or for or
concerning any thing spoken or done in relation to, or in Vindication of the
Army, from the injuries or extremities put upon it, about the said Petition, or
since: which Additionall Provision we desire, may, together with the said
Ordinance for Indemnity, be past into Acts, at the settling of a Peace: so as
we or others, may not (for what we have done or insisted on, in necessary
defense or Vindication of our selves, as Soldiers; from Ruin or insufferable
Injuries and Oppressions, or in behalf of the Common wealth; for the settling
and securing of the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and Safety thereof) remain
subject to the malice or censures of our and the Kingdoms Enemies, who we
have opposed upon any future advantage.

Putney, September. 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sr Thomas
Fairfax, and the general Council of the Army. Signed John Rushworth, Secretary.


