THE PROPOSITIONS OF HIS EXCELLENCY Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, AND The Officers in
that Army; MADE To the Right Honorable the Houses OF PARLIAMENT, Before their
drawing back the Quarters of the Army to a further distance from LONDON.

Together with the Copy of a Warrant.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1647.

THE PROPOSITIONS OF His Excellency Sr. Thomas Fairfax, And the rest of the
Officers in that ARMY.
WHereas the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament have desired to know
from us what things we do desire to be granted before our drawing back the
Quarters of the Army to a further distance from London, upon the granting
whereof we will engage to draw back; we do in answer thereunto humbly
propose these particulars following, as what are of present necessity to us;
And do we at present desire to be granted in order to the Armies and
kingdoms present safety in the further debate, transaction and settlement of
those other things contained in our former representations and papers, which
will require and may admit more time: Upon the granting of which things, we
shall willingly draw back as is desired to have those other matters debated and
transacted at a further distance, with deliberation answerable to the nature
and weight of them.

1 That the Parliament would be pleased to recall the Declaration inviting men
to desert the Army, and promising their Arreares in case they do so, and to
declare for future, that whosoever shall desert their Colors, or charges in
the Army, without the Generals particular license and discharge, shall not
have any of their Arrears paid them.

2 That the Army may be paid up equally to those that have deserted it, this
we desire may be immediately granted or resolved, before we draw back, and to
be performed (at least) to the private Soldiers fully, and in part to the
Officers, with all speed convenient.

3 That those that have deserted the Army may be instantly discharged and
dispersed, and receive no more of their Arreares till the Army be first
satisfied.

4 That both Parliament and City may be speedily and effectually freed from
the multitudes of Reformadoes and other Soldiers before mentioned, that flock
together in or about London by a speedy dispatch and discharging them from the
City.

5 That all such listings and raisings of new Forces, or drawing together of
any, (as in our Remonstrance and Papers are expressed) and all preparations
toward a new War may be effectually declared against and suppressed, as
also all invitations or endeavors to draw in foraign Forces either from
Scotland, or other foraign parts.

6 That the continuation of the Army, in the pay of the State for some
compitent time (whiles the matters in debate relating both to the Army and
Kingdom may be concluded and settled) be at present ordered and declared for
(before our drawing back) and the same with all speed to be effectually put
into an established way that the Army may be enabled to pay quarters for the
ease of the Country where it must lie, and the Soldiery the better kept from
abuse to the Country and reduced to that good order and discipline which has
formerly been happily kept in this Army, though of late (through want of pay
and other just discontents with the late provocations put upon them unhappily
interrupted.

7 That during the same space the Parliament would resolve not to propose any
place for his Majesty's residence nearer to London then they will allow the
quarters of the Army to be.

Now for our former desire of present suspending the impeached members from
sitting in the House.

1. Whereas (we understand) the house has voted that it does not appear that
any thing has been said or done by them within the house touching any matter
contained in the Papers from the Army for which the house can in justice
suspend them, though, (if way were given and opened without breach of
privilege) for us to charge them with, and for others to be examined (and
freely to testify unto such things) we should not doubt to make such
proceedings and practices of theirs in the House to appear, for which
according to former presidents they justly ought and might be suspended; yet
we are so tender of the Privileges of Parliament, as that we shall at present
forbear to reply or press further upon that point for the Houses proceedings
therein upon their own cognizance.

2 Whereas the House has Voted that by the Laws of the Land, no Judgment can
be given to suspend those Members from sitting in the House upon the Papers
presented by the Army before particulars produced, and proofs made, though we
think good Reasons may be given and presidents found to the contrary, even in
the proceedin^^ of this Parliament, as in the case of the Earl of Straffor^,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord Keeper Finch, and others yet we do
Declare, That we have both particulars and proofs against them ready to
produce; But considering that the proceeding thereupon will probably take up
much time, and the present unsettled affairs of the Kingdom in relation to
those greater matters proposed by us do require a speedy confideration; We
shall be willing that those greater and more general matters of the Kingdom
b^^ first considered of, and settled before the censure of those Members be
determined, and therefore because they may apprehend it some prejudice to them
to have their particular charges given in, and lie upon them so long
undetermined, we shall be willing to forbear the giving in of the particulars
against them, till they may without interruption to the general Affairs be
immediately proceeded upon; but if the House do think fit the particulars
against them be first delivered in, we shall be ready to do it.

3. Whereas we understand that the Members charged, have desired leave from the
House to withdraw themselves, we cannot but take notice of the modesty
thereof, so far as that we are contented therewith for the present more quiet
proceeding to settle the perplexed affairs of the kingdom (which without any
private animofities against persons) is our greatest end in what we do, only
we declare that (as we suppose the Gentlemen themselves from the same grounds
that induced them to offer this, will still forbear to offer the contrary till
the matters concerning them be heard and determined, or to make any new
interruption or disturbance to the proceeding upon, or settlement of the
general affairs of the kingdom, so we hope and shall confidently expect
that the wisdom and justice of the House will not admit any thing to the
contrary or leave it to an hazard thereof, but will use sufficient care and
caution against any such thing. And for the bringing of those Members to trial
when the house shall judge is more seasonable and safe as before expressed.

Uxbridge June 22. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX and the Council of War. Signed Jo. Rushworth,Secretary.

Vxbridge 27. Junii 1647.
WHereas, without order from the General or the Council of War, Commissary
Cowly has issued out Warrants to some hundreds within less then a mile of
London, to bring provisions from thence into the Army; which he pretended to
be, to be Rendezvouzed between London and Vxbridge; whereas there was no such
thing ordered either by the General or his Council of War. It is therefore
this day Ordered by the General and his Council of War, that the said
Commissary Cowly shall stand committed, and he is hereby committed to the
Marshall from whence he is not to be discharged until he has given
satisfaction to the Commissioners for the City of London residing at Vxbridge.

John Rushworth Secretary.

To Captain Lawrence, Provost Marshall General.

