A REMONSTRANCE From His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, AND His COUNCIL of
WAR, CONCERNING The late discontent and distraction in the Army. With his
Excellencies Declaration of himself, and expectation from the Army thereupon,
for the future uniting of the Army.

Published by his Excellency at the Head of every Regiment, at the first
Randezvouze of the Army in Cork-bush Field between Hartford and Wars, Monday
November. 15. 1647.

BY the Appointment of his Excellency, and the Council of War,

Signed, JOHN RVSHWORTH, Secr.
Novembr. 16.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbot.





London, Printed for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill near
the Royal Exchange, 1647.

A Remonstrance from His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War.
THat ever since the Engagement of the arrmy at Newmarket Heath, his
Excellency, with the General Officers, and General Council of the Army [to
which that Engagement refers] have been doing their duty and b^st endeavors
for the good of the army and kingdom, according to the ends of that
Engagement, and the Declarations and other Papers that have since past from the
army: and in this [according to their consciences, and the best of their
understandings] they have done the utmost they could without present
destruction to the Parliament, which in their opinions would inevitably have
put the Kingdom into blood and confusion, and so both the Army and Kingdom into
an incapacity or past all rational hopes of attaining or enjoying that
satisfaction or security, for which the Engagement was entered into: and if they
have neglected any thing, wherein they might have done better, They have been
ready (as still they are) to be convinced thereof, and to amend the default,
and to hearken to what any man would soberly offer for that purpose, or to lead
them to any thing better.

That while they have thus been doing their duty [besides many other
interruptions or diversions, by the designs and workings of Enemies] they have
of late found the greatest interruption to their proceedings, by a few men,
Members of the army, who [without any authority or just cause thereunto that we
know of, assuming the name of Agents for several Regiments] have [for whatends
we know no^] taken upon them to act as a divided party from the said Council
and army, and associating themselves with, or rather [as we have just cause to
believe] giving themselves up to be acted or guided by diverse private persons
that are not of the army] have endeavored by various falsehoods and scandals,
raised and divulged in Print, and otherwise against the General, the General
Officers and Council, to possess the Army and kingdom with jealousies of
them, and prejudice against them [as if they were taln from their principles,
had broken their Engagements and Declarations, and thereby forfeited their
Trust, and were in their whole proceedings false and treacherous both to the
army and Kingdom.] and by these and other practices, the said agents and their
associates, have labored to make parties and factions in the army, to raise
discontents, muti^ies, and disorders therein, to divide the soldiers from the
Officers, and both Officers and soldiers amongst themselves, and to withdraw
several parts of the army from their duty and obedience to the Generals Orders
(and that) in things most necessary for the safety of the army and Kingdom.

And thus while they causelessly cry out against breach of Engagements, and
dividing the army, they themselves have made, or endeavored to make the
greatest breaches of the Engagements, and greatest dividing of the army that
can be; a dividing most truly contrary to the Engagement: a dividing, which is
as bad and destructive, as disbanding; even the dissolution of all that Order,
Combination, and Government, which is the Essence of anarmy: and under false
delusive pretenses [that the Engagements have been broken] they have
endeavored really to loosen and draw the army off from its former Engagements,
and to draw it into new Engagements, different from, and (in some things)
destructive to the former; and have thus endangered the greatest forfeiture of
the Faith and Honor of the army, that ever it incurred.

And whilst they cry out, that there is nothing done, they themselves have
made the greatest obstructions, to the doing of any good for the army or
Kingdom, both in the hindrances and delays to our proceedings, and the
expense of time, which their workings have occasioned (either to have satisfied
them, (if it had been possible) or else to solve and quiet those discontents
and distractions which they have raised in the army) and also by the occasions
which the Parliament and Kingdom (yea even our best friends in both) have thus
received, to discourage them from compliance with, or confidence in, an army,
so uncertain, so unsettled, so divided.

For these Causes, the Genesis has thought fit to Randezvouz the Army or such
parts of it as are not fixed upon necessary duty elsewhere. And having (with
advice of the general Council,) sent to the Parliament more importunately
then before, for speedy satisfaction to the Army in their just desires
(especially in point of provision for constant pay, to avoid free Quarter, and
of security for Arreares.) thought it best (with the same advice) to dismiss
most of the Officers, and Agitators from the Head Quarters for a fortnight unto
their respective Regiments to satisfy and compose those discontents and
divisions which have thus been raised in them; and for ease to the Country and
accommodation to the Soldiery (with respect to the season of the year) thought
fit to contract the Quarters of the Army in three Brigades, and to draw them to
three several Randezvouzes, not far from each other, and this in order to one
general Randezvouz, if there should be any occasion: And, in this, the
several Regiments of Horse and Foot have been appointed to constant Quarters
in order to those several Randezvouzes taking them directly in order as their
several Quarters lay before, without any other respect or consideration; but
even these things the said pretended Agents and their Associates have labored
to pervert, etc. and make advantage of, to the aforesaid ends of discontent and
distraction, and to represent the same to the several Regiments as done in
pursuance of the same treacherous Counsels and desi^n^s which they had before
suggested, and what good they could not deny to be in the things, they assume
to themselves, as gained by their procurement, and so greedily catched at the
sole credit of it, as if the Genesis and his Council, (but for them) had not done
it, and by letters or Messages, contradicting the general order, they have
(under such scandalous pretenc^s) labored to draw diverse Regiments from the
Quarters and Randezvouzes to which they were ordered; unto the first Randezvouz
near Ware, in a disorderly and confused manner to the oppression of the
Country and disaccomodation (if not quarrelling and distraction) of the
Soldiery quartering.

That without redress of these abuses and disorders, his Excellency cannot nor
will, any longer undergo or undertake further to discharge his present Trust
to the Parliament, the Army and Kingdom.

That though he is far above any such low thoughts as to Court or woo the
Army to continue him their General, yet, to discharge himself to the utmost,
and bring the business to a clear and certain Issue, his Excellency does now
declare.

That he is yet willing to adheare to and to conduct and live and die with the
Army in the lawful prosecution of these things following viz.

I. For the Soldiery to obtain.
1. Present prov^sion for constant pay, while continued, to make them to
discharge Quarters. 2. The present stating of accounts, and security for
arreares, with an effectual and speedy course to raise moneys thereupon. 3.
Sufficient Indemnity, and Commissioners in every County for that purpose. 4.
Provision for maimed Soldiers, and the Widows and Orpha^s of men slain in
the service (and that in a certain and no dishonorable way) with Commissioners
in every County for that purpose. 5. Provision for freedom from pressing,
according to the first Petition of the Army. 6. Provision for freedom of
Prentices, that have served in the wars, with a penalty upon M^sters refusing
to give it.
II. For the Kingdom.
A period to be set for this present Parliam^nt (to end as soon as may be with
safety) and provision thereunto to be made for future Parliaments.

For the certainty of their Meeting, sitting, and ending, and for the freedom
and equality of Elections thereto [to render the House of C^mmons as near as
may be an equal Representative of the People that are to elect.]

And (according to the Representation of the Army of June 14.) to leave other
things to and acquiesse in the dete^minations of Parliament; But to mind the
Parliament of and to mediate with them for r^dresse of the common grievances of
the people, and all other things that the army have declared their desires for.

That upon his Excellencies continued conjunction in these things, He expects,
That for the particular circumstance of them, the army shall [according to
their aforesaid first Engagement] acquiesse in what shall be agreed unto by the
General Council of the Army, to which that Engagement referres; and [for the
matter of the ordering, conduct, and government of the army] That ^v^ry Mem^e^
of it shall be observant of, and subject to his Excellency, his Council of
war, and every one to his superior Officers, according to the Discipline of
war; for assurance whereof, he expects, that as many as are satisfied h^re
with, and do agree hereunto, do severally subscribe to what is here under
^r^tten for that purpose.

WE the Officers and Soldiers of (...) Regiment of (...) whose Names are
subscribed, do hereby declare, That we are satisfied in his Excellency, the
Generals continued conjunction with the Army, in the lawful prosecution of
the things here before declared, to be prosecuted for the Soldiery and
Kingdom respectively; And (for the particular circumstances of them) we shall
(according to the general Engagement of the Army above mentioned) acquiesse in
what shall be agreed unto by the General Council of the Army, to which that
Engagement referres; and for matter of the ordering, conduct, and government of
the Army, we shall be observant of and subject to his Excellency, his Council
of War, and (every one of us) to our Superior Officers in this Regiment and
the Army, according to the Discipline of War. (...)


