A DECLARATION AND APPEAL TO ALL THE FREEBORNE PEOPLE OF THIS KINGDOM IN
GENERAL.
And to all the truly Noble, Pyous and well affected Patriots and people of
God, within the Cities of London and Westminster in particular, Humbly craving
their assistance and furtherance of this just request unto the high Court of
Parliament. Made from all the brethren the poor afflicted and oppressed
Prisoners (imprisoned for debt,) within the several Goastes. (Being the Soul
destroying Houses, and Dens of Cruelty, Injustice, Tyranny and Oppression)
within this Kingdom of England.
IN all humble manner showing unto you, That from the first sitting of this
Parliament, (the only hopes left unto us next under God) for the suppressing of
all Injustice, Tyranny and Oppression, and for the advancement and opening the
door of time Justice, Judgment, and mercy to all, in a free current without
respect of persons, according to the Law of God, the fundamental law of this
Land, and the just liberty of the Subject, We have expected our just liberty
and enlargement from these several Dungions of misery, yet we your poor
oppressed Brethren have Still unto this present time been inslaved in our
persons, bereift of our Estates, Credites, and Callings, and buried alive in
the several Prisonhouse within this Kingdom, and City of London, And there
(by Iaylors) tyrannically oppressed and tormented, contrary to the law of God,
the laws of all other nations, and (as is conceived) against the contents of
Magna Charta as appears by Register folio 77. de Hommo Replegiando, folio 66.
also the 3. of Edward the 1. chap 15, and the 25. of Ed. the 3. chap 4, where
it appears that the body of no free borne Denison of England is to be
imprisoned for Debt. Nice per Legem terrae the 9. of Henry the 3. chap, 29. and
the 52. of Henry the the 3. chap, the 5. and the 14. of Edward the 3. chap. 1.
and in the Abridgement of Statutes, folio 65. and 6. and by the Petition of
Right in the 3. of Charolie. And all Statutes made to the contrary hereof (in
point of the Subjects liberty) are absolutely void by the Statute of the 42. of
Edward the 3. chap. 1.

The imprisonment of men for debt, being justly conceived to be contrary to the
late Petition of Right, Ratified by His Majesty in Anno 1640. and contrary to
the several Oaths, Vows, Protestations, and National Covenant, and the just
and undeniable Priveledge and liberty of the Subject in general, being also
ratified and confirmed, above 30. several times by the several Kings of this
Realm, and yet (most uniustly) the virtue and priveledges thereof have been
for this long time concealed from the people, and the true use and power
thereof perverted, by the indirect practices of coveteous mercenary Lawyers
(the instruments of contention and oppression) who prefer their own unjust
gain and the advancement of their kingdom of contention (and the flourishing
state of Iaylors) fair before the just rights and undeniable priveledges and
liberty of the Subject, which liberty in it self tends to the honor of God,
the advancement of true piety the establishment of Love, Unity and peace among
the people of this land, as also the tranquillity of this Kingdom, whereas the
advancement of their Kingdom of contention and Houses of iniquity, tends
only to the dishonor of God, and the suppressing of true piety, as also to the
breach of the bond of true christian love, Unity and Peace amongst all men, and
to the universal ruin of this Kingdom, suitable to the words of late uttered
by an eminent Lawyer, who said that it were better that all the Prisoners
perished, then that the flourishing state of the Law should decline, this
saying being like the words of those Ephesins, who reviled Paul the blessed
Messenger of Peace and Mercy, and cried up still Dyana the Gods of the
Ephesians saying, Great is Dyana the Gods of the Ephesians, and all this
proceeding from the Devil that grand enemy to all true Christian Love, Unity,
and Peace. And thus the wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are
exalted, they are corrupt they have done abominable works, they speak
peaceably to their neighbors, when mischief is in their hearts, for they
regard not the works of the Lord, (Even true Justice, Judgment, and mercy)
but in their hearts they prefer. That the abominable gain of Injustice and
tyranny, and love to possess the riches of Oppression, Fraud and Deceit,
dispising the Poor and oppressing them, and drawing them before the Judgment
Seat, to their utter ruin and deprivation of their Estates and Libertyes.

That your poor afflicted brethren, have often since the beginning of this
Parliament, addressed themselves by their several humble Petitions and
Remonstrances unto the honorable court of Parliament for relief against
Injustice, Tyranie and oppression inflicted on them by Lawyers and saylors, and
forre releafe of their persons from this slaverie of imprisonment, most
uniustly long since fastened upon them, and the posterity of this whole Nation,
by the most subtle and indirect practices of brybing Judges, coveteous Lawyers,
seditious Atturnies, Oppressing Iaylors, and their potent adherents, but by
what unjust and impyous hand we know not, our several Petitions and
Remonstrances have been hitherto extremely slighted and obstructed, and we
thereby still exposed to all injustice, tyranny, and oppression, and I
miserable Languishment in Jail, where the Iaylors unlimitted power and
tyranny transcends all Regal power, being (in his own cause) both Plaintiff
and Judge, and also Executioner of his own cruel will upon poor Christians
committed to his custody, and who are also conceived to be supported and
countenanced therein by some eminent persons, alied (unto some of them about
London)

The which impyous restraint of our persons in Jail, tends to none other end
then to the inrichment of Lawyers, Atturnies, Solissitors and Iaylors, and to
the utter ruin of thousands of us your oppressed brethren, and of our wives
and children, and where also (through the cruelty of Iaylors and their bloody
instruments) diverse honest and godly men have suffered untimely ends and most
cruel deaths, whose blood (doubtless) cries for vengeance at the hand of God.

That we your oppressed Brethren still hungring and thirsting after our just
and precious Liberty, and seeing no fruits of our former several Petitions and
Remonstrances, did in October 1644. address ourselves by our humble APPEAL
unto the Reverend Synod of Divines, and thereby humbly craving their favorable
furtherance of our Releasement from this our Inslayed thraldom. From whom also
we have hitherto received none other Cordial (for our comfort and hope of
Liberty) then a cold comfortless Mess of Broth, seasoned only with a few
unsavorie Lentalls, whereby we are still exposed to the many and unexpressable
Cruelties of Barbarous and extorting Iaylors, and their hungry blood sucking
Substitutes.

The Premises justify and piously weighed (by all the Commonalty of this land)
and for that this slaverie of Imprisonment of men for Debt, (most unjustlie
fastened upon us and all the Freeborne people of this Land) tends to none
other end, then to the utter ruin of us and all our posterities, in their
Estates, Credites, Callings and precious Liberties, and only to the Iurichment
of Lawyers, Atturmes, Solissitors, Clerks and Iaylors, and to the advancement
of most wicked and ungodly Contention, Injustice, Tyranny, and Oppression, for
which the wrath of God is now come down upon us, under the heavy burden
whereof the whole Kingdoms at present groneth, and by reason whereof Blood
touches Blood.

Your poor oppressed and afflicted Brethren ( And Prisoners for Debt) do
therefore appeal unto you, and most humbly beseech you in the bowels of
compassion (and for his sake that has so derely bought us) to take these our
miserable unjust sufferings (and the slaverie fastened on you and your
posterities) into your serious consideration, that so by a true and speedy
course of Justice (without respect of person this Egyptian slaverie and heavy
Yoke of Imprisonment for debt, may be b^. That so thereby both you and we,
and all our posterities in general, may be freed and clearly acquitted from
this bondage of imprisonment, tyranny and oppression (for all times and ages
to come) according to the true contents and meaning of the great and free
Charter of England, being the unalterable and fundamental law of this
Kingdom, (for the liberty of the Subject,) purchased by the blood of many
thousands of our Ancestors.

And that it may be ordered and established, That such Prisoners at present, as
have Estates, and make the Prison their Sanctuary (to the defrauding of their
Creditors) may by some just and impartial course, enforced (out of the two
third parts of their estates either in Lands or Goods) to give present
satisfaction to their Creditors, and the other third part of the said Debtors
Estate to be reserved unto the Debtor, for and toward the future subsistence
of him, his Wife and Famelie, and the Education of his children, and their
persons being freed from Imprisonment, may then be take themselves to their
former Endeavors and Callings.

And that such poor Prisoners as have been many years since (by their
Creditors) berefit of all their estates, credites, callings and liberties, by
the help of that most cruel and abominable Statute of Bancrout, and are
thereby become the most miserable Spectacle of Poverty (through Tyranny and
Oppression) and their wives and children brought to the state of beggerie. That
these may be forthwith acquitted out of Jail (Maugre the cruelty of Iaylors,
their bloody Substitutes and potent Adherents) not suffering them to perish in
Jail merely forwant of paying the Iaylor his unjust and unlimitted extorting
Fees, as many score of poor Christians have done, within the Prison of Kings
Bench alone.

Considering also that 10. 20. or 30. years imprisonment of the body,
discounteth not one penny of debt to the Creditor, but only inableth the Iaylor
and his hellish Substitutes (like so many Vipers) to suck the vital blood of
the poor Prisoners. In which particular, England may send a defyance to all
Europe, Asia, Africa and America, to parallel her cruelty inflicted on her
brethren and fellow members of the same commonwealth.

That there may be a Certain number of honestable Godly men, in every City
and Town corporate appointed (as it is in Germany and many other countries) for
the weekly visitation of the several Prisons, to know the just cause of men's
imprisonment for debt, and to inquire upon oath the present ability of the
prisoner, that so thereby the cruel Creditor, the contentious Lawyer. Atturnie
and Solissitor, and the oppressing Iaylor, may be prevented from loding of
false and fained Actions upon the poor Prisoners, who through their extreme
poverty are not able to stop the violent current of this their tyranny and
oppression. Requiring also of the poor Prisoners no less then 11. Groates for
withdrawing of every Action, besides three half pence in the pound for action
money, and 3. pence in the pound for Execution money, and besides 28. s. 4. d.
by them demanded as a Fee upon the discharge of every Prisoner out of the
common Jail, whereas in truth there is (justly according to the Statute of
Henry the 6.) But 4. d due to the Iaylor upon discharge of the Prisoner. Also
besides the 10. s. 6. d. by them extorted from the Prisoner for every days
liberty by Wrir, and 7. 9. 6. d by rule on the master side, and 3. s. a day of
every Prisoner on the Common side, And besides their excessive Chamber rent of
5. s. 8. s. and 10. s. 2 week extorted from every Prisoner on the Master side,
and in the Rules, together with 20 other several unjust extorting Fees exacted
from the poor Prisoners by these Iaylors and their hellish Substitutes. And
all this tendering to the utter ruin of the poor Prisoner his Wife and
Children, The defrauding of the Creditors, and to the only Inrichment of
Iaylors and their adherents, whose unlimitted power reaches far beyond the
lawful power of Sovereignty and exceeds the bounds of Justice, Reason and
Conscience.

And further that if any Prisoner be found to be a defrauder of his Creditors,
and upon his examination happen wittingly to perjure himself, by concealing
his Estate, then the said Commissioners to have power to instict upon such
persons convicted Corporal punishment, and then also the said perjured parties
Estate, to be disposed of by them to his Creditors, and if a Surpluge there of
remain (after the Creditors satisfaction) then the same to be by the said
Commissioners disposed of to the poor.

The reservation of the third part of the Debtors Estate, will prove an
encouragement to all, for the disclosing of the whole Estate to the
Commissioners and the Corporal punishment of the Frandulent Debtor, together
with the deprivation of whole Estate, will be a terror to all evil minded
men, (a course usual in many other Countries) and will doubtless prove a
thing just and pleasing both to God and man, and beneficial to the Creditors.

That the murders and inhumaine Cruelties by Iaylors frequently inflicted on
Prisoners may be justly and truly searched out. And that all these accursed
Achans in this our Israel may receive their due reward of severe justice,
whereby God may be glorified, and the Land acquitted from the guilt of innocent
blood, For Israel could not have peace, so long as the Gibionites (slain, by
Saul) were unrevenged.

That Iaylors may be forth with restrained, and by the higher powers, limited
and bounded in their Fees and Demands now most unjustlie extorted from
Prisoners. In especial Sir John Lenthall, who out withstanding the terror of
this Parliament (being supported by some Members of the same as is conceived)
has of late inflicted new oppressions on the Prisoners, and also for the
advancement of the rent of his seller, and kitchen, inforceth the Prisoners to
buy all their meat and drink in the said prison at a far higher price then that
which they usually before had it for (abroad at the chandlers.

And that the palpable Malignancie of some eminent Iaylors may be also
suppressed, and restrained in their extraordinary favor, liberty and
protection by them conferred upon Papists, Jesuits, Priests, Delinquents and
Malignants, and that their rigor and extreme cruelty inflicted on all such as
stand well affected to Religion the Parliament and liberty may be restrained,
that so God may receive the glory, your poor Unjust inslaved Brethren their
liberties, and all your and our posterities in general the happiness and
comfort to all succeding generations. For behold, now they despise and tread
upon the poor, they afflict the needy, yea they eat up Gods people as they
eat bread. For we are as a people ensnared in holes, buried alive in
prison-houses, robbed of our Estates, Credites, Callings and liberty, and yet
none says restore unto them their right (ever their Liberty.)

Wherefore we beseech you by the Mercies of God, and in the bowels of
compassion, to remember us that are in bonds (even as bound with us) and all of
us that suffer adversity and tribulation, as being your selves also in the body
(and by the like oppressions made subject to the same afflictions.) For behold
we are all your brethren, Flesh of your flesh, and bone of your bone, Oh,
therefore suffer us not to be any longer tormented, oppressed, distressed,
inslaved and utterly ruined and destroyed in Prison-houses, being all of them
none other but the proper places of injustice, tyranny and oppression, where
they that rule over us make us to howl, and enforce us thereby to wish for the
consumation of our days out of this veil of misery, and places of tyranny
and oppression:

For thus says the Lord, What do I require of thee Oh man, but to do
justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God, to relieve the
Widow, the Fatherless, and the Stranger, and to lee the oppressed (and long
imprisoned) go free. Then, (yet not tell then) shall your light break forth
as the Sun, and then (yet not tell then) will the Lord your God have mercy
upon you and divert these his present Judgments from you, and heal the Land,
For the Lord our God, is a God of justice, judgment and mercy. Therefore be
you merciful, as your heavenly father is merciful: observing and perserving
in this sacred rule (truly and constantly (even, To do as you would be done
unto.

November 1645.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. The
humble Petition of all the poor Oppressed and Distressed Prisoners within the
prison of King's Bench, and all other Prisons for Debt, within the Kingdom of
England, and principallitie of Wales, Conceived to be about 8000 in number at
the least.
Most humbly Complaining, Shows.

THat your poor oppressed Petitioners, having sundry times (ever since the
beginning of this Parliament) addressed themselves by their several humble
petitions, unto this honorable Assembly, for the obtaining of their just and
undoubted Rights and Priveledges, (being the liberty and freedom of their
persons from the slaverie of Imprisonment fastened on their persons by the
illegal practices and unexpressable abuse of Magna Charta, in all which
hitherto your Petitioners have reaped no redress nor release.

That in the 3. year of his Majesty's reign, the body of this Commonwealth
being sensible of many sufferings, occasioned by the breach of Magna Charta (it
being the contract and perpetual law between the King and his Subjects) the
Lords and Commons then assembled, petitioned His Majesty for confirmation on of
the same (which employed their consents) to which His Majestic then ascented and
since confirmed (which implies an Act) and if to an Act and a legal
confirmation, then we humbly conceive and tha^ most true, that it nullifies
all latter Statutes that are made in contradiction thereof, tending to the
betraying of the Liberty of the Subject, and the inslaving of their persons and
the persons of all their posterities, to all succeeding Generations (which
contradiction, wehumblie conceive may seem too great in the wisdom of this
honorable Assembly) it having been maintained publicly therein, that the
Subjects must be eased in their persons (being a freeborne people and no
Villians nor Slaves) from all illegal excess, and imprisonment of their
persons, against Magna Charta, which is our greatest liberty and the only
leading Mother-law of this Kingdom, purchased by the blood of many thousands
of our Ancestors.

The premises justly and piously weighed, and for that your Petitioners have
been of late (by many religious and well affected persons in this City and
Kingdom) Encouraged once more to adresse themselves unto this honorable
Assembly, by this our humble Petition, for release from this their unjust
tyrannical restraint, considering also and duly weighing, that 10. 20. or 30.
years imprisonment of the body, does not discount one penie of debt to the
Creditor. Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray, that by the wisdom, Justice,
and piety of this honorable Assembly, their persons may be restored to their
ancient legal and just liberties, as at the first, and the free current of
justice opened, that so your Petitioners (notwithstanding their extreme
poverty and want of potent friends) may be enabled to partake thereof freely
and not enforced to buy it for the price of Iniquity as formerly, and their
Estates, if any remaining; may only be made liable, in the two third parts
thereof, to satisfy their debts, with some charitable and due consideration
first had to the future subsistence of themselves their wives and family, and
the education of their children, A think in it self agreeable to the law of
God, the rule of Charity and the laws of many other Nations, that so both they
and all their posterities to succeeding Generation, being clearly acquitted
from this Egyptian bondage may have just cause to bless the memory of this
honorable Assembly, and Eternise their names, as of the restores of our
ancient Rights and liberties,

This Petition was before the 6. of October 1645. subscribed by almost a
hundred of us the prisoners of King's Bench and intended to have been presented
from us to the House of Peers within 2. days after, but it coming to the
knowledge of Sir John Lenthall and his cruel Deputy Thomas Dutson, they then
forthwith procured Justice Whittaker to send a Messenger with his Warrant to
the prison of Kings Bench thereby requiring James Frese, to deliver that and
all his other writings, upon whose refusal, they were then by the said
Messenger assisted by Thomas Durson and 4. or 5. of Sir John Lenthalls
servants, forcibly taken from the said James Frese and are all of them detained
from him until this present, this being the third time that the said James
Frese has been forcibly deprived of his writings by the said Sir John
Lenthall his Deputy and servants and by their procurement now at the last,
contrary to all justice equity and right, and statly against the priveledge,
liberty and safety of the Subject, and in further persuance in his cruelty
against all well affected to the Parliament, he the said Sir John Lenthall has
also since caused one Mr. Robert Cratchrod (a prisoner for Debt) to be
violently dragged forth out of the common Jail of Kings Bench and thrust into
the Common Dungion in the White Lion, (some times past the County Jail, but
now only a private house) thereby bereaving the poor Gentleman of his Cain and
Lodging, as (...)(a thing by him usually practiced) and all this is done by
him, only because the G(...)


