A full NARRATION Of the late Riotous Tumult Within the City of London. AND
Proceedings of the Lord Mayor, Committee of Militia, and the Common Council of
the said City concerning the same.

Presented to the House of PEERS upon Thursday the 13. of April, 1648.

With their LORDSHIPS ANSWER thereunto.

Die Jovis 13. April. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Narration be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.

Commune Concilium tent. in Camera Guildhall Civitatis London undecimo die
Aprilis 1648. Annoque Regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
vicesimo quarto Coram Johanne Warner Majore Civit. London, etc.
AT this Common Council Master Alderman Fowke and Master Alderman Gibbs, by
the direction of the Committee of the Militia of London, did make a large
relation of the great tumult, insurrection, and mutiny, which happened in this
City on the last Lords day and monday last, by many evil disposed persons,
which first began on the Lords day in the afternoon in the County of
Middlesex, where they seized the Colors of one of the trained Bands of the
said county, who were there employed for the suppressing of such persons as did
profane the Lords day, and being dispersed by some of the Generals Forces, did
gather together within the city of London and Liberties thereof, and in a
r^otous manner did break open diverse houses and magazines of Arms and
Ammunition, and took away Arms, Plate, money, and other things; and did seize
upon the drums of the trained bands of this city, which were beating to raise
their compani^s, and armed themselves, and beat up drums, and put themselves in
a warlike posture, and seized upon the gates, chains, and watches of this
city; and then marched to the Lord Mayors house, and there assaulted the Lord
Mayor, Sheriffs, committee of the militia of London, and other magistrates of
the same; and did shoot into the Lord Mayors house, beat back his Guards,
killed one of them, wounded diverse others, and seized and took away a piece of
Ordnance from thence, with which they did afterward slay and wound diverse
persons, and committed many other outrages. All which matters being largely
debated, and many particulars insisted upon, both for the discovery and
punishment of the said misdemeanors and outrages, and also for the preventing
of the like for time to come, it was at the last concluded and agreed by this
common council as follows: First, This common council do generally
conceive, that this city was in great danger by reason of the said outrages and
misdemeanors; and that if the same had not so timely been prevented and
stayed, the whole city would have been exposed to the fury and rage of the said
malefactors: And this common council does declare, That the same misdemeanour
and outrage was a horrid and detestable act, tending to the destruction of the
city; And that they do disavow the same, and with an utter detestation do
declare their d^slike thereof; And this common council do appoint the
committee of the militia of London to make the same known to the Honorable
Houses of Parliament; and also to make an humble request unto them, That an
Order may be issued forth from them to the several ministers of this city and
the places adjacent that they may be directed to give public thanks' to
Almighty God, the Author of this great and wonderful deliverance, from that
eminent danger wherein this city and parts adjacant were involved. And further
the said committee are appointed by this court to apply themselves to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament, for the obtaining of a special commission of
Oyer and Terminer, for the trying and punishing of all the malefactors that had
a hand in this detestable action, according to the known Laws of this Land;
and this court with thankful hearts do acknowledge the instruments under God,
by which they obtained this deliverance, to be by the forces raised and
continued by the Parliament, under the command of his Excellency the Lord
General Fairfax, and to manifest the same:

This Common Council do also order, that the said Committee of the Militia,
in the name of this City, as a thing agreed upon by a unanimous consent, shall
return their hearty Thanks to his Excellency for his speedy and seasonable
Aid afforded unto the City in this their great straight and danger; And this
court with a general consent do well approve of the endeavors of the said
committee of the Militia for London for the raising of the forces of this city,
and in their procuring of the said aid and help from his Excellency in this
extremity, and what else they have done for the appeasing and suppressing of
the said tumults; And this court does give thanks to the said committee of the
Militia for their care, and pains by by them taken upon this sad occasion; And
they do appoint Master Alderman Fowke to declare the same their thanks to
such of the said committee as are not of this court; And this court does also
with all thankfulness acknowledge the pains and care of the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor, and the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs of this city therein.
And this court do generally declare, That it is the duty of every citizen of
this city by himself, and all that do belong unto him, or is under his
command, to be ready upon all occasions to be ayding and assisting unto the
Lord Mayor and the rest of the Magistrates of this city, for the suppressing of
all tumults and disorders within the same; and the several persons now present
at this common council (by the holding up of their hands) have promised, that
for the time to come they will use their utmost endeavors, and be ready upon
all occasions to do the same.

Michell

At the Committee of the Militia of London, the tenth of April, 1648.
ORdered, That my Lord Mayor be hereby desired to call a common council to
morrow morning at ten of the clock, and that last nights tumult be reported to
the court by Alderman Fowke, and Alderman Gibbs, and what this committee then
did for the safety of this city, and what application they were forced to make
to the General for his assistance.

Adam Banokes Clerk to the said Committee.

WHereas by virtue of an Ordinance of Parliament, dated the second of
September, 1647. It was ordained and declared, That we the persons entrusted
with the ordering of the Militia within the city of London and the liberties
thereof, should have full power and authority to cause all and singular his
Majesty's Subjects inhabiting within the said city and liberties, that are meet
and fit for the wars from time to time to be assembled and called together,
and to be listed, well and sufficiently arrayed, weaponed, trained and
exercised, and put in readiness in places most fit for that purpose; and for
the better execution of the said Ordinance to make Colonells, captains, and
other officers, and to lead, conduct, and employ the said forces arrayed, and
weaponed for the safe guarding of the said city and liberties, and for the
suppression of all rebellions, insurrections, and invasions that may happen
within the same; and to give battle, and fight with them and their adherents,
and all others that shall approach with any such force toward or against the
Parliament, or the city of London and liberties thereof, or cause any
insurrection within the same, and them to invade, resist, repress, subdue,
pursue, kill and slay, and by all means to destroy as enemies of the kingdom.
We do therefore pray and require you, to observe all particulars above
mentioned unto you belonging, and to proceed therein according to the duty of
your place.

Dated at Guild Hall, London the 30. of October, 1647. Jo. Warner, Mayor. Owen
Row Thomas Noel Mark Hildsley Stephen Estwick Jo. Wollastou Tho. Andrews
Will. Berkeley Tho. Player


Colonel Underwood,
YOu are hereby required to raise your Regiment, and to draw them to the place
of Rendezvous, Completely Armed, and furnished with Powder, Match, and Bullet,
and to suppress all Tumults and Insurrections that may be to the prejudice of
the peace of the City, by sending out parties and Companies, or otherwise as
you shall see cause, and for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Dated at the Lord Mayors place the ninth of April. 1648. The Warrant above was
issued to Col. Underwood, Colonel Row, Col. Hayes, Liev. Co^^ (...) Col.
Harr^^^^,
Adam Banks Clerk to the Committee of the Militia London.

WHereas Tumults do much increase in the City, and the Drums of the Trained
Bands are taken from them, (...) ^s thought fit and so Ordered by the committe^
(...) the Militia London, that the chains of the several Wards be forthwith
(...) down, and the Deputies and Common-coun^^^men and Constables are required
to take notice hereof accordingly.

Dated the ninth of April. 1648.
To the Alderman of the Ward of Farringdon within.
By the Mayor.

THese are to will and require you in pursuance of an Order of the Committee of
the Militia for London that for the safety of this City you take care and see
that the books and stapels which fasten the chains to the Posts within your
Ward be forthwith this night pulled (...) and that they and the chains be by
you ta^^^ (...) ^^sposed of in some safe and secure place, (...) Deputy and
common-counsell shall th^^ (...) ^^^venient, until further Order be given in
(...)se, and hereof fail you not as you w^^^ ^^^wer the contrary at your
peril.

Dated the t^^th of A^ril. 1648. Michell

Their Lordships Answer.
THe Lord (...) knowl^dge the great and happy providence of Almighty God in the
preventing of so horred an outrage which might have endangered the lives of the
chief Magistrates and also hazarded the spoil of the whole City of London, in
Order to making their acknowledgements to God more public, and in answer to
the desires of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Common-Counsell, they will appoint
the Ministers of the several Parishes within the late lines of Communication
to give thanks unto God the next Lords day sot this preservation and
deliverance. They are well satisfied with the general d^slike and detestation
of (...) outrage expressed by you (...) the sense of the Lord Mayor ^ld^rmen,
and Common-couns^ll of the City of London, and will speedily Order that a
Commission of Oyre and Terminer, shall issue forth for the trial of these
Ma^efactors. They fully ap^^^ve of the ca^e, endeavors, and Orde^ of the Lord
Mayor and Militia of the City of London, and of the Orders lately made by the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Counsell concerning the same, and return
their thanks unto the Lord Ma^or, Aldermen and Common-Counsell, and the Militia
of the City of London, and they do earnestly desire them to continue still to
use their diligence and utmost endeavors for the preventing tumults and
outrages for the future, and to be careful for the preservation of the safety
and quiet of the City of London, wherein this House will always be ready to
give them their best assistance and encou^.

Ioh. (...) Cl^r. Parliamentorum:

FINIS

