THEIOS DIVINE BEAMS OF GLORIOUS LIGHT.

Shining from the sacred Scriptures, which expel the Fogges of Error, that
Engender darkness, in doubting souls, by mistaken thoughts,

TOUCHING The Diety, Faith, And Christian Ordinances.


WITH A Cordial to heal the Corasives which the ill potion prepared by Mr. John
Fry, a late Member of Parliament, has engendered.

Written by one, who desires more that God may be glorified, then to affix his
name to gain the vain applause of Man.

Licensed and Entered in the Stationers Hall Book.

London Printed by Robert Ibbitson 1651.

Divine Beams of glorious Light, shining from the sacred Scriptures, which
expel the fogs of error that engender darkness in doubting souls, by mistaken
thoughts touching the Diety, Faith, and Christian Ordinances, with a Cordial to
heal the Corasive which the ill potion prepared by Mr. John Fry, a late Member
of Parliament has engendered.
THe Philosophers, though generally they conformed their judgments to Reason,
yet the most sollid of them acknowledged there was a God (though not to be
attained unto by that study) which they called the unknown God, Act. 17.23.

Divine love in regeneration teaches us that there is a God, whom though now
with corrupted dark reason we cannot see, yet by faith we can believe, by the
rules of Scripture serve, and through hope wait for, calling upon his name.

But some (who have professed Religion) presume to be above Ordinances, whilst
the Atheists do deride and scorn them, both which contract an equal share in
guilt, as fighters against the Government of Jesus Christ in his Church here on
earth.

And in this Satanicall design against the Lord Jesus, some are great strivers
to defame those that dispense the word and Sacraments, that so Religion may the
more easily be overturned, and every man do any wickedness that seems good in
his own eyes which ought not so to be, Deuteronomy. 12.8.

I desire all solid Christians to search their own hearts, and there deal
plainly with their own consciences, whether there be not usually a nearer
communion with God in the Ordinances then in any other dispensation.

Whosoever thou art, that have ever tasted of the sweetness of God and his
love, tell me when waft thou so much filled with comfort from Gods presence, as
at such a time, when thou have heard such or such an heart breaking Sermon; or
in prayer with such or such holy people, or in thy closet, or at some public
or private devotion.

Nay more, who is there that has sweet communion with God, that sometimes
after a dull and dead affection heavenward, having prayed, and implored the
Throne of grace, before they have done wrestling with God, as Jacob did with
the Angel, have not many a time at last found so great a blessing, that their
hearts have been even swallowed up with divine ravishments of God.

I have been much troubled to see what has been published by some, pretenders
to promote Religion, and yet levelled to overthrow the doctrine of the diety,
the preaching of the gospel, and the administration of the Ordinances.

Amongst the rest, there are some things that have been declared by Mr. John
Fry, (a late Member of, but) Voted against by the Parliament, concerning which,
I shall briefly give you my thoughts.

He himself says, he desires to stand and fall according to judgment and
reason: He has asserted, and here I shall assert too, and then let Scripture
judge; and I assure you I look not on his person in my exceptions; The interest
I aim at herein is only to advance Christ, and his truth against gainsayers.

Neither do I make any apology for the factious Presbyterians, or Prelates,
nor any others of the troublers of Israel, who disquiet the comforts of those
poor souls who through experience (without litterall learning) have sweet
out-flowings in society with each other, through the internal power of the
divine workings.

And in this let reason judge, (whether he appeals himself) If studies, with
serious considerations; taking the assistance of the learned works of
predecessors, (as hand-maides to the meditations of preachers of the Gospel)
will not add to, and illustrate their abilities to preach to others; And
whether premeditated Sermons be not most beneficial to the auditors. If not to
help their own judgments, yet their expressions.

My thoughts are, to have an high esteem of all such as are precious in Gods
account, who is good to the Saints under variety of dispensations, yet even
Saints experiences though good to themselves, may (when mis-spoken) through
mistakes, prove of evil effect to others, who take them upon other grounds then
the Saints apprehended them. And whose judgment is so infallible, that they
may not possibly in some things take opinion for truth, when they speak their
own imaginations, and think it to be a truth settled on their hearts by God;
Master Fry confesses he cannot meet with any that goes with him in his way,
and you know there is a woe denounced against him that is alone.

And for the Assembly of Divines (those that now sit; For the disserters, I
have nothing to plead for them) I could Catalogue them one by one, and tell you
where, and how often they preach every week in their respective places, even
as the Oracles of God, and to the great comfort of their Auditors, amongst whom
are many precious souls. In that he pretends to take example by the noble
Bereans to search the Scriptures, he does well if he does so, but I would
desire him to reflect upon his own actions, and see wherein he has not
followed them, and let him tell me, if ever he found them or any other holy
people to publish what they concurred not with, as Crimes against the devout
Clergy that taught them, but rather put up hearty prayers to God in Christ, to
make them able Ministers of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 1.11. Phil. 1.4.10. Romans 15.30.
Phil. 4.22.

And though he has followed Hagar with Ishmael to the Well, then so near her
to preserve them, when they were ready to faint for want of water, yet if with
Jobs Wife in his mistakes, he traduce men to blaspheame God, I hope I may tell
him as Job told his Wife, that he speaks as one of the foolish women, Job
2.9, 10. and so give a check to his error, and present a Cordial to the
people, to heal the Corasive his ill prepared potion has engendered:

As for the verbal errors and contradictions by some delivered in Pulpits, it
is no wonder, Humanum est errare, in many things we offend all; yea those great
Ministers sent out by such a glorious visible Call, in some external things
differed, and had great disputes, Gal. 2.11. And it cannot be expected that we
can attain to perfection here on earth, whilst we remain in this corruptible
natural body, where at the best whilst we are in the flesh, we know in part,
and we prophecy in part, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11.

Therefore the Lord has so glorously provided a Discipline for the Church, by
which it is to be built up according to the rule of the Scriptures, which we
are to search and follow all our days.

And whatever Papists say, it is not with us as with them, for they believe the
Scripture no otherwise then as the Church believes; but we preach that the
Church is to be believed in what it concurres with the Word, and as Paul says,
so ought every Minister of the Gospel to teach, saying, So follow me, even as I
follow Christ, which is the rule of Gods Word, 2 Thessalonians. 3.7, 8, 9. Heb. 13.7. 1
Pet. 2.21. And we have great cause to bless God for the flourishing of the
Gospel, and liberty which he has given the Saints, to serve him in so much
peace as is at this day in this Nation.

Indeed for one of Mr. Fryes assertions, I do not see but we may very well
close with it, I do not know any Orthodox Minister in England that will deny
it, (viz.)

That men cannot justly be taxed with immodesty, or turbulency of spirit, for
not closing with all their Teachers would obtrude upon them, if after a
careful and conscionable search, they find no footing for such things in the
Scriptures.

But yet Christians must take heed they do not under that pretense like
Alexander the Copper-smith, design great evils against the sincere Preachers
of the Gospel, for the Lord will reward such according to their works; and of
such the Apostle bids the Saints beware, as with-standers of the Gospel of
salvation preached to the people, 2 Timothy 4.14, 15.

As for that great Controversy he makes about Free Will, wherein he says,
there is a great contradiction in what is taught; I cannot insist upon every
thing what every man says, yet because those seeming contradictions that he
alleges may become a stumbling block to simple people, if not cleared, give
me leave meekly to vindicate those Scriptures, and clear the truths.

First, he alleges, 1 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13. Ephesians. 3.8. James 1.17. as
crossing, Isa. 1.16. Isa. 5.4. Phil. 2.12. but if you mark the scope of 2 Cor.
3.5, 2 Cor. 9.8. you will find these places of Scripture will be easily
reconciled; our sufficiency is of God, but it is ours when God has given it
us, when God inables us we can wash and be clean; when he gives us power we
can put away the evil we before acted: As a sick man whom God gives an appetite
to, can then eat.

Consider but this, That the same God says, that in him we live and move, and
have our being, Acts 17.28 yet we know that God gives us means to live, and
that is by food; Is it not in man's will to eat and live (for a time in this
life) or fast, and dye; I do not say man has this power at all times when he
will; there is a time, at which and at no time else, it may be said, Now is the
appointed time, Jer. 8.7. Dan. 11.35.

There is a glorious harmony in the Scriptures, if they be not mis-understood,
as those who are led by carnal reason cannot but do, but the right knowledge
of the Word is Spiritual, by believing, Romans 8. John 1. etc.

Another parcel of Scriptures he has gathered, and says, that if we tie our
selves to the bare letter, we shall find but little harmony between them (viz.)
Isa. 1.16, 17. Phil. 2.12. Mat. 11.28. with Joh. 6.4. and 2 Cor. 3.5. with Jam.
1.17. The former rule will help us to reconcile these places of Scripture also.
It is true, no man can come unto Christ except the Father draw him; but when
God by his Spirit has broken their hearts, and made them weary with the load
of their sins, and drives them to thoughts of a necessity of seeking Christ,
and to behold mercy tendered by Christ, then they are by his Spirit enabled if
they will to go to Christ, even when he by his Spirit knocks at the doors of
their hearts; without Christ we can do nothing, John 15.5. but in Christ we
can do all things through him that strengthens us, Phil. 4.13. And so again
it is true, we cannot of our selves think a good thought, but when God gives
us a sufficient measure of grace, we can then through Christ work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. and by faith, in the power of
Christ, lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6.12. not in our own strength, but in
that sufficiency which we have from God, 2 Cor. 3.5. And again, every good and
perfect gift is from God, but when God tenders the means of grace, we may
wash and be clean, though not of our selves, yet in his strength, his grace is
sufficient for us, 2 Cor. 12 9. There is a time wherein if we seek God he will
be found, which if let slip, perhaps we shall never enjoy such an opportunity
again, Mat. 23.37.

Now I pray you tell me (whosoever will seriously lay it to heart) whether this
method has not more of Gospel truth in it, and gives not more satisfaction
and comfort to a dejected soul then M. Fryes decisions, and those needless
discords which he raises to disturb the harmony of the sacred Scriptures, and
obstruct the way of pressing the people to an hearty seeking God in his
Ordinances, which he seems to discourage; Though afterward he would seem to
minse it.

But to pass by these, and some other particulars that I might insist upon; I
shall chiefly fasten on the most material exceptions in both his books,
declared against by the Parliament, viz.

1. Exception, Mr. Fry says in his book entitled, The Accuser shamed, etc,
Thus, viz. That chaffy and absurd opinion of three persons or subsistences in
the Godhead; That gross and carnal opinion of three distinct persons or
subsistences in the Godhead: persons and subsistences, are substances or
accidents. As for the word person, I do not understand that it can be properly
attributed but to man. It is out of doubt with me, that if you ask the most
part of men what they mean by a person, they will either tell you it is a man, or
else they are not able to give you any answer at all. And for the word
accident, I suppose none will attribute that to God; For according to my poor
skill, that word imports no more but the sigure or color etc. of a thing; and
certainly no man ever saw the likeness of God, as the Scriptures abundantly
testify. And therefore neither of the words, persons or subsistences, can hold
forth such a meaning as Accidents in God. Athanasius in his Creed says, There
is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Ghost;
others say, That there is three distinct subsistences in God Well, these three
persons or subsistences cannot be accidents neither do I think it is the
meaning of any. Then certainly they must be substances: if so, then they must
be created or uncreated, limited or unlimited: if created and limited, then the
person of the Father is a creature, the person of the Son a creature, and the
person of the Holy Ghost a creature, which I think none will affirm: If they
are not created or limited, then they must be uncreated or unlimited, for I
know no medium between created and uncreated, limited and unlimited: If they
are uncreated and unlimited, then there are three uncreated and unlimitea
Substances, and so consequently three Gods. For my part I find no footing for
such expressions in Scripture, and I think them fit only to keep ignoraut
people in carnal and gross thoughts of God, and therefore I do explode them out
of my Creed.

The chief of Mr. Fryes discourse here, is against the words Subsistence,
Trinity, Person, and Unity ascribed to the diety, concerning which, any
Christian who believes the Scriptures may receive full and ample satisfaction
from them, I will insist on each particular. viz.

1 Touching the word Subsistence, The word of the Lord says, God has strength
and wisdom, Job 12.16. And he is the fountain of essence by which all things
subsist and have their being, Act. 17.28. And he is therefore called in the
Hebrew, (...) Jehovah, Jah, Ebie, all derivitives of the Radix (...) to be, or
have subsistence; and so acknowledged by the Apostle, Rev. 1.4, 8. Rev. 11.17.
Rev. 16.5. He that is, was, and is to come.

2 Touching the word Trinity, this Record is not only in earth, but has been
and shall be in heaven from eternity to eternity, for ever and ever, 1 John
5.7. there are many places of Scripture to prove it, Matthew. 18.19. 2 Corin.
13.14. Matthew. 3.16, 17. Hag. 2 5. Psa. 33.6. Rev: 1.4, 5. 1 Cor: 12.4, 5, 6.
Ephesians: 2.18. Ephesians: 2.22 Esa: 63.9, 10. Job 14.16. John 15.26, Gal: 4.6. 1 These:
3.11, 12. 2 These: 3.5. and many more Texts of the Word of the Lord.

3 Touching the word Person, It is a Scripture phrase used to the diety, Heb.
1.2, 3. And this is more particularly laid down touching the pesons in the
Trinity, viz. the Father, Mat. 18.10. the Son, 2 Cor. 2.10. 2. Cor: 4.6. and
the holy Ghost, Psalm. 95 6. compared with Heb. 3.7. which is according to the
personal actings ascribed to the Trinity, Psalm: 2.7, 8. Psalm: 110.4. Cant:
2.1. Mal: 3.1. Cant: 4. ult. Acts. 1.16. Acts 4.24. Acts 10.1. Acts 13.2, 35.
John 11.42. Heb: 1:5: Rev: 2.2. 1 Cor: 12.4, 5, 6. 2 Cor: 13.14: 2 Thessalonians: 2.16.
Gal: 1.1. Ephesians: 5.5. Rev: 1.4.5.

Damascen does thus in his judgment prove the Trinity by this demonstration,
Vnus deus, non sine verbo est, God being but one, is never without the Word:
But this word he has in himself, begotten of his own substance, not like
unto our word, which has no substance, but vanishes in the air, because the
condition of our nature is temporal, but like as our word proceeds from the
mind neque per totum menti idem est etc. is neither the same with the mind, nor
yet altogether diverse from it, so is the Son unto the Father, which is the
word, the same in substance, but diverse in subsistence, oportet autem and
verbum spiritum habere, nam and verbum nostrum nequaquam spiritus est expers:
But the word also must have a spirit, for neither is our word without a spirit:
But here is a difference, our spirit is not of the same substance with us, but
the drawing in of the air, for we are of a compound nature, but the spirit of
the word, is of the same substance with the word, Damascen, lib. 1. de fide
orthodox. ca. 6, 7.

And to amplify it yet further, he says in the same place; Impossible est
Deum destitutum esse native faecunditatis, etc. It is impossible that God
should be destitute of natural fecundity; The Lord there fore must needs
beget, sed expropria substantia generat, but he begets out of his own
substance, and that from all eternity; for if the Son had not been from the
beginning co-existent with him of whom he was begotten, we shall bring in a
change of his substance; nam cum non esset pater, postea factum est pater, for
so when he was yet no Father, he afterward should become a Father, Damas. idem.

And Bernerd says, ubi numerus, etc. where is the number? But here I have what
I may number, and what I may not number, there is one substance, and three
persons, etc. Bernerd lib. de considerat.

4. Touching the Unity of the Diety, the Scriptures plainly declare that God is
one, Deutre^n: 6.4. Jsay 44.6. John 17.3. yea; And in the decalogue the very
first command is, Thou shall have none other Gods but me, neither of which Mr.
Fry can deny, exeept he will explode them also out of his Creed, which if any
will not submit to, let them here consider reason from Damascen.

1. Deus perfectus est, etc. God is perfect, Si multo afferimus Deos, in multis
differentiam contemplari oportet; if we affirm many gods, in many we must
needs find a difference: Si autem differentia in eis, ubi perfectio; But if
there be a difference among them, where is their perfection? For if there be
difference in respect of wisdom, goodness, virtue, a perfecto deficit, there
is a failing in perfection, if there be no difference but an identity, there
must also needs be an unity in the God head.

2 Deus incircumscriptum est, God is uncircumscrible, he cannot be
circumscribed, defined, or limited to a place, Quomodo si multis diversique
sum, incircumscripti erunt, etc. but they be many and diverse, how can they be
incircumscrible? for wheresoever is one, there cannot be another.

3 Differentia contrarietatem inducit, etc. difference brings contrariety and
repugnance: if then the world be governed by many, how can it be but it should
be corrupted and dissolved? Attenta in his ipsis gubernantibus pugna;
Considering the strife between these Governors, Damascen lib: 1: desid:
orthodox cap: 5, 6, 7.

Bernard sets forth the unity of the Godhead thus; God is one, but not as the
Sun or Moon is one, because there is not another; but he is Vnus sibi, idem
est semper and uno modo. He is one to himself, the same always, and after the
same manner, so is not the Sun and Moon. Clamat uterque se non esse unum
sibi, ille motibus, ista defectibus suis: Both of them proclaim, that they are
not one and the same with themselves, the one by his motions, the other by the
waine and changes, Bernard, Lib. 5. de considerat.

II. Exception, Is to a Clause in Mr. Fryes book, entitled, The Clergy in
their Colors, (viz.) I cannot let pass one observation, and that is, the
strange posture these men put themselves into, when they begin their prayers
before their Sermons; whether the fools and knaves in stage plays took their
pattern from these men, or these from them, I cannot determine etc. what wry
mouths, squint eyes, screwed faces do they make, etc.

This savours of much lightness in Mr. Fry, like the carriage of the Scribes
and Pharisees to Christ and his Apostles, deriding and scorning them for their
devotion; and as the poor Publican was disdained by the boasting Pharisee, who
smote upon his breast and prayed, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner.

But Christ's Apostles were of another mind, they rejoiced to hear of devout
praying, yea the holy and blessed Spirit of God is promised to help the
infirmities of those whose desires are so full that they cannot express
themselves, Romans 8.

Yea and Jesus Christ himself wept, and groaned when he prayed at the raising
of Lazarus, and fell down on the ground when he prayed in his Agony in the
Garden; devotion (when it is most sound and heavenly in the heart) will teach
the mouth, Prove. 16.23. and stir up the body to a zeal heavenward, as of
sincerity, as in the sight of God, speaking in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.17.

III. Exception, Master Fry says again in the same book in derision of this
devotion; How like a company of Conjurers do they mumble out the beginnings of
their prayers, that the people may not hear them? and when artificially they
have raised their voices, what a puling do they make?

But this is very much for the advantage of the people, for when Ministers
begin with a loud voice, their spirits are usually so spent, that before they
have half done their Sermons, few can hear them in a large Congregation, and
the voice is much the clearer and plainer, the whole time of Prayer and Sermon
by beginning low, and increasing the elevation of their voice.

IV. Exception, out of the said book is this (viz.) Mr. Fry says; I must
confess I have heard much of believing things above Reason, and the time was
when I swallowed that pill; but I may say as St. Paul, etc. When I was a
child, etc. Every man that knows any thing, knows this, that it is Reason
that distinguishes a man from a beast. If you take away his Reason, you deny
his very Essence and therefore if any man will consent to give up his Reason, I
would as soon converse with a beast as with that man: and whatsoever pretense
some may make of Religion in this particular, certainly there is nothing else
in it but ignorance and policy.

Hereby is Heathenisme much exalted by Mr. Fry, and the excellency of faith
defaced, as does very clearly appear by the Gospel.

Will you know what faith is? The Holy Ghost tells us in the Scriptures, That it
is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb.
11.1. Faith teaches us that all things were made by God of nothing, verse. 3.
Reason cannot reach this; and in that Chapter we have many examples above
reason, which our faith is engaged to believe. As Abels speaking being dead,
Enochs translation, Noah's Arc, Sarahs Child by Abraham in their old age,
Isaacks deliverance by the Ram, Moses preservation in the Flagges, etc.

Augustine says, that the Saints know God, not by the outward senses, but in
divine ravishings. And so Paul told the Ephesians, that it was not from dark
natural Philosophy, and carnal reason, but Gods opening of Believers eyes by
Divine inlightnings, that they come by faith to know what is the hope of their
calling, and the riches of the glory of Christ's Inheritance in them, Ephesians.
1.17. For we are saved by grace through faith, which is not to be attained unto
by reason of our selves; it must be believed above reason, because even faith
it self is the gift of God also, Ephesians. 2.8.

Peter Martyr tells us, that Faith abundantly gathers out of the holy
Scriptures the knowledge of God, as much as suffices to Salvation, or as much
as this our life is able to receive; yet Paul testifies this knowledge to be
unperfect; For now we know him by a Glass in a shadow, and but partly; Who
knew that his reason could not apprehend what his faith could reach, but by
believing pressed forwards toward the price of the high Calling of God in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.12, 13, 14.

In a word, the eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, by reason, to know the things which by faith we are to
believe God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, 12.

FINIS.

