A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF Tho. Harris, Gent. High
Constable of the Hundred of Oswaldstone, in the County of Middlesex,
BEING THE Manner of Finding the HEAD of the Late Murdered Person, Who was Cut
to Pieces: It being found between Twelve and One a Clock at Night, in a House
of Office near the House of Mr. Fresnear, a Fringe-maker, near Exeter-Exchange,
on Sunday-night, the 5th Instant February, 1687.
HAving received a Warrant from Sir James Butler, and Sir Robert Clerk, Two of
His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for this County of Middlesex; that they
were credibly informed that the Head of the Wounded Person is slung into a
House of Office, belonging to Mr. Fresnean a Fringe-Maker near Exeter-change in
my Hundred, or some other House-Office near adjacent thereunto, did therefore
in His Majesty's Name, require me to cause diligent Search to be made in the
said Houses of Office, or in any other, of which I should have just cause to
suspect for the Head, and give an immediate Account of what I should do herein
to them, or some other of His Majesty's Justices of Peace for the said County.
Given under their Hands and Seals the Fifth day of February, 1687/8.

Pursuant to this Warrant I sent for my Constables and Officers, and procured
some Night-men, who went to the place and began to work about Eleven at Night,
and so continued till about half an hour after Twelve, at which time the
Nightmen brought up the Head, which was wrapped up in a Cloth, with one Ear
hanging out of a hole in the Cloth, and when it was taken out, I ordered it
immediately to be washed very clean, and carried to the Watch-house: And the
Head and Face is without any manner of Defacement, Wound, or Scar; but may be
known by any man who formerly knew the Person, the Visage remaining very plain.

About five a Clock this Morning, being the sixth of this Instant February, I
went to the Right Honorable the Earl of Craven, who ordered me to wait on him
to White Hall, in order to attend and give His Majesty an account thereof;
which being done, His Majesty was pleased to order that the Head should be
conveyed forthwith to the Body, which lies in St. Giles Bone-house, where it
now is, and may be seen by any that have the Curiosity to repair thither: And
this is a true Account, Witness my Hand,

Tho. Harris, High-Constable.

London Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor. 1688.


