A FVLL DECLARATION OF ALL PARTICULERS Concerning the March of the Forces under
Colonel Fiennes to Bristoll, and their carriage upon their enemies approach.

AS ALSO A Relation of the late bloody abominable conspiracy against the City
of Bristoll, as appears by the Examinations of the parties, disovering their
Plot and Intention.

Together with sundry Letters Annexed.

With the certain Information, touching the death of WILL: KENDALL a Trooper
of Colonel Essex, who was shot by the said Colonel.

From a Noble hand.

April, 18. London: Printed for R.D. 1643.

A more full DECLARATION Of all particulars, concerning the March of the Forces
under Col. Fiennes to Bristoll, and their carriage upon their enemies approach.
Right Honorable,
I know Colonel Fiennes (our Governors) modesty to be such, that I presume
he has altogether omitted the relation of diverse passages, and been sparing
in specifying others, lest he should be thought the publisher of his own
praises, or else to affect them, the which he no way does; but such have bin
his pains, care; industry, vigilance in this expedition, that I think my self
bound in concience to make a full Narration of all his proceedings since the
beginning of our March, that you, and the Honorable Committee, may not only
know it, but that he, and all under his Command; may have their deserved
praises, and that infamy, and reproach, may fall to their lots, who have
deserved it. Let your Honor therefore Deigne to know, that on Sunday the fifth
of February last. Orders were sent, by his Excellence to the said Colonel
Fiennes, his brother Captain Ihn Fiennes, Captain Walter Longs Lieutenant,
Captain Alban Coxe and my self; to march the next day, to Hertly bridge with
our Troops, where we were to meet with Captain Mason and his Dragoneers, and
there were we all to receive further Orders from the said Colonel; and
accordingly we all met there, but as Captain Coxe and I marched from Wargrove
thither wards, by Twyford with our Troops the enemy appeared, on the other
side of the River in a vaporing manner, and told us, that they had provided for
us, entertainment upon the way as we should go to our Rende-vous, whereunto
answer was made, that they were known to be more talkative, then active in
honorable ways, and therefore they should not make us to digress one step
out of our way, and so continued our march (although we heard the drums beat,
and the trumpets sound) near unto the way we were to march, till we arrived at
the said bridge, where we found the Colonel his brother, and Captain Longs
Lieutenant, with their troops in battalia; expecting to be charged by the
enemies, who were not far from thence, and we all stayed there at least an
hour for Captain Mason, who bringing with him his Lieutenant, and some 25.
Dragoniers, resigned them over to him and so we sent away our Quarter Masters
to Basing-stoke, to take up quarter for us there, and whither we marched after
them: but after their arrival there, they were told by the Constables, that
400. of the enemies Forces had appeared but one hour before, within a mile of
the Town, yet notwithstanding they took up quarters for us there; and when
Colonel Fiennes and I had viewed the advenues to the Town, and made choice of
a court of guard, we entered thereinto with our Troops; but heard no more of
the enemy that night, nor the next day, as we marched toward Andever, but
there we heard that some of their Forces were about Malborough, so that the
Colonel, and I took the same care and pains there for our security, that we
had done before, and barrocaded up most of the ways, as we found them at
Easingstoke, and from Andever we marched the next morning toward the Devices
and as we passed over Way-hill our scoutes discovered some of the enemies
scoutes, whereupon we made an Alarm and sent after them, so that two of them
were taken the others saved themselves by flight but those that were taken,
proved to be known Malignants of the Country, and would confess nothing, so
that they were released leaving their horses and furniture behind them, and
thereupon we continued our march, and arrived at the Devices late, where we
found a great disorder in that garrison, by reason of the officers overmuch
indulgencie toward the soldiers, and the soldiers insolency and incivility
toward them: who were exceeding disobedient and mutinous pretending want of
pay to be the cause of it, but our Troops somewhat awed them, from the hour
of our arrival, and encouraged the Officers to speak of action: and the next
day being Tueseday occasion was offered for it, report being brought thither
that the Cavaliers were entered into Ma'msbury, yet was the question put at the
Counsel of war, whether we should go thither to beat them out therehence,
or to Salisbury, to disperse a crew of Malignants, that were there assembled to
assist the High Sheriff; but after much debate although Colonel Fiennes, would
have had us, to march toward Ma'msbury, yet by the importunity of Sir Edward
Hungerford it was ordered, that we should march to Salisbury on Friday night
with 500. of his foot, and our party of horse, but on Friday morning, he sent
one Stevens of the Devices to the Major of the city to advertise him of our
intention, and to know if he would facilitate our entrance there, or no
whereunto he made no answer himself; although at the delivery of the message
he had promised so to do: but intimation was made to the said Stevens to get
him gone from thence or else some injury might befall him, whereupon he le^t
the town and went, as if he had had no intention to return toward the Devices,
so that we heard not of him, till ^a^^r^ay ten of the clock, that we were
within four miles of the city, and then and not before knowing of this message
and the Majors proceedings, it was determined that we should enter the city by
diverse ways, the which was accordingly performed, but by means of this
advertisement, the Sheriff, and other Malignants were fled, so that we had
nothing to actuate but to get money and horses and to disarme the citizens. But
Sir Edward was so indulgent toward them (though Malignants) that we took
therehence but very few horses and arms and but 500 li. in money, and then
being much importuned by some honest men of Bristoll, to go thither, with our
Forces, (seeing just cause for it,) and our Colonel having received two Orders
from his Excellence to go thither, it was ordered that it should be so, the
which being known to Sir Edward, he entreated us and Lieutenant Colonel White
also; that we would then pass by the Devices, whereunto our Colonel consented,
and forthwith we left Salisbury, to march thither-wards where we arrived late
at night but of our 500 foot 200 thereof disbanded in Salisbury, or by the way
back to the Devices, and the other 300 quartered by the way, but the next
morning being a very foul and snowie morning news was brought to us at the
Devices that the enemy was before Shipnam, whither we marched with all
expedition, although we had no foot to march thither with us; but we found no
enemy there, so that we entered the Town and quartered there all night, and the
next morning we drew our forces into a field between the Town and Malmsbury,
where we stood in battalia two hours, but no enemy appearing, we marched
therehence toward the Pathe, where we arrived that night, and found 200
commanded men of Colonel Essex his Regiment, who suffered us to enter the City,
and to quarter there, without any opposition, yet did the chief commander of
them testified the next day by some insolent words and carriage, that our
forces were not welcome thither: but we that were bent to do our best service
to the state and City of Bristoll, marched thitherwards, where we were welcomed
by Colonel Essex, Colonel Popham and diverse other gentlemen and citizens, but
being settled there, we soon perceived that the then Governor Colonel Essex
was much distrusted by the best affected of the City, and that those that were
then suspected to be Malignants (and now approved Conspirators) were his most
intimate friends and continual or frequent associates, the which incited all
well Wishers to Sion, and their Country, to believe what had been said of him
by those that persuaded us thither; and our now Governor Colonel Fiennes to
labor to prevent his evil designs, and that he might the better do it, he
persuaded Colonel Essex and the Committee that was then here to call in all the
Citizens arms, whereunto he yielded; as also that no man should take them
back again, but such as would take a Protestation to this effect. That they
should to the uttermost of their power with their lives and fortunes defend
this city against all forces that should come against it, raised without
consent of Parliament, and that they should discover all plots that should be
laid to ensnare and entrap the Forces sent hither for the defense of it by the
Parliament. I know you have had a copy of it, and therefore I will not stay
upon it, but when these arms were brought into Guild Hall by the Captains of
Colonel Pophams regiment and Colonel Hungerfords, and that they were there
placed, whereas the Major had always kept the key thereof before* Colonel
Essex now would keep it himself, and as is now apparent to no other end, but
that good men should not have their arms back again; and that none should be
armed but such as he should approve of, and what were they, as he declared unto
me himself (but Clubbers, and now convicted conspirators) the which he then
termed honest men, but as for Bridge-men (alias Roundheads) as infamous
creatures term them, he protested that they should have no arms back, and
as for Captain Birch Captain of the Volunteers, he said he was a coward and
should have no command, and to show that he was an enemy to him committed him,
upon so slight an occasion that he was easily persuaded by our Colonel to
release him the next morning, so that by these means the bad grew to be most
insolent and our good and honest men much dejected, so that they thought of
nothing more, then of leaving the city, and of carrying away their goods,
supposing it to be betrayed by the said Colonel Essex, These were the sad
complaints, and more then murmurings of the good citizens and gentlemen of
these parts, so that it was now time, to think of some courses, to prevent
these inconveniences, and so did Colonel Fiennes, who communicated unto me, an
Order that he had received from his Exellence, whereby he was enjoined, to
send Colonel Essex to Windsor or the Parliament; in case he saw cause for it,
and having given me reasons to see, and know that there was cause so to do, he
asked me whether I would assist him in the execution thereof or no; the which
seeing cause for, I promised to do: and promised likewise, that all under my
command should serve him in it, to the uttermost of their powers, so that then
we consulted of the place and time for it, and after deliberation, intended to
have seized his person on Saturday the 25. of Feb. on which he was to have a
coursing day, but the day proving very wette, he went not, but on Monday the
27. he was invited to a feast by one Captain Hill, whither he went, his house
being a mile from this city, whither the Colonel and I went with a party of
horse, and then, and there as he was feasting and revelling with diverse
Gentlemen and Ladies after his accustomed manner, we acquainted him with his
Excellencies Order, whereunto he promised to obey, and to depart therehence
forthwith with a party that we left there to convoye him to Berkely-Castle;
but the Governor Colonel Fiennes returning to settle all in good order at
Bristoll commanded me to stay with him till his departure: but he being gone,
he began to stand on terms and to say that he would go to his Excellence the
straightest way for Windsor, and entreated me to move the Colonel that he might
do so, whereupon I returned hither and acquainted Colonel Fiennes with it, who
told me that Prince Rupert was about Basing-stoke, or Hertly-bridge so that the
surest and safest way would be to go by Gloucester: I acquainted Colonel Essex
with so much that night, and intimated unto him, and to the Captains
Lieutenant, that convoyed him to Windsor, that their safest course would be to
march that night, to Berkly-castle, yet would he not march, although he was
much urged thereunto by the said Captain, but went to bed, and would not march
the next day till ten of the clock; that I appeared with a strong party of
horse near to Captain Hills house, wherewithal I convoyed him half the way
to Berkly-castle but it happened out well that Colonel Fiennes returned the
night before to Bristoll as he did otherwise all might have been in
combustion, by the insolency of an Ensign of Colonel Essex his Regiment, who
hurt a horse of Captain Longs Troop to enter into the castle, and there
offered a great affront to Lieutenant Colonel White whose company was then upon
the relieving of of that whereof he was Ensign, both by striking the said
Leivetenant Colonel as also by commanding his men to give fire on the other
company, but Colonel Fiennes hearing of it, hasted thither with a party of
horse and so the tumult was appeased and the insolent Ensign imprisoned, but
these proceedings infinitely enraged our Malignant souldlers and citizens, so
that they forthwith sent to call Prince Rupert to their assistance the which
incited our now Governor to look about him and to proclaim that those that
would take the aforesaid Protestation should have their Arms back again, and
those that would not, should see theirs disposed of to those that would; and
that for the defense of the city, so that we suddenly armed of well affected
men some five hundred of the citizens the which were put into five companies,
and the works of the Town had more done unto them in four days then they
had done unto them in six weeks before: But whilst these things were in
agitation Captain John Fiennes and a company of Dragoneers were sent by our
Colonel to Gloucester with much ammunition and some money by means whereof the
citizens had a new life put into them, and Captain Coxe his Troop, and other
Forces were sent into Sommersetshiere, whereby all the Malignants were
chased there hence: but whilst these our Forces were absent, we on Sunday the
fifth of this said March, that Prince Robert was at Salisbury with an Army of
five thousand men marching this way, some said more, but for certain there
came and presented themselves before this City. On Wednesday the eight of this
month, at least four thousand Horse and Foot, but with very few carriages,
some of his Forces appeared the evening before on Durdon Down, so that we all
stood upon our Guards, but at ten at night, we had intelligence that the
Malignants of the City had meetings in several Houses thereof, namely at one
Yeomans house, whereupon our Captain Buck with some foot, and I with a party
of Horse were sent thither, where we found 24. Persons that stood upon their
guards at the said Captains entrance thereinto; but when they saw my party,
and said that I had sent for a canon to batter the House, they yielded and
laying down their Arms, I conveyed them all to the Castle, but as I went
thither with them, one of them told me, that if I would have compassion of him,
he would impart unto me some things of importance, whereupon I told him I
would, and bid him relate what be had to say, and if it were of consequence, be
should find favor, and hereupon he told me that diverse of their party were
assembled at one Butchers near Fromegate that night, and would do mischief,
if they were not prevented* so that I went thither in all haste, having
delivered up my first Prisoners. But as approached near to the said house, I
saw some of Captain Goodiers soldiers, breaking open the door, and why?
because they of the house would hang out noe Lights upon this Alarm, who
entering thereinto we found at least 60. men well armed, whereof we could take
that night but fix, by means of a back Door, thorough the, which as also
thorough a river they escaped, but I have taken many of them since, and what
these men should have done, you may see by the Narration that I herewithall
send unto you, and who are the principal conspirators; you shall likewise know
by the List, that you shall likewise receive therewithal; but we have
discovered that there were at least 2000. confederates thereunto, and you shall
know more of their names very suddenly, but many of them are of the parishes,
near adjacent to this City, but when I had convoyed those that were in
Butchers house, likewise to the Prison I was commanded by my Colonel to send a
party, of horse and Dragoneers, to give an Alarm to some of the Princes Forces
that were quartered near unto Captain HILLS house, the which I did about
four of the clock in the morning the party consisting of twenty Horse, and
like number of Dragoneers, who went near to the said House, and seeing a fire
near thereunto, the Commander thereof sent some six of them, who went near
unto the said fire, and gave fire upon them that Were about it, who defended
not themselves, but run away to their rendezvouze at Dordon Down, where their
body of Horse appeared: then Wednesday morning by seven of the clock, in fight
of our Fort made on Brandon Hill, where our Governor then was, and caused
three shot to be made at them, whereby as is reported some eminent men were
slain, but sure we are that one white Horse was there killed, and thereupon
the whole body wheeled about, and marchd away, whereof I being advertised, with
the colonells consent, sent some small parties after them, whereof one being but
of four Troops, encountered with seven of the Enemies, and those men of
quality, but they fled after the first Pistol discharged by our men but yet
not so fast, but that two of them were constrained to svvimme to save their
lives, and to leave their Horses, Pistolls, and rich Coats behind them, with
the Horses Coats, and Pistolls of two others that saved themselves in woods,
so that of 7. but three went off, but if we may give credit to the Trumpeter
that came hither the Thurseday following to demand two dead bodies, we must
say that two of them were killed, one of them a Weston, and an other whose
name it is thought he had order to conceal: but whilst we were thus in some
danger and distress, we implored often the assistance of Sir William Waller,
but his engagements were such that he came not hither till Monday night the
13th. of this month, and stayed here till Sunday the 19th. and then marching
out of the City, the Counsel of War having ordered at the entreaty of the
Citizens, that I should stay here with the Governor for the defense of City,
yet did he then order when I was very sick of an Ague, that part of my
Troop should convey to Berckeley Castle those Officers of Colonel Essex his
Regiment, who had refused to march with him out of the City, and that the
rest of my Troop should follow him to the Bathe, so that I should have been
left alone, and unable to do Service, yet I knovving that I am not to contest
with higher Powers, acquainted my Troops with his Orders, they obeyed the
first, and declared that they would sooner lay down their Arms, then be
commanded by any other then my self; First because I drevv them into the
Service, and next because I have furnished them often with money and other
necessaries, when I could not have it from the State, I found that their
refusal to leave me was not much offensive to my olonell, but I perceived
that it pleased very well the Major, Aliermen, and Citizens, who sent after
Sir William to entreat him to leave my Troop with me, for the better defense
of their City, by many of the chiefest of them, who carried with them a
Petition subscribed by hundreds of them for that purpose, and with them I sent
my Coronet who was at the taking of Malmesbury, whereof I will write
nothing; since I am certain that it shall be specified unto you by a better
pen, but then Sir William was so full of business, that he could make no
answer to the said Petition, but commanded that I should send unto him to
Gloucester, whether I sent my Lieutenant on Saturday last, who was then at the
taking of the Welsh, but of this as of Malmesbury; but he brings me word, that
my Troop may not stay here with me, the which I am glad of, that I may have
the Honor to continue in so good a City, as now it is likely to become, and
with so good a Colonel, who tells me that I shall be his Major, so his
Excellence will thereunto consent, howsoever I desire to to be, where I may do
best service to God, my King, and Country, yet that I may so do. I most humbly
entreat that I may have my Troop always with me, since I can do nothing
without it, and since it is none of the worst of the Army, I desire to keep,
and to have it put into some Regiment, where it may firmly stand, and not be
at every ones disposal. More I have not to say at this present, but that our
Governor continues to fortify this place, and to secure the Countries
adjacent with as much care and industry as can be required, and that I shall
manifest my self to be a faithful Soldier and

Your Honors most obedient and humble Servant, Hercules Languish.
From Bristoll the last of March, 1643.
A Short Relation of the late bloody, abominable Conspiracy, against this City
of Bristoll, as appears by the Examination of the Parties. Together with
sundry Letters annexed.
A Malignant and traitorous party within this City, having long endeavored to
bring in the Forces of the Enemy, into this Town; They hoped they had gotten
an opportunity to effect their designs; on Tuesday last at night being the
7th. of March, when by their invitation, Prince Rupert having drawn a great
party of Horse, and Dragoneers, with some Foot, to Durdam Down, within one
mile of the City; the Enemy before that night* these treacherous and bloody
persons within that Town, had framed a party to fall upon the backs of their
Guards; and to surprise them: and cut them off, and to let in the Enemy;
whereupon the ringing of two Bells, viz. St. John's and St. Nicholas, were to
set upon the Town without as the Conspiratours were to fall upon the Guards
within the ringing of these two Bells, being a common sign both to them
without and within the Town, for the better effecting of this treacherous and
wicked conspiracy the Chief heads thereof had that night assembled together
in their houses those of their Confederacy, with diverse Sailers and Halliers;
with all sorts of Arms, Muskets, Pistolls, Swords Clubs, and barrells of old
nails to charge the Ordinance withal; after they had surprised them; and
these several Companies under their several Leaders were to have fallen upon
the several Courts of Guard. Mr. Robert Yeomans, who is the head of the
Conspiracy; and pretends that he had a Commission from his Majesty, for what
he has done (being to fall upon the maine Guard, and Mr. George Butcher with
his company was to have fallen upon the guard at Froomgate, and to have opened
it to have had the Enemy to enter by; others no doubt had their parts to play;
and that better to distinguish themselves, from those that were destined to
destruction; those of their party had a word which was Charles) and certain
marks of white Tape tied upon their breasts before, and upon their Hats
behind, and such as were to be spared within doors had certain marks set
upon the inside of their doors, for the rest, if we may believe the speeches
of an Officer: amongst the Enemies Forces one of them was heard to say, that
Prince Rupert had commanded to give no quarter to man, woman, nor child; that
had not their marks upon their persons or houses; and that at the same time,
that they were to fall into the Town; the Sailers were to set the Town on
fire in diverse places, which as is conceived was Captain ^oonew^rk, but God of
his mercy delivered us from this dangerous and devilish Conspiracy; by some
notice that we had given us of their meeting at Yeomons house; about an hour
or two before the plot should have been put in execution; which was to have
been upon the ringing of the Bells, about one or two of the clock in the
morning; having secured Mr. Robert Yeomons and his Company, and after Mr.
Boutcher and his Company; the neck of the plot being broken within the Town,
the Enemy without (whose designs as it should seem depended much upon it;)
having shown themselves before the Town, departed the next morning after; and
so God put a hook in their nostrills and commanded them back again; for which
great mercy in delivering us from a dangerous invasion from the Enemy from
without, and a damnable p^o^ and conspiracy of some traitorous Inhabitants
within the City; both this Town and the whole Kingdom, so far as it is
concerned in the preservation of this City, have great cause to give thanks to
Almighty God, unto whom alone the praise is due.

THis is a short Narration of the late detestable, and bloody Plot against this
City whereof I doubt not but more hereafter will appear; the matter being yet
under examination, only one writings which was found in Robert Yeomon's house,
I thought fit to add as follows.

ALL Inhabitants of Bridge-high-Street, and Corne-Street, keep within your
Doors upon pains of your Lives. All other Inhabitants of this City, that stand
for the King, the Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the City, let them
forthwith appear at the High-Crosse with such Armor, as they have for the
Defense of their Wives and Children; and follow their Leaders for the same
defense.

THere was also a Protestation taken amongst them to this effect, viz. that
they were to oppose all Forces whatsoever that were or should be among them; or
that should come in without consent of the King.

The Names of the chief Confederates in the late Conspiracy aginst this City
of BRISTOLL.
ROuland Searchfield, Merchant. John Waldon, Hornmaker. Mr. Brent, Minister.
George Boucher, Merchant. John Boucher. Francis Belcher, Sope-boyler. Thomas
Barret, Cutler. Thomas Brown. Philemon Barrow. John Cosbie. Robert Tailor.
Cap. Bound Rich. Edward Bound. John Nickins, Trunk maker. Toby Goodyar. John
Williams, Hatter in Broad-Street. The two Haynes, William and John Halliars in
Halliar Lane, both Sons to Widow Haynes. The two Tristrams, bothers, John a
Chaundler, and William. Richard Howell. Ephraim Goodyar. Richard Yeomans
Grasiar. William Yeomans. Merchant. Robert Yeomans. Merchant. John Broadway,
Vintener. Mr. Milward of St. Michaels. Mr. Brooks of St. Michaels. William
Deane. Edward James, a Rope-maker. George Tetge. Richard Lacket, a Cook. John
Tailor, Merchant. John Tailor, Rope-maker. Edmund Arundell, Merchant. Edmund
Dacres, Plumber. John Dimmock, Carpenter. John Throupe. Dr. Marks. John
Pestor. Mr. Thomas Bursell. John Collins. Robert Blackborrough. Robert Brown
of Clifton. Lawrence Brown. Thomas Heyman, Merchant in St. Augustines. John
Carey, Cooper. Capt. Doughtie. Capt. Coal. William Colston. Edward Capell.
Richard Grigson. John Godman. John Swetman. William Etans. John Boucher, Son
of Nathaniel Boucher, Merchant. Walton Cugly. Nathaniel Dowles. Thomas Hilman.
Mr. Green, Lawyer, Steward of Bristoll. James Sterry, Griffin Batten.
Nathaniel Street. William Pope. John Peverell. Cornelius Broadway. Samuel
Warin. Henry Russell. Thomas Martin. Edward Hungerford. James Abbotte. Edward
Hunt. William Oubler. Joseph Brown. Edmund Jews. Henry Priest. William Coxe
of Long-Ashton. John Tilly Mercer. John Council. John Rowden. Edward Tailor.
William Ioane^ Thomas Radding. James Thomas. Nathaniel Blaunch.
Besides these mentioned of certain knowledge, there are at least 2000. in the
City, suburbs, and Country adjacent, that were Confederates in the forenamed
Conspiracy. As for the Relation of what should have been acted, when, and how,
it is already sent at large, to the Houses of Parliament, by Colonel Fi^nnes,
therefore I shall here omit that, as at this time unnessary.

But it will be necessary here to annex the reasons that caused Colonel Fiennes
to put in execution the order given him by my L. General to send up Colonel
Essex from Bristoll, not as an accusation against Colonel Essex in this place
(let that be followed by those to whom it appertains) but by way of
vindication of Col. Fiennes, that he has done nothing herein but what the
trust reposed in him, and the safety of that important place did require of
him; and that the rather because by Col. Essex his own speech, giving out as
it it is reported in the t^wn) that he has cleared himself, and is to return
to his government again; it begins so far to reflect upon C. Fiennes, as if he
had done him injury. and there had bin no plot at all, but a plot to put
himself into the Governors place: the Malignants here in Town taking up
this, and spreading it, and adding strength to it by Col. Essex his own
speeches, and carriages, it will be a great injustice to him who has done his
duty, and therein no inconsiderable services, to be requited with calumny:
there shall here therefore be laid down a true Relation of the grounds and
reasons first in a Letter written by Col. Fennes: then the examinations taken
both concerning the killing of the Trooper, and the invitation of Prince Rupert
to come to Bristoll, with a Letter of Sir Edward Hungerfords about it: And to
all this, agrees a passage that fell out between Capt. Freeman and an Officer
of Prince Ruperts at Andover, where Captain Freeman was constrained to
counterfeit himself to be of Prince Ruperts party, and after they had drunk
Prince Roberts health, after Capt. Freeman demanded of the other why they did
not go to Gloucester? the Officer answered that the Roundheads had made that
place too strong; but they had an easier design and of far greater
consequence which was Bristoll; for said he there we have a sure party, there
is not the turning of a hand there, but Prince Robert has intelligence of it:
Cap. Freeman demanding what party they had there? the Officer answered him the
Governor, Tom. Essex; for says he he gives Prince Robert intelligence of all
things; there might be added also the relation of the Apothecary.

My Lord,
IF your Lordship had been an eye witness (as some have been) how little time I
have had to eat, or drink, or sleep, or to write, speak, or think of any
thing but what was necessary for our present preservation, your Lordship would
not have thought, that I had been altogether so much to blame, in being so
short in the sending of particulars concerning Colonel Essex, and the late
Plot, and yet I am sure (if it miscarried not) I sent a Letter long enough, and
full enough of particulars concerning Colonel Essex, and which I think were
sufficient to satisfy any man, that it was necessary he should be removed
from hence before the Town could be put in any possibility of security,
although he had not been touched in the point of his Fidelity: such was his
excessive prodigality and profusenes in feasting gaming, and drinking, whilst
his soldiers were fasting and perishing for hunger; and such was his
carelesenesse of the safety of the Town, that he never went about to
strengthen the Town by any works without, till two or three days before I
came. nor to confirm it within by disarming and suppressing the Malignants,
but rather on the otherside being himself familiar, and intimate with the
chief Malignants, and siding with them against the good party, and that in so
high a degree that even after I came to the Town, he imprisoned Captain
Birche (who is and always was the most active man in the Town for the
Parliament) and swore that neither he nor any of his men, nor any of the Bridge
men (who are known to be the honestest men in the Town, and who only
appeared in their Arms for us, when Prince Rupert came before the Town)
should have any Arms or any command in the City, and this I can testify my
self, for he swore it deeply in my presence: and after he swore he would
commit Lieutenant Colonel White and so by degrees began to make approaches
upon me, swearing that I should have nothing to do there, whereby I perceived,
I washed a Black-moore white, if I went about to do any thing for the
reclaiming of him, or the put^ng of the City in a posture of safety whilst he
was there, and I saw evidently that either I must send him away, or that all
the good people in the Town would leave it, and devert both it and me; he had a
little before framed a Protestation, which should be a test of m^lignant and
ill affected persons, which was such, as many of the best affected would not
take lest they should be thereby obliged to to keep out any other Parliament
Forces that might come in, and to thrust out those that were already in it, and
on the other side was taken by known Malignants (and as I think by some of
the chief Conspiratours in this late plot) and they did after make that use of
it, that they were thereby tied to suffer no Forces in the Town but such as
were by the consent of the King and Parliament, because they had protested to
oppose all Forces that should make any attempt upon the Town without the
consent of the King and Parliament, as they concluded all the Parliament Forces
did without the Kings consent. These and many other particulars which are
notorious to all the World, I wrote at large, his being here I found
inconsistent with the good and safety of this City and though there were no
apparent proof of his falsehood, which I never affirmed, yet there were shrewd
grounds of jealousy, as may appear by the Depositions: whereof I have sent
your Lordship a Copy, together with this Letter, and for that barbarous and
bloody act of killing an honest man in his Troop, there is no honest man in
this Town but abhors the memory of it, and I have sent up the evidence
against him, under the hand of six or seven of those that were eye, and ear
witnesses, of what was done and said, which was only this, that being five or
six months behind of their pay* or a very long time, they coming with their
Captain some twenty of them, to desire him to take some course for it, when
this man had said only these words, (Noble Governor, give me leave to speak
a word or two to you) he immediately shot him through the head* and both the
Sheriffs and the Coroner having been hitherto hindered to make and inquiry
concerning it, since Colonel Essex his removal desired me that they might
examine witnesses concerning it, and have a verdict about it, alleging that
they were likely to be deeply fined for not doing it, that I told them I must
acquaint my Lord General first with it, because it may somewhat entrench upon
his power by Martial law, and besides if it should be done immediately upon
Colonel Essex his removal, it might appear to have something of spleen in
it, and that I did not carry matters so farrely in his absence: for my part so
my Lord General and the World be satisfied that I had good reason to send him
away from hence according to his direction, I would not have things prosecuted
too hard against him, although I am very much deceived, if many a Governor of
a Town has not been called to an account, in point of his fidelity upon
weaker grounds then those that I have sent, nay it were sufficient to question
his fidelity, that in so long time that he has been here, when he knew that
the Town without any works. and with so slender a Company as he had in it
(being so malignant as for a great part of it, it was) could not be kept, if
any considerable Force should come against it, made no provision at all to have
the Town better fortified without, and better furnished with a Garrison
within, but spent his time in drinking and feasting, and so he would have done
till the Enemy had come to the Gates, and whether then he would have let them
in upon this ground, that it was not probable, that such a Town should be kept
with such a Force; I have cause to fear by what I have heard from the
Fountain in case he had stayed here till the Enemy came before the Town; and
that it was the expectation of the Enemy, and the Resolution of Colonel Essex,
although he reserved himself from declaring his mind till the Enemy had been
at the Gates; for as to that which Colonel Essex spoke off, as the only course
he intended to take (which was to go out* and meet the Enemy out of the Town
it was agreed by all his own Officers when the Enemy was approachin^ that
could not be done for unless we would have left the Town wh^ly unguarded and
unto it self (which in the condition it then was, and still is in great part,
was to leave it to the Enemy) we could not draw out 200. men to meet them, and
what then would Colonel Essex have drawn out to meet them, before I brought
in six Companies of Sir Edward Hungerfords Regiment into the Town.

First I had it from diverse good hands, and amongst the rest from a Knight of
good quality that be heard his Son in Law who is on the other side, say tha^
he saw a Letter of Colonel Essex which was sent to the Malignants in
Sommers^shie^e and particularly from Mr. Coventrie to his wife, to assure them
of Colonel Essex, and that in that Letter there was a clause to this purpose.
Let men dispute of me what they will by God I am for the King.

Secondly, he was familiar and intimate with some of the chief Conspiratours in
this late Plot, as Robert ^eomons, Duk. We^kes who presently upon Colonel
Essex his removal, rode to Neford to bring Prince Ruperts forces against this
Town and was heard to say as he went through Si^encester to the Governor of
that place, that this City was worth the taking.

Thirdly, his Captain Lieutenant of his own Company was a chief mah in this
plot, and Prince Rupert in his addresses to him, and some of Bristoll makes
that as one of the grounds of his coming hither to revenge the Affront done to
Colonel Essex, and his Ensign has also been suspected to incline that way,
by his discourse, and by his kindred and Friends; and one of servants that very
night, that his Colonel was removed from hence drunk a health to Prince
Rupert upon his knees, and forced others to do so likewise.

The Examination of William Walker of Thorneborough, Soldier under Capt:
Seymore in the fight at Cirencester.
HE says, that one Dr. Hiskins being Chaplain to Prince Rupert coming to a
Church in Oxon, where this William Walker was a wounded Prisoner, and
understanding by his fellows that he was son to a wealthy man; The Chaplain
told him, while he entreated for pity (being almost dead with his wound, cold
and hunger) that he should come forth the morrow; when accordingly he came, and
fetched him out of prison, and inquired of him, where his father lived, writing
a letter in his name to his Father for 40 l. for his ransom, after he had
carried to his Father in the Country this letter, at his coming again to
Oxon, in the Chamber where this William Walker was standing by the fire, one
Mon^sier Mattanne, Prince Ruperts Gentleman came to this Dr. asking him what
news in the Country. I hear that Tom Essex will let Prince Maurice have no
wine at Cirenceste^; no, says the Dr. no answered the Monsier but it is not
his fault, but those in the City, that will not let it come forth far says he
there is a letter from Tom Essex to Prince Rupert, I saw it, (...) him, (...)
keep the Castle for him, as long as his life lasts and will never shoot a
sho^ against him: after which he presently took the Dr. into the window
whispering, and then went out, and whispered in the ^ext Room a while, and came
in again and parted. The Dr. bringing this man Walker down to receive his
Ransom.

So it is, WILLIAM WALKER.

The Examination of Guido Syllcockes the 27. of Febr.
HE says, that one William Walker, that is now at Thorneborough, and was
taken at Cirencester told him, that when he was at Oxford, he saw a Letter in
the hand of one of Prince Ruperts Gentlemen, signed Thomas Essex, wherein he
promised, that if Prince Rupert pleased to come to Bristoll, he would not shoot
a shot against him, but would spend his life for him; and that for the Castle
he had possessed himself of it, and he should be sure to have no hurt from
thence; or to this effect.

GuY. SYLCOCKE. Jun.

THat I was informed at Cirencester by one Courdeene who is Groom of the
Chamber unto Prince Maurice, that his Prince did daily receive Letters from
Essex, and they were sure of the Town of Bristoll at the first summons by his
means, and most of the Cavaliers confirmed in their language his opinion

That I heard the Prince say at the Table, that if the Parliament would find
Essex money, he could tell how to spend it, and cheat them too: and drank to
him, and said, he hoped he would not stay their Sack that came from Bristoll,
meaning from Essex.

That in the hands of the Prince his Secretary, I saw Letters about to be
Sealed to be directed to Essex.

That from diverse of his Officers, I have heard word, of a mutiny intended by
Essex to which effect they had gotten some of the best Citizens to side with
them, such as they thought Malignant; but to enquire the secret truth I durst
not, because they did distrust me, but in the Company of those Townsmen I once
was, and heard how Traitorously they stood affected; but I know not their Names.

I am willing to be deposed upon the premises, not out of any envy, that
I owe him, but to protect the lives of the then half betrayed soldiers.
WILLIAM APSELEY.

Sir,
I understand by some of Chippenham, who were upon Tuesday night with Colon^^
Lunsford at Malmsbury, That news being then brought unto him of Colonel Essex
his removal from Bristoll, he struck his breast, and seemed to be much
troubled thereat, so were all the rest of the Cavaliers thou present. These of
Chippenham do likewise inform me that they conceive there are not 200
soldiers at Malmssbury not 500 at Cirencester (but of this I shall be better
informed before night.) And that most of the (...) has been collected in
Wilts and there abouts, being (a the said Chippenham-men are informed) near
upon 6000 l. remains yet there in (...). A good booty in my opinion to invite
some of our Forces thither, and Captain Jews a meet man to bring on the
Foot: But you must then needs spare a troop of horse, which with those horse
I have) ought to guard the Avenues there toward Cirencester, if you have any
inten^^^^ to assist me in this design, then to keep it as private as possibly
may be. I hear nothing for certainty of Prince Ruperes Army more then
yesterday you were as ^^^^^ed withal. I rest,

Bath this second of March, 1642. Your humble servant. Thomas Hungerford.

To the Honorable Colonel NATHANIEL FJENNES, Governor of the Army, of the
City of Bristoll. The Certain Information of Richard Kent, John Vernon, and
John Smith, late Troopers to Colonel Thomas Essex, touching the Death of
William Kendall, one of their fellow Troopers, (viz.)
THAT whereas the said William Kendall did on the 25th. of January last at
night, come unto several men of the said Troop, desiring them to go with him
the next morning to their Captain, and with him to go to their Colonel, to
lay open their grievances as to a father (having no intent to demand their pay,
but to acquaint him that they were forced for want of ready money, to pay 6 d.
for that, which other men (having ready money) paid but 4 d for, And they
being quartered in such houses, where was none (but very bad) hay and provender
for their horses, they having no money could not in conscience remove their
Horses to better, until they had discharged the house where they were, and
they having not money, were constrained to buy their Oats at the Innes, which
cost them more by six pence in a Bushel, then they could have bought better
for in the Market (there being due unto each of them at that time, 4. l. 15. s.
And they having a very considerable Precedent, therefore (viz.) that formerly
at Worcester, about ten or twelve of the same Troop, (then under the Command of
Colonel Sands) having lost their Horses in that fight (whereof the said
William Kendall was one) their Colonel giving Order they should have but half
their pay, they then (as now) in all humility, repaired to the Lord General
the Earl of Essex, and having admittance to his chamber door sent in their
grievances, and presently received a gracious Answer, having their wrongs
speedily redressed) And upon the 24. of January last in the morning, the said
William Kendall and about twenty or more of the said Troopers, thinking that by
the expressions of grief of so many, it would have caused the mote pity and
speedy redress from their Captain and Colonel) presently went to their
Captain, and meeting with him just at the door of his lodging, thinking to
have opened their grief unto him as formerly they had done, he prevented them
by telling of them, he had not then received any money for them, but was going
to the Governors to see for some, bidding them presently to follow him, and
make their case known unto the Governor, whereupon they followed him in an
orderly manner, as Soldiers with their Swords only by their sides; and coming
to the Governors, they went into the house after their Captain, where some
stayed in a little Parlour, and some in the entry, quietly waiting till the
Governor was stirring; and having waited there about a quarter of an hour,
the Governor came down unto them, without his doublet on, having a fire lock
Pistol in his hand with the cock down, and as it afterwads appeared, it was
charged with a Bullet ready span'd and primed, and coming to one of the
Troopers, he spoke to him after this manner (viz.) Sir is your Horse ready,
whereunto he replied, yes and please your Honor, then said the Governor,
sir go and fetch him, taking the Trooper by the Arm, and thrusting of him
out of the Parlour door, speaking the like words, and doing the like action to
two or three more of them, they making the like answer as before. And the said
then Governor Thom: Essex spoke in like manner to the said William Kendall
deceased, and after some short pause (not one word more passing between them,
he shot the said William Kendall into his head with his said Pistol, whereupon
he immediately fell down dead in the place, as Samuel Car^^ Thomas Coset,
William Sedwell, William Smith, the said Richard Rent, John Colstacke, James
Polle, and Benjamin Parnell who were eye witnesses thereunto, can and will
testify. All which they knowing to be true, have thought fit to certify under
their hands this fourth day of March. 1642.

And they do further certify, that the said William Kendall, after the said
Colonel Essex had bid him make ready his Horse, desired his Honor to hear him
speak two or three words unto him, for which cause only and for no other, the
said Colonel Essex immediately shot him with his Pistol as before, which the
eye witnesses before named can testify at large.

Richard Kent. John Cowlstock. William Siddell. Benjamin Parnell. Thomas Coset.
James Polle.


THese things considered, if a Town of that consequence had here (...) the
loss whereof would have drawn with it the loss of all the we^^ part of
England, besides the dangerous consequences to this Kingdom at this time from
Ireland, let any impartial man judge whether Colonel Fiennes seeing and
observing upon the place what he did, and being advertised of all these
particulars, would not in the opinion of the world, have lien under the censure
of being ^ a Knave or a Fool, if to prevent it he had not executed the command
be (...) ^ed from my Lord General.

FINIS.

