A FULL RELATION OR DIALOGUE Between a Loyallist and a converted PHANATTICK
since the time of the late Rebellion, relating their wicked conspiracy, and
barbarous intentions, whereby their divellish plots is more fully discovered
then ever it was before: Gently disputed between them both. Together with the
Phanaticks Lamentation and farewell to that Crew.

Published as a warning-piece to all Rebellious Sectaries.



Printed for F. Coals. 1660.

A Dialogue between a LOYALIST and a PHANATTICK.
Enter Loyallist. STand! who approaches there so near the walls of our
Government, lurking in the dark like a ravening wolf in sheeps clothing?


Phanattick. Behold O man and see! for lo it is I, even thy fellow creature,
and one of the faithful,


Loy. Ha, ha, say you so indeed; are you one of the faithful? in good faith by
and by I shall try your fidelity.


Phan. Then take me and try me, for thou shall not find me to be even as other
men are!


Loy. Why truly it is very likely so, and I shall take your bare word for it,
wherein I took you at first to be an honest man, now I doubt I shall find you
to be a knave.


Phan. Why, even as thou find me, so may thou leave me.


Loy. No don't you believe that I will part with you so soon, until you have
declared unto me the secrets of your breast.


Pha. What know thou not O man what the word says, that a revealer of
secrets is no less then a fool


Loy. Gad it is to be feared that you are more knave then fool, therefore
demonstrate unto me what you are!


Pha. I shall answer unto thee O man, That I am one of the Tribe of Ephraim who
now am come to advance the Cause of the righteous, and to seek after the rest
of my brethren.


Loy. I, so it seems you are a brood with a pox to ye, but we shall be as
careful to look after them as you shall.


Phan. Nay, but I tell thee O man, they are a people elected.


Loy. I believe so, for Dan has a great suspicion of it.


Pha. Of their innocence he may, for they have done nothing but what they must
answer for


Loy. I, answer for it) without dispute, either guilty or not guilty they must
say.


Phan. Verily, verily they thought no more harm, but to search out all that
were not of their Sect, and smite them to the ground with the edg of the sword,
which as we counted was the work of the just


Loy. Why then justly they shall have their reward for it I Will warrant ye, even
to a tittle of what they deserve.


Phan. Why indeed as the labourer is worthy of his hire, even according to the
Word so let it be.


Loy. But were there not a great many hirelings amongst them, think you?


Phan. Yes, there were many that came out by hands even to advance the cause of
th faithful, being a people called and led by the spirit.


Loy. I, but others do imagine they were led by the Devil else humane nature
would have blush't at their boldness.


Phan. No no, alas they were of undaunted spirits in the fancy they took to,
that they feared neither God nor Devil.


Loy. Why, so the people report indeed they were of such magnanimous spirits,
men far more flitter for the Gallows then a Garrison.


Phan. Yea, in the City do I imagine so, but truly, truly they were so zealous
in all their ways, that whatsoever idle fancy they took to, they would stand it
out to the last.


Loy. So it seems indeed, but now I doubt they will be hanged fort at last, poor
harmless Athists, it is a thousand pitties that ever one of them should dye in
their beds.


Pan. Nay, but hearken unto the words of my mouth O man, and I shall speak unto
thee. For as I lay in my bed my thoughts troubled me, and I heard a voice say
unto me, arise and girt on thy sword, and fight the battle of the faithful,
then I awaked out of my sleep and did as I was commanded, for the spirit did
move me.


Loy. No, the Devil did move you, that evil spirit, on purpose to raise up the
throne of Antichrist, and so crown your selves with the horn of Rebellion.


Phan. Nay but O man our meaning was not so, nor our intentions, no more but to
abollish all Laws, and subdue all Satutes, O what an ease would it have brought
to the Lawyers. Secondly, to have cast off both King and Government, then what
a liberty had we given to the Nation. Thirdly, to have pulled down all Churches,
and Chapels, O then what a trouble had we quitted the Clergy of. Fourthly, to
have brought all things under our power, O then what a government had the
people then lived under?


Loy. Yes, and I believe you would have massacred in houses too, before you
would have fall'd in your wicked Enterprises


Phan. O man, the Spirit did call us thereunto, and bid us fight valiantly, and
spare not one alive contrary to our Sect, which thing must be done before we
could accomplish this mighty work that the spirit has moved us to take in
hand.


Loy. Why truly you may see what the Spirit has done for you and how it has
led you, first to Newgate, then shortly to Tyburn, where he will leave you to
your deserved merits.


Phan. Verily, verily I shall answer unto thee again and say, That our host
were numerous had they been but together, and our power innumerable, but there
came others more mightier then they, and smote them back and side, and slew
them, where-now they remain for the sins of their bretren, and cannot obtain
this mighty work.


Loy. Yes, I believe it is too mighty for for you to accomplish.


Phan. Hear thou me and I will answer thee again, we were a people of the
faithful, and did not intend to do it with the hands of men.


Loy. What did ye intend to do it with the hands of Devils?


Phan. Not we did intend to do it by prayer, and though our hearts did pray,
yet our hands should fight, and though we flew as many in number as the sand on
the Sea shore, yet would we leave a Remnant alive to wonder at the deeds we
should do.


Loy. No marvel indeed to wonder at the deeds you should do, when so many
thousand do wonder at the deeds you have done already, but you know what the
Word says, The tree that brings not forth good fruit, wall be cut down and
cast into the fire.


Phan. Nay fellow creature I must tell thee.


Loy. Nay don't term me thy fellow creature, for I am none of thy fellows.


Phan. Why then I shall thee O man the prudency of our Counsels are turned into
foolishness and the hand of the City has bin upon us.


Loy. Have a care the hands of the hung does not fall on you.


P. Why, shall the faithful dye for the sins of the people?


Loy. No, but they shall dye for their divellish Rebellion.


Phan. Nay then I will sit down and complain of my misery, that my brethren
does suffer, and none regards them.


Loy. No not many thou may be sure.


Phan. Alas alas our brethren were saintly divine creatures, and as innocent as
the beast of the field, they loved all flesh alike.

They hated not each others wives, but loved them as they loved their own.

They lid'd so charitable one with another, that rather then they would part
they would go to Newgate together.

They would wrong no man sacretly, but in the streets kill them openly.

They were the judicious persons in the world, (putting treason and baseness
aside.

There was few men of more constancy then they were, but 'twas among themselves.

They were the learned Scholars that ever was, For they would coin such new
sense for Scripture words, that never was heard nor known before.

They were likewise the valiantest Soldiers that ever was, confessing they
were always led by a sp'rit.

They were also accounted for the bouldest men that ever I knew, for they could
look through the grandest piece of impudence, without being a whit ashamed:
they were the greatest lovers of Churches that ever was, for they would
willingly have pulled them down to have paved their yards with the stones
thereof. Nay, they knew that amongst all these virtues if they were taken they
should be hanged.


Loy. Why truly it is the general report of the City, especially for these
three v v v, Vice, Villainy, and Vaniy, and for three b b b, Bloody, Base, and
Busy, and for three t t t, Troubles, Treason, and Treachery, whereby you may
search Bedlam, Bridewell and Newgate, and hardly find any to exceed them.


Phan. Verily I answer and say unto thee that these are the latter days my
brethren do live in.


Loy. Why truly Dun has a great suspicion of it, that it is their latter days
they live in now.


P. Why, so I mean, but will ye believe me?


Loy. It Is a question whether I shall or no for times are dangerous.


Phan. Why indeed it is a tottering age we live in, for the word says we are
here to day and gone to morrow.


Loy. Your brethren at Newgate cannot say so except it be the day before their
Execution.


Phan. Why verily I answer thee according to the word, we live in a very
uncertain time, for a man does not know the day he shall dye on.


Loy. Yes in good says, when your brethren are going up Holbuern they have a
shrewd guess what day they are to dye on.


Phan. Alas, they were innocent and harmless creatures, they never do no hurt
but what they do willingly.


Loy. Why, so the report is, but Monday and Wednesday they could do but little
or nothing.


Phan. Alas they could do no more then what they were able, though they
endeavored as much as any men alive.


Loy. Yes I believe they did, but they should have marched in order, and have
chose some honest religious men to command ye.


Phan. Indeed there was thee honest men to have come which was Hewson, Okey and
Ludlow, but had they come and been taken, you would surely have hanged them.


Loy. Yes truly and not only them, for they have got such a use of hanging,
that that they do not care to hang the greatest Traitor in England.


Phan. I but our people did not intend to be hanged when they came out.


Loy. Very likely so indeed! but how did you come to join with the Righteous to
advance the cause of the faithful?


Phan. Why truly I shall tell thee O man, from the uprightness of my heart, how
according to my belief the spirit did move me.


Loy. Yes I warrant thee the spirit did move thee, more likely the Devil did
move thee, therefore declare to me the very truth.


Phan. Why then behold O man, on Wednesday morning Ian. 9. as I lay in my bed I
was troubled, and I heard a voice say, come away, for the day of the faithful
appears: then I arose and took my woollen vestment also with me: and the
woman that was given to be with me, said, O man whether departest thou? I said
to her, I go to seek the faithful: she answered me again, go and prosper. No
sooner was I come out at the North door, but I espied, and beheld afar off a
band of men, and I drew near unto them, and they drew near unto me, and said
unto me who art thou,

I answered and said, I am one of the faithful.

Then they answered and said draw near, and be it unto thee even as thou have
said.

Then we communed and walked together, and sought counsel by prayer; and being
come into Cheapside we met with our Enemies, who assaulted us and smote us,
both back and side, and cast us into bonds, so this was the overthrow of the
righteous, and if there is ought done against thee, it is I a servant of the
Lord, testify thou against me.


Loy. I testify against thee, that thou and the rest of thy brethren did seek
to maintain Kingly Government, to keep up the Clergy, and to continue the Laws
both for the preservation of Prince and peasant.


Phan. I tell thee O man that thy testimony is not according to truth, for we
never intended any of these things, but as we were led by the spirit, our
intention was to pull down all Government, to subvert the Laws, destroy the
Clergy, to set up Bell and Dragon, and live under the means and sweat of other
men's labors.


Loy. Nay but you did intend to raise another great Tax, and to repair and
beautify the Church of Saint Paul's, and to rectify the Altar.


Phan. Nay but O man I shall answer again, and say thou art in an Error, for
the spirit did move us to pull it down, and to remove the Altars from their
places.


Loy. And again you did intend to erect more new Colleges in both
Universities, and make the Nation mad with learning.


Phan. I tell thee again O man as I am bound to answer to my charge that it is
false also: for we were to confound learning, and destroy they universities
with the three Original tongues, Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, because our opinion
should never be confuted:


Loy. Nay but you would have made such an Order in the City, as to have Elected
two Lord Mayors, four Sheriffs, and twice as many Aldermen.


Phan, I answer thee again O man, it is very false, for we did never intend any
such thing, for our intention was to have had no Lord Mayor, Sheriff, nor
Alderman, but every one to be Governor, and Teacher of his own house.


Loy. And again it is plainly made apparent that you did intend for to erect
more Printing houses, because all the Presses in town could not Print off so
fast as your Authors did write.


Phan. Verily I say unto thee, That a flight of snow on May day is more
welcomer to us then either Printing or learning, nay we did so much disaffect
it, that we intended to have taught each other without Bell, Book, or Candle,
and so to have been as innocent as the beast in the field, that knows neither
good nor evil.


Loy. Nay, its further laid to your charge that you had such inclination to
Languages that you kept Translators in your houses.


Phan. I shall answer unto thee O man, that we were not inclined to Languages,
but was content with the same we was born withal, and for Translators we never
had any but our Shoo-repairers.


Loy. But did ye not intend to teach when you came into Cheap Side to the
Standard.


Phan. No no, we did intend to meet and assemble our selves together, and put
our host in order for the mighty work we were called to.


Loy. Yes a mighty work you had to do before we met with you, at Woodstreet,
Colledg-hill, and Cornwall.


Pha. O man our enemies met with us too soon which makes me add the lamentation
of a bad market, for the hands of the City have been upon us.

His lamentation and farewell to all Sects.
What now I say, that must I needs,
The hands of ye City have bin on our heads
that spirit which within our hearts did lurk
And put us now upon this mighty work,
Has even so betrayed us into thrall,
And brought our teachers into bondage all:
That very curse which was on cursed Cain
Is now befell amongst my brethren,
Our self-opinion teachers now is clad,
with ye very plague ye Pharaohs Egiptians had
Being unbelievers through Hipocricy,
We Are drowned all within the Ocean Sea,
Just even so we made Religion new,
And justified it like as if we knew,
the hearts of Angels in their contemplation
Although 'twas nothing but dissimulation,
Led by a spirit which did us undo
And now has ruined our Religion too,
Then farewell Sects, and farewell Sectaries,
Farewell to Schism and to Hypocrisses,
Farewell to meeting houses, and adiue
To teaching-houses farewell unto you,
Farewell to Bishopsgate we use to meet,
Farewell to preaching in the open street,
For now the Bull and mouth at Aldersgate,
Within this fortnight is to be let
What, have the tenants lately Newgate took
That now the Bull and mouth they have forsook,
A place most fit, the time was then,
Bedlam, and Bridewel did complain of them.

FINIS.

