A FULL RELATION Of all the late proceedings of His Majesty's Army in the
County of York: with the present state and condition of things there.

Declaring His Majesty's intention to advance His Standard at Nottingham the 20
of August, and by proclamation to command all men's attendance on his Person:
with the number of His Army, Horse and Foot.

Also the Propositions of the Malignant-party, by them now daily treated on for
effecting of their mischievous designs; contrary to the Laws of the Land, and
the liberty of the Subject.

Likewise how diverse Gentlemen's houses in that County have been lately
pillaged by the Troopers belonging to His Majesty.

And lastly, certain Considerations toward the redress of these groaning
evils, securing the County, and preservation of the peaceable Subjects therein.

As it was sent in a Letter to Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, and by him
presented to both Houses of Parliament.

August 19. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith printed and
published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright. 1642.

A true Relation from York, of sundry Occurrences concerning His MAJESTY, and
His Army.
SIR,
THe Constitution of affairs in this County are of so high importance to the
general good of the whole Land, as we conceive it requisite to have them
represented to the House of Parliament, and to receive directions from thence,
to guide the well-affected Subjects in such ways as conduce to the
establishment of peace, here and elsewhere; and to that end the Committee when
they returned to the Parliament promised frequent intercourse, and that those
who should be employed from hence upon such occasions should find their charge
and travel well rewarded, whereupon diverse Gentlemen of the County, having met
here at York, this day and yesterday, did resolve it necessary to dispatch the
bearer, with a view of the present condition of the Country which they desire
you to make known to the House as you shall find it necessary.

His Majesty has now withdrawn all his Forces from Hull and Beverley, and
sent most part of his Horse toward Newarke and Nottingham, and intends to
advance his Standard at Nottingham, the 20 of August, and by Proclamation to
command all men's attendance on his person, as the Proclamation which the bearer
will deliver will more fully inform. His Army at this present consists
especially of Horse which are intended to be about 4000. in several Regiments,
in which number we conceive is not included the 500. Horse which certain of
the Gentry of Yorkshire promise to raise; nor the Train of the Court,
estimated at 500. Horse. For Foot forces, here are very few visible, and those
of the scum of the Country, being raised by beating Drums for Volunteers, yet
it is said that the proportion is 13000. foot, though in discourse they declare
as if 5000. foot will be sufficient for the design, which what it is, or
against whom we know not, otherwise then is expressed in the Proclamation, for
raising the Standard: for if it were for defense of the Protestant Religion,
the Laws of the Land, and privileges of Parliament so often repeated, we
conceive the Papists, who hate them all would not so much rejoice, nor show
themselves so forward to assist the service, nor make so frequent resort as now
they do into these parts, from Ireland, Lancashire, and all parts of
Yorkeshires; and besides we observe the King has sent out warrant to call to
the service all Recusants Horse and Arms, and many Recusants, to make
themselves capable of commands do resort to Church.

It is given out that the King goes Southward on Tewsday next though of that we
can write no certainty; But whenever he goes from hence, he leaves the Earl
of Cumberland to govern these Northern Counties, with authority to raise
forces for defense of them, and a Council of War to assist him; And to
terrify the Subjects and constrain obedience to the government, it is to be
accompanied with a Commission of Oier and Terminer, and this government and
Council, are to reside at York.

You have already heard how the Gentry of this County were summoned to appear
before his Majesty at York the fourth of this Month, where His Majesty made
certain Propositions to them, which you have since seen in print, whereupon
the Earl of Cumberland, Lord Savill, Lord Faulconbridge, all or most of the
Commissioners of Array, and diverse other Gentlemen of the Country, met in the
Deanery at York, and there framed the Petition sent up by M. Jackson and M.
Maud to the Parliament; which though it was carried then with much secrecy, yet
now it is divulged, and disliked by a great number of the other Gentry of this
County, who will protest against it in writing as soon as they can meet with
convenience; yet they which framed it resolve to maintain it, and hold
meetings and consultations at the Deanery in York, where they treat of matters
of dangerous and high consequence, and contrary to the Laws of the Land, and
the liberty of the Subject; that is to say,

To join in association with other neighboring Counties, to maintain the
petition aforesaid.

To raise an Army of horse and foot for defense of the County under the
command of the Earl of Cumberland, to be laid about York, and paid by the
Country.

To obtain of the King an able Soldier to command in this Army under the
Earl, to whom they intend the Country shall allow entertainment.

To constreine all persons to contribute to the charge of this Army, and to
distreine upon such as refuse it.

And to disable the Subjects to oppose, or defend themselves against this
oppression, they intend to disarme, and imprison all such Gentlemen, as shall
not consent with them, and they have especially designed, for imprisoning a
great number of Gentlemen, who they suppose will give opposition to their
courses, and they have already disarmed part of the trained band, in every
regiment, and intend to disarme more of them, where they find danger of
opposition.

And Sir John Mallory in his regiment has already caused, both money to be
furnished to his Soldiers by the Constables, and Arms to be taken from the
Soldiers.

These Propositions and consultations which are generally spoken of, do not a
little perplex the well affected subjects; and their fears increase, by diverse
particular affronts and attempts upon the Gentry of the Country, by the
Troopers and others of the Kings Army: as the pillaging of diverse Gentlemen's
Houses about Hull, and pillaging Sir Henry Cholmelies House near Selby, on
Sunday last, and Master George Marwoods House at Nunmunckton, five miles from
York, on Wensday last. In this of Master Marwoods, we will relate some
particulars, for your better information.

It was done in the day time, and by 24 Horse or there about, part stayed
beyond the River, running close by the House, part entered the house, and others
kept watch, that none should come to hinder their attempt; They threatened
Mistress Marwood and her servants with death, to discover where her husband was:
and swore they would cut him in pieces before her face, and called her
protestant whore, and Puritan whore: They searched all the house, and brake
open 17 locks, they took away all his money, being about 120. l. and all his
plate they could find; And they pretended, that they had the Kings warrant for
their doings; which the King disavowes, and is very much offended to have his
Name so abused, and threatens to have them all hanged if they be discovered;
And though it be Master Marwoods lot to suffer first, yet the loose people
threaten to pillage and destroy all Roundheads, and name some particular
persons; under which foolish name Roundhead they comprehend all such as do
not go their ways.

These beginnings and preparations of misery, are necessary to be made known
to all the Kingdom, that the good Subjects may stand upon their guard; for
though we may assure our selves that the King will endeavor to preserve us,
yet we find it is impossible to restrain the malice and rage, of bloody
Papists, and faithless Atheists; and in time these mischiefs will approach
other parts, though for the present, we lie in the mouth of danger.

Now toward the redress of these growing evils, and securing the peace of
this County, and preservation of those peaceable subjects, intended to be
disarmed and left naked to the fury of every malicious adversary; we offer to
your Considerations, the Propositions following viz,

That an Order be conceived in Parliament, and declared, that all the Kingdom
may take notice of it; to this effect, That all well affected and good Subjects
(that shall be plundered, pillaged, or suffer in their estates, by any one of
the Cavalleeres or other forces raised without consent of Parliament) shall
have full reparation of their damages, out of the estates of such Persons of
wealth and quality, whose fortunes lying in the South, do now reside in
Yorkshire, and with their presence and assistance, do countenance, and
further these distempers of the Kingdom, and the mischiefs, that do happen,
and are like to increase.

That there may be speedily sent to Hull a sufficient proportion of powder,
bullets, Arms, ordnance and other munition, with an Order to furnish the
Country with them, as there shall be occasion, especially to such as shall be
disarmed upon the consultations held in the Deanery.

That Commissions be speedily sent down from the Earl of Essex, Lord
Leivtenant of this County, to the Gentlemen named in this enclosed paper, or
such of them as the House shall elect, for the present, to raise and command
the forces of this Country, for suppressing of any insurrections or unlawful
Tumults that may happen to arise.

That the Sheriff be commanded by special Order of Parliament, to conduct
and assist them, as the House conceives fitting.

This list of Gentlemen for Commanding the Country forces, is not intended to
disappoint any, of trust or command, who are already nominated, and entrusted
by the Parliament: nor are they intended to be continued longer then until
some other provision by act be concluded on, by the King and Parliament, for
settling and ordering the Militia.

And lastly it is the desire of the well affected in this Country, to receive
weekly advertisements from thence, by some especially employed for that
purpose, until affairs be so settled, as we may safely confide in the ordinary
post; for now we neither rightly understand the proceedings of the House, nor
can we represent to them such matters as concern the peace of the Country.

All which we hope you will be pleased to represent to the House, as the
unanimous considerations of a great number of the Gentry of the Country.

13. August. 1642. And we remain your most affectionate friends and servants.

FINIS.

