A Full RELATION OF The great Victory obtained by the PARLIAMENTS Forces under
the Command of Lievt. Genesis Cromwell AGAINST The whole Army of the SCOTS, under
the conduct of Duke Hamilton. With the numbers slain and taken Prisoners. Sent
in a Letter under the Lievt. Generals own hand: Which was read in both Houses
of Parliament upon Wednesday the 23 of Aug. 1648. With an Order of Parliament
for a Thanksgiving for the same.

Die Mercurii 23 August. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That Lievt. General Cromwels
Letter be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliament.



Imprinnted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.

For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire; Speaker of the House of Commons.
These.
Haste.

SIR;

I Have sent up this Gentleman, to give you an account of the great and good
hand of God toward you in the late victory obtained against the Enemy in these
parts.

After the conjunction of that party which I brought with me out of Wales, with
the Northern Forces about Knaresborough and Weatherby, hearing that the Enemy
was advanced with their Army into Lancashire, we marched the next day, being
the 13 of this instant August, to Oately, (having cast off our Train, and sent
it to Knaresborough, because of the difficulty of marching therewith through
Graven; and to the end we might with more expedition attend the Enemies motion)
and from thence the 14. to Skipton, the 15. to Gysburne, the 16. to Hodder
Bridge, over Ribble, where we had a Council of War, at which we had in
consideration, Whether we should march to Whalley that night, and so on to
interpose between the Enemy and his further progress into Lancashire, and so
Southward, which we had some advertisement the Enemy intended, and since
confirmed that they resolved for London it self; or whether to march
immediately over the said Bridge, there being no other betwixt that and
Preston, and engage the Enemy there; who we did believe would stand his ground,
because we had information that the Irish Forces under Munroe lately came out
of Ireland, which consisted of 1200. Horse and 1500 Foot, were on their march
toward Lancaster to join with them; It was thought that to engage the Enemy
to fight was our business; and the reason aforesaid giving us hopes that our
marching on the North fide of Ribble would effect it; It was resolved we should
march over the Bridge, which accordingly we did, and that night quartered the
whole Army in the fields by Stony-Hurst-Hall, being Mr. Sherburnes house, a
place nine miles distant from Preston, Very early the next morning we marched
toward Preston, having intelligence that the Enemy was drawing together there
abouts from all his out quarters; we drew out a forlorn of about 200. Horse and
400. Foot, the Horse commanded by Major Smithson, the Foot by Major Pounell;
our Forlorn of Horse marched within a mile, where the Enemy was drawn up in
the enclosed grounds by Preston on that side next us; And there upon a Moore
about half a mile distant from the Enemies Army, meet with their Scouts and
out-Guard; and did behave themselves with that valor and courage, as made
their Guards (which consisted both of Horse and Foot) to quit their ground, and
took diverse prisoners, holding this dispute with them until our Forlorn of
Foot came up for their Justification; And by these we had opportunity to bring
up our whole Army. So soon as our Foot and Horse were come up, we resolved
that night to engage them if we could; and therefore advancing with our
Forlornes, and putting the rest of the Army into as good a posture as the
ground would bear (which was totally inconvenient for our Horse, being all in
closure, and myerye ground) we pressed upon them, the Regiments of Foot were
ordered as follows, There being a lane very deep and ill up to the Enemies
Army and leading to the Town, we Commanded two Regiments of Horse, the first
whereof was Colonel Harrisons, and next was my own, to charge up that Lane,
and on either side of them advanced the Battle, which were Lieutenant Colonel
Reads, Colonel Deanes, and Colonel Prides on the right, Colonel Brights and
my Lord Generals on the left, and Colonel Ashton with the Lancashire Regiments
in reserve; we ordered Colonel Thornhaugh, and Colonel Twisletons Regiments
of Horse of the right, and one Regiment in reserve for the Lane, and the
remaining Hotse on the left; so that at last we came to a hedge dispute, the
greatest of the impression from the Enemy being upon our left wing, and upon
the Battle on both sides the Lane, and upon our Horse in the Lane, in all
which places the Enemy was forced from their ground after four hours
dispute, until we came to the Town, into which four Troops of my Regiment
first entered and being well seconded by Colonel Harrisons Regiment, charged
the Enemy in the Town and clear the Streets, there came no hands of our Foot
to fight that day, but did it with incredible valor and resolution, amongst
which Colonel Brights, my Lord General, Lieutenant Colonel Reads, and
Colonel Ashtons had the greatest work, they often coming to push of Pike and
to close firings, and always making the Enemy to recoyle, and indeed I must
needs say, God was as much seen in the valor of the Officers and Soldiers of
these before mentioned, as in any action that has been performed, the Enemy
making (though he was still worsted) very stiff and sturdy resistance,
Colonel Deanes, and Colonel Prides out winging the Enemy could not come to so
much share of the action, the Enemy shoging down toward the Bridge, and
keeping almost all in reserve, that so he might bring fresh hands often to
fight, which we not knowing but least we should be out winged, placed those two
Regiments to enlarge our right wing, which was the cause they had not at that
time so great a share in that action; at the last the Enemy was put into
disorder, many men slain, many prisoners taken; the Duke with most of the Scots
Horse and Foot retreated over the Bridge, where after a very hot dispute
betwixt the Lancashire Regiments, part of my Lord Generals and them being at
push of Pike, they were beaten from the Bridge, and our Horse and Foot
following them, killed many, and took diverse prisoners, and we possessed the
Bridge over Darwent and a few Houses there, the Enemy being drawn up within
Musket shot of us where we lay that night, we not being able to attempt
further upon the Enemy, the night preventing us; in this posture did the Enemy
and we lie the most part of that night; upon our entering the Town, many of
the Enemies Horse fled toward Lancaster, in the chase of whom went diverse of
our Horse, who pursued them near ten miles, and had execution of them, and
took about five hundred Horse, and many prisoners; We possessed in this Fight
very much of the Enemies Ammunition, I believe they lost four or five thousand
Arms, the number of the slain we judge to be about a thousand, the prisoners
we took were about four thousand.

In the night the Duke was drawing off his Army toward Wiggon, we were so
wearied with the dispute that we did not so well attend the Enemies going off
as might have been, by means whereof the Enemy was gotten at least three miles
with his rear before ours got to them. I ordered Colonel Thornhaugh to
Command two or three Regiments of Horse to follow the Enemy if it were
possible, to make him stand till we could bring up the Army: The Enemy marched
away seven or eight thousand Foot, and about four thousand Horse, we followed
him with about three thousand Foot, and two thousand five hundred Horse and
Dragoones, and in this prosecution that worthy Gentleman Colonel Thornhaugh
pressing too boldly was slaiue, being run into the body, and thigh, and head,
by the Enemies Launcers, (and give me leave to say, he was a man as faithful
and gallant in your service as any, and one who often heretofore lost blood in
your quarrel, and now his last; he harh left somebehind him to inherit a
Fathers honor, and a sad Widow, both now the interest of the Commonwealth)
our Horse still prosecuted the Enemy, killing and taking diverse all the way, at
last the enemy drew up within three miles of Wiggon, and by that time our Army
was come up they drew off again and recovered Wiggon before we could attempt
any thing upon them, we lay that night in the field close by the Enemy, being
very dirty and weary, and having marched twelve miles of such ground as I never
rod in all my life, the day being very wet we had some skirmishing that nigh;
with the Enemy near the Town, where we took Major General Van Druske and a
Collonell, and killed some principal Officers, and took about a hundred
prisoners, where also I received a Letter from Duke Hamilton for civil usage
toward his Kinsman Colonel Hamilton whom he left wounded there.

We took also Col. Hurrey, and Lieut. Col. Ennis, sometimes in your service.
The next morning the enemy marched toward Warrington, and we at the heels of
them, the town of Wiggon a great and poor town, and very Malignant, were
plundered almost to their skins by them; we could not engage the enemy until
we came within three miles of Warrington, and there the enemy made a stand at a
pass near Winwicke, we held them in some dispute until our Army was come up,
they maintaining the pass with great resolution for many hours, ours and
theirs coming to push of pike, and to very close charges, and forced us to
give ground, but our men by the blessing of God quickly recovered it, and
charging very home upon them beat them from their standing, where we killed
about a thousand of them, and took (as we believe) about two thousand
prisoners, and prosecuted them home to Warrington town, where they possessed
the Bridge, which had a strong Barracado and a Work upon it, formerly made
very defensive; as soon as we came thither I received a Message from Lieut.
General Baily, desiring some capitulation, to which I yielded, considering the
strength of the pass, and that I could not go over the river within ten miles
of Warrington with the Army; I gave him these terms, That he should surrender
himself, and all his Officers and Soldiers prisoners of War, with all his
Arms and Ammunition and Horses to me, I giving quarter for life, and promising
civil usage, which accordingly is done, and the Commissioners deputed by me
have received, and are receiving all the Arms and Ammunition which will be as
they tell me about four thousand complete Arms, and as many prisoners. And
thus you have their Infantry totally ruined, what Colonells or Officers are
with Lieutenant General Bailey, I have not yet received the List. The Duke is
marched with his remaining Horse, which are about 3000. toward Namptwich,
where the Gentlemen of the Country have taken about 500. of them, of which they
sent me word this day; the Country will scarce suffer any of my men to pass,
except they have my hand, telling them, They are Scots; they bring in and kill
diverse as they light upon them. Most of the Nobility of Scotland are with the
Duke, if I had a thousand Horse that could but trot thirty miles I should not
doubt but to give a very good account of them; but truly we are so harrased and
hagled out in this business that we are not able to do more than walk an
easy pace after them. I have sent Post to my Lord Gray to Sir Hen. Chomley,
and Sir Edw. Roads, to gather all together with speed for their prosecution, as
likewise to acquaint the Governor of Stafford therewith; I hear Munro is
about Cumberland with the Horse that ran away, and his Irish Horse and Foot,
which are a considerable body; I have left Colonel Ashtons three Regiments of
Foot with seven Troops of Horse, six of Lancashire, and one of Cumberland at
Preston, and ordered Col. Scroape with five Troops of Horse, and two Troops of
Dragoons, with two Regiments of Foot, viz. Col. Lassells, and Col. Wastalls to
imbody with them, by which I hope they will be able to make a resistance till
we can come up to them, and have ordered them to put their Prisoners to the
Sword if the Scots shall presume to advance upon them, because they cannot
bring them off with security.

Thus you have a Narrative of the particulars of the success which God has
given you, which I could hardly at this time have done, considering the
multiplicity of business; but truly when I was once engaged in it, I could
hardly tell how to say less, there being so much of God; and I was not willing
to say more, least there should seem to be any thing of man, only give me
leave to add one word showing the disparity of the Forces on both sides, that
so you may see, and all the world acknowledge the great hand of God in this
business; The Scots Army could not be less then 12000. effective Foot well
armed, and 5000. Horse, Langdale not less then 2500. Foot, and 1500. Horse, in
all one and twenty thousand; and truly very few of their Foot but were as well
armed, if not better than yours, and at diverse disputes did fight two or three
hours before they would quit their ground: Yours were about 2500. Horse and
Dragoons of your old Army, about 4000. Foot of your old Army also, about 1600.
Lancashire Foot, and about 500. Lancashire Horse, in all about 8600. you see by
computation about 2000. of the Enemy slain, betwixt eight and nine thousand
Prisoners, besides what are lurking in Hedges and private places, which the
Country daily bring in or destroy. Where Langdale and his broken Forces are, I
know not, but they are exceedingly shattered; surely Sir, this is nothing but
the hand of God, praise only belongs to him, and where ever any thing in this
world is exalted, or exalts it self, God will pull it down, for this is the
day wherein he alone will be exalted; it is not fit for me to give advice, nor
to say a word what use should be made of this more than to pray you, and all
that acknowledge God, that they would only exalt him, and not hate his people
who are as the apple of his eye, and for whom even Kings shall be reproved; and
that you would take courage to do the work of the Lord, in fulfilling the end
of your Magistracy, in seeking the peace and welfare of the people of this
Land, that all that will live quietly and peaceably may have countenance from
you; and they that are implacable, and will not leave troubling the Land, may
speedily be destroyed out of the Land; and if you take courage in this God will
bless you, and good men will stand by you, and God will have glory, and the
Land will have happiness by you in despite of all your enemies, which shall
be the prayer, of

Your most humble and faithful servant O. Cromwell.
20 August.
POSTSCRIPT.
WE have not in all this lost a considerable Officer but Colonel Thornhaugh,
and not many Soldiers, considering the service, but many are wounded, our
Horse almost destroyed, and our Foot beaten out of Clothes, Shoes, and
Stockings; our Horse will need recruit, and our Foot Regiments need to be
recruited also, for they are very much shaken with hard marchings, very much
wanting supplies of money; some of those which were with me in Wales not having
had any pay since before our march thither. I humbly crave, That some course be
taken to dispose of the Prisoners, the trouble and extreme charge of the
Country where they lie is more then the danger of their escape; I think they
would not go home if they might without a Convoy, they are so fearful of the
Country from whom they have deserved so ill; ten men will keep a thousand of
them from running away.

Die Mercurii 23 August. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That Thursday come
fortnight, the seventh of September next, be appointed a day of solemn
Thanksgiving through the whole Kingdom, unto Almighty God, for his wonderful
great mercy and success bestowed upon the Parliament Forces under the Command
of Lieutenant General Cromwell, against the whole Scots Army under the Conduct
and Command of Duke Hamilton on the seventeenth, eighteenth, and nineteenth of
this present August in Lancashire.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

