SIR LUCIUS CARRY, LATE LORD VISCOUNT OF FALKLAND, His Discourse of
INFALLIBILITY, with an Answer to it: And his Lordships REPLY.

Never before published.

Together with Mr. Walter Mountague's Letter concerning the changing his
Religion.

Answered by my Lord of FALKLAND.

LONDON Printed by Gartrude Dawson, for John Hardesty, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Black Spread-Eagle, in Duck-Lane, 1651.

To the Right Honorable, Henry Lord Viscount of Falkland, my Honorable Lord.
My Lord,
NOt long before the death of that incomparable person, your Lordships Mother,
that great example of piety and humility, the Lady Viscountesse of Falkland,
she was pleased to commit to my hand that, which she believed, next her
Children, the dearest pledge of her dead Lord some excellent Monuments of his
Reason, Wit, and Industry. in the search of that, which he would have as gladly
found, as he has rationally rejected, an Infallible Judge here on Earth in all
our Controversies in point of Religion, of which the laboring world seems at
present to stand in so much need. I have considered often of that singular
trust and friendship, in making me the depositarie of so rich a Jewel: And
since she, from whose hands I received it, is gone thither, where she stands in
no need of these discourses, I know no person living that has more right to it
then your Lordship, or indeed to whom I would more willingly offer it. For
though your Lordship be now out of my immediate charge and Tuition, yet as long
as it shall please God to make me able to do, or point at any thing that may,
though never so little, help forward to perfect a good work in you, I shall
never account my self disobliged. I must profess to all the World, that there
is no Family now in being, to which I owe more true service, then to your
Lordships: And shall to the utmost of my power, upon all occasions make it
good. I have nothing left me but a poor thankful heart, which has been my
only sure Companion, when all things else have forsaken me: That still
remains (...) and (...), being neither in the power of time nor persons to
spoil me of that, which like a good Conscience to my self, must to my friends
be the best feast I can make them.

My Lord, my design is not by this to engage your Lordship in this Polemicall
discourse, nor my self neither, having neither ability nor leisure for a
business of that concern, and by reason of my busy employment, I had not been
able to have presented it thus to your Lordship, without the assistance of
Judicious Friends, that honor the work for the Authors sake, and the Author
for his own.

But, My Lord, I hope I shall have my end in it however, an end which no good
man will envy me, namely, an occasion hereby to reminde your Lordship of the
Gallant Author, your Noble Father, that by proposing Him to you as your
constant Copy, you may do Him an honor beyond all his Friends: For while they
praise, you may imitate him.

Indeed, it is one of the greatest comforts I have in this calamitous life, to
remember, that I had the honor to be so: near Him: And a reproach, which I
cannot clear my self of, to have been at the same time so near, and so far
off; so near in Conversation, and yet so far removed from him in those
Excellencies, whereby he was the envy of this Age, and will be the wonder of
the next.

His Religion, (for that I should begin with) was the more Eminent, because the
more Early, at that age, when young Gallants think least on it: When they, young
Candidates of Atheism begin to dispute themselves out of a belief of a Deity,
urging hard against that, which indeed is best for them that it should never
be, a Judgment to come; then, I say, that salvation which these mention with a
scoff or a Jeere, he began to work out with fear and trembling, and effectually
to remember, that is, to honor and serve his Creator in the days of his youth.

In the next place, I may not forget his vast natural parts: Dixit ex tempore
says Pliny of Isoeus, sed tanquam diu scripserit,, and I may truly apply it
to him, his Answers were quick and sudden, but such, as might very well seem
to have been meditated. In short, his abilities were such, as though he needed
no supplies of industry, yet his industry such as though he had had no parts at
all. How often have I heard him pity those Hawking and Hunting Gentlemen, who
if unseasonable weather for their sports had betrayed them to keep home,
without a worse exercise within doors, could not have told how to have spent
their time: And all because they were such strangers to such good Companions,
with whom he was so familiar, such as neither cloy nor weary any, with whom
they converse, such company as Erasmus, a person much esteemed by my Lord your
Father, so much extolls in his 31, and 35, Epistle of his fourth Book: Not
friends of the Cellar, or the Kitchen; (...), indeed their own friends rather
then his who entertaineth them: But such, as being bidden, are ready, uninvited
intrude not, that bite no man's meat or reputation, silent, not spoken to,
spoken to, speak as we please, what we please, how long and how much we please:
Heartily communicating themselves to us without betraying our secrets committed
to them; that still tell us somewhat that may delight us for its Antiquity,
please us for its Novelty, or some way or other enrich our knowledge. While
others studied the Heraldry of Horses, of Dogs, or at the best their own: He,
though not inferior to his Neighbors in Descent, and Honor, knowing well how
much more glorious it is to be the first then the last of a Noble Family,
(Blood without Virtue making Vice but more conspicuous) was so far from
relying upon that empty Title, that He seemed Ipse suos genuisse Parents, to
have begotten his Ancestors, and to have given them a more Illustrious life,
then he recieved from them.

Though there were as much true worth closely treasured up in him, as well
divided, had been able to have set up a hundred Pretenders, yet so much Modesty
withal, that the hearing of any thing was more pleasing to him then one tittle
of his own praise.

This Virtue was indeed in a high degree in him, and showed it self upon all
occasions. If any thing, though never so little unhandsomely, had been spoken
or done where he was, he was the greatest sufferer in the company, and much
more out of countenance then he that made the offense. And surely he that was
so tender of another man's Civility, may very justly be presumed to have had a
great regard to his own. And so he had indeed. For though his Courage were as
great as his Wit and his Learning, (and that is expression high enough) his
Valor so undaunted and dreadlesse, as his great fall witnest, (...), In that
fatal Hail that made more Orphans then his Children: Yet to do an ill or an
uncivil thing, he was an arrant Coward: Though he was of David's Stature, of
his Courage too, (...), and in this most like him, afraid of nothing but to
offend.

But what needs any body plead for his Civility more then this present
Discourse, where he excels his Antagonist in that, as well as in reason, and
shows that a Gentleman writ with a Scholars Pen.

Before I shut up all, my Lord, one Virtue there is yet to be mentioned, which
of all that ever had relation to his Lordship, I may not, I must not ever
forget, and that was his Friendship. That is a Virtue, which by the
unintermitted affliction of my life, I have had more then ordinary occasion to
make use of. And that I must needs say was it, which made all his other Graces
and Excellencies relish to me, He being the dearest and the truest Friend, that
through the whole course of my unhappy life I ever had the happiness to meet
with.

If it be a kind of pleasure to read discourses of Friends and Friendship,
What is it to enjoy such a Friend in whom really was, what Excellency either
History can record, or almost Poetry feign?

Nothing so hard in Lucians Toxaris, that he durst not do, and nothing so
handsome in all Seneca's Laws of Benefits, that he knew not how to do, and to
outdo for his Friend.

Let your Virtuous and dear Grandmother, my Lord, and all your Kindred yet
alive, speak to this: And your blessed Mother were she now alive, would say,
she had the best of Friends before the best of Husbands. This was it that made
Tew so valued a Mansion to us: For as when we went from Oxford thither, we
found our selves never out of the Universitie: So we thought our selves never
absent from our own beloved home. But I dare say no more of this, it being now
a mellancholy thing, I am sure to me, to call back into my memory happiness
never to be recalled, and to afflict my self anew with the consideration of
what felicity I have outlived.

Your Lordship is now the only surviving pledge of that admired Father, of
whom-when we his poor servants have said all we can, the Character will be far
too short. It is in you, and only you, my Lord to set him out truly, and to
resemble him to the life, and that will be by taking that Evangelicall
Counsel, Tu autem fac similiter: Do like him, live like him, and pardon me if
I add one thing more, like him, Love

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and affectionately devoted Servant,
TRIPLET.

The Preface to the READER.
THe eminent abilities in the most noble Author of the ensuing learned
Discourse, and learneder Reply, can scarcely be imagined unknown to any whom
this language can reach: But if any such there be, I shall desire them to
learn the perfections of that most excellent Person, rather from the
Dedication, then this Preface; the design of which, is only to give the
Reader some satisfation concerning the nature of this Controversy in it self,
and of these Dissertations in particular.

The Romish Doctrine of their own Infallibility, as it is the most gcnerall
Controversy between them, and all other Churches excluded by them from their
Communion: So it is of such a comprehensive nature, that being once proved and
clearly demonstrated, it would without question draw all other Churches so
excluded, to a most humble submission and acknowledgement, nay, to an earnest
desire of a sudden Reconciliation upon any Terms whatsoever. For howsoever
they please to speak and write of our Heretical and obstinate persistance in
manifest Errors, yet I hope they cannot seriously thinks we would be so
irrational, as to contradict him whom we our selves think beyond a
possibillity of erring, and to dispute perpetually with them, whom only to
hear were to be satisfied.

But when they have propounded their Decisions to be believed, and embraced by
us as Infallibly true, and that because they propound them, who in their own
opinion are Infallible; if notwithstanding some of those Decisions seem to us
to be evidently false, because cleanly contradictory to that which they
themselves propound as infallibly true, that is the Word of God: surely we
cannot be blamed, if we have desired their Infallibility to be most clearly
demonstrated, at least to a higher degree of evidence then we have of the
contradiction of their Decisions to the infallible Rule. Wherefore, The great
Defenders of the Doctrine of the Church of England, have with more then
ordinary diligence endeavored to view the grounds of this Controversy, and
have written by the advantage either of their learning accurately, or of their
parts most strongly, or of the cause it self most convincingly, against that
darling Infallibility. How clearly this Controversy has been managed, with
what evidence of truth discussed, what success so much of reason has had,
cannot more plainly appear then in this, that the very name of Infallibility
before so much exalted, begins now to be very burdensome, even to the
maintainers of it: Insomuch as one of their latest and ablest Proselytes, Hugh
Paulin de Cressy, lately Dean of Laghlin, etc. in Ireland, and Prebendary of
Windfor in England, in his Exomologesis, or faithful Narration of the occasion
and motives of his Conversion, has dealt very clearly with the World, and told
us, that this Infallibility is an unfortunate Word. That Mr. Chillingworth
has cumbated against it with too too great success, so great, that he could
wish the Word were forgotten, or at least laid by. That not only Mr.
Chillingworth, whom he still worthily admires; but we the rest of the poor
Protestants have in very deed, very much to say for our selves, when we are
pressed unnecessarily with it. And therefore Mr. Cressy's advise to all the
Romanists is this, that we may never be invited to combat the authority of the
Church under that notion. Oh the strength of Reason rightly managed! O the
power of Truth clearly declared! that it should force an emment member of the
Church of Rome (whose great Principle is non-retractation) to retract so
necessary, so fundamental a Doctrine, to desert all their Schools, and
contradict all their Controvertists. But indeed not without very good cause:
For he professes withal, that no such word as Infallibility is to be found in
any Council: Neither did ever the Church enlarge her Authority to so vaste a
wideness: But does rather deliver the victory into our hands when we urge her
Decisions. In all which Confessions, although he may seem only to speak of
the Word, yet that cannot be it which he is so weary of, because we except not
against the word at all, but confess it rightly to signify that which we
impugn, neither do we ever bring any nominall Argument against it. But as when
Cardinal Bellarmine sets down the Doctrine of the Church in their positive
terms. Summus Pontifex, cum totam Ecclesiam docet, in his, quae ad Fidem
pertinent, nullo casu errare potest. We conceive he has suffciently expressed
the sense of the word Infallibility, so that, Infallibilis est, and nullo casu
errare potest, are to us the same thing. It cannot therefore be the Word alone,
but the whole importance and sense of that word Infallibility, which Mr. Cressy
so earnestly desires all his Catholics ever hereafter to forsake, because the
former Church did never acknowledge it, and the present Church will never be
able to maintain it. This is the great success which the Reason, Parts, and
Learning of the late Defendors of our Church have had in this maine
Architectonicall Controversy.

And yet though the Church never maintained it, though the Protestants have had
such advantage against it, though Mr. Cressy confessing both, has wished all
Catholics to forsake it, yet will he not wholly forsake it himself, but
undertakes most irrationally to answer for it. If the Church never asserted it,
if the Catholics be not at all concerned in it, to what end will Mr. Cressy
the great mitigator of the rigor, and defendor of the latitude of the Churches
Decisions, maintain it? If Mr. Chillingworth have had such good success
against it, why will his old Friend Mr. Cressy endeavor to answer his
arguments? especially, considering when he has answered them all, he can only
from thence conclude that, Mr. Chillingworth was a very had Disputant, who
could bring no argument able to confute that, which in it self is not to be
maintained.

So unreasonable it is and inconsistent with his Concessions, that he should
give an answer at all, but the manner of his answer, which he gives, is far
more irrational. For deserting the Infallibility, he answers only the
authority of the Church, and so makes this authority answer for that
Infallibility: from whence these three manifest absurdities must necessarily
follow.

First, When he has answered all M. Chillingworth's arguments, in the same
manner as he pretends to answer them, he must still acknowledge them
unanswerable, as they were intended by him that made them. And no argument need
to be thought good for any thing else, if he which made it knew what he said,
as Mr. Chillingworth certainly did. Secondly, He only pretends to answer
those arguments, as against the authority of the Church, simply considered
without relation to such an Infallibility, which were never made against an
authority so quallified. And therefore whether the argument of his dear friend
were to any purpose or no, his answer manifestly must be to none. Thirdly, If
he intend to refute all opposition made to their Infallibility by an assertion
of their bare authority, then must he assert that authority to be as great and
convincing, which is fallible as that which is infallible: that Guide to be as
good, which may lead me out of my way, as that which cannot. That Judge to be
as fit to determine any doubt, who is capable of a mistake, as he which is not.
And then I make no question, but some of his own Church amongst the rest of
their dislikes, will put him in mind of that handsome sentence of Cardinal
Belarmine, Iniquissimum esset cogere Christianos, ut non appellent ab eo
Judicio, quod erroneum esse potuit.
I once thought to have replied to those answers, which he has given to Mr.
Chillingworth's arguments: but his antecedent Concession has made them so
inconsiderable to me, that upon a second thought, I fear I should be as guilty
in replying after my Objections, as he has been in answering after his
Confessions. Wherefore I shall conclude with an asseveration of min own, which
shall be therefore short because mine: That the Reply of this most excellent
Person, Sola operarum summa praesertim in Graecis incuria excepta, is the most
accurate Refutation of all, which can be said in this Controversy, that ever
yet appeared, and if what has already been delivered have had such success
upon so eminent an adversary, then may we very rationally expect at least the
same effect upon all, who shall be so happy as to read these Discourses.

Which is the earnest desire of I. P.

OF THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHURCH OF ROME. A discourse written by the Lord
Viscount FALKLAND.
TO him that doubts whether the Church of Rome has any errors, they answer,
that she has none, for she never can have any; this being so much harder to
believe then the first, had need be proved by some certainer Arguments, if they
expect that the belief of this one should draw on whatsoever they please to
propose; yet this, if offered to be proved by no better ways, then we offer to
prove by, that she has erred; which are arguments from Scripture, and ancient
Writers, all which they say are fallible, for nothing is not so but the Church:
Which if it be the only infallible determination, and that can never be
believed upon its own authority, we can never infallibly know that the Church
is infallible, for these other ways of proof may deceive both them and us,
and so neither side is bound to believe them; If they say that an argument out
of Scripture is sufficient ground of Divine Faith, why are they offended with
the Protestants for believing every part of their Religion upon that ground,
upon which they build all theirs at once. And if following the same Rule, with
equal desire of finding the Truth by it, (having neither of those qualities
which Isid. Pelus, says are the cause of all Heresy, (...), Pride and
Prejudication) why should God be more offended with the one, then with the
other, though they chance to err.

They say, the Church is therefore made infallible by God, that all men may
have some certain Guide; yet, though it be infallible, unless it both plainly
appear to be so, (for it is not certain to whom it does not appear certain)
and unless it be manifest which is the Church, God has not attained his end;
and it were to set a ladder to Heaven, and seem to have a great care of my
going up, whereas unless there be care taken that I may know this ladder is
here to that purpose, it were as good for me it never had been set.

If they say we may know, for that general Tradition instructs us in it.

I answer, that ignorant people cannot know this, and so it can be no Rule for
them; and if learned people mistake in this, there can be no condemnation for
them.

For suppose, to know whether the Church of Rome may err, (as a way which will
conclude against her, but not for her) I seek whether she have erred; and
conceiving she has contradicted her self, conclude necessarily she has erred,
I suppose it not damnable, (though false) because I try the Church by one of
the touch-stones which herself appoints me (Conformity with the Ancients.) For
to say, I am to believe the present Church, that it differs not from the
former, though it seem to me to do so, is to send me to a witness, and bid me
not believe it; now to say the Church is provided for a guide of Faith, but
must be known by such marks as the ignorant cannot seek it by, and the learned
may chance not find it by, can no way satisfy me.

If they say God will reveal the Truth to whomsoever seeks it these ways
sincerely, this saying both sides will (without means of being confuted) make
use of, therefore it would be as good that neither did.

When they have proved the Church to be Infallible yet to my understanding they
have proceeded nothing farther, unless we can be sure which is it. For it
signifies only that God will have a Church always which shall not err, but
not that such, or such a succession shall be in the right, so that if they say,
the Greek Church. is not the Church, because by its own confession it is not
Infallible: I answer, That it may be now the Church, and may hereafter err,
(and so not be now infallible) and yet the Church never err, because before
their fall from Truth, others may arise to maintain it, who then will be the
Church, and so the Church may still be infallible, though not in respect of any
set persons, whom we may know at all times for our Guide.

Then if they prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church, and not the Greek
Church, because their opinions are consonant either to Scripture or Antiquity,
they run into a Circle, proving their Tenets to be true. First, because the
Church holds them: And then theirs to be the Church, because the Church holds
the Truth: Which last, though it appears to me the only way, yet it takes away
its being a Guide, which we may follow without examination, without which all
they say besides, is nothing.

Nay, suppose that they had evinced, that some succession were Infallible, and
so had proved to a learned man, that the Roman Chruch must be this, because
none else pretends to it, yet this can be no sufficient ground to the ignorant,
who cannot have any infallible foundation for their belief, that the Church of
Greece pretends not to the same; and even to the Learned it is but an
accidental Argument, because if any other Company had likewise claimed to be
Infallible, it had overthrown all.

The chiefest reason why they disallow of Scripture for Judge, is, because when
differences arise about the interpretation, there is no way to end them: And
that it will not stand with the goodness of God, to damn men for not
following Ins Will, if he had assigncd no infallible way to find it.

I confess this to be wonderful true, ((...)) and let them excuse themselves
that think otherwise; yet this will be no Argument against him that believes,
that to them who follow their reason in the interpretation of the Scriptures,
God will either give his Grace for assistance to find the Truth, or his pardon
if they miss it: And then this supposed necessity of an infallible Guide,
(with the supposed damnation for want of it) fall together to the ground.

If they command us to believe infallibly the contrary to this, they are to
prove it false by some infallible way (for the conclusion must be of the same
nature, and not conclude more then the premises set down.) Now such a way
Scripture, and Reason, and infused Faith cannot be, (for they use to object the
fallibility of these, to those that build their Religion upon them) nor the
authority of the Church, (for this is part of the Question, and must it self be
first proved, and that by none of the former ways, for the former reasons.)

The Popes Infallibility can be no infallible ground of Faith, being it self no
necessary part of Faith, and we can be no surer of any thing proved, then we
are of that which proves it:) and if he be fallible, no part is the more
infallible for his siding with them; So if the Church be divided, I have no way
to know the true Church, but by searching which agrees with Scripture and
Antiquity, and so judging accordingly: (but this is not to submit my self to
her opinions, as my Guide, which they tell us is necessary) which course, if
they approve not of as fit for a learned, man, they are in a worse case for the
ignorant, who can take no course at all, nor is he the better at all for his
Guide the Church, whilft two parts dispute which is it, and that by arguments
he understands not.

If I grant the Pope, or a Council by him called, to be infallible, yet I
conceive their decrees can he no sufficient grounds, (by their own axioms) of
divine Faith.

For first of all, no Council is valid, not approved by the Pope (for thus
they overthrow that held at Ariminum) and a Pope chosen by Simony, is (ipso
facto) no Pope.

I can have then no certainer grounds for the infallibility of those decrees,
and consequently for my belief of them, then I have, that the choice of him is
neither directly, nor indirectly Simoniacall.

Secondly, suppose him Pope, and to have confirmed their decrees; yet, that
these are the decrees of a Council, or that he has confirmed them, I can
have'but an uncontradicted confession of many men; (for if another Council
should declare these to have been the Acts of another former Council, I should
need again some certain way of knowing how this declaration is a Council)
which is no ground, say they, of Faith, I am sure not so good and general a
one, as we have that the Scripture is Scripture, which yet they will not allow
any to be certain of, but from them.

Thirdly, For the sense of their decrees, I can have no better expounder then
reason; which if (though I mistake) I shall not be damned for following, why
shall I for mistaking the sense of the Scripture? or why am I a less fit
Interpreter of the one, then of the other? and when both seem equally clear,
and yet contradictory, shall not I as soon believe Scripture which is without
doubt of as great authority?

But I doubt whether Counsels are fit deciders of Questions; for such they
cannot be if they beget more, and men are in greater doubts afterward (none of
the former being diminished) then they were at ffrst.

Now I conceive there arise so many out of this way, that the learned cannot
end all, nor the ignorant know all. As (besides the forenamed considerations)
who is to call them? the Pope or Kings? who are to have voices in them, Bishops
only, or Priests also? whether the Pope, or Council be superior: and the
last need the approbation of the first (debated amongst themselves?) Whether
any Countries, not being called, or not being there, (as the Abissines, so
great a part of Christianity, and not resolvedly condemned by them for
Heretics, were absent at the Council of Trent) make it not general? Whether
if it be one not every where received, (as when the Bishops sent from some
places have exceeded their Commission, as in the Council of Florence) it be
yet of necessity to be subscribed unto? Whether there were any surreption or
force used, and whether those disanull the Acts? Whether the most voices are to
be held the Act of the Council, or those of all required (which never yet
agreed?) Or whether two parts will serve, as in the Tridentine Synod? A
considerable doubt; because Nicephorus Callistus, relalating the resolution of
a Council at Rome, against that of Ariminum makes him give three reasons.

One, That the Pope of Rome was not present. The Second, That most did not
agree to it. The third, That others thither gathered, were displcased at their
resolutions.
Which proves, that (in their opinions) if either most not present, agree not
to it, or all present be not pleased with it, a Council has no power to bind.

All these doubts I say persuade me, that whatsoever brings with it so many new
Questions, can be no fit end of the old.

Then, if before a general Council have defined a Question, it be lawful to
hold either way, and damnable to do so after; I desire to know why it is so.
Scripture and Tradition seem to me not to say so? but if they did so, I suppose
you will grant they do this Doctrine, That the Souls of the blessed shall see
God before the day of Judgment: (and not be kept in secret Receptacles) for
without this, the Doctrine of Prayers to Saints, cannot stand; and yet, for
denying this, Bellarmine excuses Pope John the 22th because the Church (he
means, I doubt not, a general Council) had not then condemned it.

I desire to know, why he should not be condemned as well without one, as many
Heretics, that are held so by their Church, yet condemned by none: (which if
he make to be the Rule of Heresy, it had been happy to have lived before the
Council of Nice, when no opinion had been dam nable, but some against the
Apostles Council at Jerusalem, because there had yet been no other general
Council;) at least, why should not I be excused by the same reason, though I
believe not a Council to be infallible? since I never heard that any Council
has decreed that they are so. neither if it has, can we be bound by that
decree, unless first made certain some other way, that it self is so.

If you say, we must believe it because of Tradition, I answer, Sometimes you
will have the not believing any thing not declared by a Council, to have power
enough to damn (that is when against any of us:) at other times the Church
has not decreed unless a Council have, and their error is pardonable, and
they good Catholics.

Next, (as I have asked before) how shall an ignorant man know it? For he in
likelihood can speak but with a few, from whom he cannot know, that all of the
Church of Romes part do now, and in past ages have believed it to be Tradition,
so certain as to make it a ground of Faith, (unless he have some revelation
that those deceived him not) neither indeed can those that should inform him of
the opinions of former times be certainly informed themselves: For truly, if
the relation of Pappias could cozen so far all the prime Doctors of the
Christian Church into a belief of the celebration of a thousand years after
the resurredion, so as that no one of those two first ages oppose it, (which
appears plainly enough, because those that after rise up against this, never
quoated any thing for themselves before Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived at
least two hundred and fifty years after Christ;) nay, if those first men did
not only believe it as probable, but Justine Martyr says, he holds it, and so
do all that are in all parts Orthodox Christians, (...) sets it down directly
for a Tradition, and relates the very words that Christ used, when he taught
this, which is plainner then any other Tradition, is proved or said to be out
of antiquity by them) if I say these could be so deceived, why might not other
of the ancients as well be deceived in other points, and then what certainty
shall the learned have (when after much labor, they think they can make it
appear, that the ancients thought any thing Tradition) that indeed it was so,
and that either the folly or the knavery of some Pappias deceived them not? I
confess it makes me think of some that Tully speaks of, who arcem amittunt,
dum propugnacula defendunt, loose the Fort, whilst they defend the outworks;
For whilst they answer this way the Arguments of Tradition for the opinions of
the Chiliasts, they make unusefull to themselves the force, of Tradition, to
prove any else by.

For which cause it was rather wisely then honestly done of them, who (before
Fevardentius set him forth) left out that part of Irenaeus which we allege,
(though we need it not much; for many of the Fathers take notice of this belief
of his) yet he justifies himself for doing it, by saying, that if they leave
out all errors in the books they publish, (that is, I suppose, all opinions
contrary to the Church of Rome) bona pars scriptorum, Patrum Orthodoxorum
evanesceret, a great part of the writings of the Orthodox Fathers must vanish
away.

But the Tradition that can be found out of Ancients (since their witnessing
may deceive us) has much less strength, when they argue only thus, sure so
many would not say this is true, if there were no Tradition for them,

I would have you remember, they can deliver their opinions possibly, but
either before the controversy arise in the Church, (upon some chance) or
after; If before, it is confessed that they writ not often cautiously enough,
and so they answer all they seem to say for Arrius, and Pelagius his Faith,
before themselves, and so consequently, their controversy (though it may be
not their opinion) arose.

If after, Then they answer often, (if any thing be by them at that time spoken
against them) that the heat of disputation brought it from them, and their
resolution to oppose heretics enough; I desire, it may be lawful for us to
answer so too, (either one of these former ways, or that it was (as often they
say too) some Hyperbole) when they press us with the opinions of Fathers.

At least I am sure, if they may deceive us with saying a thing is Tradition,
when it is not, we may be sooner deceived if we will conclude it for a
Tradition, when they speak it only as a Truth, and (for ought appears) their
particular opinion.

Besides, If Salvian comparing the Arrians with evil livers, (and that after
they were condemned by a Council) extenuates (by reason of their believing
themselves in the right) with much instance, the fault of the Arrians, and
says, how they shall be punished in the day of Judgment, none can know but
the Judge.

If I say, They confess it to be his opinion, they must also confess the
Doctrine of the Church to differ from that of Salvians time, because he was
allowed a member of that, for all this saying, whereas he of the Church of
Rome, that should now say so of us, would be counted sesqui-heareticus, a
Heretic and half, or else they must say (which they can only say, and hot
prove) that he was so earnest against ill men, that for the aggravation of
their crime, he lessened that of the Heretics, and said, what at another time
he would not have said; which if they do, will it not overthrow wholly the
authority of the Fathers? Since we can never infallibly know, what they thought
at all times, from what they were moved to say, at some one time, by some
Collatericall considerations.

Next, To this certain and undoubted damning of all out of the Church of Rome,
which averteth me from it, comes their putting all to death that are so, where
they have power (which is an effect, though not a necessary one of the
first-opinion) and that averteth me yet more, for I do not believe all to be
damned that they damn, but I conceive all to be killed that they kill; I am
sure if you look upon Constantines Epistle, written to persuade concord upon
their first disagreement between Alexander, and Arrius, you will find, that he
thought, (and if the Bishops about him had then thought otherwise, he would
have been sure better informed) that neither side deserved either death, or
damnation, (and yet sure you will say, this Question was as great as ever rose
since) for having spoken of the opinions, as things so indifferent, that the
Reader might almost think that they had been fallen out at spurn-point, or
kittlepins, he adds, (...), for that which is necessary is one thing, that all
agree, and keep the same Faith, about divine Providence. I am sure, in the same
Author, Moses (a man praised by him) refusing to be made Bishop by Lucius,
because he was an Arrian, and he answering that he did ill to refuse it,
because he knew not what his Faith was, answered, (...). The banishing of
Bishops show enough thy Faith. So that it is plain, that he thought punishing
for opinions to be a mark, which might serve to know false opinions by. And I
believe throughout Antiquity, you will find. no putting any to death, unless
it be such as begin to kill first, as the Circumcellians, or such like: I am
sure Christian Religions chiefest glory being, that it increases by being
persecuted; and having that advantage of the Mahumetan, which came in by force,
me thinks (especially since Synesius had told us, and Reason told men so before
Synesius, that (...); Every thing is destroyed by the contrary to what settled
and composed it;) It should be to take ill care of Christianity, to hold it up
by Turkish means, at least it must breed doubts, that if the Religion had
always remained the same, it would not be now defended by ways so contrary to
those, by which at first it was propagated.

I desire recrimination may not be used; for though it be true, that Calvin had
done it, and the Church of England, a little (which is a little too much) for
negare manifesta non audeo, and excusare immodica non possum, yet she
(confessing she may err) is not so chargeable with any fault, as those which
pretend they cannot, and so will be sure never to mend it; and besides I will
be bound to defend no more then I have undertaken, which is to give reason why
the Church of Rome is infallible.

I confess this opinion of damning so many, and this custom of burning so
many, this breeding up those, who knew nothing else in any point of Religion,
yet to be in a readiness to cry, To the fire with him, to Hell with him, (as
polybius says in a certain furious faction of an army of several nations,
and consequently of several languages, (...) They all joined only in
understanding this word, [throw at him.] These I say, in my opinion were
chiefly the causes which made so many, so suddenly leave the Church of Rome,
that indeed to borrow the same Authors Phrase, (...): They needed no persuasion
to do it, but only news that others had done it: For as this alone if
believed, makes all the rest to be so too, so one thing alone disliked, (where
infallibility is claimed) overthrowes all the rest.

If it were granted, that it agrees not with the goodness of God, to let men
want an infallible Guide, and therefore there must be one, and that the Church
of Rome were it, yet if that teach any thing to my understanding contrary to
Gods goodness, I am not to receive her Doctrine, for the same cause for which
they would have me receive it, (it being as good an argument this guide
teaches things contrary to Gods goodness, therefore this is not appointed by
God, as to say, it is agreeable to his goodness there should be one, therefore
there is one) and sure it is lawful to examine particular Doctrines, whether
they agree with that Principle, which is their foundation; and for that (me
thinks) to damn him, that neither with negligence, nor prejudication, searches
what is Gods will, (though he miss of it) is as contrary, as the first can be
supposed.

Next, I would know, whether he, that has never heard of the Church of Rome,
shall yet be damned for not believing her infallible?

I have so good an opinion of them, as to assure my self, they will answer he
shall not.

I will then ask, whether he that has searched what Religions there are, and
finds hers to be one, and her infallibility to be a part of it, (if his reason
will not assent to that) shall be damned for being inquisitive after Truth,
(for he has committed no other fault, greater then the other) and whether such
an ignorance, (I mean after impartial search) be not of all other the most
invincible?

Nay, grant the Church to be infallible, yet me thinks, he that denies it, and
imploies his reason to seek, if it be true, should be in as good case, as he
that believes it, and searches not at all the truth of the Proposition he
receives; For I cannot see why he should be saved, because by reason of his
parents belief, or the Religion of the Country, or some such accident, the
Truth was offered to his understanding, when, had the contrary been offered, he
would have received that. And the other damned, that believes falsehood upon as
good ground, as the other does truth, unless the Church be like a Conjurers
Circle, that will keep a man from the Devil, though he came unto it by chance.

They grant no man is an Heretic, that believes not his Heresy obstinately,
and if he be no Heretic, he may sure be saved; It is not then certain
damnation for any man to deny the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, but for
him only that denies it obstinately; And then I am safe, for I am sure I do
not; Neither can they say, I shall be damned for Schism, though not for
Heresy, for he is as well no Shcismatick, though in Schism, that is willing,
to join in Communion with the true Church, when it appears to be so to him, as
he is no Heretic, though he holds Heretical opinions, who holds them not
obstinately, that is (as I suppose) with a desire to be informed if he be in
the wrong.

Next, Why if it be not necessary always to believe the Truth, so one believe
in general what the Church would have believed, (for so they excuse great men
that have held contrary opinions to theirs now, before they were defined, or
knew them to be so) why I say, shall not the same implicit assent serve to
whatsoever God would have assented unto? (though I mistake what that is:) when
indeed to believe implicitly what God would have believed, is to believe
implicitly likewise what the Church teaches, if this Doctrine be within the
number of those, which God commands to be believed.

I have the less doubt of this opinion, that I shall have no harm for not
believing the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, because of my being so far
from leaning to the contrary, and so suffering my will to have power over my
understanding, that if God would leave it to me, which Tenet should be true, I
would rather choose, that that should, then the contrary.

For they may well believe me, that I take no pleasure in tumbling hard and
unpleasant Books, and making my self giddy with disputing obscure Questions,
(...). If I should believe, there should always be, whom I might always know,
a society of men, whose opinions must be certainly true, and who would (...),
labor to discuss and define all arising doubts, so that I might be excusably
at ease, and have no part left for me but that of obedience, which must needs
be a less difficult, and so a more agreeable way, then to endure endless
Volumes of Commenters, the harsh Greek of Epiphanius, and the harder Latin of
Trenaeus, and be pained by distinguishing between different senses, and various
Lections, and he would deserve not the lowest place in Bedlem, that would
prefer these studies before so many, so more pleasant; that would rather
employ his understanding then submit it, and if he could think God imposed upon
him only the resisting temptations, would by way of addition require from
himself, the resolving of doubts; yet I say not, that all these Books are to be
read by those that understand not the languages, (for them I conceive their
seeking into the Scripture may suffice) but he who has by Gods grace skill to
look into them, cannot better use it then in the searching of his will, where
they say it is to be found, that he may assent to them, if there he find reason
for it, or if not, they may have no excuse for not excusing him.

For whereas they say it is pride makes us doubt of their Infallibility.

I answer, That their too much laziness and impatience of examining is the
cause, that many of them do not doubt.

Next, what pride is it never to assent, before I find reason (since they, when
they follow their Church as infallible, pretend reason for it, and will not say
they would, if they thought they found none) and if they say, we do find
reason, but will not confess it, then pride hinders not our assent, but our
declaration of it, which if it do in any one, he is without question (...),
condemned by himself, and it must be a very partial Advocate, that would
strive to acquit him.

One much prevailing argument, which they make, is this, That whosoever leaves
them, fall into dissension between themselves, whereas they in the mean while
are allwaies at Unity.

I answer,

First, In this whereof the Question is now, they all assent. Secondly, When
there is fire for them that disagree, they need not bragg of their Uniformity
who consent. Thirdly, they have many differences among them, as whether the
Pope be Infallible? whether God predeterminate every action? whether Election
and Reprobation depend upon foresight? Which seems to me as great as any
between their Adversaries, and in the latter, the Jesuits have ancienter, and
generaller Tradition on their side, then the Church of Rome has in any other
Question, and as much ground from Reason for the defense of Gods goodness, as
they can think they have for the necessity of an infallible guide.
Yet these arguments must not make the Dominicans Hercticks, and must us: If
they say the Church has not resolved it, (which signifies only that they are
not agreed about it, which is that we object) I answer, It ought to have done
so, if uniformity to the Ancient Church be required, in which all that ever I
could hear of, before Saint Austine (who is ever various I confess in it)
delivered the contrary to the Dominicans as not doubtful; and to say it is
lawful for them to disagree, wheresoever they do not agree, is ridiculous,
(for they cannot do both at once about the same point) and if they say they
mean by the Churches not having concluded it, that a Council has not: I
Answer,

First, That they condemn some without any Council, and why not these?

Next, I say the opinion of the diffused Church is of more force, then the
conclusion of the representative (which has its authority from the other) and
therefore if all extant for the first four hundred years taught any thing, it
is more Heresy to deny that, then any Cannon of a Council; But may not
howsoever any other Company of People (that would maintain themselves to be
infallible) say as much, that all other Sects differ from one another, and
therefore should all agree with them, would not those (think they) ascribe all
other men's dissentions, and learned men's falling into diverse heresies to their
not allowing their Infallibility, to their not assenting to their Decrees, and
not suffering them (...), to sit as teachers of those things that come in
Question, and to have all others in the place of Disciples obedient to them,
which is that which Nilus a Greek Bishop professed, that (because the Greeks
would not allow the Romans) was the chief cause of separation between them.

Next, They use much to object, how could errors come into the Church without
opposition, and mention both of them, and the opposition to them in History.

I answer,

They might come not at once, but by degrees, as in the growth of a Child, or
motion of a Clock, we see neither in the present, but know there was a present
when we find it past.

Next, I say there are two sorts of errors; To hold a thing necessary that is
unlawful, and false; or that is but profitable, and probable. Of the second
sort, that errors should come in, it appears not hard to me, (especially in
those ages where want of Printing, made Books, and consequently Learning, not
so common as now it is, where the few that did study, busied themselves in
School speculations only, when the authority of a man of chief note, had a
more general influence then now it has, and so as Thucidides says the Plague
did in his time, (...), the disease that first settled in the head EASILY
passed through all the body, considering how apt men are to desire that all men
should think as they do, and consequently to lay a necessity upon the receiving
that opinion, if they conceive that a way to have it received. And then if it
were believed generally, profitable (as confession) who would be apt to oppose
their calling it neccessary, for the same cause for which they called it so.

Besides, If this error were delivered by some Father in the hot opposition of
some Heretic, it may be none would oppose it, least the adversaries might take
advantage by their dissension, and he that disputed for the Orthodox side,
might lose by it much of his authority.

The word necessary it self, is also often used for very convenient, and then
from necessary in that sense, to absolutely necessary is no difficult change,
though it be a great one.

Then the Fathers use the word Heretics, sometimes in a larger sense, and
sometimes in a stricter, and so differ in the reckoning them up, some leaving
out those that others put in, (though they had seen the precedent Catalogue)
and so the doubtfullnesse of the sense of these words might bring in error:
Names also, as Altar, Sacrifice, Mass, may have been used.

First, in one sense, and the name retained though the thing signified received
change; as it was once of an Emperor of Rome, Tacitus.
cui proprium fuit nuper reperta, (I leave out scelera) priscis verbis
obtegere, whose property it was to cover things newly found with ancient
terms, And the same Author tells us, that the same state, was as it were,
cheated out of her liberty, because there did remain eadem Magistratuum
vocabula, the same titles of Magistrates: And I believe, that if the
Protestants beyond the Seas would have thought Bishops as good a word as
Super-intendents, (and so in other such things) many, who understand nothing
but names, would have missed the scandale they have now taken. These ways I
think these things may have come, without much opposition from being thought
profitable to be done, and probable to be believed, to be thought necessary to
be both; and how things may have been by little and little received under old
names, which would not have been so at once under new ones; it is not hard to
conceive.

The first of these being no such small fault, but that part of the Montanists
Heresies was, thinking uncommanded fasting days necessary to be observed,
which without doubt might lawfully have been kept, so that no necessity had
been imposed.

But my maine answer is, that if to be in the Church without known precedent
opposition, be a certain note of being derived from the beginning, let them
answer how came in the opinion of the Chiliasts, not contradicted till two
hundred years after it came in.

To condude, If they can prove that the Scripture may be a certainer teacher of
truth to them, then to us, so that they may conclude the Infallibility of the
Church out of it, and we nothing; If they can prove the Churches Infallibility
to be a suffcient Guide for him, that doubts which is the Church, and cannot
examine that (for want of learning) by her chief mark, which is conformity
with the Ancients: If they can prove, that the consent of Fathers long
together, is a stronger Argument against us, then against the Dominicans; If
they can prove (though it be affirmed by the first of them, that such a thing
is Tradition, and believed by all Christians, and this assertion till a great
while after, uncontradicted) yet they are not bound to receive it, and upon
less grounds we are; If indeed any can prove by any infallible way, the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome, and the necessity under pain of damnation
for all men to believe it, (which were the more strange, because Justin Martyr,
and Clements Alexandrinus among the Ancients, and Erasmus, and Ludovicus Vives
among the Modernes, believe some Pagans to be saved) I will subscribe to it, and

(...),
(...).
If any man vouchsafe to think, either this, or the Author of it, of value
enough to confute the one, and inform the other, I shall desire him to do it
with proceeding to the business, and not standing upon any small slip of
mine,(of which this may be full) and with that temper, which is fit to be used
by men that are not so passionate, as to have the definition of reasonable
Creatures in vain, remembering that Truth in likelihood is, where her Author
God was, in the still voice, and not the loud wind; and that Epiphanius
excuses himself, if he have called any Heretics in his anger, Deceivers, or
Wretches, ((...).) and I request him also; to help to bring me to the Truth,
(if I be out of it) not only by his arguments, but also by his Prayers; which
way if he use, and I still continue on the part I am of, and yet do neither
(...), nor (...), neither am wilfully blind, nor deny impudently, what I see,
then I am confident, that he will neither have reason to be offended with me in
this world, nor God (for that) to punish me in the next.

AN ANSWER TO THE Lord FAVLKLANDS DISCOURSE OF INFALLIBILITY.
CHAP. I.
NAture being not able to perfect the work of humane kind, which she had
begun, and bursting at those throws and springings, which her timely child
gave, to see the light of eternal life, (whereof the distaste of all things
experienced in this world, and certain sparklings sowed in our soul had given
it a dim notice) expected from her merciful Creator, the aid (whereof how much
greater the wonder was to be, and the necessity, now diverse thousand years by
lamentable experience was more deer, so much the readier was he) and it was to
send from his eternal breast, his only wisdom to recount us wonders, and
aver them under the seal of his immutable truth. He knew all secrets, and
could not be touched with suspicion of ignorance; he was all goodness, and free
from all calumny of jealousy or envy: who knew him, could not mistrust him,
for beside those great Verdicts already expressed in his favor, his works
gave assurance of his words, he fulfilling in deeds, whatsoever he persuaded in
words, and working to himself, what he wished unto others. Lo here, the high,
and sage Master of our faith, whose Oracles we cannot mis-doubt, so we be
assured they are his; and who has in vain spent so much sweat, and pains, if
after he passed from hence, he has left no means to assure mankind, what it
was he taught and practiced, and for the teaching and practicing of it,
eschewed not the stormy passage betwixt Bethlehem and Mount Calvarie: but as
in Bethlehem he multiplied the three drops of his Circumcision into the
thousands of innocent Brooks; so upon the Mount Calvarie he opened the great
Source, which has now through 16. Ages irrigated the world with an infinity
of streams of proportional examples of blood and sufferance. Now was his
Legacy performed, and he from Mount Olivet triumphantly returned, from whence
he was come, and the world left to be saved by faith, that is, by a constant
persuasion of those things which he had taught.

The Conditions of this Faith were three. First, That it should be a means
fitting for humane kind, that is, for learned, and unlearned, for young, and
old, for wise, and fools, for Princes and peasants, Rabbis, and Idiots.
Secondly, That it should be a tenent, constant, undoubted, undisputable,
uncontrollable. Thirdly, That it should be a rule of our life and actions,
making but a passage of this present life, to the following, and teaching us to
contemn the present and seen substance, in hope of an unseen and absent
fortune. Certes, a hard task, and which needs to be well grounded and
founded by God himself. For who well considers it, cannot doubt it, to be as
great a miracle (to make the whole Mass of mankind, to forsake what it sees,
and take to obscure hopes or things, it does not so much apprehend what they
are) as to force the strongest works of nature, to hang the sea in the air, to
alter the course of Moon, and Stars, and whatsoever else is strange and
incredible in nature. Besides that, to make a way of knowledge common, and
indifferent to learned, and unlearned, to make the ignorant understand, what
the learned cannot reach unto, and the learned die in defense of the truth he
has no other warrant for, then because he has learned it from an ignorant
person, was the work of him alone who framed them both, and understood in what
veins so different bloods do run.

But done it was to be, and how? Those to whom during his life, he had most
fully declared his mind, went, and told it to others, and all was done. We
cannot deny the way to have been fitting, and expedient, so it be found
efficacious and powerful to effect, what the Author intended. For if Faith
must believe what Christ has taught, what better instrument to breed faith,
then who heard him speak? If Faith must be common to learned, and unlearned,
what better means, then by hearing? From which no unlearnednesse can excuse,
nor learnednesse be exempt. Every man may have from whom to hear and learn, if
not a wiser then himself, yet one who may have properties to be a better
witness. Children naturally believe what their parents tell them, unlearned
men what Doctors teach them, absent men, what those who were present do
report. All this goes very well, so that this Expedient prove efficacious to
the end intended.

But it has the prejudice of humane fallibilitie, for who, for weakness that
he does not carry away what he has heard, who, for vanity to seem to know more
then his fellows, who, to make some lucre of it, or for some emulation to some
other; but seldom it happens that a multitude can carry away a thing all in
the same manner; and 1600 years are passed since, so that it is not credible, a
Doctrine so delivered can persever incorrupted until this day.

principle of it can be no other, then to know what was delivered them by their
Teachers, a thing not surpassing the understanding of any sensible wise man; so
that put but twenty wise understanding men to agree, that the Preacher, to
their certain knowledge, said such a thing, there remains no probable nor
possible doubt, but that it was so.

Now then suppose, that one of those (who having been taught by Christ's own
mouth, had received by the confirmation of the Holy Ghost, that he could
neither forget nor forgo this received doctrine) should have preached over and
over again the same doctrine not long, nor hard to be carried away in all the
Cities, Towns, and Boroughs of some great Country, so that whilst he stayed
there, they were thoroughly understanding and endoctrinated in that way. Now let
him be gone, and after him all dead, who had heard him speak; and then some
question arise concerning this doctrine (as we may say in the second age) let
us see whether error can creep in or no, if the Christians keep unto their
hold. Their hold is what they were taught by Christ's Apostles. Let therefore
the wisest and best men of those Cities and Towns meet together about the
controversy, and discuss it out of this principle (what was delivered unto
them as taught by the Apostles) will not there be a quick end of their dispute?
For every man can say, My father heard the Apostle speak, he understood him to
have said this, so he himself believed, so he taught me, that this was that
which, the Apostle taught us. And when out of diverse Cities and Towns, shall
come a multitude of witnesses, all agreeing in one point, how can it be
doubted, but that this is Christ's doctrine, and that which his Apostle taught?
And to disagree how is it possible? Since all their fathers heard the same
things, and things not above their capacity, and often told them, and well
apprehended by them when they were taught, and by consequence could not tell
their children otherwise then what they had heard and understood, in a matter
of such moment, and of which they apprehended no less, then that it concerned
their own, and their childrens salvation, happiness, or misery for all
eternity. And what here is most evidently certain, in the children of those
who heard the Apostles, may be derived with as much evidence again in the
grandchildren, and so in every age even to our present; for if in any age any
question begin, and it be reduced unto this principle; what did our
forefathers teach us? neither can there be any pretended ignorance (for who can
be ignorant of what was taught him when he was a child, and in what he was
bred, as in the grounds and substance of his hopes, for all eternity?)

True it is, that if men leave this principle, and seek to judge the
controversy by learned discourse, then may the, Church be divided, one part
following the authority of their Ancestors; the other the subtle Arguments, and
the great opinion they conceive, of the learning of their present Teachers: so
that one side will claim succession, and to have received it from hand to
hand; the other the glory of great learning, and to have come by great industry
to discover the errors of their forefathers. But it is evident, that if what
the Apostles preached be the touchstone of what is true, and what they preached
to be seen in what those believe who have heard them, and they who received it,
from them that heard them; It is most evident, I say, that the one part, who
seek for Christian truth in learned discourse, must needs forgo the most
certain and easy way, of attaining unto what they aim at: And likewise
evident, that who keep themselves duly and carefully unto this principle cannot
possibly in any continuance of time, swerve from the truth which Christ has
left unto his Church. So that the whole difficulty is reduced unto this,
whether the Church for so many ages be perpetually preserved in this principle,
that what she received from her forefathers is, that she must believe, and
deliver unto her posterity; A thing so grafted in nature; which makes us
receive our being, our breeding, our learning, our goods, our estates, our
arts, and all things we have, from our fathers, that it is a wonder of our
mutability, that without forcible Engines we can be drawn from it.

CHAP. II.
NOw let us turn our discourse, and as we have seen, that if our Savior ordered
his Apostles in the manner explicated, there was no way for his Church to
swerve from his truth, but by swerving from the most plain, the most natural,
and most evident, and concluding rule of his doctrine, and that but one, and
most easy; so let us see whether from the present Church we can draw the like
forcible train, which may lead us up to Christ and his Apostles. Be therefore
supposed or imagined, what no judicious man can deny to see with his eyes, if
he has never so little cast them upon this present religion of Christendom,
to wit, that there is one Congregation or Church which lays claim to Christ
his doctrine, as upon this title, that she has received it from his Apostles
without interruption, delivered ever from Father to Son, from Master to
Scholar, from time to time, from hand to hand, even unto this day; and that
she does not admit any other doctrine for good and legitimate, which she does
not receive in this manner. Again, that whosoever pretends Christ his truth
against her, says, that true it is, that once she had the true way, but that
by length of time she is fallen into gross errors which they will reform,
not by any truth they have received from hand to hand, from those who by both
parts are acknowledged to have received their lesson from Christ and his
Apostles, but by study and learned Arguments, either out of ancient Writers, or
out of the secrets of nature and reason. This being supposed, either this
principle has remained unto her since the beginning, or she took it up in some
one age of the 16 she has endured; if she took it up in some latter age, she
then thought she had nothing in her what she had not received from her fore
fathers in this sort: And if she thought so, she knew it. For as it is
impossible now any country should think it was generally taught, such a thing
if it were not so; so also was there the like necessity, and impossibility to
be otherwise, if all men were not run mad. Therefore clear it is, she took it
not up first then, but was in former possession, and so clear it is, that she
could not have it now, if she had it not from the very beginning. Now if she
had it, and has conserved it from the beginning, no new opinion could take
root in her, unless it came unto her under this Maxim, as received from hand,
to hand; and to say, that any opinion which was not truly received from hand to
hand, should by such a community be accepted, as received from hand to hand, is
to make it believe, what it sees clearly to be false, to lie unto it is own
soul, against it is own soul, and the soul of it is posterity. Let us add to
this, that the multitude of this Church is so dispersed through so many
Countries and languages of so diverse governments, that it is totally impossible
they should agree together, or meet upon a false determination, to affirm with
one consent a falsity for truth, no interest being able to be common unto them
all to produce such an effect. Wherefore as an understanding man cannot choose
but laugh at the self-weening Hampshire Clown, who thinks in his heart there
was no such Country as France, and that all that was told of it were but
Travelers tales, because himself being upon the Sea shore, had seen nothing
but water beyond England; so I think no wise man will account him less then
phrentick, that understands so little in humane ways, as to think whole
Nations by design, or by hazard, can agree together to profess, and protest a
thing, which they know of their own knowledge to be a mere lie, and a well
known falsehood to themselves, and all their neighbors.

CHAP. III.
THe force of the declared link of succession, is so manifest to a capable
understanding, that being compared with any objection made against it, it will
of it self maintain it is evidence, and bear down the greatest oppositors and
opposition, if the understanding be left unto it self, and not wrested by the
prejudice of a some ways interessed will. Nevertheless, there is a deeper
root, which greatly strengthens and reduces into action, the former efficacity
of the tradition. And this is, that Christian doctrine is not a speculative
knowledge, instituted for delight of man to entertain his understanding, and
has no further end then the delectation which arises out of contemplation;
but it is an art of living, a rule of attaining unto eternal bliss, a
practical doctrine whose end is to inform our action, that our life and
actions squared by her directions, may lead us to that great good, the which
God Almighty esteemed so highly of; that he thought it reason enough for himto
shade his Divinity under the misery of man, to make us partakers of so great a
bliss. Hence it follows, that no error can fall, even in a point which
seems wholly speculative in Christian faith, but soon it breeds a
practical effect, or rather defection in Christian behavior. What could seem
more speculative, then whether the second, or third Persons of the Trinity were
truly or participately God? Yet no sooner was an error broached in these
questions, but there followed a great alteration in Christian action; in their
Baptismes, in their manner of Prayer, in the motives of Love and Charity toward
Almighty God, the very groundwork and foundation of all Christian life.
Whether man has free will or no, seems a question, belonging to the nature
of man, fit for a curious Philosopher; but upon the preaching of the negative
part, presently followed an unknowen Libertinage, men yiedling themselves over
to all concupiscence, since they were persuaded they had no power to resist,
free will being denied. I need not instance in prayer to Saints, worshipping
Images, prayer for the dead, and the like; which is evident, could not be
changed without an apparent change in Christian Churches. So that a doctrine
contrary to faith, is like a disease, which although the cause be internal,
yet cannot the effects and symptoms be kept from the outward parts and view of
the world. The consequence which this note draws, is, that it is not
possible, that any material point of Christian faith can be changed, as it
were by obreption, whilst men are on sleep, but it must needs raise a great
scandal and tumult in the Christian Commonweal. For suppose the Apostles had
taught the world it were Idolatry to pray to Saints, or use reverence toward
their Pictures: How can we imagine this honor brought in, without a vehement
conflict and tumult, in a people which did so greatly abhor Idolatry, as the
Apostles, Disciples did? I might make the like instance in other points, if the
whole History of the Church did not consist of the invasions made by
Heretics, and the great and most violent waving of the Church to and fro upon
those occasions. We remember in a manner as yet, how change came into Germany,
France, Scotland, and our own Country: Let those be a sign to us, what we may
think can be the creeping in of false doctrine; specially, that there is no
point of doctrine, contrary to the Catholic Church, rooted in any Christian
Nation, that the Ecclesiastical History does not mention the times and combats
by which it entered, and tore the Church in pieces.

Let it therefore remain for most evidently constant, that into the Christian
Church can come no error, but it must be seen and noted, and raise scandal and
opposition to show it self (as truly it is) contrary to the nature of Piety
and Religion.

And when it does come, it cannot draw after it any others, then such as first
desert the root of Faith, and Anchor of Salvation, that is to be judged by what
their forefathers taught them, and affirmed to have received from their
Ancestors, as the Faith which Christ and his Apostles delivered to the whole
world of their time, and to such as ever claim and maintain the right of
succession, as rule of what they believe. Yet may this also be worthy of
consideration, that as in our natural body, the principal parts are defended
by Bones, Flesh, Skins, and such like defenses, in such sort, that no outward
Agent can come to offend them, before having annoyed some of these; so in the
Catholic faith, there are in speculation those we call Theological
conclusions, and other pious opinions; and in practice many Rites and
Ceremonies, which stop the passage unto the maine principal parts of Christian
belief and action. And about these we see daily such great motions in the
Catholic Church, that he must be very ignorant of the Spirit of God, which
quickneth his Church, that can imagine any vital part of his faith can be
wounded while it lies asleep, and is insensible of the harm befalls it; for
as in any Science a principle cannot be mistaken, but it must needs draw a
great shoale of false consequence upon it, and lame the whole Science, so never
so little an error in faith can be admitted, but in other Tenets and Ceremonies
it must needs make a great change, and innovation.

CHAP. IV.
NOw let any discreet man consider, what further evidence he can desire, or
peradventure, what greater assurance nature can afford, and not be of an
awkward wilfulness to ask, that which is not conformable to the laws of
nature? Much like unto him, who being sat in a chair far from the chimney,
could not think of applying himself to the fire, but was angry the fire and
chimney were made so far from him. The Philosophers say, it is indisciplinati
ingenii to expect in any Art or Science more exactness then the nature of it
affords. As if a man would bind a Seaman, to go so far every day, whether
wind and weather served or no: So in moral matters, and such as are subject to
humane action, we must expect such assurance as humane actions, bear. If for
the government of your spiritual life, you have as much as for the managing of
your natural and civil life, what can you expect more? Two or three witnesses
of men, beyond exception, will cast a man out of, not only his lands, but life
and all. He that amongst Merchants will not adventure, when there is a hundred
to one of gaining well, will be accounted a silly Factor. And amongst
Soldiers, he that will fear danger where but one of a hundred is slain,
shall not escape the stain of Cowardice. What then shall we expect in Religion,
but to see a maine advantage on the one side, we may cast our selves on? and
for the rest remem ber we are men, creatures subject to chance and mutability,
and thank God he has given us that assurance in a supernatural way, which we
are content withal, in our natural and civil ventures and possessions, which
nevertheless God knows we often love better, and would less hazard then the
unknown good of the life to come. Yet peradventure, God has provided better
for his Church then for Nature, since he loved her more, and in his own Person
did more for her. Let us therefore examine the assurance he has left her
particularly. It was found in the second Chapter, upon this principle, that so
great a multitude of men as cleave to this ground (to have received their faith
by tradition) could not conspire by lying, to deceive their posterity. And if I
be not deceived, this principle being granted, the conclusion (that this
present Church is the true) follows in as severe a way of discourse, as in
Aristotle's Organ is taught, and exemplified in Mathematical Writers; whose use
and art it is to put the like suppositions, whence to enduce something out
against their principle. As in the said Chapter you are bidden, to put what
year, or age such an error entered, and it is evidently true, that if it be
true, then that year or age conspired to tell a lie to deceive their
posterity. And as for the strength of their principle it self (although no
moral man can be so absurd as to doubt of it) yet may we consider, that the
understanding being the part, which makes man to be a man, and truth being the
perfection of our understanding, and true speech the effect, natural to true
knowledge, or understanding: It is clear, that to speak truth is as natural a
fruit of man's nature, as Pears of a Pear tree, Grapes of a Vine, Honey of the
Be: and that it can be no less grafted in nature, for men to speak truly,
then it is in any other natural cause to yield the fruit, for whose sake
nature bred the cause. Wherefore as the constancy of the effect shows, that
it holds upon eternal principles, that no one species of perfect creatures
can perish, although we are not so skillful of nature, as hansomely to weave
the demonstration; so cannot it be doubted, but that if one had all the
principles of man's nature well digested, he might demonstratively deduce the
impossibility, of (that such multitudes of men should conspire to a lie) the
variety of particulars, ever holding their being from a constancy and
uniformity in the universal. Add to this the notoriousnesse of the lie, such
as he is rarely found, that is, so wicked as to venture upon; besides the
greatness of the subject, and of the danger ensuing upon himself, and his
dearest pledges. The ground therefore assumed, is a demonstrative principle,
and peradventure in a higher degree then most physical principles be: For who
knows not the nature of the soul, to be the highest thing Physics can reach
unto? Who knows not, that immateriall things are less subject to mutability
then those which are grounded in matter? Then as more noble, and as more
immateriall, it has greater exemption from mutability, then any other natural
cause whatsoever. One addition more, may chance to clear the whole business
more fully. Nothing more clear then that, no natural cause fails of his
effect, without there be some impediment from a stronger. Now the impediments
which hinder a man from speaking truth, experience teaches us, to be no other
then hopes and fears. The same experience gives us to know, that it is a rare
thing, that hopes and fears should comprehend so great multitudes, as are in
the union of the Catholic Church, specially during an age, which is the least
time necessary for the effect we speak of; that what peradventure might at one
time be ill admitted, should not be rejected at another. But if there were; can
any man be so mad as to think, it could be a secret hope or fear, which should
not break our amongst the posterity, and be known, that what was done was not
true, but counterfeited upon fear or interest, which if it were, a whole ages
counterfeiting would not be sufficient to make the posterity believe, they had
received such a point of doctrine by tradition. Wherefore I do not see, how
this principle of tradition, and the doctrine received by it, can be accounted
of less certainty, then any Physical demonstration whatsoever; or Faith upon
this ground not as sure as any natural cause, as the course of Sun and Moon,
as the flowing and ebbing of the Sea, as the Summer and Winter, Sowing and
Harvest, and whatsoever we undoubtedly presume upon the like nature, and kind.

The principle which is taken in the following Chapter, is of no less force
(if not of far better) to who rightly understands the nature of God his
works, whose course it is deeplier to root and strengthen those things which
he would have most to flourish, or whereof he has most care. Now Christians
well know, that God Almighty has made mankind for his elect, as the world
which is about us for mankind. And therefore he has rooted those things which
more immediately belong to the Elect (as is his Church, his Faith, and Holy
Spirit in it) more strongly then the principles either of man's nature, or of,
the world which was made for it: himself assuring us of it, when he told us,
One title should not miss of the holy Writ, though Heaven and Earth should be
dissolved. And so seeing the latter principle, relied upon the not failing of
Gods Holy Spirit to his Church, which should ever watch upon their actions,
that nothing should creep into Christian life, which persently the zeal of his
faithful should not startle at. I think it needless to seek to further
qualify the strength of that part, which receives it from the quality of so
good a workman as was the Holy Ghost.

CHAP. V.
I Doubt not but whosoever shall have received satisfaction in the discourse
passed, will also have received in that point we seek after; that is in being
assured both that Christ has left a Director in the world, and where to find
him, there being left no doubt, but it is his holy Church upon earth. Nor can
there be any question, which is this Church, sithence there is but one that
does and can lay claim, to have received from hand to hand his holy doctrine
in writings and hearts. Others may cry loud, they have found it, but they must
first confess it was lost: and so if they have, it was not received by hands,
I mean, as far as it disagreeth with Catholic doctrine; so that where there
is not so much as claim, there can be no dispute. And that this Church is a
lawful directresse, that is, has the conditions requisite, I think can no
ways be doubted. Let us consider in her, presence, or visibility, authority,
power. As for the first, her multitude and succession, makes the Church if she
is ever accessible, ever known. The Arrians seemed to chase her out of the
world in their flourish, but the persecution moved against her, made her even
then well known and admired. In our own Country we have seen no Bishop, no
form of Church for many years; yet never so, but that the course of justice
did proclaim her through England, and who was curious could never want means
to come to know her confession of faith what it is, and upon what it is
grounded. Wheresoever she is, if in peace, her Majesty and Ceremonies in all
her actions, make her spectable and admired. If in war, she never wants
Champions to maintain her, and the very heat of her adversaries, makes her
known to such as are desirous to understand the truth of a matter so important,
as is the eternal welfare of our soul.

For Authority: her very claim of antiquity and succession (to have been that
Church which received her beginning from Christ and his Apostles, and never
forewent it, but has ever maintained it) gives a great reverence unto her
amongst those, who believe her, and amongst those, who with indifferency and
love of truth, seek to inform themselves; a great prejudice above others: For
it draws a greater likelihood of truth, then others have. And if it be true,
it carries an infinite authority with it, of Bishops, Doctors, Martyrs, Saint,
miracles, learning, wisdom, venerable antiquity, and the like: that if a
prudent man should sit with himself and consider, that if he were to choose
what kind of one he would have it, to carry away the hearts of men toward the
admiration and love of God Almighty, he could find nothing wanting in this,
that could be maintained with the fluxibility of nature. For to say, he would
have no wicked men in it, were to say, he would have it made of Angels and not
of Men.

There remains Power: the which no man can doubt but Christ has given it
most ample, who considers his words so often repeated to his Apostles. But
(abstracting from that) who does not see, that the Church has the nature and
proportion of ones Country, unto every one? As in a man's Country, he has
Father, and Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Kinsfolks, Allies, Neighbors, and
Countrymen, which anciently were called Cives, or Concives, and of these are
made his Country; so in the Church finds he in way of spiritual instruction
and education, all these degrees nearer and farther off, until he come unto
that further most of being, of all united under the universal Government of
Christ his Vicar: And as he in his Country finds bearing, breeding, settling
in estates and fortunes, and lastly protection and security; so likewise in the
way of Christianity does he find this more fully in the Church: so that if it
be true, that a man owes more unto his Master then unto his Father, because
been esse is better then esse: certainly a man also (as far as Church and
Country can be separated) must owe more to the Church then to his very Country;
wherefore likewise the power which the Church has to command and instruct, is
greater then the power of the temporal Country, and community, whereof he is
part; Again, this Church can satisfy learned and unlearned. For in matters
above the reach of reason, whose source and spring is from what Christ and his
Apostles taught, what learned man, that understands the nature of science and
method, can refuse in his inmost soul to bow to that which is testified by so
great a multitude, to have come from Christ: And what unlearned man can require
more for his faith, then to be taught by a Mistress of so many prerogatives
and advantages above all others? Or how can he think to be quieted in
conscience, if he be not content to fare as she does, who has this
prerogative, evident that none is so likely by thousands of degrees.

CHAP. VI.
THe stem and body of our position thus raised, will of it self shoot out
the branches of diverse Questions, or rather the solution thereof.

And first, How it happened that diverse Heretics have pretended tradition (
the Millenarians, Carpocratians, Gnostiaks, and diverse others) yet they with
their traditions have been rejected, and the holy Church left only in claim
of tradition?

For if we look into, what Catholic tradition is, and what the said
Heretics pretended, under the name of Tradition, the question will remain
voided. For the Catholic Church calls Tradition, that doctrine which was
publicly preached in the Churches, ordered and planted in the manners and
customs of the Church. The Heretics called Tradition a kind of secret
doctrine, either gathered out of private conversation with the Apostles, or
rather they pretended that the Apostles, besides what they publicly taught the
world, had another private or mystical way proper to Scholars, more endeared
then the rest, which came not to public view, but was in huggermugger
delivered from those secret Disciples unto others, and so unto them; where it
is easily seen, what difference there is betwixt this Catholic Tradition and
this pretended. For (the force and energie of tradition residing in the
multitudes of hearers, and being planted in the perpetual action, and life of
Christians, so that it must have such a publicity that it cannot be unknown
amongst them.) Those the Heretics pretend both manifestly, want the life and
being of traditions, and by the very great report of them lose all authority
and name. For, suppose some privare doctrine of an Apostle to some Disciple,
should be published and recorded by that Disciple, and some others, this might
well be a truth, but would never obtain the force of a Catholic position,
that is, such as it should be damnation to reject, because the descent from the
Apostle is not notorious, and fitting to sway the body of the whole Church.

The Second Question may be, How it comes to pass, that something which at
first binds not the Churches belief, afterward comes to bind it? For if it
were ever a Tradition it must ever be public, and bind the Church: And if
once it were not, it appears not how ever it could come to be; for if this
age, (for example) has it not, how can it deliver it over to the next age that
follows?

But if we consider, that the hope of Christian doctrine being great, and the
Apostles preaching in so great variety of Countries, it might happen some
point in one Country to have been less understood, or peradventure not
preached at all, which in another was often preached, and well both understood
and retained, we may easily free our selves from these brambles. For the Spirit
of Tradition residing in this, that the testimony of that, the Apostles
delivered this Doctrine be exceptione majus, and beyond all danger of deceit;
It is not necessary to the efficaciousness of Tradition, that the whole
universal Church be witness to such a truth, but so great a part as could be
a Warrant against mistaking and deceit; so that if all the Churches of Asia, or
Greece, or Aphrique, or Egypt, should constantly affirm such a Doctrine to have
been delivered unto them by the Apostles, it were enough to make a Doctrine
exceptione majorem: Whence it insueth that if in a meeting of the Universal
Church it were found that such a part had such a Tradition, concerning some
matter, whereof the rest either had no knowledge or no certainty, such a
Doctrine would pass into a necessary bond in the whole Church, which before
was either unknown or doubted of in some part thereof. A likely example thereof
might be in the Canonical books, the which being written some to one Church,
and some to another, by little and little were spread from those Churches unto
others, and so some sooner, some later, received into the constant belief of
the Catholic world.

The Third question may be, How (Christian religion, consisting in so many
points) it is possible to be kept incorrupted by tradition, the which depending
on memory, and our memory being so frail, and subject to variation, it
seems, cannot without manifest miracle, conserve so great diversity of points
unchanged, for so many ages?

But if we consider, that Faith is a Science, and Science a thing whose parts
are so connexed, that if one be false, all must needs be false, we shall easily
see that contrarily; the multitude of diverse points is a conservation the one
to the other. For, if one be certain, it of it self is able to bring us to
the right in another, whereof we doubt. And as in a man's body, if he wants
one member, or the operation of it, he must needs find the want of it in
another: And as a Commonwealth that is well ordained, cannot miss any office
or part, without the redounding of the dessect upon the whole, or some other
part; so a Christian, being an essence instituted by God, as specially as any
natural creature, has not the parts of his faith and action by accident and
chance knitted together, but all parts by a natural order, and will of the
Maker, ordered for the conservation of the most inward essence, which is the
charity we owe to God, and our Neighbor. Wherefore Christian life and action
consists but upon one main tradition, whose parts be those particulars, which
men specify, either in matter of Belief or Action: So that this connextion of
its parts amongst themselves, added to the Spirit of God, ever conserving zeal
in the heart of his Church, with those helps also of nature (wherewith we see
wonders in this kind done) will show this conservation to be so far from
impossibility, that it will appear a most con-naturall and fitting thing. Let
us but consider, it constant nations, their language, their habits, their
manners of sacrificing, eating, generally living; how long it does continue
amongst them. See that forlorn nation of Jews, how constantly it maintains
the Scripture? how obstinately their errors? The Arabians of the desert, from
Ismael his time unto this day, live in families, wandering about the desert.
Where Christians labor to convert Idolaters, they find the maine and only
argument for their errors, that they received them from their forefathers, and
will not quit them. The King of Socotora, thinking to please the Portugals by
reducing a nation, that had the name of Christians, to true Christianity, he
found them obstinately protest unto him, that they would sooner lose their
lives, then part with the religion their Ancestors had left them. The
Maronites, a small handful of people, amongst Turks and Heretics, to this
day have maintained their religion in Siria. And certainly thousands of
examples of this kind may be collected in all Nations and Countries;
especially, if they be either rude, and such as mingle not with others, or such
as be wise, and out of wisdom seek to maintain their ancient belief. And
Catholics are of both natures: For they have strict commands, not to come to
the Ceremonies and Rites of other religions, and in their own, they have all
means imaginable to affect them to it, and conserve a reverence and zeal
toward it.

CHAP. VII.
TO come at length to the principal aim of this Treatise, that is, to give an
answer to him that demands a guide at my hands. I remit him to the modern
present visible Church of Rome, that is, her, who is in an externe sensible
communion with the externe sensible Clergy of Rome, and the externe sensible
Head and Pastor of the Church. If he ask me now, how he shall know her? (I
suppose he means, how he should know her to be the true) I must
contreinterrogate him, who he is? that is, in whose name he speaks? Is he an
ignorant man? Is he unlearned? yet of good understanding in the world? Is he a
Scholar? and what Scholar? A Gramarian, whose understanding has no other
help then of languages? Is he a Philosopher? Is he a Divine? (I mean an
Academicall one, for a true Divine is to teach, not to ask this question:) Is
he a Statesman? For he who can think one answer, can or ought be made to all
these; may likewise expect, that a round bowl may stop a square hole, or one
cause produce all effects, and hang lead at his heels to fly withal. Yet I
deny not, but all these must have the same guide, though they are to be assured
of, that in diverse sorts and manners. If therefore the ignorant man speaks, I
will show him in the Church of God an excellency in decency, Majesty of
Ceremonies above all other Sects and Religions, whereby dull capacities are
sweetly ensnared, to believe the truth they hear, from whom they see to have
the outward Signs of virtue and devotion. If the unlearned ask; I show him the
claim of Antiquity, the multitude, the advantages of sanctity and learning,
the justifiableness of the cause, how the world was once in this accord, and
those who opposed, when they first parted, first began the Schism; how the
points of difference be such as on the Catholic side help devotion, and on the
contrary diminish the same, and such like sensible differences which will
clearly show a main advantage on the Catholic side, which is the proportional
motive to his understanding: To the Grammarian I will give two Memorandums.

First, that seeing Catholics were first in possession both of the Scriptures
and the interpretations, the adverse part is bound to bring such places as can
receive no probable Exposition by the Catholics. It is not sufficient that
their Expositions seem good or better; that is, more conformable unto the Text,
but they must be evincent, to which no so sound answer, even with some
impropriety can be given. For who knows not, that is conversant in Critics,
how many obscure, and difficult places occur in most plain Authors: and the
Scripture of all Books (the greater part of the men who wrote them, specially
the new Testament, being not eloquent, and writing not in their native tongue)
for the most part are subject to many Improprieties.

The other Memorandum is, That to prove a Catholic point by Scripture, it is
sufficient that the place brought, do bear the Explication the Catholic
bears, and if it be more probable by the very letter, it is an evincent
place. The reason is, Because the Question being about a Christian Law, the
Axioms of the Jurists takes place that Consuetudo optima interpres Legis. So
that if it be manifest that Christian practice (which was before the
controversy) be for the one sense, and the words be tolerable, no force of
Grammar can prevail to equalize this advantage. The Grammarian therefore who
will observe these rules, I turn him loose to the Scriptures, and Fathers to
seek in them what is the faith of Christ, and properties, of his Church to know
her by. Of the the Philosopher I exact to go like a Philosopher, and to search
out the pecificall differences of every Sect, and when he has found them, if
any one but the Catholic has any rule of Faith and good life: which I remit
to him to enquire? But at least when he has found the Catholics to be this
claim of Tradition before declared, then, if this do not bring him as
demonstratively, as he knows any conclusion in Philosophy, and Mathematics,
to the notice that this is the only true Church of Christ, for my part I shall
quit him before God and man. The Divine if he has truly understood the
principles of his Faith in the nature of a Divine (I mean, Trinity,
Incarnation, Redemption, Eucharist, Beatitude, the Creation and Dissolution of
the World) and has seen the exact conformity with the deepest principles of
nature, with an unspeakable wisdom of the contriver: If he does not plainly
confess it was above the nature of man to frame the Catholike-Religion, and
sees not that only, that is conformable to nature and it self; I say, he
has no ground sufficient to be of it. At last, the Statesman who is truly
informed of the Church, (how far it is really of Christ's Institution, and what
either pious men have added, or peradventure, ambitious men encroached,) If he
does not find a government of so high and Exotic strain, that neither man's wit
would dare to have attempted it, neither man's power could possibly have
effected it. If he finds not eminent helps, and no disadvantage to the
temporal government, I shall think there wants one Star in the Heaven of the
Church, to direct these Sages to Bethlehem. But if God Almighty has in all
sorts and manners provided his Church, that she may enlighten every man in his
way, which goes the way of a man; then let every man consider, which is the
fit way for himself, and what in other matters of that way he accompteth
evidence. And, if there be no interest in his soul, to make him loath to
believe, what in another matter of the like nature he would not stick at, or
heavy to practice what he sees clearly enough, I fear not his choice; but if
God send him time and means to prosecute his search any indifferent while, it
is long ago known of what religion he is to be of

After this follows no order of Chapters, because it is applied to the
discourse which was occasion of it.
Although if what is already be not satisfaction unto the writing, and the
Author thereof, (for whose sake and contentment, all that has been discoursed
hitherto, has been set down:) I confess, that I have not ability to give him
satisfaction: yet least it should be interpreted neglect, If I did not make an
application of it unto the writing, I shall as briefly as I can, for avoiding
tediousness, run over the discourse. And true it is, speaking of the Church
of Rome, as this day it is the true Church of God: I answer the doubter, she
neither has, nor can have any error, which he need to fear, and be shye of.
The which two limitations I add, for avoiding questions, impertinent to our
discourse. The first, for those which are concerning the connection of the Sea
of Rome to the universal Church. The latter, to avoid such questions as touch
that point, whether the Church may err, in any Phylosophicall or other such
like matter? which questions are not so pertinent to our matter.

Neither do I remit the Questioner unto Scripture for his satisfaction,
although I hold Scripture a very sufficient means, to satisfy the man, who
goes to it with that preparation of understanding and will, which is meet and
required. Howsoever this I may answer, for them who prove it out of Scripture,
that because they dispute against them who admit of Scripture, and deny the
authority of the Church, if they can convince it, they do well; though they
will not themselves admit generally of a proof our of Scripture, as not able
to prove every thing in foro contentioso.

That they say, the Church is made infallible, that we may have some guide, I
think it very rational. For nature has given ever some strong and
uncontrollable principle in all natures to guide the rest. The Commonwealth
has a Governor not questionable, our understanding has some principles,
which she cannot judge, but by them judges of all other verities. If there
should not be some such principle in the Church, it were the only maimed thing
God had created; and maimed in its principal part, in the very head. And if
there be such a principle, the whole Church is infallible by that, as the whole
man sees by his eyes, touches by his hands. Neither can I deny, but that the
Author well excepteth, or assumeth, that there is no less necessity, the
Church should be known to be infallible, or which is this Church, then that
there is one. For if I should admit absolutely, that it is necessary for every
man to know the Church is Infallible, precedently to the knowledge of which is
the true Church, I should forget what I had before said, that satisfaction is
to be given to every one, according to his capacity. It is sufficient for a
Child to believe his Parents, for a Clown to believe his Preacher, about the
Churches Infallibility. For Faith is given to mankind, to be a means to him of
believing, and living like a Christian: and so he has this second, it is not
much matter in what terms he be with the first. The good women and Clownes in
Italy, and Spain, trouble not themselves to seek the grounds of their faith,
but with a Christian simplicity, seek to live according unto that their
Preachers tell them; and without question, by perseverance, come to the
happiness, great Clearks by too much speculation may fail of. Such therefore
know no otherwise the Infallibility of the Church, then because she tells it
them, to whom they give credit, as innocently as any child to his Mother.

The Church therefore was made infallible, because so it was fitting for her
Maker, so it was fitting for her self, so it was fit for that part of mankind,
that had more refined wits; not because it was necessary for every one which
was to come to her, or live in her, whereof the greatest part first comes to
her, drawn by some of the means before delivered, and believes her about her
infallibility.

Neither do I remit him to a general and constant tradition, as if himself
should climb up every age by learned Writers, and find it in every one. I take
it to be impossible. Testimonies one may find in many ages, but such as will
demonstrate and convince, a full tradition, I much doubt. Neither do I find by
experience, that who will draw a man by a rope or chain, gives him the whole
rope or chain into his hands, but only one end of it, unto which if he cleave
hard, he shall be drawn which way the rope is carried. Tradition is a long
chain, every generation or delivery from father to son, being a link in it.
I send him therefore no further then to this present age, where he shall
(beyond all doubtfulnesse) find that this doctrine was delivered unto this age,
by the care of their Ancestors. And if we seek upon what terms, we find, that
upon a fixed opinion of damnation in failing; and so, that they had received it
so from their forefathers upon the same terms, with opinion that it had
continued ever since Christ his time by this means. And he who is able to look
into the means, how this can remain constantly so many ages, may find it not
only the far securer, but an evidently infallible succession of doctrine,
inviolable as long as there is a Church. And this does not only show that
there is one, but which she is, and that there can be no other. For I suppose,
no man will be so senseless as to say, the Apostles preached one thing in one
part, and the contrary in another: wherefore it will be agreed, that once the
Church agreed in her faith. This supposed, let us set the time when one part
changed, and will it not be evident, that the changing Church being challenged
cannot plead, she received it from her Ancestors, because it is manifestly
false to both parties? Then must needs one only Church remain with that
claim. And although we did not know what the Greek Church does by her History,
yet the force of consequence would tell us, they cannot do this which the
Western Church does, because the doing of one is incompatible with the doing
of the same by the other.

As for the two places concerning the Popes and Councels infallibility, it is
not to my purpose to meddle of them, because on the one side, the way I have
begun, there is no need of those discourses; and on the other, I should engage
my self in quarrels betwixt Catholic, and Catholic, obscure the matter I
have taken in hand, and profit nothing in my hearers, more then to be judged,
peradventure to have more learning then wisdom to govern it withal.
Wherefore I shall omit those Paragraphes, if I only note concerning the
tradition imposed upon Papius, that the very narration of it, shows that it
is no tradition, in the sense we speak of tradition, but in the sense some
Heretics have pretended tradition; as it were a doctrine secretly delivered,
and gathered out of private conference with the Apostles, and not their
public preaching delivered to the Churches, which is the way we exalt
tradition in. The witnesses also of ancient Fathers are no parts of tradition,
but signs and marks where it has passed, whereas the body of tradition is in
the life and belief of the whole Church. For the Church (as I have said) is an
essence composed, as it were, of interne and externe parts; the interne being
faith, the externe, the outward action, which must needs be conformable to the
internal faith, nor can there be a material change in the action, but it must
argue the internal change of faith, nor internal change in faith, but it must
draw with it an Iliad of altered actions.

As for the place of Fevardentius, which allows many Fathers to have fallen
into errors, I think it will not trouble him, who is acquainted with the
course of the present Church, wherein diverse, who be thought great Divines,
fall into errors, for which their books sometimes are hindered from the print,
sometimes, recalled, or some leaves commanded to be pasted up. The reason is,
the multiplicity of Catholic doctrine, which does not oblige a man to the
knowledge of every part, but to the prompt subjection, to the instruction of
the Church, wherefore many men may hold false doctrine inculpably, not knowing
it to be such, even now after the learned labors of so many, that have strived
to open and facilitate by method, what is true and what is false; much more in
the Fathers times, when there was great want of so many compilers, as these
latter ages have produced.

As for the two points, he says, avert him from Catholic doctrine, I am
mistaken, if he be not mistaken in both. The first is, that Catholic doctrine
damnes all, who are not in the union of their Church. He thinks the sentence
hard, yet, I think he will not deny me this, that if any Church does not say
so, it cannot be the true Church: For call the Church what you will, the
Congregation of the Elect, the Congregation of the Faithful, the Congregation
of Saints, or Just; call it, I say, or define it what you will, does it not
clearly follow, that whosoever is out of that Church cannot be saved; for he
shall not be Elect, Just, Faithful, etc. without which there is no Salvation.
How then can any Church maintain these two propositions? I am the true Church,
and yet one may be saved, without being in me. But peradventure he is
scandalized, that the Catholic Church requires actual communion, external
with her, which he thinks in some case may be wanting, without detriment of
Salvation. But how would he have the Church speak, which speaks in common,
but abstracting from such particular cases, as may change wholly the nature of
the question. For example sake; has not the Church reason to say, he that
denies the blessed Trinity is an Heretic? It happens, one who has conversed
among the Tritheites, hearing them use the word Trinity for three Gods, meaning
to speak against them, denies there is any Trinity; shall this man be
comprehended in the foresaid condemnation? Or was the sentence ill pronounced?
Neither, as I think. For bo h was it well done by the Church, to condemn
denyers of the Trinity, because per se loquendo (as the Philosophers speak)
that is, according to the ordinary course, and nature of things, who denies a
thing in words, denies it in heart; yet the man fore-spoken, did not so, and
was not condemned in that sentence. In like manner, when the Church condemns
all such as are not in actual union, and communion with her, she does well:
because according to the ordinary course, this does not fall out, without
either presumption, and damnable pride, or else culpable, either ignorance, or
fear, and love of private interest, before God and his Church. But it
follows not thence, that by accident no man may sometime be excused. The
words of our Savior concerning Baptism and Eucharist their necessity, are
very precise, yet the Church doubts not to excuse those who have it in voto.

But to proceed unto the point. The corrent of Catholic Doctors holds, that
no man shall be damned for infidelity, but he who wilfully does mis-beleeve,
and that to do so, it is required that faith be sufficiently proposed unto
him. And what is to be sufficiently proposed, is not determined amongst them.
There wants not Divines, that teach, that even ignorantia affectata, does
excuse from Herisie.

On the other side it is most certain, that no man is damned for not
professing, what he is not damned for not believing. Wherefore profession being
that which engrafteth a man exteriorly in the Church of God, according unto the
ordinary opinions of Catholics; it follows, that no man is condemned for
not being of the Church, who is not for infidelity, for which it is a very
uncertain case, who be damned and who not. So that the Catholic position is
not so crude, as peradventure the Author understood it to be, though the words
be rough, and ought to be so, as being of what is according to the course of
nature, not what chance and accidents may invent.

The other point was of putting Heretics to death, which I think he
understands to be done Vindicatively, not Medicinally. I mean imposed as a
punishment, and not in way to prevent mischeife, or oppress it in the head. If
the Circumcellians were the first, that is ancient enough for the justification
of the fact, although for banishment (which also he seems to reprehend) we
know the first that could suffer it, did suffer it. Arrius, I mean, by the
hand of Constantine, whom he praises for a speech he uttered, before he knew
the consequence of the danger, and seems to reprehend for his after and
better wits. Saint Augustine justifies such proceeding against Here tiques.
Saint Gregory advised the like against Pagans, (if I remember) and the Church
laterly, has rather increased then decreased in the practice of it. Mores's
speech, I believe is mistaken, the force of it being, that the banishment of
Bishops showed his faith, because the banished were Catholics, which showed
Lucius to be none. But what can be said, if the Church uses that for the
prevention of a greater, and more dangerous evil, which all politic Estates
use for the remedies of less, and less dangerous evils, and are commended for
it? For if Faith be the way of Salvation* and hereby the bane of Faith; if
Salvation be the greatest good, then the danger of a Countries being over run
with Heresy, is the greatest of dangers, greater then the multiplying of
Thieves, greater then the unsurety of the ways, greater then a Plague, or
Invasion. Why then does not reason force us to use the means to prevent it,
which the same reason and experience, teaches us to be most efficacious in
this, and all other contagious and gangrening maladies of the Commonwealth. I
hope reason it self, and the zeal of the Author to his own and Countries
Salvation, will supply my shortness in this point. For supposing a Church be
assured she is in the right, and that the doctrine preached by another, leads
to damnation, I know not why Caipha's words should not be prophetical in this
case, and that truly it does not expedire, that unus moriatur pro populo, and
non tota gens pereat.

He urges afterward against the unity of the Church, that it is none such as
we brag off. And I confess we brag of it, and think we have reason too. And
if it please him to look into the difference of our Country of England, and
some Land of Barbarians, as Brasile, or such other, where they live without Law
or Government. I think he will find, that our bragging is not without ground.
For wherein is the difference betwixt a civil Government, and a barbarous
Anarchie? Is it either, that in a civil Estate there be no quarrels, or
amongst Barbarians there is no quiet. The former would prejudice our Courts and
Justice, the latter is impossible, even in nature. What is then the goodness
of Government, but that in a well governed Country, there is a means to end
quarrels, and in an Anarchy there can be no assured peace? This therefore is
that we brag of, that amongst us, if any controversy rise, there is a way to
end it, which is not amongst them who part from us. And secondly, that there is
no assured agreement amongst those who are parted from us; for although to day
they agree, there is no bond, nor tie, why to morrow they may not disagree.
These two things we brag of, and I think the Author will not deny it. For he
confesses we all agree, in that the Church is an infallible Mistress. Then it
is evident, that if in any controversy she interposeth her judgment, the
controversy is ended. He likewise confesses, that who part from us, have no
such definitive authority amongst them, and that Scripture whereon they rely,
has not this virtue, to take up controversies clearly. Again, I do confess,
most English men confess a Trinity, the Incarnation, and Passion of our
Savior, but if to morrow, any one or more of them, light upon some book of an
Arrian, Trinitarian, or other Sect, so wittily written, that he puts
probable solutions for the places of Scriptures, shows slight ways, how our
well-meaning forefathers may have slipped into such an error; what is there to
retain these men, from disagreeing with the rest of their brethern, and betake
themselves to the Arrians: And when the heat is passed, light upon some Rabbi,
who shall cunningly exaggerate the absurdities (as he shall term them) of the
Trinity, Incarnation, Passion; say our Savior did strange things in virtue of
some constellation, and delivering these things so oratorically, that for a new
heat these things shall seem more conformable, then his Arrianisme; what then
shall hinder this to become a Jew, and at last to prove himself so great a
Clerk, as to write De Tribus Impostoribus. Take away the power of the Church
(which every man does, who takes away the Infallibility) what can retain any
man, why he should not yield to that discourse, which seems fairest, seeing
nothing is certain? But peradventure, some may attribute power unto the Church
without Infallibility, whom I would have consider, but what himself says. For
his Church, by the power it has, must either say, I command you to believe me,
or I command you to profess this, whether you believe me or no. The second I
think, no enemy of equivocation will admit, as the former is as much, as if it
should say, I know not whether I say true or no, yet you must think I say true.
So that if I understand any thing, where there is no Infallibility, there is no
Power, where no Power, no Unity, where no Unity, no Entity, no Church. Now for
the controversies mentioned (besides that, there is a means to terminate them)
they be such, as bring no breach of the ancient life, and action of Christians,
which all those Opinions do, which for the most part are reputed to make
Heretics; That some controversies amongst us are not resolved, is a thing
necessary amongst humane affairs, where things must have a time to be borne,
to increase, to fall; and the greater things are, the greater is their period.
Wherefore I do not see, why this may hurt the Church, more then the Suits
which hang in our Courts, prejudice the Government of the Land. Neither can any
other Church assume Infallibility to it self; because it cannot lay hold of
this principle, that it receives its doctrine by hands; and so must first
profess the Church of Christ to be fallible, or else it cannot part from it.

The last point of the Authors discourse, is, to show how errors might have
crept in. Wherein I shall have no opposition with him, for I do not think the
question is, how they should creep in, but how they should be kept out? For the
fluxibility of humane nature is so great, that it is no wonder if errors should
have crept in, the ways being so many, but it is a great wonder of God, that
none should have crept in. This nevertheless I may say, (if the Author will
confess, (as I think) he will not deny, but that it is disputable, whether any
error in sixteen ages has crept in) this very thing is above nature. For if
there were not an excellency beyond the nature of corruptible things, it would
be undeniably evident, that not one or two, but hundreds of errors had quite
changed the shape of the Church in so many years, tempests, divisions, want of
commerce in the body of the Church. But this one maxim, that she receives her
Faith by Tradition, and not from Doctors, has ever kept her entire. And he
that will show the contrary, must show how it could come to pass, that those
who lived in such an age, could say unto their children, this we received from
our forefathers, as taught them by their forefathers, to have been received
from Christ and his Apostles, from hand to hand; which if it could not be, the
question is resolved, that no error is in the Church of God, which holds her
faith upon that tenure.

And truly, if the Author desire to examine many Religions, let him look their
main ground wherein they rely, and see whether that be good or no. And I
think amongst Christians he shall find but two, Tradition, and Scripture. And
the Catholic only to rely upon Tradition, and all the rest upon Scripture.
And also shall he see, that relying upon Scripture cannot draw to an unity,
those who rely upon it; and that more then one cannot rely upon Tradition,
which when I have considered, I have no further to seek, for if I will be a
Christian, I must belong to one side. By falling on the one side, I see my
fortune in thousands who have gone before me, to wit, that I shall be to seek
all my life time, as I see they are, and how greatly they magnify very weak
pieces. On the other side, I see every man who follows it, as far as he
follow it, is at quiet; and therefore cannot choose, but think there to be the
stone to rest my head upon, against which Jacob his Ladder is reared unto
Heaven.

The Author has through his whole discourse, inserted diverse things, which
seem particularly to the justification of himself, in the way of his search.
The which, as I think, on one side I should be too blame to exaimine (for who
am I, to judge the Servant of another man) so, because I cannot think, but that
they were inserted for love of truth, and to hear what might be said against
them (craving pardon, if on presumption of that, it is his will, I anyway
offend) I shall touch the matter, wholly abstracting from the personal
disposition of any man. And to begin a far of, it is confessed amongst
Catholics, that all sin must be wilful, and so as far as any man's doubt in
Religion is not by will, but by force and necessity, so far it is not culpable,
but may be laudable before God and man. As was without doubt the anxious search
of Saint Augustine for the truth, which he relates in his confessions, for who
is assured of being out of the truth, must have time to seek it, and so long
this doubt is rational, and laudable. That which must justify this search, is
in common, that which justifies all actions, that a man be sure in the aim he
aims at, and in the means he takes, not to be governed by any passion,
interest, or wilfulness, but that he sincerely aims, and carefully pursues
in the search of the truth it self, for the love of it; and of those goods
which depend of the knowledge of it. This is a thing, in which a rational man
can have no other judge then himself; for no man knows what is within a man,
but the Spirit, or conscience of man. But he himself must be a rigorous Judge
unto himself, for it is very hard to know the truth: when I say rigorous, I
mean exact, and fearful mis-deeming: As holy Job was, who said, He was
fearful of all his actions. Holy David, but amongst all, Saint Augustine does
more sweetly complain of the misery of man, not knowing his own dispositions,
and yet he was then forty years of age, when passions and heates of youth
which make this discussion harder, are generally settled. Besides this, he must
have this care, that he seek what the nature of the subject can yield, and not
as those Physicians, who when they have promised no less then immortality, can
at last only reach to some conservation of health, or youth, in some small
degree. So I could wish the Author, to well assure himself first, that there
is possible, an Infallibility, before he be too earnest, to be contented with
nothing less. For what if humane nature should not be capable of so great a
good, would he therefore think fitting to live without any Religion, because he
could not get such a one as himself desired, though with more then a man's
wish. Were it not rational to see, whether amongst Religions, some one has
not such notable advantages over the rest, as in reason it might seem, humane
nature might be contented withal Let him cast his accounts with the dearest
things he has, his own, or friends lives, his estate, his hope of posterity,
and see upon what terms of advantage he is ready to venture all these, and
then return to Religion, and see whether, if he do not venture his soul upon
the like, it be truly reason, or some other not confessed motive, which
withdraws him. For my own part, as I doubt not of an Infallibity, so I doubt
not, but setting that aside, there be those excellencies found on the
Catholic party, which may force a man to prefer it, and venture all he has
upon it, before all other Religions, and Sects in the world: Why then may not
one, who after long searching finds no Infallibility, rest himself on the
like, supposing man's nature affords no better?

Another thing may make a man's search faulty, and is carefully to be looked
unto, I mean, that it is easy for a man to mistake himself, by too much
confidence in himself or others. He that will make a judgment in an Art he is
not Master in, if he be deceived, is to impute it unto himself. The Phrase
commands us to believe every man in his Art; he who knows and understands
himself, believes not. Therefore when we see Masters in an Art, we are not
skilled in, oppose us, we may believe we are in the wrong: which will bred this
resolution in the Author of the discourse, that if himself be not skilled all
those ways in which he pursues his search, he must find himself obliged to
seek Masters, who be both well skilled, and (the matter being subject to
faction) also very honest and upright men, or else he does not quit himself
before God and man.

I cannot part without one note more, which is, that it is not all one to
incur damnation for infidelity, and to be in state of Salvation. For the man
to whom infidelity is not imputed, may be in state of damnation, for other
faults, as those were who having known God by his works, did not glorify him
as they ought: nay, they may be damned through want of Faith, and yet not be
condemned for incredulity. As for example sake, if when they have sinned, they
know not what means to take to have them forgiven, though they be without
fault in not believing, nevertheless dying without remission of sin, they
are not in state to come to life everlasting. As the man, who should venture
into a Wood without a guide, although he did his best to have a guide, nothing
less might fall out of his way, as well as he, who neglected the taking of
one; so if God sent his Son to show us the way of Salvation, and that be but
one; as well is he like not to be saved, who never heard of such a way, as he
that heard of it, and neglected it; for neither of the two goes that way; and
who goes not on the way, is not like to come to the end. I know God is good and
merciful; but I know his works, as far as we know, are dispensed by the order
of second causes; and where we see no second causes, we cannot presume of the
effects. God is good and merciful I know, and feeds the Birds of the air,
and much more men; yet we see in dearths and hard winters, both men and Birds
to perish, do they what they could to get victuals. And how am I assured he
will send Angels to illuminate such men as do their endeavors, that their
souls may not perish? But far more do I doubt, whether ever man, who had not
the way of Christ, or even of those, who walked in it, did ever do his best
(except some few, and very few, perhaps not two of Christ his greatest
favorites) and was not so culpable, that his perdition would not have been
imputed unto himself. God of his mercy put us in the score of those, of whom
he says, He will take pity upon whom he pleases, and compassion of them he
pleases.

FINIS.
THE LORD OF FAVLKLANDS REPLY
SIR,
I Receive your intention to instruct me for a great Obligation, but I should
have esteemed it a greater; if you would have pleased to let me know to whom I
owe the Favor, and should pay my thanks; and if you had not translated the
command of secrecy from proper to metaphorical Alms.

I am also to thank you (for in this Age we are beholding to them who do what
is fit) for not mixing Gall with your Ink; since I have ever thought that
there should be as little bitterness in a Treatise of Controversy, as in a
Love-letter, and that the contrary way was both void of Christian charity, and
humane wisdom, as serving only (...), to fright away the game, Synesius.
and make their Adversary unwilling to receive Instruction from him, from whom
they have received Injuries; and making themselves unabler to discover Truth
(which Saint Austine says is hard for him to find who is calm, but impossible
for him that is angry:) raising besides a great suspicion of ignorance in him
that uses it; since it is a very true Rule which we have received from
Hierocles, (...), Confidence of knowledge conduces much to meekness: Now in
this I intend to take you for my pattern, and the same Author for my
Counselor; (...), and being able to overthrow what is false (for so must I
think I can, and such I must take your reasons to be, as long as they persuade
me not) (...), resisting Errors without Anger, and pursuing Truth with
mildness.

Now this I must profess for my self, that since I considered any thing in
Religion, and knew that there were several of them in the world, I never
avoided to hear (at least) any man that was willing to persuade me by reason,
that any of them was the true, (...). Nay rather I have laid wait to meet with
such of all sorts, as were most likely to say most on their side (as S.
Chrysostom says of Abraham, that he did (...) lay nets for Guests) and though
almost all that undertake the search of so important a Truth, do it better,
provided, with sharpness of wit, and soliditie of judgment, yet I verily
believe that few do with that indifference and equality Which is fit for a
Judge, and with which I both began and continue it.

Yet (least there might some un-mark't prejudice lie lurking in me, and least I
might harbor some secret inclination to those Tenets which I had first been
taught) I have ever leaned, and set my Byas to the other side, and have both
more discoursed of matters of Religion with those of the Church of Rome then
with their Adversaries, and read more of their writings; though none either so
often or so carefully, as this which I am now answering, both because it was
intended for my Instruction and confutation; as also because the beauty of the
style and language, in which you have apparrelled your conceptions (although --
Non haec
Ovid. Metamorph.
Auxilio tibi sunt Decor est quaesitus ab istis,
yet) shows the Author a considerable Person, and I may say of the splendor
and outside of what you have said (for my opinion (that it wants soliditie, and
that the Logic of it is inferior to the Rhetoric) is seen by my writing
against it) what Tacitus says of Vitellius his Annie, Phalerae torquesque
splendebant, and non Vitellio principe dignus exercitus; for as he would have
had that glorious Army been employed in the defense of a better and braver
Prince, Xenophon Hist. 3.
so I wish your eloquence had gilded the better cause; (...). And (having
learned moreover from the Pagan Divinity of Hierocles (which in this is
conformable to that of most Christians) that (...), that all our search is but
the stretching forth of our hands, and that our finding proceeds from Gods
delivering the Truth unto us, and that prayer is the best means to join the
latter to the former:) I have not only with my utmost endeavors done my part;
but also besought God with my most earnest fervency to do his; and so (...),
joining Prayer to search, like form to Matter; I doubt not but God who has
given me a will, to seek his Will, also (...); Eusebius. Orat. de Laud. Constable.
and if I have not the truth already, I shall be taught the truth by him, and
by you as his Instrument, or shall be excused, if I find it not; assuring you
that I was never more ready to part with my clothes when they were torn, then
with my opinions when they were confuted, and appeared to me to be so.

To begin then with your Treatise, you can say nothing for Tradition, which I
will not willingly allow, Scripture it self being a Traditum, and by that way
coming to our knowledge, (for I am confident that those who would know it by
the Spirit, run themselves into the same Circle between Scripture and Spirit,
out of which some of your side have but unsuccessefully labored to get out
between Scripture and Church) but that this way which you propound should be
convenient to know what was Tradition at first, I can by no means agree. Which
to consider the better, I will comprehend all the strength of what you have
said in a little room, and shut up your Oration into the compass of some 3.
Sillogismes; thus you argue,

What company soever of Christians alone pretend to teach nothing but what they
have received from their Fathers, as received from theirs, as so come down from
the Apostles, that company alone must hold the truth.

But that company of Christians which are in communion with the Church of Rome
only pretend this,

Therefore they alone hold the truth, and the Church.

The Major you prove thus:

If such a company of Christians could teach falsehoods, then (since it is
granted that what was at first delivered was true) some age must either have
erred in understanding their Ancestors, or have joined to deceive their
posterity.

But neither of these are beleevable,

Therefore neither is it beleevable, that such a company of Christians should
teach falsehoods.

The Minor you prove thus; (I mean that they alone pretend it, for that they, I
mean all they, pretend it, you take for granted.)

If it be incompatible with the Church of Romes doing it, that any else should
do it, then she does it alone.

But it is incompatible,(which is denied, and not yet proved.)

Therefore she does it alone.

The several parts of this Argument, I mean first to Answer; and secondly,
Whatsoever lies scattered in your discourse any thing to this purpose, or any
other unanswered in the first part: and thirdly, I will reply to those Answers
which you have been pleased to make, to part of that Nothing which I writ,
wishing that this last work might have bin longer, I mean that by answering it
all, and in order, you had given me occasion to have dwelt more upon my Reply.

Now if I do not show that all of the Church of Rome do not, nor cannot
pretend this, that for two to pretend it is not incompatible (as having been so
heretofore) that those who alone pretend this may pretend it falsely, that some
men, and in time all may mistake their Ancestors, and have a mind in some cases
to deceive their posterity, and that it is not necessary for a whole age at
once to join in doing it, though it be done (if I say) I show not this, then
let me not be believed, and if you can show me that I have not showed it, I
will promise to believe you.

First, That the Church of Rome does not, nor cannot pretend, that all their
doctrine was received by them from their fathers as come down from the
Apostles, it appears, because when questions have risen about such things,
whereof there was before no speech, yet if a Council have determined them,
they are received with the same assent, as if they had come from the Apostles;
and they profess now the same readiness to receive always any such
definition, though about a question now unknown; and it is likely, they have
done what they profess they are ready to do; at least, they show, that yours
is not the ground upon which they build. And I pray ask your self, whether
those that teach the common people (who are the greatest part of your Church)
use to be asked about it by them, or use to tell them, that this they received
from their Fathers, as descended from the Apostles, by a continual verbal
Tradition. For suppose they told them, that [this Tradition tells us] yet they
are not able to distinguish between such as is but Ecclesiastical, and
Apostolical, or whether this be known to them only by deductions, or from
ancient books, and no such uncontinued line of teaching, and not rather
persuade them in general to believe it, what by Arguments drawn from
Scripture, what from reason, what from Fathers, Councels, or Decretals? I am
not certain what is their course, but I am sure, the most ordinary amongst the
Ancients (whom they pretend to follow) was, that when they had told the people,
that such a proposition was true, they added [neither is it I that say so, but
the Apostle, the Prophet, or the Evangelist] and mentioned the place, where
they thought such a doctrine was included, seldom speak of any verbal
Tradition (less of such a one, upon which you wholly rely) except urged to it,
when that was impudently claimed by some Heretic; and when they did (as the
Asian Bishops about Easter, Justin Martyr about the age of Christ, Saint
Austine about communicating Infants, Papius and Iraeneus about the doctrine of
the Chiliasts) then (as Lucian tells us, that when that Jugler Alexander sent to
a City a Verse to be set upon their doors to keep away the Plague, those
houses which used the remedy, were more visited then those that did not so)
those doctrines which the Fathers did grace by writing verbal Tradition in
their foreheads, were not less (perhaps more) apt to be after disbeleeved,
then the other which were not in that kind taught.

Now if the Ignorant be not expressly instructed, that upon this ground they are
to think that true, which they are bid to believe (especially where their
religion is easily enough received, only for being that of their Country) you
must allow, that the greatest part of your Church cannot, nor does not pretend,
to have received all they believe under that Notion; and to know they did, you
must have spoke with them all, or have heard them all instructed; for what is
in some places so taught, may be delivered upon other grounds in the very next
Parishes.

From the Ignorant let'us come to the learned, and see whether they do not
both believe more, and require more to be believed, then has had any such
pedigree as you imagine. First, then the great, eloquent, and judicious
Cardinal Perron, (whom I prefer so much before all those of his side that
have been Authors, that [if a Pigmy may be allowed to measure Giants] I should
think that the vast learning and industry of Bellarmine, and Baronius, might
with most advantage to their party, and no disgrace to them, have been employed
in seeking quotations for his large and monstrous understanding to have
employed them) he, I say, tells us, (and not from himself, but from Saint
Austine) that the Trinity, Penance, Free Will, and the Church, were never
exactly disputed of, before the Arrians, the Novatians, the Pelagians, and the
Donatists. Now (since without doubt the former ages disputed as well as they
could, and so could not instruct their Proselites, better then they confuted
their Adversaries) I think it evident, that more has since been concluded,
then came from Tradition, and that the way you speak of, appeared not
sufficient, either to Cardinal Perron, or Saint Austin. But because Bellarmine
(being written in a more general language) is more generally (though, I think
unjustly) esteemed then Perron, I will ask you a question of him, when he
excuses Pope John the 22th. for denying, that Saints enjoy the beatificall
vision before the day of judgment (in which he was lead by a Troop of Fathers)
because the Church had not then defined the contrary; did Bellarmine believe,
that then Christians had received from their Fathers, as from the Apostles, a
direct contrary Tradition to his doctrine? If he did, how could he think the
Pope, either possibly to be ignorant of it, or excuseable, it he stood against
it? If not, then he thought our Age beholding to our Fathers, for finding out
some truths, which had no such line to come down by; nay, which the Apostles
either taught not, or but obscurely, and so as needs Arguments to deduce it out
of their writings; at least, not so generally, but that a Pope, and many more
chief Doctors of the Church, knew not they had done so, (although you often
put us in mind, that Tertullian tells us, how in that Church which he governed,
the Apostles poured out all their doctrines with their blood) and in his time,
Fathers taught not their children so: And this objection lies against you, as
often as any of your side confess any of the Ancients (accounted Orthodox) to
have delivered any doctrine, contrary to that of the now Church of Rome, which
many of them often confess, and your self do not deny: for that they could
not have done, if an uninterrupted verbal Tradition had been then the only
rule of true doctrine, and they had known it to be so (for then they had a way
of information, which you must confess easy, since they might soon have known,
whether generally, Christians had been taught the contrary, under such a
Notion, and in such a degree, as you speak of) or the Church of Rome had not
since, either deviated from the tradition of one part, or introduced on the
other.

But because you knew, that the claim of Tradition could not serve your
Churches turn, if any other different from yours made the same; you therefore
affirm, that none does, and prove it, because two cannot do it; and in this
you must give me leave to say, that you imitate the Philosopher, who made
Arguments against Motion, though one walked before him; for though we see that
the Greek Church does it as much as the Roman, (though apt to be deceived in
the doing it, by the same ways) yet you hope to persuade us beyond our eyes,
by a reason, which indeed ends in an assertion: for, I pray, why may not two
companies of Christians, both pretend to such a Tradition, (though opposing
each other) as well as the Asian Churches and the Roman did long together,
about the celebration of Easter? But not only that it may be so, but that it
is so, you may find by Hieremy, Nilus, and Barlaam (who profess to stand to
the Scriptures, the ancient Tradition of their Fathers, and the seven first
general Councels, and they can be disproved no way, but by the same you may be
so too) over and above the confessions of your own men.

But suppose you did pretend, and alone pretend to such a Tradition, yet you
might falsely do it: for I desire you to remember, that the Apostles
delivered, as well Writings as verbal Doctrine; and whatsoever the first ages
thought to be contained there, that they might as well deliver to their
posterity, as taught them by the Apostles, as what they received by word of
mouth; since we use to say, I learnt this of such a man, when we mean from his
book, and though you strive to join verbal Tradition in commission with
Scripture, yet sure none of you can desire to thrust Scripture out quite from
being at least a part of the Rule. Now that they might err in interpreting
their writings (and an error in the chiefest then, might easily cause a
general one since) I think you will not deny, especially since to say, that
they left by Tradition every place of Scripture interpreted, would be an
evidently false assertion: for how could the Fathers then have written upon it
such differently-expounding Comments.

Secondly, How shall it appear, that there were not once two contrary
Traditions claimed by two Parts (as the Asian Church, and the Roman, whereof,
both it seems claimed a direct verbal Tradition, because one pretended to
have received theirs from Saint John, and the other, from Saint Peter, whereof
there is no word in their works) and that the erring Part did not prevail? We
know, out of the fifth of Eusebius History, that the forerunners laid claim
to Tradition, and named the very Pope, that had changed the doctrine at Rome;
which claim (how impudently soever) yet shows, that men might join to
deceive their Posterity, as pretending to a Tradition, when there was no such;
for, if you say those were but few, I answer, both that you are not certain of
their number, and since so many may join, I pray, what number is it cannot?

Thirdly, Since you must and do confess, that some Doctrines, which were not
once generally witnessed to have been delivered by the Apostles, are now
Doctrines of Faith (as the Epistle to the Hebrews was rejected by the Roman
Church in Saint Hierom's time, though to her ye use to say, that Iraeneus
would have every Church agree, and though Saint Hierom, whom you would prove to
have thought Damasus infallible, when it is known, that he thought Libertius a
Heretic, received it for all that) because you say, that these doctrines had
so much Tradition as was exceptione major, beyond exception, (though the Church
of Rome thought not so then;) does not this rest upon the Logic of those Ages,
to conclude what Testimony is so? which might easily deceive them, especially
since you confess also, that particular Traditions may be false (as you
instance in the Chiliasts) and yet the same reason, which persuaded some to
receive them, may persuade more and more in several times (and so no age need
to join, as you suppose) and so a false Tradition may grow a general one; as
it seems that of the Chiliasts (if it be one) did, so general, that Justin
Martyr says, in his time all Orthodox Christians held it.

Besides, in those things which were believed very convenient, and which yet it
was feared, that unless men thought them necessary, they would be backward to
practice, in respect of the contrariety of them to their dispositions, (as
confession) how easy was it for them to be after taught, under pain of more
danger, then at first they were delivered, with? as Physicians often tell their
Patients, unless they take such a Potion, from which they are very averse,
they must unavoidably die, though the not taking of it (even in their own
opinions) would but make them less likely to recover. Some of great authority
(moved by a good meaning) might thus deceive others; these, thus deceived,
might deceive others; till, being generally spread, other good men, being loath
to oppose them for the same reason, for which others desired to spread them,
(as we saw Erasmus, who believed your confession, not to have been instituted
by the Apostles, yet would not reprehend them that said so, thinking it an
error, that would increase Piety) they be at last taken to have been commanded
by the Apostles, without contradiction.

Indeed all the ways, by which I showed in that paper, which you vouchsafed to
answer (which I desire not to repeat, to avoid both your being wearied, and my
own, (...),) that errors might come to be general; all those are ways, by
which the same errors might come to be thought to have proceeded from
Tradition. Saint Austin, and Tertullian, agreeing in the sense of the sentence,
which we read in the latter, PLACE="marg"n="*" De Coroua.
Si legem nusquam reperio, sequitur ut Traditio consuetudini morem hunc
dederit, habiturum quandoque apostoli authoritatem ex interpretatione rationis;
and it is the more strange, that Tertullian should allow any custom the
authority of coming from the Apostles, since in the same place, he gives any
man leave to begin a custom, so it be good (which depends upon his reason,
as the reception of it does upon theirs that follow him) and so make it a
custom, in these words. Annon putas licere omni fideli concipere, and
constituere, duntaxat, quod Deo congruat, quod disciplinae conducat, quod
saluti proficiat, dicente Domino cur non and vobis ipsis quod justum est
judicatis? By which it seems, he was willing, more should be believed then was
first taught, and when that way had brought in any thing (for there is the same
reason of opinion, as of actions) and made it common, then the former Rule
serves to rivet it in, under the false Notion of coming from the Apostles, or
having at least equal authority, neither can you except against this, as said
by him when he was a Montanist, since your side uses to brag of this, and the
like places, as making for them.

To explain my meaning the fuller, give me leave to consider one question,
which shall be, the immaculate conception of the Blessed Virgin: In the first
ages it is a thing granted, that many Fathers believed her, not only not free
from Original sin, but not even from Actual; Wadd. Page 271
after this second question came to be more considered, and this first to be
defined; but yet those of the Amrmative opinion, cannot but grant to those of
the Negative, that many Fathers sided with them (or else they were impudent
Quoters, who claim three hundred) nay, Wadding p. 124.
even in Saint Thomas his time, they confess, that the Negative opinion was
the more common doctrine; and yet see I pray, how things are altered? We have
now a History of some Treaties, of two Kings of Spain with two Popes, by two
Ambassadors to persuade them to define the Affirmative. The History is written
by one Wadding an Irishman, his Secretary, there I find, that the Bishop of
Carthage, (having Order from the Ambassador his Master to desire to press,
nay almost to tear a Definition from his Holiness about it) tells him (and not
falsely) that those who hold the Negative are, Inter Catholicos soli and pauci
unius instituti viri, Page 97.
and unus and alter ab ill is edocti, but a few of one only Order, and one or
two of their Disciples. His Master bids him urge for the contrary: The opinion
and subscription of so many Prelates Orders, Page 90.
and Universities, the universal acclamation of the People, the weighty
necessity of cutting off scandals; Page 400.
nay, says he, many Universities suffer none to take Degrees without making a
Vow for the Defense of the Immaculate conception; and for the Oppugners, Page
57.
Constat eos sentire aliter, quam universa docet Ecclesia, they differ from the
Doctrine of the Universal Church: If then an opinion for which nothing is to
be said out of Antiquity, and much against it, which was even lately, the
less common opinion, could grow to be held by so great a multitude in so high
a degree, in so short a time, that the much greater part of the Church should
now press to have it defined, and that so earnestly, that to remove the
opposing Fathers out of the way, they make a confession very advantageous to us
Heretics, that many things have been defined by their Church against many
Fathers, Page 127.
you may easily see that Opinions may grow very general, nay grow to claim
Tradition in one Age that were unknown in another; for that they claim and
prove only because of the the general reception in all Apostolical Churches,
not of any such uninterrupted testimony of Fathers to their Children, that so
it has been taught in all Ages.

You may see then that all your Church goes not upon your grounds, since if
they did so, many of it that stand for the Affirmative must pretend to them,
and if they do, then sure the Pope must have confessed them to be witnesses
beyond exception, and would accordingly have defined, if they do not, then
this certain way of yours, cannot keep false opinions out of a Church, which
makes not that their Rule.

You may also see that opinions first unknown, after but particular, may come
not only to be general, and to have Tradition claimed for them, but even to
be defined; since if a General Council should now meet about this point, it
is plain (without Gods immediate working to the contrary, of nay, I am
confident, that as it is observed of the Romans that they were twice as long in
first conquering Italy, as (after) all the world; and as my Lord Bacon tells us
of one, who was wont to say, That he had first with much pains gotten a little
estate, and after with little a great one; so it is a much more short, and
easy work to bring this to a Definition, then it was before to bring it thus
far on the way toward one.

Which if it were brought (it being already almost defined, and ready to topple
into a Doctrine necessary to salvation, the contrary being forbidden to be
either printed or publicly taught) then (if you forsake not your Religion) you
must forsake the Principle, and join with Turnball, who tells us, That the
Churches supreme definition of matters of Faith is the infallible word of God,
and together with the ancient Revelation made to the Prophets and Apostles
makes up one Object, which is to be held by the Catholic Faith: By which it is
plain, he thinks more may be revealed (and then must be held) then was to the
Apostles and (by consequence) could be delivered by them, which is contrary to
what you now say.

And indeed the current of Writers of your own side either knew not this
opinion and Argument of yours, or consideringly balk it; else they might save
themselves and their Readers the labor of writing, and reading such infinite
Quotations: for though they speak often of Tradition, yet they think
themselves bound to prove it better then by the pretense of your present
Church; they pretend to receive it from the Ancient Writers, (not, say they,
that Verbal Tradition has in all Ages been taught to all men, to teach it
their children, and that it never slept,) and you are the first whom I have met
with, who build upon this; Indeed they know the Greeks have as much claim to
such a one (in truth to any) as they, and if they should say with you, that it
is incompatible for two to have it, the Greeks may as well argue upon those
grounds, that the Romans claim it not, because they do, as the Romans can,
that the Greeks lay no claim to it, because their Church does. And indeed
direct experience shows that this is not, nor has always been the ground of
Christians, that it is not (even amongst you) we see by those multitudes who
cry out to have a Doctrine defined; which is so far from having any Tradition,
(much less your kind of one for it,) that they labor with little success to
show that there is none against them, and make it plainly appear, that upon
your grounds they build not, but prove out of Metaphorical places of
Scripture, some at most but probable reasons, and the Revelations of S.
Bridget, which are contradicted by those of Saint Katharine, Wadding p. 334.
(so ill do your Saints agree in heaven, that me thinks, we may be forgiven,
if we have some differences upon earth:) That this has not been always the
way, we see by the exam-of Origin, who having been esteemed by all Christians,
as almost a Prophet, no man in his time discovering that he taught contrary to
what their Fathers had taught them, Vincent Lir.
was yet condemned many years after, his decease, and his followers counted
Heretics, by the name of Originistae, which had been impossible, if the
following Ages had thought Tradition the only fit Rule to judge by, and
accounted nothing Tradition, but what they received from their Fathers in
express terms: But if the opinions of Doctors, counted the Gnomons and Canons
of Truth (for to that purpose speaks Nazianzene of Athanasius, Wadd. Page 282
and Saint Austine of Nazianzene, and Pope Pius the fifth of Saint Thomas,
calling his doctrine, the certainest rule of Christian religion, a title denied
to Scripture) the definitions of Councels counted the highest Tribunals upon
earth, assisted by the power of Emperors, which might do much, when almost
all were under one (as may be seen by the multitude which followed Constantine,
to Christianity, and Julian from it, and by Constantius (as is complained)
(...) in the twinkling of an eye, transforming an Orthodox world into an
Arrian) if these ways, I say, might make a Tenet general, though no Tradition
had come down at all concerning it; and after it please to claim by a Tenure,
by which it came not in at first, encouraged by some Rule of some Fathers to
that purpose (as some Frenchmen say of Cardinal Richelieu, that since he had
that title, he claims to have come from better Ancestors then he aimed at,
being an ordinary Person; and Harry the seventh, though he came to the Crown by
his Wives right, yet would hold it by his own) and none after oppose that
claim, some not doing it, because they think the opinion true, and then care
not though it be believed upon false inducements, some as being ignorant that
ever it was less general (which before the late and happy resurrection of
learning, the best read Persons of their time might often be) how deceiving a
way is yours, to discover what all ages have thought, by what now a part of the
present teaches, upon what pretense soever, which when you have considered,
and not only that, what I have said may be, but by several examples (whereof
I will touch some) that so it is, and has been, then I hope you will be so
far from expecting that I should be moved by your Arguments, that your self
will wonder that ever you were.

First then, that the Chiliasts are Heretics, or your Church not infallible,
which counts them so, is most certain, and most plain, and if you be in the
right, and that she teaches nothing, but what she has received
uninterruptedly down from the Apostles, then they must always have been
esteemed so by Christians; whereas their doctrine is so far from having any
Tradition against it, that if any opinion, whether controverted, or
uncontroverted (except that Scripture which never was doubted) may without
blushing pretend to have that for it, it must be this of theirs. My Reasons are
these:

The Fathers of the purest Ages (who were the Apostles Disciples but once
removed) did teach this, [as received from them, who professed to have received
it from the Apostles, and who seemed to them witnesses beyond exception, that
they had done so, they being better Judges what credit they deserved, then
after comers could possibly be.

All other opinions, witnessed by any other Ancients to have Tradition, may
have been by them mistaken to have been, so, out of Saint Austin's and
Tertullian's rules: whereas for this, and for this alone, are delivered the
very words, which Christ used when he taught it.

Of the most glorious and least infirm building, which ever in my opinion was
erected to the honor of the Church of Rome, Cardinal Perron was the Architect
(I mean his book against King James) and that relies upon these two pillars,
that whatsoever all the Fathers (he means, sure, that are extant) witness to
be Tradition, and the doctrine of the Church, that must be received for the
doctrine of those ages, and so rested upon: If these rules be not concluding,
then the whole book being built upon them, necessarily becomes as
unconsiderable for what he intended it, as Bevis or Tom Thumb: If they be, then
this doctrine, which is now heretical in your Churches belief was the opinion
of the Ancient Church. For if being taught by the Fathers of any Age, none
contradicting it, be sufficient, this all for above two Ages (and those the
first) teach, not any Father opposing it before Dionysius Alexandrinus (250,
years after Christ at least) that we know, or Saint Hierome, or Saint Austine
knew and quoted; wherein I note, besides, that both these Fathers, either
thought that no sign of the opinion of the Church, or cared not though it were.

And if Fathers speaking as witnesses will serve, let Pappias and Irenaeus be
heard, and believed, who tells us it came to them from Christ by Verbal
Tradition, and Justine Martyr, who witnesses that in his time all Orthodoxe
Christians held it, and joins the opposers with them who denied the
Resurrection, and esteems them among the Christians like the Sadduces among
the Jews: which proves that you have the same reason expallescere audito
Ecclesiae nomine, to grow pale at the mention of the Ancient Church, Camp.
(the nearest to the Apostles) as we have to start at that of two hundred years
ago, and to be ashamed of your Dionysius Alexandrinus, as we of Luther: Thus
that great Atlas of your Church has helped us to pull it down the same ways,
by which he intended to support it, and though he have best of any undergone
the burden of proving that to be infallible, which is false, yet he must have
confessed, that either these are not proofs, or they prove against himself. And
this advantage we have, that unless you prove your own infallibility (which
you will never be able to do) in what point soever you confute us, that falls
like a Pinnacle without carrying all after it; whereas if we disprove any one of
your Religion, we disprove consequently that infallibility, which is the
foundation of it all: so that (like them who use poisoned weapons) wheresoever
we wound, we kill, but we are like those creatures, which must be killed all
over, or else their other parts will remain alive.

Neither must you think that you have answered the Chiliasts by tying them to
the Carpocratians and the Gnostics, (which is but like Mezentius his joining
Mortua corpora vivis, dead bodies to the living) since the opinions of the two
latter, as soon as they were taught, made the teachers accounted Heretics and
were opposed by almost all, whereas that of the first, found in above two
ages, no resistance by any one known and esteemed Person, and the teachers of
it were not only parts, but principal ones of the Catholic Church, and such
as ever have been, and are reputed Saints; though, by I know not what subtlety
you dispense with your selves for departing from what doctrine was received
from them as come down from the Apostles, and yet threaten us with damnation if
we will not believe more improbable Tenets to be Tradition upon less
Certificate. For as Aristotle says (...), Ethics.
Wine measures to buy with are great, and to sell by are small; so when you are
to put a doctrine to us, how small a measure of Tradition would you have us
take? one place of one Father, speaking but as a Doctor, seems enough: but
when you are to receive any from us, how large and mighty a measure will yet
give you no satisfaction? Neither can I find out what it is by which you
conclude, that their Tradition was gathered the Heretical way from private
discourse with the Apostles: Irenaeus indeed tells us, that Presbyteri
meminerunt, one of which Pappias was, but not a word that it was delivered in
secret, or the auditors but few, nor that others had not heard other disciples
teaching the same doctrine; and me thinks that if you had evinced what you
desire (as you seem to me not to do, unless to affirm be to prove) it would
make more against you; sure if from so small a ground as the word of one only
disciple, that he in private discourse was taught this by the Apostles, a false
doctrine could so generally be received by all the first Doctors of the
Christian Church, and that so long after Dionysius Alexandrinus had used his
great Authority to destroy it: Saint Hierome was yet half afraid to write
against it, as seeing how many Catholics he should enrage against himself by
it, as he testifies in his Proem to the eighteenth Book of his Comment upon
Isaiah; what suspicions must this raise in the minds of those of your own
party, least what they esteemed Tradition, had at first no greater a beginning,
and no firmer foundation, but only better fortune; for why might not the same
disciple have cozn'd them from whom their belief is descended in twenty other
things, as well as in this? and why not twenty others as well as he? especially
since you confess some of your doctrine not to have had Universal Tradition,
but only Tradition enough; which if those Fathers did not think they had had,
for this, they would never have received it, but have excepted against the
Heretical way of their delivery, if they had known that to be a private one,
and a private one to be such, and if they were so deceived in this way, might
not they, and more have been so too in other points, and in time all?

If you say (as it has been said to me by one whose judgment I value, as much
as any one of your Party) that if this opinion had indeed had Tradition, it
could never have been so totally extinguished. I answer, that I affirm not,
that it had, but only that if the rules of your part be good and valid, then
it had; I am sure it has better color to plead upon, then any of those other
doctrines, which you impose upon us: Besides although it had, yet when Doctors
of great authority with the people, had won upon many, first not to think it
Tradition, and then not true, and lastly their courage increasing with their
multitude, (for Saint Hierome durst not call it) had made it accounted an
Heresy, it is not strange that none should rise to oppose it; for by that time
burning was come in fashion, which was a ready way to answer all objections,
and end all controversies, especial Piety being grown more cold, and so men
less apt to suffer for opinions, and the times more ignorant, and so men less
able to examine what had been believed before them. But you who affirm, that
your Church receives nothing, but what has come to her by Verbal Tradition
down from the Apostles, must not only destroy the Arguments, which prove this
to have had Tradition, (which you, or any else will be never able to do) but
must affirm, that the contrary has such, which yet their most ancient opposers
never pretended too, but scoft at the opinion as rediculous and savouring of
Judaisme, which as wise men, and as good Christians, as they, before them
believed to be Orthodox.

Let us next consider that controversy which more afflicted the Church, and
for a longer time then any other, that between the Arrians and their
Adversaries, and let us see, whether even against those there were any such.
Tradition as you speak of. First then I pray mark what Cardinal Perron
confesses, Lib. Con. R. Jac. Page 633.
that an Arrian will be desirous to have his cause tried by those Authors we
now have, which lived before the Question arose; for there, says he, will be
found the Son is the instrument of his Father, The Father commanded the Son,
when things were to be made, the Father and the Son are aliud and aliud, which
who should at this day say, now the language of the Church is better examined,
would be accounted an Arrian. Now though there be no reason for you to
disbelieve so learned a Prelate in a matter of Fact (especially since (...))
yet if you please to reconsider those Authors seriously, if you have not marked
it before (as Praejudication blinds extremely) you will then confess it; Sure
then if Fathers in the first ages taught their Children, that so they had
received from theirs, as the doctrine of the Apostles, how could the chief
Pillars of Christianity have been ignorant of it? or if they knew it, how would
they ever have written so directly against their knowledge. For that answer
which Saint Hierome gives (as Saint Austine to the Pelagians) that before
Arrius arose, the Ecclesiastical Writers spoke minus caute, with less
circumspection, though it brings some salve to the present objection, yet it is
a weapon against Tradition in general, for if through want of care the best
and wisest men used to contradict Tradition, (as you must grant they did) then
sure much more likely, when they taught by word of mouth, when less care is
always used, then in Books, and how then can any age be sure, that by this
reason (of minus caute loquuti sunt) their Ancestors have not mistaken their
Fathers, and mislead their Posterity? Look but into Athanasius, and see but
what he answers to what is brought against him out of Dionysius Alexandrinus,
truly in my opinion when he strives to make it Catholic Doctrine, he does it
with no less pulling, and halling, then Sancta Clara uses to agree the
articles of the English Church with the Tenets of the Roman. Consider what
eighty Bishops, and those Orthodoxe, decreed against Paulus Samosatenus, and if
you make it consent with Athanasius his Creed, I shall believe that you have
discovered a way how to reconcile both Parts of a Contradiction: This I say,
not as intending by it to prove the Arrian opinion to be true, but that the
contrary Party insisted not upon your grounds, but drew their belief out of
Scripture, for if there had been such a common and constant Verbal Tradition,
the chief Christians would not through want of Caution have contradicted it,
neither could Constantine, if it had been then as known a Part of the Christian
Religion, as Christ's Resurrection, have ever so slightly esteemed the
Question, when it first arose, neither would Alexander the Bishop of Alexandria
have remained any while in suspense, as Zozomen says he did, (...); but this
being then a Question newly started and spoken of before but by Accidents, and
so peradventure minus caute, (for the same Author says, that they did (...))
they were therefore feign to try it by Scripture, (esteeming Written Tradition,
as sufficient a Rule, as Verbal) as you may see by Constantine's own words at
the Council of Nice, (...), Theodoret.
(...). The Books of the Evangelists, and the Apostles, and the Oracles of the
Ancient Prophets teach us clearly what we are to think of the Divinity. Let us
therefore cut of these Divinity-inspir'd discourses, seek the solutions of our
Questions, which being the Emperors Proposition, and passing uncontradicted
(which the Bishops would not have suffr'd it to do, if they had known yours to
be so much the best, and most certain way, and this so hazardous as you
suppose) we have reason to believe that they for want of your direction made
the Scripture their Rule, and sought out for Truth by the same way, that we
damnable Heretics do, and by that condemned the Arrians, as not having such a
Tradition as you speak of, (or if they had, which is very unlikely) counting it
so insufficient, as that they were not to conclude by that. Neither did only
that ancient, (and not yours) Council, but even your own Modern ones show,
that they went upon other grounds, since to have had every Bishop asked what he
received from his Teachers, as received from theirs, as come down from the
Apostles, would sure have been the shortest way to find Truth, and if they had
thought it the best too, it would have saved the Friars at Trent many a long
dispute out of Scripture, Fathers, and Reason, and the Bishops many a weary
session before any thing could be determined, or the Parties brought to agree.
Besides there is another reason (if I may be pardoned a little insisting upon
my digression) which persuades me that your own Councels define not upon your
grounds (that is) because suppose a thousand Catholic Bishops meet and define
any thing, yet we know it is not among you believed de Fide, without it be
confirmed by the Pope; which shows plainly enough, that you think not they
went by such a Tradition, since of that eighty, so many persons from so many
several Parts are witnesses beyond exception, according to your own grounds,
and that their Infallibility is not thought to depend upon an Impossibility;
that (in the matter of Fact what has been taught under that Notion) they
should either deceive, or be deceived, but upon an infallible assistance of the
Holy Ghost, which may be wanting to any company, whereof the Pope is no part,
or of whose decrees he is no confirmer. Now to return to my proofs, that
against the Arrians there was no such Tradition as you speak of, (at least,
that was the ground upon which they were condemned,) consider, if you please,
that in that Epistle which Eusebius of Caesarea writ to some Arrians after the
Council of Nice, he says, First, that they assented to the word (...),
Consubstantiall, because also they knew (...), some eloquent and illustrious
Bishops and Writers had used the Term: In which I note, that neither claimed
he any such Verbal Tradition for this as you speak of, and of that sort which
he claimed, he names only (...) some, as knowing too many had writ otherwise
to give such a Tradition leave to be general.

Secondly, He says, they consented to Anathematize the Contradictors, (...),
to hinder men from using unwritten words, by which he says (and that truly)
that all confusion has come upon the Church. And if it be asked why the same
reason made them not keep out the word (...), I answer, That I believe (or else
he is not constant to his own reason) that he meant only those words to be
unwritten, which were in Scripture, neither themselves, nor equivalently,
whereas he took (...) to be in the Scripture in the latter sense: And that by
written, he meant in the Scripture only, appears by what follows, that no
divinely-inspired writing ((...)) using the Arrians Phrase, it was neither
fitting to say nor teach them: Neither can you say that Eusebius being himself
a secret Arrian prevaricated herein, for Theodoret makes this Epistle an
Argument against than, which he would not have done, if either it had seemed to
him to say any thing contrary to the Catholic doctrine, or not to have
opposed the contrary by a Catholic way, at least without giving his leader
some Caution concerning it.

All which reasons move me to think, that the generality of Christians had not
been always taught the contrary to Arrius's doctrine, but some one way, others
the other, most neither, as having been only spoken of upon occasions, and
therefore me thinks you had better either say with the Protestants, that the
Truth was concluded (as Constantine said it should be) by Arguments from
Scripture, or (as some of your own say of other points) that before the
Council it lay in Archivis Ecclesiae, in the Deskes of the Church, then claim
such a Tradition for it, as appears it can never be defended that it had.

Let us consider but two opinions more:

That Infants are not to receive the Eucharist, is now both the doctrine and
practice of the Roman Church, but six hundred years the Church used it; Saint
Austine accounted it necessary at least in some sense of the word, if not
absolutely (which last is most likely, because from the necessity of that,
which could not be received but by them who had received Baptism, he, and
Innocentius a Pope, prove the necessity of Baptism) and an Apostolical
Tradition. If therefore both these Ages had gone by your Rule, how comes this
difference between their opinions, the Sacrament being the same it was, and the
Children the same they were?

This I may consider, and see if the same way that this Doctrine has been
altered, whether any other might not have received change?

Next, that Saints are invocable, you must say, is Tradition taught from Father
to Son, as derived from the Apostles, if you will be constant to your own
principle, now though I might disprove this, first by the many Fathers that
believed, the Just not to be admitted to the Beatificall vision before the day
of judgment (for upon this your side now grounds that) but to be kept in
secret receptacles, and by the long time which passed before this doctrine was
condemned: Secondly, by the beginning of it, which was particular Doctors
Hipotheticall prayers, with (...), and such conditional clauses: And thirdly,
by Nicephorus Calistus his Relation (who in this is a believable witness,
because he allows of your opinion) that prayers to the Virgin Mary were first
brought into the public Liturgy by one Petrus Gnapheus a Heretic, about five
hundred years after Christ, Lib. 15. C. 28
yet I will rather choose to confute this by the confession of Sancta Clara out
of Horantius, who to this objection, that sub Evangelio (which must mean when
the Gospel was preached) no such precept is extant, Page 271.
not only denies it not, but gives this reason for it, least the Pagans should
think themselves brought again to the worshipping of Men instead of Gods: If
upon this or any other reason this were not then taught, then have not all your
Doctrines such a Pedigree as you suppose, but allow it were, yet, howsoever it
follows, that, some, at least, of the learned of your Church have not been
taught that they have, or consequently that it is necessary they should have:
Though it seems to me little less then Montanisme to believe that any since
(as it were a Paraclet) should perfect the doctrine which then was delivered by
the Apostles: Neither can you answer that they speak only of such a Precept,
and of being extant, whereas they might teach it lawful without giving any
Precept, and they might have given such a Precept although not extant; for I
should readily reply, that the reason they give why there is none such extant,
shows, that they mean there was none at all, neither Precept, nor allowance,
since the Pagans would have been scandalized at its being accounted lawful to
worship men instead of Gods, although it were not commanded, and not a whit the
less, whether that in after times were extant or not, which they could not
foresee.

The only answer which I am able to invent in your behalf, is this, that
though some of your particular doctrines have not such a Tradition, yet there
being a Tradition that the Churches definitions are infallible, whatsoever she
at any time define, is then to be believed upon the strength of such a
Tradition, and before did latere in causis as Flowers do in Winter.

Yet to this I may reply by desiring you to enter with me into some few
considerations.

First, If this were so, and that so much of Christian Religion depends upon
the definitions of the Church, and our Reception of them, upon knowing always
which is she, and that such is her authority, can you persuade your self, that
Christ sending his Apostles and Disciples to Preach the Gospel, and after four
of them writing his Gospel, (which shows if the Books be true to the title,
that they writ all they preached, at least that was necessary; for else they
were not Gospels, but Parts of it) that they should not rather leave out any
thing else, how important soever, then not have employed themselves about
teaching us, that the Churches Definitions are a Rule of our Faith, and
instructing us in Marks so proper to her, that we might never need to doubt,
whether it be she that defines or no, and whether their not having done this,
evince not in Reason that this your Doctrine is false?

Secondly, I pray consider whether if there were any such continued Tradition
about the Definitions of the Church, whether that must not also have taught,
(or else have been to small purpose) when it is that the Church has defined:
but yet that is a case not fully judged among you, For some hold, that the
Church has defined when a Council has, although unapproved by the Pope, which
is denied by others.

Thirdly, Consider whether (supposing as was before supposed) it must not also
have taught certain Notes to know the Church by: but yet about those you are
not agreed, Tom. 13. Page 193.
Salmeron putting Miracles among the false Signs of the Church, and Bellarmine
and many more among the True ones.

Fourthly, Consider whether the Church have an eternal spring of Doctrines
within her, or but a finite number, and only those which the Apostles preached:
and I believe you will pitch upon the latter. Not then to ask how they come to
know them, nor, if you answer by Tradition, to ask you again how come men then
not to know (before a Definition) what it is they Preached? for if the Bishops
(of which a Council is compounded) know it not now, how will they know it when
they meet? I will desire to know why the Church will not at once teach us all
the knows, and not keep us in doubts, which she may resolve? and did the,
Apostles teach their Doctrines to be locked up, or taught to us? And then having
considered this, you will find I believe, that the Church do with Doctrines, as
Fathers with Estates, never give their Children all, that they may still have
something to keep them in awe with; because if she should, she could never have
after pretended a Power to end any new emergent controversy, keeping in secret
what she knows, any that arises, she may still pretend is endable by her.

Fifthly, Consider that it will appear but a shift, if you say that there is a
Tradition that all the Churches Definitions be true, and so excuse the
particular Doctrines, for otherwise having none, and yet avoid giving us any
Rules to know the Church by at all times, and answering those Questions, which
must be ended before we can know at any time when she has defined.

Now I confess if you had said Tradition teaches, that the particular Church
of Rome is so the Admiral ship, that we may know any other if it be of God's
Fleet, because then it must follow her, that is, be subject to her decrees, and
theirs which join with her, this would have bin plainly to let me know your
mind, and we might quickly have examined, whether there were any Tradition for
the Church in this sense to be always obeyed when she Teaches, and without you
say this, you say nothing, and will never be able to give any such Note of the
Church, as the ignorant may without blushing pretend to know it by: Because
therefore I guess, that when not I, but your Adversaries reasons (for I am but
one of the worst transcribers of them) have driven you from your own Fort, you
must retire to that of your friends, or like them which are drowning, you will
rather catch at a Twigg, then sink: I will consider this Assertion, which I
suppose you must lay hold of so far forth as to show it to be indeed but an
Assertion. That there has no such Verbal Tradition (nor indeed any) come
down, seems to me for these reasons.

Saint Cyprian by opposing the Church of Rome, and that with many Bishops about
the Rebaptization, shows sufficiently, that he and they knew of no such
Tradition; and then in what Cave must it have lain hid, if the chief Doctor of
that age was ignorant of it, and even his Adversaries claimed it not? And that
he knew no such, appears not only by his Actions, but also by his words; for
to them who claimed Tradition for the particular point proposed, (though none
for the Authority of the Church proposing) he answers, if it be contained in
the Gospels, Epistles, or Acts, let it be observed, at one blow cutting off not
only that (for sure this authority of the Church of Rome is no way taught in
the Scriptures) but all other unwritten Traditions, which Cardinal Perron,
thought most skillful in that kind of Fence, was not able to ward, but Du
Plesis objecting it received no other answer, then that the opinion of Cyprian
was condemned, and that Tradition, although unwritten, maintained. Which answer
though it be as far from befitting the Cardinal, as from answering the
objection (since it is plain, that this opinion was once held by such as were
of chief estimation among the Orthodox, and consequently the contrary was not
then the general and necessary doctrine of Christians, and the prevailing of
the one since proves not the other false, but rather unfortunate, or the
spreaders (faulty) yet I confess I excuse him, for as I have learnt from
Aristotle, that it is ridiculous to expect a Demonstration where the matter
will bear but a probability, so would it be in me to expect even a probable
solution of an Argument, the evidence of which will suffer none at all.

Neither was he (I mean Cyprian) the first, that without blot of Heresy
opposed the Tradition of the Church of Rome, but that courage which he left to
others after him, when they saw the Christian World join in counting him a
Saint, and a Martyr, whom the Bishop of Rome had styled a false Christ, and a
false Apostle, the same had he received by seeing that the Asian Bishops had
also rejected, and opposed her Tradition; and yet Policrates ever had in great
honor, and the rest never branded with the crime of Heresy; nay, even the
more neighboring Bishops, and who joined with the Pope in the time of
celebrating Easter (as Iraeneus) yet thought the difference not worth
excommunication, and for want of skill in the Canon Law, transgrest so far as
to reprehend for it, whereas if to that Church all else had been to conform
themselves, then Iraeneus ought therefore to have thought the matter of weight
enough, because she thought it so, who were to small purpose made a Judge, if
she were not as well enabled to distinguish between slight and material, as
between False and Truth, though that it seems she was not: for the Church of
Rome never refused their Communion before, though she knew them to hold the
same opinion, and so (as plainly appears) counted that material in one Age,
which she had not so esteemed in others, and therefore (in the degree at least
of holding what she held) contradicted herself, and followed Traditions.

And as Cyprian imitated them, so did the Affrican Bishops him, for a Question
happening between them and the Bishops of Rome about Appeals, though they
absolutely opposed him, and (in vain I confess) desired him that he would not
bring into the Church Typhum hujus Saeculi, the swelling pride of this World,
and though he labored infinitely in the business (...), that he might bring
it to pass, yet he, and two of his successors were either so unready, or so
unskil'd in the present Roman Doctrine, that Feed my sheeep, and thou art
Peter, were either out of their knowledge, or out of their memory, and they
alleged, not any power jure divino, but only pretended to a Cannon of the
Council of Nice, which when the Affricans found not in their coppies, (for they
would not believe the Church of Rome so far as to trust to hers, though now
you generally think the Scripture it self to have its authority quoad nos,
only for her definitions) they sent to the East to enquire there, and finding
their coppies agreeing with theirs, they then more resolutely withstood the
Pretense, which brought at that time nothing to the Popes, but repulse and
shame.

And indeed, not to object that it is not numbered among any of the ancient
Herisies, that they differed from the particular Roman Church, nor is this
Rule, of being sure at all times to join with her, ever given by those Fathers
who set us ways and Antidotes how to secure our selves against Heresy, (which
could not have been left undone if they had known any such Tradition) nor to
speak of the Cannon of the Council of Chalcedon, which attributes the power of
the Popes to the gift of their Fathers, and that again to Romes being the head
City; setting all this aside, I will ask your self if it be not plain that
those Fathers, who (upon the impudent pretense of some Heretics) send men to
several places to enquire after Tradition, either send them to all the
Apostolical churches, or (to save their labor) to that to which they were
nearest, as esteeming them all of equal authority (though not jurisdiction)
for I may say of Rome, and them, as Tacitus does of Caelius and the other
Commanders ( Mutato nomine) the name only changed) Pares jure, Roma audendo
potentior, for what by watching all occasions to greaten herself, whereof
Cardinal D' Ossat is my witness, Page 208. and 687.
what by abusing the respect all men had ever given her, in respect of the
chief Apostles which founded her, of the Empire which was long seated in her,
and of her ancient Bishops, whereof about thirty together were martyred there,
what by interpreting what was given to her Authority, as given to her Power,
and taking civilities and complements (of which no Court is now so full as the
ancient Bishops were) made to Popes for alleagiance sworn to them, what by
forging false decretall Epistles (which the Termed Authors of them would not
forgive them for, if they knew it, if it were only for the barbarous language)
what by these, and such other ways, she is come at length to that pass, that
what Avitus a Roman General said to the Ansibarians, who gave him reasons why
he ought not in justice to disturb their possessions, Id Diis placitum,
Tacitus.
ut Arbitrium penes Romanos maneret quid darent, quidve adimerent, neque alios
Judices quam seipsos paterentur. It is the will of Heaven, that it be left to
the Romans what they will please to give or take away, and suffer not any
Judges but themselves, appears now not so much a History of the Pride of the
Roman Empire, as a Prophecy of the general doctrine or the Roman Church.

Having ever marked Error and Confidence to keep so much company, that I
seldom find the first, but I mistrust the second, makes me loath to affirm
any thing over-dogmatically out of these objections, or say that they cannot be
answered; Only (because I must not offend against Truth, for fear of
offending against Modesty) I will take leave to say, that if I could have
answered them my self, I would not have put you to the trouble of doing it,
which you might also have saved, if by letting me know your name, you would
have enabled me to have found you out, and so in a short discourse have tried
whether I could have obtained that satisfaction from your words, which I must
now expect from your Pen. But supposing I had none of these objections, yet two
things besides would have kept me from assenting to what you say: The first is,
that your men, when they ask us how we know Scripture to be Scripture, and
this to be the sense of it, tell us withal, that unless we know it by some
more infallible way then our own Reason (they mean their Church) it will not
serve for a belief of those things which are to be believed by a divine Faith;
Now this Argument of yours upon, which you build all, (allowing that it
appeared good reason) yet at most it is but reason, and liable to the same
exceptions, unless the same thing be a wall when you lean upon it, and a
bulrush when we do. The second is, that all you say (for as yet you speak not
of the Authority of the Particular Church of Rome, though you must at length
come to it, though by that too little is to be gotten) if it were granted,
would but prove those who adhere now to the Church of Rome to be now in the
right, but I asked for a guide, which might without new search serve me the
next year, as well as this; For (for all that you have proved) she may leave
the way you say she now pretends to walk in, and attempt to reform too, (which
I wish were as probable as it is possible) or there may arise a schism between
two parts of those Churches which now adhere to the Roman, and both may claim
Tradition, (for what has been may be again) and how shall I know then which
side to take, since both will seem equally good by that Touchstone which you
appoint me to try with. And if I be then sent to try by Ancient Writers, it is
certain, that (besides the fallibility of that way for the learned) this
cannot be done at all by the ignorant, and it is probable that both Parties
will fall into that absurdity, into which the Church of Rome daily runs, which
is, that although the evidence which she claims by cannot well be exactlie
read over in thirty years time, yet she requires us under pain of Damnation
to give our Verdicts for her by twenty years old.

The Second Part.
THe high and Sage Master of our Faith has in vain spent so much sweat, and
pains, if after he passed from hence, he has left no means to assure
mankind, what it was he taught and practiced.

Plato, and Aristotle have not left us means to know what they taught,
although they have not left us any living infallible Judge to deliver us their
doctrine verbally, or to expound their works: Or if you intended your Accent
upon the word Asiure, and if you mean by that some infallible knowledge, I
desire you (out of your own words) to consider whether humane nature be capable
of it. For my part supposing as I do, that his Faith is in a sufficient
degree, which brings forth obedience, I require not any motives more, assuring
(except from them who claim, that they cannot err) then such as any man
unpraepossest with passion or prejudice will believe sufficiently to obey; and
such in my opinion are mine: For though I know, you count any way without a
guide but groping in the dark, yet if God had nor given us so much light as we
desired, we must not therefore set up false lights, and because we would be
sure to have a guide, make one our selves: But he seems to me, to have dealt
with us in Religon not very un-analogically, to what he has in the world,
giving us two lights, Scripture, and Universal Tradition, whereof one gives
light to the other, and both to us: Universal Tradition is our Guide to
Scripture (as whatsoever else that guided us to we would receive, if there were
any such thing) and Scripture is our way to God; By Universal Tradition we
know much better, that these Books were written by Christ's Disciples (who are
sufficient witnesses of what he taught) then the Aristotelians know that these
were Aristotle's works, or the Academicks knew Plato's, since Christians have
both kept them with more care, and in the acceptance of them used more caution,
as thinking them so much more important: In the Scripture I conceive, that
(according to that rule, which I am sure I have either read in Chrysostom, or
very often quoted out of him) (...), all that is necessary is clear, or if any
man that strives to square both his actions and opinions by that Rule, chance
to fall into any error (for which his understanding is only in fault and not
his will) it shall not hinder his rising to heaven: Such an infallible way
excludes, if not all use, at least all necessity of an infallible guide, and is
as good as a Judge to keep Unity in Charity (which is only needful) though
not in opinions; and indeed since you must grant, that if any man mis-interpret
the Council of Trent, it shall not damn him, so he doubt not of its truth,
desire to discover what it meant, and be in a Propension of believing, that
when he knows it, me thinks (as Cineas told Pirrhus) you had as good do that
at first, which you must do at last, that is, say the same with us at first
concerning Scripture, which after much trouble, you are forced to say
concerning Councels, and in hard matters let the same implicit Faith in God
serve, which serves in them, who can claim no authority but from, and under
him: And (which is more then I affirm) that no man, but by his own, being
wicked, can come into any error by false interpretation of Scripture, see I
pray, what Saint Austine says in his forty ninth Sermon de Verbis Domini, that
God has so hedged in all his own sayings, that whosoever would interpret any
place of Scripture false, he that has a circumcised heart by reading what is
before and after, may find that sense which the other would pervert.

Yet if you can show me reason to believe that there is any standing guide upon
earth (and without reason it were unreasonable to hope to persuade me to
believe it) I will never be proud so much to my own cost, as rather to venture
loosing my way by choosing it my self, then be beholding to him for directing
me in it.

Those to whom during his life, he had most fully declared his mind, went and
told it to others, and all was done; But this way has the prejudice of humane
Fallibility, for seldom it happens, that a multitude can carry away all in the
same manner, and one thousand six hundred years are passed since, yet if we
look into the immediate joints of the descent, we cannot find where it can
miss: for the doctrine being supernatural, and not delivered by any man's
skill, or wit, the maine principle of it can be no other, then to know what was
delivered them by their Teachers: when therefore an Apostle had preached over
and over again the same Doctrine, not long, nor hard to be carried away in all
the Towns of a Country, and let him be gone, and all dead who heard him
speak, and some questions arise concerning his doctrine, let us see whether
error can creep in if Christians keep to their hold, that is, what they were
taught by Christ's Apostles. Let therefore the wisest and best of those Towns
meet and discuss the controversy out of this principle, will not there be a
quick end of their dispute? For every man can say, Thus my Father heard the
Apostle speak, and what is here certain of the Children of those who heard
them, may with as much evidence be derived again in the Grandchildren, and so
in every age.

Aristotle also has told all that have read him, and experience daily tells
mankind; since therefore a small mistake increases as much, and as speedily as
a grain of mustard seed, I must the earnestlier contradict this (...), this
first error of yours, as being the Parent of so many more already, and being
likely in time (if by being confuted it be not used as Sature used his Father)
to have yet a more large and numerous Issue.

put into paper, which were as if the Kings verbal Commands bound us, bat not
his Proclamations.) Then here appears a gate at which errors might enter,
which you (at least I am sure this part of your Treatise) did not consider.

Archi-Catholicks, Socrat. lib. 5.
for I pray, must not one of those two have been done, or by the Church of
Rome, or by those of Asia (which example I would not so often speak of, but
that I hope (...) is as good an excuse, as (...):) For since it is impossible,
that Saint John and Sain Peter both inspired by the Holy Ghost, which is the
Spirit of Truth, should teach contradictorie doctrines, whereof one must
necessarily be false, what else can follow, but that one part (if not both)
intended to deceive, or were themselves deceived in it (and what makes it
impossible, that such a mistake by men of authority may not generally spread)
and after a plain example your reason will be no more able to overthrow
experience, then the earthen Pitcher, in the Fable, was to break the Brazen
one, (...).

One of the Arguments you make for the infallibility of the way which you
propound, is, That the Doctrine, which the Apostles taught was neither long nor
hard to he carried away, Out off which me thinks I can evidently deduce that
the Church of Rome is not that, since both it appears how long that s, and
since you tell us your self, That the cause of many errors among you is the
multiplicity of Catholic Doctrines, which does not oblige a man o the
knowledge of every Part, but to a prompt subjection to the Church. Truly if
there be no contradiction between these two Propositions, I will confess that
I have hitherto mistaken what the word signifies, unless you mean, that the
Apostle by teaching subjection to the Church indusively, taught all that she
teaches, and so what they delivered was short, but what implicitly, much; If
this were so, certainly the Apostles, when they included almost all their
doctrine in the subjection enjoined to the Church, taught some certain marks
by which men might at all times know her, though you pretend to none hut such
as the Greek Church as much claim (which is enough to scruple the ignorant)
and rightly too, as the Roman (as Antiquity, Succession, Miracles, etc.)
excepting only communion with the Pope, and splendour, whereof neither are
proper marks of the true Church, that is such as can never be absent from her,
since the Heresy of a Pope (which has been, and is not by your own whole
Church held impossible) may take away the one way, and a general Persecution
the other.

It appears also by what you speak of the immediate join es of the descent,
Rome joined to teach their Posterity Italian instead of Latin, but some may
have taught a Doctrine to be probable in one Age, more then in the second, and
all in the third, according to Seneca's observation. The error of few
(especially when Notable Persons) begetting the error of a multitude; and
again the authority of a multitude deceiving Particular men, and so by degrees
it may be thought from Probable, True, from true fere de Fide, from that
absolutely a part of Faith, and consequently to have come from Tradition,
whilst the contrary opinion being first believed the more improbable, next
false, from false Temerary, from temerary, Haeresi proximum, and from that
absolutely Heretical, has by almost insensible degrees met with a mighty
change, and is arrived at Hell before it almost misdoubted it. And that these
progresse-Doctrines have traveled, it is easy for any man to see who has been
but a little conversant in your own Books, and whosoever denies it, may as well
deny that their is any green in Summer, when there is hardly any thing else.

And for the Case you put, that the wisest, and best of the Towns where
Doctrines were delivered should have met etc. I both suppose, that the
controversy of who were best and wisest, would not it self have been easily
ended, but allowing that it might have been easily done, and would have been
most usefully done, yet it never was; and so suppose the way never so good, it
was yet like a Medicine, which be it never, so Sovereign, can never cure if it
be never taken; Counsels there have been called Ancient, because less Modern,
and general, because less particular (for the first was not till more then
three hundred years after Christ, nor to the largest appears it, that ever
any were summoned from beyond the bounds of the Ancient Roman Empire, though
Christianity were much farther extended: Some less meetings or Conciliabula
there were indeed before, but none of these accounted infallible by your selves
(though me thinks they should by your grounds) and indeed it would go ill with
your own infallibility if you should, for of the two most notable, the one
defended Rebaptization, and the other condemned Samosatenus, and in doing so
taught as plain Arrianisme, (if we might know men's meaning by their words,
which if we cannot, all arguing, especially from what any Authors say, is
ended) as even Arrius himself was condemned for at Nice; If these intended to
discuss the Controversy out of the Principle you speak of, and yet missed
Tradition when they meant to have followed it, then so might your best and
wisest men have done too; if they did not intend it, then it seems it has not
been held needful always by Catholics to try Doctrines by that Criterium,
which you now prescribe.

Who can be ignorant what he was taught when he was a child, as the ground and
substance of his hopes for all Eternity?

received instructions in a language as strange to them, as that wherein they
say their prayers: Besides their own Fathers teach them little or nothing,
because that is as much as they have learnt themselves, (esperially in ignorant
places and times) their Ghostly Fathers teach them most, but that much more
concerning life then opinions; so that though they were not ignorant of all
they were taught, yet they are absolute strangers to the greatest part of what
your Church teaches; And it now no more of their Religion be delivered by
Verbal Tradition, what was then, when many points, which are now often taught
(though not constantly and in all places but upon occasions) were not thought
of in many years? Suppose that about the Question of what makes a Priest, a
convocation of men had met (I mean of such who knew not what was taught in
Books) before Luthers time (and what I say would be true in somewhat a less
degree of this more instructed Age) what account could they have given what
they had been taught when they were Children? Truly they could have said, we
know it to be the custom for our Bishops to make Priests, and some of us have
heard he only is to make them, what is done and taught in other places we know
not: Very far would they have been from all agreeing that they were taught when
they were Children (as part of the ground of their hopes for all Eternity) by
their Fathers, as received from theirs, as come down from the Apostles; that he
is no Priest, to whom in express terms Commission is not given to offer for
the living and the dead, which now being objected to the Clergy of England,
persuades me, that your Church teaches more then generally men are taught when
Children, or indeed at any time by any Verbal Tradition: For not only the
Ordinary sort, but even your most learned men knew not what is Tradition, if
that be still your Rule of Faith; for they disagree among themselves, whether
some things be of Faith or no; as for Example, Whether the Pope can err in the
Cannonization of a Saint, Wadd. Page 30.
for if all Questions were that way to be ended, and such Traditions were
evident, (as if they were such as you speak of they must be) all your side must
be soon resolved both in this, and all other such Questions; And if you say
that indeed all Particular Doctrines are not taught by such a Tradition, but
that by so much as all are taught, they know their Judge and Director
concerning them, and so are taught them implicitly, I answer, that the Vulgar,
although they are generally told that the Church is infallible, yet I doubt
whether they be either taught that this Doctrine has had any such general and
uninterrupted a delivery, or have heard much concerning those means, by which
she her-selfe is to he known, or those Circumstances, by which we are to know
when she expresses her opinion: That the Pope is the Head of the Church they
know, but whether Tradition teach him to be so of Divine, or humane Right, from
God, of Councels, or tacit consent, and what Power is included in that
Headship, a Mahumetan as much instructed as most of them, and even his
head-ship is ordinarily proved to them but out of some place of Scripture, our
of which they hear his Infallibility concluded too, without being, told the
different degree in which those two Doctrines are to be held. Secondly, For the
learned, neither are they taught so well some of these things, but that they
differ concerning them, and your self fly wholly speaking of them, leaving them
to agree among themselves, His Opusc.
and (as Cardinal Perron says in one place, he will do us Protestants when we
differ) suffering the dead to bury the dead; If then neither are you all agreed
by what to know your Church, nor when she has defined, so that even what is of
faith is undermined among you, I find cause to believe, that Tradition is no
excellent Director of you, even in your grounds, no not to teach you to know
that which should teach you all the rest; And if you were, yet at the same
wicket, and by the same degrees, by which I have showed that other errors both
may, and have not only entered into your Church, but ascended also to high
places there; this doctrine concerning your Director might have done the same.

True it is, that very little is generally and constantly taught in all ages
to the people, and that which; is seldom, is told them to have been so
received from hand to hand by the verbal Tradition you speak of; and if they
be at any time taught so, and remember it, yet they know not whether the next
Curate teach the same, at least, if under the same notion and degree of
Necessity: Indeed it would not be so intricate a work (as now adays it is)
to be a Christian, if your way had been only followed: but it is not this
Tradition, but the writings of past Ages, which transmit to posterity the
opinions of the Doctors of past times, many of them being erroneous, and more
unnecessarie; out of these works the learned learn, and teach again in their
works, what the greater part (the unlearned) scarce ever hear of; out of
these they settle the degrees your Doctrines are to be held in, some as
probable, some true, some almost necessary, some altogether, and teach
concerning others, that some are false, some dangerous, some damnable, whereas
the vulgar have seldom their meat so curiously joynted to them, but are told
in general for the most part (unless some public opposition, or other
occasion persuade them at some time to descend to teach them more
parcicularlie) that this is so good, and this is not so: And indeed the degree
in which the last Age held such an opnion, is both most hard to know (not only
because the ignorant are seldom taught it by word of mouth, and the learned
have seldom occasion, without some opposition, to explain themselves so far
in their writings,) but because also as many, and as considerable Persons not
writings, as do write, we cannot know by the Authors, what the whole Age
thought true (except the acceptance of that Doctrine were a condition of the
Communion) and most necessary to be known, because most of our controversies
with your Church are as much, if not more, about the necessity of her
opinions, as about the truth of them: For we seeing plainly, that in the
purest ages many of the chiefest Doctors have contradicted some of her Tenets,
without suspicion of Heresy, are not able to conceive how a doctrine should,
from being indifferent in one age, become necessary in another, and the
contrary from only false Heriticall, -- As time makes Botches Pox,
And plodding on will make a Calfe an Ox. Dr. D.

especially if that way had allwaies been walked in, which you now speak of.

No judicious man can deny to see with his eyes, (if he have cast them never so
little upon the present state of Christendom) that there is one Congregation
of men which lays claim to Christ his Doctrine, as upon this title, that she
has received it from his Apostles without interruption, delivered from Father
to Son until this day, and admits not any Doctrine for good and legitimate,
which he does not receive in this manner.

Rome, for by seeing, that not upon this, but other kind of claim certain
Doctrines have arrived to the very brink of being defined; I have cause to
think, that if they received none in upon on other grounds, these would not be
suffered to stand so near the door. And indeed there being between your self
such differences, that Erasmus tells us, Praefat. in Hillar.
that he who is a Heretic among the Dominicans, is Orthodox to the Scotists,
sure one side has admitted of a Doctrine for Legitimate, which has not been
so received, and then me thinks this being easily endable, which it is, by
seeing which claims such a delivery, (for if both do it, then two Parts may,
which you deny, if neither do, then your whole Church goes by some other Rule)
that which does, upon that which you call the Catholic Grounds, me thinks
should have obtained a definition for her, and the other, which refists that
Principle, upon which they ought only to build, should have been suddenly and
absolutely condemned. This will appear plainer, if we consider the opinions of
your Church by the Actions of her Head, in a notable and late Example. A great
controversy being risen between the Dominicans and the Jesuits, it was heard
before Pope Clement, let us see then what course he took to find which Part
held the Truth, since he was not likely (especially in a time wherein, by being
more opposed then usually, he had reasons to be consequently more cautious) to
choose a new way, by which truth was not wont to be found out by your side upon
like occasions; Did he send for the wisest and best men from all, nay from
adjoining Parts, to enquire of them what they had been taught by their Fathers,
to have been received by them uninterruptedly from the Apostles? did he examine
with which of them the first and purest ages sided? did he consider which
opinion would make us have the more excellent conceit of God, and work most
toward the expelling of Vice? None of all these were his.course, but he
appointed both sides, to prove which of them followed Saint Austine, and
according to them, he intended to give sentence, if the advice of Cardinal
Perron had not prevailed to the contrary: But many days they spent in examining
what he thought, who thought so variously concerning it, that he scarce knew
himself which, whereas before him all the Ancients that I could ever meet with,
were with the Jesuits with an Unanimous consent, and by them (if they must be
tried by men as fallible as themselves) it would have better agreed with their
own Principles to have had both Parts judged.

After the Pope, let us hear Bishop, and almost Cardinal Fisher, who being
one of your own Authors and Martyrs, cannot be thought to praevaricate against
that Church, for whose defense he employed not only his Ink, but his Blood.

His words are these,

There are many things of which was no inquiry in the Primitive Church, which
yet upon doubts arising, are now become perspicuous, by the diligence of
aftertimes. And that you may see, that he speaks of points of Faith, He adds,

No Orthodox man now doubts, Page 496.
whether there be a Purgatory, of which yet among the Ancients there is no
mention, or exceeding rarely: It is not believed by the Greeks to this day --
Neither did the Latins conceive this Truth at once, but by little and little.

And for an Epiphonema he closes it thus, Considering that Purgatory was a
good while unknown; after, Page 497.
partly by Revelations, partly by Scripture came little by little to be
believed by some, and so at last the belief of it was generally received by
the Catholic Churches -- Who can wonder concerning Indulgences, that in the
Primitive Church there was no use of them? Indulgences therefore began, after
men had trembled a while at the Torments of Purgatory.

See I pray how will you two agree? You say the Church of Rome receives, but
what she claims to be come down to her from the Apostles without interruption:
He says some of her Doctrines were long unknown, and came in by Revelations
and Scripture; you say new Doctrines cannot come into a Church that, holds this
Principle: He says, Doctrines have come in by little and little: So either she
held not allwaies this Principle, or for all that they might come in: To be
short, all, which he has said, seems to me, as if he had purposely intended
to frame a Ram to batter down that fortification, which you have built about
the Roman Church.

Now though he be of so great an Authority that he needs no backing, yet I will
desire you to look into Alphonsus de Castro, where he speaks of Indulgences,
and see if he mend the matter. He confesses, that the use of them seems to be
late received into the Church, yet would not have them contemned, because many
things are known to after-commers, of which those ancient Writers were wholly
ignorant. Amongst whom there is rarely mention of Transuibstantiation, more
rarely of the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, of Purgatory almost
none; For though he speaks after as if he meant only that the names of these
were unmentioned, and not the things, yet it is plain, that if he brought them
into any purpose, it was to prove, that some Doctrines are after of necessity
to be believed, which once were not, and Doctrines consist in the Things, not
in the Name.

I could next tell you of Erasmus his saying, Epist. Page 1164.
Res deduct a est ad Sophisticas contentiones, and Articulorum Miriades
proruperunt. Religion is come down to Sophistry, and a Miriad of Articles are
broken out. But knowing that his words will not find so much respect, (because
he himself finds less favor) as those of others more allowed among you, let
us mark these words of Sancta Clara, Page 296. 1 Edict.
The Church, when it is saidto define any thing, she rests not upon any new
Revelations, but upon theancient, lying hid in writings and words of the
Apostles, which he says not as his private opinion, but the constant belief
of Doctors: By which it appears plainly, that there are at least
interpretations of what the Apostles taught, drawn forth by Reason, not
received: by Tradition, which makes now apart of the present Roman Religion. a
sufficient Gappe for Errors to enter at, when either mistakings, or ends may
become new opinions, and style them but interpretations of the old. Salmeron a
Voluminous Jesuit, one, neither by his order, nor his inclination an enemy at
all to the Roman Church, being pressed by the opinions of the Ancients,
affirms, Doctores quo juniores, co perspicaciores esse, Tom. 13. Page 467.
That the more modern Doctors are, the more prespicatious, that perincrementa
Temporum nota facta, sunt Divina mysteria, quae tamen ante a multos latuerunt:
In process of time Divine Mysteries have been made known, which before lay hid
from many; That it is infirm arguing from Authority, and answers to the
multitude of them, who in times past had opposed him, with these words of
Exodus, That the opinion of many is not, to be followed, leading us out of the
way, with some other very Anabaptisticall answers, and very contrary to your
Tenets, (for sure it were a strange Tradition, which had so many Orthodox
Opposers) and nothing inferior to that saying of Zuinglius, so much
exaggerated, Quid mihi cum Patribus, potius quam cum Matribus?

The same Author in same place says, that Saint Hierome durst not affirm the
Assumption, but Saint Austine durst; and by that means, the Church persuaded
by his reason believes it: Such a notable Tradition have all her opinions; for
even this affirmation, which he confesses, brought in this beliefs, is it self
not now believed to be Saint Austines, for I take it, he must mean his tract of
the Assumption, counted not his by your own Divinity-Criticks, the Lovaine
Doctors, which have set it forth at Cullen.

And because I am willing to spend no more time in the proof of so apparent a
Truth, I will not urge Posa, who, to persuade the defining of an opinion, which
has a great current of the Ancients against it, (so far it is from having any
Tradition for it) reckons many other opinions condemned by your Church, In
Elucidar Deiparae Page 1113.
and defended by the Ancients, unlelsse you will believe his impudent
Assertion, that they are all corrupted, and will pass to the Conclusion of
this, which shall have for a Corollary, the Confession of a Spanish
Archbishop, who is to be thought to speak with more authority then his own,
because being employed to bring that to pass, which was desired by so great a
Part of your Church, he can scarce be supposed not to have had the advice and
consent of many of them in what he says.

He then tells us, First, Wadd. Page 125.
every Age either brings forth, or opens her Truth: Things are done in their
times, and several Doctrines are unlockt inseverall Ages.

Secondly, Page 270.
To show that though his opinion had no such Tradition as you say your Church
claims for all her Doctrines, yet it may, and ought to be defined; he desires
to know who ever taught the Assumption of the Virgin, before Saint Austines and
Hieromes time, and by whom was that opinion deduct from the Aposties: Nay, he
absolutely affirms, that before Nazianzene, no man ever taught any thing of
her delivery without pain, yet many thought the contrary.

Thirdly and lastly, Page 202.
For your absolute confutation, he confesses, that we believe and hold in this
Age many things for Mysteries of Faith, which in former Ages did waver under
small or no Probability, and many Things are now defined for Articles of Faith,
which have endured a hard repulse among the most and the weightiest of the
Ancient Doctors, and no light contradiction among the Ancient Fathers; and
having reckoned up five Particulars,

The Validity of Heretics Baptism, The Beatificall Vision before the day of
Judgment, The Spirituallity of Angels, The Souls being immediately created,
and not ex traduce, And, The Virgins being free from all actual Sin:
He shuts it up thus, Page 203.
Many of these kinds of Opinions there are, which sometimes declined to one
Part, sometimes to the other, and contrary Favorers, according to several
times, until a diligent and long disquisition being praemitted, the Truth was
manifested either by Pope, or Provincial, or general Councels, nay, and says
that the disquisition is made by conferring of Places of Scripture and Reason,
which is the way which you mislike.

These things considered, Page 204.
whosoever shall after say, that your Church claims all her Doctrines to have
come by a Verbal and constant Tradition to her from the Apostles, I will not
say that he is very, impudent, but I cannot think that a small matter will put
him out of countenance; for your part, I esteem you so much, that I am
confident you have not so little Nose as not to find the contrary, nor so
little Forehead as not to confess it, having received the Affidavit of such a
cloud of Witnesses.

Whosoever pretend Christ his Truth against her, says, that true it is, she
had once had the true way, but by length of times she is fallen into gross
Errors, which they will reform, not by any Truth which they have received from
hand to hand from those, who by both Parts are acknowledged to have received
their lesson from Christ, and his Apostles, but by Arguments, either out of
Ancient Writers, or the secrets of Reason.

Greek Church will not suffer your proportion to be general, but forbid the
Banes.

They pretend not to have made any Reformation, but to have kept ever since the
Apostles, what from them was received: Barlaam saier, they do (...) keep safe
and whole the Tradition of the Catholic Church, nay, he proves his to be the
found Part, because by them (...), Nothing was ever more esteemed then her
Tradition: And he objects it to your Church that she does (...), disanull the
Tradition of the Catholic Church, and setting them at naught, bring in
strange and undenizon'd opinions: And that Greek, who is joined to Nilus, and
Barlaam in Salmatius his Edition disputing against a Cardinal, charge you,
that you do (...), sow Tares among the Tradition of the Apostles and Fathers:
if when they make this claim they either say so, and think not so, or think
so, and err, then this proves, that though the Roman Church did make that
claim which you say she does, yet she too might either claim it against her
Conscience, or against Truth: For this claim of the last cannot be denied but
by him, who will imitate that Hamshire Clown, of whom you give me warning, and
believe no more then he sees himself, especially since your own Authors, when
they dispute for Traditions, prove their authority from this profession of the
Greeks: but I cannot blame you to forget them, (if we would suffer you) since
they cannot be remembered but by your Religions disadvantage; For I verily
believe, that if they had but one Addition which they want, (I mean Riches) not
only most of them who leave the Protestants, would sooner go to them then to
you, (unless they would take their Religion as we take Boats, for being the
Next) but money among you, who (though they dislike your pretended
Infallibility, that the Popes usurpations upon the rights of other Bishops, his
(not ancient) claim of power to deliver Souls out of Purgatory, etc, And yet
are frighted from joining with the Protestants, by want of Succession,
Vocation, and such like Bull-beggers) would go over to them (as I have heard
Spalato meant to do) if they were not kept, by an unwillingnesse to change the
spiritual tyranny of the Pope, for the temporal of the Turk.

But (although there were no such Churches, or they made no such claim, yet
having showed out of your own Authors, that some opinions have not been
constantly delivered by Tradition, but have entered into the Church upon the
grounds (which might at least possibly deceive them) of Scripture, Reason, and
Revelation, and others knocked apace to be let in) I hope we may be excused for
making a reveiw of all, and examining what doctrines have been brought in, if
not by Scripture (which we think reasonable) at least by comparing what this
age teaches and requires, with what the first Ages did; to which we are
encouraged by your selves, who make agreement with Antiquity, the chief mark
of the Church, unless you mean your selves to be only Judges, even of those
things by which you bid us to judge you: For our examinations by reason, I
cannot tell why you mislike it, since those who trust their own reason least,
trust it yet to choose for them one whom they may trust, against which, all
Arguments drawn from her fallibilitie without question lie. Your Religion is
built upon your Church, her authority upon reasons, which we think slight and
fallacious, and your selves think but prudentiall and probable; ought we not
then, nay, must we not examine them by Reason, or receive them upon your word?
And allowing them probable reason, yet I have still cause to examine further,
whether your superstructions be not more unreasonable then your foundations are
reasonable, for then I cannot receive a more, unprobable doctrine, then that is
probable, which it is proved by: Yet (in respect of things appearing diverse, at
diverse times) I do not like my own way so well, as to esteem it absolutely
infallible, but though I keep it, because I account it the best, yet I will
promise to leave it, when you can show me a better, which will be hard to do,
because you cannot prove it to be better but by reason, against which proof
(and consequently against whatsoever it proves) your own Objections.remain;
For to be persuaded by reason, that to such an authority I ought to submit it,
is still to follow reason, and not to quit her. And by what else is it, that
you examine what the Apostles taught, when you examine that by ancient
Tradition, and ancient Tradition by a present Testimony? Yet when I speak
thus of finding the Truth by Reason, I intend not to exclude the Grace of God,
which I doubt not (for as much as is necessary to Salvation) is ready to
concur to our Instruction; as the Sun is to our sight, if we by a wilful
winking choose not to make, not it, but our selves guilty of our blindness:
Indeed if we love darkness better then light, and instead of esteeming it,
shut it out, it were but just in God, if we so continue long hardened, not to
suffer it to see after when we would, since so obstinately we would not when
we might, like to that which happened to those Englishmen, of whom Froissard
speaks, who having long bound up an eye, and made a foolish vow, never to see
with that till they could see their Mistresses, when they returned, and unbound
them, they saw nothing, but that they could not see.

Yet when I speak of Gods grace, I mean not, that it infuseth a knowledge
without reason, but works by it, as by its Minister, and dispels those Mists
of Passions, which do wrap up Truth from our Understandings. For if you speak
of its instructing any other way, though I confess it is possible (as God may
give us a sixth sense) yet it is not ordinary, and ought not to be brought to
dispute, because so we leave visible Arguments to fly to invisible, and your
Adversary, when he has found your play, will be soon at the same lock, and I
believe in this sense, infused Faith is but the same thing, otherwise
apparelled, which you have so often laughed at in the Puritans, under the title
of private Spirit.

This being supposed, either this Principle has remained unto her ever since
her beginning, or she took it up in some one Age of the sixteen, if she took it
up, she then thought, she had nothing in her, but what she had received a from
her forefathers, and if she thought so she knew it.

a constant Tradition, but Scripture, and Revelations, and not at once, but by
little and little, this very Principle of receiving nothing but from Tradition,
might it self have been received not from Tradition: nor need it have been in
any one Age of the sixteen, but some might have taught it in one Age, more in
another, and all at last, and this so far from being an impossibility, that
it were no wonder.

Let us add, that the multitude of this Church is so dispersed through so many
Countries, and Languages, that it is impossible they should agree together upon
a false Determination, to affirm with one consent a Falsity for Truth, no
Interest being able to be common to them all, to produce such an effect.

Scriptura sacra cum vetust is authoribus frigebat) are lead by some few, whom
they reverence for their Piety and learning, (...), whose words are accounted
laws, Theodoret.
and they again by a Thomas, or a Scot, or at best by Austine, or Hierome, and
think it Tradition enough to have it from them (for else why think they to
bear us down with the Authority of one or two Fathers, if they think that
not ground enough to go upon themselves) it seems little stranger to me, what
whole Countries should let in not ancient opinions, then that a few should,
since a few in all places have ever governed all the rest; of this I will bring
two very known examples out of the Ecclesiastical History.

The first is of Valens the Emperor, who, being himself an Arrian, and making
peace with a Nation which was not so, and supposing that they would never have
firm concord with him, to whom in Faith he was so opposite, was advised to
persuade their Bishop to change his belief, for which end having employed both
words and money, and effected it, the Bishop, Theodoret lib 4.
directly contrary to Saint Peter, being himself weakened, weakened his
brethren, who yielded to communicate with the Arrians (which before they
abhorred from) and to esteem the Father greater then the Son.

The second, is of that Macedonian Bishop, who, being persecuted by the
Catholic Bishop of the same place (who was then gone to Constantinople to
fetch Soldiers, by whose assistance he might afflict the Heretics the more)
resolved to turn Catholic, and persuaded all his followers to join with him
in that Act, and this in so short a time, that when the other returned, he
found him chosen Bishop unanimouslie by both Parties, and himself (for his
crulelty, not undeservedlie) excluded.

There is besides another thing which helps to let in great errors, which is,
that men naturally neglect small things, and small things in time naturally
beget great; for which cause Aristotle showing to us several causes of the
Changes of Government, one of them is (...), adding, that (...), often a great
chang comes stealingly in, when what is little is not considered.

Yet besides the general carelessnesse; The Authority of the Teachers, the
Flexibility of the Taught, and the smallness of the Things themselves at the
beginning, even Interest it self (which consists of two Parts, Fears, and
Hopes) is able to produce great effects: Of this me thinks your selves may be
witnesses, who use to call ours, a Parliamentary Religion, as thinking, that
the Will of the Prince, and both Houses, only made it to be received: Whereas
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, of many thousand Livings which
were in England, the Incumbents of not a hundred, chose rather to lose their
Benefices for your opinions, then to keep them by subscribing to ours; all who
(for the greatest Part) of necessity must be supposed for private interest, to
have dissembled their Religion, either then or immediately before.

Secondly, In the Third Book of Evagrius we find, that above five hundred
Bishops subscribed against the Council of Calcedon, which we have reason to
think most did unwillingly, (especially if the Infallibility of a general
Council were so famous a Doctrine for Catholics as now it is) because we
know it was upon Basiliscus his commands, and that a considerable Part of them
(the Bishops of Asia) professed after they were forct to it, though before they
had been very angry in another Epistle with those, who said that they had done
by force, rather then Free Will.

And over, and above all this we may see by Erasmus his words, that many might
not oppose a Doctrine brought in by great Power, in hope of a time to do it in,
when there might be more likelihood of prevailing: For he says in one place of
his Epistles, that those who resist opinions, when there is no probable means
of doing good by it, are like those, who out of season attempt to break Prison,
who gains nothing by it, but to have their Irons doubled upon them: And the
same cause which he thinks should move them to stay (outwardly) contentedly in
Prison, may have made many others not resist, when they were first by violence
and crowd carried thither, who might fear least their opposall might not help
their cause, but beget a definition against it. And there being thus many
several motives which may work upon so many several kinds of men, it is no
wonder, if an error may soon over-runne all men, or seem to do so.

Next, Whereas you speak of several Countries, and Languages, I must desire
you to remember, that the Clergy of your Church are as it were all of one
Language, ( Latin either being, or being supposed to be, as much theirs, as
that of their own People) and being under the Dominion of one, that is the
Pope, which makes them as it were one Country, and from them the Laity receive
all their opinions: Nay in ancient times almost all considerable men spoke the
Language of the governing Nation, (as all of the better sort of the Irish) do
English) and the greatest part of Christians were governed by one man, the
Emperor, and so a new opinion may easily have been received generally, no such
bars being set up to hinder it, as you allege.

Christian Doctrine is not a speculative knowledge instituted for delight, but
it is an Art of living, a Rule of attaining to eternal bliss; hence it
follows, that no error can fall, even in a point which seems wholly
speculative in Christian Faith, but soon it breeds a Practical effect, or
rather defection in Christian behavior.

I wonder much to hear you say this, who certainly have a Religion consisting
of many points, which are no ways reduced into Practice: Especially from the
degrees in which they are held, (which I conceive introduced) could arise no
change in Christian behavior; I confess that Christian Religion being a
Covenant between God, and Man by the entermise of Christ, we Christians are
properly concerned, but in the knowledge of what are the Conditions and Reward
proposed and promised, what we are to observe, and what to hope for; and in so
far forth understanding the Nature and Attributes of the Covenant-maker and
bringer, as we may be made sure, that whatsoever God has promised or
threatened, that indeed he has: But though this principally concerns us, yet
the necessity of believing the veracity of God, obliges us moreover to give
our Assents to any thing, how little soever it have to do with practice (as
Saint Paul's having Parchments) if it be once made to appear to us either by
Scripture-reason, Tradition, or any way to have been said by God either
immediately, or mediately by Christ and his Apostles: And do not your selves
count the Greeks Heretics for denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost from
the Son, (though many Fathers deny it too) though, I pray, what has that to do
with Practice or Christian behavior, and if you should now change your opinion
in this point, what outward change would it breed, except only the blotting
out of one clause in a Creed in your Liturgy, wherein it was not at first? And
not so much outward change would there be, Cap. 6 Lib. 3 de Romano Pontifice.
if you should turn to believe Enoch and Elias, not bo be still alive, the
contrary to which Belarmine says all Catholics hold now with a certain
Faith: And many more are of this kind.

Whether man have Free Will or no, seems a Question belonging to some curious
Philosopher; but upon the Preaching of the Negative part, presently followed an
unknown Libertinage, men yielding themselves over to all kind of Concupiscence,
since they were persuaded they had no power to resist, Freewill being taken
away.

Pelagian, then a Calvinist, since the first does not wholly overthrow Gods
grace, (for whatever we have by Nature, His grace gives us) but the second
wholly overthrowes His justice, besides the direct contrariety of their
Doctrine to Scripture, they saying in effect, that the Kingdom of Heaven is to
take us by violence, whereas that teaches us, that we are to take it so: But
yet give me leave to say thus much for them, that though it be true, that ill
life follows very consequently from that Principle, and those who hold it,
must be ill Logicians, if they be good men, yet it is plain, that very many of
them live as good lives, as any who believe the contrary.

Besides, this in my opinion concerns as nearly your Dominicans, as our
Calvinists, since they use Free Will, as Tully says Epicurus did the Gods,
verbis asserunt, re negant, assert it in words, but deny it in deed; yet I
think you will not say that they are the more licentious, for (by direct
consequence) denying Liberty; If therefore an opinion, which is so nearly tied
to action, produce no more effects, how much fewer would those other so much
more unconcerning Tenets bring forth?

I need not instance in Prayer to Saints, worshipping Images, Prayer for the
Dead etc. which it is evident could not be changed without an apparent change
in Christian Churches.

Judgment-audit, being much better that they should have our Prayers, though
they want them not, then miss of them if they want them, may not unlikely (and
peradventure not unreasonably) have brought in that Custom without either
giving scandale, or being received by Tradition; Though if it had, you would
have gotten little by it, for unless such a Purgatory, out of which
Indulgences may deliver, will follow out of it, the Pope will not care for the
other, as being (...), nothing to profit: And though he did establish a
Purgatory, yet it might be one after the Resurrection, for such a one, more
then one Father speaks off: But it need establish none, (no not any third
place, which is less) for the Prayers might be first intended for the increase
of the happiness of the Blessed, and relaxation of the torment of the Cursed,
which latter effect, that the Prayers for the dead have, is said by Prudentius,
and confessed to have been said, both by him, and others, by your own Hero,
Lib. Con. Reg. Iac. Page 892.
Cardinal Perron.

Of the worship of Images I shall speak hereafter.

Praying to Saints may have come in upon consequences drawn out of mistaken
places of Scriptures, or others, which inducing the opinion, that they enjoyed
the beatificall vision before the day of judgment, some might conclude, that
then they saw all in it, and at first pray to them but conditionally, till
their number increased, and with it the degree in which they held the opinion,
till now to deny it is accounted Heresy, though I know no Father which
justifies our invocating of them (although they speak of their interceding for
us) before Nazianzene, whose example alone being of so great authority might
spread it much: though, I pray, remember, who (as says Nicephorus Calistus.)
it was that brought it first into the public Liturgy.

It is not possible, that any material point of Christian Faith can be
changed, as it were, by obreption, whilst men are on sleep, but it must needs
raise a great scandal, and tumult: For suppose the Apostles had taught the
world it were Idolatry to pray to Saints, or use reverence to their Pictures,
how can we imagine this honor brought in but by a vehement conflict and tumult
in a people, which did so greatly abhor Idolatry, as the Apostles and
Disciples did.

Pappias did) or only as True, till being rooted and spread, it be believed
Apostolical upon Tertullian's Argument, that else how could so many Churches,
errare in unam fidem, err into the same belief, which (because less time had
then been allowed error to disperse it self in) was then, though no concluding
proof, yet a better then it was the next Age, and so still grew the worse for
the wearing, till now it is worth just nothing.

But as Himerius says, (...), I say, it is most easy to answer that which is
not imputed, for I am so far from saying that the Apostles taught these two
things to be Idolatry (since on my Conscience they spoke not of them directly
at all) that I my self will not say they are. For Prayer to Saints (set aside
your Idolatrie-like Expressions, seeming to beg that of them, which you
profess, you mean only to have them beg for you) I suppose the Question to
be but this, whether they hear us or no (which Martyrs might possibly do,
and yet no other, how holy and canonized soever, because many Fathers held that
none else see God yet) If they do, I believe you may as well (or better,
because you are more sure of their being in favor with God) desire them to
intercede for you, as you may desire the Prayers of any living Friend, but if
they do not, then I will not say in Chrysostomes phrase, (...), what
Thunderbolts does it not deserve, but how unreasonable is it to cast men out
of the Church, and send them out of the world, for not assenting to an opinion,
which you cannot prove.

For reverence to the Pictures of Saints, if you mean only some outward
civil respect, to testify the great honor and love which you bear the
Prototypes, It is, I believe, no more Idolatry, then keeping off our hats in
the Presence Chamber to the Cloth of Estate.

Yet this I am so far from esteeming necessary, that I think they had
better never come in, then have occasioned so much un-christian turmoile about
so indifferent a thing. The first and purest Ages did well enough without these
Pictures (we hear only of a Parabolicall one of Christ in a Chalice) after
they came to be made, Tertul.
after to be set in Churches, after to be prayed before, nay, at last they are
come to so great an excess, that not only against Scripture, but all
Antiquity, they are now come to picture God the Father himself: Upon a Popes
Letter to an Emperor, wherein he defends the picturing of Saints and Christ,
and speaks improbablie of the Antiquity of their Pictures, and adds the
reason why they pictured not God the Father, Baronius says in the Margent. Yet
it has after happened, that they pictured him as he has appeared; a way which
the Church of that time could easily have found out, had they thought it
lawful, as it is plain Saint Austine did not, De fide and Symb.
unless Nefas est be an Approbation: This alone may serve to show that
beleifes may come in, even contrary to that of former time (and yet we not
know when they entered) unless you will oppose a superficial reason, that a
thing cannot be to a plain example that it is, and force me to answer with
Barlaam, (...), you tell me, it is impossible for him to die, whose Corse I
look upon.

We remember in a manner as yet, how change came into Germany, France,
Scotland, and our own Country, let these be a sign to us, what we may think
can be the creeping in of false doctrine.



There is no point of doctrine contrary to the Catholic Church rooted in any
Christian Nation, that the Ecclesiastical History does not mention, the times
and combats, by which it entered, and tore the Church in pieces.

Arrius his words, when by reason of Alexander's hot opposition there grew
divisions, but of what the Orthodox-counted Authors (which we have) before the
Council of Nice said (though ask Perron, and he will tell you, how like
Arrianisme they look) no Ecclesiastical History makes any mention, because
they made no bounce like the other, and so in likeliehood took no more notice
of other opinions, which made none neither. And what is said of this point, may
be said of Eutychianisme (see the same place of Perron) for we know how
Dioscorus called upon the Fathers of the Pelagians, and others, whose opinions
were certainly in the Church before them, who are now counted the Authors of
them.

Nay, even of opinions rooted (as you call it) are not the Procession of the
Holy Ghost from the the Father only, the communicating Infants, the admitting
none to the Beatificall Vision but Martyrs, and other such rooted in the Greek
Church? or can you tell when they entered? at least was it not long before any
combat concerning them? But suppose this were true, it is but accidentally so,
for some of those writings which deliver this to us, might as well have been
lost, as many others which were, so that no man can conclud that, of whatsoever
no beginning can be showed in Ecclesiastical story, that has not been
introduced, (especially since I speak not so much of opinions opposing the
Ancient Tradition, as of Superfaetations, not only of points indeed
Material, but of such as in continuance of time, have grown to be thougt so)
for how can I tell, many of them having been lost, but some of those would have
given me notice of it, if I now had them.

Let it therefore remain for evidently constant, that into the Christian
Church can come no Errors, but it must be seen and noted, and raise scandale
and opposition.

Reliquiae Danaum, what was overseen by the zeal and negligence, and how much
we want of what we might have known, had the rest escaped, no man can tell who
pretends not to Revelation, and to the ability of knowing what was in Books,
whereof he never saw any, and never heard of most: But though it follows not,
such a thing has been done, therefore it must ever be, yet it follows (in
spite of the most severe exception) such a thing has been done, therefore it
may be; As for example, since Valentinian the Emperor bringing in so contrary
to Christian Religion, as you will confess Polygamy to be, and establishing it
with a law which allowed it, and yet those who tells us both of his actions and
his Edict; speaking no tittle of any opposition which was made to it, but he
ever accounted a very good and pious Emperor, and his Son by his second wife
(his first still living, and undivorced from him) being esteemed Legitimate,
and succeeding him in a part of his Empire; think you whether his authority
could not have drawn the Principal men, (and inclusively the rest to subscribe
almost any opinion, who could keep them from opposing such an Act, or such a
Law: And if though this be now counted unlawful, yet we find not, that either
any Bishop advised him against it, or excommunicated him for it, or indeed any
man disliked it: If any false opinion backed by great Power, have been not only
(like this) introduced, but spread and settled, how unlikely is it that we
should now know what scandals it raised, supposing it raised any.

As in our Natural Body, the Principal parts are defended by bones, flesh,
skins, and other defenses, that no outward Agent can come to offend there,
before having annoyed some of these; so in the Catholic Faith, there are in
speculations, those which we call Theological Conclusions, and other pious
opinions, and in practice, many rights and ceremonies, which stop the Passage
unto the maine Principal Parts of Christian belief, and Actions.

Quis custodiet ipsos custodes: If they be not, but were only Deductions
either of the first Ages Logic, (which was not always excellent) or of that
of more Modern times, then may they so easily be false themselves, that I know
not how they can serve to preserve the rest certainly from all corruption
indeed to secure any Truth: But I believe many may be miscounted Heretics, for
only opposing some of these, what through the over-caution, and too much ardor
of some Primum mobile, and of the greater part lead by a few such, what through
their being come (having been long) from pious opinions, to be matters of
Faith, as in great Families Servants, who have waited long in meaner places,
are rewarded with higher: Besides I verily believe, that many Doctrines, which
you account necessary, have no such redoubts about them, or at least have not
always had, and indeed you only affirming it by Tullies Rule, (who was no
small Master of Reason) Sat erit verbo negare, It will be enough for me barelie
to deny it. And for Rites and Ceremonies which you suppose guard your
Doctrines, (many used among the Ancients being not now in use amonst you)
either some Tenets, which those did guard, and they did hold, ye hold not; or
if you do still, at least they are how unguarded.

But still, I speaking most of the easiness, that false and new Doctrines not
contradicting the old, may be brought into the Church, what answer is it to
tell me, how the Principal of Christian Religion are sure guarded, since so
they may be, and yet such other may be brought in: As Christ's Promises, and
chief injunctions may be retained, and yet praying to Saints, and Purgatory,
and such like, be superinduct.

Let any discreet man consider, what further evidence he can desire, or
peradventure what greater assurance Nature can afford.

Sapere Haeresin, since it seems as if you disclaimed any absolute
Infallibility, and pretend only to grounds of most possibility, which the
Protestants doing too, use yet to be accused for making nothing certain, and
having no firm foundation to build any thing upon: But as you claim less,
then by your own Rules you should, so you claim still more, then either you are
able to prove, or we likely to grant.

The Philosophers say, it is indisciplinati ingenii, to expect in any Science
more exactness then the Nature of it affords.

they themselves give them no higher a Title, and indeed that it self in my
opinion, is more then they deserve.

What shall we expect then in Religion, to see a main advantage on the one
Party we cast our selves upon.

those, and some imputations imposed upon their Adversaries, wherein their
Tenets, or the consequences from them were mistaken, they then by the Dogs
Logic have run over, without smelling to the Church of Rome, as knowing no
other Society but these, and being praepossest, that one of necessity must be
free from all error: Whereas for my part, as the (...), those who bound not
themselves to believe absolutely the whole Doctrines of any Sect, but picked out
what they thought accorded with reason out of them all, were a wise sort of
Philosophers, so they seem to me reasonable Divines, who speak Gods will as
they did Truth, (for it is not to choose by reason, and Scripture or Tradition
received by Reason, which makes a Heretic, but to choose an opinion which will
make most either for the chusers Lust, or Power and Fame, and then seeking
ways how to entitle God to it) For since it would be a Miracle, if the Errors
of the Roman Church being long gathering could have been all discovered in a
Day, or if it had been possible for the first Reformers, (who having their eyes
but newly open, it is not strange if (like the man in the Gospel) they saw at
first men walking like Trees, and had but an imperfect apprehension of Truth,
especially being in Tullies state Quem fugio habeo, Quem sequar non habeo. I
see whom to fly, but not whom to follow, not to have left some opinions untaxt,
which yet were errors, nor to have expurged others, which yet were none; I
cannot see why we may not in some points join with the one, and with others in
other, and besides find some Truths which ly (...), well in the midway
between the Parties, (...), nay in some points differ wholly from both: Which
Liberty, if it were generally allowed, and generally practiced, if particular
interests were trod wholly under foot, especially by the greatest, and if such
spirits as those of Cassander and Melancton were more common, no considerable
things would in a short time be left, but all would flow again in the same
Channel, whereas this opinion, that allwaies one part erres not, is both
prejudicial to Truth, and the best Unity, which is, that of Charity, for it
persuades them who have fewest errors, to believe those to be none, and to hate
all opposers as Heretics; and of this your Church is most guilty, which not
only affirms that there is such a one, but that she is it, and prophesies as
much of her self allwaies for the future, as she promises for the present,
and upon this ground (like him who having won nineteen games at Tables, threw
the Dice in the fire for not winning him the twentieth) though we should yield
to her in all points but one, and that the least considerable, she would yet
throw us into the fire as Heretics, for dissenting from her in that.

You are bidden to put what year, or age, such an error entered, and it is
evidently true, that then that year, or age, the Church conspired to tell a
lie, and deceive their Posterity.

any man pofessed it, or when first by all in communion with your Church it was
assented unto: If you mean the first, it is impossiible to be answered, for if
one should ask, who taught first that Christ was not begotten by God, before he
was conceived by the Virgin Mary, (through his power and the over-shadowing of
the Holy Ghost) one who knew little of Antiquity, would answer Socinus, a more
learned Person would say Photinus, another Paulus Samosatenus, another might
find before him, Artemon and another yet before him, Theodorus (...), (with
whom curious Logicians, and great Readers of Euclid, Aristotle, Galen, and
Theophrastus were joined) and yet that he was the first we have no certainty,
for if a little of Eusebius had been lost, Theodorus, and Artemon had not been
now heard of, which may as well have happened to others before them, either by
want of being taken notice of by an Historian, or by the loss of the History,
and not only is this so in this, but in all other points.

If you mean the second, (for so you must by your Inference, though the words
of the Question will bear both senses) it is as impossible for you to receive
an answer. For how shall I know when all it is granted? For suppose no Author
to have been lost, and me to have read and remembered them all; yet (as in
England when the Calvinists opinion prevailed most, as wise and learned men, as
those who writ, though differing in opinion from the Authors, yet opposed them
not so publicly, but that many might believe the more general Tenet to be
received by all) how should I know that the opinions of the Authors of several
Ages, did agree with that of all equally wise and learned in the same times,
for if there be no greater certainty of the opinions of all of one Kingdom in
our own Age, think what Infallibility can we have concerning an absolute
general consent a thousand years ago. And of this, France may as well be an
example as England, wherein many called Cassandrians, dissent from the
publicly received Doctrines, though with so little stir, that our Posterity
will not know that there now are such; So that all which any man can answer to
this Question, is, that such a one was the first that he knows of, who taught
such a Doctrine, and such a time the first, wherein he knows not that any
contradicted it, or that your Church defines it for a necessary opinion, and
exacted assent to it, as a condition of their Communion; which answer will be
nearer to Truth or Falsehood, according to the measure of the answerers
learning; And indeed if you please to remember, that when learning rose again,
and the Reformation began, most Manuscripts of considerable Books, had long
layn unreguarded by the generallity in Popish Libraries, and out of them only
had some few been Printed, you must confess, that it was in the power of your
Church, what answer we should be able to make to that Question which you
propose, which then it is nowonder if it were not answered, for your
willingness to keep men in darkness concerning this, even in times of most
light, is to be seen by your expurgatory Indexes: For there, though you
profess to meddle with none but Modern Authors, (whereas it is plain you go
as high as Bertram) yet both that will serve to deceive our posterity
concerning the general opinions of these times, and if your Church in former
Ages used any course somewhat Analogicall to this, upon those Authors who then
were modern too, (as likely enough they did, or you have cause to hope they
did for your more justification) then how can I know when any opinion entered,
that is, either first was at all, or first by all taught: since in all times
(how little mention soever be made of it) there may have been some Doctors of
that opinion, though either no Authors, or allthough Authors, yet by this
Stratageme may be kept from us.

Neither indeed can you answer this Question your self, for you know not in
what Year, or Age, did either the giving the Eucharist to Infants begin, or
end, at least Saint Austine knew not the first, who believed it an Apostolical
Tradition; Neither was this a bare Custom, but employed an opinion of good
which Children received, which the change shows plainly to have altered, and
certainly either the first opinion was a Superstition, or the latter a
Sacrilege.

But howsoever your Consequence follows not, for though your Church conspired,
and deceived their Posterity, yet it might not conspire to deceive their
Posterity, but to instruct it, being themselves deceived. And therefore when
you reckon up the Motives which men have to speak false, I wonder to see Hopes,
and Fears put in, and error left out.

It is Gods course deeplier to root and strengthen those things which he would
have most flourish. Now Christians know, that he made mankind for his Elect,
the world for mankind, and therefore he has rooted those things, which more
immediately belong to his Elect (as his Church, Faith, and Holy Spirit in it)
then the principles either of man's nature or of the world, which was made for
it, himself assuring us of it, when he told us, That one tittle should not
perish of the holy Writ, though Heaven and Earth should be dissolved, and so
seeing the latter principle relyeth upon the not failing of God to his Church,
which should ever watch upon their actions, that nothing should creep into
Christian life, which presently the zeal of the faithful should not startle
at. I think it needless, to seek further to qualify the strength of that
part, which receives it from the quality of so good a workman as the Holy
Ghost.

Roman Arguer, but there comes withal, four Terms into his Sillogisme, I
could wish therefore, that you would still set down your Definition of it, and
put that (instead of the word Church) into what you say, least what your late
Grecian Defender Cariophilus says of Heretics, (...), that they delight in
doubtful expressions, may seem more properly to belong to you: Certainly in
some sense the Elect are Gods Church, and in that sense, the Church belongs not
to his Elect, but is it, neither indeed know I (define it as you please) how it
does, since you confess, that men may oppose any company of men, whomsoever
you will call the Church, without being obstinate, or consequently by heresy
excluded from Heaven, and so may, for all that, be elected. Neither indeed know
I, how God has made mankind for his Elect: It is true, that having elected
those who shall persevere in Faith and Obedience, and given man Free Will,
which (joined with Grace universallie offered) might bring him to the
condition, and in that to election, and by that to Heaven; God may be said, to
have made mankind for his elect, that is, to be his elect, if they shut not
themselves out of the way to be so; And all men (especially Christians) I
believe have, and always shall have means enough to perform these
conditions, in such a measure (all things considered, I mean, either natural
defects, as in Idiots, never having heard of Christ, as in many Pagans, not
having Christ's will sufficiently proposed, as in many Christians, and
whosoever is not by some fault in his will hindered from assenting, to him it
is not proposed sufficiently) as shall by God be from them required.

But this hinders not, but that all Christians may see what they should, if
they stand not in their own light, or wilfully wink, and if they neglect
Christ's Instructions or Commands, and make themselves deaf against his voice,
charm he never so wisely, they then may fall from necessary Truths (much
more from others) unto error, as well as from good life into wickedness, from
which, without question, Gods Spirit is as ready to keep men that will be
kept, as from the other, and which is no less (if not more) part of the
conditions required (for in that epitomie, which Christ has given us of the
day of judgment, men are only mentioned to be punished for want of Charity,
and not mis-interpretations of doctrine) though I grieve to see so many of all
parts (whereof I am too much one) live, as if God were so obliged to them for
their Faith, that he were bound to wink upon their works, and not to be an
Idolater, or not a Heretic, were enough not to be damned.

And certainly to say, That one tittle of Gods Word shall not pass away, is
not to say, that God will keep here always a known company of men to teach
us all Divine Truths, which from them, because of their authority, we may
without more ado accept (for unless you mean the Church in this sense, it
concerns not our differences) till you can prove that this word makes some
such promise. For this seems to me only to show the veracitie of Gods Word,
without speaking at all of any Churches continual obedience to it, or true
interpretation of it, or the impossibility of her receiving the Traditions of
men for the will of God.

Besides in this Paragraph I observe three things:

The first, That you now draw your Arguments from the steadfast Truth of Holy
Writ, whereas you neither quote out of it any thing to prove your maine
Assertion, and in that way, which you laid before to find out Truth by, you
took no notice at all of Scripture, but would have all differences decided, by
only comparing what men had by verbal Tradition, like that Dominican, of whom
Erasmus tells us in his Epistles, that when in the Schools any man refuted his
conclusion, by showing it contrary to the words of Scripture, he would cry
out, Ista est Argumentatio Lutherana, protestor me non responsurum; This is a
Lutheran way of Arguing, I protest I will not answer to it.

Secondly, You now bring the proof of your certainty from Gods spirit never
failing his Church (though you neither define what is there meant by Church,
nor do you bring any proof, or ever can, that Gods Spirit will stay with any
unless they please it, or that this will not consist with the least error in
divine matters) whereas before you made it a Physical, or rather
superphysicall certainty, that Traditions must be delivered from Age to Age
uncorrupted, and this, not because of any other assistance, but ex necessitate
Rei.

Thirdly, You seem to think, that aptness to startle in the faithful, will
serve to secure them from all error, whereas I must profess my self, of
opinion, that in some times, and some cases, that may serve to induce it; for
(it being truly said, that there is as much folly beyond wisdom, as on this
side of it, and Nazianzene telling us truly, that (...), the mark is equally
missed by over shooting, as by shooting short) I doubt whether over much
caution may not have made some doctrines, and their Abetters condemned
(especially when they appeared somewhat new) some Truths rejcted for fear,
least they did by consequence contradict some point of Faith, when indeed they
did, (...), Arist. Ethick.
as Dogs often bark at a friend for an enemy, upon the first noise he makes,
before having considered which he is: This made the Ancients so earnest against
the now-certaintie of the Antipodes, this in after times, for the same opinion,
cost a Bishop his Bishopric, and truth in all probability, would have then
been defined a heresy, if a general Council had been called about it: Since
then this aptness to startle has inclined Orthodox Christians to condemn, not
only those who had affirmed in terms the contrary to Tradition, but even
those, from whose opinions they thought it would result, and consequently to
exact an Assent, not only to direct Tradition, but also to whatsoever else
seemed to them reasonable deductions from it; This seems to me a way by which
Errors may have entered by shoales, the first Ages (I mean then, Cum Augustinus
habebatur inexpugnabilis Dialecticus, quod legisset Categorias Aristotelis) not
having been so careful and subtle in their Logic, as these more learned
times both Arminians and Catvinists, Dominicans and Jesuits, Papists and
Protestants, seeming to me to argue much more consequently to their own
Principles, more close to their present business, and every way more
rationally then the ancient Doctors used to do I mean those which I have seen:
And I am confident, that if two or three Fathers should rise again unknown,
and should return to their old. Argument against the Arrians, from Cor meum
eructavit verbum bonum, both Parties would be so far from receiving them for
Judges, that neither would accept of them for Advocates, nor trust their Cause
to their arguing, who opposed their common enemy no better.

Now that this way of making Deductions out of Tradition, and those both very
hasty, and false ones is very ancient, appears even by an example in the end
of the Gospel of John, for there out of Christ's words falsely interpreted, a
conclusion was drawn and spread among the Brethren, that Saint John should not
dye, and what they did out of these words of Christ, other in other times may
have done out of other words of his, and their Collection pass for his
Doctrine; which shows the great advantage which we have by Gods Word being
written since, if it had not, we could not always have gone to a new
examination of the very words, which Christ or his Apostles taught, and
consequently a consequence of them spread in the place of them, would have been
more incurable then now it is. I will also desire you to look in the five
hundred eighty fourth Page of the Florentine Council, set out by Binius, and
there you will find, that the Latins confess, that they added the Procession
of the Holy Ghost from the Son, to the Creed, because the contrary opinion
seemed to them by consequence, contrary to a confessed Tradition of Christ's
eternal Divinity, to which, yet it will appear out of what Cardinal Perron
has excellently shown, Con. Reg. I^c. Page 708.
(though upon another occasion) that it does not contradict, but that this
consequence was ill drawn, which may have been in other points too, and have
brought, in no small multitude of Errors fince, neither was their Logic
certain to conclude better, nor were they less apt to add to their Creeds
accordingly, at any other times then they were at that.

I doubt not but whosoever shall have received satisfaction in the discourse
past, will also have received in the point we seek after, that is, in being
assured both that Christ has left a Directory in the World, and where to find
him, there being no doubt but it is his holy Church upon Earth: Nor can there
be any doubt which is his Church, since there is but one that does, and can lay
claim to have received from hand to hand his holy Doctrine.

said, is, that since Christ has a great care of his Elect, he must
consequently (most strongly of any thing) have rooted his Church. Now I having
showed, that by your own confession, men may be of his Elect, that are out of
your Church, I seemed to my self to have likewise proved, that there is no
necessity of any Churches being their Director. I know you generally think this
the more convenient way, to have left such a guide, that because otherwise
Dominus non fuisset Discretus, or in Epictius his Phrase, Arrian.
(...), you conclude that he has: but we (though indeed in such cases where
our (...) the common Notions concerning God, teach us that such a Thing were
contrary to Gods maine Attributes to do, some of us conclude upon that ground,
that this he has not done) in these cases which only concern convenience, of
which we have much less certainty, begin at the other end, and considering
first what he has done, conclude that to be sufficiently convenient, and so
finding no infallible guide by him instituted, suppose it convenient that there
should be none: Truly if convenience were the measure, and our Understandings
the measurers, we should resolve that God has made every Particular man, at
least every Pious man Infallible, and so to need no outward guide, which yet it
is plain that he has not done. Though in my opinion, in some sense, he has
made every man (who pleases) Infallible, in respect of his journys end, though
not of all Innes by the way, certain to find Heaven though he may miss many
Truths in Divine matters: For the belief which God requires of being to be
thought true of his word, and that man be ready to believe and obey what he
says, as soon as it shall appear to him that he has said it, and every man
being able (according to his means) to examine what he has said; It follows,
unless God should damn a man for weakness of understanding, (which were as
strange, as if he should damn him for a weak sight, or a feeble arm) that
every man is Infallible in his way to Heaven, so he lay no blocks in it
himself, (at least is undoubtedly secured of any danger of Hell) For if they
neither desire to avoid the trouble of enquiry through unwillingness to find
that to be true, which is contrary to what he now thinks, and so to hazard
either the affection of dear Friends, or the favor of great Friends, or the
fear of some other humane Inconvenience, as want of present means,
Improbability to get more, or of that, disparagement so terrible to flesh and
blood, of descending to confess that they have so long erred, (like Frobenius,
qui potuisset vivere, nisi puduisset aegrotare, Eras. Ep.
who might have lived, but that he was ashamed to confess himself sick) If I
say none of these or the like things, either keep him from seeking what is Gods
will, or from daring to profess it when he has found it, then such an Error
having no reference to the will, which is the only fountain of sin, cannot by
a just God be punished as a sin, and the proof of the necessity of an
Infallible Director drawn from Gods care of his Church, for his Elects sake, is
easily avoided.

But say you, if there be a director, it must be the Church, and again,
because you know that all congregations of Christians, pretend to that Title in
some sense, (as even the worst men call themselves by better Names then they
deserve, as Aristotle says, Rhetor.
(...)) and I may mistake our enemies Camp for our friends, and serve against
Christ, whilst I think I fight under his Banner (though even then, I believe, I
should have a share in that prayer of his, to whom none is denied, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do) unless you gave me some
certain marks to know the Church by; you therefore say, what you have before
said, that yours is it, because that alone pretends to Tradition, to which I
answer, what I before answered, that the Greeks serve me to disprove the
sufficiency of this Mark, who profess, that they hold the constant Tradition,
and that under that Notion, they have both received what you deny, and not
received what you propose.

Let us consider in her Presence or Visibility, Authority, Power; As for the
first, her multitude and succession make the one, that she is ever accessible,
ever known.

multitude and succession) such as were in a Directresse required: For she
(besides that she must bring notice and proofs with her, to prove that she is
instituted by God to direct men, and those plain and evident, if she require
merely but our assent, but if she require us to assent Infallibly, then those
Infallible, which yours cannot do) must also be so visible, as to be known to
all men, if not as a Directresse, at least as a Company of men, which yours
sure was not to those Nations, which were lately discovered by Columbus: But if
you except and say, she need only be visible to all Christians, (though this
exception need a proof) yet even this Condition your Church has not allwaies
had, for I believe, to those Christians whom Xaverius found in the East Indies,
your Church had been as little visible, as to those Pagans whom Columbus
discovered in the West: Besides beyond the Abissins, how far Christian
Religion may be propagated, and yet your Church unknown, who can tell? Besides,
even to most of them (for any credible Testimony that appears) she may not be
very visible. But above all, that reason being answered, upon which you
conclude, that there is some Director, and that ground being taken away upon
which you build, that yours is that, me thinks it will be unnecessary to
dispute long upon the Conditions required to that, which has no entity at all.

For Authority, her very claim of Antiquity and Succession, to have been that
Church which received her beginning from Christ and his Apostles, and never
being all united under the universal government of ver fore-went it, gives a
great reverence to her among those who believe her, and amongst those who with
indifferency seek to inform themselves, a great Prejudice above others. And if
it be true, it carries an infinite Authority with it, of Bishops, Doctors,
Martyrs, Saints, Miracles, Learning, Wisdom, Venerable Antiquity, and such
like.



There remains Power, which no man can doubt but he has given it most ample,
who considers his words so often repeated to his Apostles: But abstracting
from that, who does not see that the Church has the nature and proportion of
ones Country to every one. As in a man's Country he has Father and Mother,
Brothers, Sisters, Kinsfolks, and Allies, Neighbors and Countrymen,
(anciently called Cives and Concives) and of these are made his Country; So in
the Church finds he in way to spiritual Instruction, and Education, all these
digrees nearer and further off, till he come unto that furthermost of Christ
his Vicar: and as he in his Country finds Bearing, Breeding, Settling in
Estates and Fortunes, and lastly, Protection and Security; So likewise in the
way of Christianity, does he find this much more fully in the Church, So that
if it be true, that a man owes more to his Master then to his Father, Been
esse is better then esse; certainly a man also (as far as Church and Country
can be separated) must owe more to the Church, then to his very Country;
Wherefore the Power which the Church has to Command and instruct, is greater
then the Power of the Temporal Community, of which he is part.

Erasmus, (who says Ecclesiam voco totius Populi Christiani concensum, I call
the Church, the Consent of the whole Christian People) unless that be meant
too in all Ages, and so the Apostles would come in; They were so signed, and
sealed to (as I may say) from Heaven, by having most conversed with Christ, and
been most beloved by him, and chosen especially to teach the World his Will,
that it is impossible any men could be indeed Christians, and not receive their
Doctrine, as that of Christ, without any other Proof, but there is no other
Church that has such a Privilege, The Power of proposing she has, and so
have you, and without Question, if you can convince any Christian that what you
said, Christ said first, he is bound both to believe and obey it, and again
let all Churches join in proposal, yet till he be so convinced, (unless his
own fault hinder it) it binds him not, neither is it sufficiently proposed,
allowing it true, which it is not always necessary that it should be, although
so attested. For as a Natural Fool is not bound to obey any Doctrine or
Precept, taught or imposed by God himself, because his understanding cannot
discover it to be so: so in my opinion, whose understanding soever is not
convinced of the same, (how plain soever to others the thing be) he is for as
much as concerns this point, in the state of a Natural Fool, and no more to
be condemned.

Neither see I what you prove out of the Proportion between the Church, and
every man's Country, (for if any Church be intended by God to be so our
Director, that her propositions are to be received, because they are hers, then
indeed we owe her much more obedience then to our Country, which if it should
require of us to believe an opinion true, because that has defined it, I
believe no man would obey, and he who should press us to it, would be accounted
so mad, that we should send him, not to a Doctor of Divinity, but to a Doctor
of Physic, to be confuted.

And that any Church is so intended, appears not at all by this proposition,
since the same is even amongst the Church of the Turks, which is Ecclesia
malignantium, for there they find their Metaphorical Fathers, Mothers,
Brothers, Sisters, Kinsfolks, Allies, Neighbors, (which all Heretics do too
among themselves) all these degrees nearer and further of, till at last they
come to that furthermost, of being united under the Universal Government of
Mahomets Vicar, the Mufty. But to them you would say, that this proves not
Truth, but at most Concord, and that is Factio inter Malos, which is Amicitia
inter Bonos, Salust.
therefore the same we answer you, since Pirates, and Thieves, have as strict
bonds among themselves, as the honestest persons, and often gerater
conspiracies, and (...), to destroy these, then they make to defend themselves.
And whereas you say, that we owe more gratitude and obedience to the Church,
then to our Country, I have told you, that this may be true without owing
obedience to all she teaches; But yet even this in some sense is True; To the
general Tradition of Christians of the first Ages who lived with the Apostles,
and could not in any likelihood but know their writings; I owe the knowledge of
the Scripture, and to that, the knowledge of Gods will, and to that, Heaven, if
I conform carefully to it both my Life and my Belief; and to the Church in
this sense, I owe both as much gratitude as you please, and believe whatsoever
this, as generally, witnesses to have received from the Apostles: But this
concerning any present Church, does as little concern your present purpose:
For let us mean by the Church, that company of men which has kept Tradition
wholly uncorrupted, (and suppose there is such a one) yet to know that she has
done so, I must examine her Doctrine; and compare it either with Scripture, or
the first Antiquity, and so rather receive her for it, then it for her:
Besides, that the whole Church teaches nothing, and if she did, yet by the same
ways from any single learned Orthodox man, I may receive the same instruction,
to whose commands nevertheless (except when he delivers Gods) I owe no
obedience.

Thus too, when the Orthodox company commands as they are Orthodox, that is
something of the will of God, then they are to be obeyed, and so am I, and so
again, when the chosen governors for that purpose, command indifferent
Things, but if they exceed their Commission in commanding, no man is longer
bound to obey, no more then if a Mayor of a Town should command the People to
make his Hay, they were bound to obedience, since commanding more then his
Magistracy authorizeth him, he in that case is no Magisttate.

This Church can satisfy both learned and unlearned. For in matters of Faith,
above the reach of learning, whose spring is from what Christ and his Apostles
taught, what learned man can refuse in his inmost soul, to bow to that which
is testified by so great a multitude to have come from Christ? and what
unlearned man can require more for his faith, then to be taught by a Mistress
of so many prerogaives and advantages above all others.

Salmeron, Tom. 13. Page 468.
that a multitude of some opinion may proceed from some one Doctor,
especially, if he be Illustrious; and some again, taken with a pious and an
humble fear, choose rather against their mind, to approve what has come from
others, then to bring forth any new thing out of their own understanding, least
they may seem to bring some thing unwonted into the Church. This they must
needs see, may bring an undelivered opinion to be general, and then the
generallitie may bring it to be thought to come from Tradition, according to
Tertullians rule, Quod apud multas ecclesias unum invenitur, non est erratum
sed Traditum, and that of Saint Austine, that of whatsoever no beginning is
known, and yet is general, is to be believed to have its original from the
Apostles. By this way (supposing that all your Church did witness, all their
doctrines to have had such a lineall succession, which they know to be false)
they see, that opinions falsely and illogicallie deduct from true Traditions,
may be equally believed to be such themselves, Vincentius Lirinensis allowing
the following Church to give light to the former, which they might mistake in
doing, at least, the certainty of her Illustrations cannot have their force
from Tradition: By this way they see, that in time, such doctrines may come to
have such a general attestation, which had their first spring from Scripture
mis-interpreted, either by public mistakes, or by Councels mislead, either by
fear, error, or partiality, and what proceeded either from consent, or
definition, may seem to have been deduct from Tradition: In this they will be
confirmed, by seeing plainly, that more is now required to be believed by the
Church of Rome, then in all times has been, that now among you contrary
parties urge for or, expect a general Council to end questions, concerning
which, neither side claims any continued verbal Tradition, and that the
greatest part are ready to receive such a definition, in as high a degree, as
any Tradition whatsoever; They will be also confirmed by your denying
Infallibility to a Council, how general soever, unapproved by the Pope, by
seeing, that if (as you say) no man can be ignorant what he was taught when he
was a child, as the ground and substance of his hopes for all eternity, and
if in this, all your Religion were comprised (or else to what purpose say you
this) then no man bred in the Orthodox Church could err, or ever have erred in
matter of Faith, without knowing that he had departed from the very Basis of
Christianity, and for Instructions in these points, not only all Authors, as
Commenters upon Scripture, and the like, were wholly useless, but it were also
a vain thing, to go for instruction even to Christ's Vicar, and S. Hierome
might have resolved his own question, about the (...), every whit as well as
Damasus, or Saint Peter himself: And for the same reason, it were wholly
impossible, that at the same time the Popes, and most notable, and most pious,
and most learned Papists living, should have justified, and applauded Erasmus
for the same works (the one by his printed Diplomas, and the rest by their
Letters) for which, at the same instant, the greatest part of the Monks
counted and proclaimed him a more pestilent Heretic then Luther, if they had
all weighed heresy in the same balance, and more impossible if in yours;
which the learned will yet less approve of, when they see how soon the worse
opinion, and lesser authority may prevail, as how that of the Monks has
done against that of the Popes, and Bishops, and that so much, that Erasmus is
now generally disavowed as no Catholic, and given to us (whom we accept as
a great present) that Bellarmine will allow him to be but half a Christian,
and Cardinal Perron (which I am sorry for) gives a censure upon him, which
would better have become the pen of a Latomus, a Bedda, a Stunica, or an
Egmundane, then of so learned and judicious a Prelate.

Now for the Ignorant, I am sure you will never be able to prove infalliblie to
them, that your Church has any prerogatives above others; the ordinary way
cannot be taken with them, because they not understanding the languages, in
which the Fathers and Councels are written, cannot be pressed by what they
cannot construe, and your way as little, because they are not more (though
totallie) ignorant of the Authors of past Ages, then they are of the state,
opinions, and claims of the present time; so that I know not how you can
attempt them, if they have but a moderate understanding to their no knowledge.

The body of our Position shoots forth the branches of diverse Questions, or
rather the Solutions of them: And first, how it happened, that diverse
Heretics pretended to Tradition, as the Chiliasts, Gnostics, Carpocratians,
and diverse others, yet they with their Traditions have been rejected, and the
Church only left in claim of Tradition; For if we look into what Catholic
Tradition is; and what the Heretics pretended, the question will remain
voided. For the Catholic Church calls Tradition, that Doctrine, which was
publicly delivered, and the Heretics called Tradition, a kind of secret
Doctrine, either gathered out of private conversation with the Apostles, or
rather pretended, that the Apostles, besides what they publicly taught the
world, had another mystical way, proper to Scholars, more endeared, which
came not to public view, whereas the force and energie of a Tradition,
residing in the multitude of hearers, and being planted in the perpetual life
and actions of Christians, it must have such a publicity, that it cannot be
unknown amongst them.

Carpocratians and Gnostics, I have spoke before, but sure for the Chiliasts
this is only said and not proved: Howsoever this undeniablie appears, that
either Pappias and Irenaeus thought not this Tradition to have come such a way
as you speak of, or else they thought it no heretical way, but such a one, as
was (at least reasonably) to be assented to; and both what was the way by
which Traditions ought to come, and by which this came they were more likely to
know, then those of following ages; which proves, that this Objection (as much
as concerns them especially) remains still so strong, that (in spire of
Fevardentius) it will be better to answer it, Scalpello quam Calamo, with a
Penknife then with a Pen, and no Confuter will serve for it, but an
Expurgatory Index, no non si tuus afforet Hector, if Cardinal Perron were
alive.

I must by the way take notice of what yon say here, that Tradition must have
such a Publicity as cannot be unknown among Christians, and desire you to agree
this with what you say in the next Paragraph, that the Apostles may not have
preached in some Countries some Doctrines, which we now are bound to receive as
Traditions, for sure those Doctrines were then unknown among many Christians;
and if they had been necess^ry, sure the Apostles would no where have forgot
(with so good a Prompter as the Holy Ghost) to have taught them; If they were
not then necessary, how have they grown to be so since? Besides, I appeal to
your Conscience, whether it appear that the doctrine of the Exchequer of
Superabundant merits, of which the Pope is Lord Treasurer, and by virtue of
which he dispenses his pardons to all the Souls in Purgatory, appear to have
been known even to any of the best Christians, and whether if it had been known
to them as a Tradition, (being a Doctrine which necessitates at least Wisdom
and Charity, a continual practice of sueing for them, and of giving them) it
were possible, that of what they knew, such infinite Volumes of Authors should
make no mention.

Suppose some private Doctrine of an Apostle to some Disciple should be
published, and recorded by that Disciple, and some others, this might well be a
Truth, but never obtain the force of a Catholic Position, that is, such as it
would be a damnation to reject, because the descent from the Apostle is not
notorious, and fit to sway the body of the whole Church.

since received by you all, and considering that multitude of your Church,
which believe the immaculate Conception in as high a degree, as it is possible
without excommunicating the deniers, who either walk not by that which you
count the only Catholic Rule, or else claim such a Tradition, who yet are
not thought fit to sway the rest.

Secondly, I pray observe how easy it was for the two first Ages, at least the
chief of them, and all that are extant, to have given assent to Traditions so
unsufficiently testified, or to have mistaken Doctrines under that notion, (for
so they did to this of the Chiliasts) and then after for it to spread till it
were general, and last as long as men last upon their authority, and when once
it is so spread, how shall we then discover how small an Original it had, when
peradventure the head and spring of it will be as hard to find, as that of
Nilus, so that the greatest part of what you receive, might possibly appear to
be no certainer, nor better built, if we could digg to the foundation:
Wherefore, since the delivery of a Tradition by subsequent Ages has its
validity only from the authority of the first, me thinks you should either
think that they received none but upon better grounds, or else think these
grounds good.

Thirdly, I know not why you resolve this opinion of the Chiliasts, to have had
only such a private Tradition, for though they name John the Disciple, and
mention certain Priests who heard it from him, yet they deny not a more
general delivery of it, but peradventure least men might think that the
general opinion (that it came from the Apostles) might arise from places of
Scripture, (which fallacy, their testimony when not so fully expressed, was
still in danger of concerning any point, but that these books were written by
these men) they therefore thought it fit to name to us their witnesses, that it
came from Christ's own mouth, and in what words: And if they had done so much
on your side, for the differences between us, I believe you would now have few
Protestant adversaries left, for you would have converted the greater part, and
by that have been enabled to burn the smaller.

The second Question may be, How it comes to pass, that some things, which at
first binds not the Churches belief, afterward comes to bind it? For if it
were ever a Tradition, it ever must needs be public, and ever bind the
Church, and if once it were not, it appears not how ever it could come to be,
for if this age for example have it not, how can it deliver it to the next that
follows? But if we consider that the scope of Christian Doctrine being great,
and the Apostles preaching in so great varieties of Countries, it might happen
some point in one Country might be less understood, or peradventure not
preached, which in another was often preached, and well both understood and
retained, we may easily free our selves from these brambles: For the Spirit of
Tradition residing in this, that the testimony be exceptione majus, and beyond
all danger of deceit. It is not necessary to the efficaciousnesse of Tradition,
that the whole universal Church should be witness to such a truth, but so
great a part as could be a warrant against mistaking; so that if all the
Churches of Asia, Greece, or Afric, or Egypt, should constantly affirm such
a Tradition to have been delivered them from the Apostles, it were enough to
make a Doctrine exceptione majorem: Whence it ensues, that if in a meeting of
the universal Church it were found, that such a part has such a Tradition
concerning some matter, whereof the rest had either no understanding, or no
certainly, such a Doctrine would pass into a necessary bond of Faith in the
whole Church.

Lucian, Philos.
who traveling with a Magician that had no servant, and instead of one was
daily wont to say to a Pestle, Pestle be thou a man, and it would be so, and
when his occasions were served, would bid it return to be a Pestle, and was
obeyed, thought one time to imitate the Magitian, he being abroad, and made
indeed the Pestle a man, and draw water, but could not make it return to the
former state, but it continued still to draw, wherefore angry and afraid, he
took up an axe and clove the Pestle-man in two, whereupon (...), in stead of
one water-drawer there lept up two: For first I pray consider, what could you
have found more certain to destroy all, which you had before labored to
settle, about the Infallibility of your Tradition, then this distincton of
Exceptione Major, since, if not a general one, but one which seemed such, were
required, how easy was it for false opinions to get in, under that color,
testified but by a few reputed honest men, and so received by, and transmitted
from others of great and general authority. Secondly, how could you have
found a better way to answer your own Objection against the Chiliasts
Tradition, for want of being sufficiently public, since if that had not
seemed to them to have had this condition (I mean, if they had thought they
should for this cause have excepted against it) it had been impossible these
Saints should have received it, and concerning the publicitie of it, and the
number and authority of the deliverers, they must of necessity have been the
best Judges who then lived, and who were the more considerable Doctors of the
most considerable Ages: so that you must either confess, that a Tradition
binds not unless indeed general, or confess that this does, supposing this
not to have been general, which you cannot prove.

A likely example of this may he drawn from the Canonical Books.

answer helps against your self: for it is plain by Saint Hieromes
Testimony, that the Roman Church received not the Epistle to the Hebrews,
which the Eastern Churches received (whose Testimony, according to your
grounds, she then should have believed to be beyond exception) and it is plain
by Perrons Testimony, that the Eastern Churches received not the Macchabees,
when he says, the Church of Rome did. Now it is plain, that the Receivers
pretended to Tradition, because nothing else could make a book thought
Canonical, whereas other opinions might be brought in by a false
Interpretation of Scriptures, and after being spread, might be thought to come
from Tradition: So that according to your grounds and these testimonies, not
only the Western Church ought to have believed the Eastern about the Epistle
to the Hebrews, and the Eastern the Western about the Macchabees, but also
they ought to have required this assent from each other, which they not doing
(as they would have done, if they had thought their testimony so valid as you
do) it follows, that you do differ from the Churches of the fifth and sixth
age, about what is exceptione majus, you thinking that to be so, which they
thought not, and again, from all the extant Doctors of the two first ages, you
thinking that not so, which they thought was, as also those two times agreed
about it, as little with each other, as you with them both.

The third question may be, how Christian Religion (consisting of so many
points) is possible to be kept uncorrupted by Tradition, which depending upon
Memory, and our memory being so frail, it seems, cannot without manifest
miracle conserve so great a diversity of points unchanged for so many ages. But
if we consider, that Faith is a Science, a thing, whose parts are so connexed,
that if one be false, all must needs be false, we shall easily see, that
contrarily, the multitude of diverse points is a conservation, the one to the
right, the other wherein we doubt.

Judges, when a battle was to be fought between the children of Israel and the
Midianites, the Midianites destroyed each other, and left nothing to do for
Israel, but only to pursue them: so truly, your Objections work so strongly
upon your own Party, that I have nothing left me to press, and much to
applaud: For for this very reason, I believe, that all necessary points were
given in writing, and only the witnessing, that these were the Apostles
writings, was left to Tradition, which was both much less subject to error (as
being but one point, and that a matter of fact) and could no other way be done,
because no writing could have witnessed for it self so sufficiently, that we
should have had reason to have belleved it upon no other certificates, and to
this your answer seems to me no way satisfactorie, since, first, I deny Faith
to be a Science, it being nothing but an assent to Gods Revelations, neither
are those so connexed as you liberally affirm, and sparingly prove; Nay,
suppose they were, yet though errors would be the less likely to enter, yet
when any one, by any means were got in' then this connection would be a ready
way to help it to let in all its fellows. Besides, those opinions which may
be superinduct as Traditions, which such a connection could not hinder, if they
were not contrary to the true ones; and of this sort is chiefly our question.

That therefore you are no better able to wind your self out of this
inextricable Labyrinth, is no wonder to me, and no disgrace to you, since a man
may as well be good Logician, though he cannot solve an unsolvable question, as
he may be exceedingly skilled in Physic, and yet not able to cure an
incurable disease; Besides, that these Objections arose so at the first sight,
out of what was to be considered, that it was as impossible for to avoid them,
as to answer them.

Let us consider in constant Nations, their language, their habits, etc. how
long they continue among them.

Truly there is no Nation that I know, whose language has not,
PLACE="marg"Resp.
and does not daily palpablie suffer change. Consider, that of these English
hourly denizoning words of all kind of languages, these of the Spaniards,
Italians, and French, almost made up out of Latin, and that of the ancient
Greeks, unknown to those of this Age, unless they learn it at School: Habits
indeed some Nations alter less, but some daily, and none change not sometimes:
But this is little to the purpose, since those Nations which have remained very
constant in things, which no considerable cause appeared to them why they
should alter, may yet have received new opinions (especially if not
contradicting the old) taught them by such, in whom they wholly relied, (as
most go more hood-winkt in these matters, then in those which are indifferent,
out of a Vicious humility) or proved by Arguments which persuaded. For when the
reasons are probable (as they may be for a falsehood) the Persons pressing them,
in themselves of authority (as they may be and yet err) and the people to whom
they are pressed, full of esteem of their Teachers, then meet the three ways of
working persuasion which Aristotle mentions, whereof (...): Especially when
besides all these, the rewards of belief proposed, are more then
extraordinary, as also the danger of disbeliefe. Wherefore I count it by no
means reasonable, (...), like sheep (without more examination) to walk in the
steps of those, who have gone before us.

See that forlorn Nation of the Jews, how constantly it maintains the
Scripture, and how obstinately their Errors.

Cabala and others) I pray, upon what other ground hold they them then this,
that they have been taught. Moses delivered them to their Fathers, as unwritten
Traditions, and that under that Notion they have descended: Now may not they
defend themselves in them, by the very same Arguments which you use in this
Treatise for the Church of Rome: May not they say that they have received them
from their Fathers, who received them from theirs, who must either have joined
in mistaking their Ancestors, or in intending to deceive their Posterity,
whereof neither is credible: May not they say, what is said of these last Ages,
may be said upwards and upwards, till they come to that, wherein their Fathers
received these Doctrines from Moses, who was (...), as worthy of credit in the
delivery of these, as in that of the ten Commandments, and their Fathers
witnesses beyond exception, that these Doctrines be delivered: May they not ask
you in what year or age, these errors entered among them, and say it is
evidently true, that then their whole Church conspired to tell a lie. May they
not bid you besides consider the Notoriousnesse of the lie? such as he is very
rarely found, who is so wicked as to venture upon, besides the greatness of the
subject and the damage ensuing to himself and his dearest Pledges: May they not
add, that the multitude of their Church is so dispersed through so many
Countries and Languages, that it is impossible they should agree; together,
upon a false determination, to affirm a falsehood for a truth, no Interest being
able to be common to them all to produce such an effect: This they may say, and
if they do, and retort your own words upon your self, I know not truly what
new ones you will find to answer them in, unless you change the whole course
you now steer, and come about the same way which I now use to you, that is,
showing by what ways such an opinion may have spread among them, although not
at first received, and proving out of their own Authors, that this has not
been always held a Tradition among them, though now so accounted, which is
sometimes (as I remember) your own Galatinus his way, and the best that is:
But if to that they should again reply out of your own words (the Names only
changed) that if what Moses delivered were certainly true, and what he
delivered be to be seen in what they believed who heard him, and so till now,
it is evident, that they who seek for truth in learned discourses, must needs
forego the most certain and easy way of attaining what they aim at: That
Jew, who should retort this, and much more of this kind upon you, and keep you
to Tradition, and make their present Tradition (upon your grounds) the Judge of
that, I am of opinion, would make you as silent, as if (according to the
Proverb) you had seen a Wolf first, or were a Pithagoricall-Freshman, and you
would wish you had never put into an enemies hand such a weapon against your
self, as this present discourse: So that in Anna Commenas Phrase (...), you
have dug a ditch on either side of your self: For either you must grant
these Arguments not to be sufficient for your Party, or you must allow them to
be sufficient for a Jew.

Wheresoever Christians labor to convert Idolaters, they find the only
Argument for their errors that they received them from their forefathers: The
King of Socotora thinking to please the Portugalls by reducing a Nation that
had the Names of Christians to true Christianity, he found them obstinately
protest to him, that they would sooner loose their lives, then part with the
Religion their Ancestors had left them.

Ireland, where, this is all the reason the Vulgar either have or give for
their Religion, and it is the less strange, when I remember Aristotle's
Ethics, where he tells us of one, who defended the beating of his Father,
thus, (...), because it had been the lineall custom of his Family to do so.
Yet for all this, that those who earnestly desire to keep the Religion of their
Forefathers, and think they have done it, may yet be deceived, may appear to a
Christian by the example of the Jews, and to any Romanist, by the example of
the Grecians.

To your example of the answer to the King of Socotora, I answer,

That either those heterodox Christians had been at first convened by
Heretics, or by Catholics; If by Catholics, (and your Church be that, and
your grounds be hers) then it is plain, that men may grow in^^ great error,
who hold fast, as they think upon Tradition, and may swerve from that Rule,
whilst they think they walk by it: If by Heretics, then it seems Catholics
(as you call them) are not the only Religion that have converted Nations, and
that note of the Church which isso daily and so eagerly pressed, appears common
to more then it: And so you may take which horn of my Dilemma you please.

To come at length to give an answer to him that demands a guide at my hands, I
remit him to the modern Visibe Church of Rome, that is, her who is in an
externe sensible communion with the externe sensible Clergy of Rome, and the
externe sensible Head, and Pastor of that Church. If he ask me, how he shall
know her, I must counter interrogate him, who he is. Is he an ignorant man? is
he unlearned, yet of good understanding in the World? Is he a Scholar, and what
Scholar? A Grammarian, whose understanding has no other help then that of
Languages? Is he a Philosopher? Is he a Divine? (I mean an Academicall one, for
a true Divine is to teach not to ask this Question) Is he a Statesman? For he
that can think one answer can, or ought to be made to all these, may likewise
expect, that one cause may produce all effects: Yet I deny not but all must
have the same guide, though they are to be assured of that guide in diverse
manners.

Baash a King of Israel, in the Chronicles, when he came against Judah,
assailed not their Cities, but built Ramoth against them, so you have not
attempted to destroy what I had said; but raised another consideration, a City,
a Ramoth of your own; against which I have brought such battery, as seems to
me sufficient to demollish it.

Now for your directions to a guide, I answer, supposing that there is one, and
that this you speak of be now it, (for you will not say she always is) and not
to quarrel with you for giving me an accidental and mutable guide, that being
a thing which you suppose so necessary to be always known, I will join issue
upon this with you, whether she be to be known to be a guide by any Infallible
Notes, for such are required by reason to beget such an assent, as is required
by you, all other being termed by your selves, not Faith, but Opinion. To your
Contra-interrogation therefore who I am, that is, in whose Name I speak, I
answer and profess my self one of the notably ignorant, but though I act my
own part only, when I speak in his person, yet for once I will adventure to
answer you, in the name of the several persons you speak of, and will show,
that none of them have sufficient cause to receive the guide which you propose
upon the reasons which you allege.

If the ignorant man speaks, I will show him in the Church of God decency,
and Majesty of ceremonies, above all other Sects and Religions, whereby dull
capacities are sweetly ensnared to believe the truth they hear, from those
whom they see to have the outward signs of Virtue and Devotion.

Majesty of ceremonies, the Kings Chapel seems to me to equal the Queens,
and our Cathedral Churches, much to surpass your cock-lofts) and if I did,
yet the decency of them would not prove your Church to be a good guide, so well
as a good mistress of ceremonies, and if by their majesty you mean their
Magnificence, then that would only prove her rich and not orthodox, since this
is such a note, that (her doctrine remaining as true as it is) one persecution
would serve to destroy it, and with it, all that means which you allow the
Ignorant to find his guide by; And whereas you say, that dull capacities are by
this sweetly ensnared to believe the Truth; I answer, that by the same means
they may be as sweetly, and as easily ensnared to believe falsehoods, unless
you could show that Majesty and Truth are inseparable Companions.

If the unlearned ask, I show him the claim of Antiquity, the multitude, the
advantages of Sanctity, and Learning, how the World was once of this accord,
and those who opposed, when they first parted, first began the contrary Sects,
how the points of difference be such, as on the Catholic side help devotion,
and on the contrary side diminish the same, and such like sensible differences,
which will clearly show an advantage on the Catholics side, which is the
proportional motive to his understanding.

my self can take no cognizance) absolutely deny it, and to me you cannot
disprove them, unless I had at least some learning to enable me to judge, who
quotes that truly which now I cannot construe: For multitude, I find not what
that proves, it may work upon my fear rather then upon my assent, yet I am
told, that many more Christians disagree from your Church in this maine
Question of her being a guide, then she consists of; that the Turks are more
then both, and the Pagans more then all three, so that if they relate the state
of the world aright, multitude must rather seem an argument against truth then
for it: And forasmuch as I can see my self, your Religion is the least in this
Kingdom, and I know no other: For the advantages of sanctity and learning, to
the first I answer, that since in a Country where the State is their
adversary, and where for fear of scandale, and hope of gaining numbers to
their Church, (to help both to the surety and ornament of it) by commending
their Doctrine by their lives, in likelihood they are more vigilant against
vice, then where they have no such thorns against their breasts to keep them
awak, even here I can find no such advantage as you pretend, I have no cause to
guess that I should find it where the incitement of emulation and such like,
are absent, and the charms of greatness, wealth, power, and by consequence
likelihood of impunity are present: For the advantage of learning, I answer,
that speaking to me with the foreknowledge of my being unlearned, I wonder you
should make use of such a motive, which (how true soever it were in it self) I
am not capable of discerning to be so, any more then a blind man is likely to
assent to an argument drawn from Colors, of which he could have no possible
notion. Now whereas you say that the world was once of this accord, it is more
then I know: we are told that whole Churches in the East, had long denied this,
when Luther first left you, and howsoever, that it could not be brought in time
by arts, propt by power to accord in an error, is more then you have proved.
Whereas you say, that those, who opposed this, when they first parted, first
began the contrary Sects: I answer, that our men pretend that they began no new
Doctrine, but only scoured off the rust which time and worldly ends in some,
and negligence in others, had suffered to grow on. Which Question again
remains to be tried, (if you refuse Scripture, as your side uses to do) by a
Jury of such who are for the most part untranslated, or those which are by
Parties) and whose language I cannot spell, nor consequently determine by their
evidence: Now whereas you say, that the points in controversy on your side
help Devotion, and on ours diminish it, I wish you had instanced which, and
wherein, for I for the most part see nothing toward it, they being mere
speculative opinions, and not reduceable to life, as especially this whereof we
most differ, which is your Churches being a general guide: Those, which most
may seem such, are either Confession, (which yet we deny only to be
necessary, not profitable, if well used, which is practiced by some of us, and
recommended to all, and which as you have tempered it, making contrition
sufficient for his salvation, who has till his hour of death lived in all sin,
and making attrition with absolution of the same force as contrition, and
requiring to attrition, (as I am told you do) only sorrow for sin, though
arising from the fear of Hell, so some love of God being joined to it, which
none can want but an Infidel) will not help Devotion much, but rather diminish
it) or Monastic life, (which was grown into great excess and disorder, which
yet many wise and modern Protestants think might as well have been reformed as
the other parts of the Church, without total obolition, and so upon this is
left no Question) or Fasting, (which if you think Protestants are against, I
pray read Bishop Andrews his Lent Sermons, and which if it be not so much used
among us as it should, is not so much the fault of the Religion, as of the Men)
and all these things considered, I find none of your motives to show a maine
advantage on your side, and therefore I have yet no cause to leave my own: And
if in some of these things you should seem to have more Truth then we, yet
that would not free you from having more error in other points then this comes
to, much less from having any at all, without the belief of which, I should
not be received among you, though I were willing to come: And this lies upon
you to prove, and that not by probable, but by infallible arguments, if you
require (as they say your side uses to do) an assent of that Nature.

To the Grammarian I will give two Memorandums; first, that seeing the
Catholick's were first in possession both of the Scriptures, and the
Interpretations: The adverse part is bound to bring such places as can receive
no probable Exposition by the Catholics. For who knows not, that is
conversant in Critics, how many obscure and difficult places occur in most
plain Authors, and the Scripture of all Books (the greater part of the men
that wrote them, especially the New Testament, being not eloquent, and writing
not in their native Tongue) for the most part, are subject to much impropriety:
The other Memorandum is, that, to prove a Catholic point by Scripture, it is
sufficient, that the place brought, bear the Exposition the Catholic gives,
and if it be the more probable by the very letter, it is an evincent place. The
reason is, because the question being of a Christian law, the Axiom of the
Jurists takes place, that Consuetudo optima Interpres Legis, so that if it be
manifest, that Christian practice (which was before the controversy) be for
the one sense, and the words be tolerable, no force of Grammar can prevail to
equalize this advantage: The Grammarian therefore, who will observe these
Rules, I turn him loose to the Scriptures and Fathers, to seek there what is
the Faith of Christ and proprieties of her Church to know her by.

which if you could prove, you would need to prove no more, but all would
easily follow: and then for your consequence, that is equally false, for
though I confess, to make any Doctrine a point of Faith, it is required, that
the place be as plain as you please, yet to the making it the more probable
opinion (and consequently excluding the contrary from being necessary) so
much is not required. The greatest cause of the obscurity of those books, in
which Critics are conversant, is the negligence and ignorance of Transcribers,
so that some Authors would scarce know their own Books, if they were revived,
whereas the great care of Christians about so dear a pledge, has much, if not
wholly hindered, the same cause from perverting, and so obscuring Scripture: At
least, if it have not, it seems your Church is not so faithful a Guardian of
her deposit, as her dear friends (moved by partiallitie or ends) would make us
believe: Besides, till now I ever thought, that Eloquence rather lead men to
speak improperlie, then the want of it, since ignorant persons keep
themselves within the bounds of what preciselie they mean, whereas the
eloquent wander into figures, which are so many, and have gotten such footing
in language (whilst in the search of significancie propriety is lost) that
those, who use them, are obliged to those who will please to understand,
because all they say may bear two senses, the one proper, the other improper:
And though it be true, that they have over-flowne, even into the language of
the ignorant, yet it is as true, that both they are much less used among
these, and that they had not hence their beginning, but from Eloquence: And
though the Apostles write not in their native Tongues, yet they write in an
inspired language, so that they were not likely to commit, at least, any such
soloecismes as should destroy the end of the Inspirer, which was, that they
should be understood by it.

To your second Memorandum I answer, that since every man is free till some
thing binds him, you (who pretend, that we are bound to receive more doctrine
as necessary, then appears to us to be so) are in all reason to give us
plainly evincent proof, that what you thus require, God requires too, for
till then (to return you to another Axiom, for yours) praesumitur pro
liberate; whereas we (the burden of the Negative proof not lying upon us) if
we bring probable Arguments, we do it ex abundanti, and bring more then we
need to bring; And whereas you stand upon Customs, having power in Law
matters, I answer, that in all cases that is not of force, for we hold, that it
must not prevail against a Statute, which shows, that they may be
contradictorie, and as Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, is thought to be a good
civil topicall Law, so me thinks, Nullum tempus occurrit veritati, is a good
public divinity Law, your own Scripture too telling us, that Truth is
stronger then the King; Besides, where it is of force, it is in such cases as
the law has appointed that it should be so, and if you can prove out of
Christ's Law, that there it is so appointed to be in matters of Divinity, we
shall willingly yield, but seeing that our law, which allows this force to
custom, sets down also in how long time it is, before it become of force, and
I have cause to think, that Christ would have been (...) careful as our law,
and have set down this too, if he had had any such meaning, and if it were
settled to be a custom of such a standing (as by Saint Austine sometimes is
spoken of) as that in no time it be known that ever it was otherwise; in most
of your affairs this would stead you a little, though one side have burnt the
evidences of the other, to which in likeliehood you owe it, if this stead you
in any; of questions, whereof Scripture and Antiquity are wholly silent, or
merely speculative, and unreducible unto act (of which sort are the greatest
between us) or not concerning the lawfulness, but the necessity of an Action,
to the first kind no ancient custom can belong, nor other to the others then a
custom of Interpretation of some text concerning it, not enough to conclude
upon (besides, that it is not that which you speak of) since daily your men
differ, and defend their differing from all that went before them, about more
then many texts, as Cajetane, Salmeron, and Maldonate shall bear me witness,
unless, like Sampson, you may break those Ropes by which others must be
bound: And adding to all this, that our custom may serve to show the meaning
of the law, when our selves were Authors of it, though not when God is, and
that our general custom arguing our united consent (which only gives force
to our laws) may be as fit to bind, as a law in civil cases, and yet not in
divine, where the laws proceed from a higher fountain, that such a rule may
be good in civil resolutions, which require but probable proofs, and yet not
in divine ones, where (according to the grounds of your Party, which requires
an undoubting assent to her doctrines as infallible) infallible proofs are
necessary, especially this, like other Topycall arguments, having only force
caeteris paribus, and again good where it is not so necessary, that the will
of the Legislator be followed, as that peace and quiet be preserved, to which,
all alterations, even to the better, are enemies, and yet not in these cases,
where we are to prefer the will of our Lawmakers before any humane convenience,
or good, if the custom past unquestioned, when the Law was first promulgated,
but not, if crept in after by negligence, or plainly appearing to have been
brought in-by power, all this persuading me not to be so far swaied by your
Rules as you would have me, I suppose you have small hope, that not being so, I
should find either in Scripture, or the first Antiquity, either that Faith
which your Church proposes, or these properties of Christ's Church, by which
your Church proves, or rather strives to prove, that she it is: Give me leave
besides to ask you one Question, and that is; What we shall conclude when the
Christian practice of several places have ever differed; as that of Greece
from that of Rome, which it may also do in more places then we are acquainted
with, the extent of Christianity being unknown to us, as are the customs of
some remote Christian Countries which we know.

Of the Philosopher, I exact to go like a Philosopher, and to search out the
specificall differences of every Sect, and when he has found them (if any one
but the Catholic has any rule of faith and good life, which I remit to him
to enquire) but at least, when he has found the Catholics to be this claim
of Tradition before declared, then if this do not bring him as demonstratively
as he knows any Conclusion in Philosophy, and Mathematics, to the notice of
this, is the only true Church of Christ, for my part I shall quit him before
God and Man.

Knotts confession, (Quem honoris causa nomino) is as perfect as a writing can
be: And since a writing may contain all Doctrines, and only cannot give
testimony to it self, nor be (...), I have no reason to think it inferior to
that of their adversaries: Your claim of Tradition I see plainly enough, and
as plainly, that it is but a claim, many of your side overthrowing it, and
others not of your own, pretending to it: Bishop Fisher confesses, that
Scripture and Miracles brought in the Doctrine of Purgatory, and that again
the doctrine of Indulgences.

Erasmus, who though himself no Martyr, yet one who may pass for a Confessor,
having suffered, and long by the Bigotts of both Parties, and a dear Friend
both to Fisher, and his Colleague in Martyrdom, Sir Thomas Moore, (who were
the Deucalions of learning in this our Country) makes yet a larger confession.
Non obscurum est quot opiniones invectae sunt in orbem per homines, ad suum
Quaestum callidos, conflictorum Miraculorum praesidio: These reasons alone
(allowing for brevities sake that I had no more) would make me believe, not
only that what you say concludes not geometrically, but persuades not
probably, and consequently, you by your promise have quitted me, which without
it I doubt not but God would have done.

The Divine, if he has truly understood the Principles of Faith in the nature
of a Divine, I mean Trinity, Incarnation, Redemption, Eucharist, Beatitude, the
Creation and Dissolution of the World, and has seen the exact conformity of
the deepest Principles of Nature, with an unspeakable wisdom of the Contriver:
If he does not plainly confess it was above the naure of man to frame the
Catholic Religion, and sees not that only that is conformable to Nature,
and it self, I say, he has no ground sufficient to be of it.

Pagans, but for yours against Protestants, I can draw out of it no Argument,
which if upon your explanation, it appears not to be through the default of
the Lymbeck (which I expect) then the better I think of you, the worse I shall
think of your cause, which would have ministered to so sharp an inquirer, better
proofs, but that the old Axiom hindered it of, Nihil dat quod non habet: These
Principles of Faith you speak of, are agreed on by both Parts, so out of their
Truth, and the impossibility of their being forged, all the other points cannot
be proved, which have upon them no necessary dependence: and that your
Religion is conformable to the deepest Principles of Nature, I am so far from
seeing, that I conceive your own opinion of Transubstantiation contradicts them
almost all: Neither see I any such unspeakablenesse in the contriving, but that
ordinary understandings by several degrees, in a long tract of many ignorant
negligent ages, egged on by ambition, cloakt over by hypocrisy, assisted by
false miracles, and maintained by tyranny, might easily both induce and
establish them, so that though we have hitherto differed in our premises, yet
we meet in the Conclusion, which is, that I have no sufficient ground to be of
your Religion.

The Statesman, who is truly informed of the Church, how far is really of
Christ's institution, and what either pious men have added, or peradventure
ambitious men encroacht, if he does not find a government of so high and
exotic strain, that neither man's wit dare to have attempted it, neither man's
power would possibly have effected it; If he find no eminent helps, and no
disadvantage to the temporal government, I shall think there wants one starr
in the heaven of the Church to direct these Sages to Bethlehem.



I find so much policy in your Church, for most part really, and always in
voto, aimed at, although missed, that of no body of men did ever Aristotl's
saying appear to me truer, (...), Among some men it is the end of the Laws of
their Commonwealth to be masters of their neighbors, but I find nothing in the
government that should prove it, to proceed from a divine fountain: In
Ecclesiastical Monarchy you have, so have also the Turks, the Pope pretends
to a power of ending all controversies, so does also their Mufty, and since
man's wit attempted that, and man's power effected it, why it might not do the
same in the West it did in the East, (having the aid of some Tinsell-reasons,
and some not wholly averse places of Scripture) I cannot conceive: And what
help is by your Church given to temporal government, I see not, unless giving
the Pope power in temporalls, even to depose Kings be the helps you mean: I
know that some of your side are not concerned in this, but it is grown so
general, that though it be as yet no necessary part of your Religion, it is
like to be shortly; And truly throughout I find somethings which pious men
have added, many, which ambitious men have encroacht, (though of your Church I
could not be informed in this, who has not decided the Question) but nothing
that you alone hold instituted by Christ, and so to your Bethlehem, for want of
a starr I am not likely to travel.

Let every man consider which is the fit way for himself, and what in other
matter of that way he accounts evidence, and if there be no interest in his
soul to make him loath to believe, what in another matter of the like nature
he would not stick at, or heavy to practice what he sees clearly enough; I
fear not his choice; but if God send him time and means to prosecute his
search any indifferent while, it is long ago known of what Religion he is to
be of.

Demetrius, (...), because by this craft they have their Gods, some because of
temporal honor, like the Pharisees, (...), least they be cast out of the
Synagogue, loving the praise of men more then the praise of God; some for fear
like the High Priests, (...), The Romans will come and take away both our Place
and Nation; Some because of the contradiction in the true Doctrine to their
vain or wicked desires, and so as some Disciples said, though somewhat upon
another occasion, they account it, (...), a hard saying, (which made Epictetus
say, (...), indeed most Christians, who oppose any of Christ's Commands, either
for some of these reasons, dare not enquire whether Christ has commanded them,
(...), or enquiring find, but confess it not, like those I spoke of before,
who who (...): As Epictetus therefore says, that we should enquire of God, who
is our guide, as Travelers do of them they meet, (...), having no desire to
turn rather to the right hand then to the left, or again, as we enquire of
our eyes concerning what is to be seen, (...), not persuading them to show us
one thing rather then another, so say I, ought we to go to reason to find Gods
will indifferent, which is Truth, or else we are likely very lazilie to seek
what we are unwilling to find, and a probable argument for what we desire, will
seem a Demonstration, and a Demonstration against it scarce a probable
Argument. This I insist upon the more, because I think we have more cause to
put you in mind of this, then you us, being too little practiced on both parts,
but not most by yours, whereof the greatest part commonly arrives not so far,
as at the fault of not seeking as they should, because commonly they have not
leave given them to seek at all: for besides those who neglect to seek and may,
no Bible being allowed by you to most, as no Smith was suffered by the
Philistines in Israel, they fearing least the Hebrews should make them swords
and spears, and you least they should make out of it, Arguments to persuade
them to revolt from you. It is no wonder if your Church, be like the
Congregation in the Acts, (...), the most part know not why they are come
together. And truly if thus it were not, if all had liberty to seek Truth, and
if all who sought it were indifferent in their seeking, and their judgments
were absolutely unbridled by their affections, and unswaied by prejudice, I
cannot persuade my self that so many could meet in thinking it fit to receive
(for so they seem to me) such impossible Doctrines upon such improbable
grounds, or to require a more then probable assent to but probable Doctrines,
(allowing them to be such) and mould not see what is grounded upon them, (if
not impossible) is at least much more improbable, then the Motives are
probable, which kind of Assent cannot be expected by God, who as he requires
only (...), a reasonable service, so also a reasonable Faith.

Here follows the Third Part of this Discourse, which is a Reply to such
Answers as you have been pleased to make to a little of that little, which I at
first opposed.
SPeaking of the Church Rome, as this day it is the true Church of God. I
answer the doubter, she neither has, nor can have any error which he need to
fear, and be shie of.

The which two limitations I add, for avoiding Questions impertinent unto our
business.

The first, for those which concerns the connection of the Sca of Rome to the
Universal.

The latter, to avoid such Questions as touch that point, whether the Church
may err in any Philosophical or other such matter, which Questions are not so
pertinent to our Matter.

manet aeternumque manebit. For upon examination, I doubt not, it will appear,
that as I have read of a Cohort of Persians, which they called (...), the
Immortal Cohort, which all died in one battle; so your infallibe Church will
be found to abound in errors, and to belie equally her title, being troubled
her self, with what she undertakes to secure others from, like the Apothecary
in Lucian, who undertaking to cure all men of the Cough, (...), could himself
scarce prescribe his Medicine for coughing the while. Besides, of what sort
soever the error be, yet since the Condition of her Communion is to profess a
belief that she has none, such a one as to them, who indeed believe so, would
not be dangerous, yet to me, who cannot profess this but against my
Conscience, how slight a one soever, may be an occasion of damnation: Again,
as to me your answer appears false, so to those of your own side it will
appear heretical; to me it would give no satisfaction (though you had proved
what you but affirm) because I desire to know an eternal, not a temporary
Guide, whereas if in your Church there should happen any Schism, your answer
then would give me no means to resolve my self which part were the guide
(that is the true Church) without a new, and peradventure (by the way) an
endless search. To them it will give scandal, because, first, you presuppose
that we must know the Church by the Doctrine, and the Doctrine by the Church;
and secondly, you imply a possibility, that the Church of Rome is now but by
accident (and may come not to be) the true Church, and so all their confidence
built upon her, as the Directresse of all Churches, and the eternal Admiral
of Gods Fleet will appear to have a very fallible foundation: Besides, in the
cause of your Limitation I find more reason to commend your Discretion, then
your Ingenuitie: for, for the first, if you had said, that the Universal
Church of Christ must always be connected to the particular one of Rome, which
were to allow her Infallibility, you knew Antiquity to have said much against
you; and besides, that this being not yet de fide among your selves (nor
evident in it self) could not serve for a foundation to the whole body of our
faith; if you had absolutely denied it, you knew, that you should incur the
displeasure of the most prevailing part of your own men, and that then the
maine (and to the Ignorant the only visible) sign would be taken away. For
the second, if you had affirmed, that the Church could err in nothing, how
slight soever, you would both have contradicted many of your own side, as
Stapleton by name, and have asserted more then there were any color of proof
for, and would have wanted this distinction to retire to: if you were confuted
in any particular, if you had restrained her Infallibility to things
necessary, or weighty, or the like, then the question would again have risen,
which are those (for many errors, which we lay to her charge, concern not
things indeed necessary, though she add to the error, that other of thinking,
that whatsoever she holds becomes necessary by her holding it) and then for
all you have said, the doctrine of Purgatory might be false, and yet she the
Church, and that infallible, as far as by your Doctrine her Infallibility
had need to be extended.

Neither do I remit the questioner to Scripture for his satisfaction, although
I hold Scripture a very sufficient means to satisfy the man, who goes to it
with that preparation of understanding and will which is meet and required.
Howsoever this I may answer for them who prove it out of Scripture, that
because they dispute against them who admit of Scripture, and deny the
authority of the Church, if they can convince it, they do well, though they
will not themselves admit generally of a proof out of Scripture, as not able
to prove every thing in foro contentioso.

Roman Church holds, by what the Scriptures say, but to believe, that they say
whatsoever she holds, then I confess, I come not with the Conditions required;
but if it be to come desirous to find the Truth, and to follow and profess it
when I have found it, in spite of all temporal respects, which might either
fright or allure me from so doing, then I suppose, that Charity (which hops
all things) will incline you to believe, that I come as I ought to come, until
some evident reason persuade you to the contrary: That the Scripture cannot
prove every thing in foro contentioso I believe, but all necessary Truths, I
believe it can; for only those, which it can, are such; I deny not, but that
a contentious person may deny a thing to be proved, when his own Conscience
contradicts his words, but so he may Arguments drawn from any other ground as
well as Scripture, so that if for that cause you refuse to admit of proofs
from thence, you might as well for the same, refuse to admit of any by any
other kind of Arguments: And certainly, if the Scriptures (I mean the plain
places of it) cannot be a sufficient ground for such and such a point, surely
it cannot be a sufficient ground to build a ground upon, as the Churches
Infallibility, and therefore, though it it seems you desire so much that this
be believed, that so it be, you care not upon what proof, yet a considering
Protestant, who is not as hot to receive your Religion, as you are that he
should, may presently say, when he is pressed by you with Scripture to this,
since this is a way of proof which your selves admit not of, an Argument from
hence may bring me from my own Religion, but never to yours, because it is a
beam which that relies much upon, that by any other way, then the authority
of the Church, no man can be sufficiently sure of the meaning of Scripture.

That they say, the Church is made infallible that we may have some guide, I
think it very rational; for Nature has given ever some strong, and
uncontrollable Principle in all Natures to guide the rest. The Commonwealth
has a Governor not questionable, our Understanding has Principles which she
cannot judge, but by them judges of all other verities. If there should not be
some Principle in the Church, it were the only maimed thing God had created,
and maimed in its Principal part, in the very head. And if there be such a
Principle, the whole Church is Infallible by that, as the whole man sees by
his eyes, touches by his hands.



It is sufficient for a Child to believe his Parents, for a Clown to believe
his Preacher about the Churches Infallibility: For Faith is given to mankind,
to be a means of believing, and living like a Christian, and so he has this
second, it is not much matter in what terms he be with the first.

Babylon, and scarce teaches any truth, though it could not teach the least
error; why should such a one be damned for the misfortune of having had
Heretical Parents, or a deceiving Preacher: For no more it seems is required
of such, then to give his belief to those; (And indeed the same reason
extended, will excuse him, who though learned, impartially aims at Gods will
and misseth it) for though you seem to insinuate, by the cause you give of
what you say, that so men believe and do what they hear God command, he cares
not upon what grounds, yet I, who know that God has no other gain by our so
doings then that in it we sacrifice to him our souls and affections, cannot
believe, but that they shall be accepted who give him that which he most cares
for, and obey him formally, though they disobey him materially, God more
considering and valuing the Heart then the Head, the end then the actions, and
the fountain then the streams; And truly else he who through stupidity or
impotence abstained from any vice, or through negligence or prejudice missed
some error, would be as well accepted of by God, as he that by a care of his
ways and of obedience to him who should rule them, did avoid the first, and
by a studious search, the second.

I cannot part from this Theme without one consideration more, and that is,
that if so Fallible a Director as you speak of, may be cause enough of assent
to one Truth, why may they not be so to another, and why shall not the belief
of our ignorants, upon their testimony, that the Scripture is the Word of God,
be as well founded, as that of yours to the Infallibility of the Church upon
the same? And yet it is daily objected to us, that this belief of ours is not
surely enough founded, since not received from their Church, although the
unlearned among us receive it from their Parents and Preachers, and the learned
from Tradition; as from the first of those your unlearned do, and from the
second of which your learned pretend they do receive the authority, and
infallibility of the Church it self: Although we be so much more reasonable
then you, that we require them not to be so sure upon it, as they are of what
they know by sense, but only to give them so much credit, that they may give
up their hearts to obedience.

Neither do I remit him to a general and constant Tradition, as if himself
should climb up every age by learned Writers, and find it in every one I take
it to be impossible testimonies one may find in many ages, but such as will
demonstrate and convince a full Tradition I much doubt: Neither do I find by
experience, that who will draw a man by a rope or chain, gives him the whole
rope or chain into his hands, but only one end of it, unto which if he cleave
hard, he shall be drawn which way the rope is carried. Tradition is a long
chain, every generation or delivery from Father to Son being a link in it, etc.

Perron D' Aille; But though I think that nothing is wholly provable by
sufficient testimonies of the first ages, to have had Primary and general
Tradition, (except the undoubted books of Scripture, or what is so plainly
there, that it is not controverted between you and us) yet I think the Negative
is easy to be proved, because any one known person dessenting, and yet then
accounted a learned and pious Catholic, shows the Tradition not to have been
general, and that the Church of this Age differs from that of those times, if
it Anathematize now, for what then was either approved of, or at least thought
not so horrid but it might be borne with. And again, though we agree upon what
will not serve to convince a full Tradition, yet we disagree about what will
serve; for allowing there were any controverted opinions delivered, with equal
Tradition to the Scripture (which I deny to have been, but would receive if it
so appeared) yet sure you begin at the wrong end, in the examination of what
those are, which ought to be done, by considering the testimonies of the first
ages, and not of the last, for in your own similitude of a rope, though to
help me to climb by if, you put but one end into my hands, yet you must show
me, that the other end is somewhere fastened, or else, for ought I know,
instead of getting up by it, I may only get a fall, and this fastening
appears not to me, till I be showed some more certain connection between the
Opinions of this Age, and those of the Apostolic times, then yet you have
done, or till you have answered those Arguments, by which, as I persuade my
self, I have made it appear, that it cannot be done,

As for the two places concerning the Popes and Councels Infallibillity, it is
not to my purpose to meddle of them, because of one side the way I have begun,
bears no need of those discourses, and on the other, I should engage my self
in Quarrels between Catholic and Catholic, obscure the matter I have taken
in hand, and profit nothing in my hearers, more then to be judged, peradventure
to have more learning, then wisdom to govern it withal.

de fide, which if you be not, then the Glue, which it is so bragged, you have
to keep you still at Unity, is dissolved and if you be, then you should both
have answered upon what grounds you are so, and have destroyed my Objections
against the possibility of certainty, knowing when it is, that these (which
used to be called the Church) have defined: finding therefore Altum Silentium,
where there was so much cause of speaking, makes me believe, that the cause why
you have not answered is, only because you could not, and then you have a
ready Apology, that Nemo tenetur adimpossibilia, which I believe the rather,
because I know, that to so clear a judgment as yours, that place of
Scripture, When two or three are gathered together, etc. which is so often
pressed for the Infallibility of Councels, must appear to make as much for
the Synod of Dort, as for the Council of Trent, and to so great a learning as
yours, it cannot be unknown how few (if any) of the Ancients have asserted
their Infallibility, and how many, both of the Ancients, and your Modernes,
have denied it; I am confirmed in this belief too, because you, I know, would
never have accepted that as a sufficient excuse from me, if I had avoided to
answer an Argument so, because Protestants are not agreed upon the point, if
you had thought it such, as that they ought to have been agreed upon it, and
truly this is as great and considerable a question, as any among us.

As for the two places of Fevardentius, which allows many Fathers to have
fallen into errors, I think it will not trouble him who is accquainted with
the course of this present Church, wherein diverse, who be thought great
Divines, fall into errors, for which their Books are sometimes hindered from
the print, sometimes recalled, or some leaves commanded to be pasted up, the
reason is, the multiplicity of Catholic Doctrine which does not oblige a man
to the knowledge of every part, but to the prompt subjection of the instruction
of the Church, wherefore many men may hold false doctrine inculpably, not
knowing it to be such, even now after the learned labors of so many that have
strived to open and facilitate by Method, what is true, and what is false; much
more in the Fathers times, when there was great want of so many Compilers as
these latter ages have produced.

Fevardentius confesses, proves plainly that, for which I intended it, which
was, the ridiculousnesse of proving their Doctrine to be true, by being
conformable to that of the Fathers, and yet making themselves Judges of those
Judges they appeal too, and confessing, that many of them erred in many
points, which if they did, they might as well do the same in those about which
we differ, although they agreed with you, and dissented from us.

Secondly, What both he confesses, and you confess with him, disproves that
way of knowing divine Truths which you propose, for neither the Doctors of the
ancient Church (who were sure more likely to know what was then taken for
Tradition, then any late Compilers) nor of the Modern, who had a mind to
deliver truth, and traced and followed your way of finding it, could err in
points of faith, if Qui docet ut didicit, he that teaches as he has been
taught, must still be in the right, for public Tradition, no learned man, at
least can be ignorant, not any man (say you) of what he was taught when a
Child, as the substance of his hopes for all eternity, and so cannot in
reason have his books either forbidden or pasted up, for delivering any thing
contrary to it.

Secondly, Who are these Censors who forbid and paste up books, certainly not
the Universal Church, nor yet the Representative, the latter is not always in
being, nor when it is, at leisure to consider and judge all authors, and of the
first these Authors are a part, if then they be fallible, (as they must be if
they be not the Church) why may not they err, and the Martyr-books speak
truth, which yet will easily by this means be kept from Posterity, if those
in the Dictatory Office dissent from it as they will be sure to do, if the
opinion contradict never so little the power or greatness of the Pope, upon
whose favor these Oecumenicall Correctors must depend, or they not long
remain in their places: and yet you expect that your adversary should produce
succession of their opinions in all ages, though nothing be let pass but what
a few please, and though when in time all of you are agreed (as you will soon
be or appear to be, if one side appear to be gagged) then this consent, though
thus brought about, becomes the consent of the Church, and a very notable
Motive.

And since you say, that what all are bound to, is only a prompt subjection to
the Church, why leave you it so in doubt, what is the Church, as if men were
tied to be subject, but must not know to what; you say indeed, that the
adherers to the Church of Rome are now the Church, but what they may be, you
will not plainly declare; So that if a Schism among them should happen, we
are all as farrto seek as if you had been wholly silent, for since the
infallibility lies not in the particular Church of Rome, and consequently the
adhering to her is not ever a sufficient note of the Church, (as you will not
say) nor is it among your selves de fide, since the Universal Church
(whatsoever she be) can never define any thing, and of the authority of the
definitions of the Representative, and of what constitutes both her and her
decrees, you refuse to speak, what remains there, to which this prompt
subjection is to be the only everlasting Note of the true Church, but only
the Truth whenever she appears; Thus as the Priests of Apollo (therefore
peradventure called Loxias) used to spread lies, and secure his reputation, the
first by the antiquity, and the second by the darkness of his Oracles, so does
your Religion gain upon many men, and secure her seflf rom many objections, by
the manyfold acceptions, and consequently difficulty of this term Church; For
whatsoever is said in Scripture concerning her being free from all spot, or
prevailing against the gates of Hell, or their danger who resist her, the first
meant (as I believe, and the place denies not by any circumstance) of the
Church Triumphant, the second of the Church of the Elect, and the third, of the
Professors of Christianity in general, or at most of those who are in all
necessary points Orthodox among them; That they without sufficient proof
resolve to be spoken of the Church in their sense they have fancied; That is,
some ever known body of Christians which must be still guide to the rest, and
then claim to be that, because no other (all else being more ingenious)
claims it besides themselves, whereas, if (considering that (...), and the
Oraculous truth of my great Lord Bacon's observation, that unless men in the
beginning of their disputes agree about the meaning of their terms, they must
end about words, where they ought to have begun) they had marked what other
sense these words were capable of, (for if it will here bear another, then
this cannot hence be concluded but by leave) they would then soon have seen the
weakness of their building, by the slightness of their foundation. Again,
they prevail much by working upon men's assents, by the means of their
modesties, and press it to be an intolerable pride to oppose their opinions
to the consent of the Catholic Church; whereas, if it be weighed how small a
part of it they mean by that word, and yet of them how many follow blindly the
decrees of one, and how soon those prevail against that few not backed by any
power who do not, it will then appear, that not only other Churches, but even
a John or a Thomas have as much reason to be lead by their own understandings,
as by the opinions and decrees of and Urban or a Gregory, upon which that
consent is so often founded; And as they make their advantage of this word in
their offensive wars, so do they in their defensive, for when they are
pressed unto the absurdity of their Tenets, then (though indeed they be
general) yet they pretend, that they are the opinions but of private, though
many men, and not of the Church; and again, when any Fathers (who yet
sometimes they say are wholly theirs) are showed to contradict some of their
Doctrines so plainly, that none of those subterfuges, which in one of their
expurgatory Indexes, they confess they often use, will serve to palliate it;
then they strive to escape by answering, that the Church had not then defined
it, whereas if it be examined, how far they consent about what is the Church,
and what are her Definitions (whereof they are not yet agreed, for some say,
she has defined what, others say, she has not) this only will be certainly
found, that it never can be certainly found, what are her opinions of any
point, or when she has declared her self: As (besides many other Arguments,
some pressed by my self, and others, by other Pens more fit to treat of so
weighty a matter) appears by your refusing to leave your Latibula; and
declare plainly your opinion concerning it, which if you saw defensible, and
you were all agreed about it, you would quickly have done, and not incurred
the reprehension of that Axiom, which teaches, that Dolosus versatur in
generalibus, which makes me think, that if this were generally enough marked,
you would no longer be able to dazzle any man's eyes with the splendid title of
Sons to the Catholic Church, as Alexander hoped to do those of the
Barbarians, with stiling himself (...), the Son of Jupiter, although indeed
he was so much the more moderate then the second, as never to deny, that any
other could be Son to the same Father, whereas you will not allow, that any
may have interest in your Mother besides your selves.

To conclude this Paragraph, give me leave to ask one question, and that is,
how your saying, that Truth is more easy to find now then in the Fathers
times, will agree, either with the way which you say, is the only Catholic
one to find Truth by (for sure such a Tradition was always equally easy to
find, and if the first ages had erred in it, we must of necessity, following
your advice, have followed their error too) or with the saying of so many of
your side, that if I should reckon them up, I should make a Catalogue of
Authors, equal to those of Photius, or Gesner, or Possevine, who all join,
that Truth was most likely to be most certainly known that time, which was,
in Campians words, Christo propior, ab hac lite remotior, nearer to Christ, and
consequently to Tradition, and to which, for that cause, all think fit to
appeal against us, or with that custom of your Church, which suffers none to
take Orders before they have vowed to interpret Scriptures according to the
Fathers, which if men now adays be more likely to find the Truth, then at
that time they were (as they must be, if truth in this age be more easy to be
found; whether through greater abundance of Compilers, or what else soever)
then this Vow is as much, as if they had vowed to leave the best way of
Interpretation and teaching, to follow the worst.

As for the two points, he says, avert him from Catholic doctrine, I am
mistaken, if he be not mistaken in both. The first is, that the Catholics do
damn all who are not in the Union of their Church. He thinks the sentence
hard, yet I think he will not deny me this, that if any Church does not say
so, it cannot be the true Church. For call the Church what you will; the
Congregation of the Elect, the Congregation of the Faithful, the Congregation
of Saints, or Just; call it, I say, or define it what you will, does it not
clearly follow, that whosoever is out of the Church cannot be saved, for he
shall not be the Elect, Just, Faithful, etc. without which there is no
salvation. How then can any Church maintain these two Propositious; I am the
true Church, and yet one may be saved without being in me:

out of her may be saved, therefore yours is not the Church: My Major is
included in your own saying, that those two Propositions are not maintainable
together: My Minor, though false, yet is also your confession (where you say,
that the Churches Proposition is not so cruel as it seems, though the words
be rough) and therefore so ought you to make my conclusion too: Besides, those
who exclude all from Salvation, who are out of the Church in the other sense,
meaning by it the Elect, as they are not like them in the wrong, so they are
not occasion of much harm, like them, who stiling the Church, a company of
men of such a belief, and under such a government, affirm an impossibility
of being saved out of it; for they giving no visible sign of who is in the
Church (for who can know the Elect, but the Electer) cause no want of Charity,
nor frequencie of War, and persecutions by it, as the others do, who having
made first a visible partition, least those who are out of it may draw others
out too, they send them out of the world by way of prevention.

But per adventure he is scandalized, that the Catholic Church requires
actual Communion external with her, which he thinks may in some case be
wanting without detriment of Salvation. But how would he have the Church
speak, which speaks in common,, but abstracting from such particular cases
as may change wholly the Nature of the Question.

joining with you in Communion, but because also you require joining with you
in opinions, and if it were only this, yet am not I any whit satisfied with
what you say for it, for with the true Church, that is the Commpany of true
believers, in points any way material (or rather the truest) I conceive it not
damnation sometimes not to communicate: For if they have any never so slight
errors, and which appears so to me, which yet they will force me to subscribe
to, if I Communicate with them, my assent would be damnable, or if they require
the same subscription to some truths, which yet after my real endeavors in
inquiry, appear errors to me, I doubt not but my refusal is no way damnable:
Neither can I absolve your Church concerning this her saying for your reason,
because she speaks in general, wholly abstracting from particulars, which
change the nature of the Question, for why does she so, why does she not
express her exceptions, or at least tell us, that the rule is not so general,
but that it will bear some, and not make men (who know not that she intends to
restrain at all, what she so absolutely pronounces, and who will find no
cause to take your bare word for her intentions) many times, at least to hate
them as Gods enemies, whom he loves as his friends, and believe them to fry in
Hell, who shine in Heaven? Howsoever if she use to express herself in rougher
words then her meaning is, how apt may she be to be mistaken in several of her
resolutions, and consequently how easy is it for some age to have
misunderstood the past, and deceive the following: Neither do I like your
example, because that is not to differ from the Church, but to mistake her
meaning, though even he, who should deny that there were three Gods, if he
thought that by the Trinity your Church so meant, must consequently think her
not infallible, and so by your grounds be consequently a Heretic.

The current of Catholic Doctors that no man shall be damned for infidelity,
but he who does wilfully misbeleeve, and that to do so it is required that
Faith be sufficiently proposed unto him, and what is to be sufficiently
proposed, is not determined amongst them. There wants not Divines who teach,
that even ignorantia affectata, does excuse from Heresy. On the other side it
is most certain, that no man is damned for not professing, what he is not
damned for not believing. Wherefore, profession being that which engrafteth a
man exteriorly in the Church, according unto the ordinary opinions of the
Catholics, it follows, that no man is condemned for not being of the Church,
who is not for infidelity, for which it is a very uncertain Case who be
damned, and who be not.

Spain, after long calling the Hollanders Rebels, at last for his own sake
descended to treat with them as free States, so those of your Religion, when
they hope to gain a Proselite, thunder out to him crudelity, and without any
of these Mollifications which you now use, that extra Ecclesiam Romanam nulla
est salus, there is no salvation out of the Roman Church. And Master Knot
peremptorily avers, that no Catholic of an entire fame ever taught, that a
Protestant so dying could be saved, yet when they are pressed with the
consequences, they can (as it seems) vouchsafe to give us better words, and
find (...) enough to soften this opinion, though such as bring them more
disadvantage in other considerations, then help in this. For first, as before
it seemed that you are not fully agreed either about the authority of the
councels, or what constitutes the Church, (by your avoiding to speak concerning
it) so now it seems, that neither are you resolved of what constitutes an
Heretic, and then what remains there for you to know, if what you account
infallible and what damnable, be yet both uncertain to you.

Secondly, Since you confess none to be a Heretic, but he to whom the truth
is sufficiently proposed, and when that is, you are not resolved: what a more
then Sythian Barbarousnesse is it to make a coal of a Christian, only upon
suspicion of Heresy? especially since the Pagans themselves had Christian
Charity enough to persuade them, that it was much better that a guilty person
should escape, then an innocent be punished: much more should you rather suffer
the tares to grow, then venture to pluck up the corn with it, and believe the
best, when the truth lies hid in a place so hard to search into, as is the
heart of man, into which (as none entered the Sanctum Sanctorum but the High
Priest) God only can have admittance.

The other point was of putting Heretics to death, which I think he
understands to be done vindicatively, not medicinally, I mean, imposed as a
punishment, and not in way to prevent mischief, and oppress it in the head.



If the Circumcelians were the first, that is, ancient enough for the
justification of the fact; although for Banishment, which also he seems to
reprehend, we know the first that could suffer it did suffer it, Arrius I mean,
by the hand of Constantine, whom he praises for a speech he uttered before he
knew the consequence of the danger, and seems to reprehend for his after and
better wits.

Erasmus wished to Augustinus Steuckius, which is, that you were but equal in
probando diligens, as you are in asseverando fortis: For how unlikely is it
that we should give you credit without proof only, (...), that the antiquity
of a thing, which began so long after Christ's Apostles, were all dead, is
enough to prove it lawful: Howsoever it would at most but prove it lawful, to
put such Heretics to death, as force men to do so in their own defense, for
such were they: Besides I object not only against this custom the not being
ancient, (for I conconfesse there might have been before a power to do so too,
though not used to the uttermost, though in likelihood what persuaded you to
use it, would have persuaded them to the same, if they had thought they had it)
but as being also condemned by Hillary, and Athanasius, and other Orthodox: For
though some punishment of a less degree were inflicted upon others too by
their own side, (as you truly instance) when their power prevailed; yet
Constantine says, not only in an Edict for liberty of opinions, (which he,
who was then Pope never appeared to stomach, as his successor, undoubtedly
would now do the like) (...), let no man trouble another, but let every one do
as his own soul will: but also gives this concluding reason against you for
it, (...). For it is one thing willingly to take upon them this combat for
immortality, and another to force them to it with punishment; and so in
whatsoever he did contrary to this in any case, wherein this reason held his
words, condemn his action: And whereas you say, that when Constantine made so
slight of the question between Arrius and Alexander, it was, because he knew
not the consequence of the danger: I shall desire to know of you whether you
must not confess, that there is now no King of your Religion so ill instructed
in it, (though none of them be never so learned or curious as Constantine was,
who, if any man in his dominion should arise, denying Transubstantiation, would
not presently know the danger of the consequence, and resolve him for an
Heretic, and to the stake instantly, and not speak against his opinion only
as impertinent, and de lana caprina, and (...), and if this had been as
resolved a thing then among Christians, to have come from Tradition, as
Transubstantiation is now amongst Papists, he would necessarily as soon have
discovered it too: Howsoever I believe his after-witts to have been his worser
wits, in punishing, though not in condemning of Arrius, and to me it yet
seems (for to be sure, not to speak Heretically, I will not speak obstinately)
that to have labored in stopping of disputes on both parts, and tying them to
Scripture Phrases, and to speak of God only in the Word of God, had been at
least in respect of Unity, not a worse way, then to have given an example to
what after followed, I mean, the frequent explication (with Anathema to boot)
of inexplicable mysteries; Neither would then so many questions have so long
troubled the Church, which for their slightness were unworthy ever to exercise
the Schools; But for that or any other mere error, as it may be for ought any
one knows, unlawful in any to punish at all, I by no means like not to put
to death, for the same seems to me it self (...), a sin above measure sinful,
though even the act of it proceeded from an opinion of doing God some service,
and that opinion from a mere error too, then I conceive but a material no
formal sin for the same cause, and so, neither this material Murderer, nor
that material Heretic, be guilty before God, who only can distinguish, and
to whom it is fit to be left. Howsoever the long doubt of some, and opposall of
other Orthodox to this course, and that arising not from their Policy or
Compassion, but their Conscience, not as thinking it unprofitable or unfit, but
unlawful, shows, that there was then no Tradition that the Apostles taught it
to be lawful so to use Heretics, upon which only, all the Infallibility,
which you claim for any belief or custom of your Church, is founded,

Saint Austine justifies such proceedings against Heretics.

Assassines, from whom Nature teaches us to defend our selves, and
consequently to re-offend them whenever Religion bars it not, experience
showing us the danger of merely defending, to be near to that too, of not doing
it at all) I know not that ever he did, nor do I believe it: That some degree
of punishment should be inflicted upon them, I confess he at last consented,
but chiefly to force them to come and see what the Church did, (whose actions
the Heretics impudently belied; as if they set pictures upon the altar, and
did what you both do and defend, and they did not) i. e. denied it. Howsoever
we have Saint Austine against Saint Austine, and not only his authority, but
his reasons more valid by much, then that when he says, that such oppressions
would make them think themselves vi victos, non veritate convictos, overcome by
force, not convicted by Truth, and consequently dislikes it, ne fictos
Catholicos habeamus, quos apertos Hereticos novimus, least they become from
open Heretics, but fained Catholics: Reasons, which (though these be not all
we have) in my opinion it was as impossible for him reasonably to answer when
he was living, as it would be now for him to do it when he was dead. Besides,
as he uses these strong arguments against it, so he is himself a strong
example against it, for the Church had lost this her so notable Champion, if
they then had been as severe to the Manichees as you are to us.

Saint Gregory uses the like against Pagans, (if I remember) and the Church
laterly has rather increased, then decreased in the practice of it.

Rome differs from that of Saint Gregory's times, it being now with her a
judged case, that Infidels may not be compelled to the Faith, as I am told is
showed by Valentia, Saint Thomas, Hartado, and others, the Church having no
power over those who are out of it, and therefore they please to say, that
(like them who among the Romans were only Cives ad oncra, liable to the taxes
of Citizens, without Interest in their Privileges) Baptism has made us of
the Church enough to be liable to her Punishments, though not to be benefitted
by her Communion: Though indeed the same cause why you would have Heretics put
to death, for fear of harming others with their opinions, me thinks should
extend to their punishment too, unless you believe us to be as bad as
Malefactors, and not them, or that their opinions are so irrational as not
likely to spread, and ours so reasonable, that against them the sword is the
best shield, and therefore (as Brennus did his) you put that into the scales
for want of weight, it being of giving Reasons as the Poet says it is of
giving Requitalls, Irasci quam donari vilius constat.

Another reason which persuades me that you are mistaken in what you say of
Gregory, (as this mistake facilitates my belief, that you are so about
Austines too) is that Bid tells, that some Romanists, having converted the
King of Kent, that King did not yet force any to become Christians, for (says
he) he had learned of these his Masters, that the service of Christ (WHICH
REASON EXTENDS FARTHER THEN TO PAGANS) must be voluntary, and not forced; Now
if these received what they taught from Gregory, (as you often tell us) then
either he did not as you often say, or thought that unlawful which himself
did; And howsoever this Custom has increased since is very unconsiderable,
for unless it have its authority explicitly or implicitly from the Apostles,
it can give none since, and unless it be proved to be well done at first, no
continuance can give this, or any other action more justification then at first
it had.

speech I believe is mistaken, the force of it being, that the banishment of
Bishops showed his faith, because the banished were Catholics, which showed
Lucius to be none.

Moses had meant as you would have him, he should not have said, only (...),
but (...), not indefinitelie the banishing of Bishops, but the banishing of
Orthodox Bishops, the leaving therefore of that out, wherein, according to you,
the whole sense of his Argument lay, seems to me plainly enough to show, that
he meant what they and you deny: especially he adding (as you may see in
Zozomon) their being punished by labor, as well as punishment, and then
saying, (...), which things are wholly, abhorring from Christ, and all right
Believers concerning God, and in Socrates, (...) for Gods servant ought not to
fight, for so he counted to punish.

But what can be said, if the Church uses that for the prevention of a greater
and more dangerous evil, which all politic Estates use for the remedies of
less, and tesse dangerous evils, and are commanded for it. For if Faith be the
way to Salvation, and Heresy be the bane of Faith; if Salvation the greatest
good, then the danger of a Countries being over-runne with Heresy, is the
greatest of dangers, greater then the multiplicity of Thieves, greater then the
unsurety of the ways, greater then a Plague, or Invasion; why then does not
reason force us to use means to prevent it, which the same reason and
experience teaches us to be most efficacious in this, and all other contagious
and gangrening maladies of the Commonwealth. I hope reason it self, and the
zeal of the Author to his own, and Countries salvation, will supply my
shortness in this, point, for supposing a Church be assured she is in the
right, and that the doctrine preached, as then leads to damnation; I know not
why Caiphas his words should not be prophetical in this case, and that truly
it does expedire, that Unus moriatur pro populo, and non tota gens pereat.



First, Malefactors plainly offend against their Consciences, at least, think
not themselves bound by them to commit their villainies (neither pretend they
otherwise) which they, whom you call Heretics, either bona fide follow, or do
for ought at least you can know.

Secondly, What are Malefices, must be known bef re Malefa ors, and Heresies
before Heretics; now of the first Mankind agrees, but of the second but you
only, a small part of Christians, and yet you differ too about the ways of
knowing them, and consequently, whether some things be Heresies or no (as for
example, whether the Oath of Alleagiance contain any) wherein since some of
you are deceived, me thinks it should incline you to think it not impossible
for you all to do so, in what you all agree to be such.

Thirdly, Malefactors are not, or should not be punished for such, without a
plain knowledge that such they are; but although there were an impossibility
of mistaking what is Heresy, yet there is no possibility of knowing who are
Heretics, the form of which is obstinacy, a secret, and (to man) an
undiscoverable quality, whom he only should punish who only knows.

Fourthlie, Malefactors are certain to hurt others, whereas neither are
Heretics sure to perswace any, and if they do, yet they may hurt none, since
who receives their belief bona fide, and through mere error, is unharmed by it.

Fifthlie, Whom they do harm, it must be brough their own fault, and by their
own consent, whereas without either, the Malefactors are cause of much
mischief, even to the most guiltless.

Sixthlie, Malefactors passing wholly un^^nish'd, peradventure not put to
death, would ^ring a certain destruction to the state, which temporal
Magistrates are appointed to watch over, which yet in speculative opinions is
not concerned.

Seventhly, The punishment even by death, of Malefactors brings not any
temptation of sinning, upon them, the same to others is in all probability a
cause to keep many from a careful search of Gods Truth, (least they might find
the punishable belief to be the true one) and from professing it, when they
think they have found it; both which are sins of the first magnitude.

Eigthly, This course with Malefactors was not, for ought appears, ever thought
unlawful in the purest times of Christianity, and was then in use, whereas
toward errors in belief, it was disallowed of them by the chief, and long
before death was at all inflicted upon them, though then understood as well the
danger of Heresy, and were as careful to preserve their flocks from all
danger by all lawful ways, as any since.

Ninthly, It no way redounds to Christ's Glory, that Malefactors be unpunisht,
but it makes much for it, that his Army appears to consist of Volunteers, and
not of Pressed men, that his Truth should prevail by no humane force, but
only by the power of the first teacher, and the light of the Doctrine, which
for us unbidden so to assist, is to think the Arc must fall, if we hold not
forth our hands to hold it up, and takes from it the honor of subsisting by
the way, by which it took root, when (to borrow Saint Chysostomes words)
(...). The weak were to hard for the strong, and twelve for the World, and that
(...), They being naked, and their adversaries armed.

Tenthly, That death is the most effectual way to suppress Malefactors, you
say reason and experience shows, and it is generally agreed of; but in this
case it seems even to your best men the worst course, as appears by Iburranes
resolution concerning the Hyper-Ephanians, by the 267 Page of grave and
judicious Cardinal D' Ossat his Letters, by the Epistle of Cardinal Richelieu
to his King before a Book of Controversy, and by Erasmus his Testimony, who
tells us, that a Carmelite having then this power in his hands, Ubicunque
saevitiam exercuit Carmelita, ibi diceres fuisse factum Haereseon sementum,
wheresoever he exercised his cruelty, he seemed to have sowed Heresy. All
which reasons make me believe, that there is much difference between the
striving to destroy these two sorts of men, and if there were not, yet for
fore-touched reasons, and others which I will touch at, I should as soon think
it unlawful to put Malefactors to death, as lawfully to kill Heretics. For
indeed since (...), it disadvantageth what you would aid; to seem to believe
that truth, without other assistance, would not sooner root out falsehood, then
that it, that the Orthodox are not more likely to cure the seduced, then to be
infected by them; and that there is no way to end the Heresies, but by ending
the Heretics: And thus you run into three inconveniences.

First, You put reasonable scruples into considering men's minds, least as a
Greek Orator says against Ulysses for striking Thersites, (...). It was a
sign he could not confute him, that he stuck him; so that it be want of
arguments, which makes you fall to blows, and cause them to suspect, that if
you were not (peradventure for some better reasons then appear to them)
diffident of your cause, you would give your adversaries leave to speak as loud
as them pleased, and not seek so suspiciously to stop their mouths, whilst
they dispute with you at as much odds, and upon terms of as much disadvantage
as Saint Paul did with the Grecian Jews, (...), he disputed against them, but
they went about to stay him.

Secondly, It destroies those plausible Arguments so often used of Unity, and
Tradition, and Multitude, for, first Uniformitie may be induced by power, but
Unity and Impunitie can never be parted; all other agreement being but as a
thief and a robbed person agreed, the one to take his purse, and the other to
give it again. Again Tradition it lames as much, for how can any man tell,
but that two parts claiming contraty Traditions, or one part claiming it upon
false grounds, and the other denying it, the truth may not by this force have
been overborn, when we receive not what men would have delivered Posterity,
but what Power would suffer them.

Again, how shall we know but that the greater part of your multitude believes
not as they profess^^; no man knowing his Neighbor to be of his mind when it
is so probable, that many may not think as they speak, when it is not lawful
for all to speak as they think.

Thirdly, By this way you are causes, that you suffer often where you have not
the State on your side, as much as you inflict when you have for though you
will say that none should punish but the Church, yet every divided company of
Christians, thinking themselves to be that, (that is to be the orthodox) will
use your own custom to your harm, and you will be shot like the Eagle in
Esope, (...), with your own feathers; and so Truth weresoever she be (if all
follow this way) will by force by many parties be opposed, and but by one
propagated and defended; so that not only in consideration of Christianity,
but even of Policy I mislike this course, as being always wicked, and often
hurtful, and more often uneffectuall: And for my part, I desire so much that
good be done for evil, that (though you be most fit of any to be so used, who
use us so where your power extends, and whose cruelty will extend with your
acquisition, if you make any, and you hold your selves, that impendens
periculum is cause enough for a war) yet I heartily wish all laws against you
repealed, and trust, that disarmed Truth would serve to expel Falsehood,
whereas now they being in force against you, give you the honor of a
persecution, and not being executed, give you not the fear of one: It is
truly said, Militia Christiana est Haereses expellere, but it needs this
limitation, sed armis Christianis, that Christian warfare employ only
Christian arms, which are good arguments and good life else if they use such a
course, as is more properly (...), and go to force that part of man, which is
liable to no power but that of persuasion, (which if it do not beget a true and
pious assent, in likelihood it will a damnable dissimulation, and which, if
Christ had meant for a prop for his Doctrine, he would as soon have at first
made it a part of the foundation, and have charged his Apostles not to shake
the dust off their feet, but to draw their swords out of the scabbard at those,
who rejected what they taught,) then it often (though sometimes by reason of
the different dispositions which reign at several times among men, and may
happen otherwise) misseth of the intended end, and works not often so much as
upon men's tongues, and never upon their Heads and Hearts: A great example of
which happened not long since, Calvin with all his works since the time they
were written, having scarce made so many Protestants in France, as I have
credibly heard it reported, that the Massacre made in a Night, which act though
I impute not to all those of your Religion, for many of them I know did, and do
mislike it, yet it both had its fountain from the Popes Legate, (and
consequently in all likelihood from the Pope, who gave God public thanks for
it) as one of his successors confessed to Cardinal D' Ossat, Page 432, and it
may be justified as well as any judicial proceeding, upon that reason which
you give, why Heresy may be stopped with the sword, least they who are wrought
upon by it, may work upon others.

To conclude, I should be better contented with this course, if the opinions
were infallibly errors, and infallibly damnable, and this were always an
effectual way, (and no other could be found more merciful) to stop their
spreading, but since you have no infallible way of knowing the Church to be
infallible in her definitions, and consequently, that the contrary opinions are
false, since you know not infallibly which is she, (for you pretend but
prudentiall Motives) since your knowledge having defined, is likewise fallible,
as depending upon many uncertain circumstances, since; not only the matter of
Heresy is thus uncertain, but the form too: for you confess you doubt
whether Ignorantia affectata be it or no, and since though the form were
certain, yet in whom, it is by no means plain, but rather impossible to be
known, (as who is obstinate, and consequently to whom it is damnable) since
this course often gives growth, and strength to that, from which it would take
even Being and Subsistence: I cannot but think you have cause to change your
proceedings, least not only you expel not, but least you increase Heresy,
and again least you oppose it not, but mistake the Truth for it, and applaud
your self for cutting off a Gangrened member, when you destroy a sound one, and
instead of ending a Heretic make a Martyr, and again least (allowing this to
be the Truth) yet you put to death innocent persons instead of guilty;
especially since if the opinions were damnable in whomsoever they were, yet
some better way might be found, (as close imprisonment or the like) to keep
them from harming with them, rather then (as you do by putting them to death,
when else they might live to be converted) to damn them certainly, least they
may possibly damn some others; Again for Protestants, who join with me in
believing that there is no way to know the true Church, but by true Doctrine,
nor to know that but by the Scripture, (for Universal Tradition seems to us
to deliver nothing but what is so plainly contained there, that it is agreed
upon) in them I believe it must be intolerable Pride, and rashness, (and the
same in Papists concerning those places out of which they would prove the
Churches infallibility) To conclude, this seems to me the sense of this place
of Scripture, therefore this infallibility it is, and no man can deny it, who
either gainsaies not his Conscience, or has it not mislead by some sinful
passion or affection, and therefore the deniers must be damned, and therefore
least they damn others, we will send them through one fire to another. And
this, though it be an equal fault in both Protestants and Papists to say and
do, yet it is more Illogicall in the former, as contradicting at first sight
all their Principles, and destroying the whole Platform upon which the
Reformation was built.

He urges afterward against the Unity of the Church, that it is none such as
we brag of, And I confess we brag of it, and think we have Reason. And if it
please him to look into the difference of our Country of England, and some land
of Barbarians, as Brasile, or such other, where they live without Law or
Government, I think he will find our bragging is not without ground. For
wherein is the difference betwixt a Civil Government and a Barbarous Anarchie?
Is it either that in a Civil Estate there be no Quarrels, or amongst
Barbarians there is no Quiet? The former would prejudice our Courts and
Justice; the latter is impossible even in Nature. What is then the goodness of
a government, but in a well Governed Country there is a means to end Quarrels,
and in Anarchie there can be no assured peace? This therefore is it we brag of,
that amongst us if any controversy arise, there is a way to end it, which is
not among them who parted from us. And Secondly, That there is no assured
agreement amongst those who parted from us, for although to day they agree,
there is no bond or tie why to morrow they may not disagree. These two things
we brag of, and I think the Author will not deny it. For he confesses that we
all agree, in that the Church is an infallible Mistress. Then it is evident,
that if in any controversy she interposeth her judegment, the controversy is
ended. He likewise confesses, that who part from us have no such definitive
authority amongst them, and that Scripture, whereon they rely, has no such
virtue to take up Controversies clearly.

Supposing that we agreed much less then you, yet a little, all in earnest,
that is enforced, is more considerable, then much constrained, and so
peradventure much of that much but in appearance; Besides, that you all agree
in those points, wherein if any disagree, he becomes none of you, is no more
then is so common to all Religions, that even the very. Anabaptists may say as
much for themselves; For either all the Parts of them remain of assent,
insomuch that they are all still of the same Religion, and so agree as well as
your Dominicans and Jesuits, or else their differences are such, as to make
them of several Religions, and then, why is want of Unity objected to them any
more then it is to Christians in general, among whom are so many divisions,
and yet not the whole, but the faulty party taxed? And truly in my opinion
some Questions among your selves are as great, not only as any among your
adversaries, but as any between you and them. I but you answer, we have a way
of being agreed, we reply, is it a way sure to lead to Truth as well as to
Unity, or else so might we have by going to most at three throws, and
resolving to stand to that. Besides, if you have, and make no more use of it,
it seems there is no such need that Questions be ended, as for that purpose to
introduce a necessity of an Ender. But say you, neither are all suits in the
Commonwealth ended; We reply, that yet truly those Judges, who should make no
more have end them, then your Judge does these, would deserve to loose his
place, but this they do as fast as the nature of the thing will permit; which
being or depending upon matter of Fact, cannot be known enough to be judged
before examination of witnesses, and the like, be ended, and if they willingly
defer the ending, they are confessed to be in fault by all men, but those who
hold Perjury to be none. But you seem to conceive our grounds faulty, as not
leading even to a possible Unity, whereas to a possible one I am sure they do,
(since what is concluded out of them by many, may be by all) nay indeed am
confident, that all who receive the Scripture for the only rule, and believe
what is there plain to be only necessary, would if they truly believed what
they profess, and were not lead aside either by prejudice, or private ends, or
some Popish relics of holding what they have long been taught, or following
the authority of some by them much esteemed, persons either alive or dead) soon
agree in as much as is necessary, and in concluding no necessity of agreeing
in more, there being no doubt, but it would soon appear plainly what is plain.

Besides if no grounds be sufficient for Unity, which produce not the effect,
then it seems, the grounds of your grounds, those Arguments, by which you
prove, that there is a Judge, and a general Council is it, are insufficient,
since they are not able to make all Christians about this question: Again,
although a Judge, and this Judge be received, yet this is still an insufficient
ground for Unity, since the Greek Church agree thus far with you (which is
as far as you agree with one another) and yet are not so bound by it to any
universal Unity with them, but that they esteem you Heretics, and are
esteemed so by you: and if you say, that it is not, because the grounds, upon
which the Infallibility of the Church are built, lead not sufficiently to
Unity, that we join not with you in believing them to be infallible, not
because the determination of general Councels is not a sufficient means of
Unity, that the Greek Church admitting their authority, admits not of your
opinions, but it is the fault of us (and of them) hardening our hearts against
the truth; then we may as well say, that some of those, who agree in our
grounds, yet disagree from our doctrine, not that the grounds lead not to
Unity, but that our Adversaries will not be lead; or if (as you do, and some
others of you sometimes) you confess, that they through an innocent error
dissent from you, and do this without any imputation in this respect to your
grounds, I hope it will be lawful for us to allow the same possipilitie,
without any disadvantage or prejudice to ours: Besides, say you, though we
agree to day, yet we may not to morrow, which to prove, were (...), pains
wholly lost, we confess: For though Tully make it an expression of his
contempt to Piso, in an Epistle to Atticus, Ita nihil est, ut plane quid erit,
nesciat, yet I take it to be a true saying of man in general, who knows
little of present things, and nothing of future; but this is common to us both,
for if we change not our opinions, we shall agree as we do, and if you change
yours you shall not, which is possible, for not only that opinion of the
Infallibility of your judges decrees may it self be altered, which holds
together all the rest, but some of you may holding that ground (like the Greek,
either change their opinions concerning the authority of such or such a
Council, as believing it unduelie called, factiouslie carried, or not general
as is pretended, or not so consenting as is requisite) or differ from the rest,
concerning the sense of the decrees: for whereas, you say, you agree that the
Church is an infallible Mistress, and when she interposeth her judgment, the
controversy is ended.

I answer, that, first, some of you, with whom I have spoken my self, hold,
that the Churches authority in defining, extends no further then to such
points, whereof Tradition is of one part (as in many controverted there is, I
believe, no such) and that this rule she may transgress, and so err.

Secondly, Neither the Dominicans nor their Adversaries, are very ready to
remain in suspense to await her decision, but define all ready concerning her
definitions, Cum utraque pars tenax contendat suam non aliam posse definiri
sententiam, either part tenaciouslie urging, that the contrary opinion cannot
be defined, which if they did to fright the Pope from defining, least the
condemned party being even before, should after make a Schism, they obtained
their end.

Thirdly, What are you the nearer to Unity for your Infallible Mistress the
Church, when you neither agree of any certain and proper marks to know her
by, nor when it is that she interposeth her judgment; some take it to be the
particular Church of Rome, others (of which number you are) all which
communicate with her, supposing the first to be true, yet not being de fide, it
will serve but ill by your rules to build our faith upon, and even when she
delivers her opinion is not certainly agreed, whether the people of Rome be to
have Votes, or only the Clergy, or of them, only the Pope with the
Cardinals, or the Pope only without them, if the Pope, whether, only in his
Chair, and what circumstances arc required to his decreeing in Cathedra, would
beget more questions: If all that communicate with her (as you say, it is as
things now stand.)

First, I would know whether they be sure to be at all times the Church, to
that you refuse to derermine, and so inclusivelie deny.

Secondly, It is not possible, that such a multitude should ever give any
sentence explicitelie, nor can we ever know, that it has even tacitelie done
so, if they be to decree only by representation, then how large a company
represents them with all their power, of whom that company is to consist, how
many of them are to agree to make it a binding sentence, etc. are things yet
undefined, and like to be, and if any go about to determine them, their power
being it self still a question, could not end these: Therefore, whereas you
say, that we have no definitive sentence (besides that truly to have one, and
not to know when we have one, is much alike;) I answer, that whenever the
Scripture shall seem to us to have defined, we are according to our doctrine
ready to yield, and so the controversy is ended (and sure the Scripture may
be said to be a definitive sentence, as well as the written Council of Trent)
and till then, though we differ about interpretations of not plain places, we
have as much Unity as you, who are not resolved upon the sense of many
decrees of that and other Councels: and if a desire and diligence to find the
true meaning of them, and an aptness to assent when it is found, be thought to
secure among you, those who mistake the true sense of these Councels, why
should not the same disposition in us toward the Scripture, be thought every
whit as sufficient, not only to keep us in unity, but to secure us from
danger.

To conclude, though unity be a thing much spoken of by you, yet I find it
chiefly only in your discourse; your differences are many and great, only
you say, you agree in what is necessary, and make the measure of things
necessary what you agree in, so the sum is, you agree in what you do agree
(which it is impossible you should not, though you had carried away the bays
from Bibrias his Tomb) eager against us, and yet divided among your selves,
like the state of an Army in Tacitus, Manente Legionum auxiliorumque, ubi
adversus Paganos certandum foret, consensu, and if your Church brag of such an
Unity, I perceive a small matter will make her brag.

Again, I do confess most English- men confess a Trinity, the Incarnation
and Passion of our Savior, but if to morrow, any one or more of them light
upon some Book of an Arrian, Trinitarian, or other Sect, so wittily written
that he puts probable solutions for the places of Scriptures, shows slight
ways how our well meaning forefathers may have slipped into such an Error,
what is there to retain those men from disagreeing with the rest of their
Brethren, and betake themselves to the Arrians? And when the heat is past
light upon some Rabbi, who shall cunningly exaggerate the absurdities, (as he
shall term them) of the Trinity, Incarnation; Say our Savior did strange
things in virtue of some Constellation, and delivering these things so
Oratorically, that for a new heat, some of these things shall seem more
conformable then his Arrianisme, what then shall hinder this man to become a
Jew, and at last to prove himself so great a Clerk as to write de tribus
Impostoribus: Take away the power of the Church, which every man does who
takes away the Infallibility, what can retain any man why he should not yield
to that discourse which seems fairest, seeing nothing is certain?

show ways of the same kind, how your ancestors may have slipped in that, and by
that into other errors, what is there to retain you with the rest of your
Brethren, and betaking your self to us? If you say this is impossible to be
done, so think the Protestants, that the Arrians can give them no probable
answer to their places of Scripture, and such as will seem so to some, is no
imputation to their grounds, since so may, and do our Answers and Objections to
some of you, who thereupon leave you, and yet you count not your grounds
disparaged. For my part, I profess my self not only to be an
Anti-Trinitarian, but a Turk, whenever more reason appears to me for that,
then for the Contrary, and so sure would you be too; for the pretended
infallibility of your Church could no longer hold you, if you thought you saw
reason to believe it fallible, as you must do, if all weighed, more reason
appeared of her adversaries side, either your proofs of her authority not to
be probable, or else your Doctrinestaught by her, more contrary to reason, then
her authority (though probably founded, yet not upon demonstrations) is
sufficient to caution, and answer for; It is true, so long as you stick to this
hold upon the Roman Church, you are sure to receive no error, but which she
offers you, (and indeed you need not, for those are enough) but that destroyed
(which is apter to be destroyed then most of the Protestants, as weaklier
supported by reason) then no error that a Protestant may fall into, but so may
you too, and the other is but such a Privilege, as I may have by sticking to
the English Church, as well as you to the Roman; And though this following your
guide, may be able, as long as she keep her self, to keep you from some
Ditches, into which you might otherwise fall, yet it may lead you unto others,
and indeed there is no error but by this way you are liable too, yea, even of
those which she now condemns, since though she changed her opinion, which is
neither impossible, nor unlawful, yet you are by your blind obedience to
believe that she had not, and to submit your understanding in this Question to
some distinction, though without a difference. These things then I dislike in
what you say.

First, Your saying, as though there is nothing to retain a Protestant from
being of any error, when it shall appear more probable to him then Truth,
therefore there were nothing to keep him from those errors, whereas you should
have considered, that the greater probabilities may serve reasonably to hold
him without a demonstration, and the evidence of the thing, without a guide,
and that if those be not ground enough for a man to fix upon, in how ill estate
are those of your Church, in the Question concerning the Church, in which they
follow no guide, nor have any demonstration, but profess they yield to her
authority, but upon prudentiall motives, which kind of arguments sure may as
well, and as fixedly preserve a Protestant in an Orthodox opinion against a
Heretic, as the authority of the Church no surelier founded, can you against
us: That every man should yield to that discourse which seems fairest to him,
I confess, it is always, not only safe and fit, but also necessary, even
for them who receive the Infallibility of the Church, since those who believe
that, believe it, because that appears fairest to them, and as you object to
us, the possibility of being persuaded from the truth by some witty Author,
why think you not the same Author may possibly too, appear to you to destroy
your prudentiall Motives, and so consequently your whole Faith, which is built
upon the Church, which is built upon them.

Secondly, I dislike your seeming to believe, that any grounds, which are not
demonstrative, are too slipperie to rest upon, as not only being contrary to
reason, but to your self, who told me before, that no more was required, then
a maine advantage on one side, and that we had reason to be satisfied with
Probabilities to guide our Actions in Religion, or since by them we were
content to regulate all the other Actions of our life.

Thirdly, I dislike in your own parties behalf your saying, that a Protestant
is in good likelihood to turn Arrian (for if you mean only that it is
possible, it concerns you as much as them) since this seems to infer, that
the Scriptures do make more probably for them (which if they did, it is not
Heresy) and to contradict all those, whom both parts call Fathers, who think
enough plain in Scripture, not only to keep, but also to convert men from
Arrianisme, as it appears, by their employing so solelie those Arms against
them, that they needed the admonition of a Heretic, to counsel them to the
use of another.

Fourthlie, I dislike your saying, that after being made an Arrian, he is not
unlikelie to turn Jew, especially, that he is likely to be persuaded by any
exaggeration of the Absurdities in the Trinity, since both Grotius and other
Authors, seem to say, that the Jews have their Trinity too in the same
Notion, and howsoever the Arrian is so fully persuaded already, that those
are absurdities (that persuasion being almost the form of that opinion which
constitutes him an Arrian) yet the exaggeration of them can never work upon
him; And for the Constellation you speak of, it were so irrational, and so
unprovable a Crotchet, that no Oratorie could ever make it seem to a
reasonable man, to have any inclination to sense (and a fool may be made
believe any thing, how contrary soever to his grounds) unless he be of those,
who are given over to vain imaginations, because they love darkness better
then the light, and the fault of no particular men's understanding or will, is
to lead any man to condemn his grounds, for they are to be accused, not of
whatsoever he concludes who holds (or rather in this case has held) them, but
only of what he concludes reasonably according to them. Besides, for this
cause it appears strange to me, that trusting to Scripture alone, and without,
meaning the Church, for my certain guide, should bring a man into danger or
parting with his Christianity, since nothing can hold a man longer then he
believes it, and as long as our ground, the Scripture, is by him believed, no
man can possibly turn either Atheist, or Jew; and he who leaves to believe
your ground, the Church, cannot by that be any more withheld from either:
Besides that, I think it is impossible (I am sure it is irrational) that any
of you should believe in Christ, upon the authority of Christ's Church, since
believing the latter (which claims no authority but from Christ)
praesupposeth the belief of him, and so Christianity is not the apter to be
overthrown through the absence of that, upon which it is not built: I fear
rather, least your doctrine known to be grounded it self upon Tradition by
such a way, according to which, a Jew would have much advantage of a Christian,
may incline a man to Judaisme, and your sides general slighting all ways of
knowing Gods will, but only by the Church, and then neither proving her power
stronglier, nor teaching how to know her plainer, may make men sink into
Atheism, by being persuaded by you, in letting go other strong holds upon
Truth, and receiving such weak ones from you. Not to speak of your loading
Christianity with such impossibilities as the Pillars of it, which are not
absolute Demonstrations (of which it may be scarce any thing is in nature
capable but lines and numbers) are able to bear, and using all your Wits and
Industries to persuade men, that it is equally unsafe to refuse any part of
your Religion, as to receive none; and so instead of making these your beleefs
admitted for the sake of Christianity, causing Christianity to be rejected
because of them.

But peradventure some may attribute Power to the Church without
infallibility, whom I would have consider but what himself says. For his
Church by the Power it has must either say I command you to believe, or I
command you to profess this, whether you believe me or no. The second, I think
no enemy of equivocation will admit, and the former it is as much as if it
should say, I know not whether I say true or no, yet you must think I say true.

doing in the Persons of Ambassadors between God and us, and having no absolute
Letters of Credence to bid us to believe that God says, whatsoever they say,
he says, (as much as can be wrested out of Scriptures for any present Church,
being said of the Scribes and Pharisees, who yet proved themselves not
infallible) our best way is in my mind to examine their Commission, and if they
can show that they treat according to that, to submit to them, (as in the same
case we must to any of the Layetie) or rather to God, of whose commands they
are but Organs, and if not, to beware of their Leaven. Yet it may be that some
man may hold that such an opinion is to be believed only, because such a
Church proposes it, and yet not believe her Infallible, since he may think her
authority (by reason of her Learning, Multitude, Sanctity, Unity and
Liberty) to be more probable then any contradicting argument, and that men are
to assent to what is most probable, and truly if he could prove to me his
Major, I am already so much of the opinion of his Minor, that I should join
with him in his Conclusion.

So that if I understand any thing, where there is no Infallibility, there is
no Power; where no Power, no Unity; where no Unity, no Entity; where no Entity,
no Church.

And how many more do whole Bodies, and Sects of men agree about without any
such power, though they differ in other points, as so do you too; Do not
Protestants agree with you about many, and the chiefest credenda, and about
almost all the merely facienda? Though not persuaded to this agreement by the
Power of any Judge which they do acknowledge; Nay if men could be at Unity
about no thing, which were not proposed by some Guide, or defined by some Judge
endued with such a power, how came all you to agree, that there is some such
Guide and Judge required, since sure you receive not that upon its own
authority, and if men may find the necessity of a Guide and Judge, without
any Guide or Judge, and remain in Unity about that, why may they not also
about whatsoever is clearly taught by God, which reason assures us to be all
that is necessary, and if you say that all things necessary are not clearlie
taught, because we do not (though it proves not that we might not) agree upon
them, then I reply, that I may as well say, that neither is it clear that
there is a Guide, because we dissent from you in it, although receiving the
authority of the Scripture (out of which Cardinal Perron confesses, that
Saint Austine says, that both the necessity of your guide, the Church, and
she her self, are to be known) and reason, which as they may be plain in this
point for you, and yet persuade us not, so may they be in all necessary
points, and yet we who make theirs our ground, not persuade one another.

As little see I why there can be no Entitie nor Church, where there is no
Unity.

For the first, though there be small Unity among Christians, yet certainly
Christians and their Religion have some Entitie, indeed if what you say were
true, there were no Entitie in yours.

For the second, I know not why two parties over-valuing their differences may
not conceive each other to be none of the Church, and so declare even by
excommunications, and yet remain both Parts of it, (for if a Husband
misse-suspecting his Wife of Adultery, declare her to be no longer his Wife,
this cannot make her give over being so, if the bond be indeed not broken) as
well as Chrysostom and Epiphanius, both excommunicated by each other, and yet
both Saints, or as particular men may by your own confession be interiorly in
the Church, although seeming out of it, even to the Church her self, and so
those be both of the Church between whom there is no Unity: For not only in
your own Cariophilus his words (...), but also though the persons have power,
yet if the cause have not sufficiency, I take you to agree, that an
excommunication is but a brutum fulem, as Victors of the Asian Bishops: The
best therefore and strictest definition (and which I think you will not refute)
which I can give for the Church, is (especially in that sense, as out of it
there can be no salvation) those who are desirous to know Gods Will, (or
Christ's at the strictest, for I am not certain, nor I believe is it defined
among you, whether an explicit knowledge of Christ be absolutely necessary to
Salvation, though I know no guiltless ignorance of him, can bring unavoidably
upon any man eternal torments) and ready, when known, to believe and follow
it; and sure many of these may eternally disagree even in points which are
necessary, abstracting from particular cases, and yet their differences not
exclude them from the Church, and consequently a Church may be without Unity,
Quod erat demonstrandum.

Now for the Controversies mentioned, besides that there is a means to
terminate them, they be such as bring no breach of the ancient life and action
of Christians, which all those opinions do, which for the most part are reputed
to make Heretics.

will not venture to do in haste, though we much desire it at your hands, that
we may know if none of them be such.

That some controversies amongst us are not resolved, is a thing necessary
amongst humane affairs, where things must have a time to be born, to increase,
to fall, and the greater things are, the greater is their Period.

Spain concerning Fornication being but a Venial Sin: And whereas you say,
the greater things are, the greater their period, though this be ture in some
things, yet not in this, for sure the greater a difference is, the greater
necessity is there that it be soon decided, and so if your decision have power
to effect it, as you pretend among you it has, it must fall as soon as it is
born, like the (...), Creatures that live but a day.

Wherefore I do not see why this may hurt the Church, more then the suits,
which hang in our Courts, prejudice the government of the Land.

may be some of them, then sure they hurt the Church much, and more then the
Suites hurt the Government, which their hanging hurts not at all, though it
hurts (sometimes unavoidablie) the Parties. But if where there is no Unity,
there were no Commonwealth, as you say, where there is no Unity, there can be
no Church, then the Government were much prejudiced by the Suits, as your
Church by this rule, is made no Church by the differences; And indeed if men
were not agreed about the power of the Governors (as you are not about some of
your questions) it must be a maime to the government of any Commonwealth, as
consequently these are to the government of your Church.

The last point of the Authors discourse is, to show how errors might have
crept in, wherein I shall have no opposition with him, for I do not think the
question is, how they should creep in, but how they should be kept out.



For the Fluxibility of humane Nature is so great, that it is no wonder if
errors should have crept in, the ways being so many; but it is a great wonder
of God that none should have crept in. This nevertheless I may say, if the
Author will confess, as I think he will not deny, but that it is disputable,
whether any error in sixteen Ages has crept in, this very thing is above
Nature. For if there were not an excellency beyond the nature: of corruptible
things, it would be undeniably evident, that not one or two, but thousands of
errors had quite changed the shape of the Church in so many years, tempests,
dis-unions, want of Commerce in the body of the Church.

Grecians have let in any, yet you will not allow, that upon this we should
adjudge to her Infallibility: Nay if it were demonstrative, that your Church
had yet never erred, yet it would but unwillinglie follow, that she never
could, since all things necessary are so plain (without the confession of
which you seem to tax God) and it is naturally so plain what is plain, that
I cannot but think it a miracle, that some one body of Christians among so
many, should be free from any such dogmaticallie-defended error, especially if
Truth were so indifferently sought after as it ought to be, and Passion were
not often called to counsel, and Reason shut out of doors.

But this one Maxim, that she receives her Faith by Tradition, and not from
Doctors has ever kept her entire: And he that will show the contrary, must
show how it should come to pass, that those, who lived in such an Age, would
say unto our Children, this we received from our forefathers, as taught them
by our forefathers, to have been received from Christ and his Apostles from
hand to hand, which if it could not be, the question is resolved, that no error
is in the Church of God, which holds her faith upon that Tenure.

usque ad nauseam, what I have heretofore answered, as that others differing
from you, hold upon the same Tenure that your selves have not always held, nor
hold not upon it, etc. I will only tell you what Cardinal Perron tells me of
the Jews out of Isidore, and that is, that they seeing in the book of Wisdom
so clear proofs of Christ, plotted together to put it out of the Canon, which
serves not so much his turn, if it were so, as it makes against yours, and
shows how that might come to pass, which you judge impossible, the Posterity
of the Jews having been deceived by this Complot; although pretending at
least, and for ought appears, believing that the Tradition of their Church is
still uncorrupted.

And truly if the Author desires to examine diverse Religions, let him look
their maine ground wherein they rely, and see whether that be good or no: And
I think amongst Christians he shall find but two, Tradition, and Scripture,



Secondly, I think it reasonable not only to examine what their Principles
are, but whether they do constantly follow them, for a man may write awrie,
that has a straight Ruler, if he observe it not carefully.

And the Catholics only to rely upon Tradition, and all the rest upon
Scripture; and he shall see, that relying upon Scripture cannot draw to an
Unity those who rely upon it, and more then one cannot rely upon Tradition.

Communion, although you now account them both Scismaticks and Heretics: If
all Catholics do rely upon Tradition as their only grounds, and Tradition
be so sure and infallible, and unmistakable a deliverer, as you would persuade
us, how come so many differences between you, some ever counting those things
matter of Faith which others do not; which differences show, if they all rely
on these Questions, upon the ground you say they do, that more then one may
rely upon Tradition, and neither can Tradition, any more then Scripture, draw
to an Unity, those who rely upon it; if either neither part do, or either do
not, then Tradition is not the Common Tenure of Catholics, (not only in
different opinions, but even in such as are most de fide, and as both parts
think nothing but a definition (and some scarce that) to make the Holders of
the contrary to them Heretics) since if it were, neither could one part of
Catholics rely upon any other then the Catholic ground, neither is it to be
doubted, but that side which builds their opinion upon an Heretical foundation
against another, believed upon a Catholic ground, would long agone have been
among you exploded, and the Pope have been not only with so much pains
persuaded, but even of himself ready to have past his censure upon them; if
not for their superstructions, yet for their foundation.

If I will be a Christian, I must be of one side.

one from the other, Scripture from Tradition, though not from the present
Tradition of a Part, but from the Universal one of the first Christians
opposed by none, but by them, who were instantly counted by the generallitie
heterodox, and as soon opposed as known. If you mean that I must be of one side
in points, I wholly deny any such necessity.

By falling on the one side, I see my fortune in thousands who have gone before
me, to wit, that I shall be to seek all my life time, as I see they are, and
how greatly they magnify very weak pieces. On the other side, I see every
man who follows, as far as he follows it, is at quiet.

Austine had been damned if he had died in his search, nor consequently any
other in his case. And whereas you say, that all who follow the other, are at
quiet as far as they follow it, I answer, So are all who fixedly believe
themselves to follow an infallible (although indeed a false) Guide, as the
Mahumetans, being led by their Mufty,: Which proves Quiet, no sufficient
caution for Truth, nor Security for Safety, and that, supposing yours the
more easy and satisfying way, it follows not that it is the more reasonable:
And for what you say of a man's duty to judge himself rigorously, whether he
seek as he ought, I subscribe to that opinion, and approve of your Council.

Besides this, he must have this care, that he seek what the Nature of the
subject can yield, and not as these Physicians, who when they have promised no
less then immortality, can at last only reach, to some conservation of
health, or youth in some small degree; So I could wish the Author well to
assure himself, First, that there is possible an infallibility, before he be
to earnest to be contented with nothing less. For, what if humane nature
should not be capable of so great a good, would he therefore think fitting to
live without any Religion, because he could not get such a one as himself
desired, though with more then a man's wish.



He that will make a judgment in an Art he is not Master in, if he be
deceived, it is to be imputed to himself. The Phrase commands us to believe
every man in his Art, he who knows and understands himself believes not.
Therefore when we see Masters in an Art, we are not skild in, oppose us, we
may believe we are in the wrong, which will breed this Resolution in the Author
of the discourse, that if himself be not skild in all those ways in which he
pursues his search, he must find himself obleiged to seek Masters, who be both
well skilled, and the matter being subject to faction also, very honest, and
upright men, or else he does not quitt himself before God.

Tully in a Complement would persuade one of his Friends, that Nemo est qui
sapientus mihi possit suadere meipso, yet I dare not choose (as you would have
me) some Master to search for me, and believe him blindfold, (though if I
would, I see no cause why to choose any from among you, who have so many able
Teachers at home (for you confessing that the matters are subject to Faction,
and it being certain, that not only who are honest is impossible to be
known, but that eagerness and desire to have, what they think Truth, prevail,
makes even the honest men sometimes deviate from the line of exact honesty,
and lie for God, which he not only needs not, but forbids, (as is to be seen
too frequentlie in the Quotations of both sides) I conceive it the best way to
follow my own Reason, since I know I have no will to cozen my self, as they may
have to cozen me: Especially since neither could I build upon such a way, an
assent of such a degree, as your Church requires, since such Masters, although
learned, which I being unlearned may be deceived in, and honest, which all men
might be deceived in, yet not infallible, could not in reason make me
infallibly certain of the Orthodoxnesse of that side, which they should choose
for me: So that what was said by the Pagan Solomon Socrates, (who yet was no
confident man of his knowledge) (...), is my resolution too, and indeed in
effect if not wholly, yet almost every man's, for those who trust their Reason
least, yet trust it in this, that some other instead of it is to be trusted,
and so choose who they are to trust, against which the Arguments either from the
fallibilitie of Reason in general, or in this particular remain equally, an
ignorant man being as likely to be deceived in the choice of his Guide, as in
that of his Way, and that course being rather the shorter then the better, as
venturing in the same, and no stronger a Bark, only venturing all his wealth
at once.

It is not all one not to incur damnation for infidelity, and to be in state
of damnation; for the man to whom infidelity is not imputed, may be in state
of damnation for other faults; as those were, who having known God by his
works, did not glorify him as they ought.



Nay, they may be damned for want of Faith, and yet not be damned for
incredulity, As for example sake, if when they have sinned, they know not what
means to have them forgiven, though they be without fault in not believing,
nevertheless dying without Remission of sin, they are not in sat to come to
life everlasting.

how to purge himself from them then he could possibly know, God would not be
desirous of the Salvation of all men, and it would seem agreeable to no Mercy,
nor to any Justice, except that Summum jus, which ever has been thought
condemnable in man, and consequently incompatible in God.

As the man who should venture into a wood without a Guide, although he did his
best to have a guide, nothing less might fall out of his way as well as he who
neglected the taking of one; so if God sent us his Son to show us the way of
Salvation, as well is he like not to be saved who never heard of such a way, as
he that heard of it and neglected it, for neither of the two goes that way:
And who goes not on the way, is not like to come to the end.

seeing what it is not his fault that he does not see, is agreeable to the
common Notions of Justice, and God, and it is a very good Negative way to try
superstructions by, to see whether they agree with these grounds of all
Religion, whereof, rather then believe such men should be damned, I would
believe they should be annihilated, or keep your Children company, and have
poenam damni, though not sensus.

I know God is good and merciful: But I know his decrees as far as we know
are dispensed by the order of second Causes, and where we see no second Causes,
we cannot presume of the effects; and how am I assured he will send Angels to
illuminate such men as do their endeavors, that their Souls may not perish.

Pagans, was showing them that their Religion taught such things of their Gods,
as no Reason would allow not to be dishonorable to the Diety. Now truly if
when by this Argument we have rooted out the Pagan Gods, we lay as strange
imputations upon the God of the Christians, what effect is it likely to
produce, but only to make men call for their old Gods again, and think that
we had as good kept those, who delighted in the Sacrifices of men, who deposed
their Fathers, and eat their Children, as have changed hardly for the better.
It is reported in the Ecclesiastical History that a Painter for drawing Christ
in the likeness of Jupiter, had his hand dried up, and certainly they who
figure him to themselves, and others with Attributes so contrary to his, and
more fit for a Jupiter, do him much more wrong, then if they had drawn him Tela
trisulca tenentem, with a thunder bolt in his hand. What Master, Father, or
King, would not be esteemed a Tyrant, who should inflict not only an
infinite, and an eternal, but a slight and a short punishment upon a Servant,
Child, or Subject, for not doing when commanded, what the Commanders saw with
all his endeavors, which he had diligently applied, he could not do; and shall
we lay such an aspersion upon that God, (who though he be Justice it self, is
more Merciful then Just, who is (...), the Father of Mercies) as that like a
Pharaoh, he should exact Brick, when there is no possibility of getting Straw.
You may believe what you think fit, but rather then I will believe that any
man's Soul that has done his endeavors, not only shall, but that it is
possible it should perish, (although not illuminated by Angels, which yet, if
Illumination were necessary, I know some way or other he should have) rather
then I will believe, either that any be damned for what is no sin, or that sin
is (...), somewhat out of our power, (which if we thought, it would be soon out
of our care) rather then when God has so often told us, That he desires not
the death of a sinner, I will give him the lie, and say, that he desires his
damnation, even as a Creature without any reference to his sin, by chalking out
only such a way from Hell, which it was impossible for his search to lead him
into, and so make him as much a worse Father then Satan, as to damn is worse
then to devour; rather I say then this, I will make yours, or the Pagan
Legend, Ovids Metamorphosis, my Creed; nor would I be a member of the Christian
Church, if this belief were a necessaries part of Christian Religion, but
should cry out with Averroes, (whom Transubstantiation kept a Pagan) Sit anima
mea cum Philosophis, for the excellency, and purity of the doctrine in all
other points tending wholly to the honor of God, and the common happiness of
man, he sanctified life, constant sufferings, and wonderful Miracles of the
Divulgers of it, the wonderful progress of it, (not a much less Miracle then
they) the weak things of the World confounding the strong, and Fishermen
confuting Philosothers, that a Doctrine to strict and contrary to humane
desires, and not only barring from so much pleasure and glory, but also
making the Sectators liable to such cruelty and contempt, should persuade so
many, and so wise persons to leave present things in hope of future, all this
and whatsoever else, any Raimond, Seband, Vives, Plesiis, Charron, or Grotius,
could either more sharply design, or more eloquently express, would not
reasonably prevail, if such a block as such a Doctrine were laid in the way,
(of which sort your Religion has yet more) and that one dead fly would
corrupt the whole ointment; the excellency of the rest of the Doctrine of
Christianity would be thought the Art, and the great and and many miracles
would be thought the Act of some evil Genius, such as befriended Apollonius,
to ensnare men by those means into the belief of that opinion, which so much
derogates from the Maker of things, and the prevailing of it, though a very
probable argument, would not serve for a Passe-Port to such an impossibility.

But far more do I doubt, whether ever man, who had not the way of Christ, or
even of those who walked in it, did ever do his best (except some few, and very
few, perhaps not two of Christ his greatest Favorites) and was not so
culpable, that his Perdition would not have been imputed unto himself. God of
his mercy put us in the score of those of whom he says, He will take pity
upon whom he pleases, and Compassion of them he pittieth.



To conclude, I am to make two very contrary excuses; The one that my Paper
has left some things in yours unanswered: The other, that I have answered
others too often.

Of the first, I protest (which the Reader will believe me in) nothing is left
out, in which I conceived any weight of Argument lay, but only such things,
as though they were superfluous for the Logic, yet conduced to the Rhetoric
of your work, an eloquent Treatise, being always like a hopeful young Man, in
quo aliquid amputandum.

Of the Second, My Method, or rather my no Method was one, and your own
Repetitions another Reason, so that you may the better pardon me that fault, of
which your self are a partie-cause.

But to seal up all, I desire you, that how little assent soever you give to
my Arguments, you will be pleased to give credit to my Assertions, when I
seriously profess my self,

Your very much obliged and thankful Servant.

Mr. Walter Montague his Letter to the Lord of Faulkland.
My Lord,
AFter much debate concerning the fittest expression of my duty to your
Lordship, whether I ought by silence, seek to suspend your belief of the
declaration of my self, I have made here, or by a clear profession of it,
assure you of what I may only fear to present you with, as apprehensive of a
mis-interpreted affection; I conclude, what was most satisfactory to my first,
and immediate duty to God, was most justifiable to my second; and derivative to
Nature. Therefore I resolved so soon, to give you this ingenious account of my
self: The greatest part of my life capable of distinction of Religions, has
been employed in places, and conversant with persons, opposite to the Faith I
was bred in, therefore it had been strange, if Natural curiosity, without any
spiritual provocation, had not invited to the desire of looking with mine own
eyes upon the foundation I stood upon, rather there holding fast blindfold by
my education, to agree to be carried away always after it, insensible of all
shocks I met to unfasten me, and besides, I was solicited with the reproaches
Protestants press upon Catholics, that they blindly believe all the
Impostures of the Church, without any illumination of the Judgments, this my
thoughts enjoined, the clearest information of my self of the differences
between us I could propose to my capacity.

So at my last journey into Italy, I did employ all my leisure to a more
justifiable settlement of my belief, as I then imagined, by a confirmation of
my judgment, in what had been introduced by my birth and education. I began
with this consideration, that there were two sorts of questions between the
Catholics and Protestants, the one of Right or Doctrine, the other of Fact or
Story; As this, whether Luther were the first Erector of the Protestants Faith,
whether it had a visible appearance of Pastors and Teachers before his time, I
resolved to begin my enquiry with the Question of Fact, for these Reasons.

First, Because they were so few, and so comprehensible by all capacities, and
the controversies of doctrine so intricate, and so many, as they required much
time and learning for their disquisition, only I found my self unprovided for
both those requisitions for this undertaking, and for the decision of the
other, I needed not much presumption to believe my self a competent Judge,
when it consists only in the perusal of authentic Testimonies.

Secondly, I considered, that there was no one point of controverted doctrine
whereon all the rest depended, but that this one Question of Fact was such, as
the dicision of it determined all the rest, for if Luther could be proved to be
the Innovatour of the Protestants faith, it was necessary evicted, of not being
the true ancient Apostolical Religion. Therefore I began with this enquiry,
which Protestants are bound to make to answer to this Objection, to find out an
existence of some Professors of the reformed Doctrines before Luthers time: for
finding the Catholics were not obliged to prove the Negative, it was my part,
to prove to my self the Affirmative, that our Religion was no innovation by
some preexistence before that, but in the perusal of all the Stories or
Records, Eccesiasticall, or Civil, as I could choose, I could find no
ancienter a dissension from the Roman Church then Waldo, Wickliffe, or Husse,
whose cause had relation to the now-professed Protestancy, so as I found an
intervall of about eight hundred years from the time, that all the Protestants
confess a Unity with the Church of Rome down to those persons, without any
apparent profession of different Faith. To answer my self in this point, I
read many of our Protestant Authors who treated of it, and I found most of them
reply to this sense, in which I cite here one of the most authentic, Doctor
Whitaker in his Controversy 2.3. page 479. where they ask of us, where our
Church was heretofore for so many Ages? We answer, that it was in secret
solitude, that is to say, it was concealed, and lay hid from the sight of men,
and further, the same Doctor, Chap. 4. page 502. our Church always was; but
you say it was not visible, does that prove that it was not? No, for it lay hid
in a solitary concealment; to this direct sense, were all the answers that ever
I could meet to this Objection; I repeat no more, these places being so
positive to our point. This confession of Invisibilitie in our Church for so
many ages did much perplex me, it seemed to me, even to offend Natural reason,
such a derogation from Gods power or providence, as the sufferance of so great
an Eclipse of the light of this true Church, and such a Church as this is
described to be, seeming to me repugnant to the maine reason, why God has a
Church on Earth, which is to be conserver of the Doctrine, Christ's precepts,
and to conveigh it from age to age, until the end of the world. Therefore I
applied my study, to peruse such arguments as the Catholics brought for the
proof of a continual visibility of the true Church down from the Apostles
time in all Ages, and appearance of Doctors teaching and administering the
Sacrament, in proof of this I found they brought many provisoes of the
Scripture, but this text most literal, of the fourth of the Ephesians, Christ
has placed in his Church, Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Saints, till we meet in the Unity of the Faith, and next the discourse, upon
which they infer this necessary visible succession of the Church, seemed to
me, to be a most rational and convincing one, which is to this effect,
Natural Reason not being able to proportion to a man a cause that might
certainly bring him to a state of supernatural happiness, and that such a
cause being necessary to mankind, which o herwise would totally fail of the
end it was created for, there remained no other way, but that it must be
proposed unto us by one, whose authority we could not doubt of, and that in so
plain a manner, as the simplest may be capable of it as well as the learned.
This work was performed by our Savior, from whose mouth all our Faith is
originally derived, but this succeeding age not being able to receive it
immediate from thence, it was necessary it should be conveyed unto them that
lived in it, by those that did receive it from Christ's own Mouth, and so from
Age to Age until the end of the world; and in what Age soever this thread of
doctrine should be broken, it must needs be acknowledged for the reason above
mentioned, that the light, which should convey makind through the darkness of
this world, was extinguished, and mankind is left without a Guide to infallible
ruin, which cannot stand with Gods providence and goodness, which Saint
Austine affirms for his opinion, directly in his book de Util. Cred. Cap. 16.
saying, If divine providence do preside over humane affairs, it is not to be
doubted, but that there is some authority constituted by the same God, upon
which going, as upon certain steps, we are carried to God; nor can it be said,
he meant the Scriptures only by these steps, since experience shows us the
continual alteration about the right sense of several of the most important
places of it, that what is contained there, cannot be a competent rule to
mankind, which consists more of simple then learned men; and besides, the
Scriptures must have been supposed to have been kept in some hands, whose
authority must beget our acceptance of it, which being no other thing then the
Church in all Ages, we have no more reason to believe, that it has preserved
the Scriptures free from all corruption, then that it has maintained it self
in a continual visibility, which Saint Augustine concludes to be a mark of
the true Church, in these words, in his book Cont. Cecill. 104. The true Church
has this certain sign, that it cannot be hid, therefore it must be known to
all Nations; but that part of the Protestants is unknown to many, therefore
canno be the true; no inference can be stronger then from hence, that the
concealment of a Church disproves the truth of it. Lastly, not to insist upon
the allegation of the sense of all the Fathers of the Church in every several
Age, which seemed to me most clear; that which in this cause weighed much with
me, was the confession and testimony of the approved Doctors themselves of the
Protestant Church, as Hooker in his Book of Eccles. Pol. page 126. God always
had, and must have some visible Church upon Earth: and Doctor Field, the first
of Eccles. cap. 10. It cannot be, but those that are the true Church must be
known by the profession of truth; and further, the same Doctor says, How
should the Church be in the world, and nobody profess openly the saving truth
of God; and Doctor White in his defense of the Way, chap. 4. page 790. The
providence of God has left Monuments and Stories for the confirmation of our
faith; and I confess truly, that our Religion is false, if a continual
descent of it cannot be demonstrated by these monuments down from Christ's time;
this appears unto me a direct submission of themselves, to produce these
apparent testimonies of the public profession of their faith, as the
Catholics demand; but this I could never read, nor know of any that
performed; for Doctor White himself, for want of proof of this, is feign to
say in another place in his Way to the Church, page 510. The Doctors of our
faith, has had a continual succession, though not visible to the world, so
that he flies from his undertaking of a conspicuous demonstration of the
monuments of his faith, to an invisible subterfuge, or a belief without
appearance; for he says, in the same book in another place, page 84. All the
eternal government of the Church may fail, so as a local and personal
succession of Pastors may be interrupted; and page 403. We do not contest for
an external succession, it suffices that they succeed in the doctrine of the
Apostles and Faithful, which in all ages did embrace the same Faith; so as
here he removes absolutely all external proof of succession, which before he
consented to be guided by. I cannot say, I have verbally cited these Authors,
because I have translated these places, though the Original be in English, yet
I am sure, their sense is no way injured; and I have chosen to allege Doctor
Whites authority, because he is an Orthodox Professor of the Protestant Church;
the reflection of the state of this question, where I found the Protestants
defend themselves, only by flying out of sight, by confessing a long
invisibility in their Church in appearance of Pastors and Doctors; the same
interpretation left me much loosened from the fastness of my professed
Religion, but had not yet transported me to the Catholic Church, for I had an
opinion, that our Divines might yet fill up this vacancy with some more
substantial then I could meet with, so I came back into England, with a
purpose of seeking nothing so intentively as this satisfaction, and to this
purpose I did covertly (under another man's name) send this my scruple to one,
whose learning and sufficiency I had much affiance in, in these terms, whether
there was no visible succession to be proved in the Protestant Church, since
the Apostles time down to Luther, and what was to be answered to that
Objection, besides the Confession of invisibility for so many ages, to this I
could get no other answer, but that the point had been largely and learnedly
handled by Doctor White, and many other of our Church: upon this I resolved to
inform my self in some other points, which seemed to me unwarrantable and
suspicious in the Ceremonies of the Roman Church, since I had such an
inducement as so little satisfaction in a point that seemed to me so
essential; and in all these scruples, I found mine own mistake in the belief
of the Tenants of the Roman Church, gave me the only occasion of scandal,
not the practice of their doctrines, and to confirm me in the satisfaction of
all them, I found the practice and authority of most of the ancient Fathers,
and in the Protestant refutations of these doctrines, the recusations of their
authorities, as men that might err, so that the question seemed then to me,
whether I would rather hazard the erring with them, then with the latter
Reformers, which consequently might err also in dissenting from them: I will
not undertake to dispute the several Tenants controverted, nor doubt that your
Lordship will suspect, that I omitted any satisfaction in any of them, since my
resolution, of reconciling my self to the Roman Church, is not liable to any
suspicion of too forward or precipitate resignation of my self, my judgment
perchance may be censured of seducement, my affection cannot be of corruption.

Upon these reasons I did, soon after my return last into England, reconcile
my self to the Roman Catholic Church, in the belief and convincement of
it, to be the true ancient and Apostolic all by her external marks, and her
internal objects of faith and doctrine; and in her I resolve to live and dye,
as the best way to Salvation: When I was in England I did not study
dissimulation so dexterously, as if my fortune had read it to me, nor do I now
profess it so desperately, as if it were my fortunes Legacy, for I do not
believe it so dangerous, but it may recover, for I know the Kings wisdom is
rightly informed, that the Catholic Faith does not tend to the alienation of
the Subject, it rather super-infuseth a Reverence and Obedience to Monarchy,
and strengthens the bands of our obedience to our Natural Prince, and his Grace
and Goodness shall never find other occasion of divertion of them from the
natural usual exercise of themselves, upon those that have the honor to have
been bred with approbation of fidelity in his service, nor can I fear, that
your Lordship should apprehend any change in my duty, even your displeasure
(which I may apprehend upon the mis-interpreted occasion) shall never give me
any of the least recession from my duty, in which profession I humbly ask your
blessing; as

Your Lordships obedient Son
Paris 21. November. 1635.
The Lord of Faulklands Answer to a Letter of Mr. Mountague, justifying his
change of Religion, being dispersed in many Copies.
I Was desired to give my opinions of the Reasons, and my Reason if I misliked
them; having read and considered it, I was brought to be persuaded.

First, because having been sometimes in some degrees moved with the same
Inducements, I thought that what satisfied me, might possibly have the same
effect upon him. Secondly, because I being a Lay man, a young man, and an
Ignorant man, I thought a little Reason might in liklyhood work more from my
Pen, then more from theirs, whose Profession, Age, and Studies might make him
suspect, that it is they are too hard for him, and not their Cause for his.
Thirdly, Because I was very desirous to do him service, not only as a man,
and a Christian, but as one, whom all that know him inwardly, esteem of great
parts, (and I am desirous somewhat to make up my great want of them, by my
respect to those that have them) and as an impartial seeker of Truth, which I
trust he i^, and I profess my self to be, and so much for the cause of this
Paper: I come now to that which it opposes.
FIrst then, whereas he defends his search, I suppose he is rather for that to
receive praise, then to make Apologies, all men having cause to suspect that
gold which were given with this condition, that the Receiver should not try it
by any Touchstone.

Secondly, He says, that there being two sorts of Questions, the one of Right,
or Doctrine, the other of Fact, or Story; As whether the Protestants Faith had
a visible appearance before Luther, he resolved to begin his enquiry with the
matter of Fact, as being sooner to be found, (because but one) and easier to be
comprehended: To this I answer, by saying, that if they would not appeal from
the Right Tribunal, or rather Rule, which is the Scripture, those many might
easier be ended then this one, (we building our Faith only upon plain places,
and all reasonable men, being sufficient of what is plain) but if they appeal
to a consent of Fathers, and Counsels, whereof many are lost, many not lost
not to be gotten, many uncertain whether Fathers or no Fathers, and these,
which we have, and know, being too many for almost any industry to read over,
and absolutely for any memory to remember, (which yet is necessary, because
any one clause of any one Father, destroies a consent) and being besides liable
to all the exceptions which can be brought against the Scriptures, being the
Rule, as difficulty, want of an infallible Interpreter, and such like, and
being denied to have any infallibility, (especially when they speak not as
witnesses, which a consent of them never does against us) by one party, which
the Scripture is allowed to have by both, then I wonder not if he think such a
way so uncertain, and so long, that he was willing to choose any shorter cut,
rather then travel it: Neither do I believe this other to be so short, or so
concluding as he imagines, for if he consider the large extent of Christian
Religion, so that we know little from any indifferent Relator of the opinions
of the Abissins, so great a part of Christendom, if he consider the great
industry of his Church in extinguishing those whom they have called Heretics,
and also their Books, so that we know scarce any thing of them, but from
themselves, (who are too partial to make good Historians) if the consider how
carefully they stop men's mouths, (even those of their own) with their Indices
expurgatorii, it will then appear to him both a long work to seek, and a hard
one to find, whether any thought like Luther in all Ages, and that he concludes
very rashly, who resolves that there was none, because he cannot find any,
since they might have been visible in their times, and yet not so to us, (for
men are not the less visible when they are so, for not being after remembered)
as a man may be a Gentleman, though he know not his pedigree: So that as I will
not affirm that there were always such, because I cannot prove it, so neither
ought they to make themselves sure there were none, without they could prove
that which is impossible, and therefore no Argument can be drawn from thence;
and if it could be proved, that such a no-waies-erring Church must at all times
be, I had rather believe that there were still such, though we know them not,
which may be true, then that theirs is it, which in may opinion cannot.

Thirdly, He says that he could find no one point of controverted Doctrine,
whereupon all the rest depended, but that this one Question of Fact was such,
as the decision of it determined all the rest.

To this I answer, That the Question of the Infallibility of the Pope, at
least of those who adhere to him, which they call the Church, is such a one, as
if determined, must determine all the rest, and not only to us, but to all
men, whereas this (though granted necessary, and determined to his wish) would
indeed conclude against us, but not for them, since the Greek Church would put
in as good a Plea upon the Title of Visibility, as that of Rome, and he would
be to begin anew with them, when he had ended with us.

Fourthly, He gives his reason, If Luther could be evicted to be the Innovator,
his Religion is then evicted of not being the true ancient and and Apostolical.

To this I answer, by confessing the consequence; but he might be the
Renovator, and no^ the Innovator, and then no such consequence follows.

Fifthly, He says we are bound to find an existence of some Professors of the
reformed Religion before Luther, which requirie is bound upon his supposition
of the necessity of a continual succession of a visible, and no-waies
erroneous Church.

Now I will first examine the sense of his terms. By the first, I conceive by
a place he cites out of Saint Austine, that he means visible to all Nations,
but I pray, has his been always so, I mean at least (for many Centuries) to
those Nations, which Columbus has not long since discovered.

By the second term Church, I suppose he means a Company of Christians
holding neither more, or less then Christ taught, (for in a more large sense,
no man denies the Church to have been always in some degrees visible) and in
this sense, I not only deny it necessary, that it should be always visible,
but that it should always be, for I doubt whether there be, or for a long
while, have been any such.

Next, That such a one he means, appears, because when Catalogues have been
brought of some, who in all Ages have differed from them in things which we
hold, his side would not accept of them, because they agreed not with us in all
things, and yet when Campian intends to prove all the Fathers to be his, he
uses only this course of instancing, in some things wherein they agree with
him, (though sometimes not so much, but rather the contrary ought to be
inferred, as in the instance of Polycarpus, for comparing his words with the
History, it will appear, that he concluded him a Papist for not being
persuaded by the Pope) though they differed from them in many other, as indeed
all the notable Fathers did in more then one point. I will therefore say, that
if this be required to showing that a Church has been ever visible, it is,
more then either part can do, and therefore I hope they will come upon better
consideration to confess that not necessary for us to do, which is impossible
for themselves. For let any man look into Antiquity, I will not say without
all prejudice, but without an absolute Resolution of seeing nothing in it that
contradicts his present belief, and if he find not some opinions of the Church
of Rome as unknown unto Antiquity, as either he, or I; as the Popes Indulgences
having power to deliver out of Purgatory, confessed by Bishop Fisher, and
Alphonsus de Castro, where they treat of Indulgences, if he find not others at
first unknown, after known, but not held de fide, which are so at Rome, as
Prayer to Saints, their enjoying the Beatificall Vision before the day of
Judgment, Tom. 9. An. 726. de fide and Simbol.
the Assumpti of the Blessed Virgin, and herbeing free from all actual sin, if
he find not some wholly unknown, and absolutely condemned, which we condemn,
as the lawfullnesse of Picturing God the Father, whereof the first is confessed
by Barronius in the Margent to an Epistle of a Pope, 2 Lib. C. 2.
which says the same, and the latter to be found in many places of Saint
Austine, Lactantius, and others, nay if he find not that all the Doctors,
Saints, Martyrs of the two first Ages (I mean as many as are now extant, and
speak of it) held something, which both parts condemn, as the opinions of the
Chiliasts; If I say, he find not this, or I show him not that he might have
found, it I profess I will be ready to spend my life for that Church, against
which I now employ my Pen: So that this will be the end, neither of your
Churches have been always visible, only the difference is this, that we are
most troubled to show our church in the Latter, and more corrupt Ages, and they
theirs in the first and purest, that we can least find ours at night, and they
theirs at Noone. And whereas he expects that Doctor White should stand to this,
to confess his Religion false, if a continual descent of it cannot be
demonstrated, if he himself will please to grant as much as he exacts, if he
but continue in this resolution, and in this search, I doubt no more but that
he will soon leave to be a Papist, then I should doubt if I saw him now
receiving the Communion in the Kings Chapel, that he had done it already.

Sixthly, His Reasons for the necessity of the Visibility follow, because the
contrary were a derogation from Gods Power or Providence.

I anser, To say he could not keep the Truth exactly in men's belief, were to
derogate from Gods Power, to say he had not given sufficient means to find the
Truth, and yet damned men for error, the first would be a derogation from his
Providence, the second from his Justice, but to say he suffers men to err, who
neglect the means of not erring, and that he damnes none for a mere error, in
which the will has no part, and consequently the man no fault, derogates from
none of the three, but says he, this is repugnant to the maine reason why God
has a Church upon Earth, to be the conserver of the Doctrine of Christ, and to
conveigh it from Age to Age.

I answer, To conserve it is every man's duty, but such as they may all fail
in, and indeed is rather the the form of the Church, then the end of the
Church, an exact conservation making an exact Church, and a less perfect
conserving, a less perfect Church. As for conveighance of Doctrine, the whole
Church conveighs none, whereof many (if his be it) have had but little
conveyed to them. Particular Christians (especially Pastors) teach others,
which it is every man's duty to do when he meets with them who want instruction,
which he can give, and they are likely to receive, yet is not the instruction
of others every man's maine end.

But Mr. Mountague I know persuades him, that some body of men are appointed to
conveigh this Doctrine which men are to receive, only because they deliver it,
and this I absolutely deny, for we receive no Doctrine from the Church upon the
Churches authority, because we know her not to be the Church, till we have
examined her Doctrine, and so rather receive her for it, then it for her.
Neither for the conveighance of the Truth, is it necessary that any company of
men in all times hold it all, because some may conveigh some Truths, and
others another, out of which, by comparing their Doctrine with the Scripture,
men may draw forth a whole and perfect body of Truth, and though they deliver
few other Truths, yet in delivering Scripture (wherein all necessary Truth is
contained) they deliver all, and by that Rule, whosoever regulates his life and
Doctrine, I am confident, that though he may mistake Error for Truth in the
way, he shall nerve mistake Hell for Heaven in the end.

Seventhly, His next reason is their common Achilles, the fourth of the
Ephesians, which he chooses only to employ like his Triarios, his main Battle,
leaving his Velites, his light-armed Soldiers, some places too allegorical,
even in his own opinion to stand examination.

The words are these, He has given some Prophets, some Apostles, Verse. 11.12 13
some Evangelists, some Pastors, and some Doctors. For the instauration of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edification of the body of
Christ, till we all meet in the Unity of Faith, and the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the Age of the fulness of
Christ. That we may be no more Children, tossed and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, etc.

Now out of this place I see not how a Succession may be evinced, rather I
think it may, if that Apostle meant none.

For first, He says not I will give, but he has given, and who could suppose
that the Apostles could say, that Christ had given, then the present Pope and
the Doctors who now adhere to him.

Secondly, Allow that by what he has given, were meant he has promised,
(which would be a gloss not much unlike to that which one of the most witty,
and most eloquent of our Modern Divines, Doctor Done, notes of Statuimus (i)
abrogamus) yet since these several Nounes are governed by the same Verb, and
no distinction put, it would prove as well a necessity of a continual
Succession of Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, as of Pastors, and Doctors,
which is more then either they can show, or pretend they can, so that it seems
to me to follow, that these were then given to do this till then, and not a
Succession of them promised, till then to do this, and so we receiving and
retaining the Scriptures, wherein what they taught is contained, (as we would
any thing else that had as general and ancient a Tradition, if there were any
such) need no more, for if he say that men are tossed for all the Scripture, I
answer, so are they for all their Doctors, nay, if these keep any from being
tossed, it is the Scripture which does it, upon which their authority is by them
founded upon their own Interpretation and Reason, who yet will not give us
leave to build any thing upon ours out of plainer places, and though they tell
us, that we cannot know the Scriptures but from the Church, they are yet feign
(as appears) to prove the authority of the Church out of Scripture, which
makes me ask them in the words of their own Campian, and with much more cause
Nihilne pudet Labyrinthi?

Eighthly, There follows another reason to this sense, that reason not being
able to show man a way to eternal happiness, and without such a one man would
fail of the end to which he was ordained, it must be proposed by an infallible
authority in so plain a manner, as even the simple might be capable of it,
which being performed by our Savior, it must be conveyed to succeeding Ages
by those, who heard it from him, and whenever this thread failed, mankind was
left without a Guide to inevitable ruin.

I answer, That though all this granted, it proves not against us, for we have
the Scripture come down to us, relating Christ's Doctrine, and written by those
that heard it, which the simple are capable of understanding, (I mean as much
as is plain, and more is not necessary, since other Questions may as well be
suffered without harm, as those between the Jesuits and the Dominicans about
Praedetermination, and between the Dominicans and almost all the rest about
the Immaculate Conception) and those who are not, neither are they capable out
of Scripture to discern the true Church, much less by any of those Notes
which require much understanding and learning, as Conformity with the Ancients,
and such like.

Ninethly, The same answer I give to this, serves also to the following words
of Saint Austine, for whereas Mr. Mountague concludes, that he could not mean
the Scriptures as a competent Rule to mankind, which consists most of simple
Persons, because there has been continual alterations about the sense of
important places.

I answer, That I may as well conclude by the same Logic, that neither is the
Church a competent Guide, because in all Ages there have also been disputes,
not only about her authority, but even which was she, and to whatsoever reason
he imputes this, to the same may we the other, as to Negligence, Pride,
Praejudication, and the like, and if he please to search, I verily believe he
will find, that the Scriptures are both easier to be known then the Church, and
that it is as easy to know what these teach, as when that has defined; since
they hold no decrees of hers binding de Fide, without a confirmation of the
Popes, who cannot never be known infalliblly to be a Pope, because a secret
Simony makes him none; no not to be a Christian, because want of due intention
in the Baptizer makes him none, whereof the latter is always possible, and the
first in some ages likely; and in hard Questions a readiness to yield when
they shall be explained, me thinks should serve as well as a readiness to
assent to the decrees of the Church, when those shall be pronounced.

Tenthly, He says that the Scripture must be kept safe in some hands, whose
authority must beget our acceptance of it, which being no other then the church
of all ages, we have no more reason to believe that it has preserved that free
from Corruption, then it self in a continual visibilitie.

I answer, That neither to giving authority to Scriptures, nor to the keeping
of them, is required a continual visibility of a no-waies erring body of
Christians; the Writers of them give them their authority among Christians, nor
can the Church move any other, and that they were the Writers, we receive from
the general Tradition and Testimony of the first Christians, not from any
following Church, who could know nothing of it but from them, (for for those
parts, which were then doubted of by such as were not condemned for it by the
rest, why may not we remain in the same suspense of them that they did) and for
their being kept and conveyed, this was not done only by their Church, but
by others, as by the Greeks, and their is no reason to say, that to the keeping
and transmitting of records safely, it is required to understand them
perfectly, since the old Testament was kept and transmitted by the Jews, who
yet were so capable of erring, that out of it they looked for a Temporal King,
when it spoke of a Spiritual; and me thinks the Testimony is greater of a
Church which contradicts the Scripture, then of one which does not, since no
man's witnessing is so soon to be taken, as when against himself, and so their
Testimony is more receiveable, which is given to the Scriptures by which
themselves are condemned. Besides the general reverence which ever has been
given to these Books, and the continual use of them (together with several
parties, having always their eyes upon each other each desirous to have
somewhat to accuse in their adversaries) give us a greater certainty, that
these are the same writings then we have, that any other ancient book is any
other ancient Author, and we need not to have any erring Company preserved to
make us surer of it: Yet the Church of Rome, as infallible a Depositarie as she
is, has suffered some variety to creep into the Coppies in some less
material things, nay, and some whole Books (as they themselves say) to be
lost, and if they say, how then can that be rule whereof part is lost? I reply,
That we are excused if we walk by all the Rule that we have, and that this
makes as much against Traditions being the Rule, since the Church has not
looked better to Gods unwritten Word, then to his written, and if she pretend
she has, let her tell us the cause why Antichrists coming was deferred, which
was a Tradition of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians, and which without impudence
she cannot pretend to have lost? And if again they say, God has preserved all
necessary Tradition. I reply, so has he all necessary Scripture, for by not
being preserved, it became to us not necessary, since we cannot be bound to
believe and follow that we cannot find.

But besides, I believe that which was ever necessary is contained in what
remains, for Pappias says of Saint Mark, that he writ all that Saint Peter
preached, as Irenaeus-doth, that Luke writ all that Saint Paul preached, nay,
Vincentius Lirinensis, though he would have the Scripture expounded by ancient
Tradition, yet confesses that all is there which is necessary, (and yet then
there was no more Scripture then we now have) as indeed by such a Tradition as
he speaks of, no more can be proved then is plainly there, and almost all
Christians consent in; and truly I wonder, that they should brag so much of
that Author, since both in this and other things, he makes much against them,
as especially in not sending men to the present Roman Church for a Guide, a
much readier way, (if he had known it) then such a long and doubtful Rule, as
he prescribes, which indeed it is impossible that almost any Question should be
ended by.

Eleventhly, He brings Saint Austines authority to prove, that the true Church
must be always visible; but if he understood Church in Mr Mountagues sense, I
think he was deceived, neither is this impudent for me to say, since I have
cause to think it but his particular opinion, by his saying (which Cardinal
Perron quoted) that before the Donatists, the Question of the Church had never
been exactly disputed of, and by this, being one of his maine grounds against
them, and yet claiming no Tradition, but only places of Scripture, most of
them allegorical, and if it were no more, I may better dissent from it, then
he from all the first Fathers, (for Dionysius Arcopagita was not then hatched)
in the point of-the Chiliasts, though some of them ( Pappias and Irenaeus)
claimed a direct Tradition, and Christ's own words.

Secondly, As uses this kind of liberty, so he professes it in his
nineteenth Epistle, where he says, that to Canonical Scriptures he had learnt
to give the reverence, as not to doubt of what they said, because they said it,
from all others he expected proof from Scripture or Reason.

Thirdly, The Church of Rome condemns several opinions of his, and therefore
she ought not to find fault with them who imitate her example.

Twelfthly, He adds two reasons more, The consent of the Fathers of all ages,
And the confession of Protestants.

To the First I answer, That I know not of any such, and am the more unapt to
believe it, because Mr. Mountague vouchsafes not to insist upon nor to quote
any, which I guess he would have done, but that he misdoubted their strength.

Secondly, Suppose that all the Fathers which speak of this, did say so, yet
if they say it but as private Doctors, and claim no Tradition, I know not why
they should weigh more then so many of the now learned, who having more helps
from Arts, and no fewer from Nature, are not worse searchers into what is
Truth, though less capable of being Witnesses to what was Tradition.

Thirdly, They themselves often profess they expect not to be read as Judges,
but as to be judged by their and our Rule, the Cononicall Scriptures.

Fourthly, Let him please to read about the Immaculate Conception Rosa
Salmeron, and Wadding, and he will find me as submissive to Antiquity, even
whilst I reject it, as those of their own Party; for they to prefer new
opinions before old, are feign to prefer new Doctors before old, and to
confess the latter more perspicatious, and to differ from those of former
times, with as little scruple as he would from Calvin, (whom Maldonat, 6 Cap.
St. Johan.
on purpose to oppose, confesses he chooses a new Interpretation, before that
of all the Ancients, which no witness but my eyes could have made me believe)
nay, and produce other points wherein their Church has decreed against the
Fathers, to persuade her to do so again, althoug Campian with an eloquent
brag, would persuade us, that they are all as much for him, as Gregory the
thirteenth who was then Pope.

To the Second I answer, That Infallibility is not by us denied to the Church
of Rome, with an intention of allowing it to particular Protestants, how wise
and learned soever.

Thirteenthly, He says next, that he after resolved to inform himself in other
points which seemed to him unwarrantable, and superstitious, and found only
his own mistakes gave him occasion of Scandal.

To this I answer, That I cannot well answer any thing, unless he had
specified the points, but I can say that there are many, as picturing God the
Father, (which is generally thought lawful, and as generally practiced) their
offerings to the Virgin Mary, (which only differs from the Heresy of the
Colliridians, in that a Candle is not a Cake) their praying to Saints, and
believing de side that they hear us, though no way made certain that they do
so, and many more, which without any mistake of his might have given him
occasion to be still scandalized: For whereas he says that those points were
grounded upon the authority of the ancient Fathers, which was refused as
insufficient by Protestants.

I answer, that none of these I name have any ground in the Ancientest, nay,
the first is by them disallowed, and if any other superstition of theirs have
from them any ground, yet they who depart from so many of the Ancients in
several opinions, cannot by any reason be excused for retaining any error,
because therein they consent, nor have the Protestants cause to receive it from
them as a sufficient Apology, neither has he to follow the Fathers rather
then Protestants, in a cause, in which not the Persons, but the Reasons, were
to have been considered. For when Saint Hierome was by this way both brought
into, and held in a strange error, though he speaks something like Mr.
Mountague, Patiaris me errare cum talibus, Suffer me to err with such men, yet
he could not obtain Saint Austines leave, who would not suffer him, but
answered their Reasons, and neglected their Authorities.

Fourteenthly, He speaks of his Religion super-infusing Loyalty, and if he had
only said it destroyed or weakened it not, I (who wish that no doubt of his
alleagiance may once enter his mind, to whom we all owe it, but profess my
self his humble Servant, and no ways his enemy, though his adversary) would
then made no anser, but since he speaks as if Popery were the way to
obedience, I cannot but say, that though no Tenet of their whole Church (which
I know) make at all against it, yet their are prevailing opinions on that side,
which are not fit to make good subjects, when their King and they are of
different persuasions. For besides that Cardinal D' Ossat (an Author which Mr.
Mountague, I know, has read, because whosoever has but considered State
matters, must be as well skilled in him, as any Priest in his Breviary) tell
us, that it is the Spaniards Maxim, That Faith is not to be kept amongst
Heretics, and more, that the Pope intimated as much in a discourse, intended
to persuade the King of France to forsake the Queen of England; he says
moreover, speaking in another place, speaking about the Marquizat of Saluces,
that they hold at Rome, that the Pope, to avoid a probable danger of the
increasing of Heresy, may take a Territory from the true Owner, and dispose of
it to another, and many also defend, that he has power to depose an Heretical
Prince, and of Heresy he makes himself the Judge; So that though I had rather
my tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth, then that I should deny that
a Papist may be a good Subject, even to a King whom he accounts an Heretic,
since I verily believe, that I my self know very many, very good: yet Popery is
like to an ill air, wherein though many keep their healthes, yet many are
infected, (so that at most they are good Subjects but during the Popes
pleasure) and the rest are in more danger, then if they were out of it.

To conclude, I believe that what I have said may at least serve (if he will
descend to consider it) to more Mr. Mountague to a further search, and for
Memorandums in it, which if it do, he will be soon able to give as much better
Reasons for my conclusion, (that such a Visible Church neither need, nor can be
showed) as his understanding is degrees above mine. I hope also by comparing
the body of their belief, and the ground of their authority, the little that
can be drawn out of the fourth of the Ephesians, with the Miriads of
contradiction in Transubstantiation, he will come to see, that their Pillars
are too weak to hold up any building, be it never so light, and their building
is too heavy to be held up by any Pillars, be they never so strong, and trust
he will return to us, whom he will find that the has causelessely left, if he
be (which I doubt not) so ingenuous, as not to hold and opinion, because he
has turned to it, nor to stay, only because he went.

FINIS.

