A FVLLER ANSWER TO THE MODERATOVR, WHEREIN
His Argument of Advantage and Disadvantage is so opened, as that he is laid
open too, and made manifest to be an impostor, most grossly abusing King and
Kingdom.

Worthy all men's observation, who, with an entire heart, wish Peace to both.

Proverbs 25. 26. When he speaks fair, believe him not; for there are seven
abominations in his heart. I Am not like one, that takes a Dog by the ears,
for I meddle with a matter belonging unto me Prove. 25. 17.
: In my Countries peace, I have peace; and while war is in her gates, I shall
have no rest in my spirit. Peace is the mother blessing, we all as brethren of
the same mother (but for our unnatural divisions, there are great thoughts of
heart) are pretenders to it, we seem to follow, and pursue after it. The
Answer to the Moderatour before this, assures us by the same word, The Hea^ens
and Earth have for their continuance, That all the powers on Earth cannot
ac^mmodate a peace there; Our impieties, ungodly policies, Idols, and lying
vani^^es, have thrust away our Peace: and now that it is taken from the Earth,
it cannot be regained, till we have made Peace with Heaven. And this the
Answerer has ^ld us, so well and so fully, that it were vain for me to meddle
further in it.

He knows very well, so do all, that have any understanding of the Times, or
in the Records thereof, what became of all Treaties, wherein Idolaters were
Agents: Therefore it had been folly for him or my self, to meddle with a
Re^itting on either Party. The Kings party will not remit any thing of their
Rigid government (as the Moderatour calls it in ^est, and we in earnest, for
so it will be, if their counsell^ prevail.) The Parliament must not remit of
their Imperious Reformation (the Adversary calls it so, we say, and God says
so too, It is not Imperious enough, not high enough, but) we are sure they
should Remit nothing there: What the one parley will do, and the other should
do, stands at as full a distance from an honorable Accommodation, as the two
Poles stand: at such a distance stand these two Parties, and will stand so
opposite while the World stands, and Rome in the World, and a Papist in the
Kingdom, that has power in the hand there: And we of the lower sort, may stand
with others of a contrary mind to us, like Dogs at a Bay: But agree we cannot,
till the Temple of GOD, and Idols be agreed. And this the Answerer has made as
clear as the Sun beam.

I shall apply my self only now, to the Moderatours Argument, (handled in two
pages, marked with the same figure) of Advantage and Disadvantage, which the
Page 16.
Answerer has touched only, and no more: and in refference thereunto, I call
this A Fuller Answer, not that I would diminish one mite from the abilities of
the Answerer, or one grain from his Answer: He will give me good leave, to be
fuller a^ that point, whereunto he has spoken little or nothing; and yet it is
the killing Argument; for when he has well considered, what the Moderatour
has spoken there, (which on the sudden he could not do) he will say, That
the Pen of a mean and private person could not do better service to King and
Kingdom, then in opening that point, and making a full Answer thereunto. And
the Answerer will excuse me too, when he has read all, That I do not speak so
comely of the Moderatour, ^^ he has done, f^^ truly I am persuaded, That
Charity it self cannot judge him to be an honest Man, because, directed by
Reason, says he, by a low and unsavory spirit, say I, this he says;

M. WE shall find the Parliament has nothing to cement its self, to increase
and fix their party, and keep it from staggering, but a little temporary
reputation, and a resolution to hold to the public good.


A. I must not forbear him here, though the Answerer does; he speaks (...)
wickedly, or (...) foolishly; wickedly if he speak in earnest; foolishly if he
speak in jest, speaking in such serious matters. He says, We find the
Parliament has nothing to cement it self and fix their party, but a little
temporary reputation. Alas! what will that do to fix^ a man (for I will speak
in individio) and keep him from staggering in such an agony and shaking time
as this is, when the wicked Prelates and such like, must be shaken out of the
earth, where they have taken root this long time, I say, shaken out, and that
is the reason of the Earthquake. And what will keep from staggering now, will
a little temporary reputation do it? No, no; Alas it is a fluid thing, no
fixednesse in it at all; and therefore a great deal cannot fix the man, but
unfixe him rather; make him as weak as water; it cannot hold up the spirit,
and keep from staggering. Shall a Parliament Man, (I would be plain) one, that
is chosen to stand for thousands, to appear for God; to stand-up for his
Country, (he is engaged so to do, by all the obligations that are
conceivable) Can this man fix himself by popular applause, by the esteem and
repute the people have of him? Can this keep a man from staggering? But I am
not such a fool to question it; ^^ say, and there is no question to be made of
it, A great deal of Temporary Reputation will not be sufficient to fix a man,
no not a little, and to keep from staggering. But there is another thing, which
foolishly and wickedly he puts together, and would cement with temporary
reputation (but they can c^ment no better then Gold can with Clay) A resolution
to hold fast to the public good. What is that? The public Faith of the King
and Kingdom, Religion, Truth, Gospel; call it what you will, it is the
public Good, the great Trust of the Kingdom: Hold fast to this, and this will
do it, keep from staggering; This will ^^xe a man, keep-up his spirit, make
him stand u^right though the Earth totter like a drunken Man: How violent
soever the motions are, though words against him, are Swords, and deeds are
ungodly and devouring, yet he can appeal to GOD, that he has done his work,
discharged his trust; he has laid out himself for the saving a distressed
Ghurch and State; he has not been biased to his private wealth; thoughts of the
public have drunk up his spirits; This fixes a Man, keeps him from
staggering in an earthquake, when the earth is smitten, and the Nations are
angry, and the Kingdoms are moved; This I say, holds up the spirit of this
Man, this fixes him, that he h^th, does, and will stand up in the breach; if
he perish, there he will perish, in the breach, in the resolution to hold fast
to the public good. And see I pray you, and consider how efficacious this
resolution is to fix the heart, and to keep from staggering: And then see how
this Fool or Knave, (which you will, for he is both) has matched it here*
with a little temporary reputation, and then calls it nothing, nothing but a
resolution to hold fast to the public good: and that is all the Parliament
has to cement it self, to fix their party, and to keep it from staggering, a
Resolution only to hold fast to the public good. They that are the Parliaments
best friends, can wish them no more to fix and stablish them, but such a
Resolution; if they have that, they have all, that concerns them in this
matter: for, Blessed is that Man, who is resolved to hold fast to the public
good, for in such a business as this, this is all and abundantly sufficient to
fix the person, and to keep from staggering; That he has done his utmost;
laid-out, and spent himself for the saving (as we may call it indeed) a
distressed Church and State. Surely, though it be not saved (which yet we do
not question) yet this person may comfort himself as his LORD before him, My
judgment is with the Esa. 49. 4.
LORD, and my work with my GOD. He has done his duty as aforesaid, not with so
strong an hand, but with as good an heart as Josiah did; and that is his
comfort, and exceeding strong consolation; Now he can remit the matters, leave
it in Gods Hands, let Him do what is good in His eyes; he can now stand still
and weight the salvation of GOD, for he has done his duty; Though, and so the
Moderatour goes on.


M. And this (viz.) [a Resolution to hold fast to the public good] if things
run so high as they do now, will be called Rebellious stobborunnesse, and be
branded with the foul imputation of Treason.


A. The Man says true; Things do run so high, as that a Resolution to hold
fast to the public good is called Rebellion and Treason; but it mooves not
those, whose spirits are fixed. It was so in Ancient times, they that were
fiexdly resolved to hold to God, His Christ, His peoples good, were accounted
no better then Rebels and Traitors; Gods servants are not careful about Neh.
4 and 6.
this now. But yet let us observe how contemptably he speaks of this holding
fast to the public good; It is nothing but; and what more? That which will be
called Rebellion and Treason: Be it so, so called I mean, when it is in deed
and truth, the truest obedience and highest point of loyalty to hold fast to
the public good, to prefer that before all your private engagements. And
this I thought fit to insist upon, and make the plainer, That we, the lowest of
the people, may put the more observation upon it; and be more resolved for, and
fixed on the public good also; That we may look to our standing, keep our
holdfast, close to the public good: for that which is good for the Kingdom,
is good for us also: as, what is good for the Bee-hive, is good for the Be.
Let us hold fast there, while the Moderatour goes on in his Argument.


M. Whereas the King (as the chief Master and dispencer of the Commonwealth)
is able to fit the humor of every Man, that he has a mind to take off.


A. Take off! from what? from a Resolution to hold fast to the public good.
That is his meaning, and it can be no other. And who must take them off? The
King, the chief Master and dispencer of the Commonwealth; he that should
stand like the stalk of a Balance; he that is the Father of his Country,
and, as a Father, should tender his Subjests; and, next to his own Soul; mind
only their good; he must take them off. Whom will he take off? The proud Man,
the ambitious Man, the busy Man. And he shall do it, I mean, The King is
able to call these forth, to his foot; for these mind their private wealth, and
so they may build-up that, they care not though the public fall to ruin; he
shall be able to tak^ ^hese off, for they were never on. But what means has
the King to effect this? what ways has he to take these persons off from
serving the public good?


M. That which will fit every man's humor, [the better, the veryer Knave he is]
The King has honor for the proud; places of Trust [such a place as Hull, a
place of Trust, and being so, not] for the Ambitious man; inferior Offices,
for the busy Man; favor and promises, and a possibility of several
preferments to invite all sorts of men to him. What to do when they are come?
To betray the public good, the places of Trust. Is this the advantage on the
Kings side! I speak it with indignation; is this it? Are these his gifts, and
bestowed upon such persons, and for these ends? he could not have spoken more
to the dishonor of his Prince, not more to the honor of the Parliament.


M. The King has Power, etc.


A. I will cut him short here, for he speaks proudly. The King has Power, so
much as is derived from God, or permitted to him: So much Power he has and no
more: Nor Prince nor people, have any power of their own, but to sin against
God, to do wickedly, to shed blood to their power Ezekiel. 22. 6.
: But no power they have to do good, nor knowledge there; It is too high for
them Prove. 14. 7.
; This power is lost and never recovered again, but by a full and free
acknowledgement that so it is, That a power of doing good is gone, and a power
of doing evil as we can Ier. 3. 5.
, remains, and will remain fixed in the heart, till an humble confession
remooves, and throws it forth. This is not to the Moderatours purpose; but of
infinite concernement, and a prime point of knowledge this; To know That Man
has no power of his own, to do good; But to do contrary, his power is
sufficient. It follows;


M. He has the power of a Pardon.


A. A Pardon! for whom? for Rebels and Traitors; Who are they? Those that are
resolved to hold fast to the public good; To the cause of God; to His Worship;
these are Traitors and Rebels in this man's account, for so his words relate if
you will observe and conster them.


M. He has the power of a Pardon, to hold out like a Lure, to fetch in such as
have turned tail, and would turn again, but dare not stoop till a Pardon
call them in.


B. No, Let them stoop to a Lure, who have stood-up stoutly against GOD; have
turned head and tail against Him; These are resolved to look strait forward,
and not look after a Lure, nor respect a Pardon for their good service done to
the public: Though he that has done best, and has been most resolved for the
public good, does say, as Nehemiah did, for our best works need a Priest, and
an Altar, and a Sacrifice; I mean a pardon; Remember me (O my GOD) concerning
this also, and SPARE me according to the greatness Neh. 13. 22.
of Thy Mercy.

I will add; I never yet s^w such a pack of knavery open before me in so
narrow a compass, tending so directly to the dishonor of his Prince, and to
the honor of his loving subjects; To the Disadvantage of the King, and to the
Advantage of his faithful people; such as hold fast to the public good, and
are resolved so to do. And yet we have not heard half; he goes on to show the
Advantage on the Kings side. What is that?


M. A King can keep off the aid of foreign States from his Parliament: [who
desire none but for the Defense of the King and Kingdome] how will he do it?
The King will use all Arts, having the most expert instruments for it, to
disable or take off that party; and he may do it very easily, by corrupting
some Eminent Engineere there, some great Officers, or most popular Men, or by
kindling some divisions, etc.


A. Certainly there was never such a Knave read in Print; how dares he lay
open the nakedness of his King? how dares he instruct his Prince to deal
corruptly; To kindle divisions in other States, though thereby he could soder
and cement his own? how dares he put that down for an Advantage to his Kings
Crown and Dignity, which la^es his Honor in the dust? Corrupt dealing! how
far below a Prince! [The chief Master and dispencer of the Common-wealth]
that is uncomely for a Peasant? Let right be done though the world and the
things thereof shatter to pieces.


M. He tells us next; We have an encouraging President of the Scots, as we
look upon it, but we are mistaken both in the circumstances and nature of the
Case.


A. Truly mistaken we are (I think) and yet not in the nature of the Case, but
unhappily, perhaps, in the managing of it. The Cause the Scots maintained, was
the Cause of GOD, and His Anointed, The Public Faith of the Kingdom,
Religion, Truth, Gospel: That is our case too. But I fear we do not make it
the principal, chief and masterpiece of our work, as certainly they did;
for they did manage it as the Cause of GOD. We do not follow it so, with so
single an eye; we do not, if I observe aright, keep close to the Cause, nor
to our covenant: we are not constant, we do not hold-fast to it; we do not
shape and mould all our actions thereunto; we are more for our outward
liberties, then for the privileges of the Saints, our eye is not single that
way if I discern aright: And if so, then there is a great difference in point
of circumstance and manner of prosecuting this great work; but in the nature
of the Cause, the Scots and ours, I conceive there is no considerable
d^ff^rence at all. He prosecutes the Argument of Advantage on the Kings ^ide,
h^ says;


M. The King is more likely to draw to him the affections of the people, in
that the pressures and miscarriages of this late government are passed, and
almost expiated by his acknowledgment.


A. Here he speaks reason, and more; It is the honor of a King to pass by an
^ff^nce, then the duty of a subject to pass by the error of their King; and,
though he should not acknowledge it, yet our duty to go backward with a cloth
to cover what might be uncomely in a King. Doubtless, and so his good people
did, and so I pass it over. The Moderatour adds.


M. And a Promise of a Redress.


A. A Promise! he might have added, and Protestations too, as solemn as are
conceivable. And we will believe, That the King speaks as he means; his
thoughts are sad and serious for the public good; we will hope and think so.
It is the glory of GOD to conceal a thing; but the honor of Kings is to Prove.
25. 1, 3.
search out a matter: The Heaven for height, and the Earth for depth, and the
heart of Kings is unsearcheable. The wise Man does not tell us here what guile
and deceit lies in the heart; nor what an Abyss, a bottomless thing the heart
is; though that be true also: But how sad, and serious, and deep the thoughts
of Kings are for the good of their subjects, and establishment of Peace in
their borders, how fixed upon that. And this we will force our selves,
notwithstanding what went before, and what will follow anon, to believe, is the
Kings purpose. But this we must believe also; That the heart is, in this sense,
an Abyss, a deep, which the wisest Man, (a Man and no more) that ever was
upon the earth, could never bottom. It is deceitful above all things, and, we
Ier. 17 9.
may add, desperately wicked: No wise Man did ever give trust unto it, no not
to his own promises: A man may promise that, which he thinks verily to
perform, as the Israelites once did; speak thou unto us, all that the LORD
Deuteronomy. 5. 27.
our GOD shall speak unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it: And yet all
this was as the LORD said, but the voice of words, not the voice of the heart;
That flinkes away, would not be engaged. And, yet I say, a Man may promise,
that, which he thinks verily to perform; and, when it comes to the point, he
flies off: why? The reason is: It was the voice of words, not of the heart. A
deceived heart has beguiled him, it has turned him aside from his purpose; The
heart would bear no part there, would endure no band or engagement;

We cannot forget what we read related of Lady Mary, Daughter to Hen. 8. The
Crown was now unsettled; and, to settle it upon her own head, she craved the
aid of Suffolk men, amongst whom she was in Fremingham Castle there. They were
very ready to give her their best help, and assistance, on this condition,
That she would make no alteration of Religion, which her Brother King Edward
had before established: The Lady was as ready to Promise, as they were to ask:
And such a Promise she made unto them, [That no alteration should be made of
Religion] as that (I will set down the very words) no man would or could then
have misdoubted her. That which follows is remarkable, but this only to our
purpose; By the help of the Gospellers (that is the Authors word, he means the
Suffolk men, forward in promoting the proceedings of the Gospel) she did
vanqui^h the good Duke of Northumberland, attained her haven, and had the
Crown. These Suffolk men now, to whom she stood engaged next unto God,
supplicate their Queen now to perform her Promise, from whom they received
this heavy Answer (so Mr. Fox calls it, and I will keep to his words) for so much
(says she) as you, being but members, desire to rule your head, you shall one
day well perceive, that members must obey their head, and not look to bear
rule over the same. I will take leave to reply; The Gospellers did not seek to
bear rule over her; No, They sought her peace, and the peace of her Kingdom,
the maintenance of that, which would effect all this, establish her peace, and
theirs. They besought her to remember her Promise touching the Gospel, which,
being maintained in truth, would stablish her Throne, and Kingdom for ever: so
they besought her. But they saw now, that she spoke to them before, as a Lady,
that would be Queen; and now, as one that knew her self Queen: and so
answers them clean cross to expectation and Promise. For, indeed, what she
promised them before, was the voice of words only; and what she said
afterward, was the voice of her heart. The result of all this is, That the
Promise of the tongue is but the voice of words, which may deceive a man's
self, as well as those, that trust to it: The voice of the heart is not heard
till afterward; and what that will be, the Man himself, perhaps, knows not,
till time has told him how false the heart is; so false, that no man will trust
it; for a thousand experiences have told him, That, when he thought verily the
heart spoke, it was but the tongue, the voice of words, the heart spoke
nothing, that was silent. The Moderatour goes on, will tell us the Advantage of
sillables, and yet we will not think him a Conjurer.


M. But to go on in our Argument of Advantage and Disadvantage; The King is a
syllable of as much Advantage as another Army.


A. And more; we acknowledge it with as loyal hearts as once the people showed
to David, Thou art worth Ten thousand of us 2 Samuel ^2. 3.
. So David was when he ruled with God; and for God, by His Law-booke, and
sitting in Gods Throne, Gods Deputy, and Vicegerent: so considerable David was,
a syllable of such advantage to his Kingdom: And the desire of our souls is,
That our King may be such an one, so considerable, and of that advantage to
himself and to his whole Kingdom. But, so he is not as he is King, but as he
rules for God; commands from His Mouth; orders and directs all by Statute Law,
in his Law-booke; If he goes cross to this, he is a syllable still, Deuteronomy. 17.
and of the greatest disadvantage to himself and Kingdom, That is
conceivable. I remember a sad Story; Jehoram Son of Ahab, being with two more
Kings in a great strait, went down to Elisha, thinking himself a very
considerable Person, being King; and that Elisha would respect him. It was
otherwise, What have I to do with thee, said Elisha to the King; get thee to
the Prophets of thy Father, and to the Prophets of thy Mother. O say not so
says 2 King. 3. 13.
the King; send me not to them, they cannot help me in this extremity: And
Elisha said; As the LORD of Hosts lives before whom I stand, surely, were it
not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the King of Judah, I would not
ver. 14.
look toward thee nor see thee. I relate it here for this very reason, That
we may know, a King is not a syllable of Advantage, if he rule not as a King,
by the Rule of Heaven and Law of his GOD. Again, we do not well to put virtue
and efficacy into syllables, they have no more virtue in them, then is in
spells, and that is to do hurt and mischief, for they work in the Devils
Name. If I would put any virtue there, I could say as much for Disadvantage;
The King is but one syllable, no more is a Queen neither, yet, coming to
Jerusalem, she turned away the heart of the wisest King from God, she darkened
all his glory: And afterward she was of more disadvantage to all Judah, then
an Host of a Thousand thousand: for such an Host could not hurt Judah, nor the
King thereof; but a Queen destroyed the King, and his house, and his Kingdom.
We might go on and show the vir^ue and effecacy of monosyllables, for
disadvantage to King and Kingdom. Blood, but one syllable, and yet, the stain
of it could never be remooved till Judah was remooved from out of Gods sight;
And when God makes inquisition for blood, lays it, reallizeth it upon the
conscience, it shall be shaken as Belshasars knees were when they smote one
against the other. So, these Gods, which Idolaters make so, are but one
syllable neither, yet more skillful to destroy Kingdoms, then Armies are.


M. The King in his very Name is sacred and Powerful, and shakes the
consciences of many.


A. Yes; it is a sacred Name and powerful, and may shake the consciences of
them, that have so much as a disloyal thought against his sacred Majesty. But
it cannot shake them, not their consciences, who have resolutly held fast to
the public, laid out themselves in maintaining the Cause of their God, the
Crown of their King, the glory of his Kingdom; his Name cannot shake their
consciences, bearing them witness, their God also, that so they have done in
sincerity and uprightness of heart; And in this thing they appeal to God, and
stand better bottomed then the everlasting hills, they cannot be moved. Nay,
the sacred Name of a King shakes no Man, that does not see more in his King
then in his God. And many such there are, that walk by sense, they know their
King, but they know not their God; with His help I shall unvaile their eyes
anon, only this here. Does this Name of a King, and no more, shake the
consciences of men? What can GOD do then, but one syllable neither, He will
shake them to pieces, (their consciences are rotten already,) He will break
them as a Potters vessel, who, for fear of a Man, have deserted His Cause,
the Truth, the Gospel; and, what in them lies, have given it up to the enemies
hand: God, the KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, will shatter these men to
pieces, who have turned head and tail both against their God, their King and
Country. I will add a word or two more, for this is the killing Argument;
Your King! go against your King! he is more considerable then an Army! will
you fight against him? That has been Answered Ten times, It shall have no
Answer here. If I could teach the Country man to speak, who sees more in a
King, then he does in his God, he should reply from Gods Mouth, by way of
Question too; A GOD! but one syllable, yet of more Advantage then all the
Armies in the world; In His very Name, He is sacred, and terrible; I heard Thy
voice, and I was afraid, said Adam: I heard Thy NAME says another, and I
trembled. Shall I fight against GOD, His Christ, His Truth? His terror makes
me afraid. If I do, so, as now the most do, He will hold me up to the wind,
and shake me to pieces; for He is God, hear Him what He says; Gird up thy
loins now like a man, I will demand of thee, and declare thou unto Me: Job
40. 7.
Will thou also disanull my judgment; will thou condemn Me that thou ver. 8.
may be righteous? Have thou an arm like GOD? or can thou thunder with a
voice like Him? Deck thy self now with Majesty and excellency, ver. 9. ver. 10.
and array thy self with glory and beauty: Cast abroad the rage of thy wrath,
and behold every one that is proud and abase him: look on every ver. 11. ver.
12.
one that is proud, and bring him low, and tread down the wicked in their
place: Hide them in the dust together, and bind their faces in the secret. ver.
13.
(If thus thou can do, as God can do, and does do,) Then will I also
confess unto thee, that thine own right hand can save thee. I add; then let
the ver. 14.
terror of the LORD make me afraid; and not the terror of a Man; let His Name
be sacred and Powerful, to shake my conscience, that I may not entertain a
proud thought; much less lift up a hand against Him. The Moderatous sets up
Man too high, he sets him as Lord in the consciences of men; God is to be set
there, for He has His Throne there, and He only; A King not so, but as he
commands from Gods Mouth; so he must be obeyed: And he may be followed, but not
a step farther then as he follows the LORD CHRIST; Who is given a Commander
and a Leader to His people. Esa. 55. 4.



M. The King has the Advantage of the written Law.


A. If he has the Law on his side, the L^w of GOD, or the Law of Man, (I would
speak as briefly as I could) If he has any Law on his side, the least tittle
of Law, then acc^rsed be they, that are on the other side; for they pretend to
stand-up for the Law, and they go point-blanck against the Law, if this be
true, for says the Moderatour, The King has the advantage of the written Law.
We need not the honest Lawyers help here; he has done his part, and has
declared it twice, nay thrice; That the King has no more Advantage of the
written Law, for that he does, Then Jezabel had (for she ruled in chief) and
Ahab, for taking away Naboths life, and then his vineyard: And yet the
Moderatour goes on;


M. Which wtitten Law, the King can use now in his Defense.


A. Now! and heretofore as well as now, and hereafter as well as now; If he has
the advantage of the written Law, let him take it, cursed is he that denies him
that Advantage, which the meanest subject will challenge as his birthright, and
would fight for it too, if his Armor were not taken away, for he fights for
the Law of his God too. The Moderatour goes on;


M. And by the Authority of the written Law joined with the Power of the Sword,
etc.


A. The King has as loyal subjects as ever any King in the world ever had,
they never put up any other Petition unto their King, then that he would
govern them by the written Law, for therein is contained, the Kings power, and
his peoples rights; The Law dispenceth, orders, and limits all this. Why then
does the King join thereunto [to the written Law] the power of his Sword, that
oppressing thing, which works so contrary to the Law, making it speechless,
and putting it out of office? The Moderatour will do us some little favor and
resolve us here.


M. By the Authority of the written Law, joined with the Sword, the King can
thunder out accusations, and, perhaps, the penalties of Treason against those,
whom he shall call his opposers.


A. Call his opposers! That Is brave but not good Law sure. Pardon me, No mat^^r
whom Man calls but whom Go^ calls opposers.
Sir, but I will not pardon you; you do enable the King by the authority of
the Law, to do the greatest injury that is imaginable. What is that? To
thunder out accusations against the innocent, and penalties of Treason against
the lawalists in the Kingdom; for so he does, when he does it against those,
whom he calls opposers, and so exposes himself to the wrath of the Almighty;
The LORD will smite that Ruler (a most notorious hypocrite, like a Mat. 23. 27.
whited wall or Sepulcher) who sits to judge His people after the Law, and
will smite those with his tongue, and hand, whom he shall call opposers, Acts
23. ^.
contrary to the Law. He calls opposers! then ^e does them wrong; if the Law
calls them not so, they stand recti in Curia, clear and upright both in the
Court above, and here below, and within their own breast; It is not whom the
King calls opposers, but whom the Law calls opposers, and by authority thereof
are found so to be; and if the King shall ligh^en and thunder too against
those, he shall call opposers against the authority of the Law, they so called,
and so thundered against, will regard this thunder, no more, then they do the
crackings of that the boys call Grackers and Squibs I think, but I know no
more do they care what they be called, whom the King calls opposers, the Law
calls good subjects. And though he takes to him the power of the Sword, against
the authority of the Law, yet it is Gods Sword, and the judge of all the world
will do right: And these men, whom the King calls opposers, do expect help
from God according to the uprightness in their hearts, and the innocence found
in their hands touching this matter.


M. The King has a Counsel.


A. Yes, that he has; as Israel said once, so the worm Jacob now, My soul
come not thou into their secret, unto their Assembly, mine honor be not Gen
49. 6.
united: for they counsel the King to the destruction of the King and
Kingdom, To go against Law; to call them Rebels and Traitors, whom he calls
opposers, but the Law calls the best subjects. Let me be called a Rebel and a
Traitor too (for truly it is an honor) so long as the Law clears me to be
a good subject and an honest Man. But this is the result of the Counsel; I
cannot forbear, cursed be their advice for it is carried headlong, and their
counsel for it is cruel, The Lord will divide them in Jacob and scatter them
in ver. 7.
Israel, Amen. He goes on to tell us more touching the Kings Counsel.


M. He has a Counsel so well mingled.


A. What are the ingredients? They have knowledge, that is granted them: What
is mingled with it? The Moderatour tells us in plain terms, cunning, fraud,
craft; his Counselors, like the crooked Serpent, are subtle, and can turn
and spy into all the windings of State. He might have called them Knaves as
well, for it is as good English, and certainly good Law too; Knaves in grain,
Magni Nebulones, as one says, and Magni Latrones too, Great Robbers: and the
Moderatour shall prove it to be even so; for he tells us, The Kings
Counselors, some of them, are versed and cunning in the Law, and know: what
do they know? how to turn the Law to the most necessary use; I pray what is
that, for I would feign know the use of the Law? He tells us; to the
destruction of King and Kingdom; it is just so; when cunning crafty Lawyers
will turn the Law, which is a strait Rule, when they will turn it, and biasse
it at their pleasure, it is to the destruction of King and Kingdom, that all
may be wiped as a Man wipes a dish, turning it upside down. So I say it is,
when the Law is turned; for let the Law go on its 2 King. 21. 13.
course, it tends directly to the salvation of the King and Kingdom. These
cunning Lawyers then, so crafty in all the windings of State, are great Knaves,
I will speak it again, and great Robbers, for they steal away the supporters
of the Kings Throne; and, by turning the Law (that sweet blessing) into gall
and wormwood, they lay waste his Kingdom. Is he a Thief that picks my
pocket; or breaks open my doors? That he is, the Law tells me so, he is a
thief? what is he then that steals away the Kingdoms chiefest tre^sure, its
birthright, and lays open the frontiers of the Kingdom, to Beasts like
themselves, Robbers and spoilers skillful to destroy? The Law assures us, that
these are Thieves, Robbers rather. This puts me ^^ mind of a pretty distinction
between Fur a Thief, and Prado a Robber. The Fur is he, who picks your pocket,
or your house; takes away your Ox or your Ass^, does you some private injury;
This Praedo a Robber is he, who robbs a whole Nation, and what in hi^ lies,
ruins a whole Kingdom. It minds me also what a poor little Thief told
Alexander the great. I steal some petty matters from some private men; Thou
do spoil and rob whole Kingdoms: I am poor and am quickly taken off, and
short by the neck, thou art mighty and can break through; but so it comes to
pass, That great Thieves send little Thieves to the gallows: and these we
have met with here, Men versed and cunning in the Law, that know how to turn
it to the most necessary use, says the Moderatour; to the most pernicious
abuse say we; and to the greatest disadvantage of King and Kingdom. Now we may
discern what peace we shall have of this Parties making, when these are the
agents for an Accommodation, proud, ambitious, busy men, taken off from the
public good by favor and promises; and made to turn head and tail against
GOD, His Truth and Peace. When Spiritual Lords are agents for Peace, whom the
Land have sp^ed-out, because they have taken Peace from the earth: and now they
would accomodate a Peace, that they might thrust themselves into their places
again, there to murder more souls, as if their iniquities that way were not
yet full. When Achitophels are agents for Peace; Men cunning and crafty in all
the windings of State, and so know how to turn the Law to the most pernicious
abuse: And when corruption is used also, to fetch-in some eminent Engeneers,
some great Officers and most popular Men. I ask again; what kind of Peace
will this be, which this Party will Accomodat? We need not guess, we can
answer punctually to the matter; A peace, that has no respect to the honor of
GOD; to the glory of His Anointed, none at all. No regard to Truth, to
Holiness, none at all; A Peace, which will be as a Sword in the bones of the
Righteous, because thereby the Name of the LORD will be blasphemed. Do we
doubt of this? Look again upon the Kings Party, whom he reckons on his side,
and are of his Counsel here, proud Men, ambitious busy Men, Spiritual Lords,
cunning, subtle, crafty in all the windings of State, and know how to turn
the Law (as they have turned Religion) to the most necessary use. We need no
more. They that are so cunning to turn the LAW of GOD and Man as they please,
know as well, and are as skillful to turn the Peace as well (for it is as
ductill through their hands as the Law is,) they can and will bias that also to
their own ends, the dethroning the LORD CHRIST, and inthroning the Pope and his
Prelates; the setting up their Dagon, the furthering their Party; their
desperate and bloody designs.

From a Peace made up by these men, and by their means, such a pack of knaves
and their knavery, good Lord deliver us: Amen, say all that know what they say;
and they know their GOD will do it: Their GOD and Prince of Peace will not
give His people such a Peace, so packt-up; for they will give their LORD no
rest for this thing; that they may have a Peace of His giving, and bequeathed
unto them by their PRINCE of Peace, Amen.

From these premises well thought upon, we can commune with our own hearts, and
argue the Case as men, that have sense left them, and are directed by reason:
As for any higher principle, we will not seem to reach after it, or care for
it; We will reason with our selves according to our common capacity as
reasonable men. Thus we reason; They that hold fast to the public good, [the
common faith of the Kingdom,] these are called Rebels and Traitors: and are
so dealt with, and injured according to the power in the hand. The Law which is
every man's Master, and the common Treasury, which dispenses to every Man his
right, is turned to the destruction of King and Kingdom: They, who oppose with
all their might, the Laws of GOD and Man are accounted good Men and Subjects:
They that oppose these, and withstand their desperate and bloody designs are
called opposers.

Directed by reason what is to be done now? certainly it is not questionable,
not a matter to be parlied on, whether a free people shall stand up for their
own lives, their Wives and children, against merciless and bloody Adversaries,
who delight in proud wrath? Directed by reason we cannot stand to parle about
this, for know we not yet that our Canaan is destroyed? We Exodus 10. 7.
have the same reason now as once Israel had, when their Right eyes 1 Samuel 11.
2.
were demanded; and afterward the Jews Esth. 9.
, when designed to destruction, the same reason I say to ASSOCIATE our selves
(there is no other way) To Assemble our selves, to stand up every man in his
place, for our lives; that we may do unto those, whom the Laws of GOD and Man
call opposers, as they would do and have done to their power, against them,
whom the King and his party call opposers, for no other reason, then (as was
said of a Poor man oppressed by the mighty) because they will not receive the
Adversaries whole Qui totum telum in corpus non recipisset. Cic. de Fimb^^a.
Sword, blade, hilts and all into their bodies. We may stand looking one upon
another, consulting the way how to Accomodate a Peace, when in the mean time,
the contrary party gains Advantage, and strengthens his hand and heart to
accomplish his bloody resolution: Therefore we must think only of our duty, and
conclude to ASSOCIATE our selves against these sons of Belial; for there is
no pa^lying with them. The Spring is now come, a time of action, and hear how
the Moderatour prosecutes the Advantage on the Kings side;


M. The King has those that are experienced in all the designs of War;
Intelligencers in the bosom of his Antagonists, or else his Agents conjure; he
has them, that serve him to make him Great [let that pass, though they will
make their Master the most inglorious Prince in the world] The Nobles and
Gentlemen bear their own charges; his Army can defend its self till the
spring, and what is likely to be done then let every man judge, that considers
his party abroad, and almost in all Counties.


A. Why does the Moderatour leave it to every man's judgment, whenas every man
cannot judge charitably? The Kings good people will think as charitably as
possibly they can; That he, who is the Sheapheard of his people (the King is
called so I know not how often in sacred and in other books) That he will not
persist to hurry and spoil the Sheep, over whom God has made him a Shepherd.
It is enough and too much that he has so done this winter. His good people can
hardly think, That he, who is the Father of his Country, will seek all means
to destroy his people, whom he should respect as his Sons and Daughters; Nor
that he, whom God has made King, has set upon his own Throne, will endeavor,
with his own hands to lay his own Kingdom waste, to make his Eden a
wilderness; Nor that he, whom God has made the Head over a great people, will
spy out what Port is open thereby to take-in instruments of cruelty, wherewith
to tear the whole body? because he is pleased to call some members there,
opposers. His good people will hope as charitably as possibly can be, That
their King will understand his place and Office there; That, ruling over men,
he must be just, ruling in the 2 Samuel 23. 3.
fear of GOD: Equity and justice must shine in him, even as the Sun when it is
at the highest, whereof poor and rich may take refreshing: he must be as the
morning when the Sun rises, even as the morning without Clouds. Thus his poor
people will hope concerning him, for a Prince, that wants understanding is
also a great oppressor Pro. ^8. 16.
; his people will think as charitably as possibly they can, concerning their
King and these matters, notwithstanding what the Moderatour speaks to the
contrary; he says;


M. And it is a fond thing certainly to think his Army can want Ammunition,
having any Port open, or that it will want money more then the other: If the
Kingdom has it, the Soldier will not be without it, if it have not, they must
feed on free cost.


A. Here we may take a full view of the Kings Army, not so terrible for
multitudes as they are for injustice and violence in their hands; they carry
their right on their Swords point; they spoil and lay waste according to the
power in their hands, and so have a great advantage indeed of those, who must
walk by rule. This is enough to fray us into a Peace, as I have seen some fray
Sheep into the water. For now that the Spring is come, and such expectation of
Forragne help to take part and join with his Forces here; Surely now, if there
be not a Port and refuge open (and GOD be praised, that is always open) we
will lay down our weapons now, and make Peace with the Devil: for so we may,
as the Answerer has told us, upon as good terms as with this party, which the
Moderatour has so fully described unto us, and discovered before us, viz. That
rob and pillage and lay all waste wherever they come; And now that the Spring
is come, they expect supplies from the Popes side, who wait this Advantage,
That those angry people and as skillful to destroy, may join Forces with the
Kings Armies here, to maintain the established Religion (that is the pretense,
and the Protestation too,) the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, after they
have laid all waste, and destroyed the Kings good people there. And this is the
Party with whom we would accomodate a Peace: God say it not unto our charge.
But to the thing in hand; Here we have all the Advantages on the Kings side;
And surely a man directed by reason cannot tell what to say unto all this, But
there is one Port always open, a Refuge, whereunto the LORDS people can
continually resort, in assured confidence; That GOD, who remembered Noah, and
every living Genesis 8.
thing, and all the Cattle that was with him, will remember His people also;
He that remembered the Beasts will remember the Sheep of His pasture; He will
have a special and peculiar eye to them, who have held fast to the public
good, and to their GOD, and are resolved so to demean themselves, That man
shall not be able more then to call them opposers; Certainly the Lord will
remember these; The proud waters threatened to go over their souls; The floods
have lifted up (O LORD) they have lifted up their voice; the floods lift up
their waves. (i. e.) The wicked are exceeding proud, and so they speak and
do, as if they could do what they have a will to do, against those, whom
they shall call opposers. The LORD on high is mightier then the noise of many
waters, yea then the mighty waves of the Sea (i. e.) The LORD is above them:
And though the LORD be so high, yet has He a respect unto the lowly: Though I
walk in the midst of trouble Thou will revive me; Thou shall stretch forth
Thine Hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and thy right hand shall save me,
says the Ps. 1^8. 7.
Church; And it is the Anchor of their hope, sure and steadfast. Therefore now
that the Spring is come, this people are not afraid with any amazement; now
that the Adversary, by his fraud and cunning, is turning the Peace as they have
turned Religion and Law, all to the most pernicious and cursed abuse; Now are
Gods people turning themselves to GOD; They put no trust in a syllabl^, but in
GOD, Who is of more Advantage to His people then are the Armies of Men and
Devils against them. He is GOD of Hosts, Power and wisdom ar^ His, A Neh. 4.
14.
Great GOD and terrible, a discovering GOD; Let Israel say so, He that told
Elisha the words, that were spoken in the Kings Bedchamber. 2 King. 6 12.
He reveals the deep and secret things; He knows what is in the darkness,
and the light dwells in Him Dan. ^. 22.
, His servants need not conjure, their God is a discovering God, Israel must
say so. Jacob, though a worm, is not afraid now, no not at all this; They will
set this one GOD against all that we read before; They will take courage and
be confident, for their God is on their side, and that is Advantage enough. And
the LORD CHRIST, (of no Advantage, as He is but a syllable,) but of mighty
Advantage, as He is a mighty Savior, a Redeemer that i^ strong, the LORD of
Hosts is His Name, He shall thoroughly plead their cause, that He may give rest
to the Land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon. Truth is ^ syllable also,
(our English Tongue abounds there, no Tongue more, therefore no trust (...)
that, but) of mighty advantage as Gods eye is upon the Truth; He will maintain
His own Cause, and His Hand is upon all them for ^ood that seek (...) but His
Power and His wrath is against all them that forsake. Him Ezra. ^. 22.
, them that the Law calls opposers, and resisters of His holy will; th^se shall
one day feel to their smart and everlasting confusion, what it is to be a
Rebel, and a Traitor in Gods account, To be called so by Him, Who calls
things as they are. But by Him Jacob shall run through a Troop, and by this
God he shall leap over a Ps. 18. 29.
^all; with the help of God we also, that were ^oward^ before will be valiant
for the Truth, His Cause, (though we be called oppos^rs for that) and for the
Cities of our God, and then remit the whole matter to Him our Righteousness; Let
Him do what is good in His eyes 2 Samuel 18 1^.
. The Lord does all things well; and Israel shall say, All that was done, was
done for the best, to magnify the Name of their God and His Hand in the
salvation of His people. Wait we a little for the Lord waits to be gracious
and all these seeming Advantage^ on the Adversaries side, shall greatly
Advantage His people in the prom^ting the Glory of GOD and the Peace of Israel,
Amen.

The Moderatour ha^ done now with the Advantage^ on the Kings side; and he
tells us, it were a vain work for him, To s^^mme-up all the strength and
Advantages which the Parliament has go^ together for its des^^^^; and to go,
through with its designs: And there ^^ puts a scorn upon them, ^s^er his
manner, and passes on: I will pass on too, only we must remember w^^t we
read, The scorner is an abomination Pro. 24. ^.
: and the greatest reason he should b^ so, for be brings a City into a ^nare
Pro. 29 8.
, nay more then so, he sets a City o^ (...). And yet he has not done so much
to the scorn of the City; as he has to the scorn and reproach of his King.
Certainly a Man cannot imagine what h^ i Inflammant sufflant. Trem.
could have spoken more to his Kings dishonor, and to the scorn and eternal
reproach of his party. But for all this, he may find an Advocate. He has
spoken also to the dishonor of God, and to the weakening the hands of His
people lifted up for the Cause of their God, and His Anointed, and there I will
not spare him; he has labored what he can, that the poor people may see more
in their King, then in a God; more in the anger of a King then in the wrath of
the LORD; more in a Peace accomodated by Man, then in a Peace given from God.
My work is now to remove the veil which he has spread before the eye. By Gods
good hand with me, I shall be able to do it; To make it clear to every man's
eye, who will not wilfully shut it up, That GOD answers every particl^, jote
and tittle, in the Advantages on the Adversaries side; And shall willingly
endeavor this for my Countries sake, whose peace I wish as I do the peace of
my own soul; first;


M. The King can call an hold fast to the public good, a Rebellion and
Treason.


A. Look to God now. He will call things as they are, and this hold fast He
will call Loyalty to thy Prince, and faithfulness toward his people: And He
will clear thy innocence at this point as the morning; and thy Righteousness
as the noone Day. He will account and call thee His Friend, and then no matter
what others call thee.


M. 2. The King is able to fit the humor of every Man.


A. Look to God, and be upright, Then enlarge thy desire toward Him; He will
satisfy thy desire; whereas thou may search all the world over, and all the
creatures there, and distill the marrow and juice of them, and yet find but
wearines, and emp^ines in them all; for so capacious the soul is, and so
uns^ti^fiable in all she finds and fixes upon here below, till it comes and
fixes on Him, in Whom i^ fulness and satisfaction.


M. 3. The King has favor and promises, and possibility of preferments, etc.


A. Look to God, In His favor is life Psalm. 30. 5.
; And He has given thee rich and precious promises, both concerning this life
and a better; and more then a possibility ^^ certainty of such an honor, as
have the Saints Psa. 146. 9.
, and that is an honor unspe^kable, to have the friends and favorites of GOD,
whom He will honor.


M. 4. He has the Power of a Pardon.


A. I would the Moderatour had not said so, That the King has a Power on will
either, to pardon the wicked, to account them innocent, whom the LORD ^a^eth.
But so the will of man may be, and his power also. Look to God now; He will by
no means clear the guilty Exo. 24. ^.
: But the LORD the LORD GOD, merciful, etc. will multiply pardons to the hu^be
soul, as his sins are, though as the ^^nds for multitude: fix upon this GOD;
surely it belongs to Him to say, I have Power to Pardon. Let others say what
they will, and boast of their excommunication (which we care no more for, then
we do the bellowing of a Bull:) or their pa^dons (which we respect no more
then the dirt under our feet) The said full soul will hearken what the LORD
says for He speaks Peace. Ps. 85. 8.


That which follows is corrupt dealing, and fase-hood, which the Lords soul
hates; His eyes are upon the Truth.


M. 5. The King has penalties of Treason against those, who^ he shall call
opposers.


A. The Lord has abundance of mercy and loving kindoes, to show to those, whom
He accounts faithful.


M. 6. The King has a Counsel well mixed, cunning in the Law, and that know
how to turn it to the most necessary use [here is plain dealing.]


A. Look up to God now, for now is the time; Thou art in a wilderness, see no
path there; know not in the world what way to take; Cunning crafty men
devise mischief, they are turning the very Law against thee, whence thou do
expect help: It is time now to look about thee and consider: on whose shoulders
is the government Esa. 9. 6.
? Enquire into that, and what His Name is? It will be told thee, His Name is
called WONDERFVLL COVNCELLOVR, The mighty GOD: One letter of this Name is
enough to sustain all the faithful in the world, though all the wisdom and
strength in the world, and the gates of H^ll, be against them. There is no
wisdom, nor understanding nor counsel against the ^ Pro. 21. 30.
LORD. Will the cunning, crafty man, will he counsel against the LORD? The
stepps of his strength shall be straightened; and his own counsel shall cast him
down Job 18. 7.
. There is no Power against the LORD neither; will the Assemblies of the wicked
Associate themselves; will they gird on their harnesses, and go out against
the LORDS hidden ones?

Is this the very purpose of their Association? It tells the Righteous what
they are to do as it bids them, Look up to GOD, hearken what He says; ye
shall be broken in pieces; ye shall be broken in pieces; ye shall be broken in
pieces; Most certainly so, and therefore it is thrice repeated in one place.
Ob. But in the Esa. ^. 9.
mean time the wicked break the Righteous to pieces; A. I pray you now mark
what follows; The LORD, the LORD, the discovering GOD, the COVNSELLOVR, as
well versed in the Law, as the mixed Counsel ar^; and as they can turn the
Law, so the LORD GOD can turn their might and counsels upside down: All
their Malignancie to the most necessary use. What is that? To the magnifying
His own Name, and His peoples comfort, in the confounding of them and their
counsels. We must not stand and (...) into the manner how, The LORD will turn
about all this, To the most necessary use; But the Lord will do it, we are
resolved upon that, and in the best time. And now we care not, how big the
Kings Army is; we have known an Army a thousand times bigger, and yet could
do Judah no hurt, none at all, but good a great deal. Nor are we afraid of
the Spring now it is come. We know the Nations are angry; and we know the
reason of their wrath, though their wrath knows no reason: And yet what a fond
thing is it to think, that the Nations can do what is in the purpose of their
hearts to do. While His servants are about His work, apply themselves to that,
Let the LORD alone with ^^e rest, He can order it so, that the Enemies shall
not desire this Land Exo. 34 25.
: He can take-off their spirit; But if they do come-in, with GODS leave, like
a flood, He can lift-up a Standard against them, for that is His promise Esa.
59. 19.
; He can looke-out upon them, Exo. 14. ^4. Esa 17. 12, 13.
and truble their Host, make them drive heavily; He can chase them, as the
chafe of the Mountains before the wind, and as a rolling thing before the
whirlewind.


M. Lastly, and so to give the marrow of all the Moderatour has said in point
of Advantage, and to Argue the accomodating a Peace with the Kings party; They
have Power and Policy with them; That is all;


A. By the same Argument and no other, I can argue for a peace with the Devil;
but I must conclude a Peace with God, for Counsel and Might are with Him. I
have said: and this I have said for excellent reason;

1. That we may fear more the frown of God, then the wrath of Principalities,
and Powers, Angels and Men; That we may see more in the favor of God, then in
the favor of all the Emperors, Kings and Princes of the World; More excellent
Glory in Him, then in all their Courts and Crowns. In a word, That we may see
All in Him, and then we shall find all in Him; All Advantages in His being on
our side: we shall expect all from Him; and then return all to Him.

2. That we may make this Conclusion; we will sum up all we have in one GOD;
All our counsels, All our strength, All our comforts, we will summeup all in
one God: for as Jacob said, He is ALL Genesis 33. ^1.
, And if we have Him, we have ENOUGH indeed. Oh that we could see what is in
GOD! what Wisdom what Power, what Good^^sse! we should then say, He is ALL
indeed. Oh tha^ we did know this GOD! we should then know the weight of duty,
how t^ fear GOD, and honor the King. We should then be able, as to resolve
our ^ill into His Will; so also our fear into His Fear; our love into His
Love, We should resolve all our comforts into Him; We would not be troubled how
broken our Cisternes are, all our pursuit, the very strength of our desires
would be afte^ the fountain.

And thus much in a dear affection to the King and Kingdom; That we man see
where ou^ ^dvantage lies, and where Peace is to be had, from the Princ^ of
Peace, and Father not of some, but of all Consolution; And all this, That we
man ^asten to make our Peace with Him, that we may be found of Him in Peace and
su^^^e-up all in Him, Amen.


Printed in the Day of Jacobs trouble, and Year of hope that he shall be
delivered out of it, 1643.


