Truth Maintained, Or POSITIONS DELIVERED in a Sermon at the SAVOY: Since
Traduced For DANGEROUS: Now Asserted For SOVND and SAFE.

By THOMAS FVLLER, B. D. late of Sidney College in Cambridge.

The Particulars are These.
I That the Doctrine of the Impossibility of a Churches perfection, in this
world, being well understood, begets not laziness but the more industry in wise
reformers. II That the Church of England cannot justly be taxed with
superstitious innovations. III How far private Christians, Ministers, and
subordinate Magistrates, are to concur to the advancing of a Public
Reformation. IIII What parts therein are only to be acted by the Supreme power.
V Of the progress, and praise of passive obedience. VI That no extraordinary
Excitations, Incitations, or Inspirations are bestowed from God, on men in
these days. VII That it is utterly unlawful to give any just offense to the
papist, or to any men whatsoever. VIII What advantage the Fathers had of us, in
learning and religion, and what we have of them. IX That no new light, or new
essential truths, are, or can be revealed in this age. X That the doctrine of
the Churches imperfection, may safely be preached, and cannot honestly be
concealed.
With several Letters, to clear the occasion of this Book.

I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until
he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me; then will he bring me forth to
the light, and I shall see his righteousness, Micah. 7. 9. Printed at Oxford,
Anno Dom. 1643.

TO THE Most Sacred, and Reverend ASSEMBLY For the REFORMATION of the CHURCH,
now convened by the PARLIAMENT.
Most Sacred and Reverend Divines,
I Have but the thoughts of an Afternoon to spread before you; for I Examined
the same Pace that I read, that if it were possible a Truth might overtake an
Error, ere it go too far. It is not a little Encouragement that I may sit
like the Prophetess under the Palm tree, under such a Shade as your selves,
and what weakness soever may appear in these my Assertions: This ayring them
under your Patronage, will heal them. For so they brought forth the sick into
the streets, that at least the shadow of Peter might touch some of them. Thus
have I suddenly set up my Candle for others to Light their Torch at; and, I
hope, you will pardon me, if my Zeal to the Truth made me see Another faults
sooner then mine Own,

Your Servant in Christ Jesus John Saltmarsh.

TO the Two most Famous UNIVERSITIES OF ENGLAND
I Dare not give you such high Epithites as Master Saltmarsh bestows upon the
Assembly, Quid amplius praepotenti and immortali Deo tribuimus si quod eius
proprium est eripimus? Bodin. de Repub. l. 1 c. ult
to call you the MOST SACRED. Be contented to be Styled the Two most Famous
Universities; a Title, which it is no Flattery to give you, but Injury to deny
you.

I have the Studies of some whole days to spread before you. I am not ashamed
to confess so much, but should be ashamed to present your learned
Considerations with less. And will rather run the hazard of other men's
Censure, to have studied so long to no purpose, then to be guilty to my self
of so much disrespect to You, as to offer to your Patronage what cost me but
slight studying.

Indeed I examined his Examinations of my Sermon with the same pace that I read
them. But I could not confute his Errors so speedily as I could discover them,
nor could I so soon make them appear to others, as they appeared to me; and
the Evidencing of his Faults did cost me some Pains, whereof I hope I shall
never have just Cause to Repent.

I am altogether out of hope that my Truth should quickly overtake his Error,
which had the Advantage of me both at the Starting and in the Speed; And yet I
believe what I want in the swiftness of my Feet, I shall have in the
Firmness of my footing. And when I overtake it at last, as I am sure I shall,
seeing untruths will Tire (as being better at hand then at length) I am
confident by Gods Assistance, it will get firm and quiet Possession in spite
of opposition.

It is altogether Improper for me to compare You being Two in number to the
Palm Tree under which the Prophetess Deborah sat; But the Analogy will,
hold well, if I should resemble You to the Two Olive Trees continually dropping
oil in the Presence of God. And methinks Master Saltmarsh his Expression to
the Assembly, UNDER SVCH A SHADE AS YOUR SELVES, making them in the Assembly
but a Shadow, (and then what is the Shadow of a Shadow worth under which he
desires to sit?) was but an undervaluing and diminutive expressing of their
worth.

I honor you as You Deserve, and Counting You a Real and Lasting Substance, so
I address my Respects unto you:

Humbly requesting you to be pleased to Patronize and defend this my defense:
the rather because what doctrines therein I deliver, not long since I sucked
from One of you, and in this respect I believe both Breasts give Milk alike;
And therefore as your Learning is most Able, so your Goodness will be willing
to Protect the same, not so much because I had them from you, as because you
had them from the Truth.

Some perchance may blame my Choice in Choosing You for my Protection who in
these troublesome times are scarce able to defend your selves* The Universities
being now Degraded, at least suspended from the degree of their former Honor.
And I wonder, Men should now talk of an Extraordinary great Light, when the
two Eyes of our Land (so you were ever accounted) are almost put out. However
this short Interruption of your Happiness will but add the more to your
Honor hereafter.

And here, as it were Store of Pride for me to Counsel you, so it were want of
duty not to Comfort you. Know, the only Good Token of these Times is, That they
are so extremely Bad they can never last long. God give you a sanctified
Impression of your Afflictions, neither to slight them nor sink under them;
and so, forbearing to be longer troublesome to your more serious Employments,
rests

The meanest of your Sons or Nephews Thomas Fuller.

TO THE LEARNED AND MY WORTHY GOOD FRIEND, Master Charles Herle.
SIR,
WHen I read a Pamphlet of M. Saltmarsh written against me, it something moved
my Affections, but nothing removed my Judgment. But when I saw it recommended
to the world with your Approbation, in this manner, Nihil invenio in hoc
Libello, cui Titulus, (Examinations, or a discovery of some dangerous
Positions, delivered in a Sermon of Reformation Preached by Tho. Fuller, B. D.
quin utiliter imprimatur. Charles Herle.


I must confess it troubled me not a little, suspecting either my Eyes or my
Understanding, that either I misread your Name, or had mis-written something in
my Sermon. Wherefore fearing Partiality might blind me in mine Own Book
(knowing that Eli was not the only Indulgent Father to his own Offspring) I
imparted my Sermon to some whom you respect, and they respect you: Men of
singular Learning and Piety, to Examine it. These likewise could discover no
dangerous Positions in it, except such as were dangerous for a Preacher to
deliver, but safe for People to Receive in these Troublesome Times. And I am
Confident that their Judgment was such, They would not be deceived with my
Falsehoods: and their Honesty such, They would not deceive me by their Flattery.

And now Sir (Love cannot Hate, but it may justly be Angry) Consider how your
accusing of me, to maintain dangerous Positions, might, as the Times stand,
have undone me and mine, and at least have entitled me to a Prison, now
adays the Grave of men alive. Times are not as formerly, when Scholars might
safely Traverse a Controversy in disputation. Honorable Tilting is left off,
since men fell to downright killing; and in vain should I dispute my
Innocence against Soldiers violence, who would interpret the Accusation of a
man of your Credit to be my sufficient Conviction.

I have in this my Defense, so well as God did Enable me, more clearly
expressed, and strongly confirmed the Positions I formerly delivered, and
request you to tell me, which are the dangerous Points that here I maintain.
By the Laws of our Land, the Creditor has his Choice, whether he will sue the
Principal, or the Surety, and discretion will advise him, to sue him which is
most solveable. Your Ability is sufficiently known, and seeing you have been
pleased to be bound for Master Saltmarsh his Book, in your Approving it: blame
me not Sir, if I (I will not say sue you) but Sue to you for my Reparation.

If you can Convince me of my Faults herein (and I will bring great desire, and
some capacity to Learn from you) I shall own my self your Proselyte, thank
God for you, and you for my Conversion. Yea in a Printed sheet I will do
public Penance to the open view of the World, to show men, that although I
had so much Ignorance as to Err, I have not so much Impudence as to Persist in
an Error, and shall remain,

Yours in all Christian Offices. THOMAS FULLER.

To the Reverend and his Worthy good Friend, Master JOHN DOWNAM.
SIR,
BEing about to read Master Saltmarsh his examination of a Sermon of mine,
which you (to the Preachers credit, and Printers security) were pleased to
approve for Orthodox and Useful, mine eyes in the beginning thereof, were
entertained (I cannot say welcomed) with this following note, An Advertisement
returned to the Author, by a Reverend Divine, to certify him touching the
Licensers allowance of Master Fullers late Sermon of Reformation.

Sir, To satisfy you concerning M. Downams approbation of Master Fullers
Sermon of Reformation, I assure you I heard him complain, that he was wronged
by him, in that having taken exception at some passages of that Sermon, Master
Fuller promised to amend them according to his correction, but that he did not
perform what he promised.

Conclude me not guilty if I were moved, but senseless if I had not been
perplexed with this accusation. Had it been true, I want a word bad enough to
express the foulness of my deed. Yea justly may my preaching be suspected of
falsehood, if my practice be convicted of dishonesty. We know how the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 1. 17. 18.
from the supposed breach of S. Paul's solemn promise, were ready to infer the
falsity, at least the levity of his doctrine, till the Apostle had rectified
their mistake. This added also to my trouble, that I can privately enjoy my
innocence with more contentment to my self, then I can publikly declare it
with safety to others. For the present therefore, all that I will return, is
this.

Here is an Accusation without a witness, or a witness without a name, and
both without truth. Would the Ink of this reverend Divine (whosoever he was)
only hold out to blot my name, and not to subscribe his own? We know what
Court was complained of, as a great grievance, because Men therein might not
know their Accusers. If it cannot consist with our mutual safety, Acts 25. 16.
to have my accusers (as S. Paul had) face to face, yet it will stand with
equity, I should have them name to name: till when, I account this namelesse
note, no better then a Libel both on you and me.

God put an end unto these woeful times, before they put an end to us; that all
outward hostility being laid aside, we may have more leisure to attend, and
comfort to follow, that inward Christian Warefare, which your pains have so
well described.

Yours in Christ Jesus Thomas Fuller.

To Master JOHN SALTMARSH Minister of Heslerton in Yorke-shire.
SIR,
YOu have almost converted me, to be of your opinion, that some extraordinary
Light is peculiarly conferred on men in this age. Seeing what cost me many
days to make, you in fewer hours, could make void and confute. You examined
(you say) the same pace, you read, and (as is intimated) wrote as fast, as you
examined, and all in one ofternoon. This if it were false, I wonder you would
say it; and if it were true, I wonder you could do it. However I commend your
policy herein: for besides that you have given the world notice of the
Pregnancie of your parts, (and it is no fault of yours, if you be rather heard
then believed) hereby you have done me a great disadvantage. For if I at
leisure discover some notable errors in your examinations, you have a present
Plea, that you wrote them suddenly, and I shall only be repaired for the wrong
that you have done me, with your raptim scripta, whereas you had done God as
much Glory, the cause as much good, more right to your self, and credit to me,
if you had took more time, and more truly.

And now consider, you only endeavor to confute some dismembered sentences of
my Sermon, of which some are falsely, and more of them imperfectly alleged. You
know, how in a continued speech, one part receives and returns strength and
luster unto another. And how easy is it, to overthrow the strongest sentence,
when it is cut off from the Assistance of the Coherence, before and after it?
Alas, this disiointing of things, undoeth kingdoms as well as sermons, whilst
even weak matters are preserved by their own unity and entirenesse. I have
dealt more fairly with you, and set down your whole Examinations, thereby not
expecting any praise, but preventing just censure, if I had done otherwise.

If you demand why my answer comes so late, seeing so long silence may be
interpreted a consent. Know Sir, it was the tenth of September, before either
friend in love, would do me the favor: or foe in anger, the discourtesie, to
convey your book unto me.

Whether this proceeded from the intercepting commerce betwixt the City and the
Country, or that your Book was loath to come out of London: as sensible, that
the strength of your positions, consisted in the fortifications thereof.

When I had received one of your books, I had not your present parts to answer
it. Men must do, as they may do: I hope, though my credit may, Gods cause
shall not suffer by my delay; seeing Truth does not abate with time. Here I
speak not of those many afflictions, that have befalne me, as not being so
unreasonable, as to expect any pity from others, in these doleful days,
wherein none are at leisure to bemoane the misery of any private men, whilst the
general Calamity ingrosseth all grief to it self; and yet, I may say, such
losses could not but disturb my studies.

When I had finished my answer, I could not so speedily provide to have it
printed. And to speak plainly, I was advised by my best friends, to pass by
your pamphlet altogether with silence and neglect, and apply my self only to
enlarge my Sermon, for the satisfaction of others.

However, that you may see I will not decline any thing: I have answered every
operative passage in your Examination.

Here I might take just exception at the sentence prefixed in the title page of
your book, 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power
thereof. Out of the whole quiver of the Bible, could you choose no other Arrow
to shoot, and make me your mark? whom if you tax for a mere formalist; God
grant I may make a good use of your bad suspicion of me, endeavoring to acquit
my self in Heaven, whom you have accused on Earth: I must stand or fall to my
own Master, to whom I hope I shall stand, being held up by my Savior.
Remember, remember, we must all appear before Gods Judgment Seat, when those
things which have been done in secret, shall bebrought to light. Mean time go
you on, a fast as you can in the high way to heaven; but be not too free,
wilfully to dash your fellow travelers, with foul aspersions: for if dirt
may pass for coin, debts in this nature, may easily be paid you back again,
so rests

Thomas Fuller.

TO MY DEAR PARISH SAINT MARY SAVOY.
MY dear Parish, for so I dare call you, as conceiving that although my
calamities have divorced me from your bed and board, the matrimonial knot
betwixt us is not yet rescinded. No not although you have admitted another,
(for fear I hope rather then affection) into my place. I remember how David
when forced to fly from his wife, 2 Samuel 3. 14.
yet still calls her, My wife Michall: even when at that time, she was in the
possession of Phaltiel the son of Laish, who had rather bedded then wedded
her.

This Sermon I first made for your sake, as providing it, not as a feast to
entertain strangers, but a meal to feed my family. And now having again
enlarged and confirmed it, I present it to you, as having therein a proper
interest, being confident, that nothing but good and profitable truth is
therein contained.

Some perchance will object, that if my Sermon were so true, why then did I
presently leave the parish when I had preached it? My answer is legible in the
Capital letters of other ministers misery, who remain in the City. 1 Cor 7.
26.
I went away, for the present distress, thereby reserving my self to do you
longer and better service? if Gods providence shall ever restore me unto you
again. And if any tax me as Laban taxed Jacob. Genesis 31. 27.
Wherefore did thou flee away secretly, without taking solemn leave? I say
with Jacob to Laban, Genesis 31. 31.
because I was afraid. And that plain dealing Patriarch, who could not be
accused for purloining a shoe latchet of other men's goods, confesses himself
guilty of that lawful felony, that he stole away for his own safety: seeing
truth it self may sometimes seek corners, not as fearing her cause, but as
suspecting her judge.

And now all that I have to say to you, Luke 8. 18.
is this, Take heed how you hear: Acts 17. 11.
imitate the wise and noble Bereans, whatsoever the Doctor, or doctrine be
which teaches, or is taught unto you. Search the Scripture daily whether these
things be so. Hansell this my counsel, on this my book: and here beginning,
hence proceed to examine all Sermons, by the same rule of Gods word.

Only this I add also, Pray daily to God, to send us a good and happy Peace;
before we be all brought to utter confusion. You know, how I in all my Sermons
unto you, by leave of my Text, would have a passage in the praise of Peace.
Still I am of the same opinion. The longer I see this war, the less I like
it, and the more I loath it. Not so much because it threatens temporal ruin
to our Kingdom, as because it will bring a general spiritual hardness of
hearts. And if this war long continues, we may be affected for the departure
of charity, as the Ephesians were at the going away of Saint Paul, Act. 20. 38.
Sorrowing most of all, that we shall see the face thereof no more. Strive
therefore in your prayers that, that happy condition which our sins made us
unworthy to hold, our repentance may, through Gods acceptance thereof, make us
worthy to regaine.

Your Loving Minister THOMAS FULLER.

To the unpartiall Reader.
BE not aff^aid to peruse my Positions, though they be accused to be
dangerous. The Saints did not fear infection from the company of Saint Paul,
though he was indicted to be a Pestilent Fellow. Acts 24. 5.


To acquaint you with my intentions in this Book (that so you may proportion
your expectation accordingly) Herein I have to my Power vindicated the truth:
consulting with my conscience, not outward safety; Insomuch that I care not
whom I displeased, to please the Bird in my Breast. Yea when the actions of
other men, have by the Examiner been laid to my charge, I have took the
boldness to leave them to their Authors to defend. For though Honesty
commands me to pay my own debts, yet discretion advises me from Solomon's
mouth, to avoid Sureti-ship, Pro. 11. 15.
and not to Break my self with being bound for the Errors of others.

I cannot but expect to procure the Ill Will of many, because I have gone in a
middle and moderate way, betwixt all extremities. I remember a story too truly
appliable to me. Once a Jayler demanded of a Prisoner, newly committed unto
him: whether or no he were a Roman Catholic. No, answered he: what then said
he are you an Anabaptist? Neither replied the Prisoner, What, (said the other)
are you a Brownist. Nor so said the man, I am a Protestant. Then said the
Jayler, get you into the dungeon: I will afford no favor to you, who shall get
no profit by you: Had you been of any of the other religions, some hope I had
to gain by the visits of such as are of your own profession. I am likely to
find no better usage, in this age, who profess my self to be a plain
Protestant, without wealt or guard, or any Addi^ion: equally opposite to all
Heretics and Sectaries.

Let me mate this with another observation. By the Law of the twelve Tables, if
a man were indebted but to one creditor, Bodin de Repub. lib. 1. p 50.
he had no Power over his body: but if he owed money to many, and was not
solvable, all his creditors together might share his body betwixt them, and by
joint consent pluck him in pieces. Me thinks, a good Moral lurkes in this
cruel Law: namely, that men who oppose one adversary alone, may come off and
shift pretty well, whilst he who provokes many enemies, must expect to be
torn asunder: and thus the poor Levite, will be rent into as many pieces,
Judge. 19. 29.
as the Levites wife was.

Yet I take not my self to be of so desolate and forlorn a Religion, as to
have no fellow professors with me. If I thought so, I should not only suspect,
but condemn my judgment: having ever as much loved singleness of heart, as I
have hated singularity of opinion. I conceive not my self like Eliah to be
left alone: 1 King. 19. 14.
having, as I am confident, in England, more then seventy thousand, just of the
same Religion with me. And amongst these, there is one in price and value,
eminently worth ten thousand, even our gracious Sovereign, whom God in
safety and honor long preserve amongst us.

And here I must wash away an aspersion, generally, but falsely cast on men of
my profession and temper: for all moderate men, are commonly condemned for
Lukewarm

As it is true, Saepe latet vitium proximitate boni.

It is as true, Saepelatet virtus proximitate mali.

And as Lukewarmnesse has often fared the better (the more men's ignorance) for
pretending neighborhood to moderation: so Moderation (the more her wrong) has
many times suffered for having some supposed vicinity with lukewarmnesse.
However they are at a grand distance, Moderation being an wholesome Cordial to
the soul: whilst lukewarmnesse (a temper which seeks to reconcile hot and
cold) is so distastefull, that health it self seems sick of it, Rev. 3 16.
and vomits it out. And we may observe these differences betwixt them.

First the Lukewarm man (though it be hard to tell what he is; who knows not
what he is himself) is fixed to no one opinion, and has no certain creed to
believe; Whereas the Moderate man, sticks to his principles, taking Truth
wheresoever he finds it, in the opinions of friend, or foe; gathering an herb,
though in a ditch: and throwing away a weed, though in a Garden.

Secondly, the Lukewarm man, is both the archer and mark himself; aiming
only at his own outward security. The Moderate man, levels at the glory of
God, the quiet of the Church, the choosing of the Truth, and contenting of his
conscience.

Lastly, the Lukewarm man, as he will live in any Religion, so he will dye
for none. The Moderate man, what he has warily chosen, will valiantly
maintain, at least wise intends, and desires to defend it, to the death. The
Kingdom of Heaven (says our Savior) suffers violence. Mat. 11. 12.
And in this sense, I may say, the most moderate men are the most violent, and
will not abate an hoof, or hairs breadth, in their Opinions, whatsoever it
cost them. And time will come, when Moderate men, shall be honored as Gods
Doves, though now they be hooted at, as Owls in the Desert.

But my Letter swells too great, I must break off. Only requesting the reader by
all obligations of charity. First, to read over my Sermon, before he enters on
the Examination. To conclude, when I was last in London, it was generally
reported that I was dead: nor was I displeased to hear it. May I learn from
hence with the Apostle, To Die daily. And because to God alone it is known, how
soon my death may come, I desire to set forth this book as my Will and
Testament, which if it can be of no use to the reader, it may be some ease and
comfort to the writer, that the world may know, in this multitude of Religions,
what is the Religion of

Thy Servant in Christ Jesus Thomas Fuller.

TRUTH Maintained.
EXAMINER.
The A Policy of the Sermon of Reformation.
THE Scope of the Sermon is Reformation, but it so B moderates, so modificates,
and conditionates the Persons, and Time, and Business, that Reformation can
advance C little in this way, or Method. As our Astronomers who draw so many
Lines and imaginary Circles in the Heavens, that they put the Sun into an
heavenly Labyrinth and learned D perplexity; such is the Zodiac E you would
make for the light of the Gospel, and the Sun of Reformation to move in. It
was one of the Policyes of the Jews F Adversaries, that when they heard of
their Buildings, they would build with them. They said, let us build with you,
for we seek your God as you do. But the People of God would have no such
Helpers, there is no such G Jesuiticall way to hinder our work as to work with
us, and under such Insinuations set the Builders at variance when they should
fall to labor. And how easy is it to reason Flesh and Blood back from a good
way, and good Resolutions? I remember the old H Prophet had soon persuaded even
the man of God to return when he told him I am a Prophet as thou art. 1 King.
13. 18.


Treatise.
A. The Policy of the Sermon.) Such carnal Policy wherein the subtilty of the
Serpent stings the simplicity of the Dove to death, I utterly disclaim in my
Sermon. Christian Policy is necessary, as in our Practice so in our Preaching,
for Piety is always to go before it, but never to go without it.

B. But it so moderates and modificates.) The most Civil Actions will turn
wild, if not warily moderated. But if my Sermon clogges Reformation with false
or needless Qualifications (till the strength of the matter leakes out at
them) my guilt is great. I am confident of my Innocence, let the Evidence be
produced and the Reader judge.

C. That Reformation can advance but little in this way.) Know that Zoar a
little one that is lasting, is better then a great Babel of Confusion. That
Reformation which begins slowly and surely, will proceed cheerfully and
comfortably, and continue constantly and durably. Builders are content to have
their Foundations creep, that so their Superstructures may run; let us make
our Groundwork good, and no more have then good speed.

D. They put the Sun into an heavenly Labyrinth and learned perplexity with
their imaginary Lines.) This your strong line more perplexeth me to understand
it: Only this I know, that you might have instanced more properly in any other
Planet which is more laden with Cycles, and Epicycles, whilst the Sun has
found from Astronomers this favor and freedom, to be left to the simplest
Motion.

E. Such a Zodiac you would make for the light of the Gospel.) were I to
spread the Zodiac of the Gospel, it should stretch from Pole to Pole, and be
adequate to the Heavens. There should be no more Pagans in the World then there
were Smiths at one time in Israel; 2 Samuel 13. 19.
not that I would have any killed, but all converted; yea the Sun of
Reformation should not have so much darkness as a shadow to follow it. To
effect this, my wishes are as strong as my power is weak. I will (God willing)
pray and preach for it, and therefore do not slander me to be an Hinderer of
the Word.

F. G. H. Of the Jews adversaries. J^suiticall way. The old Prophet.) What you
say is as true in the History as false in the Application to me. You compare me
to the Ammonites (Adversaries to Gods people, to Jesuits, to the old lying
Prophet. I hope the God of Michael the Arch-Angell will give me patience, Jude
9.
when he that disputed with him shall furnish him others railing. And now
torture me no longer with your Accusation, come to the proof.

Examiner.
I find there are three Principles animates the Sermon.

1 How imperfect I a Church will be and a Reformation do best you can.

2 That the light which the K Fathers had formerly, was as full and glorious as
the light of these days, or rather brighter.

3 That none but the supreme Authority, or Authority L Royal, and that alone
ought to begin and act in this Reformation.

Treatise.
I How imperfect a Church.) I said it and I say it again; it was a Truth
before your Cradle was made, and will be one after your Coffin is rotten.

K That the light that the Fathers had formerly, was as full and glorious. Show
me such a syllable in all the Sermon and I Will yield the cause: Not that this
Position is false, but because I never said it; except you collect it from
those my words where I say, that the Moderns had a mighty advantage of the
Ancients who lived in the Marches of Paganismes and in the time wherein the
Mystery of Iniquity began to work.

L. None but the supreme Authority or Authority Royal.) I said that the
supreme Authority alone in those respe^tive places wherein it is supreme,
has the lawful calling to reform. Thus of the three Principles which you
reck^n in my Sermon. The first I said I will defend it: The second I said not,
and do deny it: The third I said otherwise then you do allege it. And yet
even for the two latter (that you may not complain for want of play) in due
time as occasion is offered, I will fully discover my opinion, that so we may
eitheir freely agree, or fairly dissent.

Examiner.
These are your principles, and let M any judge if this be a Qualification fit
for him, that judges or writes of such a Truth. For first, he that conceits
there can be no Perfection in a Church, will N scarce labor to make that
Church better, which he is sure will be bad at all times: Nor will he care for
any new light, whilst the old is best reputation with him: nor will be seek to
advance the work, but stay for a supreme Authority alone: A good policy to
stay the Reformation till His Majesty's return, and there is hopes it may
cool in their hands.

Treatise.
M, And let any judge.) On Gods blessing let any indifferent person, who is
divested of prejudice, which makes a bad witness and a worse judge: And now
we join Issues.

N. For first, he that conceits there can be no perfection in a Church, will
scarce labor to make that Church better.) If the He you spoke of be a mere
carnal man, this nor any other principle (save Grace and Gods Spirit) can
spur him on to goodness. But if this He be a regenerate man, this doctrine
will make him tire no whit the sooner in his endeavors of Reformation. You
say, he will scarce labor, whereby you confess he will labor. The Gramarian
says, Quod fere fit, non fit, quod vix fit, fit. One scarce is better then ten
thousand almosts. Yet I perceive by the scant measure in your expression, that
you conceive this Doctrine of the impossibility of a Churches perfection on
earth, to be but a back friend to Reformation. Hear therefore what I answer
for my self.

First, 1 The Doctrine of the impossibility o^ a Churches perfection in this
world, being well understood, begets not laziness but the more industry in
wise reformers
hereby you furnish the papists with a Cavil, and with a Color to enforce the
same against the Protestants. For we teach and maintain, that the best works
of men are stained with some imperfections. Hence the papists may infer, That
he that conceits there can be no perfection in a good deed, will scarce labor
to do one. And thus our Doctrine shall be condemned for disheartning of
holiness. See Sir how you meet popery in your undiscreet shunning of it.

Secondly, though there can be no absolute perfection in a Church, yet quo ad
gradum, in some good degree it is attainable, and all good men will endeavor
it. Mariners which make forth for the Northern Discoveries, go out with this
assurance, that it is impossible to come to the pole. Yet have they sought and
found out very far, almost to the eightieth degree of latitude. What
covetousness or curiosity did in them, sure Grace is as active to do in Gods
Children who will labor to draw near to a perfect Reformation, in obedience
to Gods command, though they know they shall never fully attain unto it.

Thirdly, the Doctrine of the impossibility of a perfect Reformation in this
world well understood, begets not idleness, but the more industry in men's
endeavors. For those that believe that the perfection of a Church may be
attained in this life, are subject to this mistake (one error is procreative
of another) to think that sometimes they themselves have attained it, and so
ending in the midst of their journey, may sit down and take up their rest:
Whereas those who conceive the impossibility of perfection are kept in constant
doing, having still plus ultra. with Saint Paul, forgetting those things that
are behind, they reach forth to those things which are before, Phil. 3. 13.
and press toward the mark.

Fourthly, if it be objected that the impossibility of perfection discourageth
men to endeavor it, seeing they cannot rationally desire it, non est voluntas
impossibilium, it is no level wish aimed at a mark, but a Velleity shot at
random, which desires an impossibility. It is answered, that Gods servants
endeavoring a perfect Reformation, do not light on a labor in vain, that
which is wanting in them being supplied in Gods acceptance: If they do their
best, their desire is taken for the deed: The deformities of their imperfect
Reformation being pardoned by God in Christ, in which respect, their labors
are not in vain in the Lord.

Lastly, seeing this point of the impossibility of a Churches perfection is
most true (as hereafter we shall make so appear) if hereupon any grow remiss
and large in Reforming, it is not the fault of Gods straight Doctrine, but of
men's crooked practice: For if men infer hellish Conclusions from heavenly
premises, such bad consequences are not the lawful Children of Gods Truth, but
the Bastards of man's corruption, where they are justly to be fathered for their
maintenance. And now I suppose that your exception in those your words will
scarce labor, is abundantly answered.

O. Nor will we care for any new light, whilst the old is in best reputation
with him.) This is grounded on what I never said, but if by the old light be
meant that which shined from the Ancient of days into the Scriptures and
thence through the Fathers to us, I prefer it before any new light whatsoever.

P. A good policy to stay the Reformation till His Majesty's return.) It need
not have stayed till His Majesty's return, which might have been done before
His going away; who so often and so earnestly offered to reform whatsoever
could justly be convinced to be amiss in our Church; which proffers had they
been as thankfully accepted, as they were graciously tendered, long since it
had been done what we now dispute of, though it matters not for the spilling of
our ink, if other men's blood had been spared. And I doubt not when
opportunity is offered His Majesty will make good his word, whom no Vollyes of
discurtesies though discharged never so thick against him, shall drive him
from His Princely Promise, whilst he looks not downwards on men's behavior to
him, but upwards to his Protestations to God, learning from Him whom he
represents to be Unchangeable. But if (which God foresend, and yet all earthly
things are casual) it should come to pass, that in point of Reformation, what
formerly was proffered by the Sovereigne, and refused by the Subject, should
hereafter be requested by the Subject, and denied by the Sovereigne; we shall
have leisure enough to admire Gods Justice, bemoane our own condition, and
instruct our Posterity not to outstand good offers, least for want of seeing
their happiness they feel their own misery. But to return to your
mentioning of His Majesty's return; when all is done for ought I can see,
Reformation must stay till His Majesty's return. As for the time and manner
thereof when and how it shall be done. God in his wisdom and goodness so
order it, that it may be most for his glory, the Kings honor, the good of the
Church and State. But this I say again, that till this his returning, the
general enjoining and peaceable practicing of any Reformation cannot be
performed.

Q. And then there is hope it may cool in their hands.) If by their hands you
mean his Majesty's (and what else can your words import) it is as disloyal a
suspicion, as his would be an unfitting expression that should say, that
Reformation would boil over in the hands of the Parliament. But Sir, thus
far you have excepted against my Sermon in general, now you are pleased to
confute some particulars thereof.

Sermon Paragraffe 10.
Withal we falsely deny that Queen Elizabeth left the dust behind the door,
which she cast on the dunghill, whence this uncivil expression is raked up.
The Doctrine by her established, and by her Successors maintained in the 39.
Articles if declared, explained and asserted from false glosses, has all gold,
no dust or dross in them.

Examiner.
I will not detract from the Religious huswifry of such a Queen of famous
memory, but we know her Reformation is talked of now in a Politic R
Reverence, and we are commended back into her times only to hinder us from
going forward in our own; for I am sure till this Engine was contrived, She
was not such a Saint in the Prelates S Calender.

Treatise.
R. If there be any so base that they now make Queen Elizabeth's Reformation
their protection, which formerly they disdained (running in rain to that bush
for shelter, which they mean to burn in fair weather) shame light on them
for their hypocrisy. Let such be stripped naked to their utter disgrace, who
only wear the Memory of that worthy Queen to cloak and cover them in their
necessity, whose Reformation was signed with success from Heaven; our Nation
in her time being as famous for foreign Achievements as now it is infamous
for homebred dissentions. Yet God forbid our eyes should be so dazzled with the
luster of her days as not to go forward to amend the faults thereof, if any
such be justly complained of.

S. She was not such a Saint in the Prelates Calender.) I never saw the
Prelates Calender, but in the late reformed Almanacks, I find neither Her nor
any other for Saints.

EXAMINER.
For the Doctrine established from Queen Elizabeth's times, though it be not the
business so much of our Reformation as the 39. Articles where it dwells; yet
this we know, either the light of the Doctrine was very dim, Bishop Montague,
Franciscus, Secta Clara.
or the eyes of our Bishops T and Jesuits, for one of them would needs spy
Arminianisme, and the Jesuit Popery. And some will make it a Problem; yet
whether their gloss may accuse the Articles, or the Article their gloss, such
Cassanders ^ound so much Latitude in our Doctrine as to attempt a V
Reconciliation of their Articles and ours together.

TREATIS.
T. I expect (and ever may expect) that you would have produced some dross in
our Articles, instancing in some false place or point contained in them, and
then I must either have yielded to you with disgrace, or opposed you with
disadvantage. But instead of this, you only tell us how some have seen
Arminianisme and Popery in them. I answer: So the Papists do read every point
of Popery where you will say it was never written in the Scripture. Those who
bring the jaundies in their eyes do find yellowness in every object they
behold; and nothing can be so cautiously penned, but engaged persons will
construe it to favor their opinions.

V. As to attempt a reconciliation of their Articles and ours together.) Thus
many Egyptian Ks. attempted to let the red sea into the Mediterranian. A
project at first seeming easy to such as measured their neernesse by the eye
and at last found impossible by those who surveyed their distance by their
judgment; seeing art and industry can never marry those things whose bands
Nature does forbid. And I am confident that with the same succes, any shall
undertak the Accommodating of English and Romish Articles. Nor can the wisest
Church in such a Case provide against the boldness of men's attempting, though
they may prevent their endeavors from taking effect. For my own Opinion, as
on the one side, I should be loath that the Bells should be taken down out of
the steeple and new-cast every time that unwise people tune them to their
Think: So on the other side, I would not have any just advantage given in our
Articles to our Adversaries. However, what you say confutes not, but confirms
my words in my Sermon, that the 39. Articles need declaring, explaining and
asserting from false glosses. And seeing it is the peculiar Privilege of Gods
Word to be perfect at once and for ever, on Gods blessing let the dark words
in our Articles be expounded by cleerer, doubtful expressed in plainer,
improper exchanged for fitter, what is superfluous be removed wanting supplied,
too large contracted, too short enlarged always provided that this be done by
those who have calling, knowledge and discretion to do it.

SERMON Paragraffe 11.
Again, we freely confess that there may be some faults in our Church in
matters of practice and Ceremonies, and no wonder if there be it would be a
miracle if there were not. Besides* there be some Innovations rather in the
Church then of the Church, as not chargeable on the public Account, but on
private men's scores, who are old enough, let them answer for themselves.

EXAMINER.
These are but subtle W Apologies and distinctions, for the X superstitions in
the Church, and to take off the eyes of the Reformers, and entertain them into
changeable discourses, as if they were faults and no faults, and those that
were, were irreformable, and could not be made better. And thus while the
errors of our Church should call them to reform, your difficulties Y and
impossibilities would call them off. You say it were a Miracle to have none:
This is such Sophistry as the malignity of your Clergy would cast in the way of
our Reformation. And for the A Innovations they have been made by your most
learned the immediate issues of our Church, our Rubric and practice have been
called to witness it; therefore go not on to persuade such a B Fundamental
Integrity and Essential Purity. You know in what a case that C Church was when
she thought her self rich, and full, and glorious. He is no less an enemy to
the Patient then to the Physician that would persuade him that all is well or
at the lest incurable.

TREATISE.
W. These are but subtle Apologies.) Truly no such matter; they are even
plain and downeright confessions from the simplicity of my heart.

X. For the superstitions in the Church.) Sir, lay not your Enditement higher
then you are sure your proof will reach. You might have done well to have
insisted on some particulars, whilst now your generals accuse much, convict
nothing.

Y. Your difficulties and impossibilities would call them off.) Not so; for to
show wise Reformers the true difficulties of their work will quicken not
quench their endeavors. Thus the Carpenter being truly told that the wood is
hard, he is to hew, will therefore not throw away his Axe, but strike with the
greater force. And that the Doctrine of the impossibility of a Churches perfect
Reformation on with well understood, is no hinderer to men's Labors to Reform,
has been largely proved before.

Z. You say it were a Miracle for a Church to have no fa^lt^* This is such
sophistry as the Malignity of your Clergy would cast in the way of our
Reformation.) This sophistry will at last prove good Logic, and whatsoever you
pretend of Malignity, this is a truth to be confided in: Namely, That no Church
in this world can be so complete, but it will have faults. For the Church being
a body consisting of imperfect men the Members thereof, the body must needs be
imperfect also. This appears by the constant necessity of Preaching, which
otherwise might well be spared, and all our Sermons turned into Psalms, as
also by the power of the Keys, which will never rust in the Church for want of
employment. Yea that Petition in the Prayer of Christ's p^oviding for us ( and
forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us) were
both needless and false if men might be perfect in this world. This perchance
is the reason why the Perfection-mongers of this Age quarrel with this Prayer,
as having too much pride to confess their own faults, and too little Charity
to forgive other men's, so ill does a Publicans prayer fit a Pharisees mouth.

A. As for Innovations they have been made by your most learned.) 2. That the
Church of England cannot justly be taxed with ^^perstitious innovations.
Concerning Innovations I must enlarge my self. In mixed Actions wherein good
and bad are blended together, we can neither choose nor refuse all, but may pick
out some, and must leave the rest.

First, they may better be termed Renovations then Innovations, as lately not
new forged, but new furbished. Secondly, they were not so many as some
complain. The suspicious old man cries out in the Comedy, that 600. ^ooks were
set into his house, when they were but two. Jealousy has her hyperboles as
well as her flattery. Thirdly, some of these Innovations may easier be rayled
on then justly reproved; namely, such as concerned the adorning of Churches,
and the comeliness of men's behavior in Gods service, where outward decency (if
not garish, costly above the Estates of the parish, mimicall affected or
superstitious) is the Harbinger to provide the lodging for inward holiness.
For some bodily distance brings our souls the nearer to God, with whom some
have such clownish familiarity, they have the less friendship. Fourthly, if
these gave offense, it was not for any thing in themselves but either because;

First, they were challenged to be brought in without law. This often makes
good matters to be ill relished, honest men if wise withal, being loath to pay
their obedience, before it becomes legally due.

Secondly, because they seemed new and unusual, and we know how in dangerous
times every well-meaning stranger may be suspected for a spy till he has given
an account of himself. Now few daughter-Churches had seen such Ceremonies,
though some of their Mother-Cathedrals could well remember them.

Thirdly, because they were multiplied without any set number; and those
Ceremonies which men saw were indefinit, they feared would be infinite.

Fourthly, because they were pressed in some places without moderation. And
herein some young men (I will not say ran without sending, but) ran further
then they were sent, outstripping them who first taught them to go.

Fifthly, because they were pressed by men, some of whose persons were
otherwise much distasted; how justly? let them seek who are concerned.

Lastly, because men complained that painful Preaching and pious living, the
life of Gods service were not pressed and practiced with equal earnestness,
as outward decency the luster thereof; whence their fears inferred, that the
shadows would devour the Substance.

Now whereas you say that these Innovations have been made by our most learned,
herein I must confess that the scales of my skill are too little in them to
weigh the learning of great Scholars, and to conclude who have the most. But
this I know, that always a distinction has been made and admitted betwixt the
opinions and practice of the most eminent particular Doctors (how great soever
in place power or parts) and the Resolutions and Commands of the Church in
general. In which respect, what hitherto you allege to the contrary, does no
whit disprove my words, that such Innovations are rather in the Church then of
the Church, by which they were never abso^utely enjoined nor generally
received, as always disclaimed by many, and lately disesed by most.

Such indeed as used them out of Conscience (I should have no Conscience to
think otherwise of some) are not to be blamed if they privately practice them
still, at their own peril, till their judgments are otherwise informed. Such
as took them up for fashion sake, for fashion sake have since laid them down.
Such as were frighted into them desist, now their fear is removed. Lastly,
those who used them in hope of preferment, now disuse them in despair thereof,
not to say some of them are as violent on the contrary side, and perchanee
only wait the Word of command from the prevalent party to turn Faces about
again. In brief, seeing generally these Ceremonies are left off, it seems
neither Manners nor Charity, always to lay that in men's dishes, which the
Voider some pretty while since has clean taken away.

Say not that these Innovations are now rather in a swound then dead and likly
to revive, when cherished with the warmth of Authority seeing His Majesty has
often and fully proffered, that whatsoever is justly offensive in them shall be
removed, and pity it is but that the rest should by the same lawful power be
re-enforced. But enough hereof, and more perchance then will please the Reader,
though less could not have satisfied the Writer; if I have contented any,
well; If I have displeased all, I am contented.

B. Therefore go not on to persuade such a Fundamental Integrity and
Essential purity.) Indeed the pains may well be spared, for all wise men are
sufficiently persuaded thereof already. For if hereby you mean (and I would
feign learn what other sense your words are capable of) that the Csturch of
England has not as yet been Entire in the Fundamentals, and Pure in the
Essentials to Salvation. We all are in a woeful Condition. Have we lived thus
long in our Church, now to dye eternally therein? Seeing none can be saved
therein if it be unsound in the Fundamentals of Religion; must the thousand six
hundred forty third year from Christ's birth, be the first year of the nativity
of the Church of England, from which she may date her Essential purity? Sir, I
could at the same time child you with anger, bemoane you with pity, blush for
you with shame, were it not that I conceive this passage fell unawares from
your pen, and that you intend to gather it up again.

C. You know in what a case that Church was, when she thought her self rich,
and full, and glorious.) Good Sir, accept of my service to stay you, or else
run on till you be stopped by your own weariness. Our Church never bragged thus
her self, nor any other for her; whose faults we have already freely
confessed, yet maintained her to be sound in all Fundamentals, and pure in all
Essentials.

SERMON Paragraffe 12.
A through Reformation we and all good men desire with as strong affections,
though perhaps not with so loud a noise as any whatsoever.

EXAMINER.
If your through Reformation in this page be compared with your fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen pages, where you have bound it up with so many D
Restrictions, the fallacy will soon appear. You would smoothly tax some
Brethren for clamor E and noise in their desires after Reformation. Indeed if
you could persuade the Prophets of God into silence, or slight endeavors,
half your Design were finished; but they have a Fire which slames into
stronger expressions: If the zeal of the Prophets and F Martyrs had given no
further testimony to the truth, then their own Bosoms, we had not had at this
day such a cloud of witnesses; you know these loud importunities awaken and
hasten men unto that holy G Business you would so feign retard. If you think
it your virtue that you can be silent in the midst of our importunities and
loud cries after Reformation, I am sure it is your policy too, for should you
make too great a noise after it, you might be heard H to Oxford, and perhaps
you are loath to speak out till you see further.

TREATIS.
D. Fourteen, fifteen, sixteen, seventeen pages, where you have bound it up
with so many Restrictions.) Indeed I bound Reformation with Restrictions, but
such as are Girdles to strengthen it, not fetters to burden it, and thereupon
no fallacy, but plain dealing will appear. And if those pages you instanee in
be guilty of any such fault, no doubt when your examination does come to them,
you will press it home, and I shall be ready to make my best defense.

E. You would smoothly tax some Brethren for clamor.) If any be faulty herein
they deserve not only to be smoothly taxed. Pro 9. 13. A foolish woman is
clamoro^^. Ephe. 4. 31. wrath and anger, and clamor.
but sharply reproved. For clamor (as the English word is taken in Scripture)
sounds in a bad sense, as arguing an ill tempered Spirit with a mixture of
pride and impatience. And as Reformation ought to be prosecuted and sought
after with holy and zealous importunity (far from all Lethargicall dullness
and carnal stupidity) so it must be done with a quiet and compose soul, 1
These. 4. 11. Study to be quiet.
a grace commended by the Apostle. Now grant none to be guilty, yet seeing all
are subject (especially in tumultuous times) to clamor and passionate
extravagancies, my gentle Advertisement by the bye could not be amiss.

F If the zeal of the Prophets and Martyrs had given.) I thank you Sir for
mentioning the Martyrs; They were the Champions of passive obedience, and the
lively Patterns of that holy Temper I now described; Men of a meek and quiet
disposition, not clamorous, though since their death, the noise and fame of
their patience has sounded aloud through the whole world to all Posterity. And
I pray God in continuance of time the very Doctrine of Martyrdom be not
Martyred.

G That holy Business you would so feign retard.) I appeal from your hard
Censure to the Searcher of hearts, who one day will acquit my innocence and
punish your uncharitableness, except it be first pardoned upon your repentance.

H For should you make so great a noise, you might be heard to Oxford.) I care
not how far I be heard, nor which way, to Oxford and beyond it, to Geneva, or
to Rome it self: Truth is Calculated for all meridians. But speak not
slightingly of Oxford, it is ill wounding of a Court, and a Camp, and an
University, and all in one word.

I And perhaps you are loath to speak out till you see farther.) I see too
far already; namely, that ruin and desolation is likely to follow, except
Moderation be used on both sides: If you mean, till I see farther into His
Majesty's pleasure of Reforming, what shall be found amiss, his unfeigned
desire thereof does already plainly appear? But if you mean till I see
farther into his success, know Sir, my Religion observes not the tides of His
Majesty's Fortune, to ebb and flow therewith. Where Conscience is the
Fountain, the stream keeps the same height.

SERMON Paragrasse 12.
But with this Qualification, that by through Reformation, we mean such a one
whereof we are capable, pro statu viatorum, made with all due and Christian
Moderation.

EXAMINER.
You write of the Reformation of a Church like K Bod^^, not like Bucer, you
make it a work of Policy L not of Piety of Reason, not Divinity. Such
Counselors had M Jeroboam and Jehu, and they made a Church as unhappy as a
Kingdom miserable. This Moderation and Qualification you speak of is not so
consistent with spiritual Essenses and N operations: If the Spirit of God
should not work in the souls of O unregenerate, but expect an answerable
Compliancy first, who should be sanctified? If God had expected any such
Congruity in our business of salvation, we had been unredeemed. To speak P
closer, what Qualification did Queen Q Elizabeth expect when she received a
Kingdom warm from Popery? What Qualification did R Henry the eight expect in
his Attempt against the Supremacy, when all his Kingdom was so universally
conjured to Rome? Such Moderation and Qualification is no other but a discreet
taking so much as will serve your turn. To the law (says the Scripture) S and
to the Test money; Moses wrought according to the Pattern, Bucer in lib. d^
Regno Christ^.
so Solomon too; godly Bucer makes it his work to persuade King Edward to
build up a perfect Church and he V prophesies sadly, that he was afraid Popery
would succeed, because the Kingdom of England was so averse to the Kingdom of
Christ. And we know the Marian days followed, me-thinkes we are too like his
proprophesie, and our W Marian times approach too fast.

TREATIS.
K You write of a Reformation of a Church like Bodin.) Would I wrote like
Bodin, though on the condition that I never wrote Answer to your Examinations.
Would we had some Bodins, some such able Statesmen, that they might improve
their parts to advance an happy Accommodation betwixt our Sovereigne and his
Subjects.

L You make it a work of Policy not of Piety.) I make it as indeed it is, a
work both of Moses and Aaron, wherein Piety is to be preferred, and Policy is
not to be excluded.

M Such Counselors had Jeroboam and Jehu.) Sir, shoot your Arrows at me till
your Quiver be empty, but glance not with the least slenting insinuation at His
Majesty, by consequence to compare him to Jeroboam or Jehu, for their Idolatry;
He knows how to bestow his Gold far better, and to leave the Calves for
others.

N This Moderation and Qualification you speak of, is not so consistent with
spiritual Essenses and Operations.) This your line is not so consistent with
sense, as to need much less deserve a Confutation.

O If the Spirit of God should not have wrought in the souls of Unregenerate.)
I wonder that allotting (as you say) but one afternoon for the whole work of
your Examination you could spend so much time (some minutes at least) in such
impertinencies.

P To speak closer.) And truly no more then needs, for as yet you are far
enough from the matter: But I will not confute what you confess.

Q What Qualification did Queen Elizabeth expect.) She needed not to expect
any, when she had all Requisites to reform. Those who have such Qualification
are not to expect, but to fall a working; those that want it are not to fall a
working, but still to expect. Queen Elizabeth as supreme in her Dominions had a
sufficient calling to reform, nothing was wanting in her: Only her Memory
does still deservedly expect a more thankful acknowledgement of her worthy
pains then generally she has received hitherto.

R What Qualification did Henry the eight expect in his attempt against
supremacy?) He likewise had Qualification sufficient (and therefore needed not
to expect any) as your following words do witness, wherein you say that All
his Kingdom was universally conjured to Rome. If it was his Kingdom, then he
had a calling; if it was conjured to Rome, then he had a cause to reform: and
being the King was bound to be the Exorcist to un-conjure his Subjects from
such superstition: Yea, had King Henry reformed as sincerely as he had a
lawful Calling thereunto, his memory had not been constantly kept in such a
purgatory of men's tongues for his lukewarm Temper, even the most moderate
counting him too good for to be condemned, and too bad to be commended.

S To the Law (says the Scripture) and to the testimony.) I will treasure up
this excellent passage till a convenient time, being confident that before the
next Paragrasse is examined, I shall appeal to these Judges, and you decline
them.

T Godly Bucer makes it his work to persuade King Edward to build up a perfect
Church.) The book of godly Bucer which you cite I have seen* on the self same
token, that therein he makes (...) perpetua^ Ecclesia^um observation^ ab ipsis
iam Apostolis v^d mus, visnm and h^c esse spiritus Sancto ut inter Presbite^^
quibus Ecclesiarum precuratis potissimum est comm^ss^ unus Ecclesia^ rum, and
let us Sac^^ Minis^^rii ^aram (...) singularem eaque enra and solicttudina
cauctis prec^at alus, qua de ca^sa Ep^scopi nomen huiusm^di summis Ecclesiarum
Curatoribus est peculiaritur attributum. Bucerus de regno Christi lib. 2. cap.
12.
Bishops to be above Presbyters Jure divino. You know Bucer wrote this work
(as leading the front of his Opera Anglicana) in the very beginning of King
Edwards reign, before the Reformation was generally received in England, and
whilst as yet Popery was practiced in many places. And next to this his book
follows his gratulation to the English Church for their entertaining of the
Purity of the Gospel; so that what he does persuade in the book you allege,
was in some good measure performed in that Ks. reign, and afterward better
completed by Queen Elizabeth.

V And he prophesies sadly that he was afraid Popery would succeed.) Herein he
took shrewd aim and it happened he hit right. Such predictions are only
observed when afterward they chance to take effect: otherwise, if missing the
mark, men miss to mark them and no notice at all is taken of them: I know a
latter Divine (not the lowest in learning* one of the highest in M. Greenham in
his grave Counsels in the word Atheism, page 3.
zeal amongst them) who foretells that Atheism rather then Popery is likely
to overrunne England. Such Presages may serve to admonish not to afright us, as
not proceeding from a prophetical spirit, but resulting from prudentiall
observations. But before we take our farewell of this book of Bucers, it will
not be amiss to remember another passage (not to say presage) in the same
worthy work; that we may see what sins in his opinion were forerunners of
ruin in a Kingdom. The margin presents the Reader with the Q^am horrenaum
illi faciunt divina Maiestati contumeliam qni Templa Domini habent pro De
Ambulaer^is lucisque tam prophanis ut in illis quaevis impura and prophana cum
similibus suia garriant and per^ractent. -- Haec certa tanta est divini numinis
Contemptio ut ea vel sola prid^m meriti sumus o^n no de Terra exterminari and
quidem suppliciis gravissimus multari Bucerus de r^gno Christi lib. 1. cap. 10.
latin which I here translate, though the former part thereof be englished
already in men's practice, and the latter I fear will be englished in Gods
judgments.

How horrible an affront do they do to the Divine Majesty who use the Temples
of the Lord for Galleries to walk^ in, and for places so profane, that in them
with their fellows that prattle and treat of any unclean and profane
business. This sure is so great a contempt of God, that long since even for
this alone we have deserved altogether to be banished from the face of the
earth, and to be punished with heaviest judgments.

Such I am afraid will fall on our nation for their abominable abusing of
Churches (besides other of their sins) and profaning the places of Gods
worship. Not to speak of those (and yet what man can hold his tongue when the
mouths of graves are forced open) who in a place to which their guilty
conscience can point without my pens direction did by breaking up the
Sepulchers of our Saxon Christian Kings* erect an everlasting Monument to their
own sacrilege. Such practices must needs provoke Gods anger, and now
methinks I write of the Reformation of a Church like Bucer and not like Bodin.

W Methinks we are too like his prophecy, and our Marian times approach too
fast.) I hope otherwise; trusting on a good God and a gracious King. But if
those times do come, woe be to such as have been the cause or occasion to
bring or hasten them. One day it will be determined whether the peevish,
perverse and undiscreet spirit of Sectaries, bringing a general dis-repute on
the Protestant, has not concurred to the inviting in of superstition and
Popery, may come riding in on the back of Anabaptisme. If those times do come,
I hope that God who in justice lays on the burden, will in mercy strengthen
our shoulders, and what our prayers cannot prevent, our patience must undergo.
Nor is it impossible with God so to enable those whom you tax to have only a
form of Godliness, to have such Power thereof as to seal the Protestant
Religion with their blood.

SERMON Paragrasse 13. 14.
Such who are to be the true and proper Reformers, they must have a lawful
calling thereunto; duties which God has impaled for some particular persons,
amongst these Actions Reformation of a Church is chief. Now the supreme Power
alone has a lawful calling to reform a Church, as it plainly appears by
the Kings of Judah in their Kingdom.

EXAMINER.
I had not known your meaning by the lawful calling you name, but that you
expound it in the lines that follow, to be the calling of the supreme
Magistrate; as if no calling were warrantable at first to X promove a
Reformation but that. But you must take notice there is an inward and an
outward Call. The inward Call is a Y special excitation from the Spirit of
God, and such a Call is warrantable by God to be active; I am sure it has
been sufficient always to set holy men on work: Another Call is outward, and
that is either of Place and Magistracy, or public Relation. Now though
Magistracy be of public Relation, yet when I speak specifically of public
Relation. I mean that in which every man stands bound in to God and his
Country; now all these Callings are commissions enough either to meddle as
Christianly inspired, or Christianly engaged. In ordinary transactions, I know
the ordinary dispensation is to be resorted to; but the business of
Reformation as it is extraordinary, so God gives extraordinary Conjunctures of
times and circumstances, and extraordinary concurrences, and extraordinary
incitations. In the building of the Temple you shall see in Ezra and Nehemiah
such workings of God, Nehem. 8. 1.
when the people were gathered together as one man, they spoke to Ezra the
Scribe to bring the Book of the Law of Moses. Here the people put on even Ezra
to his duty.

TREATIS.
Before I deal with the particulars of this examination, I will enlarge (not
alter) what I said in my Sermon of this point, promising as much brevity as God
shall enable me to temper with Clearness, and desiring the Readers patience
whilst at mine own peril I deliver my opinion.

But first, here we promise necessary distinction. Distinguish we betwixt those
Times, when the Church lives under Pagan or persecuting Princes, and when God
blesses her with a Christian King, defender of the Faith: In the former case
the Church may and must make an hard shift to reform her self so well as she
can (for many things will be wanting, and more will be but meanly supplied)
without any relating to a supreme Power, whose leave therein will be dangerous
to desire and impossible to obtain. But withal, they must provide themselves
to suffer, offering no violence, except it be to drown a Tyrant in their
tears, or to burn him with coals of kindness heaped on his head. In the
latter case, when the supreme Power is a nursing Father to the Church,
suckling it, not sucking blood from it, the Church must have recourse to it
before she may reform. Reforming of a Church must neither stay behind for
Nero his leave, nor run before without the consent of Constantine. Religion
it self must not be decked with those flowers which are violently plucked from
the Crowns of lawful Princes.

Come we now then to show, how in a Christian state, all are to contribute
their joint endeavors to promote a Reformation.

In a Church, 3 How far private Christians, Ministers and subordinate
Magistrates are to concur to the advancing of a public Reformation.
and such a State I consider three degrees thereof. First, mere private men
without any mixture of a public Relation. Secondly, persons placed in a middle
posture with the Centurian in public employment over some, yet under Authority
themselves. Thirdly, the absolute supreme Power, who depends of God alone.

For the first of these, mere private men; they have nothing to do in public
reforming but to advance it by their hearty prayers to God, and to facilitate
the general Reformation, by laboring to amend their own and their Families
lives according to the Word; this is all God requires of them and more I fear
then most of them will perform.

Next, succeed those persons in a middle posture, and these are either
Ministers or Magistrates. Ministers even the meanest of them have thus far
their part in public Reforming, that they are to lift up their voice like a
Trumpet (though not like Sheba his Trumpet to sound sedition) both to reprove
vitiousnesse in Manners, 2 Samuel 20. 1.
and to confute errors in Doctrine. And if men of power and imminent place in
the Church, then as their engagement is greater, so their endeavors must be
stronger, to press and persuade a public Reformation to such whom it does
concern.

Magistrates may have more to do in public Reforming having a calling from
God, who therefore has set them in a middle place betwixt Prince and people,
to do good offices under the one, over the other, betwixt both. And having a
calling from the King, especially if they be his Counselors, whose good they
are to advance by all lawful means, and rather to displease him with their
speech, then to dishonor him with their silence; and having a calling from
their Country, whose safety they must be tender and careful of.

First, therefore they are with all industry (both from the Ministers mouth and
by their own inquiry) to take true notice of such defects and deformities in
the Church or State as are really to be reformed. Secondly, they are with all
sincerity to represent the same to the supreme Power. Thirdly, with all
humility to request the amendment of such Enromities. Fourthly, with all
gravity to improve their request with arguments from Gods glory, the Princes
honor, the peoples profit, and the like. Lastly, with their best judgment to
propound and commend the fairest way whereby a Reformation may as speedily as
safely be effected. And if they meet with difficulties in the supreme Power
delaying their request, they are not to be disheartened, but after their servent
prayers to God, who alone has the hearts of Kings in his hands, they are
constantly to re^ue their request at times more seasonable, in places more
proper, with expressions more patheticall, having their words as full of
earnestness, as their deeds far from violence.

As last comes the supreme Power, 4. What parts therein are only to be acted
by the supreme Power.
who alone is to reform by its own Authority, though not by its own advise
alone. For because it is rationally to be presumed* that Divines have best
skill in matters of Divinity, they are to be consulted with; and here comes in
the necessity and use of Councels, Convocations, Synods and Assemblyes. And
because there is not only a constant correspondency but also an unseperable
complication betwixt the Church and State; Statesmen are therefore to be
advised with in a Reformation, so to settle it as may best comply with the
Commonwealth. For God in that general warrant, Let all things be done
decently and in order; p^ts as I may say the Cloth and Sheeres into the hands
of the Church and Christian Princes, to cut out and fashion each particular
decency and order, so as may shape and suit best with the present Time and
Place wherein such a Reformation is to be made.

These parts therefore are to be acted in a Reformation by the supreme Power.
First, he is (either by his own Motion, or at the instance and entreaties of
others) to call and congregate such Assemblyes. Secondly, to give them leave
and liberty to consult and debate of matters needing to be reformed. Thirdly,
to accept the results of their consultations, and to weigh them in the balance
of his Princely discretion. Fourthly, to confirm so much with his Royal
Assent as his judgment shall resolve to be necessary or convenient. Lastly, to
stamp the Character of Authority upon it, that Recusants to obey it may be
subject to civil punishments.

But now all the question will be what is to be done if the endeavors of
Subjects be finally returned with deafness or denial in the supreme Power.
In this case a pulike Reformation neither ought nor can be performed without
the consent of the supreme Power: It ought not,

First, because God will not have a Church reformed by the deforming of his
Commandment. He has said Honor thy Father and thy Mother and requires that
all Superiors should be respected in their places. Secondly, the Scripture
rich in Presidents for our instruction in all cases of importance affords us
not one single example, wherein people attempted publicly to reform, without
or against the consent of the supreme Power; and in this particular, I
conceive a negative Argument follows undeniably: wherefore seeing the Kings
in Judah (there the supreme Power) were always called upon to reform,
commended for doing so much, or condemned for doing no more; and the people
neither commanded to remove, nor reproved for not removing public Idolatry,
without the consent of the supreme Power; it plainly appears, that a
public Reformation belongs to the supreme Power, so that without it, it
ought not to be done.

As it ought not, so it cannot be done without the consent thereof; for admit
that the highest subordinate Power should long debate, and at last conclude,
the most wholesome Rules for Reformation; yet as Plato said, that amongst the
many good Laws that were made one still was wanting, namely, a Law to command
and oblige men to the due observing of those Laws which were made. So when the
best Resolutions are determined on by any inferior Power, there still remains
an absolute necessity that the supreme Power should bind and enforce to the
observing thereof.

For instance: Some Offenders are possessed with such unclean Spirits of
profaneness, Mar. 5. 3. 2^.
that none can bind them, no not with Chains of Ecclesiastical Censures,
only outward Mulcts in purse or person can hold and hamper them. Scythian
slaves must be ordered with whips, and a present prison more affrights impudent
persons, then Hel-fire to come. In the Writs De Excommunicato capiendo, and de
Haeritico comburendo, such as flout at the Excommunicato and the Haeretico, are
notwithstanding heartily afraid of the Capiendo and the Comburendo. Wherefore
in such cases the Church when it is most perfectly reformed is fame to crave
the aid of the State by civil and secular penalties, to reduce such as are
Rebels to Church Censures (sometimes inflicting death it self on blasphemous
Heretics) and this cannot be performed by any subordinate Power, in the
State, but only by the supreme Power. Otherwise, Offenders, if pressed by any
inferior Power would have a free Appeal and no doubt find full redress from
the supreme Power, without whose consent such penalties were imposed on them.

Now if it be demanded, what at last remains for any to do, in case the
supreme Power finally refuses to reform: Thus they are to employ themselves.
First, to comfort themselves in this, that they have used the means, though it
was Gods pleasure to withold the blessing. Secondly-they are to reflect on
themselves, and seriously to bemoane their own sins which have caused Gods
justice to punish them in this kind. If a^rhumaticke head sends down a
constant flux, to the corroding of the lungs, an ill affected stomach first
sent up the vapors which caused this distillation: And pious Subjects conceive
that if God suffer Princes to persist in dangerous errors, this distemper of
the head came originally from the stomach, from the sins of the people, who
deserved this affliction. Thirdly, they are to reform their selves and
Families, and if the supreme Power be offended thereat, to prepare themselves
patiently to suffer, whatsoever it shall impose upon them, having the same
cause though not the same comfort, to obey a bad Prince as a good one.

By the way, 5. Of the progress and praise of passive O^e^ence.
a word in commendation of passive obedience: When men who cannot be active
without sinning, are passive without murmuring. First, Christ set the
principal copy thereof, leading Captivity captive on the ^rosse, and ever
since he has sanctified suffering with a secret sovereign virtue even to
conquer and subdue persecution.

Secondly, it has been continued from the Primitive Church by the Albigences
to the moderate Protestants unless some of late ashamed of this their Masters
badge, Est haec pontificiorum tess^ra crudelitas, aliud est Protestantium
symbol^m clementia. Isti occidunt, Hi occidunt Laurentius Humphreys in resp^n.
ad Epistolas Camp^ani.
have plucked their cognizance from their coats, and set up for themselves.

Thirdly, it is a Doctrine spiritual in it self. It must needs be good, it is
so contrary to our bad natures and corrupt inclinations, who will affirm any
thing rather then we will deny our selves, and our own revengefull
dispositions. And surely the Martyrs were no less commendable for their
willing submitting to, then for their constant enduring of their persecutors
cruelty. And it was as much (if not more) for them to conquer their own
^indicative spirits, as to undergo the heaviest tortures inflicted on them.

Fourthly, it is a doctrine comfortable to the Practisers, bitter, but
wholesome. Yet it is sweetened with the inward consolation of a clear
conscience, which is Food in Famine, Freedom in Fetters, Health in Sickness,
yea, life in death.

Fifthly, it is glorious in the eyes of the beholders, who must needs like and
love that Religion, whose professors (where they cannot lawfully dearly sell)
do frankly give their lives in the defense thereof.

Lastly, it is a Doctrine fortunate in success. By preaching of passive
obedience, the D^ve has out-flowne the Eagle. Christ's Kingdom has
out-streatched Ca^sars Monarchy. Hereby the wisdom of the East was subdued to
the folly of Preaching. The Sun of the Gospel arose in the Western parts.
The parched South was watered with the dew of the Word. The fro^en North was
thawed with the heat of Religion: But since the Doctrine of resisting the
supreme Power came into fashion, the Protestant Religion has run up to a
high top, but spread nothing in breadth; few Papists have been reclaimed, and
no Pagans have been converted. Alas! that so good a Doctrine should be now in
so great disgrace; yet will we praise such suffering, though we suffer for
praising it. If we cannot keep this Doctrine alive, we will grieve because it
is dying; being confident, that though now it be buried in so deep dishonor,
God in due time will give it a glorious resurrection. And though I must
confess, it is far easier to praise passive Obedience then to practice it,
yet to commend a virtue is one degree to the imitation of it, and to convince
our judgments: First, of the goodness of the deed, is by Gods blessing one
way to work our wills to embrace it: In a word, if this Doctrine of passive
Obedience be cried down, hereafter we may have many books of Acts and
Monuments, but never more any books of Martyrs. And now these things premised,
we return to Master Saltmarsh his examination of my Sermon.

X As if no calling were warrantable at first to promote a Reformation but the
supreme Power.) I never said or thought so: But in what manner, and by what
means inferiors may and must labor to promote it, I have at large declared.

Y The inward call is a special excitation from the spirit of God, and such a
call is warrantable to be active.) I shall have presently a more proper place
to deal with these special excitations, when I come to answer your
extraordinary incitations.

Z Now all these callings are commission enough to meddle.) I am not of so
froward a spirit, as to quarrel at a word. Otherwise I could tell you, that to
meddle generally imports an over-businesse in some Pragmaticall person,
tampering with that which is either unlawful in it self, or hurtful to, at
least improper for the party who medleth with it, and in Scripture it is
commonly used with a prohibition, Deuteronomy. 2. 5.
Meddle not. To pass this by, the question is not whether Magistrates may
meddle (as you say) in advancing a public Reformation; 2 King. 14. to Cro.
15. 19. Pro. 20 19. and 24. 21. and 26. 17. and 20. 3.
but how? and how far they may be active therein? Therein I report the Reader
to what I have largely expressed.

A In ordinary transactions, I know the ordinary dispensation is to be resorted
to, but the business of Reformation as it is extraordinary, so God gives
extraordinary conjunctures of Times and circumstances, and extraordinary
concurrences, and extraordinary incitations.) Now you soar high, give us leave
to follow you as we can. First, I confess that a public Reformation is an
extraordinary work in this sense, as not common or usually done every day (as
private amendment of particular persons is or ought to be.) But it is a rare
work, which comes to pass but seldom, and the doing of it is out of the
road of ordinary men's employment. But I deny a public Reformation to be
extraordinary in this acception; as if it were to be ordered or managed by any
other rules or presidents, then such as are ordinary and usual in the Bible,
where many patterns of public Reformations are presented; in which respect
the ordinary dispensation is to be resorted to in the performance thereof.
Whereas you say, that in public Reformations, God gives extraordinary
conjunctures of Times and circumstance, and extraordinary concurrences. It is
true in this sense, that the great Clock-keeper of Time so orders the
coincidence of all things, that when his hour is come, wherein such a
Reformation shall be made, every officious circumstance will joyfully
contribute his utmost assistance to the advancing thereof. Whetefore if men
cannot make a Reformation without roving from their calling, or breaking Gods
Commandment (according to which it cannot be done without the consent of the
supreme Power.) Hereby it plainly appears, that the hand of Divine Providence
does not as yet point at that happy minute of Reformation, there being as yet
times distracted with jarres and disjunctures, not only in circumstances, but
even in substantial matters requisite thereunto. And therefore seeing Gods
good time may not be prevented, but must be expected, men are still patiently
to wait and pray for that conjnncture of Times and concurrency of
circumstances, whereof you speak.

But whereas you speak of Extraordinary Incitations (parallel to what you said
before, of special excitations and christianly inspired.) In these your
expressions you open a dangerous Pit, Exo. 21. 33. 34
and neither cover it again nor rail it about with any cautions, so that
Passengers may unawares fall into it.

For everyman who has done an unwarrantable act, 6. That no extraordinary
excitations, incitations or inspirations are bestowed from God on men in these
days.
which he can neither justify by the law of God or man, will pretend presently
that he had an extraordinary Incitation for it; a fine trick to plead Gods
leave to break his law. Nor can we disprove the impudence of such people,
except we may use some touch-stones, thereby to try their counterfeit
incitations; my opinion herein shall be contrived into three Propositions.

First, no such extraordinary incitations are extant now a days from God, as
stir men up to do any thing contrary to his Commandments. Indeed, some such
we meet with in the Scripture, where the Lawgiver dispensing with his own
law, incited Abraham to kill his son, Sampson to kill himself, Genesis 22. 2.
Judge. 16. 30. Exodus 12. 36.
and the Isralites to rob the Egyptians. In such cases it was no disobedience
to Gods public command, but obedience to his private countermand; if the
servant varied his practice according to his absolute Masters peculiar
direction. But such incitations come not now a days but from the spirit of
delusion.

Secondly, no extraordinary excitations are extant now a days from God,
seizing on men (as anciently) in Enthusiasmes, or any such raptives, as make
sensible impressions on them. For these are within the virge of Miracles, which
are now ceased, and our age produces things rather monstrous then miraculous.

Thirdly, extraordinary incitations are still bestowed by God in these days;
namely, such that he gives to some of his servants; a more then usual and
common proportion of his grace, whereby they are enabled for and incited to his
service with greater rigor and activity then ordinary Christians. My judgment
herein shall nto be niggardly to restrain Gods bountiful dealing, but I
verily believe that he who was so exceedingly liberal in former ages, is not
so close handed in our times, but that in this sense he bestows extraordinary
motions, especially on such whom his Providence does call to eminent Places,
either in Church or State. But such motions quicken them to run the way of
Gods Commandments, not to start without or beside it. And as hereby they are
heightened to an Heroical degree of Piety, so though sometimes we may say of
them in a Rhetorical expression, that they go beyond themselves, yet they
never go beyond their calling, nor never go beyond Gods Commandments.

Now if any shall pretend that they have an extraordinary excitation to make a
public Reformation without the consent of the supreme Power, to whom by Gods
law it belongs, such an excitation cannot come from the holy Ghost: For if the
spirit of the Prophets be subject to the Prophets. much more is it subject to
the God of the Prophets, and to the law of that God. And truly Sir, this
passage of extraordinary incitations, as it is by you rawly laid down and so
left, contains in it seed enough if well (or rather ill) husbanded, to sow
all the Kingdom with sedition, especially in an age wherein the Anabaptist in
their actions, beaten out of the field by Gods Word, do daily slye to this
their Fort of extraordinary excitations.

And you may observe when God gave extraordinary excitations, quo ad regulam
(stirring up men to do things contrary to the received rule of his
Commandments) then such excitations were always attended with extraordinary
operations. Phinehas, who killed Cosby and Zim^y, could stay the plague with
his prayer; and Eliah who cursed the Captains with their fifties, could cause
fire to come down on them from Heaven. It appears this his curse was
pronounced without malice, because inflicted by a miracle. It is lawful for
such to call for fire, who can make fire come at their call; and would nore
would kindle discord on Earth, till first they fetched the sparks thereof from
Heaven. Neither do we proudly tempt Gods providence, but truly try such men's
pretended extraordinary incitations, if when they wander from Gods
Commandments in their Actions, and plead inspirations, we require of them to
prove the truth of such inspirations, by working a miracle.

Now Sir, you being (as it seems) an opposite to Prelacy, would make strange
work, to put down one Ordinary in a Diocese, and set up many extraordinaries
in every Parish: And for ought I know, if some pretend extraordinary
excitations, publicly to reform against the will of the supreme Power, such
as side with the supreme Power, may with as much probability allege
extraordinary excitations to oppose and cross the others Reformation, and so
betwixt them both our Church and State will be sufficiently miserable. And now
Sir remember what you said in the last Paragraffe: To the law (says the
Scripture) and to the Testimony; to such Judges we may safely appeal from all
your special excitations, extraordinary Incitations and christian Inspirations.

B In the building of the Temple you shall see in Ezra and Nehemiah such
workings of God, when the people were gathered together as one man, they spoke
to Ezra the Scribe, to bring the Book of^ the law of Moses.) The unanimous
consent of so many we acknowledge to be Gods work. O that we might see the
like agreement in England, where the people are so far from being gathered
together as one man, that almost every one man is distracted in his thoughts,
like the times, and scattered from himself as if he were many people. Well,
they spoke to Ezra to bring the Book of he law; what of all this?

C Here the people put on even Ezra to his duty.) And little speaking would
spur on him who of himself was so ready to run in his calling: But I pray
what was this Ezra? who were these people? Ezra was indeed a Priest, a learned
Scribe of the law who brought up a party out of Babylon to Jerusalem armed with
a large patent and Commission from Artaxerxes. The people here were the whole
body of the Jewish Church and State together with Zerobabel the Prince* and
Jeshuah the high Priest, This appears because in the Prop^et he is styled
Governo^r of Judah, Hag 1. 14. and that at the self same time when Ezra came
thither, see Luthers Chronology in 40. millenarco.
who (by leave from the Persian King) had the chief managing of spiritual and
temporal matters. And judge how little this does make for that purpose to
which you allege it that from hence private persons may either make the
supreme power to reform, or do it without his consent. Had you free leave of
the whole Scripture to range in, and could the fruit of your pains find out no
fitter instance for your purposes.

EXAMINER.
And whereas you say, Reformation is of those duties that are D impaled in for
some particular persons. I answer, this were a grand design if you could
heighten E Reformation into such a holy prodigy, as you would of late the
Church into the Prelacy and F Clergy, and excluded the Layty as a profane G
Crew, and to be taught their distance. Luther H will tell you, this is one of
the Roman engines, to make such an holy business; like the mountain in the
law, not to be touc^t or approacht to, but by Moses alone. Thus you might take
off many good Workmen, and honest l Laborers in the Vineyard whom Christ has
hired and sent in, and to whom he has held out his Scepter, as Ahasuerus to
Ester.

TREATIS.
D And whereas you say Reformation is of those duties that are impaled in for
some particular persons.) It appears that public Reformation is so impaled;
for whereas every man is commanded to observe the Sabbath, honor his Parents,
and every man forbidden to have other Gods, worship Images take Gods Name in
vain kill, steal, etc. Yet the supreme Power alone in Scripture is called on
for public Reformation, and no private person, as Saint Austin has very well
observed.

E I answer, Auscrenda Idola, non potest quisquam iubere privatus Aug. cont.
literos Utilium lib. 2. cap 92.
this were a grand design, if you could heighten Reformation into such an holy
Prodigy.) I need not heighten it, which is so high a work of it self, that
our longest arms cannot reach it, though we stand on the tip-toes of our best
desires and endeavors, till God shall first be pleased to send us a peace. A
prodigy it is not (not long since you termed it an extraordinary business)
yet if it be performed whilst war lasts, it is a work of the Lord, and may
justly seem mervallous in our eyes.

F As you would of late the Church into the Prelacy and the Clergy.) When and
where did I do this? I ever accounted that the Cetus fi^^l^um, the
Congregation of the faithful was Gods Church on earth. Yet I often find the
Church represented in general Counsels by the Prelacy and Clergy (who are or
should be the best and wisest in the Church) and their decisions in matters of
Religion interpreted and received as the resolutions of the Church in general.

G And excluded the Layty as a profane crew, and to be taught their distance.)
What honest man ever thought the Layty, as Layty, profane? I conceive our
Kingdom would be very happy, if none of the Clergy were worse then some of the
Layty. And I am sure that the godly Clergy are Gods Layty his (...) and the
godly Layty are Gods Clergy, his (...) Yet now a days, some usurping Laymen
may well be taught their distance, who meddle with ministeria'l functions: Nor
will a wel-meaning heart one day excuse the unsanctified hands of such Vzzah's,
who presuming to preach, hold not our Arc from shaking, but shake our Arc
with holding it.

H Luther w^ll tell you this is one of the Romish engines.) Indeed this was a
Popish device too much to depresse the Layty. But this engine thanks be to God)
is since broken asunder, and it will be in vain for any to glue the pieces
thereof together. And now since the Monopoly of the Popish Clergy (engrossing
all matters of Religion to themselves) is dissolved; it is fit Protestant
Ministers lawful propriety in their calling, should justly be maintained.

I Thus you may take off many honest Laborers in the Vineyard.) Far be it
from me especially if they be skillful Laborers such as will prune the Vines,
not pluck them up by the roots. But this and what you say of those to whom God
has held out his Scepter, is nothing to the purpose; except you could prove
where God in the Scripture, hires or calls private men to make a public
Reformation.

EXAMINER.
And whereas you tell us that the supreme Power alone has the lawful calling
as appears in the Kings of Judah. I answer that if so the Parliament were now
in a dangerous K praemunire for you know that is suspended from us, and yet our
state goes on in their work, enabled (as they say) by their fundamen^all power
and constitution: I shall not here dispute the emanations of this power in
ordinances, votes and orders* they have made it appear in their own
declarations; only this I read of an ordinance made by the Nobles and Elders
of Israel, those Lords L and Commons. That whosoever would not come according
to the Counsel which was taken for Reformation, all his substance should be
forfeited. Here is no King of Judah's hand, nor a ^^yrus King of Persias* but
an ordinance of their own to their own people; only they have King Cyru's
writ for their assembling and consulting. Had Christ M and his Apostles waited
in their Reformation for the consent of the Roman Magistrate the supreme
Power, they had not made that holy expedition they did. Had Luther and
Zun^glius N and Oecolampadius staid for the Emperors Reformation, they had not
shed half that light in the Germane hemisphere: There was a time when God
took part of the spirit of Moses and put it upon O the Elders.

TREATIS.
K If so the Parliament were now in a dangerous Praemunire.) I will not mar a
mean Divine of him, to make a meaner Statesman, by meddling with matters in
the Commonwealth. I that maintain that every man must stay in his calling,
will not step out of mine own: Let the differences betwixt our Sovereign and
his Subjects which consist in points of State be debated by the Politicians on
either side, the questions in law be argued respectively by their learned
Counsel and the controversies in Religion be dispuputed by their several
Divines. But alas! such is our misery when all is done, the final decision is
devolved to the Soldiers sword on either side, and God send the best cause the
best success.

L Only this, I read of an Ordinance made by the Nobles and Elders of Israel
those Lords and Commons.) By your favor it was a complete act of state as
confirmed by the royal Assent. True, there was no King of Judah's hand unto
it, because at that time Judah had no King; and who can expect that the Sun
should shine at midnight, when there is none in that Horizon. Reasonable men
will then be contented with the Moonshine, and see that here. For Zerobabel
shining with borrowed beams and a reflected light from the Persian King (in
which respect he is styled, Hag. 1. 14. the Governor of Judah) concurred to
this Ordinance by his approbation thereof. Besides this, there was also a
triple consent of the Persian Kings.

First, the grand and general grant from Cyrus, Ezra 1. 3. which still stood
in full force, as confirmed by Darius. Ezra 6. 12. whereby the Jews being
authorized to re-build the Temple, were also by the same enabled to settle Gods
service in the best manner, by what wholesome laws they thought fitting.
Secondly, a particular implicit grant, in that the Persian King knowing
thereof, did not forbid it when it was in his power, had it been his pleasure;
and such a not opposing, amounts to a consent. Lastly, they had a large
express command from King Artaxerxes to Ezra (chap. 7. ver. 26.) And whosoever
will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the King, let judgment be
executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death or unto banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment. And now Sir, I have the less cause
to be offended with you for citing mangled and dismembered pieces in my Sermon,
seeing the Scripture it self finds as little favor from your hand; for had
you compared on place thereof with another you could not but have seen the
Persian Kings consent to this Reformation. Yea so observant were the Jews of
the Persian Kings, that at the first issuing forth of their prohibition to that
purpose, they instantly desisted building the Temple; having their souls so
well managed, and mouthed with the reins of loyalty, that their Kings negative
voice checked and stopped them as they were running full speed in so good an
employment: Ezra 4. 24.
so little does the instance alleged advantage your cause.

M Had Christ and his Apostles waited in their Reformation for the consent of
the Roman Magistrate.) I answer. First, Christ and his Apostles; were Christ
and his Apostles, I mean extraordinary persons, immediately inspired.
Secondly, the Reformation they brought was mainly material indeed, being the
Gospel, without which there was no salvation. Thirdly, because they had not
the Emperors consent to their Reformation they pacified his displeased sword
by preferring their necks unto it, not repining at the dearnesse of the
purchase to buy the safety of their souls with the loss of their lives; all
the Jury of the Apostles ( John only accepted) followed their Master to
Martyrdom: and hence we truly deduced the pattern of passive obedience.

N Had Luther and Zuniglius, and Oecolampadius stayed for the Emperors
Reformation.) Luther was a Minister and so had his share in reforming, so far
as to propagate the truth and confute falsehoods by his pen, preaching and
disputations. What he did more then this was done by the flat command, at lest
free consent of Frederick Duke of Saxony under whom Luther lived. This Duke
owing homage, but not subjection to the Emperor; counted himself* and was
reputed of others, absolute in his own Dominions, as invested with the power
of life and death to coin money, make offensive and defensive leagues and the
like. And although this wary Prince long poised himself betwixt fear of the
Emperor and love of the truth, yet he always either publicly defended Luther,
or privately concealed him, till at last having outgrowne his fears, he fell
boldly to public reforming. As for the states of Zurich and Basil, wherein
Zuniglius and Oecolampadius lived, as those Cities in one Relation are but
members of the Helvetian Commonwealth, so in another capacity they are entire
bodies of themselves, and in these states the Magistrates did stamp the
Character of civil authority on that Reformation which these Ministers did
first set on foot by their preaching. But if any extravagant action of worthy
men be tendered us in example, our love to their persons binds us not to defend
their practice, much less to imitate it. We crave liberty, and if denied will
take it to leave them to themselves who if they had any especial warrant to
justify their deeds, will at the last day produce and plead it.

O There was a time when God took part of the spirit of Moses and put it upon
the Elders.) I will not dispute the manner how the spirit was taken from Moses,
perchance added to others, without being subtracted from him, Drusius in
pentetuchen ex R. Aben-Ezrah.
as a candle loses no light by giving it to another. But this is falsely
al^eaged by you to intimate that sometimes inferior Officers may make
Reformations without the knowledge, yea, against the will of the supreme
power. For you must know, that though the Sannedrin or seventy Elders were a
constant Court and standing Counsel, yet when there was a chief Governor they
had recourse to him in actions of Moment, Number. 27. 15, 16, 17. And Moses spoke
unto the Lord saying let the Lord the God of the spirits of all flesh set a man
over the Congregation which may go out before them* and which may lead them out
and bring them in, that the Congregation of the Lord be not as Sheep which have
no Shepherd. See that notwithstanding the power of the Elders stood still in
full force, and determined not at Moses his death, yet he accounted Gods people
no better then Shepheardlesse, till they had a power Paramount placed over
them, and a supreme above the Elders to guide and direct them.

SERMON Paragraffe 15.
Mean time mere private men must not be idle but move in their sphere, till the
supreme Power does reform they must pray to inspire those that have power.
Secondly, they must reform themselves and their Families.

EXAMINER.
Still you drive on your design through many plausible P insinuations you would
keep private men doing but still doing in their own Q circle; I confess I
would not improve their interest too high nor too soon, for the early settings
forth of private men is apt to exceed into a tumultuary motion: Yet I would not
put them so far behind as they should like the lame and the diseased at the
poole of Bethesda waiting till a supreme R Power came down amongst them.
There are many public engagements which they are capable on, and which
providence will often guide them to as in finding S out-ways of facilitation
and advancement for the business; besides some other arcana and secret T
preparations; we see every thing naturally is spirited with an instinct of
aiding, the whole V water and air will part with their own interest to serve
the universal in the danger of a vacuity; the very W Romans by a morrall
principle, would contend to be first in the service of their Country, and it
remains as a crime upon record that X Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and that Dan
remained in ships, and Ashur abode in his breaches; that is that they would sit
down encircled with their own interest and affairs.

TREATIS.
P Still you drive on your design through many plausible insinuations.) Not
insinuations but positions, and those no more plausible then profitable. Truth
has a precious inside, and withal a pleasing face.

Q You would keep private men doing but still doing in their circle.) And good
reason too for if they be out of their circle, they are very troublesome
spirits to conjure down again.

R Not like the lame at the poole of Bethesda waiting till a supreme Power.)
If God in his Word will have it so, they must wait. Better to lie still in the
porch, though not cured then to rush headlong into the poole and be drowned.

S Providence will guide them in finding out-wayes of facilitation.) I protest
against all out-wayes, if they be any way different from the high-road of the
King of Heaven; Reformation however must come lawfully, and if it will not come
easily, let it come hardly, we will tug at it with our prayers (which are
always best at a dead lift) and will sweat but not sin to obtain it. Nor can
any better facilitation for private men be found out, then for every one of them
to reform themselves. How does an Army of ten thousand men almost change their
postures from East to West in an instant, because every one turns one, and so
soon would the work be done in a public Reformation, if particular persons
would take care for their private amendment.

T Besides some other arcana and secret preparations.) Good Sir play fair and
above board: The surface of the earth is wide enough for us both, creep not
into crannies, to put me to the pains of Pioners to mine for your meaning: Pro.
3. 32.
I know the secret of the Lord is with the righteous; but then it is such a
secret, as being concealed from profane persons is revealed in the Word. This
your expression if clear from fault, is not free from just suspicion, for
hereby you buz into peoples hands (and such tinder I tell you is ready to take
fire) that there are some strange unknown mysteries of Religion lately
communicated to some private men. Strange that others of the same form with
you for learning and Religion should know no such secrets, except you have
received from Heaven some express packet of intelligence. You might have done
well to have told us what these arcana are unless being of Heavens close
Committee you be bound to secrecy. Mean time I will be bold to tell you that
if these secrets differ from Gods will in his Word, they are depths of the
Devil and mysteries of Iniquity.

V We see every thing naturally is spirited with an instinct of ayding, the
whole water and air will part with their own interests to serve the
universal in the danger of a vacuity.) I distinguish betwixt natural Agents
and voluntary, rational and Christian Agents. Natural Agents go the nearest
way to their own home, their Center, except countermanded to avoid a vacuity,
which being yielded to, necessarily inferres a destruction of the whole. In
such a case heavy bodies have from God a dispensation yea command to ascend,
light bodies to descend, forgetting their particular propensity, to remember
the public good, according to the words of the Psalmist, Ps. 148. Q
He has made a decree which they shall not pass. But voluntary, rational and
Christian Agents, are to regulate their actions by Gods will in his Word; the
greatest and only vacuity they are to fear is Gods displeasure whose glory
they are to prefer before their own temporal self-preservation; and indeed
man's eternal good is wrapped up in his obedience to Gods will. Wherefore
except you can produce a place in Gods Word, wherein private men are commanded
to make public Reformations, there is a mere vacuity of all you have alleged.

W The very Romans by a morrall principle would contend to be first in the
service of their Country.) It was well done of them. Their forwardness in
serving their Country will one day condemn our frowardness in deserving our
rending our native soil asunder with civil dissentions; but in such cases as
this is which we have now afoot (whether private persons may reform without the
consent of the supreme Power) we are not to be guided by the practice of the
Pagan Rom^ns but by the precept of the Christian Romans, Romans 13. 1
Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers.

X And it remains as a crime upon Record, that Gilead abode b^yond Jordan, and
that Dan remained in ships.) Thus it was; Sicera a Pagan general under Jabin a
Tyrant and Usurper hostilely invaded I^rael. Deborah a Prophetess by Divine
inspiration incited Barach to resist him. In this case each single man had a
double call to assist Barach: In publi^cos (...), omn^^s (...) T. rtullianus.
One from Nature to defend his Country, another from Gods immediate vocation.
Here it was lawful for all to be active, sinful for any to be idle: Jacl the
woman was valiant; shall men be womanish and cowardly? Now prove that private
men have the like calling in point of public Reformation and if they be not
active, we will not only confess it their crime but proclaim a curse against
them with Meros, till this be done this instance befreindeth not your cause.

EXAMINER.
And Y though you would put private men upon such duties here as are godly and
commendable the policy is to keep them exercised in one good duty that they
should not advance another and thus you would cunningly make one piece or
Divinity to betray another, and make the friends of Reformation do it a
discurtesie in ignorance.

TREATIS.
Y I confess it is an ancient subtilty of Satan, to keep men exercised in one
good duty that they should not advance another. Thus he busieth some men all in
praying to neglect preaching, all in preaching to neglect Catechizing all in
prayers* preaching, catechizing, 2 King* 9. 35.
to neglect practicing. Jesabels body was all eaten up, save only her head,
hands and feet. But indiscreet zeal so consumes some, that they have neither
hands nor feet left, either to work or to wa^ke in their Christian calling:
Yea, of all their head nothing remains unto them but only their ears,
re^olving all Gods service into hearing alone.

But this accusation is not only improperly, but falsely here laid to my
charge because I forbid mere private men to meddle with public reforming,
which belongs not at all unto them: That so cutting off the needless suckers
the tree may be fed the better* and that private men leaving off those
employments which pertain not to them, may the more effectually advance their
own amendment; a task which when it is done, the severest Divine will give
them leave to play.

And because one dangerous Policy has been mentioned by you, it will not be
amiss to couple it with another device of the Devil, as seasonable and
necessary in these times to be taken notice of. Satan puts many mere private
men on to be fierce and eager upon public reforming thereby purposely to
decline and avert them from their own selfe-amendment. For public reforming
has some pleasure in it, as a Magisteriall act and work of authority,
consisting most in commanding and ordering of others; whereas private amendment
is a work all of pain, therein a man, as he is himself the judge, so he is
the malefactor, and must indite himself, arraigne himself, convict himself,
condemn hmselfe, and in part execute himself crucifying the old man and
mortifying his own corruptions. And we can easier afford to put out both the
eyes of other men, to force them to leave their dear darling sins, then to
pluck out our own right eye (in obedience to our Saviors precept) and forsake
our own sins, Mat. 5. 29.
which do so easily beset us. Besides men may be prompted to public reforming
by covetousnes to gather chips at the felling of the old Church government by
ambition to see and be seen in office by revenge to wreck their spite on the
personal offenses of such, whom formerly they distasted. Self amendment is not
so subject to private ends but goes against the hair yea, against the flesh
it self, in making men deny themselves in duty to God.

Yea, at the last day of judgment, when God shall arraigne men, and say, Thou
art a drunkard, Thou art an adulterer, Thou art an oppressor; it will be but a
poor plea for them to say Yea Lord, but I have been a public Reformer of
Church and State. This plea, I say, will then not hold water, but prove a
broken ^^sterne. Nor will God dispense with their want of obedience, because
they have offered him store of sacrifice. Such people therefore are daily to be
called upon, to amend themselves and their Families, which is a race long
enough for the best breathed private Christians, though they start in their
youth, and run till their old age.

SERMON Paragraffe 26.
Lastly, with carfulness not to give any just offense to the Papists.

EXAMINER.
I Z wonder you would here express an indulgence which is not allowable, and
the memory of the Parliament will be honorable for that; they knew so much
divinity, as taught them not to value their offense, and to proclaim to them
both in England and A Ireland an irreconcilable war. This carfulness and
tenderness you plead for, was the first principle which our Church so far,
as to take up their Altars and Ceremonies to avoid offense. Saint Paul was of
another spirit who forbore not B a Disciple and Apostle. When I saw, says he,
that they walked not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. You much
mistake the Divinity of Christ, in matter of offense, who never forbore to
preach, or publish any necessary truth: Nay, when his Disciples were
scandalized, and said, this is an hard saying, does this offend you, says he?
What and if, etc. He goes on C and pursues the offense, till they left him and
his Doctrine too. And for the Papists, they are much of the relation and
constitution of the Scribes and Pharisees, not without, as you say nor within
and yet see if you can find our Savior or his Apostles letting out themselves
into such restrictions, and moderation, and cautions. Those truths which are
essentially, D universally, always and at all times holy, ought not to be
measured by the unbrage and scandal of the Adversary. Indeed in things merely
civil or indifferent, our use or liberty may appear more but for such truths
as our Reformation shall bring they will be always an offense to the
Adversary: We preach Christ, says the Apostle, unto the Jews a
stumbling-blocke, and to the Greeks foolishness and yet the Apostle preaches,
E and lays these blocks, and this rock of offense in the way too.

TREATIS.
Z I wonder you should here express an indulgence which is not allowable. That
it is utterly unlawful to give any just offense to the Papists or to any men
whatsoever.
) I wonder and am sorry withal, to see a Protestant take unjust offense at
this Doctrine, that no just offense is to be given to the Papists. Know Sir,
that besides those Papists in England and A Ireland, to whom you say, the
Parliament has proclaimed an irreconcilable war; there be also many of their
Religion in Spain, France, Germany, Italy, Poland, etc. all Europe over, with
whom the Parliament has not as yet, any professed open hostility, and to these
no offense must be given. The eye of all Christendom is upon us, the Sea
surrounds, but does not conceal us: Present Papists read the text of our
actions, and their posterity will write comments upon them; we cannot therefore
be too wary.

Besides, grant that this irreconcilable war you speak of, should bind men in a
martial way to kill all Papists; yet I pray take notice, that in some cases we
may justly kill them, whom in no case we may justly offend. Though a malefactor
be condemned by the Judge to be executed, yet the Sheriff is a murderer if he
torment him to death, contrary to the sentence of law. Now giving unjust
scandal to the Papists, is torturing of them, and tyranny to their souls which
may eternally destroy them; and you are the first Divine, and I hope shall be
the last, which ever held this to be lawful.

Whereas you say, I much mistake the Divinity of Christ in matter of offense. I
should be very thankful to you, if you be pleased to rectify my erroneous
judgment to which end I will crave the Readers leave, the more largely to
express my opinion in this point.

I hold that we ought not to give just offense to any man whatsoever: Indeed
there is no danger of giving offense to the devil. He who fears to offend
Satan, offends God with his foolish fear: Because the devils very nature is all
mischief and malice, nothing being good in him save his being which he has of
God and he is utterly incapable of salvation. But seeing in the very worst of
men there is some goodness, or at lest a capability of grace here, and glory
hereafter, through repentance and faith in Christ, we may not give any man just
offense, as being against the rules of Piety, Charity and Christian Prudence.

Against the rule of Piety: 1 Cor. 10. 32.
Because God has said, give no offense to any. Against the rule of Charity;
because thereby we are cruel to them which are our Brethren by nature, 2 Cor.
6. 3.
and may be by grace. Against the rule of Christian Prudence because we cannot
give any just offense, but also thereby we do give them a just advantage
against us. I believe Sir, were you to dispute in an University against Popish
Opponents you would so warily state the question which you defend, as that you
would not willingly give any upper ground to your Adversaries, more then what
they could get for themselves. Wherefore as the wrestlers in the Olimpian games
used to anoint themselves with oil, not only thereby to supple their joints,
but also to make their naked bodies the more slick and slippery, that so those
who wrestled with them might catch no hold upon them, so ought we, who are like
to have constant opposition with the Papists, to give them no more advantage
then what they can earn and if we give them more, they will be more ready to
jeere us for our folly, then thank us for our bounty unto them.

Yea, in this respect it is more dangerous to give just offense, and thereby
just advantage (for the one cannot be done without the other) to the Papists
then to any mere Pagans: For Pagans being rude, dull and ignorant, though an
advantage be given them, cannot in point of learning husband and improve it to
the utmost. But the Papists whom we do know and must acknowledge cunning
fencers in the School of wit and learning, are so well skild, as ever to keep
and enforce the advantage we once bestowed on them. And though we need never
fear them and all their art so long as we have God and a good cause on our
side, so if we betray our cause by giving them just advantage, it is just with
God to deliver us over into their hands, to beat us with our own weapons.

And hear let the Reader be pleased to take notice, as much material to our
purpose, that there is a grand difference, betwixt the Removing of things, bad
in their own nature, and betwixt the manner of removing them. If any thing be
bad in it self, it may not be continued, it must be removed. None can dispense
with the retaining thereof, though never so many or great Persons take offense
at the taking of it away. If Friars be offended thereat, let them turn their
girdles, with all their knots in them behind them, whilst we need not care
for their causeless anger. They who were so quick sighted that they could see
an offense, where it was never given them; Let them look again in the same
place, and their quick eyes will behold there, the amends which were never
tendered them.

But now, as for the manner of removing of things badd in themselves, when
there is a liberty and latitude left unto us after what fashion we will do it,
either this way or that way, we must do it so as to give none any just
offense. For where it is at our choice and pleasure to use variety of ways,
our discretion must pitch on the best, whereby God may receive the most glory,
the action the most luster, we our selves the greatest comfort, and all others
no just cause of offense. And here once again let me request the Reader to
observe, that in my Sermon, I never mentioned any tenderness, to give the
Papists offense, in removing of things bad in themselves, but this caution of
not giving the Papists just offense, was inferted in the proper place, when we
came to show how discretion is to appear in the manner of a reformation.

Yea the same thing for substance may be done and just offense either may or
may not be given according to the different manner of doing it. For instance,
such Pictures which are in the suburbs of superstition, because the gate of
that City is always open, may without any giving of just offense be fairly
taken away. But to shoot off the head of the statue of Christ, either to spite
the Papists, or sport our selves gives just offense. Though the Image be
nothing, yet such usage thereof is something, the bullet shot at the picture,
wounds piety: For to do serious work in a jearing way, is inconsistent with
Christian gravities, and argues not light of knowledge but lightness, not to
say lewdness of behavior.

Another instance. Suppose that some ceremonies ancient for time, used by the
fathers, (though abused by the Papists (reduced by the Protestants, defended by
our English, not opposed by foreign Devines, be practiced in our Church. And
withal suppose, that such ceremonies as they are harmless so to be useless,
and not without the suspicion of danger, as the present times stand. In this
case it will give no just offense to the Papists to take them away under the
Nation, of things unnecessary, and unsuting with our present condition. But to
remove them as things profane, Idolatrous, or superstitious, gives just
offense and great advantage to our Romish adversaries, by the disgrace we put
on Antiquity. Besides, hereby we betray our friends which have don good service
for our Religion, namely such English Devines who with their penns have
Learnedly and truly asserted the lawfulness of such ceremonies, and this our
retreating from them and leaving them engaged, (as Ioas served Vriah 2. Sam.
11. 15.
at the siege of Rahab treacherously) shows much baseness in us and, in such a
case, the dishonouring of good men is the dishonoring of God himself.

But if I should in Courticie yield so much unto you (which I never will) that
it were lawful to give just offense to and grounded dedicated Papists, yet
know there be some, who in their opnions, and affections, the borderers betwixt
us and the Papists, almost Protestants not far from our Religion, having one
foot in it, and the other likely to follow, such People when they see, that we
take no care, and make no conscience, to give just offense to the Papists, will
be ready to retract their resolutions, and call back their forward affections,
say not that such men are better lost then found. Is this the bowels of
Christian compassion, which ought to be in us, If we wilfully blast such
blossoms, we are not worthy of any ripe fruit, and it is both cruelty and
profanesse to cast such do bakt cakes to the Dogs, which by standing a while
longer in the Oven, would make good and wholesome bread. Nor herein do I write
only by guess, but too much by knowledge, such as I can, neither well conceal
nor comfortably, relate. For when the Religious pains of some reverend Devines
whom I know, have brought some Papists to the door of our Church, the just
offense given them, by the modern extravagances of some undiscreet
Protestants, caused them to fale back again to Popery. And now to return to
your Examination. All things contained therein, are easily to be answered by
that which we have promised.

B. Saint Paul was of another Spirit, who forbore not a Disciple* and Apostle,
Gall. 2. 11
Saint Paul perceiving a dangerous error, in Peter, reproved him, both
presently while the would was green, and publicly, that the plaster might
be as broad as the fore. But in thus doing he gave no just offense to Peter but
blamed Peter for giving just offense to other Christians.

C. He goes on and persueth the offense till they left him) This instance of
Christ's his carriage herein nothing advantageth you. Give me leave to repeat
what I said before, If things be bad in themselves, they must be removed,
though they give never so many offense or rather though never so many or great
men, take offense thereat so also if a necessary* Truth be to be introduced,
it must be preached and brought into the Church, though never so many be
offended thereat. And if there be but one way, and no more allowed us, how and
in what manner to do it, according to that one way, it must be don, not
valluing the offending of any. But if verity of way be permitted unto us, God
expects that we should give the least, and if possible no offense to any. Now
to apply the truth which our Savior hear preached, and pressed, was of
absolute and necessary concernment. Namely that he was the true Manna Messiah
and bread from heaven. Such truths must be preached, and if any burn with
anger threat, let not their fire be quenched, till it go out for want of
fuel. The case is far otherwise in this Reformation, betwixt us and the
Papists. We had all essential truths before, and if any ornamentall, or
additionall truths be now to be brought in, they must be so done as to give no
just offense to the Papists.

D. Those truths, which are essentially, universally, always, and at all times
holy ought not to be measured, by the umbrage and scandal of the adversaries.)
If hereby you mean, that necessary truths must not be forborne to be
preached, for fear of giving any offense, I clearly concur with you. Only
I say that all such truths are in our Church already, and not now to be newly
brough in, (as you intimate) by the Reformation.

E. And yet the Apostle Preaches, and lays those blocks and this rock of
offense in the way too.) The Apostle preached Christ, and intended him to be a
rock of defense to all, As for those who perverted him to be a rock of offense
to themselves, this scandal was not justly given to them, but unjustly taken
by them. If Papist take offense at any such truth, it shall affect us no more
then the cries of Baals Prophets 1 King. 18. 29.
affected any of whom it is said, there was none to answer them, nor any that
regarged them. But as for the manner of removing away any errors, or bringing
in any Truths, we ought to be wary and circumspect, for our own sakes, as well
as theirs, to give them no just offense.

To conclude. For mine own part Sir I pity the Persons of all Papists, and
heartily desire their convertion, but hate theirs, and all other errors, with a
perfect hatred. And this my enmity to all Popish Tenants, does the more
plainly appear to be grounded on my Judgment not on my passion, Because I
would have al men so cautious, as not to give them just advantage, least our
actions fight for them, whilst our affections fight against them. What Friar
will not laugh in his Coule at this your opinion, that it is lawful to give
Papists just offense? Well, you never shall have my consent, to combat as our
Churches Champion, against Rome for the Protestant cause, until you have
learnt more skill in fencing, and not to lie at so open a guard. And if you
hold it lawful to give Papists just offense, by the next return you will hold
it lawful to give just offense to all, which are termed Popishly affected, the
Gangrean of which expression, is by some extended to taint as sound and hearty
Protestants, as any be in England.

SERMON Page. 24.
That it is to be desired, not hoped for, a Pla^oes Commonwealth and Moors
Vtopia These Phrases are pleasing but unfeerable.

EXAMINER.
He that looks abroad shall soon have his sight terminated, but the more he
goes on the more he sees, and that which closed his prospect opens then into
new discoveries; if you see no perfect reformation as you stand, do not
therefore say there is none, they that stand higher and on a holyer mountain,
perhapps see farther, you that stand in the Horizon G of Prelacy cannot see
much beyond it; Corruption is deceitful and makes us like Adam see all
Generations in our selves, because we will not be pefectly reformed, let us not
argue our Judgments into a beleeife that we cannot, ^ let us think it as
possible to be the best, as easy to be the worst, Let us not think that a
Plato's Common wealth or a Mor'es Vtopia which for ought we know is real and
existent, there is under the Gospel I a royal Preisthood, an holy nation, a
peculier People, and certainly had former K ages lived to see, but the
discovery of latter times, they would have admired their own ignorance and our
happiness.

TREATIS.
F. They that stand higher and on a holyer mountain, perhapp's see further) I
deny it not. But if they see a perfect Church on earth they see it in a trance
or vision.

G. You that stand in the Horizon of Prelacy, cannot see much beyond it.) Miss
not the matter, to h^tt my person, if I stand in the Horizon of Prelacy I stand
no more for it, then it stands, with Gods glory, and will in his word. Because
you tax me with dimnesse of sight, I will strive by my study to get the best
advantage ground I can, I will beg of God, to animate mine eyes with his Rev.
3. 18.
eye salve, I will be careful to keep mine eyes from being bloodshot, by
animating any to cruelty in this unnatural War And know Sir that they who
stand in the Horizon of Presbutary, or Independency, are subject also to
Errors, and mistakes. As delight in old Customs may deceive some, so desire of
Novelty may blind the eyes of others. God help us all we are badd at the best.

H. Because we will not be perfectly reformed, let us not argue our Judgments
into a belief that we cannot) A distinction or two of perfection and your
fallacy will perfectly appear. Some Saints in the Scripture phrase are styled
perfect, but then it is Comparatively as they stand in opposition to Sanctorum
nonnulli perfecti dicuntur respectu mundanorum, qui negligunt res divinas nec
ingrediuntur unquam viam prosectionis Amb. Com. in Epist: ad Phil. Cap. 3.
wicked men who have no goodness at all in them. Or else they are called
perfect as so denominated from their better part (good reason the best
Godfather, should name the Child) their regenerate half, which desires, and
delights in endeavoring toward perfection, or lastly perfection is taken for
integrity, sincerity, and unrightnesse opposite to inward hippocrisie, and in
such a perfection the Heart may have many defects by the by, but no
dissimulation in the maine service of God. Such a perfection as this, men may
have, yea must have, in this life, and without such a perfection here, no hope
of any happiness hereafter.

But as for an exact^ legal perfection (such as some Papists dream of, and
most Anabaptists doat on) a perfection able to stand before Gods Justice,
without the support of his mercy, it is utterly impossible for mortal men to
attain unto it. In which sense in my Sermon, I said that a Perfect reformation
of a Church in this world is difficult to be prescribed, and impossible to be
practiced.

Yea let me tell you Sir (cautious coming from goodwill, deserve to be heard,
if not heeded) if you persist in this opinion of exact perfection, I conceive
your condition dangerous. Elisha told King Ioram, Beware that thou pass not 2
King. 6. 9.
such a place, for thither the Aramites are come down. I may friendly tell
you, press not one any further in this point, for spiritual pride lies hard
by in wait, and the ambush thereof will surprise you. For my own part, as I
hate my badnesse, so I hug the confession that I am badd, And Gods children,
find both contentment and comfort in knowing they cannot be perfect. Hence
they learn, (what soul so bad, which has not sometimes some holy day
thoughts) to loath earth to love. Heaven, to run from themselves, to fly to
their Savior, to pity others, to pray heartily for them, to hope comfortably
of them, in a word this doctine, abateth pride, increases charity, and
confounds censuring.

Yea I solemnly profess that I would not herein change my doctrine for yours,
to have much to boot. Should I say, that I could be perfect, both my head and
my heart would give my tongue the lie. And one of the best hopes, I have to go
to Heaven, is that I am suit I deserve Hell. I remember a strange, but true and
memerable speech of Reverend Mr. Fox Cited by Mr. Capel in his Book of
Temptation.
to this effect, that his Graces sometimes did him harm, whilst his sin did
him much good. A wonderful thing, yet sometimes so it commthe to pass, God
making a cordial for us of our own wickedness, thereby teaching us humility.

I. There is under the Gospel a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation a peculiar
people.) True, Here these things are sincerely begun, and hereafter fully
perfected, for in this life there is still some baseness, even in the royal
priesthood, impiety in the holy Nation, commonnesse in the Peculiar people. And
I pray remember you are to prove, that a whole Church may be perfectly
reformed in this world. For though it were granted that some men might be
perfect, yet it follows not thereupon, that any one Church is existent on
Earth, consisting entirely all of perfect members. Hipocrites are of so
glutenous a nature, they will stick close in every visible Church. They cannot
be divided, who cannot be discerned, except one could borrow Gods touchstone of
hearts, such shining dross will ever pass current in this Kingdom of Grace.

K. Had former ages lived but to see the discovery of latter times) If by
former ages you mean the time of Popery, I concur with you. If you
understand the times of the Primitivs Fathers, I suspend my suffrage till the
next paragrave. But if you extend it to the age of Christ, and his Apostles, I
flatly descent. Nor am I sensible of any such late discoveries in Religion
though many Recoveries thanks he to God there have been, in rescuing the faith
from Romish superstition.

L. They would have admired their own ignorance and our happiness.) By our
Happiness, I suppos^ you mean, what lately we had before this War began,
and what we had not the happiness to keep, and we trust in due time, God
will restore to us again. Otherwise, as for our present woeful condition, I
would not wish our friends, or envy our foes such happiness.

SERMON Paragarffe 32.
There are some now adays talk of a great light mainfested in this age more
then before. Indeed we modernes have a mighty advantage of the ancients,
whatsoever was theirs by industry may be ours, all contribute themselves to us
who live in this latter age.

EXAMINER.
If we had no more light, then what you insinuate were seen from the Fathers,
why do we see more, and more clearly and further? He that sees far, must
either have a good sight or a clear light, and sure in this age we have both,
Those errors which our Fathers saw for dim truths we see for Herisies; so
surely both our eyes, and our light are better; for the light which our Fathers
have in their lamps can discover, but so much to us, as it did to them, and we
know our discovery is such, as we are able to see the shadow which followed
them, even that Mystery, which was working in their days, both in Prelacy and
ceremony, who will deny but that the cloud of Antichristianisme, was thick in
their times, and then the light could not be so glorious, as now when those
couds grow thinner, and more attenuated by the preaching of the Gospel.

TREATISE.
To cut off all occasion and pretense of caviling, 8. What advantage the
Fathers had of us in Learning, and Religion, and what we heve of them.
we will show, God willing, in what respect the Fathers, for knowledge
excelled, and exceeded us, and in what respect we modernes go beyond them.
They had a threesold advantage above us. 1. Of sight. 2. Of light. 3. and of a
nearer object.

First, Of a better sight. Being men of eminent natural parts, improved with
excellent learning, and to the Eastern fathers, the Greek tongue, the
language of the New Teastament was natural, so that it costeth us much pains
and sweat but to come to the place whence they started.

Secondly, Of a brighter light. As their constancy in persecution was great,
so no doubt the heat of their zeal was attended with a proportionable light,
and heavenly illumination God doing much for them that suffer much for him.
Especially in those points wherein they encountered heretics, they were more
then men, and went beyond themselves, as St. Athanasius against the Arians, St.
Augustine against the Pelagians and Donatists, from whom our modern Brownists
differ no more, then the same man differs from himself in new clothes.

3. Of a nearer Object. They living closer to Christ's times, could therefore
better understand the sense of the Church* in the doctrine delivered to the
Apostles. Here we must know that Apostles, and Apostolic men as they wrote
Gods word in their Epistles* and Gospels for the profit of all posterity so for
the instruction of their present age they also (...). 1 Cor. 11. 23.
traditioned it in their Preaching by word of mouth to the people of those
times, not that they delivered any thing viva voce contrary or differtent from
what they wrote, or that (as the Papists style for their traditions) they
supplied and enjoined any thing as necessary to salvation, which otherwise was
wanting in the Scripture, but the self same things which they wrote in the New
Testament, they also delivered in their Sermons, and in their Preaching delated
upon them, wherefore the prime primative age, having (as I may say) two strings
to their bow, Scripture, and Preaching, must needs be allowed to have had the
clearest apprehention of the meaning of heavenly mysteries, and as the children
Judge. 2. 7^
of Israel served the Lord all the days of Iehossuah and all the days of the
Elders, who outlived Iehossuah, who had seen all the great works of the Lord
which he did for Israel, in like manner we may conclude, that the greatest
purity and the clearest light of the Church, lasted so long as any, within
sight, hearing, or memory of Christ or his Apostles preaching, or miracles, did
survive.

Now to hold the scales even, we in like manner have a three fold advantage
over the Fathers. First a degree of experimental light more then they had or
could have, having seen the whole conduct, Mannaging and Progress of Religion
since their times, whereby (with a little help of history) a Devine who is
under sixty in age, may be a bove sixteen hundred in experience.

Secondly, we have the benefits of the Fathers books, a mighty advantage if
we were as careful to use it to Gods Glory, as we are ready to bragg of it for
our own credit. And here I must complain of many men's laziness. Indeed a
learned man Nos nani sumus stantes super humeros Gygantum. Hol. cott.
compares such as live in the latter times in respect of the Fathers to
Dwarffes standing on Giants Shoulders. But then if we will have profitt by the
fathers learning, we must take pains to mount to the tope of their Shoulders.
But if like idle Dwarfes, we still do but stand on the ground, our heads will
not teach to their girdles, it is not enough to through the books of the
fathers, together on an heap, and then making their works our footestoolle
to stand on the outside and Covers of them, as if it were no more, but UP and
RIDE, boasting how far we behold beyond them. No, if we expect to get
advantage by their writings, we must open their books, read, understand,
compare, digest and meditate on them. And I am afraid many that least look
into the Fathers, boast most that they look beyond them.

Thirdly. We have the advantage of a darkness removed by Gods goodness from
our eyes, which in some matters did dim the sight of the Fathers. Namely the
mystery of Iniquity which wrought in their times, and now is taken away in the
Protestant Church. That Bramble of Rome, (soon will it prick, which will be a
thorn,) which afterward Lorded it over the Vine, Olive, and figtree, began
very timely to play his part, And the Man of sin, then but an infant (and
every thing is pretty when it is young,) was unawares dandled on the knees of
many a devout Monk, and rockt in the cell of many an holy hermit, who little
suspected that then voluntary sequestring themselves to enjoy heavenly
thoughts, would by degrees degenerate to be in after ages the cover of Pride,
lust and laziness. Now seeing this man of sin, is dead already in the
Protestant Church, and has a consumption attended with the Hecktick Fever in
all other places, the taking away of Popish superstition, may justly be
accounted the third advantage which our age has.

By the way we must take heed of a fault whereof many are guilty. For some are
ready to challenge every thing in the practice of the Fathers which does not
please them presently to be Popish, and pretend they taste superstition in
whatsoever themselves distaste. O say they, the Fathers lived when the mystery
of iniquity did work, and hence they infer that it is evidence enough without
further trial to condemn any ceremonies used by them, because they were used
by them. The way indeed to make Short Assizes, but Perjured Judges, whereas it
is not enough to say, but to show that they are superstitious, to anotomize,
and dissect the Popery contained in them, demonstrating where it crosses the
word of God, whereas on the contrary all wise and charitable men ought to
esteem the practices of the primitive Church not only to be innocent, but
useful and honorable till they be legally convicted to be otherwise.

If any object that the Fathers had another disadvantage, that besides the
spreading of Popery, other Heresies did also spring and sprout apace in that
time, to the darkening of the light of the truth, let them know that such
opposition only gave truth the opportunity to triumph, and the teeth of Error
filled it the brighter Heresies, In eodem seculo, quo natae, damnatae equos
err^res patrum aetas tulit, eos and sustulit, condemnig them in Synods and
Counsels, And in this point to be an equal Empire betwixt the ancients and
us, we must consider that we live in the Later age, and commonly bad humors
which have visited the whole body, do settle at last in the legs and lowest
parts, with us Sects and Schisms do also abound, and some Heresies first set a
broach in the Primitive times, now run a Tilt with all their dredgs in our
days.

Thus we see how the Fathers were both before and behind us, for knowledge, and
we therein both above and beneath them in several respects. See the wisdom
and goodness of God, how he has sweely tempered things together. So good that
all have some, so wise that none have all. And how easy may this controvercy
be accommodated, whether ours or the Fathers light were the greatest, where if
the difference be but clearly understood, the parties are fully reconciled. And
now I conceive having answered you in gross, I need not apply my self to any
perticulers of your examination.

EXAMINER.
The Gospel does work M and wind its beams into the world according to the
prophetical seasons for Revelation, many prophetical truths were sealed up,
and those not unsealed but successively, and as our Generations after may have
a Star rising to them which we have not, so we may have Beams N and
Radiations, and shootings which our fathers had not. The Apostles O had not all
their truths and light revealed at once, some early, some late, some not till
the holy Ghost was bestowed. Revelations are graduall and the veil is not
taken off at once, nor in one age. We honor the Fathers as men in their
Generations famous, their light was glorious in its degree and quality, but
they had not all the degrees attainable, they had a light for their own times,
and we for ours, and who cannot think that we are rising into that Age P
wherein God shall power his Spirit upon all flesh, and wherein the light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun and the light of the Sun as the
light of Seven days.

TREATISE.
You hover in Generals, 9. No new light or new essential truths are or can be
revealed in this age.
and seem to me desirous that your Reader should understand more then you are
willing to express, my opinion briefly is this. That no new Revelations, or
new infused light in essential points of Religion, is bestowed on any
now-adayes, but that the same light has in as plentiful a measure been given
to former ages, especially to the age wherein the Apostles lived, and when the
faith was once delivered to the Saints, and by them set down in the
Scripture, and that then so perfectly and completely, that it needed not the
accessions of any future Revelations.

I confess that men by searching the Scripture (that oil will never leave
increasing as long as more vessels be still brought) and diligent prayer to
God may and do arive daily at a clearer understanding of many places of Gods
word which they had not before. These words; Thou art Peter and on this rock
will I build my Church, and that Place, this is my body, are now more truly and
plainly understood then they were 200. years ago, when the Popes supremacy
was as falsely founded on the former as transubstantiation was unjustly inferred
from the latter. However these were not Revelations of new truths, but
reparations of old. For the prime primative Church received and embraced the
same, The Saints Revel. 14 3.
in the time of Popery Sung as it were a new song, a Song not new but renewed,
not new in it self but perchance to the hearers, and such are many truths,
which are preached in our age in the Protestant Church.

They that maintain the contrary opinion of modern revelations of new
essential truths do a three fold mischeife therein. First they lay an
aspertion of ignorance and imperfection of knowledge on the Apostles
themselves, and this is no less then Scandalum Magnatum.

Secondly they much unsettle men in matters of Religion, and produce a constant
inconstancy and scepticall hovering (...) all oppinions and as the Athenians
erected an Altar to the unknown God, so men must reserve a blancke in their
souls therein to write truths as yet unknown, when they shall be revealed. Thus
men will never know when their creed is ended, and will daily waver in that
truth which they have in possession, whilst they wait for a clearer and firmer
as yet in revertion.

Thirdly, they fix on the Scripture an imputation of imperfection and such as
talk of new revelations of truth, may well remember the passage in the Old
Revelation. Reve. 21. 18.
If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book. And it seems to me all one in effect whether
men piece the Scriptures, with old Traditions, or new Revelations; and thus the
Papist and Anabaptist are agreed like men in a circle going so far from each
other with their faces, till their backs meet together. And I profess I
should sooner trust a tradition containing in it nothing cross to the
Scripture and coming to me recommended from the primitive times, and
countenanced with the practice of the Church in all ages, then a new upstart
Revelation. The best is, we have no need to trust either, whilst we have Gods
word alone sufficient to rely on.

The result of all is this, We have now a-dayes no new truths revealed, but old
ones either more fairly cleared or more firmly assented to, no new Stars of
Revelation arise in any hearts. If any such do burn and blaze there, they are
but commerts which will fade at last. In a word this age is not happy with any
new truths, but guilty of many old lies.

Yea, it rendereth it suspicious, that some men are going about somewhat, which
they cannot justify by the old known laws of God, because they begin to
broach preparative doctrines, Introductorie of new revelations: Distrusting (as
it seems) the Scripture, the old Judge, as not for their turns, because they
provide for an Appeal to an other Vmpirer; and if those are justly accounted
dangerous members in the Church, who would bring in Innovations in Ceremonies,
then pretenders of new Revelations in Essential points of Doctrine are so much
the greater offenders, by how much Doctrine is more necessary, and fundamental
in a Church then ceremonies. But I will answer some passages in your
Examination particularly.

M. The Gospel does work and wind its beams into the world, according to the
prophetical seasons for Revelotions.) Distinguish we hear, betwixt matters of
fact, and matters of faith. Matters of fact being foretold in the Scripture,
are best understood when they are accomplished: In which respect the longer the
world lasts, the clearer men see and the plainer they understand such
predictions. The Seals in the Revelations were successively opened, the
Trumpets successively blown, the Vialls successively powered out, and the
things imported in and by them, are successively performed. Wherefore time is
the best comentator on the prophetical parts of the Bible, Dies diem docet.
And to day, which is yesterdaies schoolmaster will be Scholar to to morrow,
in which respect the Dan. 12. 4.
Prophets words are most true, Many shall run too and fro, and knowledge
shall be increased. But now, as for matters of Faith, they were at once, and
for ever, fully, and freely, delivered at the first to the Apostles, and so
from them to us, and that so perfectly, and completely, they need no new
revelations, quo ad Materiam, though quoad modum, old truths may now have a new
measure to be more clearly understood then in the dark times of Popery.

N. We may have Beams, and Radications, and Shootings, which our Fathers had
not.) For Beams and Radication of knowledge, I have delivered my oppinion: but
as for Shootings, God k^owes we have many such as our Fathers never had; God
in his mercy cease such Shootings, or else in his Justice direct the Bulletts
to such marks, as in truth have been the troublers of our Israel.

O. The Apostles had not all their truths and light, revealed at once, some
early, some late, some not till the Holy Ghost was bestowed.) All this is most
true which you say, The Apostles at first were (as we may say) Freshmen, newly
admitted into Christ's Company. Then they took their first degree of knowledge,
when sent forth to Preach the Gospel, Mat. 10. to the Jews alone in their
Masters life time. They commenced in a higher knowledge after Christ his
Resurrection; And after his Assention, assended yet higher in Spiritual
Illuminations: Lastly, after the coming of the Holy Ghost, they proceeded
Doctors in deed; I mean, they then had the completion and consumation of all
understanding necessary to salvation. Now Sir, Consider that after this time,
they wrote the New Testament, and therein all essentialls for us to know and
do for our souls health, so that we now do deduce and derive our knowledge,
not from the Apostles in their infancy, or minority of Judgment, but from them
having attained to the Top, and Vertical point of their perfectest skill in
heavenly mysteries.

P. And who cannot think, we are rising into that age, wherein God will power
his Spirit upon all flesh, etc.) What proportion does this bear with what you
said not long since. Prophesying that our Marian Times did approach too fast?
When nothing was light but the Bo^efiers to burn the Marters. I will not deny,
but this great sun may arrise, but the reigning vices of the time are but an
ill Morning Star to harbinger the rising thereof. We have taken the St.
Ship from those in heaven, but have no more holiness in our selves here on
earth. What betwixt the sins which brought this War, and the sins this
war has brought, they are sad presages of better times. Never was Gods name
more taken in vain by oaths and imprecations. The Lords day, formerly
profained with mirth, is now profained with malice, and now as much broken with
Drums as formerly with a Taber and Pipe. Superiors never so much slighted,
so that what 1 Samuel 25. 10
Naball said sullenly, and (as he applied it) falsely, we may say sadly and
truly, there be many servants now adays, that break away, every man from his
Master. Killing is now the only Trade in fashion, and Adultery never more
common, so that our Nation (in my opinion) is not likely to confound the
spiritual Whore of Babylon, whilst corporal whoredom is in her every where
committed, no where punished. Theft so usual, that they have stolen away the
word of Stealing, and hid it under the Name of Plundering. Lying both in word
and Print grown Epidemicall, so that it is questionable whether Gunnes or
Printing, (two inventions of the same Country and standing) at the present do
more mischeife in this Kingdom. It is past coveting of our Neighbors houses,
when it is come to violent keeping them. He therefore that does seriously
consider, the Grievousnesse and Generality of these sins, will rather
conclude that some Darkness of Desolation, then any Great light is likely to
follow upon them. God I confess in mercy may do much, both to pardon and
prosper us, and can extract Light out of Darkness, but whether he will or no,
I (though confident of his power,) see little cause to hope of his pleasure
herein, And though herein I must confess, many of these inormities. may,
(though not wholly be excused, yet) be something extenuated, by pleading the
unavoidable necessities which war does cause, yet surely we shall answer to
God for causing this war, by our crying sins, and transgressions.

Q Wherein the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun as the light of the seven days.) This, for ought I can find
to the contrary, was accomplished as Christ Coming, and the general giving of
the Gospel to the Gentiles, with the sending of Gods Spirit miraculously upon
them, sure I am a Parallel place of the Prophet was then fulfilled, by the
exposition of Saint Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17.
Peter himself, And it shall come to pass in the last days (says God) I
will power out my spirit upon all flesh: and your Sons and your Daughters
shall prophecy, and your youngmen shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams. These words having the advantage of that Date In the last
days, might with the more color have been alleged by you, and applied to
these times, to prove some special Revelations in our days, had not the
Apostle marred your Mart, and prevented you by applying the prophecy to the
primative times.

EXAMINER.
But we see the Policy R of commending the Fathers light to our Generation, for
could you prevail with us to set our Dialls by that, you then might reform
our Church by the Canterburian Gnomen, and so set us back to a falsly-reputed,
Primitive Reformation.

TREATISE.
R. But we see the policy of commending the Fathers.) I protest before
Almighty God I have neither base nor by respect in praising the Fathers. Saint
Paul blamed Gal. 2. 11.
Peter at Antioach, because he was to be blamed. I in the like manner commend
the Light of Fathers, because it is to be commended not for any favor or
flattery. A falsely-reputed primitive Reformation, I abhor from my heart, and
I presume our Church is to wise to be cosened therewith. If Canterbury has
misbehaved himself his friends for him desire no more, and foes to him should
grant no less, then a legal trial. But insult not on any man's sufferings,
Organs I dare say, are not so offensive in Churches as the making of Music on
men in misery. Time was when you set as much by a smile from Canterbury, as he
still setts little by a Scoff from you.

SERMON Paragraffe 13. 14. 15. 16.
The qualification for Reformers, the Decent burialls of such Ceremonies, as
are taken from the Fathers, the honorable Reservation to our first Reformers.

EXAMINER.
That it may appear I look not only at the worst of the Sermon, There are
Excellent Truths in it, and it is pity they are not better S situated, I
could always wish to see a Diamond set in Gold.

These are good Positions, and in their pages not without their enamill of
wit, yet there is a policy to write fair in one Lease, though you T make a
blot in another, but I cannot let these pass without some observation.

TREATISE.
S. And it is Pity they are not better situated, I could always wish, to see
a Diamond set in Gold.) I cannot blame you, especially if the Diamond be their
own. But what mean you by this Expression; Would you have had the Truths in
my Sermon to have been set in the Gold of rich and glittering language. Truly
I could not go to the cost thereof especially on so sh^rt warning, wherein the
Sermon was made. How ever a Diamond, is a Diamond though set in Horn, whereby
the luster thereof may be somewhat dimmed, but the worth thereof no whit
deminished. But in one respect I must confess these Truths were ill
situated, that they stood too near to a captious Reader, who took causeless
exception at them.

T. Yet there is a policy to write fair in one leaf, though you make a blot
in another) Show me Sir, where these blotts be. For as yet I am more troubled
to know my fault, then my defense.

EXAMINER.
First for qualification, V I dare say, never age afforded more eminent in this
Kimgdome, their calling lawful, their Piety exemplary, their knowledge
radiant, their courage experienced through a legion of difficulties, Their
prudence in the conduct of a business, though opposed with the Policy, and
malignity of a grand and Potent Enemy.

TREATISE.
V. For their qualification I dare say.) If you dare say it, I dare not to
gainsay it. Their calling no doubt is lawful, if the supreme powers concurres
with them. Of their piety, which consists in their hearts, God alone is Judge.
I will not dispute against their radiant Knowledge, nor fight with their
experienced Courage, and it were folly in me to oppose their Prudence. Let not
the perfections of King David's 2 Samuel 3^
Subjects be numbered. God make their Konwledge, their Courage, their Prudence,
an hundred fold more then it is, and may the Eyes of my Lord the King see the
same, to his comfort and Honor.

EXAMINER.
And for the decent burial of Ceremonies, and superstitions W of the Fathers)
They shall have a Parliament of Senators, and an Assembly of Devines to lay
them in their grave, And I dare say a Godly Congregation in the Kingdom to
sing a Psalm at their Funeral; and will not this be a very decent X burial?
And for the Honorable reservation, to the reformers, and their memories, our
Devines and reformers, now have ever made resort and appeal to the Truths
they delivered; and in those times when Beza, and Calvin, and Peter Mertir were
set lowest, till the Master of the feast came lately, and bid them sit up
higher, a Caistan and Bellarmine, and a Council of Trent, I am sure had more
honor from the Devinity of the other year, or your times, so far we admire
the reformers as to love their Truths and to pity their Errors. But I will
not say much, Errors may be more provoked then remedied with over-handling; let
us be wise in the Colors of good and evil, though it be an honest, yet it is
a dangerous mistake to many our friends, and to f^w our Enemies.

TREATISE.
W. As for the decent burial of Ceremonies and superstitions of the Father.)
Paragraffe 24.
You are cunning to improve your self on my words. In my Sermon I made a
double supposition, First, if there be found in the Fathers practice any
Ceremo^^es smacking of Paganism or Popery. Secondly. If the same can be justly
Challenged to be continued in our Church now, (as if two Suppositions made a
Position) you flatly infer and perumtorily conclude such Superstitions are in
our Church. I should be loath to sell wares to such a Chapman, and to trust his
honesty in measuring of them out, who has such a slight in slipping his
fingers, that gives him an inch and he will take an ell. You might have don
better, to have told us what the perticulers of these superstitions are.

X. And will not this be a decent burial.) The pleasantness of your wit does
please me, some mirth in this sadd times does well. But you might have been
pleased to have taken notice, that by the decent burial of superstitious
Ceremonies, (if any such can be proved to be in our Church) I meant the removing
of them in that manner, as might give no just offense to any, as I have largely
discoursed of before. However as you say, let but a Parliament lay them in the
ground and I shall not moorne for their death but rejoice at their solemn and
legal Interment.

Y. Had more honor from the Devinitie of the other year, or your times.) The
more shame for such, if any who under valued such Worthy Men. And blessed be
God that they have recovered their former esteem. For my part they have not
with me regained any new degree of Honor, but still keep the selfsame place
in my valuation of them whereof they ever were peaceably possessed.

EXAMINER.
If I be now examined what reformation I aim at, I answer, my endeavor here,
was only to take out of the way such rubbish as others would bring in; If we
can but clear the passage, we go far in the work, and in the mean time let
us like Ioshuas spies, bring no evil report upon the land we are going to.

TREATISE.
Z. My endeavor here was only to take out of the way such rubbish as others
would bring in.) Whether rather, you have not bronght in such Rubbish, which
others have taken away, be it reported to the juditious Reader.

A. Let us like Ioshuas spies, bring no evil report upon the Land we are going
to.) By Ioshuas spies, you mean those who accompanied Caleb, and Joshua; to
spy the Land of Canaan, and these were guilty of a three fold Fault.

First they spoke truth with an ill intent, to disharten the Israelites, in
their reporting of the strength of the Country. Secondly, they speak more then
truth, raising the walls of the Cannanitish Cities by their Hyperbolyes bolyes
as high as Heaven, 1 Dut. 28.
Lastly they suppressed the most material point, not encouraging the people,
(as Caleb and Joshua did, by the assured assistance of God against their
enemies. But I conceive my self, (against whom your words are darted) to be
innocent in the foresaid perticulers.

EXAMINER.
But suppose this perfect reformation, B or Church, were among the C (...) the
(...) the Ragione disacro Dominio. He were no wise D, nor faithful Devine who
would not preserve that secret E for holy advantages, it is Gods own design
and his Apostles to hold out a perfection to us, be perfect as your Heavenly
Father, And some pastors for the perfection of the Saints, I commend Boden and
Tacitus for their Political faithfulness, they writ far yet would not
sun the imperial, (...) nor make them Popular.

TREATISE.
B. But suppose this perfect Reformation were e. c.) It seems you suspect the
strength of your outworkes, that you so seasonably retire to your Castle, Now
at last condemni^g this doctrine, not as false, but unfitting to be preached.

C. Were among the (...) I think you would say (...) or otherwise Sir my
learning will not extend to understand this your new greek.

D. He were no wise and faithful Devine) So then you conclude me a foolish and
deceitful Minister, and I had rather you should call me so tentimes, then my
guilty conscience should tell me so once, for concealing of a necessary truth.

E. Who would not preserve that secret for holy advantages.) First the question
is, wheither or no it lay in my power if I would to keep this Point secret.
What your people at Heslerton^ in Yorkshire are, you best know in this
Doctrine, I was not the teacher but the remembrancer of my people at the Savoy,
from whom had I closely covered it with both my hands, they would have seen it
through all my fingers. Besides what hope can one have to keep it secret when
(as you say) so great and glorious a light is shining now-a-dayes.

But if I could, 10. That the Doctrine of the Churches imperfection may safely
be preached and cannot honestly be concealed.
I ought not to suppress it. Let Popish tenants be shutt in a cloister, and
sick opinions keep their Chamber, God never lighted this Truth for us to put
it under a bushel, it being always seasonable to be divulged, and now
dangerous to be concealed.

These holy advantages, (I would not count them advantages were they not holy,)
arise from Preaching this point. First, it awakens men from their Idle dreams
of their conceited perfection of a Church here, and too many I fear have made
this commonwealth here woefully militant, under pretense here to make the
Church happily triumphant.

Secondly, to teach all Christians (Majestrates and Ministers most especially)
as industry so patience, daily to do, and constantly to suffer no whitt
disheartened in their endeavors to perfection. Knowing though things be badd,
after their best labors to amend them, that this proceeds from the inevitable
vanity, to which the creature is subject.

Thirdly, to weane men from this world, making them to love and long for the
time of the restitution of all things, when this world as a watch out of tune
shall not only be taken ass^nder and scoured, but also have all the wheels
made new and then be perfectly reformed.

Yea Sir, let us try whether you or I proceeding on our contrary principles,
shall more effectually persuade a reformation, you will tell the world that a
perfect reformation in this life is attaineable, even to the anticipating of
Heaven hear, and this you will press with all your power and flowers of
Retorick, and all little enough to perform so unsavory an untruth. Now see sit
what mischeifes will follow hereupon.

1. Because one falsehood requires more to support it, you must call in other
auxilliary falsities to defend this, and so engage your self in a multitude of
errors.

2. Seeing sl^ghts and shifts can never last long, your forgery will be
detected.

3. You are liable to Heavens Pillorie to be punnished for holy fraud.

4. You will scarce be trusted afterward though telling truth being once
convicted and ever suspected of falsehood.

As for those whom you have deceived unto the utmost of their endeavors of
Reformation, on your false persuasion that the perfection thereof may be had
in this world, though their labors therein be very forward at the first, yet
soon will they wither and weaken* with the grain in the Gospel that wanted
Root (no Root and a false Root are the same in effect,) and Gods blessing
cannot be expected on the deceitful proceedings.

As for me who have no cunning in such hunting, but please my self with Jacob
to be a plain man, I would go another way to work, and tell them the worst
first, that indeed it is vain to expect a perfect reformation in this world.
However let them comfort themselves, that we serve such a Master who accepts
of the will for the deed, and knows whereof we are made. He remembers that
we are but dust. And therefore let us do our best, and strugle against our
infirmities, being confident that God in Christ will pardon what is amiss, and
reward what is good in us. And I doubt not but such doctrine by Gods blessing
will both take deeper impression in men's hearts, and bring forth better fruits
of amendment in their lives.

F. I commend Bodin and Tacitus for their political faithfulness, they writ
far, yet would not Sun the imperial (...) nor make them popular.) I confess
it to be unfitting, yea dangerous to impart mysteries of State to private
people, for such Jewels are to be locked in a safe and sure Cabinet, the bosoms
of Politians, Not so in necessary Points of Divinity, for though every private
man has not a State to govern, he has a soul to save, and therefore must
be partner in all wholesome doctrines.

Indeed in some cases, Preachers may though not finally suppress, yet
seasonably conceal, or rather warily defer the publishing of some points of
Religion, First when they are not of absolute concernement to salvation, and
the Minister by his Christian discretion plainly foresees, that all the good
which rationally can be expected to redound from Preaching such a Truth, will
not countervaile the ill, which in probability will inevitably follow
thereupon; Or else when the Auditors are not capeable as yet of such difficult
Doctrines. Christ himself did fit his Wines to his bottles, pouring in not
what he could give, but they could take, least otherwise he should rather
spill his liquor, then fill his vessels.

Neither of these cases now alleged take place concerning the publishing of
the Doctrine of the Impossibility of the Churches perfection in this world. For
we may by Gods blessing justly expect and promise to our selves and others much
good and comfort from the preaching thereof, as we have largely proved before.
Nor dare I so much to disparage the times we live in, (now it being above a
hundred years since Luthers reformation) as to count them to have age so much,
and Knowledge so little, as not yet to be capable with safety and profit of so
plain and true a Doctrine, some shortly expect the day of Judgment, and sure
then the world is already come to Age to understand Truths, except she come
not out of her Mynority till just she be ready to die and to be dissolved.

G. Would not Sun the Imperial (...).) Godly secrets in Religion in some
respects may be Sunn'd. First that thereby they may be tried, (all Truths have
Eagles eyes) whether or no they can behold, and bear the Sun Beams.
Secondly, because our Math. 10. 26
Savior has said, what I tell you in darkness, that speak in the light, and
what you hear in the Ear that preach you upon the House top. Lastly, that
by proclaiming them the Godly may have an oppertunity to receive them, and the
wicked be rendered unexcusable for refusing them, when such Truths are made
generally known.

H. Nor make them popular.) I distinguish on the word Popular. If it be taken,
as generally it is, (use having confined a word, of general acception in it
self, to an ill sense) to Court the good will of people for any private or
sinester end, it is utterly unlawful for Popularity, which is necessary love,
in a Prince, is unlawful lust, in a Subject, who may not Court the Kings wife,
for to him a lone, are the People married in a Politic Relation. All honest
men therefore disclaim, to make Truths Popular in this fence, to impart them
to the vulgar to gain any vain applause. Yea, consider herein, whether you
rather be not faulty in making the Imperial (...) to be Popular, who incite
and encourage ordinary People, to make a Public Reformation

But Truths in Divinity must be made Popular, that is be communicated to all
people, in true sincerity for the saving of their Souls.

The Jude. 3.
Apostle, calls it the Common salvation, and therefore it must be preached to
all in common, our Sermons must, as well be ad Populum as ad clerum.

Otherwise such Monopolies are illegal and distructive to the State of the
Church, for any Ministers to engrosse any wholesome Doctrine to themselves, and
not imparte it to their Parish, except in the cases before mentioned.

EXAMINER. Apology.
I have now done (I will not say) refuting, but committing Errors, I am a fraid
my have at this time, has made me mend one fault, only with another.

TREATISE.
I will not oppose yours, but annex my own conclusion. If I should deny my
own many Imperfections, my practice would confute what my Pen has maintained.
Reader, for the matter of what I have written, I require thee, in Gods name do
me Justice, for the manner, method, or words thereof, I request thee, as I am a
Man show me favor. Think not the worse of the Truths, for my sake, but
think the better of me, for the Truths sake which I have defended. And
conceive me not to be of a brawling and controversiall disposition, who do
desire and will pray for an Agreement from my Soul, so long as my speech shall
serve me. Yea if I should chance to be stricken dumb, I would with Zacharia
make signs for table booke^ and write the name of that which I desire above
all earthly thing is PEACE. God send it, Amen.

FINIS.

